

Portrait of the Artist at his Ease] , oil, 1 8 8 8 .

Letters reirealing hi s life
as a painter, selected by
W
H . A U D E N
' New Y ork Graphi c Soeiety
Greenwich , Cog necticu
’
t
»
,
VAN G O G H
A Se
Portrait

PRIN TED IN HOLLAN D
1 96 1

FO REW O RD
In most c ases, to g o throug h a man
’
s c orrespondenc e and make the proper
selection for public ation woul d be easy
. One would merely have to piek
out the few letters whi ch w ere interesti ng and di sc ard the many whi ch were
dull or uni ntellig ible to the g eneral reader without elaborate editorial notes .
But there i s sc arc ely one letter by Van G og h whi ch I, who am c ertai nly no
expert, do not ﬁnd fascinating
. Anyone who c an afford them will want to
possess and oug ht to buy the mag niﬁc ent three volumes edited by Vinc ent
W
van G og h .
Wh at,
” I asked my self,
i s the sing le most important fact about Van
G og h ?
” To that there
seemed only
one answer
“That he painted pic
tures .
”
I have, therefore,
c onﬁned my
selec tion to those of hi s letters whi ch
c ontain reﬂections upon the art of painting
and the problems of being
a
painter, and have only included letters c onc erned with hi s personal rela
tions, to hi s father and hi s brother, for example, in so far as these throw
di rect lig ht upon his c areer as a painter .
Van G og h was such an
extraordinary
character, however, that I have
also g enerously
selected from the desc riptions g iven of him by
acquaint
anc es at various times in his life, whi ch are printed in the c omplete edition
.
W
. H
. A UD E N

G EN EALO G I CA L N O T E S
The family name van Gogh occurs as early as the ﬁfteenth century, in connection
with religious institutions in The Netherlands . The earliest ancestor who can be
traced directly to Vincent the painter was also called Vincent van Gog h . He was
born in September,
1 674, at The Hague ; he was a Protestant and hi s godfather
bore the same name .
From father to son the family went as follows
Vincent van Gogh
1 674—1 746
David van Gogh
1 697
9
Jan van Gogh
1 72 2—1 796
Johannes van Gogh
1 763
— 1 840
Vincent van Gogh
1 789
- 4 874
Theodorus van Gogh
1 8 2 2— 1 8 8 5
Vincent van Gogh
1 8 5 3 —1 890
Up to the painter
’s grandfather, these forefathers were tradespeople and citizens
of The Hague . They all married in their own circle ; one of the wives came from
Belgium .
jan van Gogh (1 72 2— 1 796) had a brother Vincent ( 172 0
who was child
less . He had acquired some wealth, which Vincent, the painter
’s grandfather,
inherited and used to study theology at the University of Leiden and to become
a clergyman . He married Elisabeth Huberto Vrijdag, whose grandfather had come
from Switzerland ; her family belonged to the same class as the Van Goghs .
This couple had eleven children, ofwhom Theodorus ( 1 8 2 2—1 8 8
the painter
’s
father, was the eldest . He studied theology at the University of Utrecht and be
came a clergyman at Zundert (in the province of North Brabant, near the Belgian
border) where Vincent and Theo were born . Their mother was Anna Cornelia
Carbentus (1 8 1 9
Her family name seems
to indicate a French origin
(Charpentier), but in
1 672 her direct forefather already lived in The Netherlands .
Her family were also townspeople, and since the beginning of the eighteenth
century they had lived in The Hague .

I N TR O D UC T I O N
On March 5 0, I 8 5 z, a son was born in the rectory at Zundert he lived only a few
weeks . A year later, on the same date, a healthy son was born who received the
names of hi s two grandfathers , Vincent Willem . Two years later a daughter was
born, and
on May 7,
1 8 5 9, another
son, Theodorus , named after hi s father ; he
was to play a great role in Vincent
’s life . These children were followed by
two
more daughters and another son . In later years the youngest sister was the only
one with whom Vincent c orresp onded . I
The grave of the little brother who w as born a year before Vincent is situated
near the chapel where hi s father preached . Even in hi s earliest childhood Vincent
had seen it often, and thi s may have caused an unconscious inner guilt . This may
have been partly relieved by the coming of another brother (Theo), who was
there as long as Vincent could consciously remember . Most likely thi s constitutes
a basic factor in the two brothers
’ lifelong friendship and their mutual support .
Zundert w as a village in the middle of a poor country worked by small farmers
who were predominantly Roman Catholic . For a short while Vincent was
en
rolled in the public school, but as hi s parents thought he had become too rough
through hi s contact with the boys , they took hi m home and engaged a governess
to teach the children .
According to two
of hi s sisters , the children loved the country life, in whi ch
they were isolated among their own little group . Contrary to older opini ons ,
recent investigations have brought out the fact that Vincent started drawing early.
Four sketches of 1 862 (when he was nine years old) have been preserved ;
2 two of
them are from nature, the others , copies . Some known landscapes date from 1 865
to
1 873 ; in them his great power of observation i s already apparent .
When he was twelve years old, he was sent to a small private boarding school
at Zevenbergen, a town some ﬁfteen miles away from Zundert . According to the
principal , who was interviewed around 1 9 5 0, there w as nothing special about the
boy, as he di d not remember him . Vincent himself wrote later on in a letter to
Theo that he learned very httle there . After that he seems to have been at another
boarding school at Tilburg (a larger town), but nothing i s known of that period .
A t Goupz
’l
’
r
Vincent
’s paternal grandfather (also named Vincent) was a clergyman in the town
of Breda, where he was also attached to the lVIilitary Academy . He had eleven
children, the oldest ofwhom was Theodorus , Vincent and Theo
’s father . One son
entered the navy and eventually became a rear admiral, then the highest rank
1 Vinc ent
’
S letters to his youngest
sister Willemi en (Will) are published ln TH E COM PLETE
LETTERS OFVINCENT V AN GOGH , an English translation published m 1 9 5 8 by New Y ork G ra
phie Soc iety, Greenwic h , Conn ectic ut, 3
vols . , with
200 fac simile reproductions
Of
sketches
in the letters .
2 See “The beginni ngs ofVin c ent
’
s art , by Professor J
. G . van Gelder, Utrec ht, in th e D E
TAILED CATALOGUE WITH FULL D OCUMENTATION OF
272 W OR KS
BY VINCENT
VAN GOGH, BE
LONGING
To THE STATE MUSEUM KROLLER-MULLER (at Otterlo , The Netherlands) , published
in English , July,
1960, ill ustrated .

(Vincent later lived for a while at hi s house in Amsterdam)
. Another son became
a civil servant . Two of the daughters married high-ranking military men ; three
remained unmarried . But for Vincent and Theo, the most important fact was that
three
of their uncles (Cornelius, Hendrik,
and Vincent) chose the art-dealing
business as their profession .
College education being rather rare in those days , these uncles made their own
way
. Uncle Vincent started as an apprentice in a paint store in The Hague, which
he later transformed into an establishment dealing in paintings . He then became
affiliated with the Goupil ﬁrm of Paris . With the social changes in the ﬁrst half of
the nineteenth century, the nobility were
no longer the only ones who were
interested in paintings . Among the new commercial and industrial classes , some
very rich people became buyers . Furthermore, there was a growing demand for
reproductions . As photography was still unknown, the procedure was to make a
drawing on stone after an oil painting or a woodcut, and print therefrom . The
demand for these reproductions became international . Goupil
’s
of Paris was a
leader in thi s ﬁeld, and it was also among the great dealers in paintings . It had
branches in Brussels , Berlin, London, The Hag ue, and New York . 3
Uncle Vincent married a sister of the painter
’s
’ mother .
_ H e became very rich,
and after retiring from business , lived on an estate at Prinsenhage (near Breda),
not far from Zundert . Hence a rather close contact developed with his namesake,
who, at sixteen, became an apprentice at Goupil
’s in The Hague (July 3 0,
Uncle Hendrik (Hein) was then head of Goupil
’s at Brussels , where Theo went in
January, 1 873 , when he was ﬁfteen years Old . Uncle Cornelius established himself
independently at Amsterdam, where Vincent later visited hi m frequently.
In I 873 Vincent was transferred to Goupil
’s in London, whi ch jobbed reproduc
tions only, and no paintings . Then the difﬁculties began . So far he had enjoyed
life like any young man who enters the world and has an interesting job and few
cares . He was attracted by all the new things he saw and got pleasure from the
feeling of learning and of developing himself. The people for whom he worked
were satisﬁed with him, and much later he himself mentioned in a letter that up
to that time he was a good salesman .
In London he fell in love with the daughter of hi s landlady, a clergyman
’s
widow, but the
“ girl refused him. Thereupon he left his boardinghouse and went
to live in furnished rooms ; he kept hi s own council more and more, lost hi s joy
of life, and became more and more religious . At hi s parents
’ request his un cle g ot
him transferred to Paris for a Short while (from October to December,
a
gesture which made him angry . In May , 1 875 , he went to Paris permanently . He
felt displaced, and when not at work, he stayed in his room, reading the Bible .
At Christmastime, the busiest season, he went home for a holiday ; after hi s return
this led to hi s dismissal as of April
1 ,
1 876 . It shoul d be noted that during hi s
association with Goupil Vincent saw many paintings , which he absorbed in
minute detai l . He read a lot and learned English and French to perfection .
3 For the Americ an
activities
of the Goupil firm
see
the Columbia Historic al Portrait
of
New Y ork, p .
1 97 ; the Goupils were active in founding the Americ an A rt Union .
8

A deentarer after leaving Goupil
Vincent liked England and returned there in April, 1 876, as a teacher in a boarding
school in Ramsgate ; the establishment was soon moved to Isleworth, near Lon
don . He received board an d lodging only, no salary, so that he soon accepted a
position at another boarding school in the same locality . His religious zeal con
tinued . At the end of the year, seeing no possibility for advancement, he gave up
England altogether . His uncle Vincent helped him ﬁnd employment in a book-w
i
store in Dordrecht . However, he had no interest whatsoever in the work, and
ﬁnally formulated hi s wish to devote himself to religion by becoming a ministeg
of the gospel, like hi s father . That required studying for the university
’s entrance)
examination, but hi s family helped him . He lived with the uncle who was then
commander of the naval establishment at Amsterdam .
Hi s uncle Stricker, a
clergyman married to
one of hi s mother
’s Sisters , found him a good teacher of
Latin and Greek, and he could go on seeing paintings at hi s uncle Cornelius
’ art
allery.
g
It was not much use, though Vincent studied the classical languages for over a
year . He would punish himself for not advancing sufﬁciently, for example, by
Sleeping on the floor, but soon he began to realize that it was not the study of
grammar he w as after, but doing something beneﬁcial for other people . He gave
up hi s studies and, soon after, discovered a chance ofgetting to the colliery di strict
w
w The requirement would
be a three-month course at a missionary school in Brussels where one had to pay
for board and lodging only . Though he was the most intelli gent of the very few
pupils , hi s behavior did not qui te ﬁt in ; furthermore, he had difﬁculty speaking in
public from memory . At the end of the course he failedto get the coveted appoint
ment .
n hi s own , giving Bible lessons, visiting the sick,
ouse where he boarded . When
the evangelical committee met again in January, he received a
six-month trial
3 activities .
When his contract expired, it was not renewed . During thi s time there was a great
accident in one of the mines, and it made an enormous impression on him .
Tbeﬁrrty earr as a drafe
‘rwaﬂ
Vincent Stayed on in the Borinag e the whole winter I 879—1 8 8 0, without any ﬁxed
employment,
an d living
on the little his parents and Theo could provide him.
Then, in the summer, he realized that he could not do anything for others any
more . He compared himself with a bird in a cage, living without care, like
a
gentleman at large (a queer kind at that l)
to get to freedom he had to change hi s
plumes . And then he started to draw anew— the beginning
of hi s becoming a
9

professional— with Theo helping him ﬁnancially. Having found a permanent
occupation whi chl iberated hi s spirit, he grew constantly, despite hi s difﬁculties .
During the next winter he lived in Brussels where he became acquainted with
the Dutch painter Van Rappard, a friendship which lasted ﬁveyears .4 He worked
hard, but the expenses were too high and he wanted to leave and get into the
country once more . Therefore, he moved to hi s parents
’ at Etten, where he stayed
for eight months . During the summer he fell in love with hi s cousin, a young
widow with a baby son who had come for a short visit with hi s parents . She didn
’t
want him, and that was another blow . He reproached hi s parents for not having
helped him in this matter, became increasingly nervous, and ﬁnally left for The
Hague at the end of 1 88 1 .
The stay in this city marks the ﬁrst great period of Vincent
’s work ; there he
made a number
of magniﬁcent drawings and his ﬁrst paintings . As before, hi s
relations helped him . After he had left Goupil, hi s uncles had helped him in
Amsterdam ; in the Borinag e hi s father had stood behind him; in The Hague hi s
cousin Anton Mauve and other painters took an interest i n him, as well as H . C .
Tersteeg, then head ofthe Goupil ﬁrm . But, as always , Vincent
’s friendships (with
the exception of the one with Theo) soon came to an end, as he was too critically
outspoken .
The gulf between Vincent and those who meant him well widened when Vin
cent began to live with a woman he had picked up in the street . She already had
one chi ld and was soon to have another . Theo was the only one who continued
to support him; hi s father was not in a position to do more than give some clothes .
Vincent worked hard and made beautiful drawings , but the household deterio
rated and soon became unbearable ; the illusion ofhaving a home and family of hi s
own could not last .
Firrty earr as a painter
In November, 1 8 8 3 , the household was broken up and Vincent left for the prov
ince
of Drenthe (in the northeastern Netherlands), a sparsely populated region
where peat digging was the only occupation . The poverty an d bleakness appealed
to Vincent, and he made a lot of sketches and some small paintings . However,
when the winter came, with its early darkness, he felt very forlorn and did what
many people have done in similar circumstances : he returned to hi s parental home .
His father was now a clergyman at Nuenen (in the eastern part of the province
ofNorth Brabant), a village as small as those where he had lived before .
.Vincent
’s
stay at the parsonage was not a pleasant arrangement for any of the parties c on
cerned . His not being understood and hi s work
not being appreciated was a
great hardship for Vincent . On the other side, the presence of an un social intruder
(which was what the inmates considered him) created a strain . Very little remained
of the
old admiration for hi s father. His bond with the spiritual world
of hi s
mother was as slight as ever, though he cared for her with great devotion when
4 Vinc ent
’
s letters to Van Rappard are also published in the COMPLETE LETTERS OFVINCENT
VAN GOGH (see note

she broke her leg
and was in bed for a few months . Next door to his parents lived
x the only woman who ever cared for Vincent ; she was older than he ; through the
inﬂuence of the families nothing came of thi s attachment .
In Nuenen Vincent became a full-ﬂedg ed painter . He made a great number of
portraits
of farm laborers and peasant women, but also scenes on the land, still
lifes, etc . His large drawings of people at work rank among hi s most celebrated
ones . The paintings were all very dark, though he experimented with color from
the beginning . Their texture i s already the same as that of the later colorful pic
tures . His work
’s peak at Nuenen i s the splendi d canvas
“The Potato Eaters ,
”
which Shows the result of his efforts in portrait painting . He made it shortly after
the sudden death of hi s father, which made a great impression on him ; it meant
also that once more hi s home was broken up .
With Theo helping ﬁnancially, Vincent moved to Antwerp to become a pupil
at the Academy . Notwithstanding the large series ofpaintings which he had made
with S O great an effort, he wanted to learn from others and to work after models ,
which he could seldom pay for himself. The professor in drawing considered hi s
work inadequate and had him put back into the preparatory class ! Vincent carried
on , however, and also joined drawing clubs with hi s comrades so he could work
of the lightening of his whole palette .
Vincent spent most of the money Theo sent him on models and paint, neglect
ing hi s food completely . Together with the hard work, this brought him to ex
haustion and longing for another change .
E xp eri menting
at Parir
One morning a small note was brought to Theo in the Goupil gallery
on the
Boulevard Montmartre, where he was in charge ; it was written by Vincent, and
said that he was waiting for Theo in the anion aarre
' ofthe Louvre museum . Vincent
then went to live with Theo in hi s apartment on the Rue Laval ; because he needed
a studio, they moved after a couple
of months to the Rue Lepic, also
on the
Montmartre hill
. Vincent started work in Cormon
’s studio, where he met Tou
louse
-Lautrec, Emile Bernard, and others . Theo had been one of the advocates of
the impressioni sts in his gallery, and Vincent was inﬂuenced by them . The work
of these painters was a revelation to him . He made a number of experiments , and
hi s palette became lighter, but he did not follow their techni cal methods of repre
sentation . He considered that they depicted the superﬁcial aspect of things only,
and he wanted to do more . Having found his own way , hi s paintings at the end of
his stay in Paris are almost as full in color and expression as the famous ones done
in the South .
Vincent stayed in Paris for two years ; then the strain of city life became too
much for him and he longed again for the country . For Theo it was a difﬁcult time
I I

because
of Vincent
’s endless discussions, whi ch few
of his friends could bear .
Theo was at that time very close to Andries Bonger, who was hi s age and was
employed commercially ; he later married the latter
’s sister Johanna .
Tbeg lorionr 5 anti:
In February, 1 8 8 8 , Vincent moved to Arles , in the South of France, on the Rhone
River . When he arrived, the orchards were just in bloom, an engaging sight
anywhere, and especially for someone from the big city. He painted them eleven
times . When the summer advanced, he was struck by the bright sunshine and the
glowing colors . He worked extremely hard, in the full
sun and in the wind . In
Paris he had already inﬂuenced those around him ; here in the South, with n o
painters or other direct inﬂuences from the past, even Theo, hi s creativity was
stimulated to the utmost . His friends were mostly plain people,
an d therefore
Violent discussions
on artistic matters did not occur . In the subjects he painted,
reminiscences from Holland Often come to the fore (roads in the landscape, the
bridges ,
The same subjects recur throughout hi s paintings . During the hot
months he produced some of hi s best-known works :
“The Sunﬂowers ,
”
“The
Yellow House,
” “The Harvest,
” “The Drawbridge,
” “The Boats on theBeach,
”
etc . , the last of which was painted at nearby Saintes-Maries de la Mer .
Theo continued to send him an allowance as well as colors and canvas ; Vincent
spent most
of hi s money on paint and brushes and completely neglected hi s
bodily needs . He was very proud of having a little abode of hi s own an d dreamed
of establishing a c o-operative society of painters for mutual artistic and material
support . With Theo
’s help , the ﬁrst and last one to try the experiment was Paul
Gauguin . At that time he was living in Brittany, and he also had ﬁnancial difﬁc ul
ties . Two months ofthese powerful characters working under the same roofended
in a quarrel, and Gauguin left immediately after Van Gogh suffered the ﬁrst of hi s
crises . This happened at the time Theo became engaged to be married . Vincent
might have worried about thi s ending his material support, but Theo did not even
consider withdrawing . However, Vincent was overworked and g ot into difﬁc ul
ties with the neighbors and the authorities because of hi s alleged queer conduct .
He himself decided it would be wise to be cared for permanently, and he entered
the Asylum St . Paul at St . Remy-en—Provence, not far from Arles . This institution
was splendidly located, but its inmates must have made Vincent
’s life extremely
difﬁcult .
Around the time of Theo
’s marriage, after the announcement of the coming of
a baby, and after its birth, Vincent passed through serious crises ; however, he
recovered each time . He may unconsciously have feared losing hi s support, but
actually there never was any question on this matter . Vincent
’s creativity
c on
tinned to grow to the end ; only during the crises did the old passivi ty seem to
recur .

In tbe N ortb ag ain
In January,
1 890, the important French monthly Mertare de France published an
enthusiastic article on Vincent
’s work by a well-known art critic, Albert Aurier,
who had seen his paintings at Theo
’s . With the coming
of the spring Vincent
felt better and longed to leave the depressing asylum . He came to Paris , staying a
few days with Theo, who lived with hi s wife and baby at no . 8 Cité PIg alle . He met
some
of hi s
old acquaintances, but soon he wanted to be in more quiet
sur
roundings, where he could g o on with hi s painting .
Theo had heard from Camille Pissarro, whose works he handled at Goupil
’s
gallery
on the Boulevard Montmartre, about Auvers sur-Oise, at one time a
painters
’ colony where famous men like Daubigny (of the Barbizon school),
Cézanne, an d Pissarro himself had worked . A friend of all these men, Dr . Gachet,
himself an amateur painter, still lived there, and Vincent was recommended to
him . Dr . Gachet was reputed to be familiar with mental healing as practiced in
those times , and Pissarro and Theo supposed he could help Vincent if it were
necessary. The two men met frequently ; Vincent painted hi s portrait and that
of hi s daughter, as well as some other famous canvases . Though Vincent was
most industrious , the number ofpaintings and drawings that he could make in the
ten weeks he lived at Auvers at best falls below the number that current literature
ascribes to him.
The physician failed to exert a steadying inﬂuence ; perhaps it was the opposite .
On July 27 Vincent attempted to end hi s life ; he died on the twenty—ninth . Half
a year later, on January 2 1 ,
1 89i) , Theo also passed away . They rest next to each
other in the cemetery of Auvers-sur-Oise .
Vincent W. van Gogh
1 3

Vinc ent as seen by himself in a group ofpencil sketches drawn in the spring of 1 886, at the
beginning of hi s Paris period .

N O T E S O N T H E I LLUS T RA T I O N S
Immediately following are twenty-seven representative drawings by Vinc ent van Gogh,
reproduc ed from both the letters and those in the c ollection
of the Stedelijk Museum in
Amsterdam. A number of c olor plates of his maj or paintings are sc attered throughout the
text. The numbered annotations below refer to the drawings
1
One
of Vinc ent
’
s ﬁrst
attempts, done
from a
c opybook when he was a boy
of
ten, probably
after
an illustration
in
a
magazine .
2 . View
from Vinc ent
’
s
window
in
the
school
where he taught
at Ramsgate,
England . April 2 1 ,
1 876 , (Letter
3
. A saloon inLaeken , a suburb ofBrussels,
from letter
1 26 , November
1 5 ,
1 878 , in
whi ch Vinc ent writes :
“The little draw
ing
‘Au Charbonnage
’ is not particularly
remarkable, but I made it because
one
sees here
so many people who work in
the
c oal mines,
and they
are
a
rather
distinctive type ; it is a
small inn whi ch
adj oin s the big
c oal shed, and the work
men
c ome to
eat their bread
and drink
theirglass ofbeerduring the lunch hour.
4 . Drawn in The Hag ue
,June—July
1 8 8 2 .
From letter
2 1 7, showing one of Sien
’
s
children while Vinc ent was living with
her :
“What I want to
save is Sien
’
s life
and that
of her
two
children . I do not
want her
to fall back into that terrible
state
of
illness
and
mi sery
in
whi ch
I found her.
”
5
.
One of the very few drawings in the c or
respondenc e given
a title, S orrow. From
The Hague period, October—November
1 8 8 2 . It was
a
sketch for
a lithograph .
(Letter 244
t.
6 .
Nuenen , Dec ember
1 8 8 5 , probably
the
parsonage where
the elder Van Goghs
lived . Drawn
shortly
after Vinc ent
’
s
return home from Drenthe . His studio
was in
a shed behi nd the house . (Letter
7 an d 8 .
S c ratches of studi es of heads— p er
haps y ou would ﬁnd something in them,
perhaps
not , I
c an
’t help it . I
repeat, I
e
know no other way
.
” From lett ers 3 9 3
94, Nuenen , January—February
1 8 8 5
. In
drawing these Studies of peasant women
Vinc ent was preparing himself for his
ﬁrst great painting, T
P otato E aters,
1 5
I O .
I I
.
1 2 .
done during thi s period
an d
of which
drawing 9 was a descriptive sketch .
Sketch
of Tbe Potato E aters from letter
3 99 , April
1 8 8 5
.
Nuenen,
spring
1 8 8 5 ,
another
of Vin
c ent
’
s deeply
sympathetic
studi es
of the
peasants
of
the
region ,
letter
409 ,
of
which he writes :
“peint avec de la terre .
”
Nuenen, Jun e—July
1 8 8 5
. In letter 42 5
Vinc ent writes :
“I am now busy painting
still lifes
of my birds
’ nests
I think
some people who are good Observers of
nature might like them bec ause
of the
c olors of the moss, the dry leaves and the
grasses .
”
A sketch of one ofVin c ent
’
s most impor
tant still lifes, Tbe Breakfast Table, men
tioned in
letter
489 , written
in Arles,
May
2 0,
I 8 8 8 .
1 3 and
14
. These
two magniﬁc ent drawings
1 5
.
w ere both
sent
to
his painter
friend,
Bernard, from Arles, letter B 6
the
sec ond half of June
1 8 8 8 .
In letter
5 5 4, October
1 5 —20,
1 8 8 8 ,
to
Theo, Vinc ent begin s :
“At last I
c an
send y ou
a little Sketch
to give y ou
at
least
an
idea
of th e way
the work is
Shaping up
. FortodayI am all right again .
My eyes are still tired, but then I have a
new idea in my head and here is a Sketch
of it
This time it
’
sjust simply my bed
room, only here c olor is to do everything,
and giving by its simpliﬁc ation a grander
style to things, it is to be suggestive here
of rest or of sleep in general . In a word,
looking at th e picture ought to
rest the
brain,
or
rather the imagination
It is
going to be
a
c ontrast to, for in stanc e,
the Tarasc on diligenc e
and
the
night
c afé .
“This is a sketch of the latest c anva
s I am
w orking on , another S ower . An immense
c itron-yell ow disk for the
sun . A green
yellow
sky with pink
clouds . Th e ﬁeld
violet, the
sower
and
the tree Prussian

blue .
S o wrote Vinc ent
at
the
end
of
October
1 8 8 8 from Arles, letter 5 5 8a .
A Sketch
sent to his
sister Wilhelmina,
letter W 9
of November
1 8 8 8 , in whi ch
he desc ribes
the
sc ene
as
an imaginary
garden in whi ch his mother an d sister are
walking, as in a poem or in
a dream .
In March
1 8 89 Vin c ent had
seen
his
friend,
the painter Paul
Signac (letter
to whom he wrote in April, letter
5 8 3 b ,
“I have just c ome back with two
studies of orchards . Here is a c rude Sketch
of them .
”
In an unﬁnished letter (643) to Gauguin ,
whi ch
was
found
among
his papers,
written
at Auvers-sur-O ise , June
1 890,
Vinc ent writes :
“I
still
hav e
a
cypress
with
a
star from down there,
a last
at
tempt
a night sky with a moon without
radianc e,
the
slender
c resc ent barely
emerging from the
opaque Shadow
cast
by the earth
one star with an exag g erat
ed brilli anc e, if y ou like, a soft brilli an c e
ofpink and green in the Ultramarine sky ,
ac ross which
some
clouds
are hurrying .
Below, a road bordered with tall yellow
A CKN O W LED G M EN T S
VAN GOGH, A SELF-PORTRAIT is a selected c ondensation by W . H . Auden ofT HE COMPLETE
LETTERS OF V1N CENT VAN GOCH, published in
1 9 5 8 by the New Y ork Graphic S ociety in
three volumes, with more than 2 00 tipped-ou, fac simile reproductions of all th e drawings
and water c olors from the c orrespondenc e . Any letters referred to above by number, not
published in A SELF-PORTRAIT, will be found in the thr ee-volume edition of TH E COMPLETE
LETTERS .
The editors of this one—volume selection wish to express their thanks and appreciation
to Vinc ent W . van Gogh for hi s c onstant an d devoted help throughout its preparation and
partic ul arly for his c ontribution of the Introduction and Genealog i cal N otes on hi s uncle, the
painter. Dr . Jan H ulsker, of the Ministry Of Educ ation , Arts and Sci enc es at The Hague,
has earned our spec ial thanks for permitting his rec ent revisions in the dating of th e c or
respondenc e to be used throughout. Full
c redit is hereby given
and thanks . warmly
ex
tended to the Stedelijk Museum in Amsterdam for the use of its printing blocks and the
permission to reproduc e all the c olor plates and eight of the drawings that follow and
are
sc attered throughout the text. Finally, N ew Y ork Graphic Society is also most grateful
to W . H . Auden for his thoughtful selection of the material for thisbook from among some
75 0 entries
of the entire c orrespondenc e.
c anes,behind these the blue Basses A lp es
[Alpill es] , an old inn with yellow lighted
windows,
and
a very tall
cypress, very
straight, very
somber.
The following
eight drawings,
2 0—27,
not from the c orrespondenc e,
are in the
large
and
important
c oll ection of Van
Gogh material in the Stedelijk Museum .
Old
man grieving, pencil,
1 8 8 2 ,
The
Hague.
Old man with top h at , black crayon and
ink ,
1 8 8 2 , The Hague .
The weaver at his loom, p en heightened
with white,
1 8 84, Nuenen .
The garden
of the parsonage, p en
and
pencil,
1 8 84, Nuenen .
Digging peasant, black
c rayon,
1 88 5 ,
Nuenen .
Peasant woman digging, black
c rayon ,
1 8 85 , Nuenen .
The fountain in the hospital garden , p en
and ink,
1 8 89 , St . Remy.
Cottage
with
c abbage patch
and
c y
presses, black crayon,
1 8 89 , St . Remy .


















que de talent
[as yet more modesty than talent]
. Mr . Post in The Hague has
this picture . If you should ever come to our shop, ask them to Show you hi s (V an
Muyden
’
s)
Réfectoire .
There are no more than four
or ﬁve copies
of this
photograph in existence, as the negative i s broken . Show it to Mr. Tersteeg
some time .
The
“Lune de Miel
[Honeymoon] is after Eugene Feyen, one
of the few
painters who pictures intimate modern life as it really i s, and does not turn it into
fashion plates .
I know the photograph
Der Wirthin Tochterlein
[The Landlady
’s Little
Daughter], and I admire it very much . It i s a good thing you appreciate
Bourg uereau . Not everybody i s capable of perceiving the good and the beautiful
as keenly as you do .
And now I am going to stop ; I enclose another picture of autumn, this one by
Michelet .
I hope you will be able to read this ; I have written on without considering that
one must take care a letter i s intelligible . aDieu ; the best of luck to you all ; many
kind regards to all at the Poten, and any other friends you may meet .
12
Dear Theo,
London,
1 9 Nov .
1 87 3
I want to be sure you hear from me soon after your arrival at The Hague . I am
eager to hear what your ﬁrst impressions were of your new position and home .
I heard that Mr . Schmidt gave you such a beautiful souvenir . That proves you have
been very
'satisfactory in every respect . I am glad that we now work in the same
house of Goupil . Lately we have had many pictures and drawings here ; we sold
a great many, but not enough yet— ir must become something more established
and solid . I think there i s still much work to do in England, but it will not be
successful at once . Of course, the ﬁrst thing necessary i s to have good pictures, and
that will be very diﬂicult . Well, we must take things as they are and make the best
of it .
How i s business in Holland ? Here the ordinary engravings after Brochart do not
sell at all, the good burin engravings sell pretty well . From the
“Venus Anadyo
mene
” after Ingres we have already sold twentyépreuves d
’
arti ste. It i s a pleasure to
see how well the photographs sell , especially the colored ones, and there is a big
proﬁt in them . We sell the Musée Goupil
CO . photographs only en papillottes,
on an average of a hundred a day.
I think you will like the work in the house at The Hague as soon as you have g ot
used to it . I am sure you will like your home with the Roos family. Walk as much
as your time will allow . Give my best love to everybody at Roos
’s .
Y ou must write me sometime whom you like best among the older painters as
well as among the modems . Don
’t forget, as I am curious to know . Go to the
museum as often as you c an ; it i s a good thing to know the old painters also . If
you have the chance, read about art, especially the art magazines, Gazette des
Beaux -A rts, etc. As soon as I have the opportunity, I will send you a book by
3 4

Burger about the museums at The Hague and Amsterdam . Please send it back
when you have read it .
Ask Iterson to write me when he has time, and especially to send me a list of the
painters who have won awards at the Paris exhibition . Is Somerwill still in the
ofﬁce or di d he leave when you arrived ?
I am all right . I have a pleasant home, and although the house here i s not so in
teresting as the one in The Hague, it i s perhaps well that I am here . Later on ,
especially when the sale of pictures grows more important, I shall perhaps be of
use . An d then, I cannot tell you how interesting it i s to see London and English
business and the way of life, which differs so much from ours .
Y ou must have had pleasant days at home ; how I should like to
see them all
again . Give my compliments to everybody who inquires after me, especially at
Tersteeg
’
s, Haanebeek, AuntFie, Stockum andROOS and tellBetsyTersteeg some
thing about me when you
see her . And now, boy, good luck to you write to
me soon .
Do
on have m room at Roos
’s or the one ou sle t in last summer ?
Y
Y
Y
13
Dear Theo,
London, Jan .
1 874
Thanks for your letter . I wish you a happy New Year with all my heart . I know
that you are doing well at The Hague, for I heard it from Mr . Tersteeg . From
your letter I see that y ou take a great interest in art ; that i s a good thing, boy .
I am glad y ou like Millet, Jacque, Schreyer, Lambinet, Frans Hals , etc . , for as
Mauve says ,
“That i s it .
”
Yes , that picture by Millet,
The Angelus,
that i s it— that is beauty, that i s
poetry . H ow I should like to talk with you about art ; instead, we must write
about it
Often . A dmire as much as you can ; most people do not admire enong b. The
following are some of the painters whom I like especially : Scheﬂer, Delaroche,
Hebert, Hamon, Leys , Tissot, Lag ye, Boughton, Millai s , Thijs [Matthijs] Maris ,
De Groux, De Braekeleer, Jr . , Millet, Jules Breton, Feyen—Perrin, Bug ene Feyen,
Brion, Jundt, Georg Saal, Israels, Anker, Knaus , Vautier, Jourdan, Compte-Calix,
Rochussen,
‘ Meissonier, Madrazo, Ziem, Boudin, Gerome, Fromentin, Decamps ,
‘
Bonington, Diaz, Th . Rousseau, Troyon, Dupre, Corot, Paul Huet, Jacque, Otto
Weber, Daubigny, Bernier, Emile Breton, Chenu, César de Cock, Mlle . Collart,
Bodmer, Koekkoek, Schelﬂaout, Weissenbruch, and last but not least, Maris and
Mauve . But I might g o on like that for I don
’t know how long . Then there
are the old masters , and I am sure I have forgotten some of the best modern
ones .
Try to take as many walks as you c an and keep your love ofnature, for that i s the
true way to learn to understand art more and more . Painters understand nature
and love her and teacly as to see leer . Then there are painters who can only make
good things, who cannot make anything bad, just as there are ordinary people
who cannot do anything that doesn
’t turn out well .
I am doing very well here . I have a delightful home, and it i s a great pleasure to

me to study London, the English way of life and the English people themselves .
Then I have nature and art and poetry. If that i s
, not enough, what i s? Still , I do
not forget Holland— especially The Hague and Brabant . We are very busy in th e
ofﬁce just now, taking inventory . However, it lasts only ﬁve days, so it i s much
easier for us than for you at The Hague .
I hope you had as happy a Christmas as I had .
Well, boy, I wish you all happiness, and write to me soon . In thi s letter I have
just written what came into my mind, and I hope it i s not too confused . aDieu, my
regards to everybody, especially at Aunt Fie
’s and Haanebeek
’
s .
Vincent
67
Dear Theo,
Ramsgate, 3 1 May 1 876
Bravo on going to Etten May 2 1 , so four of the six children were at home . Father
wrote me in detail how the day was spent .
Thanks also for your last letter .
Did I tell you about the storm I watched recently? The sea was yellowish,
especially near the shore ;
on th e horizon a strip of light, and above it immense
dark gray clouds from whi ch
the rain poured down in slanting streaks . The
wind blew the dust from the little white path on the rocks into the sea an d bent
the blooming hawthorn bushes and wallﬂowers that grow on the rocks . To the
right were ﬁelds of young green corn, and in the di stance th e town looked like
the towns that Albrecht Diirer used to etch . A town with its turrets, mills, slate
roofs and houses built in Gothic style, and below, the harbor between two
jetties which project far into the sea .
I also
saw the
sea last Sunday night. Everything was dark
an d gray, but in
the horizon the day began to dawn . It was still very early, but a lark was already
singing . SO were the nightingales in the gardens near the
sea . In the distance
shone the light from the lighthouse, the guard ship , etc .
From the window of my room that same night I looked on the roofs of the
houses that can be seen from there and on the tops of the elm trees, dark against
the night
sky
. Over those roofs
one single star, but a beautiful , large, friendly
one. And I thought of you all and of my own past years an d of our home, an d
in me arose the words and the emotion :
Keep me from being a son that maketh
ashamed ; give me Thy blessing, not because I deserve it, but for my mother
’s
sake . Thou art love, cover
all
things . Without Thy continued blessings we
succeed in nothing .
”
Enclosed i s a little drawing of the View from the school window
through
which the boys wave good-by to their parents when they are going back to the
station after a visit . None of us will ever forget the View from the window . Y ou
ong bt to bare seen it this week when it rained, especially in the twilight when the
lamps were lit and their light was reﬂected in the wet street .
On such days Mr . Stokes i s sometimes in a bad temper, and when the boys
make more noise than he likes, they occasionally have to g o without their supper.
I wish you could see them looking from the window then, it is rather melancholy

they have
so little else except their meals to look forward to an d to help them
pass their days .
I should also like you to see them going from the dark stairs and passage to
the dining room, where the bright sun i s shining . Another curious place i s the
room with the rotten ﬂoor . It has
six washbasins in which they have to wash
themselves a dim light ﬁlters onto the washstand through a window with broken
panes . It is a rather melancholy sight .
I should like to spend a winter with them or to have spent a winter with them
in the past to know what it i s like . The boys made an Oil stain on your drawing,
please excuse them .
Enclosed i s a little note for Uncle Jan . And
now good
night ; if anybody
should ask after me, give them my kind regards . Do you visit Borchers now and
then ? If you see him say hello to him for me, also Willem Valki s and all at Roos
’s .
A handshake from
Your loving brother, Vincent
A 7
DORDRECHT
[Letter written by P . C . Gorlitz to Frederik van Beden
J]
Your article in D e N ienn/e Gids about the painter Vincent van Gogh induces me
to give you some information about this man . I held regular intercourse with
him for a year, now approximately ﬁfteen years ago, at Dordrecht, where both he
and I were employed, and where we boarded in the very same house .
I was an assistant teacher at Dordrecht, and ﬁfteen years ago was living in
Tolbrug straatje there, a neighborhood
of no high standing, when
one day my
landlord told me that a young man, a clergyman
’s son from Etten and Leur , had
applied for board and lodging in his house . Seeing that he had already taken in
three young people, he begged me to do him the favor of sharing my room with
the newcomer, as otherwise he could not take him in . I agreed to thi s ; the newly
arrived young man was Mr. Vincent van Gogh, who had got the position
of
bookkeeper in Blu ssé 8c Van Braam
’
s bookshop .
He was a man totally different from the usual type
of the children of man .
Hi s face was ugly, hi s mouth more or less awry, moreover his face was densely
covered with freckles, and he had hair of a reddish hue . A s I said, hi s face was
ugly, but as soon as he spoke about religion
or art,
an d then became excited,
whi ch was sure to happen very soon, hi s eyes would sparkle, and hi s features
would make a deep impression on me ; it wasn
’t his own face an y longer : it had
become beautiful .
A S we lived in one room, hardly any of hi s doings could escape my attention .
When he came back from hi s ofﬁce at nine o
’clock in the evening, he would
immediately light
“a little wooden pipe ; he would take down a big Bible, and sit
down to read assiduously, to copy texts and to learn them by heart ; he would
I Frederik van Eeden wrote an appreci ative article on Vincent in D e IVi euwe Gids (the literary
monthly Tbe N ew Guide)
of Dec ember 1 , 1 890. In c onnection with this Mr. Gorlitz wrote him
the following letter.

also write
all kinds of religious compositions . When I sai d to him on such oc
casions,
“Van Gogh, my boy , you
’re working yourself too hard, you had better g o
rest for a while,
” he would answer with a peculi ar smile, half melancholy, half
humorous, which made hi s Sharp ugly features
so attractive, so beautiful,
“Oh
dear, G
, the Bible is my comfort, the staff of my life . It is the most delicious book
I know, and to follow what Jesus taught mankind will be the purpose ofmy life .
Thus, evening after evening, he would
Sit reading hi s big folio volume or a
small English New Testament, or the j nn/eeltf
'
es [Little Jewels] by the Rev . Mr .
Spurgeon (the only three books he used to read, as long as I knew him), and
when he went to bed about one o
’clock, he would go on reading the Bible until
he fell asleep . And early in the morning I would ﬁnd him lying on hi s bed with
hi s beloved book on hi s pillow, and then I would wake him up so that he might
g o where hi s humdrum little job as a bookkeeper called him.
He was so modest, so timid in some respects . One day— we had known each
other about a month— he asked me, again with hi s irresistibly charming smile,
“G . , you could do me such an enormously great favor if you wanted to .
I replied,
“Well, by doing what ? Say the word .
”
Oh, you see, this room i s really your room, and now I should so very much
like to have your permission to paste some little Biblical pic tures
on the wall
paper.
” Of course I immediately acceded to this request, and he went to work
with feverish haste . And within half an hour the whole room was decorated
with Biblical scenes
and ecce-homos, and Van Gogh had written under each
Head of Christ,
“Ever sorrowful, but always rejoicing .
”
This scriptural expression reﬂected the state
of hi s. own mind as clearly as
anything could . On one of the Christian holy days , I think it was Easter, he
framed every picture of Jesus in palm branches . I am not a religious man , but
I thought his religious devoutness touching to contemplate .
When Sunday came Van Gogh would go to church three times, either to the
Roman Catholic church, or to the Protestant
or Old Episcopal church, which
was commonly called the Janseni st church . When once w e made
the remark,
“But, my dear Van Gogh, how i s it possible that you can go to three churches
of such divergent creeds
he sai d,
“Well, in every church I see God, and it
’
s all
the same to me whether a Protestant pastor or a Roman Catholic priest preaches ;
it i s not real ly a matter of dogma, but
of the spirit of the Gospel,
and I ﬁnd
thi s spirit in all churches . ”
To the present day I have a clear memory of the pleased, intensely satisﬁed
expression on hi s face when he succeeded at last in inducing us to accompany
him to church . When we went home he asked,
Didn
’t you feel ﬁner beneath
those beautiful vaults , with that stately organ , than if you had been sitting in
your room smoking cigars ? Are you going to come with me next week? Y ou
will , won
’t you,
” he wheedled, and I could not refuse him ; I went with him again .
He would often ask us if he might read something to us ;
and this he would
do, not at all to the satisfaction of the youngest one among us, who would try
to set us laughing by offering absurd observations or making faces . On one occa
sion I drew Van Gogh
’s attention to this , and told him,
“Don
’t do such useless

work, my dear fellow ; the simple fact i s that he thinks it ridiculous ; he i s laughing
But the man answered, Never mind, G . , let him laugh, I shan
’t lose my temper
because of that ; he doesn
’t know better yet, someday he will learn to see i t ; if
I succeed in inspiring his mind to seriousness, if only for a quarter of an hour,
I shal l think my trouble rewarded .
”
Van Gogh out of temper ! Never, not once did I observe in his character the
least little bit of an indication
of an evil quality or inclination . He lived like a
saint, and was as frugal as a hermit. In the afternoon, at the table, the three of
us would eat with the appetite
of famished wolves ; not he, he would not eat
meat, only a little morsel
on Sundays, and then only after being urged by our
landlady for a long time . Four potatoes with a suspicion of gravy and a mouthful
of vegetables constituted his whole dinner . To
our insistence that he make a
hearty dinner and eat meat, he would answer,
“To a human being physical life
ought to be a paltry detail ; vegetable food i s sufficient,
all the rest i s luxury .
’
How sensitive a man he was will become evident to you from the two incidents
I am now going to relate .
One Saturday afternoon we went out for a walk ; suddenly he saw an emaciated,
miserable, deserted street dog, a poor hungry beggar of a dog . He searched hi s
purse and i n it found a
“dubbeltje
” [twopence]
— it was all the money he had, for
it was the last days of the month . Then he bought two rolls for a penny to give
to the dog, and Stood looking at the animal full
of complacency as it devoured
the bread in a few swallows . Going back to hi s compani ons, Van Gogh said,
“What do you think this animal told me just now ? That he would like to have
another couple ofrolls like that,
and following hi s impulse, he bought two more
and gave them to the yearning dog . Now he didn
’t even have the money to
buy a pack of tobacco, the only luxury he permitted himself.
The second incident was of a more serious nature .
It was again on a Saturday that he came to me with hi s own smile and said,
G
. , I need y ou, perhaps you can help me, I
’m in a bad ﬁx . I just got word from
home that
an
Old peasant I
’ve known for years, and who has always been a
faithful follower
of my father, i s dying . I
’m so fond of that man, and I should
like so much to see him once more ; I want to close hi s eyes, but I can
’t pay for
the journey to Breda, I haven
’t got any money left. Should you think it queer,
G . , to advance me the money for such a purpose ? —and I don
’t dare
ask our
landlord for it .
”
“I think it queer, Van Gogh?— not
on your life, but I shall not be able to
manage the whole ; here i s something ; the
‘boss
’ will lend you the rest ; I
’ll ask
him to put it down
on my bill , then we
’ll settle
our account in due time, for
instance on the Day of Atonement .
”
He went,
an d
on Sunday
night came home again, and when I asked hi m,
Well, Van Gogh, how di d it go ?
” he answered,
“When I came to that peasant
’s
house it was too late ; he had died a few hours earlier .
”
“God bless me, Vincent, that was a rotten thing for you !
” But he replied, hi s
Smile a little more melancholy than at other times,
“Y ou use the wrong expression,

G . , it wasn
’t a rotten thing ; it was certainly a disappointment, but these things
are there to strengthen man on hi s way through life ; yet I
’m glad I was there,
for I did not go there in vain ; I sat down with the members
of the old man
’s
family and prayed with them . I
’ll tell you what my words to them were : Let
Jesus and hi s teachings be unto you the light
on your path and the lamp for
your feet, then you will learn to he resigned . ”
But although thi s man tried to do his job with an iron zeal and as cheerfully
as was possible for him, thi s job weighed upon him like a leaden burden ; the
poor fellow was unﬁt for his profession . While bookkeeping he would write
sermons or read them, and psalms or texts from the Bible ; he struggled against
it , but it was too much for him . Besides , it was as clear as daylight that hi s were
not the qualities of a businessman . It was hi s job not only to keep the books but
also to attend to the sale of the artistic prints in the shop . For instance he advised
some ladies to buy a cheaper engraving, whose artistic value he explained, rather
than a more expensive one, which was less beautiful according to him, but for
which the ladies showed a preference . He drew unpleasant comments
on hi s
method of working and doing business , and this was painful to him ; for a time
he managed to hide hi s pent-up feelings— why? T he why became clear to me
when during a conversation I had with him he told me that he thought it
so nice that he was no longer a burden to hi s parents— that he now earned hi s
own bread, and that in the past he had found this di fﬁcult, in London and in
Paris, where (if I am not mistaken) he had tried to qualify for the art-dealing
business .
During the same conversation he remarked with great satisfaction,
Yes, G . ,
I earn as much as my predecessor here .
” Thi s was an illusion on his part, for he
received
1 20 g ui ldersI less than hi s predecessor, who had had experience ; but
fortunately for him hi s employer was considerate enough to let him keep hi s
illusion .
He used to speak rather often about London and hi s stay there . Many a time
on our rambles he would point out to me a picturesque back yard with a lean-to
near the waterside,
or something like that, and would then say,
“Look how
exqui sitely beautiful thi s is ; it reminds me of London ; there I used to wander
around a lot in the slum districts, and many a time I found a spot just as beautiful
as here in Dordrecht .
” He also deeply enjoyed the ﬁne river views in the neigh
borhood ofDordrecht then hi s face would brighten wonderfully, hi s melancholy
expression was gone,
and it seemed as though he was breathing in this beauty .
But on the whole during this period he was not dominated by his art but by hi s
mystical religious feelings .
One evening he asked me,
What kind of school do you teach in ?
” I replied,
“A charity school .
”
Then you have a splendid job . Don
’t you think it delightful to teach those
poor creatures something good,
and to lift them
out
of their misery
and
evil
ways ? When I was in London I taught a class a few times a week, at night, in a
school for the down-and- out, for pleasure . That time i s unforgettable for me ; a
Or 2 0 guilders ; this c annot be deciphered with any
c ertainty [H . van Eeden]
.


Van Gogh, at Amsterdam, if I am rightly informed ; at hi s age he had to learn
Latin, etc . I never saw him again ; but later on I heard that he had chucked Latin,
etc . (that a person should have to learn Latin and Greek in order to preach the
teachings of the Gospel was something wholly out of keeping with hi s c onvic
tions), and that he had become an evangeli st in Belgium, in the mining di stricts .
I was not at all surprised at thi s ; I think he may have comforted many a poor
devil by the power of his rich mind .
I am afraid, most respected Mr . Van Eeden, that I have bored you with thi s
lengthy story ; should this be the case, please do not take it ill of me, for I felt it
would be wrong for me to refrain from telling you all I know about this good man .
P . C . Gorlitz
100
Dear Theo,
Amsterdam, 4 June
1 877
Y ou remember that ni ght at Dordrecht when we walked together through the
town, around the Great Church and through
so many streets, and along the
canals— in which the old houses and the lights from the windows were reﬂected ?
You spoke then about the description of a day in London by Theophile Gautier,
the coachman for a wedding party in front of the door of a church on a stormy
foggy day : I saw it all before me . If that struck you, you will also appreciate the
pag esI I enclose . I read them on a very stormy day last week
it was in the evening,
and the sunset threw a ruddy glow on the gray evening clouds, against which
the masts of the ships an d the row of old houses and trees stood out ; and every
thing was reﬂected in the water, and the sky threw a Strange light on the black
earth, on the green grass with daisies and buttercups , and on t he bushes of white
and purple lilacs , and on the elderberry bushes of the garden in the yard .
In London I had read that book of Lamartin e
’
s, and I was very much struck
by it ; the last pages especially made a deep impression on me again . Tell me
what you think
of it . These places mentioned in it— Hampton Court with its
avenues of linden trees full of rookeries
Whitehall overgrown with ivy at the
back ; and the square bordering St . James
’s Park where one can see Westminster
Abbey— they are
all before me, and the weather and the gloomy atmosphere
cela m
’
empéche de dormir [it keeps me from sleeping]
.
Were you in Etten Sunday ? I certainly hope so, an d that you had a pleasant
day . I gathered thi s from a sentence in the last letter from Etten,
We
expect
Theo probably next Sunday.
”
This evening I have to go to Uncle Stricker
’s . Went to early service yesterday
morning, heard a sermon on the text :
“DO y ou want to be healthy?
” —how they
that be whole need not a physician, but they that are sick . After that I heard
Uncle Stricker in the well-known Amstel Church on II Cor .
4
1 8 : For
the
things which are seen are temporal ; but the things which are not seen are eternal .
Toward the end there was a passage in which he spoke with much rapture
and exclaimed,
“But love remains”
; how we are tied together by God with
Lamartine
’
s Cromwell . Vinc ent c opied three full pages, part of whi ch is added to this letter.

bonds that are in Hi s hand, and in them lies
our streng th, for they are old and
do not easily break.
I am very busy, so aDieu ; perhaps I will continue this letter tonight, a hand
shake from
Your loving brother, Vincent
Today when I passed the ﬂower market
on the Singel, I
saw something very
pretty. A peasant was standing selling a whole bun ch of pots with all kinds of
ﬂowers and plants ; ivy was behind it, and hi s little girl was sitting between it all,
such a child as Maris would have painted,
so simple in her li ttle black bonnet,
and with a pair of bright, smiling eyes . She was knitting ; the man prai sed hi s
ware—
an d if I could have spared the money I should have liked only too well
to buy some— and he said, pointing unintentionally at his little daughter also,
“Doesn
’t it look pretty?
”
119
Dear Theo,
Amsterdam,
1 8 February
1 878
Thanks for your letter of February
1 7 ; it made me very happy,
as I had been
looking forward to it
so much . And I am answering it at once, boy, for I think
of you and long for you
so often, and every morning the prints on the wall of
my little study remind me
of you— “Christus Consolator
”
; the woodcut after
Van Goyen,
“Dordrecht
”
;
“Le Four by Rousseau, etc .
- for. I received them all
from you . So the pot was calling the kettle black when you wrote me that I
ought not to send you a print for your room sometimes when I ﬁnd one that I
think you will like . In my turn I say , Enough of that ; but tell me if you have
got some new acquisitions for your collection lately.
Last evening at Uncle Cor
’s I
saw a whole volume of that magazine , L
’A rt ;
you have the issue with the wood engravings after Corot . I was especially struck
by wood engravings after drawings by Millet, including
Falling Leaves,
” “The
Ravens
’ Wedding,
”
“Donkeys in a Marsh,
”
“The Woodcutters,
”
“Housewife
Sweeping Her Room,
”
“A Farm Courtyard
(night effect), etc . Also by an
etching after Corot,
“The Dune
”
; and
“St . John
’s Eve
” after Breton ; and
others by Chauvin ; and another after Millet,
The Beans .
”
Last Sunday Uncle Jan and I spent the whole afternoon and eveni ng at Uncle
Cor
’s . It was a very pleasant day for me . I got up very early and went to the
French church in the morning . A clergyman from the neighborhood of Lyons
preached here— he had come to collect money for an evangelical mission . Hi s
sermon was mainly stories from the lives of the working people in the factories,
an d though he was not particularly eloquent and
one could even hear that he
spoke with some diffi cul ty and eﬂort, hi s words were still effective because they
came from the heart— only such are powerful enough to touch other hearts .
At one o
’clock I had to be at the Sunday school Of an English clergyman,
Adler, in the Bamdesteeg ; he has a small but very neat old church there . H ow
ever, the school was held in a little room where even at that hour, in the middle
of the day, the gaslight had to be turned on . There were perhaps twenty children
from that poor section . Though he i s a foreigner, he preaches in Dutch (but
43

the service i s in English) ; he teaches hi s Bible class in Dutch too, and does it
very well . I had brought with me a sketch of the map
of the Holy Land which
I made for Father
’s birthday, in red crayon and o n strong brown paper, and I
gave it to him ; I thought that little room would be a ni ce place for it, and I
am glad it hangs on the _wall there now . I had met him at Mr . McFarlane
’
s, the
incumbent of the English church in the Beguinage whom I ha d ventured to call
on ; he received me kindly and I hope to repeat my visit someday.
Besides this English clergyman, I also ventured to call on the Reverend Mr .
Gag nebin . He took it in good part and told me to come again some evening ;
as he suggested tonight, I must g o there in a little while . I hope to write you
all
about it . Father had also advised me to try and make some acquaintances . I was
so glad to speak French and Engli sh again— ir i s a peculiar sensation when one
hasn
’t for a long time .
The last two mornings I got up very early to work on a sketch of the map of
Paul
’s travels which I had begun and have
now ﬁni shed ; it looks well
now
(with the names in French), even better than those I made for Father and for
my own room . I plan to give it to the Reverend Mr . Gag nebin , as I want to
emphasize that Visit if possible : he i s a learned man who can perhaps give me
some good advice later on if he realizes that my intentions are serious .
I have just been to G ag nebin
’
s, but I was told that he was too busy to receive
me (yet he had ﬁxed thi s hour and this day for my visit)
. I heard music in the
house, so probably there was
something going on . I left what I had made for
G ag nebin with the servant, requesting that it be given to him . I want to do
such things now and then, for it certainly i s very doubtful that I shall ever succeed,
I mean, shall ever pass all the examinations . Five years at the least is a very long
time ; if one begins earlier, it is SO much easier . It i s true I can work longer and
concentrate better, and things that many others care about have no attraction
for me ; but, after all, the work costs me greater effort . Even if I fail, I want to
leave my mark here and there behind me .
There are
so many, many things
one has
to know, and though they try to
reassure me, it constantly gives me a terribly anxious feeling . There i s no remedy
but to set to work again , since it is clearly my duty to do this, whatever it costs .
So I must push on , for standing still or going back i s out of the question : it
would make things even more difficult and cause confusion— and the end would
mean the necessity of beginning all over again .
I had a nice letter from home ; the journey seems not to have done Father
any harm . It is pretty late, and I am not a little tired, for I have walked quite a
distance today. Have a good time, and blessings on your work and on all you
undertake ; write soon if you can . My regards to all at the Rooses
’
, and a warm
handshake in thought . Good night an d sleep well, believe me,
Your loving brother, Vincent
Tuesday morning. It i s beautiful weather this morning, I have to g o to Mendes
’
s
in a few minutes .

1 8 7 8 —
1 8 8 0 T H E BO RI N A G E
Vincent
’
s mi ssion to the miners
127
Petites Wasmes,
26 December 1 878
Dear Theo,
Borinag e, Hainaut
It i s time for me to write you again, ﬁrst, to send you my very best wishes at
the beginning of the New Year . May your share be everything that
’s good, and
may God
’s blessing rest on your work in the year we now begin .
I am eager to receive a letter from you, to hear how y ou are and what you are
doing, and also to hear perhaps if you have seen any beautiful and remarkable
things lately.
A s for me, I am sure you realize that here in the Borinag e there are no pictures
generally speaking, they do not even know what a picture i s . So of course I have
not seen anything in the way
of art since I left Brussels . Notwithstanding, the
country i s very pict uresque and very unique here : everything sp eaks, as it were,
and is f ull of character . Lately, during the dark days before Christmas, the ground
was covered with snow ; then everything reminded one of the medieval pictures
by Peasant Brueghel, for instance, and
of those by the many who have known
how to express
so remarkably well that peculiar effect of red and green, black
and white . At every moment I am reminded here of the work of Thijs Maris or
of Albrecht Durer . There are sunken roads, overgrown with thornbushes, and
old, gnarled trees with their fantastic roots , which perfectly resemble that road
on the etching by Diirer,
“Death and the Knight .
” So, a few days ago, it was an
intriguing sight to see the miners going home in the white snow in the evening
at twilight . Those people are quite black . When they come out of the dark mines
into daylight, they look exactly like chimney sweeps . Their houses are very small,
an d might better be called huts ; they are scattered along the sunken roads, and
in the wood, and on the Slopes
of the hills . Here
and there one can
see moss
covered roofs, an d in the evening the light shines kindly through the small -paned
windows .
In our Brabant we have the underbrush
of oak and in Holland, the pollard
willows here blackthom hedges surround the gardens, ﬁelds and meadows . Now ,
with the snow, the effect i s like black characters on white paper— like pages
of
the Gospel .
I have
already spoken in public here several times, in a rather large room
especially arranged for religious meetings, as well as at the meetings they hold
in the evenings in the miners
’ cottages, which may best be called Bible classes .
Among other things, I spoke about the parable of the mustard seed, the barren
4 5

ﬁg tree, the man born blind . On Christmas, of course, about the stable in Bethle
hem and peace on earth . If with God
’s blessing I get a permanent appointment
here, I shall be very, very happy .
Everywhere around one sees the big chimneys and the immense heaps of coal
at the entrances to the mines, the so-called charbonnages . Y ou know that large
drawing by Bosboom,
“Chaudfontaine”— it expresses the character ofthe country
well , only here it is all coal ; the stone quarries are in the north of Hainaut, and
in Chaudfontaine it i s iron.
I still think
so Often of the day you spent in Brussels and of our visit to the
museum . And I often wish that you were nearer so we could be together more
often . Write again soon . I look at that etching of
“A Young Citizen
” over and
over again .
The language of the miners i s not so very easy to understand, but they under
stand ordinary French well , provided it is spoken quickly and fluently ; then, of
course, it resembles their patois , which is spoken with great rapidity .
At a meeting this week my text was Acts
1 6
9 ,
“And a vision appeared
to
Paul in the night ; There stood a man
of Macedonia, and prayed him, saying,
Come over into Macedonia, and help us . ” And they listened attentively when I
tried to describe what the Macedonian who needed and longed for the comfort
of the Gospel and for knowledge of the only true G od was like . How we must
think of him as a laborer with lines of sorrow and suffering and fatigue in hi s
face— without splendor or glamour, but with an immortal soul— who needed the
food that does not perish, God
’s word . H ow Jesus Christ i s the Master who
can comfort and strengthen a man like the Macedonian— a laborer an d working
man whose life i s hard- because He is the Great Man
of Sorrows Who knows
our ills , Who was called a carpenter
’s son though He was the Son of G od, Who
worked for thirty years in a humble carpenter
’s Shop to fulﬁll God
’s will . And
G od wills that in
imitation of Christ man should live humbly an d go through
life not reaching for the
sky , but adapting himself to the earth below, learning
from the Gospel to be meek and simple of heart .
I have already had occasion to Visit some patients, as there are many sick
people here .
I wrote today to the President of the Committee Of Evangelization, asking
him if my case could be brought up at the next meeting Of the committee .
It has been thawing tonight ; I cannot tell y ou how picturesque the hilly
country i s in the thaw, now that the snow i s melting and the black ﬁelds with
the green winter wheat are Visible again .
For a foreigner the village here i s a real labyrinth with innumerable narrow
streets and alleys of small miners
’ huts, Situated at the foot of the hills as well as
on the slopes and on the top . Y ou can best compare it to a Village like Scheve
ningen, especially the back streets , or to those Villages in Brittany which we know
from pictures . But you have traveled through this part of the country on your
way to Paris, and perhaps you remember it somewhat . The Protestant churches
are small— like the one at De Hoeve, only a little larger— but the place where I
spoke i s only a large bare room which
can accommodate a hundred people at
46

the most. I also assisted at a religious service in a stable or shed, so you see it i s
quite simple and original .
Write soon if y ou have time, and know that you are again and again, aye
constantly, in my thoughts . May God
’s blessing be yours in
the New Year .
Believe me, with a handshake, always,
Your so loving brother, Vincent
My regards to everyone at Roos
’s, and also to everyone who inquires after me .
When you write, please address your letter : M . van der Haegen, colporteur a
Paturages , pres de Mons , Borinag e, Hainaut .
I have just visited a little old woman in a charcoal-burner
’s family. She i s very
ill , but patient and full of faith . I read a chapter with her and prayed with them
all . People here have a characteristic Simplicity and good nature, like the Brabant
people at Zundert and Etten .
129
Dear Theo,
Wasmes, April
1 879
It i s time that you heard from me again . From home I heard that you had been
in Etten for a few days and that y ou were on a business trip . I certainly hope
y ou had a good journey . I suppose you will be in the dunes someof these days
and occasionally in Scheveningen . It i s lovely here in spring, too ; there are spots
where one could almost fancy oneself in the dunes, because of the hills .
Not long ago I made a very interesting expedition, spending
six hours in a
mine . It was Marcasse, one of the Oldest and most dangerous mines in the neigh
borhood . It has a bad reputation because many perish in it, either going down or
coming up, or through poisoned air, ﬁredamp explosion, water seepage, cave-in s,
etc . It i s a gloomy spot, and at ﬁrst everything around looks dreary and desolate .
Most of the miners are thin and pale from fever
they look tired and emaciated,
weather-beaten and aged before their time . On the whole the women are faded
and worn . Around the mine are poor miners
’ huts, a few dead trees black from
smoke, thorn hedges, dunghills, ash dumps, heaps of useless coal, etc . Maris
could make a wonderful picture of it .
I will try to make a little sketch
of it presently to give you an idea
of how
it looks .
I had a good guide, a man who has already worked there for thirty-three years
kind and patient, he explained everything well and tried to make it clear to me .
So together we went down 700 meters an d explored the most hidden corners
of that underworld . The maintenag es or gredins [cells where the miners work]
which are situated farthest from the exit are called des cacbes [hiding places, places
where men search]
.
This mine has ﬁve levels , but the three upper ones have been exhausted and
abandoned ; they are no longer worked because there i s no more coal . A picture
of the maintenag es would be something new and unheard of— or rather, never
before seen . Imagine a row
of cells in a rather narrow, low passage, shored up
with rough timber. In each of those cells a miner in a coarse linen suit, ﬁlthy
47

and black as a chimney sweep , i s busy hewing coal by the pale light of a small
less like the cells in a beehive, or like a dark, gloomy passage in an underground
prison, or like a row of small weaving looms, or rather more like a row of baking
ovens such as the peasants have, or like the partitions in a crypt. The tunnels
themselves are like the big chimneys of the Brabant farms .
The water leaks through in some, and the light of the miner
’s lamp makes a
curious effect, reﬂected as in a stalactite cave . Some of the miners work in the
maintenag es, others load the cut coal into small carts that run on rails, like a street
car . This i s mostly done by children, boys as well as girls . There i s also a stable
yard down there, 700 meters underground, with about seven Old horses which
pull a great many of those carts to the so-called accrochage, the place from which
they are pulled up to the surface . Other miners repair the old galleries to prevent
their collapse or make new galleries in the coal vein . A S the mariners ashore are
homesick for the
sea, notwithstanding
all the dangers
an d hardships which
threaten them,
so the miner would rather be under the ground than above it .
The villages here look desolate and dead and forsaken ; life goes on underground
instead of above .
“One might live here for years and never know the real State
of things unless one went down in the mines .
People here are very ignorant and untaught—r most ofthem cannot read— but at
the same time they are intelligent and quick at their di fficult work brave an d frank,
they are short but square-shouldered,with melancholy deep-set eyes . They are skill
ful at many things, and work terribly hard . They have a nervous temperament— I
do not mean weak, but very sensitive . They have an innate, deep-rooted hatred
and a strong mistrust of anyone who is domineering . With miners one must have
a miner
’s character and temperament, and nopretentious pride or mastery, or one
will never get along with them or gain their conﬁdence .
Did I tell you at the time about the miner who was so badly hurt by a ﬁredamp
explosion
Thank G od, he has recovered and is going out again, an d i s beginning
to walk some distance just for exercise ; hi s hands are still weak and it will be
some time before he can use them for hi s work, but he i s out of danger. Since
that time there have been many cases
of typhoid and malignant fever, of what
they call la sotte ﬁévre, which gives them bad dreams like nightmares and makes
them delirious . So again there are many sickly an d bedridden people— emaciated ,
weak, and miserable .
In one house they are all ill with fever and have little or no help,
so that the
patients have to nurse the patients .
Ici c
’est les malades qui soignent les malades
”
[here the sick tend the sick] , said a woman, like,
“Le pauvre est l
’ami du pauvre
[the poor man is the poor man
’s friend]
.
Have you seen any beautiful pictures lately ? I am eager for a letter from you .
Has Israels done much lately and Maris and Mauve ?
A few days ago a colt was born here in the stable, a pretty little animal that
soon stood ﬁrm
on hi s legs . The miners keep many goats here, and there
are
kids in every house ; rabbits are also very common here in the miners
’ houses .
48


I often read in Uncle Tom
’
s Cabin these days . There i s Still
so much slavery
in the world, and in this remarkably wonderful book that important question i s
treated with
so much wisdom,
so much love, and such zeal and interest in the
true welfare of the poor oppressed that one comes back to it again and again,
always ﬁnding something new .
I still can ﬁnd no better deﬁnition ofthe word art than thi s , L
’art c
’est l
’homme
ajouté ala nature” [art i s man added to nature]
— nature, reali ty, truth, but with a
signiﬁcance, a conception, a character, whi ch the artist brings out in it, and to
which he gives expression,
“qu
’il dégage,
” which he di sentangles, sets free and
interprets . A picture by Mauve or Maris or Israels says more, and says it more
clearly, than nature herself. It i s the same with books, and in Uncle Tom
’
s Cabin
especially, the artist has put things in a new light ; in this book, though it i s
becoming an
old book already— that i s, written years ago— all things have be
come new . The sentiment in it is so ﬁne, so elaborate, so masterly . It i s written
with so much love,
so much seriousness ,
so faithfully. It i s humble and simple,
but at the same time so truly sublime, so noble and reﬁned .
Recently I read a book about the English coal di strict, but it di d not give
many particulars . Enclosed i s a wood engraving for your collection .
The other day I made the acquaintance of somebody who has been a foreman
over the miners for many years . Of humble origin, he i s a self-made man . Now
he has a lung di sease, serious enough, and c an no longer stand the terribly fati
g uing work down in the mine . It i s very interesting to hear him speak about all
those things relating to the mines . He has always remained a friend of the miner
(unlike so many others who have also got on, but more for the sake of money
than real distinction, and prompted by less noble and very often mean motives)
.
He has the heart ofa laborer— faithful and honest and brave— but he i s far superior
to most of them in intellectual development . More than once during a strike he
has been the only person with any inﬂuence on the miners . They would listen to
nobody,
they would follow nobody
’s advice but hi s ; and he alone was obeyed
in the critical moment . When I met him for the ﬁrst time, I thought of the etching
by Meissonier which we know so well,
“The Reader .
” One of the Denis boys i s
about to become engaged to hi s daughter, that i s why he Visits the house here
now and then, though rarely, and so I made hi s acquaintance . Since then I vi sited
hi m a few times . Have you ever read Leg ouV é, Les Peres et les Enfants ? It i s a
remarkable book . I found it at hi s house and read it with interest .
A few days ago I received a letter from the Reverend Mr . Jones of Isleworth
in which he writes about building little wooden churches here in the -Borinag e .
Is that practicable, i s it desirable
He i s ready to work for that end, that i s, for
the erection of the ﬁrst of such little buildings . He even speaks
of coming here
in the autumn to talk it over ; I certainly hope it happens . If you have time, write
me a line, and if you can, stop here when you go to Paris . At all events let me
know, ifpossible, on what train you will be passing the station nearest to Wasmes ,
for then I will try to be there . Blessings on your work, believe me always ,
Your loving brother, Vincent

13 3
My Dear Theo,
Cuesmes , July
1 8 80
I am writing you with some reluctance, not having done so in such a long time,
for many reasons .
To a certain degree you have become a stranger to me, and I have become
the same to you, more than you may think ; perhaps it would be better for us not
to continue in this way . Probably I would not have written you even now if I
were not under the obligation an d necessity of doing so, if you yourself had not
given me cause . At Etten I learned that you had sent 5 0 francs for me ; well, I
have accepted them . Certainly with reluctance, certainly with a rather melancholy
feeling, but I am up against a stone wall and in a sort of mess . How can I do
otherwise
SO I am writing you to thank you .
Perhaps you know I am back in the Borinag e. Father would rather I stay in
the neighborhood
of Etten ; I refused, and in thi s I think I acted for the best .
Involuntarily, I have become more
or less a kind of impossible and suspect
personage in the family, at least somebody whom they do not trust, so how could
I in any way be of any use to anybody ? Therefore, above all, I think the best and
most reasonable thing for me to do i s to g o away and keep at a convenient distance,
so that I cease to exist for you all.
As molting time— when they change their feathers— i s for birds, so adversity
or mi sfortune i s the difficult time for us human beings . One can stay in it— in
that time of molting— one can also emerge renewed ; but anyhow it must not be
done in public and it is not at all amusing, therefore the only thing to do is to
hide oneself. Well, so be it .
Now, though it i s very difficult, almost impossible, to regain the conﬁdence of
a whole family, which i s not quite free from prejudices
an d other qualities as
fashionable and honorable, I do
not quite despai r that by and by, slowly but
surely, a cordial understanding may be renewed between some of us . And in the
very ﬁrst place, I should like to see that entente cordiale, not to put it stronger,
re-established between Father and me ; and I desire no less to see it re-established
between us two . An entente cordiale is inﬁnitely better than misunderstandings .
Now I must bore you with certain abstract things , but I hope you will listen
to them patiently . I am a man of passions, capable of and subject to doing more
or less foolish things, which I happen to repent, more or less, afterward . Now
and then I speak
and act too hastily, when it would have been better to wait
patiently. I think other people sometimes make the same mistakes . Well, this
being the case, what
’s to be done
Must I consider myself a dangerous man,
incapable of anything
I don
’t think so . But the problem i s to try every means to
put those selfsame passions to good use . For instance, to name one of the pas
sions, I have a more or less irresistible passion for books, and I continually want
to instruct myself, to study if you like, just as much as I want to eat my bread .
Y ou certainly will be able to understand this . When I was in other surroun dings ,
in the surroundings of pictures and works of art, you know how I had a Violent
passion for them, reaching the highest pitch of enthusiasm . And I am not sorry
about it, for even now ,farfrom tbat land, I am oftenbomesic/éfor tbeland ofpictures.

Y ou remember perhaps that I knew well (and perhaps I know still) who
Rembrandt was, or Millet, or Jules Dupre or Delacroix or Millais or M . Maris .
Well, now I do
not have those surroundings any more— yet that thing
called
soul , they say it never di es, but lives on and continues to search forever and ever
and ever . So instead of giving way to this homesickness, I said to myself: That
land, or the fatherland, i s everywhere . So instead of giving in to despair, I chose
the part of active melancholy— in so far as I possessed the power of activity— in
other words, I preferred the melancholy which hopes and aspires and seeks to that
which despairs in stagnation and woe . So I studied somewhat seriously the books
within my reach like the Bible,and the Frencb RevolutionbyMichelet, and lastwinter,
Shakespeare and a few by Victor Hugo and Dickens , and Beecher Stowe, and
lately Escbj lus, and then several others, less classical , several great
little masters .
Y ou know, those
little masters
” include people like Fabritius or Bida .
Now he who is absorbed in all this i s sometimes choquant, shocking, to others ,
and sometimes unwittingly sins against certai n forms and customs and social
conventions . It i s a pity, however, when thi s i s taken in bad part. For instance,
you know that I have often neglected my appearance ; I admit it, and I admit
that it i s shocking, But look here, poverty
and want have their share in the
cause, and also profound discouragement ; and then, it i s sometimes a good way
to assure the solitude necessary for concentrating on whatever study preoccupies
one. A very necessary study i s that of medicine ; there i s scarcely anybody who
does not try to know a little
of it, who does not try to understand what it i s
about, and you
see I do not yet know one word about it . All this absorbs and
preoccupies one— all this gives one something to dream about, to reﬂect on and
to think about .
Now for more than ﬁve years— I do not know exactly how long— I have been
more
or less without employment, wandering here
and there . You say, Since
a certain time you have gone down, you have deteriorated, you have not done
anything . Is this quite true ?
It i s true that occasionally I have earned my crust
of bread,
oc casionally
a
friend has given it to me in charity. I have lived as I could, as luck would have
it, haphazardly. It i s true that I have lost the conﬁdence of many
it i s true that
my ﬁnancial affairs are in a sad state ; it i s true that the future i s only too gloomy ;
it i s true that I might have done better ; it i s true that I
’ve lost time in terms of
earning my bread ; it i s true that even my studies are in a rather sad and hopeless
condition, and that my needs are greater- i
nﬁni tely greater— than my possessions .
But i s this what you call
“going down
i s thi s what you call
“doing nothing
”?
You will perhaps say, But why didn t you continue as they wanted you
to
they wanted you to g o through the university
My only answer i s, the expenses were too heavy, and besides, that future was
not much better than the one on the road now before me .
But I must continue on the path I have taken now . If I don
’
t do anything, if
I don
’t study, if I don
’t g o on seeking any longer, I am lost . Then woe i s me .
That is how I look at it : to continue, to continue, that i s what is necessary.
But you will ask, What i s your deﬁnite aim ?

That aim becomes more deﬁnite, will stand out slowly and surely, as the rough
draft becomes a sketch, and the sketch becomes a picture— little by little, by
working seriously
on it, by pondering over the idea, vague at ﬁrst, over the
thought that was ﬂeeting and passing, till it gets ﬁxed .
I must tell you that with evangelists it i s the same as with artists . There i s an
old academic school, often detestable, tyrannical, the accumulation ofhorrors ,
men who wear a cuirass, a steel armor,
of prejudices and conventions ; when
these people are in charge of affai rs, they dispose of positions, and by a system
of red tape they try to keep their protégés in their places and to exclude the other
man . Their God is like the G od of Shakespeare
’s drunken Falstaff, le dedans d
’une
e
'
g lise [the inside of a church]
indeed, by a curious chance some of these evangel
ical
gentlemen ﬁnd themselves with the same point of View
on spiritual
things as that drunken character (perhaps they would be somewhat surprised to
discover thi s if they were capable of human emotions)
. But there i s little fear of
their blindness ever changing to clear-sightedness in such matters .
This state of affairs has its bad side for him who does not agree, but protests
against it with all hi s soul and all hi s heart and all the indignation of which he i s
capable . For my part I respect academicians who are not like these, but the respect
able ones are rarer than
one would ﬁrst believe . One of the reasons why I am
unemployed now , why I have been unemployed for years, i s simply that I have
different ideas than the gentlemen who give the places to men who think as
they do . It is not merely the question
of dress which they have hypocritically
reproached me with ; it i s a much more serious question, I assure you .
Why do I tell you all this
— not to complain, not to excuse myself for things
in which I may or may not have been wrong, but simply to answer you . During
your Visit last summer, when we walked together near the abandoned pit which
they call La S orciere, you reminded me that there had been another time when
we two had walked together— near the
old canal and mill
of Rijswijk .
“And
then,
”
y ou said,
“we agreed in many things .
” But you added,
“Since then you
have changed so much, you are not the same any longer .
”
Well, that is not quite true . What has changed i s that my life then was less
difficult and my future seemed less dark ; but the inner state, my way of looking
at things and my way of thinking, has not changed . If there has been any change
at all, it i s that I think and believe and love more seriously now what I already
thought and believed and loved then .
So you would be wrong in persisting in the beliefthat, for instance,I should now
be less enthusiastic for Rembrandt, or Millet, or Delacroix, or whoever it may be ;
the contrary i s true . But, you see, there are many things which one must believe
and love . There i s something of Rembrandt in Shakespeare, and of Correggio in
Michelet, and of Delacroix in Victor Hugo ; and then there i s something of Rem
brandt in the Gospel, or something of the Gospel in Rembrandt— whichever, it
comes to the same if only one understands it properly, without misinterpreting
it and considering the equivalence of the comparisons , which do not pretend to
lessen the merits of the original personalities . And in Bunyan there i s something
of Maris or of Millet, and in Beecher Stowe there i s something of Ary Scheffer .
5

If now you can forgive a man for making a thorough study of pictures , admit
also that the love of books i s as sacred as the love of Rembran dt— I even think
the two complement each other. I am very fond
of the portrait
of a man by
Fabritius which, one day when we were walking together, we stood looking at
for a long while in Haarlem Museum. Yes, but I am as fond of Sydney Carton
in Dickens
’s Tale of Twe Cities, and I could Show you other ﬁgures as curiously
striking in other books, with a more or less remarkable resemblance . And I
think that Kent, a character in Shakespeare
’s King Lear, i s asnoble and disting ui shed
a personage as a ﬁgure by Th . de Keyser, though Kent
an d King Lear lived
in a much earlier period . Not to say more . My G od, how beautiful Shakespeare
is ! Who i s mysterious like him? Hi s lang uage and style c an indeed be compared
to an artist
’s brush, quivering with fever and emotion . But
one must learn to
read, just as one must learn to see and learn to live .
So you must
not think that I disavow things— I am rather faithful
in my
unfaithfulness and, though changed, I am the same ; my only anxiety i s, How
can I be of use in the world ? Can
’t I serve some purpose and be of any good
H ow can I learn more and study certain subjects profoundly
You
see, that i s
what preoccupies me constantly ; and then I feel imprisoned by poverty, excluded
from participating in certain work, and certain necessities are beyond my reach .
That is
one reason for being somewhat melancholy. And then
one feels an
“
emptiness where there might be friendship and strong and serious affections ,
and one feels a terrible discouragement gnawing at one
’s very moral energy,
and fate seems to put a barrier to the instincts of affection, and a choking ﬂood
of disgust envelops one . And one exclaims,
“How long, my God !
”
Well, what shall I say
Do our inner thoughts ever Show outwardly
There
may be a great ﬁre in our soul, yet no one ever comes to warm himself at it, and
the passers-by
see only a wisp of smoke coming through the chimney, and go
along their way
. Look here, now, what must be done ? Must one tend that inner
ﬁre, have salt in oneself, wait patiently yet with how much impatience for the
hour when somebody will come and sit down near it— maybe to stay
Let him
who believes in God wait for the hour that will come sooner or later .
For the moment it seems that things are going very badly with me, and it has
already been so for a considerable time and may continue awhile in the future ;
but after everything has seemed to g o wrong, perhaps a time will come when
things will g o right . I don
’t count
on it, perhaps it will never happen ; but if
there i s a change for the better, I should consider it so much gain, I should be
contented, I should say, At last ! you see tbere was sometbing
after all
But you will
say , Yet you are an intolerable being because you have impossible
ideas about religion and childish scruples of conscience .
If my ideas are impossible or childish, I hope to get rid of them— I ask no
better. But this i s approximately what I think on the subject. In Un Pbilosopbe
sous les toits, by Souvestre, you will ﬁnd how a man of the people
, a simple miser
able laborer, imagines hi s own country.
“Perhaps you have never thought what
your own country really i s,
” he said, putting hi s hand
on my shoulder .
“It i s
everything around you, everything that has brought you up and nourished you,

everything you have loved ; those ﬁelds that you
see, those houses, those trees ,
those young girls laughing as they pass— that i s your country ! The laws that
protect you, the bread whi ch rewards your labor, the words you speak, the joy
and the sorrow that come to you from the people and the things among which
you live— that i s your country ! The little room where you used to
see your
mother, the memories which she has left you, the earth in which she reposes:
\
that i s your country ! You see it, you breathe it, everywhere ! Figure to yourself
the rights and the duties, the affections and the needs , the memories and the
gratit ude ; gather it
all under one name, an d that name will be your country.
”
In the same way I think that everything whi ch i s really good and beautiful
Of inner moral, spiritual and sublime beauty in men and their works— comes
from G od, and that all whi ch i s bad and wrong in men and in their works i s not
of God, and God does not approve of it .
But I always think that the best way to know God i s to love many things .
Love a friend, a wife, something— whatever you like
-you will be
on the way
to knowing more about Him ; that i s what I
say to myself. But one must love
with a lofty and serious intimate sympathy, with strength, with intelligence ; and
one must always try to know deeper, better and more . That leads to G od, that
leads to unwavering faith .
To give you an example
someone loves Rembrandt, but seriously— that man
will know there i s a G od, he will surely believe it . Someone st udies the history
of the French Revolution— he will not be unbelieving, he will
see that in great
things also there i s a sovereign power manifesting itself. Maybe for a short time
somebody takes a free course at the great university of misery, and pays attention
to the things he sees with hi s eyes and hears with hi s ears , and thinks them over ;
he, too, will end in believing, and he will perhaps have learned more than he
can tell . To try to understand the real signiﬁcance of what the great artists , the
serious masters , tell us in their masterpieces, tbat leads to God ;
one man wrote
or told it in a book ; another, in a picture . Then simply read the Gospel and
the Bible : it makes you think, and think much, and think
all the time . Well,
think much and think
all the time, it rai ses your thoughts above the ordinary
level without your knowing it . We know how to read— well then, let us read !
It i s true that there may be moments when
one becomes somewhat absent
minded, somewhat visionary ; some become too absent-minded, too Visionary .
This i s perhaps the case with me, but it i s my own fault ; maybe there i s some
excuse after
all— I was absorbed, preoccupied, troubled, for some reason— but
one overcomes this . The dreamer sometimes falls into a well, but i s said to ger
out
of it afterward . And the absent-minded man also has hi s lucid intervals in
compensation . He i s sometimes a person who has hi s reasons for being as he i s,
but they are not always understood at ﬁrst, or are unconsciously forgotten most
of the time, from lack of interest . A man who has been tossed back and forth
for a long time, as if on a stormy sea, at last reaches hi s destination ; a man who
has seemed good-for-nothing and incapable of any employment, any function,
ends in ﬁnding one and becoming active and capable of action— he shows himself
quite different from what he seemed at ﬁrst.

I write somewhat at random whatever comes to my pen . I should be very
glad if you could
see in me something more than an idle fellow. Because there
are two kinds of idleness, which are a great contrast to each other . There i s the
man who i s idle from laziness and from lack of character, from the baseness of
hi s nature . If you like, you may take me for such a one .
On the other hand, there i s the idle man who i s idle in spite ofhimself, who i s
inwardly consumed by a great longing for action but does nothing, because it i s
impossible for him to do anything, because he seems to be imprisoned in some
cage, because he does not possess what he needs to become productive, because
circumstances bring him inevitably to that point . Such a man does not always
know what he could do, but he instinc tively feels, I am good for something, my
life has a purpose after all, I know that I coul d be qui te a different man ! H ow
can I be useful, of what service can I be ? There i s something inside of me, what
can it be ? This i s quite a different kind of idle man ; if you like, y ou may take
me for such a one !
A caged bird in spring knows quite well that he might serve some end ; he
i s well aware that there i s something for him to do, but he cannot do it . What
i s it ? He does not quite remember . Then some vague ideas occur to him, and
he says to himself,
“The others build their nests and lay their eggs and bring
up their little ones
”
; and he knocks hi s head against the bars
of the cage . But
the cage remains, and the bird i s maddened by angui sh .
“Look at that lazy animal,
” says another bird in passing,
he seems to be
living at ease .
Yes , the prisoner lives , he does not die ; there are no outward signs of what
passes within him— hi s health i s good, he i s more or less gay when the
sun
shines . But then the season of migration comes,
an d attacks of melancholia
“But he has everything he wants ,
” say the children that tend him in hi s cage .
He looks through the bars at the overcast sky where a thunderstorm i s gathering,
and inwardly he rebels against his fate .
“I am caged, I am caged, and you tel l
me I do not want anything, fools ! Y ou think I have everything I need ! Oh !
I beseech you liberty, that I may be a bird like other birds 1
”
A certain idle man resembles thi s idle bird .
And circumstances often prevent men from doing things, prisoners in I do
not know what horrible, horrible, most horrible cage . There i s also— I know it
the deliverance, the tardy deliverance . A justly
or unjustly ruined reputation,
poverty, unavoidable circumstances, adversity— that
i s
what
makes
men
prisoners .
One cannot always tell what it i s that keeps us shut in, conﬁnes us, seems to
bury us nevertheless, one feels certain barriers, certain gates certain walls . Is all
this imagination, fantasy ? I don
’t think
so . And one asks ,
My God ! i s it for
long, i s it forever, i s it for all eternity ?
”
Do you know what frees
one from this captivity
It i s every deep, serious
affection . Being friends, being brothers, love, that i s what opens the prison by
some supreme power, by some magic force . Without this, one remains in prison .
Where sympathy i s renewed, life i s restored .
5 6


correct and distinguée, with a somewhat decorative effect (decorativeused here in a
favorable sense)
. So I know something of hi s work, and you speak of someone
who i s not qui te unknown to me . I love the portrait of Victor Hugo ; it i s very
conscientiously done, with the evident intention of portraying the truth without
any straining after effect .
Thi s winter I have studi ed certain works by Hugo, including Le D ernier four
d
’un Condamne
’
, and a very beautiful book on Shakespeare . I started studying that
author long
ag o ; he i s as beautiful as Rembrandt . Shakespeare i s to Charles
Dickens or Victor Hugo what Ruysdael i s to Daubigny, and Rembrandt, to
What you say in your letter about Barbizon i s quite true, and I will tell you a
few things whi ch will prove I Share the opinion . I have not seen Barbizon, but
though I have not seen it, last winter I saw Courrieres . I had undertaken a walking
tour mostly in Pas-de—Calais, not La Manche [The Channel] , but the department
or province . I had undertaken the trip hoping to ﬁnd some kind of work there
if possible . I would have accepted anything . But
after
all, perhaps I went in
voluntarily, I can
’t exactly say why .
I had said to myself, Y ou must see Courrieres . I had only 1 0 fr .
-ln my pocket,
and having started by taking the train, I was soon out of money ; I was on the
road for a week, I had a long, weary walk of it . Anyhow, I saw Courrieres, and
the outside
of M . Jules Breton
’s studi o . The outside
of the studi o was rather
disappointing : it was quite newly built of brick, with a Methodist regularity, an
inhospitable, chilly and irritating aspect . If I could only have seen the interior,
I would certainly not have given a thought to the exterior, I am sure of that .
But what shall I
say
of the interior ? I was not able to catch a glimpse, for I
lacked the courage to enter and introduce myself.
I looked elsewhere in Courrieres for traces
of Jules Breton or some other
artist; the only thing I was able to di scover was his picture at a photographer
’s,
and in a dark corner
of the
old church a copy
of Titian
’s
“Burial
of Christ,
”
which in the shadow seemed to me to be very beautiful and of wonderful tone .
W as it by him
I do not know, as I was unable to discern any signature .
But no trace of any living artist ; there was only a café called Café des Beaux
Arts , also built of new bricks, equally inhospitable, chilly and repellent ; the
said café was decorated with a kind
of fresco or mural painting representing
episodes in the life
of the famous knight, Don Quixote . Conﬁdentially, those
frescoes seemed to me a poor consolation, as they were ofa rather inferior quality.
I do not know who painted them .
But I have at least seen the country around Courrieres , the haystacks, the
brown earth or almost coffee-colored clay, with whitish spots here and there
where the marl appears, which seems very unusual to those of us who are accus
tomed to black earth . And the French sky seemed to me very much clearer and
more limpid than the smoky, foggy sky of the Borinag e . Besides, there were farms
and sheds which, the Lord be praised, still retained their moss-covered thatched
roofs . I also
saw ﬂocks of crows made famous by the pictures of Daubigny an d
Millet . Not to mention, as I ought to have in the ﬁrst place, the characteristic and
5 8

picturesque ﬁgures of the different travelers , diggers , woodcutters , peasants driv
ing horses, and here and there the silhouette of a woman in a white cap . Even in
Courrieres there was a charbonnage or mine . I saw the day shift coming up in the
twilight : there were no women in men
’s clothes as in the Borinag e, only miners
with tired and miserable faces, blackened by the coal dust, clad in tattered miners
’
c lothes , and one of them in an old soldier
’s cape .
Th ough thi s trip was almost too much for me and I came back overcome by
fatigue, with sore feet, and quite melancholy, I do not regret it, for I have seen
interesting things, and
one learns to take a different but correct View
of the
hardships
of real mi sery. Occasionally I earned some crusts
of bread along the
road in exchange for some drawings which I had in my valise . But when the
1 0 fr . were all gone, I had to spend the last nights in the open
air, once in an
abandoned wagon, which was white with frost the next morning— rather a bad
resting place ; once in a pile of fagots ; and one time that was a little better, in a
haystack, where I succeeded in making a rather more comfortable berth— but
then a drizzling rain did not exactly further my well-being .
Well, even in that deep misery I felt my energy revive, an d I sai d to myself,
In spite of everything I shall rise again : I will take up my pencil, which I have
forsaken in my great discouragement, and I will go on with my drawing . From
that moment everything has seemed tran sformed for me ; and now I have started
an d my pencil has become somewhat docile, becoming more so every day . The
too long an d too great poverty had discouraged me so much that I could not do
Another thing which I
saw during
that excursion was
the villages of the
weavers .
The miners and the weavers still constitute a race apart from other laborers
and artisans, and I feel a great sympathy for them. I should be very happy if
someday I could draw them, so that those unknown or little-known types woul d
be brought before the eyes of the people . The man from the depth of the abyss,
deprofundis— that i s the miner ; the other, with hi s dreamy ai r, somewhat absent
minded, almost a somnambulist— that i s the weaver . I have been living among
them for two years, and have learned a li ttle of their uni que character, at least
that
of the miners especially. And increasingly I ﬁnd something touching and
almost sad in these poor, obscure laborers— of the lowest order,
so to speak,
and the most despised — who are generally represented as a race of criminals and
thieves by a perhaps Vivid but very false and unjust imagination . Of course one
can ﬁnd criminals, drunkards, and thieves here, just as anywhere else, but none
of them are the true type .
In your letter you mentioned vaguely my coming eventually to Paris, or in the
neighborhood, if it were posmble and if I wanted to . It would certainly be my
great and ardent wish to g o to Paris or to Barbizon, or elsewhere . But how
could I, when I do not earn a cent ? Though I work hard, it will be some time
before I reach the point where I can consider such a thing as coming to Paris,
for indeed to be able to work as i s necessary, I should need at least
1 00 fr . a
month— one can live on less, but then it i s hardship, even want .

Poverty keeps the good spirits from arriving
i s an old Palissy proverb which
has some truth in it, and which i s perfectly true if one understands its real meaning
and depth .
For the moment I do not see how the thing would be practicable ; it i s better
for me to stay here, working as much as I c an— and, after all, it i s cheaper . But
it i s certain that I cannot remain very much longer in the little room where I am
now . It i s a small room anyway, and then there are two beds , one for the children
and one for me . And now that I draw those rather large sized Bargues, I cannot tell
you how inconvenient it i s . I don
’t want to upset the people
’s household arrange
ments, and they have already told me that I could by no means have the other
room in the house, even if I paid more, for the woman needs it for her washing,
which has to be done almost every day in a miner
’s house . So I should just like
to take a small worker
’s house ; it costs about 9 fr . a month .
Though every day difficulties crop up and new ones will present themselves, I
cannot tell you how happy I am to have taken up drawing again . I had been
thinking of it for a long time, but I always considered the thing impossible and
beyond my reach . But now , though I feel my weakness and my pai nful depend
ence in many things , I have recovered my mental balance, and day by day my
energy increases .
N ow I will tell you my opinion about coming to Paris . If I had an opportuni ty
to develop a friendship with some good and worthy artist, it would be of great
advantage to me . But abruptly going there would only be a large-scale repetition
of my trip to Courrieres, where I had hoped to meet some living specimen of an
artist, but found none . The thing for me i s to learn to draw well, to be master of
my pencil or my crayon or my brush ; this gained, I shall make good things any
where, and the Borin ag e i s just as picturesque as
old Venice, Arabia, Brittany,
Normandy, Picardy or Brie .
If my work i s bad, it i s my
own fault . But certainly at Barbizon
one would
have more chance than anywhere else
of meeting some more advanced artist,
who would be as one
of God
’s angels to me . I
say thi s in all seriousness and
without exaggeration . So, if you eventually ﬁnd the means or opportuni ty for it,
think
of me . In the meantime I
’ll stay here quietly in some little miner
’s hut,
where I shall work as well as I can .
You wrote about M éry on , and what you say about him is qui te true . I know hi s
etchings a little . Would you like to see a curious thing
Put one of hi s correct
and masterly drawings alongside some print by Vi ollet—le-Duc
or some other
architect . Then you will see Méryon in hi s full strength, because the other etching
will serve to set off hi s work, to form a contrast . Well , what do you
see
Thi s
Méryon, even when he draws bricks ,
or granite, or iron bars,
or a railing
of a
bridge,puts into hi setchings something ofthehuman soul,movedby I do not know
what inner sorrow . I have seen drawings of Gothic architecture by Victor Hugo .
Well , without having Méryon
’
s force and masterly techni que, there was some
thing
of the same sentiment . What i s that sentiment ? It has some relation to
what Albrecht Durer expressed in his
“Melancholia,
and, in
our day, James
Tissot and M . Maris (different as these two may be) ; some profound critic
60

rightly said
of James Tissot,
He i s a soul in angui sh.
However this may be,
there i s something
of the human soul in hi s work ; for that reason alone it i s
grand, immense, inﬁnite : put Viollet-le-Duc
al ongside and it i s Stone, while
Méryon is Spirit . Méryon i s said to have had such a capacity for love that, like
Dickens
’s Sydney Carton, he loved even the stones
of certain places . In Millet,
in Jules Breton, in Jozef Israels too, this precious pearl, the human soul, i s even
more in evidence— expressed in a nobler, worthier tone, more evangelically, if I
can say it that way
.
But to return to Méryon, he also has a distant relationship with Jongkind, I
think, and perhaps with Seymour Haden, for at certain times these two artists
have been very strong . Wait, perhaps someday you will
see that I too am an
artist ; I do not now know what I c an do, but I hope I shall be able to make some
drawings with something human in
them . But ﬁrst I must draw the Barg ues
and do other more or less difficult things . The path i s narrow, the door i s narrow,
and there are few who ﬁn d it .
Thanking you for your kindness, especially for
Le Buisson,
I Shake hands
with you in thought,
Vincent
Now I have taken your whole collection, but you will have another one, I hope ;
besides, for your collection of wood engravings I have some very good things
from the two volumes of the M usée Universel, which I intend for you .
143 a
[Reprinted from Louis Pi erard, La vie trag ique de Vincent van Gog b, Edition revue .
Paris , Editions Correa
Cie, I
Reading an article by M . Pierre Godet in L
’A rt D e
’
coratif and the comments it
prompted from a certain Protestant publication, Foi et Vie, induced me one day
to start investigating in my native country this disturbing period
of Vincent
van Gogh
’s life . I knew that Vincent had once been sent as a missionary to the
Borinag e ; nothing more . I have patiently interrogated the pastors of numerous
villages and a certain number oftheir congregations . And at last I had the informa
tion I sought .
It was during a strike . Before the Village Hall an
Old miner, squatting with
his knees drawn up to hi s chin , a pipe between hi s teeth— ln the favorite resting
position
of
“tapeurs d la
veine
”— said in hi s
rude patois,
“L
’pasteur Vincent ? Si
j
’mein sauvie
’
r? j e l
’
crois be
’
[Pastor Vincent ? Do I remember him ? I should
think
so l]
I did my best to make him specify hi s memories more precisely .
In hi s mind
’s eye he saw Van Gogh again, sitting
on a campstool in
the
yard at the mine (at pit NO .
1 0, G risoeul), making sketches of the cage and
“la belle ﬂeur,
” the iron framework, and then
of the emerging miners, black
with coal dust, their eyes blinking at the sudden daylight, their lamps in their
At last I learned that Van Gogh had boarded at the house of a certain Jean
Baptiste Denis, a baker, and had preached in the
old
“Salon de Bébé
” (in
the
6 1

Borinag e, a hall for dancing and meetings i s always called a
salon)
. The
old
house, whi ch at the time was something between a farm and a salon, has been
much altered during the last thirty years . But when I found the vast kitchen intact,
with its mighty beams covered with white stucco, the big open hearth, and in a
corner the stone table at which Vincent liked to eat, I was
The S alon,
or as some said, L
’timpe [the temple] of Bébé, was situated at the edge of the
Colfontaine forest . The whitewashed walls of the meeting hall were blui sh-white .
Behind the preacher
one could see the sloping gardens, the square vegetable
plots , through the
So here Van Gogh livedafterNovember 1 878 in the Borinag e vastmining district
in the neighborhood of Mons "
. The Reformed religion has always possessed,
and does to this day, important nuclei here . In every mining village, or in nearly
every
one, there i s a Protestant church, and i n some, two (one of the National
Church, and the other
of the Free Church, which refuses State
At last, after a long search, I found in the Toum aisi s district an
old pastor,
M . Bonte, who was installed in Warquig nies , a village in the neighborhood
of
Wasmes , in
1 878 , and received Vincent van Gogh with the greatest kindness .
Here are the notes he was good enough to send me
I should like to satisfy you as much as possible by putting together some remini s
cences
of Vincent van Gogh . In fact, I knew him some forty-ﬁve years ago in
the Borinag e, where he was an evangelist (not a pastor, as he had no theological
degree)
. He worked at Wasmes about one year .
He was the son of a Dutch mini ster . I remember well hi s arrival at Paturages
he was a blond young man of medium stature and with a pleasant face ; he was
well dressed, had excellent manners, and showed in his personal appearance all
the characteristics of Dutch cleanliness .
He expressed himself in French correctly, and was able to preach quite satis
fac torily at the religious gatherings
of the little Protestant group in Wasmes
which they had entrusted to hi s care . Another community in Wasmes had a
pastor . He worked near the edge of the forest, in the direction of Warqui gni es ;
he led divine service in a former dance hall .
Our young man took lodgings in an old farm at Petit-Wasmes . The house was
relatively pretty— it diﬂered considerably from the dwellings in the neighborhood,
where one saw only little miners
’ cottages .
The family which had taken Vincent in had Simple habits , and lived like
working people .
But our evangelist very soon showed toward his lodgings the peculiar feelings
which dominated hi m : he considered the accommodation far too luxurious ; it
Shocked hi s Christian humility, he could not bear being lodged comfortably, in
a way so different from that of the miners . Therefore he left these people who
had surrounded him with sympathy and went to live in a little hovel . There he
was all alone ; he had no furniture, and people sai d he slept crouched down in a
corner of the hearth .
Besides this, the clothes he wore outdoors revealed the originality
of hi s

aspirations ; people
saw him issue forth clad in an
old soldier
’s tunic and a
shabby cap, and he went about the village in this attire . The ﬁne suits he had
arrived in never reappeared ; nor di d he buy any new ones . It i s true he had only
a modest salary, but it was sufficient to permit him to dress in accordance with
hi s social position . Why had the boy changed this way ?
Faced with the destitution he encountered on hi s visits , hi s pity had induced
him to give away nearly all hi s clothes
hi s money had found its way into the
hands of the poor, and one might say that he had kept nothing for himself. Hi s
religious sentiments were very ardent, and he wanted to obey the words of
Jesus Christ to the letter .
He felt obliged to imitate the early Christians , to sacriﬁce
all he could live
without, and he wanted to be even more destitute than the majority of the
miners to whom he preached the Gospel .
I must add that also hi s Dutch cleanliness was singularly abandoned ; soap was
banished as a wicked luxury ; and when our evangelist was not wholly covered
with a layer
of coal dust, hi s face was usually dirtier than that of the miners .
Exterior details did not trouble him ; he was absorbed in hi s ideal of self-deni al,
but for the rest he showed that hi s attitude was not the consequence of laisser—aller,
but a consistent practicing of the ideas governing hi s conscience .
He no longer felt any inducement to take care
of hi s
own well-being— his
heart had been aroused by the sight of others
’ want .
He preferred to go to the unfortunate, the wounded, th e sick, and always stayed
with thema long time he waswilling to make any sacriﬁce to relieve their sufferings
In addition, hi s profound sensitivity was not limited to the human race . Vincent
van Gogh respected every creature
’s life, even of those most despised .
A repul sive caterpillar did not provoke hi s disgust ; it was a living creature,
and as such, deserved protection .
The family with whom he had boarded told me that every time he found a
caterpillar on the ground in the garden, he carefully picked it up and took it to
a tree . Apart from thi s trait, which perhaps will be considered insigniﬁcant or
even foolish, I have retained the impression that Vincent van Gogh was act uated
by a high ideal
. self-forgetfulness and devotion to all other beings was the guiding
principle whi ch he accepted wholeheartedly.
It will
not revile the memory of the man
to confess that in my opinion he
retained one weakness : he was an incorrigible smoker . At times I teased him about
it ; a loather of tobacco myself, I told him that he di d wrong not to give it up, but
he ignored me— Painters cannot do without a little spot of shade in the picture .
As far as hi s painting i s concerned, I cannot speak as a connoisseur ; besides,
he was not taken seriously .
He would squat in the mine ﬁelds and draw the women picking up pieces of
coal and going away laden with heavy sacks .
It was observed that he did not reproduce the pretty things to whi ch we are
wont to attribute beauty .
He made some portraits of old women, but for the rest, nobody attached any
importance to an activity that was considered a mere hobby .

But it would seem that as an artist, also, our young man had a predilection for
all that seemed miserable to him .
These, sir, are a few remini scences which my aged memory has tried to collect .
Here i s another letter . I did not have the heart to make any alteration in it . The
good baker who wrote it and who had lived on intimate terms with Vincent van
Gogh will not take it amiss if I reproduce it completely an d faithfully.
Monsieur Pi erard,
One ﬁne spring day, when I
saw our young friend Vincent van Gogh arrive,
richly dressed, I could not stop looking at him, next day he paid a visit to the
pastor, M . Bonte . Immediately putting himself on a level with the working class,
our friend sank away into the greatest humiliations , and it was not long before
he had di sposed of all hi s clothes .
Having arrived at the stage where he had no shirt and no socks on hi s feet,
we have seen him make Shirts out of sacking . I myself was too young then .
'My kind-hearted mother sai d to hi m : Monsieur Vincent, why do you deprive
yourself of all your clothes like thi s— you who are descended from such a noble
family of Dutch pastors ? He answered : I am a friend of the poor like Jesus was .
She answered : You
’re no longer in a normal condition .
The same year there was a ﬁredamp explosion in Pit NO . I of the Charbonnage
Belge, and many miners were burned . Our friend Vincent did not give himself a
moment
’s rest day and night cutting up the last remnants
of hi s linen to make
bandages with wax and olive oil on them, and then ran to the wounded to dress
their burns .
The humanity of our friend continued to grow day by day, and yet the persec u
tions he suffered grew, too . And still the reproaches and insults an d stoning by
the members of the Consistory, though he always remained
in the deepest
abasement ! One day when he came to
our house he started vomiting
on
the
basement ﬂoor . It had been too great a luxury for him, he ought to have stayed
in a thatched hovel . Hi s food consisted ofrice and treacle, no butter on hi s bread .
Yet he was always at hi s studies ; in a single ni ght he read a volume of 1 00
'
pages ; during the week he taught a school he had founded for the children
teaching them to fear God, and at the same time he was busy making drawings
of photography an d the mines .
On a very hot day a Violent thunderstorm burst over
our region . What di d
our friend do ? He went out to stand in the open ﬁeld to look at the great marvels
of God, an d so he came back wet to the skin . SO it came about that our friend
was turned
out of hi s mini stry, he went away to Paris
an d we have not heard
from him since . And when he walked [it was
always] on the edge of the road,
dear friend, Monsieur Piérard , I could not tell you more, I was only fourteen
years at the time .
Some of hi s characteristics have been remembered vividly . When the miners of
Wasmes went to the pits, they put
old vests made
of sacking over their linen
64


to send us M . Vincent ; after him came M . Huton, both
of them evangelists
during four years or thereabouts .
We have been powerfully assisted in the work of evangelization .
And here
i s the
1 879
—80 report of the Union
of
[Protestant Churches
in
Belgium, chapter
“Wasmes” [twenty-third report of the Synodal Board of Evan
g elization ( 1 879
The experiment of accepting the services
of a young Dutchman, Mr . Vincent
van Gogh, who felt himself called to be an evangelist in the Borinag e, has not
produced the anticipated results . If a talent for speaking, indispensable to anyone
placed at the head of a congregation, had been added to the admirable qualities
he displayed in aiding the sick and wounded, to hi s devotion to the spirit
of
self-sac riﬁc e, of which he gave many proofs by consecrating hi s night
’s rest to
them, and by stripping himself of most of hi s clothes and linen in their behalf,
Mr. Van Gogh would certainly have been an accomplished evangelist .
Undoubtedly it would be unreasonable to demand extraordinary talents . But
it i s evident
that the absence
of certain qualities may render the exercise
of
an evangelist
’s principal function wholly impossible .
Unfortunately this is the case with Mr. Van Gogh . Therefore, the probationary
period— some months— having expired, it has been necessary to abandon the
idea of retaining him any longer .
The evangelist, M . Hutton (sic), who i s now installed, took over his charge
on October I ,
1 879
.
1 879, the tragic year : epidemics of typhoid fever,
the mad fever,
broke out,
and then a great catastrophe cast a pall of grief over the country (the ﬁredamp
explosion in the Ag rappe at Frameries)
. Without a thought for himself, Vincent
devoted himself to nursing the sick and the men suffering from burns , with their
faces black and swollen .
A strike broke
out ; the mutinous miners would no longer listen to anyone
except
“l
’
pasteur Vincent,
” whom they trusted .
In the meantime Van Gogh was increasingly busy with hi s drawings . One day
he started for Brussels
on foot . He arrived at Pastor Pietersen
’
s house in rags,
hi s feet bleeding, but carrying with hi m some of hi s drawings (Pietersen was an
amateur water
-colorist)
. The reception was cordi al and soothing . It was decided
that Van Gogh would go back to the Borinag e, but this time to another parish,
Cuesmes .
One
of my Protestant fellow citizens, M . G . Delsaut, who knew him at
Cuesmes in I 880, sent me some notes which I reproduce without a word changed
He was an intelligent young man , speaking little— always pensive . He lived very
soberly : when he g ot up in the morning, he breakfasted
off two slices of dry
bread and drank a cold cup of black coffee .
Apart from his meals, he drank only water. He
always had hi s meals
alone,

and took pains to avoid eating in company. While eating, he made drawings in
hi s lap or he read . All hi s spare time was given to drawing . He often went to
Ghlin Wood, to the cemetery of Mons, or into the country .
He drew chieﬂy landscapes , castles , a shepherd with hi s ﬂock, cows in the
meadows .
The most striking picture, which my Sister-in
-law , with whom he boarded,
Still remembers, was a drawing Showing the family gathering in the crop
of
potatoes , some digging, others (the women) picking up the potatoes .
He left hi s drawings and his books behind, but now they have all di sappeared
because the family was scattered .
His board was paid by hi s father, who sent hi m money . He spent much money
on Bibles and New Testaments , whi ch he gave away when he went out to draw .
Once hi s father had to come to Cuesmes to put a stop to hi s spending money
on books .
He would set out to draw, a campstool under hi s arm and hi s box of drawing
materials on hi s back, like a peddler .
When he was annoyed he rubbed hi s hands as if he could not stop .
[In the Greene A msterdammer (Amsterdam weekly) of September 1 9 , 1 9 2 5 , Pi érard
added the following to his account ]
I thbught I had collected
all the particulars , until
old Mr. Deni s whom I met
some days ag o, told me that one ﬁne morning, when, as he put it,
the dew had,
as it were, strewn the trees and ﬂowers in the garden with pearls of silver,
he
was on the point of crushing a caterpillar underfoot when Van Gogh stopped
hi m with the exclamation,
“Why do you want to kill that little animal ? G od
created it .
Louis Pi érard used to be the socialist senator for Hainaut, the province to which
the Borinag e belongs ; after the liberation (1 9 1 8) he was sometimes called the
cul tural ambassador of Belgium . To my question as to what grounds he had for
hi s statements about Vincent
’s alleged endeavors to calm the strikers , he wrote
the following letter a few weeks before hi s death .
Club des e
’
crivains belg es de lang uefranfaise.
Pen Club
President : Louis Piérard
47, aV . Victor Rousseau, Forest (Brux .)
téléphone
Dear Mr . Van Gogh,
Brussels, October 8 ,
1 9 5 1
I hasten to answer your letter
of October 4
. I am happy to hear that you are
preparing a new edition of TbeL etters of Vincent . Thank y ou for kindly conferring
importance on the particulars I gave in my book on Van Gogh
’s sojourn in the
Borinag e .

The catastrophe to which I referred, and in the course of whi ch Vincent
exerted himself with the utmost
unselﬁshn ess (which is conﬁrmed by Pastor
Bonte
’
s letter) , was
one of those ﬁredamp explosions that occurred again and
again in the Ag rappe Pit at Frameries, near Wasmes . There were hundreds
of
victims . Most of them were miners , killed
on the spot by the explosion . But
others, the wounded, were possibly burned by igni tion of the coal dust.
Vincent tried to relieve the atrocious sufferings of these unfortunate wretches,
applying compresses drenched in olive Oil to their burns .
These frequent mining disasters (there had been three,
one after the other, at
the Ag rappe and at the Boule) at last prompted an outbreak of anger and mutiny
among the mining population . They believed that the inspection of the mines
was not conducted i n such a way as to protect the miner and guarantee hi s safety.
So there were strikes which were in fact strikes of despair . Because of this , the
strikers were tempted to commit acts of violence and destruction . The gendarmes
and even the army were mobilized to maintain order . It i s highly probable that,
in order to prevent bloodshed, Vincent intervened and used hi s great moral
authority to restore the miners
’ self-control .
I would also allude to the depth at which people have to work in the mines .
Do you know that there i s a pit at Quaregnon in which at tbis very bour people
are working at a depth of 1 400 meters (about
ft .)
Will you please give my kind regards to Mrs . Van Gogh .
Bien avous
Loui s Pi érard,
47, av . V . Rousseau, Bruxelles

1 8 8 1
BR U S S EL S A N D ET T E N
Vincent
’
s c areer as an arti st beg ins in earnest
140
My dear Theo,
72 Boulevard da Midi , Brussels, Jan .
’8 1
Y ou will qui te forgive me when you know that I wrote my last letter in a moment
of spleen . My drawings went all wrong, and not knowing what to do, I began
to write . I certainly ought to have waited for a better moment, and this will
Show y ou that I myself undoubtedly belong to that class
of people of which I
spoke in my last letter, namely, that class of people who do not always reﬂect
on what they say or do . Thi s being so, let us drop it .
I can tell you
one thing ; during these last days there has been a change for
the better . I have ﬁnished at least a dozen drawings , or rather sketches in pencil
and in pen and ink, which seem to me to be somewhat better . They vaguely
resemble certain drawings by Lancon, or certain English wood engravings, but
as yet they are more clumsy and awkward . They represent a porter, a miner,
a snow shoveler, a walk in the snow, old women, a type of Old man (
“Ferragus”
from Balzac
’s L
’bistoire des treize) , etc . I am sending you two small ones ,
“En
Route
” and
“Devant les Tisons” [in front
of the wood ﬁre]
. I see perfectly well
that they are not good, but they are beginning to look like something .
I have a model almost every day, an
old porter,
or some working man,
some boy , who poses for me . Next Sunday perhaps one or two soldiers will
sit
for me . And because now I am no longer in a bad humor, I have quite a different
and better opini on of you , and of the world in general . Also I have again drawn
a landscape— a heath—
a thing I had not done for a long time .
I love landscape very much, but I love ten times more those studies from life ,
sometimes
of startling realism, which have been drawn
so masterft
by G a
varni , Henri Monnier, Daumier, De Lemud, Henri Pille, Th . Schuler, Ed . Morin,
G . Doré (e.g
. in hi s
A . Lancon, De Groux, Félicien Rops, etc . , etc .
Now without in the least pretending to compare myself to those artists, still, by
continuing to draw those types of working people, etc . , I hope to arrive at the
point of being able to illustrate papers and books . Especially when I am able to
take more models, also female models , I shall make more progress— I feel it,
and know it . And I shall also probably learn to make portraits . But the condition
i s to work hard,
Not a day without a line,
” as G avarni said .
S O it i s understood that for the present I shall stay here, till you perhaps ﬁnd
something better for me . Only write me now and then . I am for the moment
busy drawing for the third time all the E x ercices au Fusain by Bargue .
Y ou told me of a change in the staff of the house Goupil
Co . , and also of
69

another change in your own position . I congratulate you, and as to those gen
tlemen Goupil
Co . , I am inclined to believe that they are to be congratulated
on having got rid of some of the staff. I have always thought that those gentlemen
themselves were animated by a superior and nobler spirit than that of those who
have now left. Perhaps the position the latter have occupied so long in the ﬁrm,
the inﬂuence and domination, whi ch Messrs . Goupil 8: Co . put up with, were
repugnant to some
of the other employees, whom the company would perhaps
have done better to retain, but who were so driven to extremes that they resigned .
As you vaguely spoke to me some time ago about coming to Paris, I must
tell you that I wish no better than to go someday soon, provided I were sure of
ﬁnding some work there whi ch would give me a salary of at least
1 00 fr . a
month. I must also tell you that as I have begun to draw, I do not intend to drop
it, so I will try chieﬂy to get on in that line . Not only does drawing ﬁgures and
scenes from life demand a knowledge
of the technique of drawing, but it also
demands profound studies
of literature, physiognomy, etc . , which are difficult
to acquire .
Enough for today ; write me when you have a moment to spare, and believe
me, with a handshake,
Yours Sincerely, Vincent
72 Bd . du Midi
‘
Someday I hope to go to see Mr. Horta .
142
Dear Theo,
72 Bd . du Midi , Brussels ,
’8 1
In reply to your two good letters , and as a result of Father
’s visit, for whi ch I
had been longing for some time, I have a few things to tell you .
In the ﬁrst place thi s . I hear from Father that without my knowing it you have
been sending me money for a long time, in thi s way effectively helping me to
get on . Accept my heartfelt thanks, I ﬁrmly believe that you will
not regret it .
In this way I am learning a handicraft, and though it certainly will not make me
rich, I will at any rate earn my 1 00 fr . a month, which i s the least
one needs to
live on, as soon as I become a better draftsman an d get some regular work .
What you told us about the painter H eyerdahl I has greatly interested Van
Rappard, as well as me .
A s the former undoubtedly will write you about it himself, I speak about this
question only in so far as it concerns me personally, more or less .
I ﬁnd much truth in your remarks about the Dutch artists , that it i s very
doubtful if one could get from them any clear counsel on
the difficul ties of
perspective, etc
with which I am struggling . At least I qui te agree with you that
someone like Heyerdahl would be far preferable (as he seems to be such a versatile
man) to many others who do not possess the ability to explain their method and
to provide the necessary guidance and teaching . You speak of Heyerdahl as one
who takes great pains to seek
“proportions for drawing
” that is just what I need .
Many a good painter has not the slightest, or hardly any, idea ofwhat proportions
Norwegian painter, temporarily in Paris at Bonnat
’
s studio .

for drawing are, or beautiful lines,
or characteristic composition, and thought
and poetry. Yet these are important questions which Feyen-Perrin, and Ulysse
Butin , and Alphonse Legros— not to mention Breton and Millet and Israels
take extremely seriously, and never lose sight of.
Many a
“ Dutch painter would understand nothing, absolutely nothing, of the
beautiful work of Boughton, Millais , Pinwell, du Maurier, H erkomer, and Walker,
to name only a few artists who are real masters as draftsmen, not to mention
their talent in other directions .
I
say many
of them look with contempt
on such work, as many do on the
work
of De Groux, even among the painters here in Belgium who ought to
know better . This week I saw some things by De Groux which I di d not know,
namely, a picture,
“Departure
of the Conscript,
and a full -length drawing,
“The Drunkard
”
—two compositions which resemble Boughton so much that I
was struck by the resemblance, as of two brothers who had never met and
who were yet of one mind .
So you see, I quite agree with your opinion on Heyerdahl , and I shall be very
happy if later on you coul d put me in touch with that man ; further, I will not
insist on carrying out my plan of going to Holland, at least not if I have the pros
pec t of going to Paris later and can more or less count on it .
But in the meantime what must I do ? What do you think would be best
I
can continue to work with Rappard for a few weeks , but then he will probably
leave here . My bedroom i s too small, and the light i s not good, and the people
would object to my partly shutting out the light from the window ; I
am not
even allowed to put my etchings or my drawings up on the wall . So when Rappard
leaves i n May, I shall have to move ; I should like to work awhile i n the country
at Heyst, Calmphout, Etten, Scheveningen, Katwijk, anyplace, even nearer here,
as Schaerbeek, Haeren, Groenendael . But preferably a place where there i s a
chance of coming into contact with other painters, and if possible of living and
working together, because it i s cheaper and better .
Wherever it may be, living expenses are always at least
1 00 fr . a month ; if
one has less , it means want, either physical or of the necessary material and tools .
This winter I have spent, let us say,
1 00 fr. a month, though in reality it has
scarcely been as much . And I spent a great deal of that on drawing materials
and also got myself some clothes . I bought two workmen
’s suits of rough black
velvet,
of that material known as veloutine . It looks well, and
one can wear it
everywhere ; besides , the sui ts will be of use to me later, because I shall want a
great many workmen
’s clothes— as I do already— for my models, whi ch of course
I need like everybody else . Gradually I must make such a collection, of all kinds
of garments, secondhand if necessary, men
’s as well as women
’s ; but of course
I need not do it all at once, though I have started, and am going on with it .
What you say i s true, ﬁnancial questions have either advanced or handicapped
many people in the world . It i s
so, and Bernard Palissy
’s saying remai ns true,
“Poverty prevents the good spirits from arriving .
But when I thi nk it over, I
cannot help wondering, Isn
’t it right that in a family like ours— in which two
Messrs . Van Gogh are very rich,
an d both in the art ﬁeld, Uncle Cor an d our

uncle
of Prinsenhage, and in which you an d I
of the younger generation have
chosen the same line, though in different spheres— isn
’t it right, I wonder, that,
this being so, I should be able to count in some way on
1 00 fr . a month during
the time which must necessarily elapse before I can get reg ular work as a drafts
man
Now three years ago I quarreled with C . M . about quite a different question,
but i s that any reason for C . M . to remain my enemy forever ? I would much
rather think that he had never been my enemy and consider it a misunderstanding,
for which I gladly take
all the blame, rather than argue about how much was
really my fault, for I have no time for such things . Uncle Cor so often helps other
draftsmen— would it be
so unnatural now if someday, when I needed it, he
showed me hi s good will ? However, I do not say this to get ﬁnancial helpfrom
him . He could help me in quite another way than by giving money : for mstaﬁc e,
if it were possible, he might bring me into contact with persons from whom I
could learn many things, or help me get regular work from some magazine .
Thi s i s the way I expressed myself to Father . I noticed that people talked
about the strange and unaccountable fact that I was
so hard up , although I
belonged to such and such a family . I replied that I thought it was only temporary ,
and would come right after a time . Still, I thought it better to talk it over with
Father and you , and I wrote something about it to Mr. Tersteeg . But he seems
to have misunderstood my intention, as he got the impression that I planned to
live
on the bounty of my uncles ; this being hi s opinion, he wrote me a very
discouraging letter, and said I had no right to do such a thing . I certainly do
not pretend to have the right, but I want to prevent thi s affair from everbecoming
the subject of gossip in the studios ; therefore I think that i t i s necessary for good
relations between myself and the family to be re-established, at any rate provision
ally and outwardly, in expectation
of their changing their minds about me . If
they are unwilling , que soit, but then I should not be able to prevent gossip here
and there . Were I immediately to write C . M .
or go to see hi s Honor, it i s to be
feared he would not read my letter, or would receive me too uncordially . That
’s
why I am talking it over with Pa and yourself, as you might possibly drop a
word occasionally, so that he will not misunderstand my intentions . I was not
hoping to get money from hi s Honor, as Mr . Tersteeg seemed to think, but
only hoping that if he gained faith and conﬁdence in my future after a talk with
me, he might
see me with new eyes . And if he di d, it stands to reason that I
most certainly would not scorn hi s help ; and in that case he might smooth the
way for me by means other than by giving me money, for instance, in the interval
between now and my going to Paris .
I wrote back that I was not at all astonished at hi s misconstruing my letter in
this way because you yourself had spoken
one time
of
“living
on my rents . ”
And
as I now gather from the tone of your letter that you no longer
see my
difficult position in that miserable light and as I infer itfromyour strong assistance,
so I hope that Mr . Tersteeg
’
s opinion will also change eventually. The more so
because he was the ﬁrst to help me with those Bargues, for which I shall always
be grateful to him .
Y ou write me about a mani kin . I am not in a special hurry for it, but it would


and perhaps would meet C . M . there some day this summer . There are no real
objections to it, as far as I know . Either inside or outside the family, they will
always judge me or talk about me from di fferent points
of view, and you will
always hear the most divergent opini ons about me . And I blame no one for it,
because relatively few people know why an artist acts as he does . But in general,
he who searches
all kinds
of places to ﬁnd picturesque spots
of ﬁg ures— holes
and corners which another passes by— i s accused of many bad intentions and
villainies which have never entered hi s head . A peasant who sees me draw an
old tree trunk, and sees me sitting there for an hour, thinks that I have gone
mad and, of course, laughs at me . A young lady who turns up her nose at a
laborer in hi s patched, ﬁlthy dirty clothes,
of course cannot understand why
anyone Visits the Borinag e or Heyst
an d goes down the shaft of a coal mine ;
she also comes to the conclusion that I am mad .
Nat urally, I do not care at all what they think if only you and Mr . Tersteeg,
and C . M . and Father, and others with whom I come into contact, know better,
and instead
of making remarks about it, say, Your work demands it, and we
understand why it i s so .
So I repeat, under the circumstances there i s after all no urgent reason why I
should not go, for instance, to Etten or to The Hague, if that were preferable,
even though it may be criticized by some fops and silly girls . As Father said
when he was here,
“Just write to Theo, and arrange with hi m what i s best,
and what will be the cheapest way .
I hope you will let me know your opinion
soon .
Heyst and Calmphout are very picturesque . In Etten I could also ﬁnd subjects
enough, even here if necessary, though then I would move to Schaerbeek.
Scheveningen
or Katwijk would perhaps be possible if C . M . changed hi s
opinion of me, and then I could proﬁt directly or indirectly by the Dutch artists .
As to the expenses , I suppose they would amount to at least
1 00 fr . a month ; to
do with less i s impossible
“Thou shalt not muzzle the ox when he treadeth out
the corn .
”
So I wait for your reply about these things, and in the mean time I am working
with Rappard .
Rappard has painted some good Studies , among others a few after the models
at the academy, which are well done . A little more ﬁre and passion would not
hurt him, a little more self-c onﬁdenc e and more courage . Somebody once said to
me,
“Nous devons faire des efforts de perdus , de désespérés” [We must make the
same efforts as lost, desperate beings]
. He does not do that as yet. Hi s pen- and-ink
drawings of landscape are very witty and charming, but in these, also
, a little
more passion,please .
And now I take my leave, with a handshake, and am always
Yours sincerely, Vincent

15 0
Dear Theo,
Etten, September
’8 1
Though it i s only a short time since I wrote you, I already have some news to
tell you .
That i s to say, my drawing has changed, the techni que as well as the results .
Also, as a result of some things Mauve told me, I have begun to work from a
live model again . Fortunately, I have been able to persuade several persons here
to sit for me, Piet Kaufman, the gardener, for instance . Studying the E x ercices au
Fusain by Bargue carefully and copying them over and over again have given
me a better insight into drawing the ﬁgure . I have learned to measure and to
observe and to seek for broad lines . 8 0 what seemed to be impossible before i s
gradually becoming possible now, thank God .
I have drawn ﬁve timm over a man with a spade, a Digger [nu Becheur] , in
different positions , a sower twice, a girl with a broom twice . Then a woman in
a white cap, peeling potatoes ; a Shepherd leaning on hi s staff; and, ﬁnally, an
old, sick farmer sitting
on a chair near the hearth, hi s head in hi s hands and
hi s elbows on hi s knees . And of course I shall
not stop here— when a few
Sheep have crossed the bridge, the whole ﬂock follows . Diggers , sowers,
plowers, male and female, they are what I must draw continually. I have to
observe and draw everything that belongs to country life— like many others have
done before, and are doing now . I no longer stand helpless before nature, as I
used to .
I brought some crayon in wood (like pencil) from The Hague, and that is
what I use most often right now . I have also begun to touch up my work with
a brush and a stump with a little sepia and India ink,
and now and then with
a little color . It i s a fact that the drawings I have done lately have little resem
blance to those I used to do . The size ofthe ﬁgures i s about that ofthe E x ercices an
AS
to landscape, I think it will in no way lose by this ; on the contrary, it
Enclosed are a few little sketches to give you an idea . Of course, I must pay
the people who pose for me . It i s not much, but as it recurs daily, it i s that much
more of an expense as long as I do not succeed in selling any drawings .
But as it seldom happens that a ﬁgure is a total failure, I think the expense of
the models will pretty soon be repai d . For at the present time there i s some demand
for anyone who has learned to attack a ﬁgure and put it on paper well .
I need not tell you that I
’m only sending you these sketches to give you an
idea of the pose . I scribbled them in no time, and I see there is much to be Said
against the proportions, at least more than in the real drawings .
I had a nice letter from Rappard, who seems to be hard at work ; he sent me
some very good landscape sketches . I wish he would come back here for a few
days .
This i s a ﬁeld of st ubble, where they are plowing and sowing . I made a rather
large sketch of it, with a thunderstorm overhead .
The two other Sketches are poses of diggers .

I hope to make several more of them .
The other sower has a basket .
Above
all, I should like to have a woman pose with a seed basket, to draw
that little ﬁgure which I showed you last spring and which you see in the fore
ground of the last sketch.
Well , as Mauve says,
The factory i s in full swing .
Please do not forget the Ingres paper the color
of unbleached linen . Write
soon and receive a handshake in thought,
Yours sincerely, Vincent
R 2
Amice Rappard,
Etten,
1 5 October
1 8 8 1
In my opinion your letter must be answered on the spot . In the ﬁrst place I want
you to know that it interests me very much— more than any other letter I have
received from you—~I learned more from it than you yourself meant to write
down .
I learned from it that my friend Rappard has taken a great step forward, or
will do so shortly . Why ? Oh, it doesn
’t matter right now, but I have my reasons
for believing that you have reached a point
of revolution a nd reform . Ca ira !
Within a short time there will be ﬁre and enthusiasm in you . Ca ira ! But for the
:
moment not another word about it in thi s letter .
But if by chance you should be surprised at what I have told you, I hope to
be able to tell you more soon, in person . For in any case I expec t to see you
soon, whether you come by way of Breda or Rozendaal .
In the ﬁrst place, on my parents
’ behalf I invite y ou to come and stay with us
one of these days, for a longer
or shorter time . So it i s not necessary for you
to
ask if it is convenient, you will only have to write : I shall come on this
or
that day by thi s or that train.
If it is impossible for you to come and stay a few days, then I count on your
skipping a train, either at the station at Breda
or at Rozendaal,
an d on your
letting me know by letter or postcard the hour and place of your arrival . Then
I shall be
on the spot according to your information . And then I shall bring
along a number
of drawings , the large
one,
“Worn Out,
” and several others
that you do not know at all . I need not tell you that I hope that on the same
occasion you on your part will show me some
of your water colors, as I am
anxious to see them .
Look, we really must arrange to meet somehow one of these days . There i s
only one thing which might prevent me from coming to the station on the day
of your passing through, but it i s most unlikely that it should happen just on
that very day . It i s like this
Mauve i s going to Prinsenhage for a day, and after
that he will come and spend a day here . We hope it will happen soon, but we
don
’t yet know which day it will be . And when Mauve i s here, I go where
Mauve goes . Suppose you were staying here when Mauve came, would you think
that so unpleasant ? I don
’t think you would ; I don
’t know whether you know
Mauve personally, but I think meeting him or meeting him ag ain would be a
76

good thing indeed . Mauve gave me courage when I needed it not long ago . He
is a man of genius .
Now you are thinking seriously of going to Brussels until Christmas to paint
from the nude .
Well, in your case I can well understand it, and especially in your present
mood I shall see you go with an easy mind . Ce que doit arriver arrivera— what
must happen will happen .
Whether you go to Brussels or not, some new ﬂame will be kindled in you .
Ca ira, and your going to Brussels or not will make little di fference, but the
caterpillar will become a butterﬂy ; in thi s I am speaking like a fellow adventurer
.
I feel sure you need not think that a few days
’ stay at Etten would mean a
neglect of duty ; on the contrary, you may take it for granted that it will be
devoting yourself to duty, for neither you nor I should be idle here .
You can do some ﬁgure drawing here too if you want to . I am not sure whether
I told you that my uncle at Prinsenhage saw the little sketches in your letter and
thought them very good, and noticed with pleasure that you are making progress
in ﬁgure drawing as well as in landscape .
I am of the opinion, Rappard, that in the beginning you should work from
the clotbed model . Most certainly one must have a sound knowledge of the nude,
but in reality we have to do with ﬁgures with clothes on . Unless you intend to
go the way of Baudry, Lefebvre, Henner, and so many others who specialize in
the nude . Of course in that case you should study the nude almost exclusively ;
in that case the more you conﬁne yourself to it and concentrate on it , the better .
But in point of fact, I do not think you will take this road . Y ou have too much
feeling for other things . You think a poor woman gathering potatoes in a ﬁeld, a
digger, a sower, a little lady in the street or at home, too beautiful not to feel
the impulse
to attack them in qui te a di fferent manner than you have done
up to now . You have too much feeling for color, too keen a perception of
tone, y ou are too much of a landscapist to follow in Baudry
’
s footsteps . The
more
so because I believe that y ou, Rappard, will ultimately decide to settle
down in Holland too . Y ou are too much
of a D utcbman to become a Baudry.
But I certainly think it excellent that you paint such beautiful studies from the
nude
as the two big ones I know— the reclining pose and the brown seated
ﬁg ure— and I wish I had done them myself. I am telling you my thoughts
unreservedly, and you on your part must always tell me yours unreservedly too .
Your remark about the ﬁgure of the Sower— that he i s
not a man who i s
sowing, but one who i s posing as a sower— i s very true .
However, I look upon my present st udies purely as studies after the model,
they have no pretension to being anything else .
Only after a year or a couple of years shall I have gained the ability to do a
sower who i s sowing ; there I agree with you .
Y ou tell me, Rappard , that y ou have done hardly anything for a fortnight.
Surely I know these
“fortnights”
; I had them myself last summer . I did not
work at drawing directly— but indirectly I di d ; what I did was go through one
of those periods of metamorphosis .

I
saw Mesdag
’
s
Panorama .
I was there with the painter De Bock, who
collaborated on it, and he told me of an incident that happened after the Panorama
was ﬁni shed and that I thought quite funny .
Perhaps you know the painter Destree . Between you and me and the lamppost
the incarnation of mealy-mouthed arrogance . Well, one day this gentleman came
up to DeBock and saidto him,Very haughtily, very blandly, very condescendingly,
“De Bock, I was invited to paint that Panorama too, but because it was so in
artistic, I refused .
”
To which De Bock answered,
Mr . Destree, what 13 easier, to paint a Panorama
or to refuse to paint a Panorama? What i s more artistic, to do a thing or not to do
it ?
” I thought this answer very much to the point .
I have good news from my brother Theo— he sends hi s kind regards
. Do not
neglect to keep up your acquaintance with hi m by writing him once in a while .
He i s a clever, energetic fellow, and I am very sorry he isn
’t a painter although
it is a good thing for the painters that there are such persons as he . Thi s y ou
will ﬁnd out if you keep up your acquaintance with him.
And now I shall say ,
“See you soon .
” Shall I ? And believe me, with a hand
shake in thought,
Ever yours , Vincent
I am looking for a poem, I think by Tom Hood,
The Song of the Shirt
do
you happen to know it, or do you see your way to hunting it up for me
If you
know it, I should like to ask you to write it out for me .
After I had closed thi s letter I opened it again to tell you that, although I quite
understand your having made your plans, yet I want you to consider whether
you will positively carry them out after all .
Speaking my mind unreservedly, I
say to you, Rappard, stay here . But
of
course there may be reasons
of which I am
ignorant but which are weighty
enough to make you decide on that plan .
Therefore, speaking only from an artistic point
of View, I tell you
that in
my opinion you as a Dutchman will feel most at home in the Dutch intellectual
climate, and will get more satisfaction from working after the character of this
country (whether it be ﬁgure or landscape) than by concentrating on and specializ
ing in the nude .
Although I like Baudry and Others , such as Lefebvre and Henner,
too— I
greatly prefer Jules Breton, Feyen-Perrin, Mi llet, Ulysse Butin, Mauve, Artz,
Israels, etc . , etc .
And I am speaking i n this way because I am positive that fundamentally thi s
i s your opinion too . And though you have seen a lot, it i s certain that I at least
have not seen less than you
of different kinds
of art . Particularly seeing that
I, though loosely speaking only a beginner in the art
of drawing, am a pretty
good judge of art in general, you should not take my opinion too lightly the few
times I give it
. And as I see it, both you and I cannot do better than work after
nature in Holland (ﬁgure and landscape)
. Then we are ourselves, then we feel at
home, then we are in our element . The more we know of what i s happening
78

abroad, the better, but we must never forget that we have our roots in the
Dutch soil .
If I am not mistaken, you have made good progress with your work for Mr .
Lan tsheer ; at least I am pleased to hear that he spoke that way about your
picture at Arti . He has a clear eye for art, and there are not many who have so
much knowledge and good taste .
The Chapel at Nuenen, Oil,
1 8 84

R 3
Dear Rappard,
[Etten,
2 November
1 8 8 1
Thanks for your quick reply—
so you soon succeeded in ﬁnding rooms, and are
now living near the academy .
With reference to a certain question, which I descried at the bottom of your
postcard, I want to tell you that, far from thinking it
7
'9‘stupid
” of you to go to
the aforesai d sanctuary, I think it very wise, even
so wise that— yes , that I am
almost tempted to say, a little bit too wise and righteous .
In my opinion if you had not gone, if your expedition had not taken place, it
would have been
all the better, but since you have undertaken it, I wish you
success from the bottom of my heart, and notwithstanding everything ,
“ I have no
doubt about the good results .
Y ou— and others too
-even if you really and truly attend the lessons at the
academy, you will of course never be in my eyes an
academician” in the despi
cable sense
of the word . Of course I do not take you for one of those arrogant
fellows whom one might call the Pharisees of art, and the prototype of whom i s,
I think,
“good old” Stallaert . And yet even thi s man may have something good
in him, and if I knew him better, I might think differently of hi s Honor . But it
will be di fficult to hammer it into my head that hi s Honor does not have some
thing damned bad in him too, whi ch eclipses his possible good qualities . Nothing
pleases me more than discovering good qualities even in such fellows . It always
hurts me, it always makes me nervous , when I meet a man of whose principles I
am obliged to say,
“But this i s really too bad, thi s doesn
’t hold water,
” and I go
on having thi s choking feeling until someday I di scover something good in hi m.
Never think it gives me pleasure to notice something wrong ; it grieves me
and gives me so much pain that at times I cannot keep it to myself. Ca m
’
ag ac e
[it exasperates me]
.
I do not like catching myself at
having a beam in mine eye,
and yet— yet
I have happened to catch myself at it, but then I didn
’t let it go at that, and I
tried to remedy it .
And exactly because I know from my own experience how terrible such a
beam in one
’s eye
” i s, I sympathizewith others sufferingfrom the same complaint .
Please, please do not take me for a fanatic or a partisan . Certainly I have the
courage to take sides, like any other man ; at times one i s compelled to do so in
life, one i s comp elled to speak one
’s mind an d to give one
’s opinion candidly, and
stick to it .
But seeing that I do my utmost to look at the undeniably good side
, of things
in the ﬁrst place, and only afterward, most unwillingly, look at the bad side too,
I make bold to believe that, even if I have not quite succeeded in it, I shall
eventually arrive at what I may call in general a mild and broad and unprejudiced
judgment . And therefore it i s to me a petite misere de la Vie humaine to meet a
man who thinks he is always right, and who demands to be taken for someone
who i s always right ; and this i s because I am so convinced of my own fallibility
and, at the same time, of the fallibility of all the children of men .
Now as to you, I believe that you too ar e striving after a mild and broad and
80


and good luck in Brussels . And don
’t forget to dropin on your return journey,
if it is possible ; let
’s agree on that as a matter of principle .
Kind regards from my parents and a handshake in
thought from me . And
believe me
Ever yours, Vincent
15 8
Dear brother,
Etten, Friday 1 8 November
1 8 8 1
If I couldn
’t give vent to my feelings now and then, I think the boiler would
burst . I must tell you something which would perhaps upset me if I had to keep
it to myself ; but if I can make a clean breast of it, perhaps it will not be
so bad .
As you know, Father and Mother on one side and I on the other do not agree
about what must be done or not done in regard to a certain
“no , never never .
”
Well, after hearing the rather strong expressions ,
“indelicate
” and
“
untimely
for some time (just imagine that you were in love and they called your love
indelicate, would you not have proudly resented it, and said, Stop
I emphati
cally requested that these expressions
not be used
any more . Thi s ceased, but
another phrase appeared . Nowthey say that I am
“breaking family ties .
”
Well, many a time I have told them earnestly, patiently and with feeling that
such was not at all the case . It helped for a time, and then they began anew .
The fact that I
“wrote letters
” was the real grievance against me . But when
they persisted in using so rashly and recklessly that miserable expression
“breaking
family ties,
” I did the following .
For a few days I di d not speak a word or take any notice of Father and Mother .
Against my wish, but I wanted to make them feel how it would be if those
family ties were really severed . Of course they were astoni shed at my beha vior,
and when they asked me about it, I answered, See, tbat is bow it would be if there
were no tie of affection between u s but fortunately it does exist and will not be
broken
so easily. But I beg you, consider now how miserable that expression,
breaking ties,
i s, and do not use it any more .
But the result w as that Father grew very angry, ordered me out of the room
with a curse, at least it sounded exactly like one ! Father i s used to having every
one give in to
‘ him when he
’s in a passion, even I , but thi s time I was quite
determined to let him rage for once . In anger Father also said something like I
had better leave the house and go elsewhere ; but because it was sai d in a passion,
I do not attach much importance to it .
I have my models and my studio here ; elsewhere living would be more
expensive, and my work more difficult, and the models would cost more . But if
Father and Mother said g o in earnest to me, of course I Should go . There are
things which a man cannot put up with .
If one has to hear continual ly,
“You are crazy,
or,
Y ou are a person who
breaks family ties,
” or,
“Y ou are indelicate,
” any man with a heart in hi s body
would protest with all hi s energy . Of course I have also told Father and Mother
a thing or two , for instance that they were very much in error on the subject of
this love affair and that their hearts were hardened, an d that they were completely
8 2

closed to a more g entle and humane way of thinking . In short, that their way of
thinking seemed narrow-minded to me— neither tolerant nor generous enough ;
and also that to me God would merely be an empty sound if one were forced to
hide one
’s love and were not allowed to obey the heart
’s dictates .
Well, I am quite willing to believe that at times I have not been able to curb
my indignation when I heard
“indelicate
” and
“breaking ties,
” but who could
remain calm under it if there were no end to it
Quoiqu
’il en soit, in hi s ﬁt of passion Pa muttered nothing less than a curse .
However, I already heard something of the sort last year, and, thank God, far
from being really damned, I developed new life and new energy within myself.
So I am fully convinced it will be the same now, or more so, and more strongly
than last year .
Theo, I love her— her, and no other— her, forever . And
an d
and
Theo,
although as yet it never
“seems
” to be in full activity, there i s a feeling of deliver
ance within me and it i s as if she and I had stopped being two, an d were united
forever and ever .
Did you receive my drawings
Yesterday I made another,
of a peasant boy
lighting a ﬁre early in the morning on the hearth over which a kettle i s hanging ;
an d another, of an old man putting kindling wood on the hearth . I am sorry to
say there i s still something harsh and severe in my drawings, and I think that sbe,
her inﬂuence, must come to soften this .
Well , boy, I suppose there i s no reason to take that curse of Father
’s
so very
seriously ; perhaps I used too harsh a method to make Father and Mother feel
what they would not bear . Well, I shake hands with you . Believe me,
Ever yours , Vincent
R 5
Dear Rappard ,
Etten, 2 1 November
1 8 8 1
To talk less abstractly this time, I am going to discuss some facts with you . Y ou
say that Ten Cate spoke to you about similar matters as I did . All right, but if
this Mr . Ten Cate i s the same person whom on a certain day I saw in your studio
for a moment, I very much doubt whether he and I have exactly the same ideas
fundamentally . Is he a man of small stat ure with black or at least dark hair, who
on that occasion had a very pale complexion, or at any rate was very neatly
dressed in a suit
of black cloth? You should know that I am in the habit
of
observing very accurately the physical exteriors of people
in order to get at
their real mental make-up
. However, I
saw this Mr . Ten C . only once, and
that very ﬂeeting ly
—
at least if I
saw him at
all— and so I cannot make up my
mind about him . All the same, it i s possible that in some respects he spoke
to you as I
did , and I don
’t object to
that—
all the better, I
say
. Actually
your answer to my letter i s no more than half an answer, thanks
all the same .
I think y ou will tell me the other half some time, but not in the near future .
The other half, still to come, will be longer than the one I received, and mucb more
sati sfactory
.
Suppose at some time you leave the academy for good, then I think that you

will eventually have to struggle ag ainst a very peculiar difficulty, which i s not
quite unknown to you even now . A man who, like you, i s working at the academy
regularly cannot help feeling more
or less
out of hi s element when, instead of
knowing, Thi s or that i s my task for today, he i s forced to improvise, or rather
create, hi s task every day anew . Especially in the long run this looking for and
ﬁnding your work will not prove such an easy job by any means . At least it
would not surprise me if, after having broken away from the academy for good,
you did not occasionally feel that th e ground was giving Way
under your feet .
But I think you are not the kind of man to be thrown into a panic by such a
natural phenomenon, and y ou will soon regain your balance .
However, when y ou have thrown yourself once and for
all, heal
ng and
Without reservation, into reality (for after you have thrown yourself into it , you
will never go back), you will speak to others who are still clinging to the academy,
exactly as Ten Cate does and exactly as I do . For from what you have told me of
Mr . Ten Cate I infer that hi s reasoning c an be reduced to the following words
Rappard, give up your reservations , and throw yourself headlong into reality .
The Open Sea i s your true element and even at the academy you do not belie
your true character and nature ; that i s Why the worthy gentlemen there will
not recognize you in fact, and put you off with idle talk .
Mr . Ten Cate is not yet an able seaman, and I myself much less , and we cannot
steer and maneuver yet
as we would like to ; but if we do not get drowned or
smashed
on the rocks in the seething breakers , we shall become good sailors .
There i s no help for it, everyone has to go through a period of wo rrying and
fumbling after he has risked himself on the open sea . At ﬁrst w e catch little or no
ﬁsh, but we get acquainted with our course an d learn to steer
our little vessel,
and thi s i s indispensable to begin with . And after a While we shall catch a lot of
ﬁsh, and big ones too, be sure of that !
But I think Mr . Ten Cate is casting hi s nets for another kind of ﬁsh than I am,
because to my mind our temperaments diverge ; for every ﬁsherman has a right
to hi s own specialty, but now and then a ﬁsh of one kind will swim into the net
meant for another kind, and Vice versa, and so it may happen that at times there
is a similarity between his catch and mine .
Now from time to time you dislike sowers and seamstresses and diggers . Well ,
What of it
So do 1. However, with me this
“disli king from time to time
” i s far
outweighed by a certain enthusiasm, but with you the two things seem to have
equal weight .
Have you kept my epistles
If you have a little time to spare, and they have
not perished in the ﬂames , then I
say : read them again, although it may seem
pretentious to ask such a thing of you . But I did not write them Wi thout serious
intentions, though I was
not afraid to speak my mind freely
an d to give free
rein to my imagination . Now y ou say that 1 am a fanatic at heart, and that most
certainly I am preaching a doctrine .
Well, if you want to take it that way ,
so be it ; when it comes to the point
I don
’t Object to it , I am not ashamed
of my feelings , I do not blush to own
that I am a man with principles
and a creed . But where does my fanaticism
3 4

seek to drive people, especially myself ? To the open sea And what is the doctrine
I preach ? My friends , let us give our souls to our cause, let us work With our
heart, and truly love what we love .
L ove wbat we love, how superﬂuous a warning this seems to be, and yet it i s
justiﬁed to an enormous extent ! For how many there are who waste their best
efforts on something that is not worth their best efforts, Whereas they treat what
they love in a stepmotherly way instead
of yielding wholly
to the irresistible
urge of their hearts . And yet we venture to call thi s conduct
“ﬁrmness of char
acter
’’ and
‘‘strength ofmind,
” and we waste our energy on an unworthy creature,
all the While neglecting our true sweetheart . And all thi s
“with the most sacred
intentions,
’’ thinking
we are compelled to do it,
”
out of
‘‘moral conviction
and a
“sense of duty .
And so we have the
“beam in our own eye,
” confusing a
pseudo
or would-be conscience with our true conscience . The person who at
thi s moment i s writing to hi s dear friend Rappard has been marching around
on this earth with one,
or even more than
one, Such object— but then
of a
monstrous size— in hi s eye for a long time .
Has this beam been g ot
rid of? you ask . Well, What can the present writer
answer to this
Of one thing he i s sure, namely that
one very big beam i s g ot
rid of, provisionally ; but, for the very reason that he did not notice it when he
was laboring under it, he does not deem it impossible that there are others
of
whose existence or nonexistence he is not fully aware . However, the person in
question has learned to be
on hi s guard against di seases
of and beams in the
eyes . The excessively big beam in question was of a more or less inartistic char
acter . I won
’t tell you just now what kind of beam it was . For there are all kinds
of eye beams , artistic, theological, moral eye beams (quite a multitude of them),
practical eye beams and theoretical eye beams (sometimes the two are combined
— very ruinous indeed
and
oh well, a lot more .
We must not let ourselves be thrown into too much of a panic if we are not
without them, provided this
‘‘
not being in a pani c
” does not lead us into care
lessness or indifference i n this respect, or even into stubbornness .
A few days ago I had a nice letter from my brother Theo, who also inquired
after y ou ; I had sent hi m some drawings, and be strongly advised me to g o on
with those Brabant types . What he says about art i s always
to the point and
purpose, and he often gives hints that are practical and practicable .
Today I have again been attacking a certain
“béte noire”
of mine, to wit, the
system of resignation ; I believe thi s
bete noire
is of the race of the hydra— that
i s to
say the more serpent
’
s heads you cut
off, the more spring up again . And
yet there have been men who have succeeded in killing 05 such a
“bete noir .
It i s always my favorite occupation, as soon as I can ﬁnd a spare half hour, to
resume the ﬁght against this old
béte noir”
. But perhaps you do not know that
in theology there exists a system
of resig nation with mortiﬁc ati on as a side
branch. And if this were a thing that existed only in the imagination and the
writings or sermons of the theolog ians, I should not take notice of it ; but alas,
it i s one
of those insufferable burdens which certain theologians lay
on the
shoulders
of men, Without touching them themselves with their little ﬁnger.

And
so— more
’s the pity— this resignation belongs to
the domain
of reality,
and causes many great and petites miseres de la vie humaine . But when they
wanted to put this yoke upon my shoulders, I said,
“Go to hell !” An d thi s they
thought very disrespectful . Well, so be it . Whatever may be the raison d
’etre of
this resignation, it— the resignation, I mean— is only for those who canbe resigned,
and religious belief is for those who can believe . And what can I do if I am not cut
out by nature for the former, i .e. resignation, but on the contrary for the latter,
i .e. religious belief, with all its consequences ?
Well, if you have a little time to spare, write me again, and in the meantime
believe me, with a handshake,
Ever yours , Vincent
R 6
Dear Rapp ard,
Etten,
2 3 November
1 8 8 1
On rereading your letters , my dear fellow, I ﬁnd such lively and funny sallies
in them that I feel stimulated, particularly by the latter, to continue our corres
pondenc e .
Well, well ! So after all I am a fanatic ! All right, for your words have gone
home, right through my skin ! So be it— thanks for your revelation, yes, thank
G od, at ﬁrst I dared not believe it, but y ou have made it clear to me—
so I have
a will, a conviction, I am going in a deﬁnite direction, and what i s more, not being
contented with this , I want others to go along with me ! Thank God,
so I am
a fanatic ! Well, from now on I won
’t be anything else . And now Lshould like
to have my friend Rappard as a fellow traveler— ir is not a matter of indifference
to me to lose sight of him— do you think I am wrong in this ?
Now I said in my hurry that I wanted to drive people
“to the open sea
(see
my previous letter)
. If I did nothing but this, I should be a sorry barbarian .
But there i s something else which renders the thing more reasonable . In
the
long run a man cannot stick it out in the open sea— he must have a little cottage
on the shore with a bit of ﬁre on the hearth— with a wife and children around
that hearth .
Look, Rappard, Whither I am trying to drive myself, and whither I am trying
to drive others too, i s to be ﬁshermen on the sea that we call the Ocean of Reality,
but
on the other hand I want— for myself and for the fellow creatures Whom
I importune now and then— that
“little cottage,
most decidedly I do ! And in
that cottage,
all those things ! So the open
sea and that resting place,
or that
resting place and the open sea . And as regards the doctrine I preach, thi s .doctrin e
of mine—
“My friends , let us love what we love
”— is based on an axiom. I thought
it superﬂuous to mention thi s axiom, but for clarity
’s sake I will add it . That
axiom i s
“My friends, we love .
”
From thi s I deduce that ﬁrst thesis .
My friends, let us love what we love, let us be ourselves,
do not let us think
we know better than God .
This
“do
not let us
think we know better than
G od
” i s not my expression, it belongs to Mauve . And this thesis I prove by
neg ative demonstration, i .e. in the following way to begin with .
86

Suppose a man did
not love what he loves , what a lot of misery he would
cause himself and others,
and how much turbulence he would create in God
’s
world . In short, if all men were like the person who, as we suppose— at least if
this i s possible— for the moment, does not love what he loves , how the world
(which, I think, our Lord put squarely on its feet, whi ch i s kept in that position
by Him, and whi ch will stay that way as long as you and I are alive— which Will
serve our time, you know !)
if, I say, all men were like thi s imaginary one, will
fully turned inside out and upside down
(an d how fortunate it i s that he c an only
ex15 t i n our imagination as an abstraction, just like our proof by negative demon
stration
of an unmathematical thesis)
— how much the world, correctly created
by God, woul d gradually seem to become a radically wrong world . Methinks,
by continuing to work with this abstraction in our imagination— and this only
for a short, even a very short whi le— I mean, with the above actually nonexistent
man, willfully turned inside out and upside down— we cannot help feeling it
goes
so much
“against the grain
” that we are entitled to think we have proved
deﬁnitely the correctness and reasonableness
of our thesis :
“My friends, let us
love What
‘we love .
” (Besides , if I have not demonstrated clearly enough that
the incorrectness of the said thesis would be an enormous
absurdity, you, who
are much further advanced in mathematics than I, would easily succeed— if
y ou would give your mind to it— ln ﬁnding more conclusive proofs for my
thesis .)
We
now come to some remarkable conclusions or
deductions
from
our
primary thesis , as for instance
I
. The man who damn well refuses to love what he loves dooms himself.
2 . He must have quite a lot
of o(a) bstinatie1 to stick it
out in the long
3
. If he changed, wouldn
’t hi s conversion be a great thing
Yes, and whether I add it or not, I think you will understand that I am suggest
ing more or less , Rappard, by Sticking so close to the academy you are clinging
to a reservation
as to a rope that has
“strangled
” many a
one— I mean, who
coul d not cut himself loose when he wanted to put to sea .
Are there still other
“reservations” besides the academic ones ? See the chapter
eye beams
” in my previous letter . There are, if you will allow me to say
so, as
many kinds of reservations as there are kinds of eye beams .
H ow many ? Leg ions, I telly ou, leg ions !
This
“being strangled
” by a reservation i s a much slower and more agonizing
death than stoutly hanging oneself by means
of a halter . Are there also moral
reservations
Why shouldn
’t there be, just as there are moral
“eye beams
” ? But
you and I , have we labored under them, are we laboring under them, shall we
labor under them
Goodness gracious— I am far from sure, and if I were speaking for myself
instead of for the two of us , I should say , I have labored, am laboring and shall
labor under moral eye beams and moral reservations, but thi s has
not altered,
I
The a and the a happenboth to be appropriate, eh ? [This pun is untran slatable . TheDutch word
obstina ti e mean s
“
obstinacy,
”
and the (incidentally inc orrect) word abstinatie (c orrect : abstinentie)
means

does not alter and Will not alter the fact that I have
cast, am casting and shall
go
on casting moral beams
out
of my eyes , and that I have chucked away, am
chucking away and shall go on chucking away moral reservations .
Until in the end I Shall stand with a clear eye and a free neck .
When
If I persevere until the end— in the end .
But I feel sure you will
see that by continuing our correspondence w e get
so mucb proﬁt out of i t that gradually this correspondence i s getting more serious .
For though, as I said, I give my imagination a free rein, yet I swear that I
write in dead earnest, and not the reverse . Nothing i s further from my thoughts
than writing you out of a lust for argument, but my intention i s
“to wake Rap
pard up,
and I doubt whether I shall drop
off myself when
“waking Rappard
up .
God forbid that this should be the case— far be it from me !
Now I told you on a former occasion that in general, and more
especially
with artists, I pay
as much attention to the man who does the work as to the
work itself. If the man i s not there, I am now and then forced to draw conclu
sions from the work only (we cannot know all artists personally) , or if the work
is not there, to form an opinion of the man by himself. Now I know something
of the work
of a certain Mr . Van Rappard , and secondly something
of the
g entleman himself.
His work is always saying to me, Better is to come ; his person i s saying the
same thing to me .
Better and better .
Do you think thi s a very merciless judgment ? And (to jump from one subject
to another) as regards my special
“bete noire,
today I had little opportuni ty to
occupy myself with hunting it ; but for all that 1 have not been able to refrain
from attacking it a little .
And we Shall have a bone to pick with it by and by . But it is beginning to
be a little on its guard ; the fact is that resignation i s accustomed to resignation,
and I thought it would give up the struggle . But 10 ! I am not yet in a mood
for it . Oh well, later on I shall probably tell you something more about the
said bete noire . Damned béte noire ! And yet it amuses me .
Meanwhile believe me, with a h andshake,
Ever yours , Vincent
I am writing you pretty often now, as shortly I Shall have a lot of other corres
pondenc e to attend to .


vague and insubstantial— du coton ﬁlé trop ﬁn . His pict ures are the shadow of an
impression, and in my opinion that impression i s hardly worth repeating so often .
I do not wish to associate much with other painters . Each day I ﬁnd Mauve
cleverer and more trustworthy, and what more can I want ? However, Theo,
I shall have to dress a little better now . I know now the direction in which I have
to go, and need not hide myself,
so I shall not avoid meeting other people
neither shall I seek them . Mauve and Jet send you their compliments .
Adieu, I still have a lot to do, believe me,
Yours sincerely, Vincent
192
Dear Theo,
The Hague, 3 —9 May 1 88 2
Today I met Mauve and had a very painful conversation with him, which made
i t clear to me that Mauve and I are separated forever . Mauve has gone
so far
that he cannot retract, at least he certainly wouldn
’t want to . I had asked him
.to come and see my work and then talk things over. Mauve refused point-blank :
“ I will certainly not come to see you, that
’s all over .
At last he said,
“You have a Vicious character .
” At thi s I turned around— it
w as in the dunes— and walked home alone .
Mauve takes offense at my having sai d,
“I am an artist
”— which I won
’t take
back, because, of course, these words connote ,
“Always seekingwithout absolutely
ﬁnding .
” It i s just the opposite of saying,
“I know, I have found it .
”
A s far as I know, that word means ,
“I am seeking, I am striving, I am in it
with all my heart .
”
I have ears, Theo . If somebody says ,
You have a Vicious character,
should I do next ?
I turned around and went back alone, but with a heavy heart because Mauve
had dared to
say thi s to me . I shall not ask him to explain it, nor Shall I excuse
myself. And still— an d still— and still
I wish Mauve were sorry for it .
They suspect me
of something— it i s in the
ai r— I am keeping something
back . Vincent i s hiding something that cannot stand the light .
Well, gentlemen, I will tell you , you who prize good manners and culture, and
rightly so if only it be the true kind : Which i s the more delicate, reﬁned, manly
—
to desert a woman
or to stand by a forsaken woman ?
Last winter I met a pregnant woman, deserted by the man whose child
she
carried .
A pregnant woman who had to walk the Streets in winter, had to earn her
bread, y ou understand how .
I took thi s woman for a model, and have worked with her all winter . I coul d
not pay her the full wages of a model, but that did not prevent my paying her
rent, and, thank G od, so far I have been able to protect her and her child from
hunger and cold by sharing my own bread with her . When I met thi s woman,
she attracted my attention because
she looked ill . I made her take baths an d as
‘
much nourishing food as I could afford,
and
she has become much stronger . I

went with her to Leyden, to the maternity hospital where she will be conﬁned .
(No wonder she was ill, the child was
not in the right position, and she had
to have an operation— the child had to be turned With forceps . However, there
i s a good chance of her pulling through. She will be conﬁned in June .)
It seems to me that every man worth a straw would have done the same in
such a case .
What I did was so simple and natural that I thought I could keep it to myself.
Posing was very difficult for her, but she has learned ; I have made progress in
my drawing because I had a good model . The woman i s now attached to me
like a tame dove . For my part, I can only marry once, and how can I do better
than marry her ? It i s the only way to help her ; otherwise misery would force
her back into her old ways, which end in a precipice . She has no money, but she
helps me earn money in my profession .
I am full of ambition and love for my work and profession ; I gave up painting
and water colors for a time only b ecause I was
so Shocked by Mauve
’s desert
ing me, and if he came back, I would begin again with new courage. I cannot
look at a brush now , it makes me nervous .
I have written : Theo, can you give me some information about Mauve
’s
behavior ? Perhaps this letter can give you light . You are my brother, it i s natural
that I speak to you about private things
but for the time being I cannot speak
to anyone who says to me,
“You have a vicious character .
”
I couldn
’t do otherwise, I di d what my hand found to do, I worked . I thought
I would be understood without words . I had not forgotten another woman for
whom my heart was beating, but
she was far away and refused to
see me
and
thi s
one walked the streets in winter, sick, pregnant, hungry— I coul dn t do
otherwise . Mauve, Theo, Tersteeg, you have my bread in your hands, will y ou
take it from me, or turn your back on me
Now I have spoken, and await what
ever will be said to me next .
Vincent
I send you a few studies because you can see from them that
she helps me a
great deal by posing .
My drawings are done
by my model and me .
The woman in a white bonnet
i s her mother .
But I should like these three back, as in a year— When I probably shall draw
quite differently— my work will be based on these studies which I now make
as conscientiously as I can . Y ou can see they are carefully done . Later on when I
make an interior or a waiting room or the like, these will be useful to me because
I can consult them for the details . But I thought perhaps it would be good for
y ou to see how I spend my time .
These studies require a rather dry technique ; if I had tried for effect, they
would be of less use to me later . But I think you will understand thi s yourself. The
paper I should like best i s that on which the bent ﬁgure of a woman i s drawn,
but the color of unbleached linen ifpossible . I have none of it left in tbat tbickness,
I think they call it double Ingres, I can
’t get it here . When you see how that drawing
9 1

is done, you
’ll understand that it couldn
’t be done on thin paper . I wanted to
send with it a small ﬁgure in black merino, but I can
’t roll it . The chair near the
large ﬁgure i s not ﬁnished because what I want there i s an old oak chai r .
207
Dear Theo,
The Hague, 8—1 0 June
1 8 8 2
Few things have given me
so much pleasure recently as hearing things from
home which to a certain extent set my mind at ease about their feelings toward
me . Sien came to tell me that a parcel had been delivered to the studio, and I
told her to go and open it and see what was in it, an d in case there was a letter,
to bring it with her ;
so I learned that they had sent a whole package of things ,
underwear an d outer clothing and cigars, and there was also
1 0 guilders enclosed
in the letter . I cannot tell you how it touched me, it i s much more than I expected ;
but they do not know everything yet.
I am just weak and feeble, Theo, and I need absolute, absolute rest to recover,
so everything that makes for peace i s welcome . But I felt much worse than now
before I was lying here, and please bear in mind that it i s not at all serious , and
only a short period of treatment will make me well again . I wanted to tell you
the news about Father and Mother immediately, because I thought it would
please you, too .
Sien will probably go next Monday, for I think she i s better off in the hospital
now ;
she will be admitted about the middle
of June . She wanted to stay here
for me, but I wouldn
’t allow it .
I have my books on perspective here, and a few volumes of Dickens , including
Edwin D rood there i s perspective in Dickens, too . G OOd God, what an artist !
There
’s no one like him .
I hope my having to take a rest will have a good effect
on my drawings ;
sometimes one gets a better View of things when one does not work
on them
for a whi le— then when one sees them again, they seem fresh and new .
The View from the window of the ward i s splendid : yards on the canal , with
the barges loaded with potatoes , rear View of houses that are being pulled down
by workmen, part of a garden ; and on the next, more di stant, plane the Quay
with its rows of trees and street lamps, a very complicated little almshouse with
little gardens connected to it ; an d ﬁnally, all the roofs . The whole is a bird
’s—eye
view which, especially in the evenings and in the mornings , i s mysterious because
of the light
’s
eﬂec t, for instance, like a Ruysdael or Van der Meer . But I may
not and cannot draw it as long as I am so weak . But though I
’m forbidden to
get out of bed, I cannot refrain from getting up to look at it every evening .
Write me soon ; wasn
’t that parcel from home a surprise
— and especially coming
at a time like this , it made me more than happy .
The rest cure does me good and makes me so much calmer, an d takes away
that nervousness which has troubled me
so much recently. And the ward here
is no less interesting to me
than the third-class waiting room . But I may
not
an d cannot draw yet . Adieu, I hope you will ﬁnd time to write to me, believe me,
Yours sincerely, Vincent

I thought it so ni ce that thi s came from home, I wanted to let you know at once .
Of course I do not need any more clothes now . I wrote home to thank them,
and to tell them I was here . You know th e address i s— City Hospital— 4 Class
Ward 6— No . 9
. Brouwersg racht .
218
Dear brother,
The Hague,
1 9—2 3 July
1 8 8 2
It i s already late, but I want to write you once more . You are not here, but
I wish you were, and sometimes it seems to me we are not far away from each
other.
Today I promised myself something, that i s, to consider my illness , or rather
the remains of it , as nonexistent . Enough time has been lost, the work must
continue . So, well or not well, I shall start drawing again, regularly from morning
un til night . I do not want someone to
say to me again,
“Oh ! these are just old
drawings .
”
Today I made a drawing of the baby
’s cradle with a few touches of color in it .
I am also working on a drawing like the one ofthe meadows I sent you recently.
My hands have become too white, but i s thi s my fault ?
I will go out and work in the open air, even if it should cause my illness to
return . I cannot keep from working any longer .
Art i s jealous,
She does not want us to choose illness in preference to her,
so
I do what she wishes .
Therefore I hope that within a short time you will receive a few pretty good
new drawings again . People like me must not be ill ,
so to speak .
I want you to understand clearly my conception of art . One must work long
and hard to grasp the essence . What I want and aim at i s confoundedly difficult,
and yet I do not think I aim too high .
I want to do drawings which toucb some people .
Sorrow
i s a small beginning
perhaps such little landscapes as
“Laan van Meerdervoort ,
” “Rijswijk Meadows ,
and
“Fish Drying Barn
” are also a small beginning . In those there i s at least
something straight from my own heart .
In either ﬁgure or landscape I should wish to express, not sentimental melan
choly , but serious sorrow .
In short, I want to progress so far that people will say of my work, He feels
deeply, he feels tenderly— notwithstanding my so-called roughness , perhaps even
because of it .
It seems pretentious to talk thi s way now, but thi s i s the reason why I want
to push on with all my strength .
What am I in most people
’s eyes
A nonentity, or an eccentric and di sagreeable
man— somebody who has no position in society and never will have, in Short,
the lowest of the low . Very well, even if this were true, then I should want my
work to Show What i s in the heart of such
“
an eccentric, of such a nobody.
Thi s i s my ambition, which i s, in spite of everything, founded less on anger
than on love, more on serenity than on passion . It i s true that I am often in the
greatest misery, b ut still there i s a calm pure harmony and music inside me.
9

I
see drawings and pictures in the poorest huts , in the dirtiest corner. An d
my mind i s drawn toward these things by an irresistible force .
More and more other things lose their interest, and the more I get
rid
of
them, the quicker my eye grasps the picturesque things . Art demands persistent
work, work in spite
of everything, and continuous observation . By persistent,
I mean not only continuous work, but also not giving up your opini on at the
bidding of such and such a person .
I do hope, brother, that within a few years , perhaps even now, little by
little, you will see things by me which will give you some satisfaction for your
sacriﬁces .
I have had very little intercourse with other painters lately . I have not been
the worse for it . It i s not the language
of painters but the language
of nature
which one should listen to . Now I understand better than I di d six months ag o
Why Mauve said,
“Don
’t talk to me about Dupre; but talk about the bank
of
that ditch, or something like it .
” It sounds rather crude, but it i s perfectly true .
The feeling for the things themselves , for reality, i s more important than the
feeling for pictures—
at least, it i s more fertile and more enlivening .
Because I now have such a broad, ample feeling for art and for life itself, of
whi ch art i s the essence, i t sounds
so shrill and false to me when people try to
compel me .
Personally, I ﬁnd in many modern pictures a peculiar charm whi ch the
old
masters do not have .
For me one of the highest and noblest expressions of art i s always that of the
English, for instance, Mi llais and H erkomer and Frank Holl . What I mean about
the difference between the old masters and the modern
l
ones i s this— perhaps the
modern ones are deeper thinkers .
There i s a great difference in sentiment between
Chill October
by Millais
and
“Bleaching Ground at Overveen
” by Ruysdael ; and also between
“Irish
Emigrants” by H O11 and
“The Bible Reading
” by Rembrandt . Rembrandt and
Ruysdael are sublime, for us as well
as for their contemporaries ; but there i s
something in themodern painters that appeals to us more personally an d intimately.
It i s the same with the wood engravings by Swain and those of the old German
masters .
So, I think it was a mi stake a few years ago when the modern painters went
through a period of imitating the old masters .
Therefore I think father Millet i s right in saying,
11me semble absurde que les
hommes veuillent paraitre autre chose que c c qu
’ils sont
” [I think it absurd when
people want to seem something different from what they are]
. It seems like a
commonplace saying, yet it i s fathomless, as deep as the ocean, and personally
I think one would do well to take it to heart .
I just wanted to tell you that I shall
set to work regularly again in spite of
everything ; and I want to add that I am longing for a letter from you
so very
much, and now I wish you good night . Adieu, with a handshake,
Yours sincerely, Vincent

Please do not forget the tbiek Ingres if you
c an get it— a sample i s enclosed .
I still have enough of the thin kind . I can wash with water colors
on the thi ck
Ingres ; on the other it always blurs through no fault of mine .
I hope I Shall be able to draw that little cradle persistently a hundred times
more, not counting what I did today.
221
Dear Theo,
The Hague, 3 1 July
1 8 8 2
Just a line to welcome you in anticipation of your arrival . Also to acknowledge
the receipt of your letter and the enclosed, for which I send my warmest thanks .
It was very welcome, for I am hard at work and need a few more things .
As I understand it, we of course agree completely about black in nature .
Absolute black does not really exist . But like white, it i s present in almost every
color, and forms the endless variety of grays— different in tone and strength . So
that in nature one really sees nothing but those tones or shades .
There are only three fundamental colors— red, yellow an d blue ;
composites
are orange, green and purple . By adding black and some white
one gets
the
endless varieties of grays—
red gray,y ellow gray, blue gray, g reen gray, orang e gray,
violet-gray .
It i s impossible to
say , for instance, how many green—grays there are ; there
i s an endless variety . But the whole chemistry ofcolors i s no more complicatedthan
those few simple
rules . An d having a clear notion of thi s i s worth more than
.
seventy different colors
of paint— because with those three principal colors an d
black and white, one can make more than seventy tones and varieties . The colorist
i s the man who knows at once how to analyze a color, when he sees it in nature,
and c an say, for instance : That green-gray i s yellow with black and blue, etc . .
In other words, the man who knows how to ﬁnd nature
’s grays on hi s palette .
In order to take notes from nature, or to make little sketches, a strongly
developed feeling for outline i s absolutely necessary as well as for intensifying
the drawing later . I believe one does not acquire thi s without effort, but ﬁrst by
observation, and particularly by strenuous work and research ; an d special study
“
of anatomy and perspective i s necessary too . A landscape study by Roelofs i s
hanging beside me— a pen draw
ing, but I cannot tell you how expressive its
.
simple outline IS
e
, verything i s in it .
Another even more striking example i s the large woodcut
The Shepherdess
by Mi llet, whi ch you Showed me last year an d which I have remembered ever Since .
And then, for instance, the pen-and—ink sketches by O stade and Peasant Breughel .
When I
see such results I feel the great importance of the outline even more
strongly. An d you know from
“Sorrow,
” for instance, that I take a great deal of
trouble to make progress in that respect .
But y ou will see when you come to the studio that apart from seeking the
outline, I have, just like everybody else, a feeling for the power
of color . And
that I do not Object to doing water colors ; but their foundation i s the drawing,
an d then many other branches sprout from the drawing besides the water color .
This will develop in me in time, as in everybody who loves his work .
9 5.

I have attacked that old giant of a pollard willow, and I think it i s the best of
the water colors . A gloomy landscape— that dead tree near a stagnant pool
covered with reeds, in the distance a car shed of the Rhine Railway Compan y,
where the tracks cross each other ; dingy black buildings, then green meadows,
a cinder path, and a sky with scudding clouds, gray with a single bright white
border, and a depth of blue where the clouds are momentarily rent apart. In short,
I wanted to make it the way the signal man in his smock and with hi s little red
ﬂag must see and feel it when he thinks,
“It is gloomy weather today.
”
I have worked with great pleasure these last days, though now and then I Still
feel the effects of my illness .
Of the drawings which I shall Show you now, I think only thi s : I hope they
will prove to you that my work does not remain stationary, but progresses in a
reasonable direction . As to the money value
of my work, I do not pretend to
anything less than that it would greatly astoni sh me if in time my work did not
become just as salable as that of others . Of course I cannot tell whether that will
happen now or later, but I think the surest way, whi ch cannot fail, i s to work from
nature faithfully and energetically . Sooner
or later feeling and love for nature
meet a response from people who are interested in art . It i s the painter
’s duty to
be entirely absorbed by nature and to use all hi s intelligence to express sentiment
in hi s work so that i t becomes intelligible to other people . In my opinion working
for the market is not exactly the right way ; on the contrary, it means fooling
art lovers.The true painters have not done thi s ; the sympathy they event ually
received was the result of their sincerity . That
’s all I know about it , and I don
’t
think I need to know more . Of course it i s a different thing to try to ﬁnd people
who like your work, and who will love it— of course this is permitted . But it
must not become speculation ; it would perhaps
turn out wrong
an d would
certainly cause one to lose time that ought to be spent on the work itself.
Of course you will ﬁnd things that are not correct in my water colors, but this
will improve in time .
But know it well, I am far from clinging to a system or being bound by one .
Such a thing exists more in Tersteeg
’
s imagination, for instance, than in reality.
As to Tersteeg,youunderstandthat my opinion of hi m i s quite personal, and that I
do not want to thrust ony ou the opinion I am forced to have . As long as he thinks
and says the things about me you know of, I cannot regard him as a friend, nor as
being of any use to me on the contrary. And I am afraid that his opinion of me i s
too deeply rooted ever to be changed, especially because, as you say yourself, he
will never take the trouble to reconsider some things an d to change .
When I see how several painters I know here have so much trouble with their
water colors and pictures,
so that they cann ot pull it off, I often think, Friend,
the fault i s in your drawing . I do not regret for a Single moment that I did not
go on with water color and oil painting in the beginning . I am sure I shall make
up for that if I only work hard, so that my hand does not falter in drawing and
in the perspective . But when I
see young painters compose
and draw from
memory — an d then haphazardly smear on whatever they like, alsofrom memory
then look at it from a distance and pull a very mysterious , gloomy face while
96


223
Dear Theo,
The Hague, 5 August
1 8 8 2
In my last letter you will have found a little sketch of that perspective frame
I mentioned . I just came back from the blacksmith, who made iron points for
the sticks and iron corners for the frame . It consists
of two long stakes ; the
frame c an be attached to them either way with strong wooden pegs .
So on the shore
or in the meadows or in the ﬁelds
one can look through it
like a window. The vertical lines and the horizontal line of the frame and
the
98

diagonal lines and the intersection, or else the division in squares, certainly give
a few fundamental pointers which help
one make a solid drawing and which
indicate the main lines and proportions— at least for those who have some instinct
for perspective and some understanding of why and how the perspective causes
an apparent change of direction in the lines and change of size in the planes and
in the whole mass . Without thi s, the instrument i s of little or no use, an d looking
through it makes one dizzy
. I think you
c an imagine how delightful it i s to
turn thi s
“spy-hole
” frame on the sea, on the green meadows, or on the snowy
ﬁelds in winter, or on the fantastic network of thin an d thick branches an d trunks
in autumn or on a stormy sky
.
Long and continuous practice with it enables one to draw quick as lightning
— and , once the drawing is done ﬁrmly, to paint quick as lightning, too .
In fact,for painting it is absolutely the thing ; for one needs a brush to express
sky
-earth-sea— or rather, in order to express
all that in drawing, it i s necessary
to know an d understand the treatment of the brush . I certainly believe that if I
paint for some time, it will have great inﬂuence on my drawing
. I already tried it
in January, but then I had to stop, and what decided me, apart from a few other
things was that my drawing was too hesitant . Now
six months have passed
which have been entirely devoted to drawing . Well , it i s with new courage that
I start painting again .
The perspective frame i s really a ﬁn e piece of workmanship ; I
’m sorry you
didn
’t see it before you left . It cost me quite a lot , but I have had it made
so
solidly that it will last a long time . So next Monday I shall begin to make large
fusains with it , and begin to paint small studies . If I succeed in these two things ,
then I hope that better painted things will follow soon .
I want my studi o to be a real painter
’s studio by the time you come again .
Y ou know there were several reasons for my stopping in January, but after all , it
may be considered like a defec t in the machine, a screw or a bar which was not
strong enough and had to be replaced by a Stronger one .
I bought a pair of strong, warm trousers , and as I had bought a pair of strong
shoes just before you came, I am now prepared to weather storm an d rain . It i s
my deﬁnite intention to learn from this landscape painting a few things about
the tecbnique which I feel I need for theﬁg ure, namely, to express different materials ,
an d the tone and the color . In one word, to express the body— the mass—
of things .
Your coming made it possible for me, but before you came not a day passed
that I di d not think about it this way, only I should havehad to keep exclusively to
black and white an d to the outline a little longer — But now I have launcbed my
boat . Adieu, boy, once more, a warm handshake and believe me,
Yours sincerely, Vincent
224
Dear Theo,
The Hague, 8—1 2 August
1 88 2
During the few days since you left, I have made some experiments with painting .
And I thought y ou might be curious to know how it turned out . I wish you could
spend an hour with me in the studio again, that would be the best way to tell

you how it went . But as thi s is of course impossible, I shall only tell you that I
now have three painted studies . One of a row of pollard willows in a meadow
(behind the Geest bridge)
then a study of the cinder path near here ; and today
I was at the vegetable gardens on Laan van Meerdervoort again, and saw a
potato ﬁeld with a ditch ; a man in a blue smock and a woman were picking up
potatoes, and I put their ﬁgures in .
It was a white, sandy ﬁeld, partly dug up, partly still covered with rows
of
dried stalks, with green weeds in between . In the distance, dark green trees and
a few roofs .
I di d this last study with special pleasure . I must tell you that painting does not
seem so strange to me as
‘ you would perhaps suppose ; on the contrary, I like it
very much, as it i s a very strong means of expression . An d at the same time one
can express tender things with it too, let a soft gray
or green speak amid
all
the ruggedness .
1 am very glad I have the necessary materials, for already I had often suppressed
the desire to paint . It opens a much broader horizon .
Now I should prefer to go on making quite a number of painted studies, and
hang them i n my studio without speaking to anybody about the change . An d in
case someone wonders at seeing things painted by me, I should
say , Did you
think that I had no sentiment for it, or was unable to do it ?
But I have attached great value to drawing and will continue to, because it i s
the backbone
of painting, the skeleton that supports
all the rest . I like it
so
much, Theo, that it i s only because of the expenses that I Shall have to restrain
myself rather than urge myself on . These studi es are
of medium size, a little
larger than the cover of an ordinary paintbox, because I do not work inside the
cover, but thumbtack the paper for the study onto a frame which has canvas
stretched on it, and which I can carry easily in my hand . I will draw larger things
before I paint them, or I will make grisailles of them if I can discover the tech
ni que— I will try to ﬁnd it .
It becomes too expensive if one i s not economical with the paint ; but, boy, it
i s
so delightful to have so many new and good materials ; once more, many,
many thanks . I will certainly try and take care that you never regret it, but have
the satisfaction of seeing progress . I write you just thi s little word to tell y ou
I have made a beginning . Of course the studies must get even better . I know
they have many faults , but I believe that in these ﬁrst ones you will already see
something of the open
ai r, which proves that I love nature and that I have a
painter
’s heart . Enclosed, a small scratch of the Laan van Meerdervoort . Those
vegetable gardens there have a kind of Old Dutch character which always appeals
to me greatly.
Well, good night, it is already late, with a handshake,
Yours sincerely, Vincent
I am reading Zola
’s La Cure
’
e.
When I ﬁnished this letter, it seemed to me something was missing .
I thought, I ought to be able to write him that I have started to paint a scene


so hard on seven painted studies that right now I
’m beat . One
of them ha s a
ﬁgure in it, a mother with her child, in the shadow of a large tree, in tone against
the dune, on which the summer sun i s shining— almost an Italian effect . I simply
couldn
’t restrain myself or keep my hands off it or allow myself any rest .
As you perhaps know, there i s an exhibition of the Black and White Society.
There i s a drawing by Mauve— a woman at a weaving loom, probably in Drenthe
-which I think superb .
No doubt you saw some of them at Tersteeg
’
s . There are splendid things by
Israels— including a portrait of Weissenbruch, with a pipe in hi s mouth and hi s
palette in hi s hand . By Weissenbruch himself, beautiful things— landscapes and
also a marine .
There i s a very large drawing by J
. Maris, a splendi d town View . A beautiful
W. Maris , among other thin gs, a sow with a litter of pigs, and cows . Neuhuys,
Duchatel, Mesdag
. By the last, besides a ﬁne large marine, two Swiss landscapes
which I think rather Stupid and dull . But the large marine i s splendid .
Israels has four large drawings, a girl at the window, children near a pigsty
the sketch for the little picture at the Salon—
a little
old woman kindling the
ﬁre in the twilight, at the time engraved for the A rt Cbronicle.
It i s very inspiring to see such things , for then I perceive how much I still
have to learn .
But this much I want to tell you— while painting, I feel a power of color in
me that I di d not possess before, things of broadness and strength .
Now I am not going to send you things at once— let it ripen a little ﬁrst— but
know that I am full
of ambition and believe that for the present I am making
progress . (In three months, however, I will send something to give you an idea
of how I
’m getting on .) But that i s just the reason for me to persevere an d to
acquire what I need .
So do not think that I am satisﬁed with myself from what I say about my
work— the contrary i s true ; but I think this much i s gained : in the future when
something strikes me in nature, I shall have more means than before with whi ch
to give it new Vigor .
An d I am not di spleased that what I shall make in the future will look more
attractive .
Neither do I believe that it will hinder me if my health should give way a
little from time to time . As far as I can see, the painters who occasionally cannot
work for a week or two are not the worst ones . It may be because they ar e the
ones
“
qui y mettent leur peau,
” as father Millet says . That doesn
’t matter, and
in my opinion one must not spare oneself when there i s something important to
do . If a short period of exhaustion follows, it will soon pass,
and
so much i s
gained that one harvests one
’s studies just the way a farmer harvests hi s crops .
Now for myself, I have not yet thought
of taking a rest . Only yesterday,
.
Sunday, I di d not do so much— ar least I did not go out to paint . I will see
to it that even if you come this winter, you will ﬁnd the studio full of painted
studies .
I had a letter from Rappard yesterday ; he has been to Drenthe, and judging
1 02

from the two little sketches he sent me, he has not been idle . He seems to work
very hard and well, too— ﬁg ures as well as landscape .
Well, adieu, I must set off to work again ; with a handshake,
Yours sincerely, Vincent
It i s now just two years since I began to draw in the Borinag e .
226
Dear Theo,
The Hague,
1 9 August
1 88 2 , Saturday evening
My sincere thanks for your letter and the enclosed . As soon as I received your
letter I bought 7 guilders
’ worth of colors immediately,
so as to have some
provisions and to repleni sh my box. All during the week we have had a great
deal ofwind, storm and rain, and I went to Scheveningen several times to see it .
I brought two small marines home from there .
One of them i s slightly sprinkled with sand— but the second, made during a
real storm, during which the sea came quite close to the dunes, was so covered
with a thick layer
of sand that I was obliged to
scrape it
off twice . The wind
blew so hard that I could scarcely stay on my feet, and could hardly see for the
sand that was ﬂying around . However, I tried to get it ﬁxed by going to a little
inn behind the dunes, and there scraped it
off and immediately painted it in
again , returning to the beach now and then for a fresh impression . So I brought
a few souvenirs home after all .
But another souvenir i s that I caught cold again, with all the consequences you
know of, which now forces me to stay home for a few days.
In the meantime, I have painted a few studies of the ﬁg ure— I
’m sending you
two sketches .
Painting the ﬁgure appeals to me very much, but it must ripen— I must get to
know the technique better— what i s sometimes called
“la cuisine de l
’art .
” In the
beginning I shall have to do much scraping, and shall often have to begin anew,
but I feel that I learn from it and that it gives me a new, fresh view of things .
The next time you send money, I shall buy some good marten brushes, which
are the real drawing brushes, as I have di scovered, for drawing a hand or a proﬁle
in color . Also, I see they are absolutely nec essary for very delicate branches , etc .
No matter how ﬁne, the Lyon brushes make too broad stripes or strokes . My
painting paper is also almost used up— toward the ﬁrst of September I shall have
to buy a few more supplies, but I shall not need more than the usual allowance .
Then I want to tell you that I quite agree with several points in your letter .
Especially, I fully agree that, with all their good and bad qualities, Father an d
Mother are the kind of people who are becoming rare in the present time— more
and more rare— and perhaps the new type i s not at
all better— and
so one must
appreciate them that much more .
Personally, I do indeed appreciate them . I am only afraid that the feeling about
which you reassured them for the time being would come back, especially if
they saw me again . They will never be able to understand what painting i s. They
cannot understand that the ﬁgure
of a laborer— some furrows
in a plowed
ﬁeld— a bit
of sand, sea and sky— are serious subjects,
so difﬁcult, but at the
1 03

same time
so beautiful, that it i s indeed worth while to devote one
’s life to
expressing the poetry hidden in them .
In the future, whenever they saw me toiling and pegging away at my work
scraping it
out and changing it— now severely comparing it to nature— then
changing it a little so they can no longer exactly recognize the spot or the ﬁgure
—ir would always be a disappointment to them . They w ill not be able to under
stand that painting cannot succeed at once, and over and over again they will
think,
“He doesn
’t really know anything about it ,
” and that real painters would
work in quite a di fferent way
.
Well, I dare not allow myself any illusions, and I am afraid that Father and
Mother may never really appreciate my art . Thi s i s not surprising,
” and it i s not
their fault ; they have not learned to look at things as you and I have learned to
look at them . They look at different things than we do ; we do not see the same
things with the same eyes , nor do the same thoughts occur to us . It i s permissible
to wish this were otherwise, but in my opinion it is not wise to expect it .
They will hardly be able to understand my frame of mind, and they will
not
know what urges me
on . When they see me doing things which they think
strange and eccentric, they will ascribe them
to
di scontent, indifference, or
carelessness , whereas in reality there i s something quite different at the bottom of
it , namely, the wish to pursue, coute que coute, what I need for my work . Now
they are perhaps looking forward to the
“painting in
oil .
” Now at last it will
come— and oh ! how disappointed they would be, I am afraid, if they could see
it
tlmy wouldnoticenothing but daubs ofpaint— besides , they considerdrawing a
‘Zbrgbaratomstudy ,
”
an expression which many years ago I learned to hate in
expressibly, and think as incorrect as it can be . A s you well know . And when
they
see me still at it , the way I was before, they will think I am going to be
doing that preparatory study forever .
Well, let us hope for the best and try to reassure them .
What you tell me about their new surroundings i s very interesting . I should
certainly love to paint such a little
old church, and the churchyard with its
sandy grave-mounds and
old wooden crosses . I hope I shall have the chance
sometlme .
Then you write about the stretch of heath and the pine wood close by . I can
tell you, I feel an everlasting homesickness for heath and pine trees, with the
characteristic ﬁg ures—
a poor woman gathering wood, a poor peasant carrying
sand— in short, those simple things that have something of the grandeur
of the
sea . I have always had a wish to go and live somewhere qui te in the country, if
I had an opportunity and circumstances would permit . But I have plenty
of
subjects here— the woods, the beach, the Rijswijk meadows near by, and so,
literally, a new subject at every footstep .
But it would also be to live more cheaply .
But for the moment, as far as I can see, there i s no immediate reason, and so
I am in no hurry .
I only tell y ou
so you
’ll realize how sympathetic I am to scenery like that
which you describe as Father and Mother
’s new surroundings .


227
Dear Theo,
The Hague,
20 August
1 8 8 2 , Sunday afternoon
I have just received a nice letter from home which pleased me very much, and
showed clearly that your visit and the things you told them about me and my
work have had a reassuring effect on them . I think the results c an only be good .
I particularly thank you for the way you spoke, though it seems to me you said
more good about me than I yet deserve . At home they seem very much pleased
with their new surroundings, and are still full of your visit .
For that matter,
so am I, for several things y ou told me make me think
of
you more often than before, and certainly not with less affection . Especially
what you told me about your health makes me think of you often . I am pretty
well ; my not sparing myself and acting as if I had never been ill works all right .
But you realize that I have not entirely recovered . I feel it at times, especially in
the evening when I
’m tired ; but fortunately it never got bad enough to prevent
my working .
Thi s week I have painted some rather large studies in the wood, which I tried
to carry out more thoroughly and vigorously than the ﬁrst ones .
The one which I believe succeeded best i s of nothing but a piece of dug-up
earth— white, black
an d brown sand after a pouring rain . Here and there the
lumps of earth caught the light, and stood out in strong relief. After I had been
sitting drawing that piece
of ground for some time, there was another vi olent
thunderstorm with a terriﬁc cloudburst, whi ch lasted for at least an hour . I was
so eager to continue that I remained at my post and sheltered myself as well as
I could behind a big tree . When it was over at last, and the crows flying again,
I was not sorry I had waited, because of the beautiful deep tone which the rain
had given to the soil . As I had begun before the rain, with a low horizon,
on
my knees, I now had to work kneeling in the mud, and it i s because
of such
adventures , which often present themselves in different forms, that I think it i s
not superﬂuous to wear an ordinary workman
’s sui t, which i s less easily spoiled .
The result of this was that I could bring that piece of ground home to the studio
—though Mauve once rightly said, while speaking about a study of hi s, It i s a
hard job to draw those lumps of earth and get perspective into them .
The other study in the wood i s of some large green beech trunks on a stretch
of ground covered with dry sticks, and the little ﬁg ure of a girl in white . There
was the great diffi culty of keeping it clear, and
of getting space between
the
trunks standing at different distances— and the place an d relative bulk of those
trunks change with the perspective— to make it so that
one
c an breathe and
walk aroun d in it, and to make you smell the fragrance of the wood .
It was with extreme pleasure that I made these two studies .
The same with a thing I
saw at Scheveningen, a stretch 111 the dunes in the
morning after the rain . The grass was comparatively green, and the black nets
were spread over it in enormous circles, giving the soil deep reddish-black and
greeni sh-graytones . Onthis somber ground, women in white caps and men spread
ing or repairing the nets were sitting or standing, or walking around like dark
fantastic ghosts . In nature it was as strikingly gloomy and serious
as the most
1 06

beautiful Millet, Israels
or De Groux
one can imagine— over the landscape a
simple gray sky with a light streak on the horizon .
Notwithstanding showers of rain, I made a st udy
of it
on a sheet
of oiled
Torchon .
Much will have to happen before I shall be able to make it as vigorous as I
should like, but these are the things in nature that strike me most .
How beautiful it i s outside when everything i s wet from the rain— before— in
and after the rain . I oughtn
’t to let a single shower pass .
This morning I have put
all the painted studies up in the studio . I wish I
could talk them over with you .
A s I had already expected and counted on , whi le I was busy, I had to buy a
great many things , and the money is nearly all spent on them .
For two weeks I have painted from early in the morning until late at night,
so to speak ; if I continued thi s way, it would be too expensive as long as I do
not sell .
I think it possible that if you saw the paintings, you would say that I ought
to g o on with it, not just at times when I feel particularly inclined, but regularly,
as absolutely the most important thing, though it might cause more expenses .
But though I myself love doing it, and for the present shall probably not paint
as much as my ambition and desire demand because of the heavy expenses , I think
I shall not lose by giving a great deal of my time to drawing, and I do this with
no less pleasure . However, I am in doubt— painting comes easier to me than
I expected— perhaps it would be better
to throw myself into it with
all my
strength, ﬁrst pegging away with the brush . I must say I cannot tell .
At all events , drawing in charcoal is something I am sure I must study now
more than ever
-at all events, I have enough to do and can go on . Even when
I restrain myself a little in painting, I c an work just as hard .
If I have now painted
so many studies in a short time, it i s because I work
hard, literally working all day, scarcely taking time even to eat or drink .
There are little ﬁgures in several of the st udies . I also worked on a large one
and have scraped it off twice, which you would perhaps have thought too rash
if you had seen the effec t ; but it was not impatience, it was because I feel I c an
do even better by grinding and trying, and I absolutely want
to succeed in
doing better, however much time, however much trouble it may cost .
Landscape, as I have taken it up now, decidedly requires the ﬁgure too . They
are studies for backgrounds which one must do
so thoroughly because the tone
of the ﬁg ure and the effect of the whole depend on it .
What I like so much about painting i s that with the same amount of trouble
which one takes over a drawing, one brings home something that conveys the
impression much better and 1s much more pleasant to look ar— and at the same
time, more correct too . In a word, it i s more gratifying than drawing . But it i s
absolutely necessary to be able to draw the right proportion and the position of
the object pretty correctly before one begins . If one makes mistakes i n this, the
whole thing comes to nothing .
I am longing for autumn . I must be sure to have a stock of colors and other
1 07

things against that time . I love so much, so very much, the effect of the yellow
leaves ; the g reen beech trunks stand out so well against them, and ﬁgures , too .
LatelyI readpart ofa rathermelancholybook, L etters nndD z
'
ary of GerardBz
'ln
’
err. I
He died at the age when I began . When I read that, I was not sorry that I
started late . He certainly was unhappy and was often misunderstood, but at the
same time I ﬁnd a great weakness in him, something morbid in hi s character . It
i s like the story of a plant which shoots up too soon, and cannot stand the frost,
and gets stricken to the roots by it on a certain night and then withers . At ﬁrst
everything goes
all right— he i s with a teacher (as in a hothouse)
— he makes
quick progress but in Amsterdam he i s almost alone, and with all hi s cleverness,
he cannot stand it there, and comes back home to hi s father
l quite discouraged,
di ssatisﬁed, listless— he paints a little there, and then dies of consumption or of
some other disease in hi s twenty-eighth year.
What I don
’t like about him is that wbz
'le be paints, he complains of terrible
dullness andidleness, as though it were something he couldn
’t do anything about ;
an d he continues to run around with a, to him, too oppressive circle of friends,
and persisting in the amusements and way
of life which bore him to death . In
short, he i s a sympathetic ﬁgure ; but I would rather read the life of father Mi llet
or of Th . Rousseau or of Daubigny .
Reading Sensier
’
s book on Millet gives one courage, and Bilders
’
s makes one
feel terrible .
I often ﬁnd an enumeration of difficulties in Millet
’s letters, but still ,
“j
’
ai tout de
meme fait ceci ou cela
” [I have done this or that after all] , and themhe always has
other things in mind which he absolutely must do and which he will Carry out .
And too often G . Bilders says ,
“I
’ve been blue this week and have been making
a mess of things— I went to thi s or that concert or theater, but came home even
more miserable than when I went.
”
What strikes me in Millet i s this simple,
I must do this
or that after all .
Bilders i s very witty, and can lament in a most ludi crous way about
“Manila
cigars
”— which he likes and which he cannot afford— about tai lors
’ bills which
he cannot ﬁgure out how to pay. He describes hi s anxiety about money affairs so
wittily that he himself and the reader have to laugh . But no matter how wittily
these things may be told, I di slike it, and have more respect for Millet
’s private
difﬁculties ,
“il faut tout de meme de la soupe pour les enfants” [after all, there must
be soup for the children] ; he does not talk about
“Manila cigars
”
or about
amusements .
What I want to say i s, Gerard Bilders
’
s View of life was romantic, and he never
got over the illusions perdues ; for my part I think it a certain advantage that I
started only when I had left romantic illusions behind me . I must make up for
lost time now . I must work hard, but just when one has left the lost illusions
behind, work becomes a necessity and one of the few pleasures left . And this
gives a great qui et and tranquillity.
I regret that it will be a year perhaps before you will
see
all my paintings
(even though I might send you something now and then) and before we
c an
I A Dutch painter who died young .
1 08


uncertain what to do . My money i s not quite gone, but there i s not much left .
If I am not mistaken, today i s the twentieth ; I have spent less rather than more
than usual on the household thi s month . It i s true I have had to spend a good
deal on painting materials, but much of this will last quite a while . But it i s true
that everything is very expensive . I hope you will be able to send something
soon . Receive a warm handshake in thought and believe me,
Yours sincerely, Vincent
I certainly hope that you will not infer from thi s letter that I am pretentious
enough to think these ﬁrst studies salable . Formerly I could tell better than now
what things were worth, whether they were
salable
'
or not ; now I notice daily
that I do not know any more, and studying nature i s more important to me than
studying the prices of pictures .
But I think I
see that the painted studies have a much more pleasing aspect
than either those drawn in black and white or the water colors you saw recently.
And therefore I am uncertain as to whether it might possibly be more proﬁtable
after
all to make painting absolutely the principal thing, notwithstanding the
greater expense . I would rather you decided this than I, because I think you are
more competent to judge ﬁnancial success , and I absolutely trust your judgment .
You told me to try to ﬁni sh a little drawing in water color . I believe that by
painting I shall actually be able to make better water colors than before, if
I start them again . But if it does not turn out well , you must not get discouraged,
neither must I, and you must not be afraid to criticize me . I do n ot~sy stematic ally
ignore criticism, but it generally takes more time to change a thing than to
indicate a change . Thus I have only just put into practice things
that Mauve
told me in January . And, for instance, I painted that piece of ground according
to a conversation I had with hi m about a study of his .
228
Dear Theo,
The Hague, 3 September
1 8 8 2 , Sunday morning
I just received your very welcome letter, an d as I want to take some rest today,
I
’m an swering it at once . Many thanks for it and for the enclosure, and for the
things you tell me .
And many thanks for your description
of that scene with the workmen in
Montmartre, which I found very interesting, as you describe the colors too, so
that I c an see it . I am glad you are reading the book about G avarni
. I thought it
very interesting, and it made me love him twice as much .
Paris and its surroundings may be beautiful , but we have nothing to complain
of here either.
This week I painted something which I think would give you the 1mpress1on
of Scheveningen as we saw it when we walked there together : a large study of
sand, sea and
sky
—
a big
sky
of delicate gray and warm white, with a single
little spot
of soft blue gleaming through— the sand
an d the sea, light—
so that
the whole becomes blond, but animated by the characteristically and strikingly
colorful ﬁgures and ﬁshing smacks , which are full
of tone . The subject of the

sketch i s a ﬁshing smack with its anchor being weighed . The horses are ready to
be hitched to the boat and then to draw it into the water . Enclosed i s a little
sketch of it .
It was a hard job . I wish I had painted it on a panel or on canvas . I tried to
get more color into it, namely depth and ﬁrmness of color . H ow
curious it is
that y ou and I often seem to have the same thoughts . Last night, for instance,
I came home from the wood with a study, and I had been deeply absorbed in
that question
of depth
of color for the whole week,
an d especially then . And
I should have liked to have talked it over with y ou , especially with reference to
the study I made ; an d look here, in thi s morning
’s letter you accidentally speak
of having been struck in Montmartre by the strong, vivid colors, whi ch were
nevertheless harmoni ous .
I do not know if it was exactly the same thing that struck us both, but I know
well that you would certam have felt what struck me so particularly, and
probably you would have seen it in the same way too . I begin by sending you a
little sketch of the subject and will tell you what it was about .
The wood i s becoming quite autumnal— there are effects of color which I very
rarely ﬁn d painted in Dutch pictures .
In the woods, yesterday toward evening, I was busy painting a rather sloping
ground covered with dry , moldered beech leaves . This ground was light and
dark reddish-brown, made more so by the shadows of trees casting more or less
dark streaks over it , sometimes half blotted out . The problem was— and I found
it very difficult— to get the depth of color, the enormous force and solidity of that
ground—
an d while painting it I perceived for the very ﬁrst time how much light
there still was in that dusk— to keep that light and at the same time the glow
and depth of that rich color .
For y ou cannot imagine any carpet as splendid as that deep brownish-red in
the glow of an autumn evening sun , tempered by the trees .
From that ground young beech trees spring up whi ch catch light on one side
and are brilliant green there ; the shadowy sides of those stems are a warm, deep
black-green .
Behind those saplings , behind that brownish-red soil, i s a sky very delicate,
bluish-gray, warm, hardly blue, all aglow— and ag ainst it all i s a hazy border of
green and a network of little stems and yellowish leaves . A few ﬁgures of wood
gatherers are wandering around like dark masses
of mysterious shadows . The
white cap of a woman bending to reach a dry branch stands out suddenly against
the deep red-brown of the ground . A skirt catches the light—
a shadow i s cast
a dark silhouette of a man appears above the underbrush . A white bonnet, a cap ,
a shoulder, the bust of a woman molds itself against the sky
. Those ﬁgures are
large and full of poetry— in the twilight of that deep shadowy tone they appear
as enormous terracottas being modeled in a studi o .
I describe nature to y ou ; how far I rendered the effect in my sketch, I do not
know myself ; but I do know that I was struck by the harmony of green, red,
black, yellow, blue, brown, gray. It was very like De Groux, an effect like that
sketch of
“Le départ du conscrit,
for instance, formerly in the Ducal Palace .
I

It was hard to paint . I used for the ground one and a half large tubes of white
— yet that ground i s very dark— more red, yellow, brown ocher, black, sienna,
bister, and the result i s a reddi sh-brown, but one that varies from bister to deep
wine-red, and even a pale blond ruddiness . Then there i s still the moss on the
g round, and a border of fresh grass, which catches light and sparkles brightly,
and i s very difficult to get . There you have at last a sketch whi ch I maintain has
some signiﬁcance, and which expresses something, no matter what may be said
about it .
While painting it, I said to myself, I must not g o away before there i s something
of an autumn evening in it, something mysterious, something serious . But as this
effect does not last, I had to paint qui ckly. The ﬁgures were put in at once with
a few strong strokes of a ﬁrm brush.
It struck me how st urdily those little stems were rooted in the ground . I began
painting them with a brush, but because the surface was already so heavily covered,
a brush stroke was lost in it— then I squeezed the roots and trunks in from the
tube, and modeled it a little with the brush . Yes— now they stand there rising
from the ground, strongly rooted in it .
In a certain way I am glad I have not learned painting, because then I might
have learned to pass by such effects as this . Now I
say , No, this i s just what I
want— if it i s impossible, it i s impossible ; I will try it, though I do not know
how it ought to be done . I do not know my setf how I paint it . I
sit down with a
white board before the spot that strikes me, I look at what is before my eyes,
I
say to myself, That white board must become something ; I come back di s
satisfied— I put it away, and when I have rested a little, I go and 103 ; at it with
a kind of fear . Then I am still dissatisﬁed, because I still have that splendid scene
too clearly in my mind to be satisﬁed with what I made of it . But I ﬁnd in my
work an echo ofwhat struck me, after all . I see that nat ure has told me something,
has spoken to me, and that I have put it down in shorthand. In my shorthand
there may be words that cannot be deciphered, there may be mistakes or gaps ;
but there i s something of what wood or beach or ﬁgure has told me in it, and it is
not the tame or conventional language derived from a studied manner or a sys
tem rather than from nature itself.
Enclosed another little sketch made in the dunes . Small bushes are standing
there, the leaves
of which are white on one side an d dark green on the other,
and are constantly rustling and glittering . In the background, dark trees .
You
see I am absorbed in painting with
all my strength ; I am absorbed in
color— until now I have restrained myself, and I
am not sorry for it . If I had
not drawn so much, I should not be able to catch the feeling of and get hold of
a ﬁgure that looks like an unﬁnished terracotta . But now I feel myself on the
open
sea— the painting must be continued with
all the strength I can give it .
When I paint on panel or canvas, the expenses increase again . Everything i s
so expensive,
the colors are also expensive
and are
so soon gone . Well,
all
painters have those di fficulties . We must see what can be done . I know for sure
that I have
an instinct for color,
and that it will come to me more
and more,
that painting i s in
the
very marrow
of my bones . Doubly
and twice doubly
1 1 2.


and children, not counting what I have drawn in my sketchbook . Although the
number does not matter so much, I just mention it to show you that I am trying
to push on energetically, and yet I am looked down upon, and considered a
nonentity, by fellows who are certainly working less hard than I am— which by
the way leaves me pretty cold —and nobody here pays the slightest attention to
my work .
And from this you will see that, though what is happening to me i sn ot exactly
the same as your experience, it i s after all tweedledum and tweedledee .
On the other hand I am of the opinion that whoever wants to do ﬁgures must
ﬁrst have what i s printed on the Christmas number of Pnnc/J :
“Good Will toA ll
—and this to a high degree . One must have a warm sympathy with human beings ,
W
.
A
é rk w
w
t
W M
“
i m
C/ ‘v
c
u m/ v
M
M
V M A
.
If
and go on having it, or the drawings will remain cold and insipid . I consider it
very necessary for us to watch ourselves , and to take care that we do not become
disenchanted in this respect, and I therefore think it of little importance to
meddle in what I will call
“painters
’ intrigues
” and to assume any attitude toward
them other than defensive . I always think
of the
old proverb,
“One does not
gather ﬁgs from thorns ,
” as soon as I realize that some people believe they will
be stimulated by their intercourse with artists . I believe Thomas a Kempis says
somewhere,
I never mingled with human beings without feeling less human .
”
In the same way I think one feels weaker as an artist (and rightly too) the more
one associates with artists . Only when artists seriously combine to c o-operate on
a task that i s too much for only one man (for instance Erckmann -Chattian in their
works— or the artists of the Grap/n
’
c for the Grapbic) do I think it an excellent thing .
But in most cases it turns out to be much ado about nothing .
If I said just now that at times I wish I could see your work, on the other hand
I often wish you could see mine too . The reason i s that I think I could proﬁt by
1 14

your opinion, and also that you would see that the separate drawing s are gradually
beginning to form a whole, and also that we might talk things over and try to
ﬁnd a way of making some money out of them .
N ot without some trouble I have at last di scovered how the miners
’ wives in
the Borin ag e carry their sacks . You may remember that when I was there I did
some drawings of ir
—but they were
not yet the real thing . Now I have made
twelve studies of the same subject . Look, the opening of the sack i s tied up and
hangs down . The points at the bottom are joined together, and in this way you
get a very funny-looking sort of monk
’s hood . (At the points 1 and 2 the hands
grasp it .) I often made a woman with such a sack pose for me, but it never
turned out right . Now a man who was loading coal at the Rhine railway junction
has shown me .
This week I came across a volume of Pancb for
1 8 5 5 and also one for
1 862 .
In the former there i s a cartoon by old Swains which i s indescribably noble in
character . The Czar of Russia of that time had, I think, in a
“speech from the
throne
” referring to the Crimean War that was then going on, declared that
Russia had two generals on whom she could depend, namely the winter months
January and February . Now it happened that in the month of February of that
same year hi s Majesty the Emperor fell ill , having caught a cold, and died .
Now you see in this cartoon, probably drawn by Tenniel, the old emperor on
hi s deathbed,
and General February
tnrnea
’ a traitor is standing near thi s deathbed
— in the shape of a skeleton dressed in general
’s uniform ; the deathbed as well
as the phantom near it
ar e covered with snow and glazed frost . It is glorious ,
and, if such a thing i s possible, I think its sentiment even more profound and
serious than that of Holbein
’s
“Death Dance .
”
C . R . [Robinson] , whose beautiful cartoon I sent you, i s rather uneven in hi s
work, by whi ch I mean that hi s ﬁgures , though they are always well drawn, do
not always move one . But now I have found another cartoon that i s nearly as
beautiful as Caldec ott
’
s
“Afternoon in King sroad
”— a long row ofﬁgures looking
over a low fence at a collapsed bridge .
Do you have the Dagnan and the Montbard about which I wrote you
Char
meur au Jardin des Tuileries” and
“Arab Beggars”
-you know they are at your
disposal . I have found another beautiful sheet by Emslie,
“The
‘Rising of the
Waters ,
a peasant woman with two children
on a half-ﬂooded meadow with
pollard willows .
I assure you, every time I feel a little out of sorts, I ﬁnd in my collection of
wood engravings a stimulus to set to work with renewed zest . In all these fellows
I see an energy, a determination and a free, healthy, cheerful spirit that animate
me . And in their work there i s something lofty and dig niﬁed— even when they
draw a dunghill . When you read in that book about Gavarni , with reference to
hi s drawings, that
“il sabra jusqu
’a 6 par jour” [he dispatched up to six a day] ,
and you think
of the enormous productivity
of most of those men who make
these
“little illustrations
”—
“those things you ﬁnd on the reading table of the
South Holland
you know— you can
’t help thinking that there must be an
extraordinary amount of ardor and ﬁre in them . And I think, having this ﬁre
1 1 5

within oneself and stirring it up continually i s better than having the arrogance
of those artists who disdain looking at it . I think that bit of reasoning of your
friend, or rather your critically critical (how can one express it P) visitor, about the
“imp ermissible line” highly curious and characteristic . Will you be so kind as to
convey to him, at the ﬁrst opportunity, my profound respect for hi s wisdom and
competence, although I have neither the privilege nor the pleasure of knowing
hi s Honor, for I am not wholly unacquainted with men of that ilk, and so
Just
ask your friend
of the impermissible line whether he wants
‘ to object to
the
“Bénédicité” by De Groux or the
“Last Supper
” by Leonardo da Vinci— in
which compositions the heads are also placed in a nearly straight line .
Do you know
“A Midsummer Night
’s Dream
” by Harry Furniss, showing
some people—
an
old man, a street urchin , a drunk— spending the ni ght on a
bench under a chestnut tree in the park? This sheet i s as beautiful as the most
beautiful Daumier .
Don
’t you think Andersen
’s Fairy Tales are glorious
—he i s surely an illustrator
too l
23 1
Dear Theo,
The Hague,
1 7 September
1 8 8 2
.
The weeks pass quickly and it i s Sunday again .
I have often been to Scheveningen these last few days, and one evening I just
hi t that curious moment when a ﬁshing smack was coming in . Near the monu
ment i s a little wooden shed in which a man sits on the lookout . A S!
0011 as the
boat came in sight, the fellow appeared with a large blue ﬂag, followed by a
crowd
of little children who just reached his
'
t knees. It was apparently a great
pleasure for them to stand near the man with the ﬂag, and I suppose they fancied
they were helping the ﬁshing smack come in . A few minutes after the man had
waved hi s flag, a fellow
on an
old horse arrived who had to go and get the
anchor .
Then the group was joined by several men and women— including mothers
with children— to welcome the crew . When the boat was near enough, the man
on horseback went into the water and came back with the anchor .
Then the men were carried ashore on the backs of men wearing high wading
boots, and there was a great cheer of welcome at each new arrival . When they
were all ashore, the whole troop marched home like a ﬂock of sheep
or like a
caravan , with the man on the camel— I mean the man on the horse— towering
over them like a tall spectre .
Of course I tried to sketch the various incidents most carefully . I have also
painted part of it, namely, the group of which I enclose a little sketch .
Then I painted another study of a marine, nothing but a bit of sand,
sea,
sky— gray
an d lonely . I sometimes long for that quiet, where there i s nothing
but the gray sea— with a solitary sea bird— except for that, no voice other than
the roaring of the waves . It i s a refreshing change from the noisy bustle of the
Geest or the potato market .
For the rest, this week I have been working on sketches for water colors .
1 1 6


Of course the characters must be much more vigorously executed for that
purpose .
I made about ten different sketches
of the ﬁshing smack
’s arrival, also of the
weighing of the anchor whi ch I sent you in my last letter .
23 7
Dear Theo,
The Hague, 2 2 October
1 8 8 2 , Sunday afternoon
Your letter and the enclosure were very welcome . I need hardly tell you it comes
just in time and i s of great help to me .
It i s real autumn weather here, rainy and chilly, but full of sentiment, especially
splendid for ﬁgures that stand out in tone against the wet streets and the roads
in which the sky 13 reﬂected . It is what Mauve does so often and so beautifully.
So I
“have again been able to work
on the large water color of the crowd
of
people in front of the lottery ofﬁce , and I also started another of the beach, of
which thi s i s the composition.
I completely agree with what you said about there being times in
our lives
when we seem deaf to nature or when nature doesn
’t seem to speak to us any
more . I often have that feeling, too, an d sometimes it helps to undertake quite a
different thing . When I have had enough of landscape
or light effects , I attack
ﬁgures, and vice versa . Sometimes one can do nothing but wait until it passes,
but many a time I succeed in chasing
that feeling
of impassiveness away by
changing subjects . More and more, however, I become interested in the ﬁg ure .
I remember there was a time when the feeling for landscape was very strong
in me, and I was more impressed by a picture
or drawing which rendered a
light effect or the atmosphere of a landscape well , than by the ﬁgure .
Painters of the ﬁgure in general inspired me more with a kind of cool respect
than with a warm sympathy,
However, I remember quite well having been very much impressed at that
time by a drawing by Daumier, an old man under the chestnut trees in the Champs
Elysees (an illustration for Balzac), though that drawing was not
so very impor
tant. But I remember being so very much impressed at the time by something so
strong and manly in Daumi er
’
s conception that I thought, It must be a good
thing to think and feel that way, and to overlook or to pass up many things in
order to concentrate on things which provide food for thought, and which touch
us as human beings more directly and personally than meadows or clouds .
And so I always feel greatly attracted by the ﬁgures either of the English drafts
men or of the English authors because of their Monday-morning-like soberness
and studied simplicity and solemnity and keen analysis , as something solid and
strong which can give us strength in the days when we feel weak. So , among the
French authors , the same i s true of Balzac and Zola .
I do not know the books by Murg er which you mention, but I hope to become
acquainted with them soon .
Did I tell you that I was reading Daudet
’
s Les Rois en Exil ? I rather like it .
The titles of those books are very interesting to me, for instance, La Bobérne.
How far we have strayed nowadays from the Boheme of G avarni
’
s days . In my
1 1 8

opini on, at that time there was a more hearty and cheerful
an d lively feeling
than now . I do not know for certain . There i s much good in our time
too,
or there might be more than i s actually the case if thereweremore goodfellowship .
Right now I
see a beautiful effect from the window
of my studio . The city,
with its towers and roofs and smoking chimneys, stands out as a dark, somber
silhouette against the horizon
of light. This light i s, however, merely a broad
streak, over which hangs a dark cloud more concentrated at the bottom, but
torn apart at the top by the autumn wind ; large tufts are being driven away .
That streak of light, however, makes the wet roofs glisten here and there in
the dark mass of the city (in a drawing one would indicate it by a streak of body
color), an d enables one to distingui sh between red tiles and slates, th ough the
whole mass has but one tone . The Schenkweg
runs through the foreground like
a shining streak through the water ; the poplars have yellow leaves ; the banks of
the ditches and the meadows are a deep green ; the little ﬁgures are black .
I would draw it, or rather try to draw it, if I hadn
’t been busy
all afternoon
drawing ﬁgures of men carrying peat ; my mind i s still too full of them to have
room for anything new .
I long for you so much and think of you so often . What you tell me about the
character
of some artists in Paris, who live with women and are less narrow
minded than others , perhaps trying desperately to retain a youthful ai r, I think
perfectly observed . Such people exist there
as well as here . There it i s perhaps
even more difﬁcult than here to keep some freshness in one
’s domestic life
it means even more rowing against the current there . H ow many have become
desperate
in Paris—
c almly, rationally, logically and justly desperate . I read
something of the kind about Tassaert, whom I like very much, and it pains
me that such was the case with him.
For thi s very reason I think that every effort in that direction i s worthy
of
respect . I also believe that it may happen that one succeeds after
all, and
one
must not begin to despair, even though one i s defeated occasionally, and even
though one sometimes feels a kind
of exhaustion ; it i s necessary to take heart
again and
new courage, even though things go differently than
one at ﬁrst
expected . Y ou must not think that I look with di sdain on persons like those
you describe because their lives are not founded on serious and well-thought—out
principles . My opinion about this i s : the result must be an action, not an abstract
idea .
I approve of principles and think them worth while only when they develop
into actions, and I think it well to reﬂect and to try to be conscientious, because
this strengthens a man
’s energy an d unites hi s different activities into a whole .
Those people whom you describe would, I think, be more stable if they thought
more about what they were going to do, but for the rest I greatly prefer them
to those people who air their principles without taking the slightest trouble or
even thinking of putting them into practice . For the latter have no use for their
most beautiful principles, and the former are just the people who, if they begin
to live with energy and reﬂection, might achieve something great . For great
things are not done just by impulse, but are a series of small things put together .

What i s drawing ? H ow does one learn it ? It i s working through an invisible
iron wall that seems to stand between what onefeels and what one can do. How
i s one to get through that wall— since pounding against it is of no use ? One must
undermine the wall and drill through it slowly and patiently, in my opini on .
And, look here, how can one continue such a work assiduously without being
dist urbed or distracted from ir— unless one reﬂects and regulates one
’
3 life accord
ing
to principles ? And it i s the same with other things as it i s with art . Great
things are not accidental, but they certainly must be willed. Whether a man
’s
principles originate in actions or the actions in principles i s something whi ch
seems to me insoluble, and
as little worth decision as the question
of which
came ﬁrst, the chicken or the egg . But I consider it
of very positive and great
value that one must try to develop one
’s power of reﬂection and will .
I am very curious to know whether you will ﬁnd something in the ﬁgures
I am making now when you eventually see them . That is also a question like the
one about the chicken and the egg— must one make ﬁgures after a composition
i s found, or must
one combine the separate ﬁgures into a composition whi ch
follows from them ? I think that the result would be pretty much the same
provided one works .
I conclude the same way you ended your letter : that we have in common a
liking for looking behind the scenes in a theater ; or, in other words, we both
.
are inclined to analyze things . It i s, I believe, exactly the quality one needs for
pain ting— in painting
or drawing one must exert
that power . It may be that
to some extent nature has endowed us with a gift (but you certainly have it, and
so do I
—for that perhaps we are indebted to our childhood in Brabant a nd to sur
roundings whi ch contributed more than is usually the case to
our learning to
think) but it i s especially later on that the artistic feeling develops and ripens
through work . I do not know now you might Become a very good painter, but I
certainly believe that it i s in you and might be developed .
Adieu, boy, thanks for what you sent me and a warm handshake,
Yours sincerely, Vincent
My little stove i s already burning . Oh, boy, how I wish we could
sit together
some evening , looking at drawings and sketches and wood engravings . I have a
splendid new one .
This week I hope to get some boys from the orphanage to pose for me, then
I should perhaps be able to save that drawing of the group of orphans .
23 8
Dear Theo,
The Hague,
1 0 October
1 8 8 2
Your letter and its contents , literary as well as ﬁnancial , were very welcome, and
I thank you warmly for it . In the ﬁrst place, I was especially glad to hear that
perhaps it will not be so very long before you come to Holland again . I should
like very much to know as soon as it i s possible for y ou to decide whether it will
be before or after New Year
’s . Am very glad that y ou sent off the studies . These
days ,when I am making many new ones, I feel so strongly that I must try to keep
1 20


many lose sight of the origin and the goal, or in other words, they do not stick
to the point .
Your description
of that night
eﬂect again struck me as very beautiful
. It
looks very different here today, but beautiful in its own way, for instance, the
grounds near the Rhine railway station : in the foreground, the cinder path with
the poplars, which are beginning to lose their leaves
then the ditch full of duck
weed, with a high bank covered with faded grass and rushes ; then the gray or
brown-gray soil of spaded potato ﬁelds, or plots planted with greenish purple-red
cabbage, here and there the very fresh green of newly sprouted autumn weeds,
above which rise bean stalks with faded stems and the reddish or green or black
bean pods ; behind thi s stretch of ground, the red-rusted or black rails in yellow
sand ; here
and there stacks of
old timber— heaps of coal— di scarded railway
carriages ; higher up to the right, a few roofs and the freight depot— to the left,
a far-reaching View of the damp green meadows, shut off far away at the horizon
by a grayish streak, in which one can still distingui sh trees, red roofs and black
factory chimneys . Above it, a somewhat yellowish yet gray sky , very chilly and
wintry, hanging low ; there are occasional bursts of rain, and many hungry
crows are ﬂying around . Still , a great deal of light falls on everything ; it shows
even more when a few little ﬁgures in blue or white smocks move over the
ground, so that shoulders and heads catch the light.
I think, however, that in Paris everything probably looks much cleaner and
less chilly . For the chi lliness even penetrates the house, and when
one lights a
pipe, it seems damp from the drizzling rain
. But it i s very beautiful
.
But it
’
s on days like thi s that one would like to go and
see some friend or
would like a friend to come to the house ; and it
’
s on days like thi s that one has
an empty feeling when one can go nowhere and nobody comes . But it
’
s then
that I feel how much the work means to me, how it gives tone to life, apart
from approval or disapproval ;
and
on days which woul d otherwise make one
melancholy, one i s g lad to have a will .
I had a model for a few hours today, a boy with a spade , bod-carrier by trade,
a very intriguing type— ﬂat nose, thick lips and very coarse, strai ght hair— yet
whenever he does something, there i s grace in the ﬁgure, at least style and
character . I think I shall have some good models this winter ; the owner of the
yard has promised to send me the ones who come to ask for work, which often
happens in the slack season. I am always glad to give them a few sixpences
for an afternoon or morning, for that i s just what I want . I see no other way
than to work from the model . Of course one must not extingui sh one
’s power
of imagination, but the imagination i s made sharper and more correct by contin
ually st udying nature and wrestling with it . Next Sunday I hope to have the
same boy again . Then I should like to draw him as if he were towing one of the
boats ﬁlled with stones, which one often sees in the canal here .
Working out-of-doors i s over now— I mean, sitting qui etly, for it i s getting
too chilly—
so we shall have to take up our winter quarters .
I look forward to the winter with pleasure ; it i s a delightful season, when one
can work regularly. I have some hope I shall get
on well . I need not tell you

that I sincerely hope you will get back the money in question . As you know,
I carried painting an d water colors further than I originally intended, and now
I have to pay for it by being hard up . But we shall get over that, and it must
not be a reason for slacking
off. I now vary my work by drawing a great deal
from the model, though that i s also rather expensive, but it ﬁlls my portfolios in
proportion to its emptying my purse .
If you do not have the whole sum by the twentieth
of the month, send me
part of it ; but I would rather receive it a day sooner than later, as I have to pay
the week
’s rent on that day.
The house continues to please me, except that
one wall i s very damp . I can
work here with a model much better than at the other studio . I can even work
with several people at the same time, for instance, two children under an umbrella,
two women standing talking, a man and woman arm-in-arm, etc .
But how short a spring and summer we have really had . Sometimes it seems
to me as if there had been nothing between last autumn and thi s one, but perhaps
it i s because of my illness lying between . I feel qui te normal now , except when
I am very tired then I sometimes have a day or halfa day when I feel indescribably
weak and faint, much more so now than before . However, I do not pay attention
to it any more, for I
’m getting sick of it, and I can
’t afford to be ill , as I have
too much work to do . At such times taking a long walk to Scheveningen or
somewhere often helps me .
Well , be sure to write by the twentieth , I have had to buy some Whatman
paper and brushes . You cannot believe how many things one sometimes needs .
Well , it
’
s the same with every painter .
A handshake in thought, and believe me,
Yours sincerely, Vincent
248
Dear Theo,
The Hague,
26 and 27 November
1 88 2
Yesterday I happened to read a book by Murg er, namely L es Baoenr s d
’E an
[The Water Drinkers]
. I ﬁnd something of the same charm in it as , for instance,
in drawings by Nanteui l, Baron, Roqueplan , Tony Johannot— something witty,
something bright .
Still, it i s very conventional, at least this book i s, I think . I haven
’t read any
of hi s other books yet, and I think there i s the same difference between him and,
for instance, Alphonse Karr and S ouvestre as there i s between a Henri Monni er
an d a Comte-Calix an d the above-mentioned artists . I try to choose all the persons
I compare from the same period . It has a fragrance
of the Bohemian period
(though the reality of that period i s obscured in the book), and for that reason it
interests me, but in my opinion it lacks originality and sincerity
of sentiment .
However, perhaps hi s books in whi ch no painter
types occur are better than
thi s one ; authors always seem to be unlucky with their types of painters . Balzac,
among others (hi s painters are rather uninteresting) , Zola, even though his
Claude Lantier i s real— there certainly are Claude Lantiers, but after
all, one
would like to see Zola depict a different kind of painter than Lantier, who seems
I

to be drawn from life after somebody who certainly was not the worst represent
ative
of that school, which I think i s called impressioni stic . And they are not
the nucleus of the artistic group .
On the other hand, I know very few well—drawn or well-painted author types ;
on that score painters generally lapse into the conventional and make an author
nothing more than a man sitting at a table full of papers,
or they do not even
go that far, and the result i s a gentleman with a collar and an expressionless face .
There i s a painting by Meissonier whi ch I think beautiful : it i s a ﬁgure viewed
from behind, stooping over, with hi s feet on the rung of the easel, I think ; one
sees nothing but a pair ofdrawn-up knees, a back, a neck, and the back of a head,
and just a glimpse of a ﬁst with a pencil or something like it in it . But the fellow
i s there, and one feels the action of strained attention just as in a certain ﬁgure
by Rembrandt, a little fellow reading, also bent over with hi s head leaning
on
hi s ﬁst, and one feels at once that he i s absolutely lost in hi s book .
Take Bonn at
’
s Victor Hugo— ﬁne, very ﬁne— but I still prefer the Victor Hugo
described in words by Victor Hugo himself, nothing but,
“Et moi je me taisais ,
tel que l
’
on voit se taire un coq sur la bruyere
” [And I kept silent, just as one sees a
cock keeping silent on a heather bush]
. Isn
’t that little ﬁgure on the heath splendid
Isn
’t it just as vivid as a little general of
’
93 by Meissonier— about one centimeter
in size ?
There i s a portrait
of Millet by Millet himself which I love, nothing but a
head with a kind
of shepherd
’s cap, but the look out of half-closed eyes, the
intense look of a painter— how beautiful it i s— also that piercing gleam like in a
cock
’s eye, if I may call it so .
It i s Sunday again . Thi s morning I took a walk
on the Rijswijk road . The
meadows are partly ﬂooded, so that there was an effect of toneful green and silver
with the rough black and gray and green trunks and branches
of the
old trees
distorted by the wind in the foreground, a silhouette of the little village with its
pointed spire against the clear sky in the background, and here an d there a gate
or a dungheap on which a ﬂock of crows sat pecking . How you would like such
a thing, how well you would paint it if you tried .
It was extraordinarily beautiful this morning, and it did me good to take a
longwalk, for what with drawing an d the lithography,I had hardly been outdoors
this week .
As to the lithography, tomorrow I hope to get the proof of a little old man .
I hope it will turn out well . I made it with a kind of crayon especially designed
for this process, but I am afrai d that the common lithographic crayon will prove
to be best after all, and that I shall be sorry I did not use it .
Well, we
’ll see how it turns out .
Tomorrow I hope I shall learn several things about printing which the printer
will show me . I should love to learn the art
of printing itself. I think it quite
possible that this new method will bring new life into the art
of lithography.
I think there might be a way of combining the advantages of the new way with
the old
one cannot tell for certain, but perhaps it may bring about the publishing
of new magazines .
1 24


But I tell you that di ssatisfaction with bad work, the failure of things , the
difﬁculties
of technique, can make one dreadfully melancholy . I can assure you
that I am sometimes terribly discouraged when I think of Millet, Israels , Breton,
De Groux, so many others , Herkomer, for instan ce ;
one only knows what these
fellows really are when one i s at work oneself. And then to swallow thi s despair
and melancholy, to be patient with oneself as one i s— not in order to sit down
and rest, but to struggle on notwithstanding thousands of shortcomings and
faults and the uncertainty
of conquering them— all these things are the reason
why a painter i s unhappy too .
The struggle with oneself, the trying to improve oneself, the renewal of one
’s
energy—
all thi s i s complicated by material di fficulties .
That picture by Daumier must be beautiful . It i s a mystery why a thing whi ch
speaks as clearly as that picture, for instance, i s not understood— at least that the
situation i s such that you are not sure of ﬁnding a buyer for it even at a low price .
Thi s also i s something unbearable for many a painter, or at least almost un
bearable . One wants to be an honest man, one i s that, one works as hard
as a
slave, but still
one cannot make both ends meet ; one must give up the work,
there IS no chance of carrying it out without spending more on i t than one can
get back, one gets a feeling of guilt, of shortcoming, of not keeping one
’s prom
i ses, one i s not honest,whi ch one would be if the work were paid for at its natural,
reasonable price . One i s afraid of making friends, one i s afrai d of moving ; like
one of the
old lepers ,
one would like to call from afar to the people
. Don
’t
come too near me, for intercourse with me brings you sorrow and loss . With all
that huge burden of care on one
’
8 heart, one must set to work with a calm every
day face, without moving a muscle, live one
’s ordinary life, get along with the
models, with the man who comes for the rent-m in fact, with everybody . With
a cool head, one must keep one hand on the helm in order to continue the work,
and with the other hand try not to harm others .
And then storms arise, things
one has not foreseen ;
one doesn
’t know what
to do, and one has a feeling that one may strike a rock at any moment .
One cannot present oneself as somebody who comes to propose an
advanta
g eous deal or who has a plan which will bring great proﬁt ; on the contrary, it i s
clear that it will end in a deﬁcit . And yet one feels a power surging within— one
has work to do and it must be done .
One would like to talk like the people of 1 793 , this
an d that must be done,
ﬁrst these have to be killed, then those, then the last ones ; it i s duty,
so it i s
inevitable, and nothing more need be said .
But i s thi s the time to combine
and to speak out ? Or i s it better, since
so
many have fallen asleep and do not like to be awakened, to try to stick to things
one can do alone, for which
one i s alone liable and responsible, so that those
who sleep may go on sleeping and resting .
Well, you see that for this once I express more intimate thoughts than usual ;
you yourself are responsible for it , as you did the same .
I think this of you, you are certainly
one
of the watchers,
not one of the
sleepers— wouldn
’t you rather watch while painting than while selling pictures

I say this in
all coolness, without adding what I think would be preferable, and
with full conﬁdence in your own insight into things . That there i s a great chance
of going under in the struggle, that a painter i s something like a sentinelle perdue,
these and other things,
of course . Y ou must not think me
so easily frightened
— for instance, to paint the Borinag e would be something so difficult,
so com
paratively dangerous as to make life a thing far removed from any tranquillity
of pleasure . Yet I would undertake it if I could— that i s, if I didn
’t know for
sure, as I do now, that the expenses would exceed my means . If I could ﬁnd
people who would interest themselves in such a project, I would risk it . But
just because for the moment you are really the only one who i s interested in
what I do, the thing must be shelved for the present, and remain so, and mean
whi le I shall ﬁnd other things to do . But I would not give it up to spare myself.
I hope you will be able to send the money not later than December
1 .
Well, boy, hearty thanks for your letter
warm handshake in thought,
believe me,
Yours sincerely, Vincent
The Potato Eaters , oil ,
1 8 8 5

25 6
Dear Theo,
The Hague, 5 1 December 1 8 8 2 and 2 January
1 8 8 5
It i s New Year
’s Eve and I want another chat with you .
When I wrote my last letter, I spoke of some large heads I was working on .
At that time I was busy making an experiment of which I can tell you the initial
outcome, as I had models for two drawing s the day before yesterday, yesterday
and today .
When I made the lithographs , it struck me that the lithographic crayon w as
very pleasant material, and I thought, I
’ll make drawings with it .
However, there i s one drawback which you will understand— a s it i s greasy,
it cannot be erased in the usual way ; working with it on paper,
one even
loses the only thing with which one can erase
on the stone itself, namely the
scraper— which cannot be used strongly enough
on the paper because it cuts
through it .
But it occurred to me to make a drawing ﬁrst with carpenter
’s pencil and then
to work in and over it with lithographi c crayon, which (because of the greasiness
of the material) ﬁxes the pencil, a thing ordinary crayon does not do, or, at least,
does very badly . After doing a sketch in this way , one can, with a ﬁrm hand, use
the lithographic crayon where it i s necessary, without much hesitation or erasing .
So I ﬁni shed my drawings pretty well in pencil, indeed, as much as possible “
Then I ﬁxed them, and dulled them with mi lk . And then I worked it up again
with lithographic crayon where the deepest tones were, retouched them here an d
there with a brush or pen, with lampblack, and worked in the lighter parts with
white body color .
In this way I made a drawing
of an
old man sitting reading, with the light
falling on hi s bald head,
on hi s hand and the book . And the second one, the
bandaged head of a injured man . The model who sat for thi s really had a head
injury and a bandage over hi s left eye . Just like a head, for instance, of a soldier,
of the old guard in the retreat from Russia .
Now when I compare these two heads with the others I have done, there i s a
great difference in the power of effect . So I hope that the drawings done this way
will lend themselves to reproduction by the process which you described to me .
Especially ifthe paper you sent i s not absolutely necessary for the reproduction .
And if it i s, I should be more apt to get a better than a worse effect on this
g ray p aper with the same ingredients . When I looked at what Buhot had scratched
on one ofthe samples , I saw at once that the black was of a very deep tone, an d
I can understand that this i s a real necessity for the reproduction where photog
raphy and galvanography are used . So I at once began to try to ﬁnd what kind
of black to u se an d still stick to my usual way of sketching .
First I tried it with ink, but that didn
’t satisfy me ; however, I think that with
the lithographic-crayon method the results will be better .
Well , I am not writing about it to worry you during your busy days ; I am in
no hurry for it, and am even very glad to have a little time for additional exp eri
ments .
But I am writing you about it so that you may know I am working heart and
1 2 8


continue my work quietly without mixing with anybody else . When there i s
bread in the house and I have some money in my pocket to pay the models,
what more can I want
My pleasure lies in the progress of my work, and that
absorbs me more and more .
Well , boy , if you haven
’t written already, do so soon, for I am rather hard up .
Once more, my best wishes for the New Year . I had a nice letter from home .
Adieu . With a handshake,
Yours sincerely, Vincent
25 7
Dear Theo ,
The Hague, 3 January
1 8 8 5
I wrote you yesterday, but I am doing so again today to acknowledge receipt of
your letter and to thank you for it and to tell you that it cheered me . I was rather
worried that you might think I had begun to slacken because you had seen so little
of my work recently .
On the contrary, I have been working very hard lately, and am still absorbed
in all kinds of things in which I am beginning to see a light, but which I do not
quite have within my grasp yet . In my last letter I told y ou I was making ex
periments in Black and White with lithographic crayon .
You speak too well of me in your letter, but your thinking well of me i s all
.
the more reason for me to try not to be qui te«unworthy
of it . And as to what
I said about having made some progress by the experiments in question, perhaps
I do not see my own work clearly. Perhaps it i s a step forward, perhaps not— will
you tell me your opinion of it in reference to the two studies I sent
\
you, which
I did recently along with a few others ?
In seeking a more vigorous process than the one I have used up to now , I am
trying to follow somewhat the English reproductions made by the process you
described ; and as to the value of black, I am also gui ded by the black sketches
which Buhot made on the sample paper . And if you have an opportunity, please
talk it over with an expert and
ask him if reproduction of drawings like these,
for instance, would be possible (aside from the secondary question
of whether
these or similar ones would be to their particular taste)
.
As to the sentiment ofthe drawings, I should like to knowy our opinion because,
as I have already said, I myself cannot judge what i s or isn
’t in them .
Or rather, it i s because I myself prefer studies like these— even though they
are not quite ﬁnished and many things in them have been neglected— to drawings
with a deﬁnite subject : they remind me more vividly of nature itself. Y ou will
understand what I mean : there i s somethin g of life itself in the real studies , and
the person who makes them will not think
of himself, but
of nature, and so
prefer the study to what he may perhaps make
of it later~ unl ess something
quite different should ﬁnally result from the many studies, namely the typedistilled
from many individuals.
That
’s the highest thing in art, and tbere art sometimes rises above nature— in
Miller
’
s
“Sower,
” for instance, there i s more soul than in
an ordinary sower in
the ﬁeld .
1 5 0

But what I want you to tell me is whether you think that this process would
eliminate some ofyour objections to pencil . They are a few “Heads ofthe People .
And I intend to try to form a collection of many such things, which wouldn
’t
be quite unworthy of the title
“Heads of the People .”
By working hard, boy, I hope to succeed in making something good . It isn
’t
there yet, but I aim at it and struggle for it . I want something serious— something
fresh—
something with soul in it ! Forward— forward
From what I have just said you will see clearly enough that I want to do some
serious work for reproduction rather than be contented with having one little
drawing printed .
But all information and hints about processes are very welcome to me .
In Goupil
Co .
’
s show window I saw a large etching by Fortuny ,
“Un Ana
chorete,
” as well as hi s two beautiful etchings ,
“Kabyle Mort
and
“La Garde du
Mort .
” I was very sorry then that I had told you some time ago that I didn
’t like
Fortuny— I like tbis very much . But of course you understand this , too .
It
’s th e same wi th Boldini
.
But Fortuny
’
s seriousness in those three etchings , for instance, i s just the
thing many of hi s imitators lack they settle down into the style for which Fortuny
set the fashion, for instance, in
“Le Choix d
’un Modele,
” etc .
And tbat i s diametrically opposed
to the somber, noble art
of Brion, De
Groux, Israels, etc .
If possible, please send me a recent issue of the Vie Moderne, choosing
one
with reproductions such as those which you wrote about. The magazine
is
nowhere to be found here (and the few numbers I have are years old)
.
When you come sooner or later, I can show you more, and then we can talk
about the future . You know well enough how unﬁt I am to cope with either
dealers
or art lovers , and how contrary it i s to my
nature . I should like it so
much if we could always continue as we are now , but it often makes me sad to
think that I must always be a burden to you . But who knows , in time you may
be able to ﬁnd someone who takes an interest in my work, who will take from
your shoulders the burden which you took upon yourself at the most difficult
time . This can only happen when it is quite evident that my work i s serious ,
when it speaks more clearly for itself than it does now .
I myself am too fond of a very simple life to wish to change it, but later on ,
in order to do greater things, I shall have greater expenses, too . I think I shall
always work with a model— always and always . And I must try
to arrange
matters so that the whole burden doesn
’t always fall on you .
This i s only a beginning— later you will get better things from me, my boy
.
In the meantime, let me know whether you think that some of the objections to
the use
of pencil alone may have been taken care of somewhat by this crayon .
Don
’t you also think that by making such drawings , I perhaps indirectly learn
things useful for the actual lithographing ?
Adieu . Once more many thanks for your letter.
With a handshake,
Yours sincerely, Vincent

262
Dear Theo,
The Hague, January
1 8 8 3
The more I think of it, the deeper the impression your last letter made on me i s .
Generally speaking (apart from the difference between the two persons in
question), to you and to me there appeared on the cold, cruel pavement a sad,
pitiful woman
’s ﬁgure, and neither you nor I passed it by— we both stopped and
followed the human impulse of our hearts .
Such an encounter has the quality of an apparition about it, at least when one
recalls it ;
one sees a pale face, a sorrowful look like an Ecce Homo on a dark
background— all the rest disappears . That i s the sentiment of an Ecce Homo, and
there i s the same expression in reality, but in this case it i s on a woman
’s face .
Later it certainly becomes diﬂerent— but one never forgets that ﬁrst expression .
I
think it probable that your meeting thi s woman will take your thoughts
back to the period some ten or even twenty years ag o, and even further back .
Anyway, what I mean is that you will rediscover yourself in her, a phase of your
own life you had nearly forgotten— that is to say , the past
—and I do not know
whether, after having been with her for a year, you will view the present with
the same eyes as , for instance, before you knew her .
Underneath a ﬁgure of an English woman (by Paterson) i s written
the name
Dolorosa ; that expresses it well.
I was thinking of the two women now, and at the same time I thought of a
drawing by Pinwell,
“The Sisters
” in which I ﬁnd that Dolorosa expression.
That drawing represents
two women in black, in a dark room ;
one has just
come home and is hanging her coat on the rack . The other i s smelling a primrose
on the table while picking up some white sewing .
That Pinwell reminds
one a little of Feyen—Perrin— in hi s early work ; it also
reminds one of Thijs Maris , but with an even purer sentiment .
He was such a poet that he saw the sublime in the most ordinary, commonplace
things . Hi s work i s rare— I saw very little of it, but that little was
so beautiful
that now , at least ten years later, I see it as clearly as I did the ﬁrst time .
At the time they used to say of that club of draftsmen, It i s too good to last.
Alas, Herkomer
’
s words show that it was true ; but it i s not dead yet, and in
literature as well as in art, it will be di fﬁcult to ﬁnd a better conception of that
time than theirs .
I often disliked many things in England, but that Black and White and Dickens
are things which make up for it
all . I speak from my
own experience . It
’s not
that I disapprove
of everything in the present, far from it, but still it seems to
me that something of the ﬁne spirit of that
time which ought to have been
preserved
is disappearing— in
art especially . But
al so in life itself. Perhaps I
express myself too vaguely, but I cannot
say it differently— I don
’t know
exactly what it i s, but i t i s not just the Black and White which changed its
course and deviated from its healthy, noble beginning . Rather, there
i s in
general a kind of skepticism and indifference and coolness, notwithstan ding
all the activity . But
all this
i s
too vague,
too indeﬁnite . I do not think
too much about it, because I think ofmy drawings and have no time to spare .


We
’ve had snow again , which i s thawing just now . That thaw weather i s very
beautiful . Today, while the snow i s melting, one feels spring approaching, as it
were, from afar .
I think when you come, sooner or later, we
’ll have a really good time together .
I long for the spring breezes to blow away the weariness from working indoors
so long .
I am very glad to have my sou
’wester ; I wonder if you will ﬁnd some good
in those ﬁshermen
’
s heads . The last one I made this week was of a fellow with
white throat whiskers .
I know a drawing by Boyd Houghton which he calls
My Models
it rep
resents a passage where a few invalids, one with crutches, a blind man , a street
urchin, etc . , come to visit the painter on Christmas Day .
There i s something very pleasant in the intercourse with the models ,
one
learns much from them. This winter I have had some people whom I shall not
easily forget. It i s a charming saying of Edouard Frére
’
s that he kept the same
models
so long that
“celles qui posaient dans le temps pour les bébés, posent
maintenant pour les meres” [those who used to pose for the babies , are now
posing for the mothers]
.
Well, adieu, Theo, write soon, my best wishes, believe me, with a handshake,
Yours sincerely, Vincent
265
Dear Theo,
The Hague, 8 Feb
\ruary
1 8 8 3
My hearty congratulations
on Father
’s birthday, and thanks for your letter,
which I was very glad to receive just now . I congratulate you especially on the
operation
’s being over . Such things as you describe make one shudder ! May the
worst be over now, at least the crisis past 1Poor woman 1Ifwomen do not always
show the same energy and elasticity of thought as those men who are inclined to
reﬂection and analysis , we cannot blame them, at least in my opinion, because
in general they have to expend so much more energy than we in suffering pain .
They suffer more and are more sensitive .
And though they do not always understand our thoughts, they are sometimes
quite capable of understanding that
one i s good to them . Not always, though,
but
“the spirit i s willing,
” and sometimes there i s a curious kind
of goodness
in women .
It must be a great load off your mind that the operation i s over .
What a mystery life i s, and love i s a mystery within a mystery. It certainly
never remains the same in a literal sense, but the changes are like the ebb and
ﬂow of the tide, which leave the sea unchanged .
Since I last wrote you, I have given my eyes some
test and it has done me
good, though they still ache now and then .
Do you -know what occurred to me ? That in the ﬁrst period of a painter
’s life
one unconsciously makes it very hard for oneself— by a feeling of not being able
to master the work— by an uncertainty as to whether one will ever master it— by

a great desire to make progress , by a lack of self-c onﬁdenc e— one cannot banish
a certain feeling of agitation, and one hurries oneself though
one doesn
’t like
to be hurried .
Thi s can
’t be helped, and it is a period which one must g o through, and whi ch
in my opini on cannot and must not be changed .
In the studies , too, one i s conscious
of a nervousness
an d a certain dryness
which is the very opposite of the calm, broad touch one i s striving for, and yet it
doesn
’t work well if one tries too hard to acquire that broadness of touch .
This gives one a feeling of nervous unrest and agitation, and
one feels an
oppression, as on summer days before a thunderstorm . I had that feeling again
just now, and when I have it, I change my work, just to start something fresh .
This trouble which one has in the beginning sometimes g ives an awkwardness
to the studies .
But I am not discouraged by this, because I have noticed it i n myself as well
as in others , who later simply g ot rid of it gradually .
And I believe that sometimes one keeps this painful way of working one
’s whole
life, but not always with
so little a result as in the beginning . What you write
about Lhermitte is quite in keeping with the review of the exhibition of Black
and White . They, too, mention the bold touch which can almost be compared
only to Rembrandt
’s . I should like to know such an artist
’s conception of Judas
— you write of hi s drawing Judas before the scribes . I think that Victor Hugo
could describe that in detail, so tbat one would see it, but to paint those expressions
would be even more difficult .
I found a pagebyDaumier, ceux qui ont vu un drame and ceux qui ont vuune
vaudeville” [those who have seen a drama and those who have seen a vaudeville] ;
I am increasingly eager to see more Daumi ers. He has pith and a staid profundity,
he i s witty and yet full
of sentimental passion ; sometimes , for instance in
“The
Drunkards
”— and possibly also in
“The Barricade,
” which I do not know— I ﬁnd
a passion which can be compared to the white heat of iron .
Some heads by Frans Hals, for instance, have the same quality ; it i s so sober
that it seems cold, but when one looks at it for a short while, one is astoni shed
to see how a man who apparently workedwith somuchemotion,and so completely
wrapped up in nature, had at
the same
time
the presence
of mind to put it
down with such a ﬁrm hand . I found the same thing in studies and drawings
by De Groux perhaps Lhermitte glows with the same white heat. And Menzel,
too .
There are sometimes passages in Balzac
or Zola, for instance in Fire Goriot,
where words reach a white heat of passion .
Sometimes I think I will make an experiment, and try to work in quite a diﬂer
ent way, that i s, to dare more and to risk more, but I don
’t know whether I ﬁrst
ought to study the ﬁgure directly from the model more .
I am also looking for a way to shut oﬂ
' the light in the studio, or to let it in ,
at will . It doesn
’t fall sufficiently from overhead, I think, and there is too much
of it . At present I occasionally shut it off with cardboard, but I must try to get
the landlord to put up some shutters .

What was in the letter I told you I tore up was quite in keeping with what
ou sa
Y
But! hough ﬁnding increasingly that
one i s not perfect oneself, and makes
mistakes, and that other people do too , so that di ﬂi c ulties continually arise which
are the opposite
of illusions, I think that those who do not lose courage and
who do not grow indifferent ripen through it ; one must bear hardships in order
to n en .
So
linetimes I cannot believe that I am only thirty years old , I feel so much older .
I feel older only when I think that most people who know me consider me a
fai lure, and that it might really be so if some things do not change for the better ;
and when I think it mig bt be so, I feel it
so intensely that it quite depresses me
and makes me as downhearted as if it were really so . In a calmer an d more normal
mood I am sometimes glad that thirty years have passed, and not without teaching
me something for the future, and I feel strength and energy for the next thirty
years, if I live that long .
And in my imagination I see years of serious work ahead of me, and happier
than the ﬁrst thirty .
How it will be in reality doesn
’t depend only on myself, the world an d circum
stances must also contribute to it .
What concerns me and what I am responsible for is making the most of the
circumstances and trying my best to make progress .
For the working man , the age
of thirty i s just the beginning
of a period
of
some stability, and as such, one feels young and full of energy.
But at the same time a chapter
of life i s closed ; it makes
one m
t lancholy ,
thinking some things will never come back . And it is no silly sentimentalism to
feel a certain regret. Well, many things really begin at the age
of thirty, and
certainly all i s not over then . But one doesn
’t expect to get from life what one
has already learned it cannot give ; rather one begins to see more and more clearly
that life i s only a kind of sowing time, and the harvest i s not here .
Perhaps that
’s the reason why
one i s sometimes indiﬂ
'
erent to the world
’s
opinion, and if that opinion depresses us
all too strongly, we may shake it
oﬂ
'
.
Perhaps I had better tear up thi s letter again .
s
I understand perfectly that you are quite absorbed in the woman
’s condition,
thi s is one of the things necessary for her safety, an d also for her recovery . For
one must throw oneself into it headlong, and the English saying i s true,
“If you
want it well done, you must do it yourself, you mustn
’t leave it to others .
It
means that one must keep the general care and the management of the whole
in one
’s own hands .
We had a few real spring days, last Monday, for instance, which I enjoyed
very much .
The people are very sensitive
to the changing seasons. For instance, in a
neighborhood like the Geest and in those courts
of the almshouses or those
“charitable homes,
” the winter i s always a difficult, anxious and oppress we time,
an d spring, a deliverance . If one pays attention, one sees that such a ﬁrst spring
day i s something like a Divine Message .
1 3 6


It was not done recently, however . I started it a few months ago, and have
occasionally given it a few touches since then . But it i s still crude . Since then,
I have made a large number
of studies— that i s, drawings
of the ﬁgure, and
especially
of heads— with just such a scene in mind
as this sketch represents ;
it must be ﬁnished by adding character and reli ef, especially to the heads, hands
and feet . I am sending them to you because you will
see in them more clearly
than in many other water colors I have done till now that I have a keen eye for
striking colors— that I see them fresh, through a gray haze . However unﬁni shed
and imperfect it may be, this i s part of a street chosen at random and done in
the way in whi ch I want to represent the Geest
or the Jewish quarter. Thi s
sketch was no accident : I can take all kinds of scenes I see this far, getting the
same relatively strong effects of color and tone . Now if you compare thi s drawing
with the litbog rapbs and drawing s of beads I sent you this winter, you can
see my
intentions clearly from those variousfailnres .
The large st udies of heads, for instance, of which I have still many others— for
instance, with sou
’westers, with shawls and white bonnets and top hats and caps
-must serve for compositions such as the one I am sending you this time .
But I shall have
to put up with many more fai lures , for I believe that in
water color much depends on a great dexterity and qui ckness
of touch . One
must work in it before it i s dry to get harmony, and one hasn
’t much time for
:
reﬂection then . So the principal thing i s not ﬁni shing each one separately, no,
one must put down those twenty or thirty heads rapidly,
one after the other.
Here follow a few curious sayings about water colors
.
“L
’
aquarelle est quelque
chose de diabolique
”
; and the other i s by Whi stler, who said,
“Y es, I did that i n
two hours, but I studi ed for years to be able to accomplish this in two hours .
”
Enough of thi s ; I love water color
too much ever
to give it up entirely,
I come back to it again an d again . But the foundation of everything is the knowl
edge
of the ﬁgure, so that one can readily draw men and women and children
whatever they are doing . So this i s my chief aim, which cannot be realized in
any other way , I think .
And I try to work myself up to a higher level of knowledge and ability in
general, rather than to care very much about ﬁnishing off some particular sketch .
After having drawn for a month, I now and then make a few water colors , for
instance, by way of casting the plumm
’et to fathom my depth . Each time I
see
that I have overcome some obstacles, but that new difficulties have arisen . Then
I start drudging again to conquer those .
As for the colors , they are really all used 11d
not only that, but because
of some relatively heavy expenses, I am not only hard up, but absolutely penniless .
Spring is coming, and I should like to take up painting again, too . So that is
partly the reason why I am not working i n water color right now .
But
indirectly I am always working at it, and now
that I
can study the
effects of chiaroscuro better because of the alterations i n the studio, I shall work
more and more with the brush, even in Black
an d White drawings, and wash
the shadows in with neutral tint, sepia, India ink, Cassel earth,
an d accent uate
the lights with Chinese white .

Do you remember that last summer you brought me pieces of mountain
c rayon? I tried to work with it at the time, but it didn
’t work well . So a few
pieces were left, which I picked up the other day ; enclosed you
’ll ﬁnd a scratch
done wi th it ; y ou see it i s a peculiar, warm black . Y ou would greatly oblige me by
bringing some more of it this summer . It has a great advantage— the big pieces
are much easier to handle while sketching than a thin stick of conté, whi ch is hard
to hold and which breaks all the time . So for sketching outdoors, it i s delightful .
Well, boy— ir is difficult to write it all, an d I wanted to answer your question
about water color in more than words . I should not want anybody to
see just
thi s one sketch ofmine, because I myself think nothing i s right in this sketch except
the general aspect, and I will wrestle with the ﬁgures till I get in water color what
they are beginning to get in li thography— that is, more character and effect .
It i s not pleasant to make sketches like the one I sent you, and then not to be
able to ﬁnish them ; I hate thi s so much that I rarely make them, except as a trial
to
see if I have made any progress . But now I have new courage and interest,
just because I have been making a great many studies again .
I think the change in the studio will help me on , not the
.ﬁrst day, but after a
few months
’ struggling .
I can now do part of my work perfectly well at home, studying with models ,
such effects as the water color I sent you .
Here the windows are closed at the bottom so that the light on the group of
ﬁgures falls from above . In this way I can group them in the studio, and then
I get, for instance, the high lights on the heads of the ﬁgures .
Like in thi s water color .
I have tried it already with the,
old man,
the woman and the children— it
gives splendid effects . The desire to make them is not wanting, but I expect new
failures— which I hope, however, will have sometbing in them to encourage rather
than to make one lose courage, though they are failures .
I had to pay for so many things at once out of the money you sent that I wish
you could send some more ; but arrange it as best you can— I have so much
work now that I can vary it just as I like . I long very much for your coming,
just to show you the studies and to talk about thework.
Adieu, thanks again . With a handshake,
Ever yours , Vincent
165 b
[Reprinted from Benno J
. Stokvis , LL .D . , N asp oring en
omtrent (Investigations
concerning) Vincent van Gog b in Brabant (Amsterdam, S . L . van Looy,
1
Etten-Lear, a small village between Breda and Roozendaal, makes a far less
prosperous impression than Zundert . However, it appears that there are
no
fewer Protestants here than in the latter village .
After having been stationed at Helvoirt for some years , the Rev . Mr . Van Gogh
came to Etten in
1 875
as successor to the Rev . Mr. Peaux (father of the poetess
Augusta Peaux)
. He remained there until
1 88 2 . Here his intercourse seems to
I

ﬂ
q
e l
-
l
a mo
have been limited to the members of hi s own parish more than it was in Zundert .
However, here
too
non-Catholics and Catholics remember
him with equal
sympathy .
If anyone failed to appear in church on a Sunday, he could be sure that the
Rev . Mr . Van Gogh would look him up that very week to lecture him , however
far in the
“interior,
” however remote from the village, hi s farm might be situated .
He even visited the people living on the most distant farms regularly.
The Rev . Mr . Van Gogh was charitable : at times he distributed more among
the poor than the consistory could approve
of. But at the same time he was
described as a severe
an d forceful personality. This observation may help to
dispel the notion advanced in some writings on Vincent that the father behaved
in a spineless , powerless fashion toward hi s son (in support of which, I refer to
letter
Although the people of Zundert were in general fully aware of Vincent
’s fame
as a painter, in Etten I was struck by an
ahnost complete ignorance
on the
subject. Neither old villagers who had known him personally, nor even hi s one
time models whom I met, knew that he had made a name for himself ; and when
I told them so, they looked amazed— they would never have expected such a
thing of
“that Vincent
” 1
I asked an
old Protestant woman whether she had known the Rev . Mr . Van
Gogh
’s
son ,
“who had drawn . ”
“Drawn ?
” was the counter—question .
Y ou
mean to say he was drawn into the East Indi an army ?
” Though such intellectual
agility on the old lady
’s part may provoke laughter, from a psychological point
of view such an answer proves, after
all, how little Vincent
’s acti vities were
actually taken seriously.
The painter returned repeatedly to Etten ; the last time he stayed there for
about one year . So he was present at the wedding of hi s sister Anna at Etten,
at which the Rev . Mr . Van Gogh himself officiated .
The following persons were interviewed by me
j
. A
. Oosteryck
’
s father was an elder
of the church under the Rev . Mr . Van
Gogh . Vincent often used to drop in upon the Oosterycks and would then make
drawings indoors and in the granary
. Once he made a portrait of my informant
’s
mother which was a very good likeness . His father was also immortalized by
Vincent in a large picture of him plowing his ﬁeld .
According to the son the picture of hi s father
’s ﬁgure did not look like him,
but for the rest,
“a photograph could not have been more perfect .
” When the
painting was ﬁnished, old Mr. Oosteryck happened to remark that Vincent had
forgotten to put in the dog
. Vincent obligingly took up his brushes and added
the dog . Those for whom Vincent had a liking [literally,
“who had a good
odor in hi s nostrils
”] were given a drawing by him more than once . Vincent
worked a great deal in the vicinity of the village ; he was highly respected by the
farmers . When he
set
off for work, he generally wore a sort of raincoat and a
sou
’wester . In general hi s attire was rough
Every day he might be seen
walking with a small campstool under one arm and a square frame
under
the other, always staring straight in front of him, and he took little notice
of
1 40


posed for Vincent, he was the Rev . Mr . Van Gogh
’
s gardener and seventeen
years
old . Vincent often made drawings
of him at the parsonage, especially on
Sat urdays
as a rule Kauﬂ
'mann posed standing, holding a rake or spade . Vincent
also drew pictures
of him a number of times as a sower, with a piece of cloth
hanging from hi s shoulders .
At times Vincent would work
on a drawing for hours : he worked
on until
he had caught the expression he was aiming at . The Rev . T . van Gogh
’s servant
girl at that time used to tell how Vincent would occasionally continue to paint
all through the night : many a time it happened that hi s mother found him still
at work when she came down in the morning . Often Vincent would not take
time for lunch : at such times hi s mother would call him repeatedly, and he
would keep answering,
“Yes , I
’m coming,
” but
all the same he would either
not make an appearance at all, or come more than an hour later .
Generally Vincent went about with a portfolio under
one
arm and a camp
stool under the other, and he used to hold his head a little to
one side—
“he
always walked lost in thought
”
; he never recognized anybody in
the street,
“he was a queer little fellow .
A few times Kauffmann received
some drawings by way
of a present, but
they had been lost when he moved from
one house to another . Informant
es
timates that he posed for Vincent some forty or ﬁfty times .
Tbe Rev. Mr . Dﬁkman showed me a map of the Holy Land whi ch Vincent had
drawn by hand ; for years it hung on the vestry wall (until
At Etten Vincent was not registered as a member of the Reformed Church .
Data furni shed by the registrar
’s office [often inaccurate— Ed ] :
October
2 2 ,
1 875
. Arrival of the Van Gogh family in the municipality from
Helvoirt .
Depart ure of the family for Nuenen : August 4,
1 8 8 2 .
Arrival of Vincent Willem (i .e. the painter) at Etten from Brussels : August
1 8 ,
1 8 8 1 .
Departure of Vincent Willem for The Hague : July 20, 1 8 8 2 .
In the Register hi s profession is stated to be
“painter .
”
Some birth dates, accidentally found, may be mentioned here as a matter
of
c uri oSi ty :
The Rev . T . Van Gogh : February 8 ,
1 8 2 2 .
Mrs. Van Gogh-Carbentus : September
1 0,
1 8 19
.
Cornelis Vincent (the painter
’s younger brother Cor)
May 1 7,
1 867
.
Elisabeth Huberta (the painter
’s well-known sister Lies)
May
1 6,
1 8 5 9
.
291
Dear Theo,
The Hague, 5
or 6 June
1 8 83
Today I received a letter from home, and though Father does not mention y ou
in it, I want to speak to you about it because just now you would perhaps like
to know something more about their frame
of mind than what they write to
you directly . And it is my impression that for the present you need not worry
about it .
142

The said letter i s Father
’s ﬁrst since his visit here, and it i s very kind and
cordial, and was accompanied by a parcel containing a woman
’s coat, a hat, a
packet of cigars, a cake, a money order . In the letter was a draft of a sermon, of
which I liked the text by far the best, and which touched me less than a simple
word
' about a funeral from a farm t
did afterward .
I tell you this in such detail so that you may see there is nothing abnormal or
any deﬁnite overexcitement ; but I did get the impression that Father was in a
rather passive or submissive mood, more inclined toward a friendly, melancholy
view of things than might be supposed from the expressions of disapproval you
passed on to me .
I suppose those words were intended more as advice or warning— but not as a
sign of direct opposition to your ﬁrm decision .
Because in my previous letter I disapproved
so strongly of what Father had
said— and I still disapprove of it, as I am most decidedly of the opposite opinion,
and consider it irrelevant to rai se difficulties and ﬁn ancial and religious objections
in this case— I should like to soften my words to this extent that I think we are
concerned with an error (at least number oneI i s an error) which exists more in
hi s words than in hi s heart or hi s frame of mind . And I cannot help reminding
you that Father i s an
old man,
and
so fondly attached to you, and I
am sure
y ou will ﬁnd that he will give in to you if it must be so, even though it be contrary
to hi s own opinion, but that it would be impossible for him to live estranged from
you or on less friendly terms . Well, I suppose I know Father somewhat, and I
think I notice signs of a little melancholy .
And looking at it from a human point
of view I withdraw my opinion that
by talking the way they did, they have shown themselves unworthy of your
conﬁdence, and therefore I think you need not consult them
any longer
”
or
something of the kind, for I do not remember exactly what I wrote . But please
understand what I mean : not because I disapprove less of what they said, but
because I have the impression that in this case you need not resent it
so much,
and that there i s no urgent need to start hostilities as long as they conﬁne them
selves to words . Better forestall unpleasantness by saying, forinstance
“You take
rather a somber view of the fut ure,
” or,
“But y ou cannot demand of me that I act
as if the clock were going to strike the hour of the world
’s end,
” which I think
would be more sensible than attaching too much weight to their words .
I have the impression Father i s somewhat melancholy, and that perhaps he is
worrying over you, and imagining gloomy things— but I repeat, Father did not
write one syllable about the matter itself, and did not say a word about it on the
occasion
of hi s visit, though this avoidance
of mentioning it is somewhat
ab
normal too .
If y ou want to remedy this, write somewhat cheerfully and lightly, and write
about your visit this summer as if it were certain that you would see them
soon (even if you do
not know yourself how you can ﬁx the time
of your
coming)
.
For perhaps, perhaps Father himself is conscious
of having gone a little too
I .e . the ﬁn anc ial objections.

far, or perhaps he i s anxious about how you will take it, and i s afraid you will
not come .
Of course I do not know it for sure and can only guess ; but what I think i s,
Father is an old man and deserves to be cheered up if possible .
That it is my opinion that you ought to be faithful to the woman , you know
well enough ; there is no question of saying anything less about it than I did ;
you must act as you think right, but don
’t be angry with Father if he i s mistaken .
That i s what I wanted to say
. Don
’t even mention that he i s mistaken unless
he continues to press the point ; perhaps he will change hi s mind
of hi s
own
accord .
Now again about the work : today I asked permission to make sketches in the
old people
’s asylum, that is, of the men
’s ward, of the women
’s ward and of the
garden .
I was there today. From the window I sketched an old gardener near a twisted
apple tree, and the carpenter
’s shop of the asylum, where I had tea with two old
almshouse men . In the men
’s ward I can come as a vi sitor : it was very striking,
indescribably striking .
One little fellow, for instance, with a long thin neck, in a wheel chair, was
splendid . That carpenter
’
s shop with those two old men and a view of the cool
green garden was just the thing, like Bingham
’s photograph of that little picture
by Meissonier, those tw o priests sitting at the table drinking . Perhaps you know
what I mean .
But it i s not quite certain that I shall get the permission, and the application
must be made to the deacon i n charge . I have done so, and must come back for
the answer .
Meanwhi le, I am making sketches for the drawing of the refuse dump . I wrote
you, I hoped to get a Scheveningen cape ; well, I have got it, and an old bonnet
into the bargain ; the latter i s not very good, but the cape i s superb, and I set to
work on it at once . I am just as delighted with it as I was with the sou
’wester
And the sketch of the refuse dump i s so far advanced that I have caught the
sheepfold-like effect
of the interior in contrast with the open
air and the light
under the gloomy sheds : and a group
of women emptying their dustbins i s be
ginning to develop and take shapes
‘But, the moving back and forth of the wheel
barrows , and the dustmen with the dung forks, that rummaging under the sheds ,
must still be expressed without losing the effect of light and brown of the whole
on the contrary, it must be strengthened by it .
I suppose you will take Father
’s words in the same way of your own accord,
so that I
’m not telling you anything new, but I should be glad if, with a little
good will, peace might be preserved . Last winter Father was nearly
as much
opposed to my living with the woman as he is in your case now, yet he sent me
a warm woman
’s coat
“I might have some use for,
” not precisely indicating for
what, but obviously with the thought,
“Perhaps she is suffering from the cold .
”
Well, you see that is the right thing, and for
one such deed I would endure a
whole shower of words with pleasure .
144


Indeed,
one
can have a deep longing sometimes to talk things over with
people who know about one
’s craft . Especially if each works and seeks in the
same spirit, it i s possible greatly to strengthen and animate each other, and one
is not
so easily discouraged . One cannot always live away from one
’s native
land, and one
’s native land i s not nature alone— there must also be human hearts
who search for and feel the same things . And only then i s the native land perfect,
only then does one feel at home .
Thi s now is the composition of the refuse dump . I do not know how much
you
c an make out . In the foreground, women are emptying dustbins ; behind
them are the sheds where the dung i s kept, and the men at work with wheel
barrows, etc . The ﬁrst
one I made of it was a little diﬂerent ; there were two
other men in the foreground with
sou
’w esters, which they often wear in bad
weather, and the group of women was darker .
But that light effect i s really there because the light falls from overhead between
the sheds on the ﬁgures in the pathways . It would be a splendid thing to paint .
I think you will understand all about it . I wish I could talk it over with Mauve .
But perhaps it
’
s better as it is, for it does not always help to get advice from
somebody else, clever though he may be, and those who are cleverest are not
always clever in explaining things clearly . I repeat, I hardly know myself what i s
best . In the ﬁrst place, painting i s not my principal object, and perhaps I will be
ready for illustrating sooner all by myself than if somebody, who wouldn
’t think
of illustrations at all, advised me . I get on best of all with Rappard .
Adieu, boy . All best wishes and thank you for your timely help .
\
Yours sinc efely , Vincent
R 3 7
Amice Rappard,
The Hague, May—June
1 8 83
I was just writing you a letter when the postman brought me your very welcome
letter ; I am glad to hear that you have made progress with your drawing . I never
doubted you would, for that matter, for you attacked it in a virile way
.
Now , to begin with I want to tell you that I think what you say about the
English black-and-white artists perfectly right and proper . I saw in your work
exactly what you say. Well, I quite agree with you— particularly about the bold
contour .
Take Miller
’
s etching
The Diggers ,
take an engraving by Albrecht Durer,
above
all take the large woodcut by Millet himself,
“The Shepherdess
”— then
you see with full clarity what may be expressed by such a contour . And, as you
say , you feel
“that i s how I have always wanted to do it, if I had always gone my
own way , etc .” That
’s well said, old fellow, and spoken like a man .
Now I think another example of characteristic, bold and vigorous drawing is
Leys
’
s pictures , and more especi ally that series of decorations for hi s dining room
“La Promenade dans la Neige,
” “Les Patineurs,
” “La Rec eption,
” “La Table,
”
La Servante .
” And De Groux has it too, and so has Daumier .
Even Israels , and at times Mauve and Maris too , cannot refrain from drawing
a vigorous contour, but they don
’t do it in the manner of Leys , or of H erkomer.

But when you hear them talk, they will have none of it, an d more often they are
talking about
“tone
” and
“color .
” And yet, in certain charcoal drawings Israels
has also used lines that remind one of Millet . I want to state ﬂatly that personally,
however much I admire and respect these masters , I regret that, when they speak
to others, they— a nd particularly Mauve and Maris— do not point out more
emphatically what can be done with the contour, and advise them to draw cau
ti ously and softly . And so it happens that water colors are the order of the day
nowadays , and are considered the most expressive medium,whereas in my opini on
too little attention i s being paid to black and white, so much so that there i s even
a certain antipathy against it . There is no black, so to speak, in a water color, and
that i s what they base themselves on in order to say,
“Those black things .
” It i s
not necessary, however, to devote my whole letter to this .
I wanted to tell you that I have four drawings on my easel at the moment
peat cutters— sand pit— dunghill — loading coal . I even di d the dunghill twice ;
the ﬁrst one was too overworked to be continued .
Besides I have not ventured to work too much in them with printer
’s ink and
turpentine ; instead I have used charcoal, lithographi c crayon and autographic
ink so
Except in the case
of the dunghill that became too overworked ;
I attacked this one with it an d not unsuccessfully ; it became rather black, it
’
s true,
but for all that the freshness ret urned somewhat, and now I see my way again to
working
on it some more, although I thought it hopeless before I put on the
printer
’s ink .
I have been working very hard since I visited you ; I had not done any composi
tions for such a long time— only a lot of studies— that when I once started I went
quite wild about it . I was pegging away at it many mornings as early as four
o
’clock . I am extremely eager for you to see them, for I can make neither head
nor tail of what Van der W eele, the only one who has seen them, said .
Van der W eele
’
s opinion was rather sympathetic, but he sai d about the sandpit
that there were too many ﬁgures in it ; the composition was not simple . He said,
“Look here, just draw that one little fellow with hi s wheelbarrow on a little dike
against the bright sky at sundown ; how beautiful such a thing would be— now it
i s too turbulent .
”
Then I showed him Caldec ott
’
s drawing
Brighton Highroad,
and said,
Do
you mean to say that it i s not permitted per se to introduce many ﬁgures into a
composition ? Never mind my drawing, just tell me what you think of this
composition .”
“Well ,
” he said,
I don
’t like that one either. But,
he added,
I am speaking
personally, and I can
’t speak any other way than personally, and this i s not the
kind
of thing I like and want to look at.
” Well, I thought this well said in a
certain way, but y ou will understand that I did not ﬁnd in him exactly that
sound knowledge
of things which I was looking for. But he i s quite a sound
fellow on the whole, and we took a very pleasant walk together, and he pointed
out some damned ﬁne things to me .
It was while taking a walk with him that I saw that sand pit too, but he
hardly looked at it on that occasion, and next day I went back to it alone . I have

drawn that sand pit with many ﬁg ures because at times there really are very many
fellows toiling there, because in winter and in autumn the town gives employment
in this way to persons who are out ofwork . And then the scene i s extremely busy .
I have had some beautiful models of late . A superb grass mower, a mag
niﬁc ent peasant boy, exactly like ﬁgures by Millet. A fellow with a wheelbarrow,
the same whose head you may remember I drew, but then in hi s Sunday clothes
and with a Sunday-clean bandage around hi s blind eye . Now I have him in hi s
everyday clothes, and— as I see it— it i s difﬁcult to believe that this is the same
man who posed for both studies .
The size of these four large drawings i s 40 x 20 inches .
I am much pleased with using a brown passe-partout with a very deep black
inner rim . Then many blacks seem to be gray, whereas they would show up too
black in a white passe-partout, and the whole retains a clear effect .
Lord, how I wish you could see them, not because I thi nk them good myself,
but I should like to know what you think of them, although I am not yet satisﬁed
with them . In my opinion they are not yet sufficiently pure ﬁgure drawings ,
though they are ﬁgure drawings
all right, but I should like to accentuate the
drawing of the actions and the structure more cleanly and boldly.
What you write about feeling that you are now
on a
road, and not on little
bypaths and crossroads , is very true, in my opini on . I have a similar feeling
myself, because during the past year I have been concentrating on ﬁgures even
more than I used to .
If you believe that I have eyes to
see with, then you may be sure that there
most certainly i s sentiment in your ﬁgures ; what you are doing i s
\
healthy
and
virile— never doubt yourself in thi s respect, and for the very reason that you do
not doubt, dash it on without hesitation .
I think the studies of the heads of those blind fellows are superb .
It must not surprise you that some of my ﬁgures are so entirely different from
the ones that I sometimes make after the model . I very seldom work from
memory— I hardly practice that method. But I am getting so used to being
confronted immediately with nature that I am keeping my personal feelings
unfettered to a far greater extent than in the beginning— and I get less dizzy
and I
am more my selfjust because I
am confronted witb nature. If I have the good
fortune to ﬁnd a model who is quiet and collected, then I draw it repeatedly,
and then at last a study turns up which i s different from an ordinary study
I mean more characteristic, more deeplyfelt .
And yet it was made under the same circumstances as the more wooden, less
deeply felt studies that preceded it . This manner of working i s as good as any
other— just a little more easily understood— like these
“Little Winter Gardens .
”
You sai d it yourself— they are felt ;
all right, but that was not accidental ; I drew
them over and over again before, and that feeling was not in them then . After
that— after the iron-like ones— came these, and also that clumsiness and awkward
ness . H ow does it bappen tbat I express sometbing witb tbat?
—because the thing has
shaped itself in my mind before I start on it .
The ﬁrst ones are absolutely repulsive to others . I say this to make you under
148


Another thing I must tell you i s that the other day I got hold of a marvelous
old Scheveningen woman
’s cape as well as a cap, but the cap is not so beautiful .
And I shall also get a ﬁsherman
’
s jacket with a high turned-up collar and short
sleeves . I am immensely eager to
see your charcoal drawing ; perhaps when my
brother comes here— I don
’t know exactly when— I shall go with him to Bra
bant, and then, as we are passing through Utrecht, and if I can manage it, I shall
look in on you ; but at any rate I shall try to come to y ou without that, for I am
very curious to see it .
As for you, try to keep your promi se to come to The Hague, for you will
have to come here anyway for that wedding party, you know . If my recent luck
with ﬁnding models holds out, I shall certainly make some more large drawings
thi s summer.
I should like to go on working on those I have in hand, so as to raise them to
a high standard against the time my brother comes here .
In H arpers Weekly I came across a very characteristic thing after Smedley, the
black ﬁgure of a man on a white sandy road . He calls it
“A Generation Ag o
”
the ﬁgure i s some kind of clergyman, and perhaps I could describe my impression
of it thus— Y es, that
’s what my grandfather looked like . I wish I had done it . In
the same issues , after Abbey, two girls standing ﬁshing on the side of a ditch with
pollard willows . Both
' of these things in H arpers are only sketches in a review
.
of an exhibition.
I should like to
send you sketches
of my drawings , but I don
’t have much
time to spare .
I asked permission to make drawings in the
old men
’s
an d
ol d women
’s
almshouse here, but they refused again . Oh well , there are more almshouses in
the villages near by. But here I knew some fellows that I have used as models .
But I went there to have a look, and among other things I saw a little old gardener
near an old twisted apple tree, very characteristic .
Well, here comes my model . Adieu, send the H arpers if you can spare them,
with a handshake,
Ever yours , Vincent
299
Dear Theo,
The Hague,
1 0 July
1 8 8 3
I had already been on the lookout for your letter and was glad when it came .
Many thanks .
What you write about the exhibition is very interesting . How was that
old
picture by Dupre which you liked so much ? I should love to hear more about
it . Your description of the Troyon and the Rousseau, for instance, is striking
enough for me to get an idea of the manner in whi ch they are done . About the
time of Troyon
’s
“Pré Communal
” [Common] more pictures had a certain
sentiment which I should like to call D ramatic, though there are no ﬁgures in
them . Speaking of a Jul es Dupre (the large
one in the Mesdag collection), Is
raels expressed it exactly,
“It i s like a ﬁg ure-painting .
” It i s this dramatic touch
which causes one to ﬁnd a je ne sais quoi which makes one feel what you say ,
“It

expresses that moment and that spot in nature where one can go alone without
company.
Ruy sdael
’
s
Bui sson
also has it very strongly .
Don
’t y ou remember having seen
old Jaques in which it was somewhat ex
ag g erated, perhaps a little sensational— no, not that after all— which one admired
for that very reason— though they were not ranked among the best Jaques by
the general public ?
Speaking
of Rousseau, do you know the Rousseau in
the Richard Wallace
Collection, a
“Lisiere de Bois
[The edge of the forest] in autumn after the rain,
with a glimpse ofa wide stretch of swampy meadows— in which cows are grazing,
the foreground quite in tone ? To me it i s one of his ﬁnest— very like the one with
the red sun in the Luxembourg . The dramatic effect in those pictures i s a thing
which, more than anythin g else in art, makes
one understand
“
un coin de la
nature
vu a travers d
’
un tempérament” [a nook of nature seen through (the
medium of) a temperament] , and
“l
’homme ajouté a la nat ure
” [man added to
nature] ; and one ﬁnds the same thing, for instance, in portraits by Rembrandt . It
i s more than nature, it i s a kind of revelation . And it seems to me that one must
feel all respect for it, and not join those who often say that it i s exaggerated or
mere manneri sm .
Oh, I must tell you, Theo, that De Bock has been to see me— it was a rather
pleasant visit . Yesterday Breitner appeared— I hadn
’t in the least expected him
because he seemed to have broken oﬂrelations entirely . I was very glad, because
at the very beginning of my stay here he was very pleasant to g o out with . I do
not mean in the country, but in the city itself, to look for characters an d intriguing
models .
There isn
’t a single person in The Hague with whom I ever did thi s within
the city . Most of the painters think the city ugly and won
’t look at anything . An d
yet the city is very beautiful
too sometimes, isn
’t it
For instance, yesterday
in the Noordeinde I
saw workmen busy pulling down that part opposite the
pal ace, men all white with lime dust, with carts
and horses . It was cool windy
weather, the sky was gray, and the spot was very characteristic .
Last year I met Van der Velden
one evening at De Bock
’s, when we were
there to see De Bock
’s etchings . I told you then that he made a very favorable
impression
on me, though he spoke very little and was not very sociable that
evening . But my
— immediate impression
of him was that he is a solid, serious
painter . He has a square Gothic head, wi th a keen, sharp, and yet gentle look,
strongly built, in fact quite the opposite
of Breitner and De Bock . There i s
something manly an d powerful in him, even though he doesn
’t say or do any
thing in particular .
I hope to come into closer contact with hi m someday— perhaps through Van
der Weele .
Last Sunday I was at Van der W eele
’
s ; he was worki ng on a picture of cows
by a creek, for which he has some serious studies . He is now going to the country
for some time .
For a change, thi s week I have done a few water colors out-of-doors , a little
1 5 1

cornﬁeld and a small part of a potato ﬁeld, and I have also drawn a few landscapes
as studies for the surroundings
of a few ﬁgure drawings I am planning . These
are very hasty sketches of those ﬁgure drawings . The topmost i s the burning of
weeds ; the other one, the return from the potato ﬁeld .
I seriously intend to paint a number of ﬁgure studies especially for the sake of
working up the drawings more thoroughly .
What delightful news that you intend to come
to Holland in the beginning
of August, for,
as I
’ve told you often enough, I long very much for your
coming .
I am rather anxious to hear from you to what extent your woman i s versed in
art matters . At any rate, I imagine a good many things will have to be done and
cultivated in thi s respect . Tant mieux . At
all events I hope
she will get some
sort of scrapbook, for which I expect you will have some items among the smaller
drawings . Now and then there are pages in the sketchbook which, though rough,
are nevertheless more or less striking . I am going to make a small collection of
them against the time of her arrival .
Well, I talked it over with De Bock again, and I can leave my things at hi s
house when I go to make studies in Scheveningen . I also hope to g o and
see
Blommers someday soon . I spoke to De Bock about hi s picture at the Salon,
“November,
” the reproduction of which I liked
so much in the catalogue . He
‘
must still have a sketch of it, and I should like to see it .
As to my eventually going to London for a shorter
or longer time, I quite
agree with you that there would be more chance of selling my work, and I also
think that I could learn a great deal if I came into contact with some artists there .
And I can assure you, I should have no lack of subjects there . What beautiful
things one could make at those dockyards
on the Th ames ! Well, we must talk
all these things over when you are here . I hope you won
’t be in too great a hurry :
there are so many things w
e must discuss .
I wish I could g o to Brabant again and make some studies in the autumn .
Above all, I should like to make studies of a Brabant plow, of a weaver, and
of that village churchyard at Nuenen. But again , it will
all cost money.
Well, good-by : Once more, thanks for your letter and the enclosure . Have a
good time . Do you intend to bring the woman with you to Holland,
or don
’t
you think this advisable yet ? I should like it if y ou did .
Adi eu, boy . With a handshake,
Yours sincerely, Vincent
I add a few more lines to tell you some particulars about Breitner too, as I have
just come home from hi s temporary studio (you know he i s actually living in
Rotterdam at present)
. Do you know Vierge
or Urabiette, the draftsmen for
L
’Illustration? Well, at times Breitner reminds me
of Vierge, but very seldom.
When hi s work is good, it looks like something hasty by Vierge ; but when
his— that i s, Breitner
’
s— work is too hasty or unﬁnished, then it i s hard to
say
what it looks like : it doesn
’t look like anything— except strips of faded old wall
paper of I don
’t know what period, but at all events a very strange kind and
probably very ancient . Just imagine, I entered the small attic he has rented at
1 5 2


of it . He i s intelligent enough, but he obstinately tries to realize a predilection for
eccentricity .
Well, I am starting in Scheveningen this week . If you could have sent a little
extra, I might have bought some new painting material .
I am going to have a few drawings photographed in cabinet size or a little
larger (to see how they will look on a smaller scale) by a photographer who ha s
photographed drawings by Meulen, Duchatel and Z ilcken : He charges 7 5 cents ,
which isn
’t much, i s it ? I will begin with
“The Sower
” and
“The Peat Cutters ,
”
the one with many small ﬁgures , the other with a single large one . If they turn
out well, I coul d always send you photos of the drawings I have made,
so that
you could show them to Buhot, for instance, to see if he could ﬁnd a buyer .
They could reproduce those that were accepted from the original drawings,
or
I could copy them onto their paper .
Once more good-by , Theo . Good luck . Write again soon . I am having those
photos taken because we must work Buhot for
all he i s worth . I must try to
earn some money in order to be able to start new things, and to try my hand at
painting too, for I am right in the mood for it .
After all, I don
’t think it nice of C . M . never to have answered a syllable to
my letter, in which I took the trouble to enclose two sketches
of the drawings
in question . Nor i s it nice of Tersteeg not to come to
see me, since for my part
I tried to make i t up . It i s nonsense to say he i s too busy, for that i sn
’t the reason ;
once a year he might ﬁnd time to come .
Mauve has not only quarreled with me, but he has also quarreled with Z il cken,
for instance . Not long ago I saw Z ilcken
’
s etchings , and just now at the photog
rapher
’
s I saw photos of Z ilcken
’
s drawings . Leaving myself out of the question,
I declare I don
’t understand what Mauve has against Z ilcken : his drawings are
good— not at all bad— but -Mauve is capricious .
I add another half-page to talk a little about Brabant . Among the studies
of
types from the people I
’ve done there are several which have what many would
call a decidedly
old-fashioned character, also in the conception, for instance a
digger who looks more like those one sees on thewooden has—reliefs of the Gothic
church pews than like a present-day drawing . Very often I think of the Brabant
types , what a strong sympathy I feel for them .
The thing which I should immensely like to make, which I feel I
can make,
provided there i s the inclination for patient posing, i s the ﬁgure of Father on a
path through the heath ; the ﬁgure austerely drawn, with character, and I repeat,
a stretch of brown heath with a narrow white sandy path
running through it,
and a sky just delicately tinged, yet brushed with some passion . Then Father and
Mother arm in arm— in an autumn landscape or against a li ttle row of beeches
with withered leaves .
I should also like to draw Father
’s ﬁgure when I draw a peasant
’s funeral ,
which I certainly intend to do, though it would be very difﬁcult . Leaving the
difference of religious opinion out of the question, the ﬁgure of a poor country
clergyman i s to me, in type and character, one of the most sympathetic sights
I know, and I should not be true to myself if I didn
’t try it someday.
I 5 4

When you come, I should like to consult you about how to arrange such a
trip to Brabant! When you see my drawings of almshouse men, you will under
stand my intentions and what I want .
What I want to make i s a drawing which will not be exactly understood by
everyone the ﬁgure essentially simpliﬁed with intentional neglect of those details
which do not belong to the real character,
and are only accidental . For it must
not be a portrait of Father, but rather the type of a poor village clergyman on
hi s way to visit the sick . In the same way, the couple arm in arm against the little
row of beeches must be the types of a man and a woman who have grown old
together in love and faith rather than the portraits of Father and Mother— though
I hope they will pose for it . But they must know that it i s a serious thing, whi ch
perhaps they woul d not see of their own accord if the likeness were not exact .
And they ought to be more or less prepared for it that in case they should have
to pose, they should have to do so in the attitude I shall select, and not alter it .
Well, that will come all right, and I do not work so slowly that it need be very
troublesome to them . And I for my part would love to do it .
Simplifying the ﬁgures i s something which greatly preoccupies me . Well , you
will
see it for ourself in the ﬁgures I show you . If I g o to Brabant, it certainly
must not be a kind of pleasure trip, but a short time of very hard and quick-as
lightning work . Speaking of the expression of a ﬁgure, more and more I come to
the conclusion that it i s not so much in the features as in the whole attitude . There
are few things I hate more than most of the academical tétes d
’
expression . I prefer
to look at
“the night
” by Mi chelangelo , or a drunkard by Daumier, or the diggers
by Millet, and that well -known large woodcut of hi s,
“The Shepherdess ,
or an
old horse by Mauve, etc .
3 06
Dear Theo,
The Hague,
27 or 2 8 July
1 8 83
To my surprise, I received another letter from you yesterday with a bank note
enclosed . I needn
’t tell you how glad I was, and I thank you heartily for it . But
they refused to change the bank note because it was too torn . However, they gave
me
1 0 guilders on it, and it has been forwarded to Paris . If the bank refuses it ,
I
’ll have to pay back the
1 0 guilders— for which I had to sign a receipt— but if
the bank changes it, I
’ll get the rest later .
In your letter you write about the conﬂict one sometimes has about whether
one is responsible for the unfortunate results of a good action— if it wouldn
’t be
better to act in a way one knows to be wrong, but which will keep one from
getting hurt— I know that conﬂi ct too . If we follow
our conscience— for me
conscience is the highest reason— the reason within the reason— we are tempted
to think we have acted wrongly or foolishly we are especially upset when more
superﬁcial people jeer at us, because they are
so much wiser and are so much
more successful . Y es, then it is sometimes difficult, and when circumstances occur
which make the diffi cul ties rise like a tidal wave,
one i s almost sorry to be the
way one i s, and would wish to have been less conscientious .
I hope you don
’t think of me
as other than having that same inner conﬂict

continually, and often very tired brains too, and in many cases not knowing how
to decide questions of right and wrong .
When I am at work, I have an unlimited faith in art and the conviction that I
shall succeed ; but in days of physical prostration
or when there are ﬁnancial
obstacles, I feel that faith diminishing, and a doubt overwhelms me, which I try to
conquer by setting to work again at once . It
’s the same thing with the woman and
the children ; when I am with them and the little boy comes creeping toward me
on all fours , crowing for joy , I haven
’t the slightest doubt that everything i s right .
H ow often that child has comforted me .
When I
’m home, he can
’t leave me alone for a moment ; when I
’m at work,
he pulls at my coat or climbs up against my leg till I take him on my lap
. In the
studi o, he crows at everything, plays quietly with a bit of paper, a bit of string ,
or an
old brush ; the child i s always happy . If he keeps this disposition
all his
life, he will be cleverer than I .
Now what shall we say about the fact that at times one feels there i s a certain
fatality which makes the good turn out wrong and the bad turn out well .
I think one may consider these thoughts partly the consequence of over
wrought nerves , and if one has them, one must not think it one
’s duty to believe
that things are really as gloomy as
one supposes ; if
7one di d, it would make
one mad . On the contrary, it i s reasonable to strengthen one
’s physique then, an d
later
set to work like a man ; and even if that doesn
’t help,
one must still alway s
continue to use tbose two means, and consider such melancholy fatal . Then in the long
run one will feel ones energy increase, and will bear up against the troubles .
Mysteries remain, and sorrow
or melancholy, but that eternal negative i s
balanced by the positive work which i s thus achieved after
all . If life were as
simple, and things as little complicated as a goody-goody
’s story or the hackneyed
sermon of the average clergyman, it wouldn
’t be so very diﬂi c ult to make one
’s
way . But it isn
’t, and things are inﬁnitely more compli cated, and right and wrong
do not exist separately, any more than black and white do in nature . One must
be careful
not to fall back on opaque black—
on deliberate wrong— and even
more, one has to avoid the white as ofa whitewashed wall, which means hypocrisy
and everlasting Pharisaism . He who courageously tries to follow his reason, and
especially hi s conscience, the very highest reason— the sublime reason— and tries
to stay honest, can hardly lose his w
ay entirely, I think, though he will not get
off without mistakes , rebuffs
and moments
of weakness ,
an d will not achieve
perfection .
And I think it will give hi m a deep feeling of pity and benevolence, broader
than the narrow-mindedness which i s the clergyman
’s specialty .
One may not be considered of the slightest importance by either of the parties ,
and
one may be counted among the mediocrities and feel like a thoroughly
ordinary man among ordinary people — for all that one will obtain a rather steady
serenity in the end . One will succeed in developing one
’s conscience to such a
point that it becomes the voice of a better and higher self, of which the ordinary
self i s the servant . And one will not return to skepticism or cyni cism, and not
belong among the foul scoffers . But not at once . I think it a beautiful saying of
1 5 6


3 16
Dear brother,
The Hague, 2 1 Aug ust
1 8 8 3
Your letter came today and comforted me in many ways . My thanks for speaking
to C . M .
' —I will write to thank him myself, and send him a few studies, but
for the rest— especially about the woman— notbing
. One more thing, however .
One of these days I shall write you a letter ; I shall write it carefully and try to
make it short, but say everything I think necessary . You might keep that letter
then,
so that in case you should meet somebody who might be induced to buy
some of my studies, you could tell that man my own thoughts and intentions
exactly . My thought in this being especially : one of my drawings taken separately
will never give complete satisfaction in the long run , but a number
of studies ,
however different in detail they may be, will nevertheless complement each other .
In short, for the art lovers themselves it i s in my opinion better to take a number
of them than just a single one. As to the money, I would rather deal with an art
lover who buys cheaply but regularly than with one who buys only once, even if
he paid well then .
Perhaps you might, either in your own words or in mine, propose to C . M .
what we discussed last year ; the result might be that because of my expressing
myself more clearly, he might like the idea better .
Well, more about this later on .
Now I still have to tell you ofa visit from Rappard, who saw the large drawings
and spoke warmly of them . When I told him that I felt rather weak, and that I
thought making the drawings might have had something to do withit, he di d
not seem to doubt the probability .
We spoke aboutDrenthe . He is going there again one of these days, and hewill go
even farther, namely to the ﬁshing vi llages on Terschelling . Personally I should
love to go to Drenthe, especially after that visit from Rappard . So much so that
I have already inquired if it would be easy or difficult to move the furniture there .
The furni ture can be sent by Van Gend
Loos, even the stove and the bed,
by taking half a van ; then few or no packing cases are needed .
Of course I am thinking
of it because, though those things
of mine are of
little or no value, it would be very expensive to buy them all over again .
My plan would be to g o with the woman and the children .
Of course there will be the moving and traveling expenses .
Once there, I think I would remain permanently in that country of heath and
moorland, where more and more painters are settling down,
so that perhaps ,
after a time, a kind of colony of painters might spring up . Life is so much cheaper
there that I think I should economize at least 1 5 0 or 200 g uilders a year, especially
on rent .
And having paid my debts with the money from C . M . , I think it might be
g ood to act quickly.
In fact, I think it would be superﬂuous for me to go there ﬁrst to gather
information .
I have a little map
of Drenthe in front of me . On it I
see a large white spot
without any Village names ; it is crossed by the Hoogeveen canal, which ends
1 5 8

suddenly, and I see the words
peat ﬁelds
on the map , written across the blank
space . Around that blank space, a number of black dots with names of villages ,
a red one for the little town of Hoogeveen .
Near the border, a lake— the Black Lake —a name full of suggestions , I imagine
all kinds of workmen dredging on it s banks .
Some of the names of the villages— like Easthills, Erica— a re also suggestive .
Well , tell me your opinion about the possibility of a quick move to that region .
If it happened, I should begin by acting on Rappard
’
s information based on
hi s experiences there, then I would follow hi s advice to go more to that secluded
part of which I told you how it looked on the map .
I am now trying to get a more detailed map of Drenthe, indicating the different
terrains .
We should have
an immediate cash outlay, but in the long
run we shoul d
economize a lot , I think . But more important, I think, I should be staying in a
country which would certainly stimulate me and make my mind receptive to all
that i s serious , so that my work can only improve by it .
What would the expenses be ? I shall ﬁgure that out more exactly for you one
of these days .
I suppose the whole family will be counted as 25 persons , but they c an demand
the fare for three .
The railway expenses are not given in the timetable, but I suppose it will be
under
1 0 guilders a head .
According to Van G end
Loos , half a van to Assen i s 2 0 guilders . But one
would have to spend a few days in an inn , which would cost a guilder per person
per day.
Here the rent especially, and the high cost of living, too, are murder . And the
heaviest expense, the one for models , would be different over there : either I
should have more and better models for the same money, or just
as many for
less money .
I suppose if I settled down there, Rappard would visit that same neighborhood
even more often than now, so that we could proﬁt a little from each other
’
s
company . As I told you, it was especially since hi s visit and our talking about
the work that my mind became ﬁxed on Drenthe .
Of course if it must be, I can also look for a cheaper house here, and I think
it beautiful here too, but yet— I should like to be alone with nature for a time
far away from the city.
I can hardly tell you how pleased I am with what you
say about my work,
I am glad you are of the opinion that it would be the wrong policy to undertake
some outside job at the
This leads to half measures , which make one half a man .
The most important thing i s to get that
“quelque chose de male
[something
manly] more and more into my work .
I don
’t believe y ou will need to take back that you notice something
of it
already, especially if I regain my strength .
It i s very troublesome that my stomach i s upset by even the most ordinary
1 5 9

food, and if I followed my inclination, I should only care to eat— sour apples .
I don
’t indulge myself in thi s , but my stomach i s weaker than it ought to be .
I expect another letter from Rappard about Drenthe . At
all events I will
write you again soon, also about another plan
of staying quietly here, when
I have had information from my landlord about the house at Voorburg, whi ch
he says I can perhaps get cheaply.
Adieu, again many thanks .
Yours sincerely, Vincent
3 19
Dear Theo,
The Hague, 4 September
1 88 3
I received your letter just now, coming home from the dunes behind Loosduinen,
wet through, for I had been sitting in the rain for about three hours on a spot
where everything was reminiscent ofRuysdael, Daubigny or Jules Dupre
. I came
back with a study of twisted, gnarled little trees , and another one of a farm after
the rain . Everything i s already bronze-colored . Everything i s what one can
see
in nature only during thi s time of the year, or when one looks at some pictures
by Dupre, for in stance ; and it i s so beautiful that one
’s imagination always falls
short of it .
You write about your work that Sunday in Ville d
’Avray ; at the same moment
on the same day, I too was walking alone, and I too want to tell you something
.
about that walk, when our thoughts probably met again . As I wrote you, I had
spoken to the woman— we felt that in the future it would be impossible for us
to stay together, nay, that we should make each other unhappy, yet we both felt
how strongly we are attached to each other— and then I went far but into
the
country to have a talk with nature . Well, I walked to Voorburg and from there
to
Leidendam .
You know the scenery there, splendid trees, majestic and
serene, right next to horrible green toy summerhouses and
all the absurdities
the heavy fancy of retired Dutchmen
c an invent in the form of ﬂower plots,
arbors and porches . Most of the houses very ugly ; some, however,
old
and
stately . Now at that very moment, high over the meadows , boundless as the
desert,
one mass
of clouds after the other came sailing
on , and the wind ﬁrst
struck the row of country houses with their clumps of trees on the other side of
the canal, bordered by the black cinder path . Those trees were superb ; there was
drama in each ﬁg ure I was going to
say , but I mean in each tree . But the scene
as a whole was even more beautiful than those scourged trees
viewed apart,
because at that moment even those absurd little summerhouses assumed a curious
character, dripping with rain and disheveled .
It seemed to me an image ofhow even a man of absurd deportment and convem
tions, or another one full of eccentricities and caprice, may become a dramatic
ﬁgure of a peculiar type, if only real sorrow strikes him— a calamity befalls hi m.
And the thought crossed my mind, how at moments when today
’s deteriorating
society is society seen against the light of a renewal, it stands
out as a large,
gloomy silhouette .
Yes, for me, the drama of storm in nature, the drama of sorrow in life, is the
most impressive .


you will approve of this idea ; that would comfort me, for in England they are
very serious once they start something : whoever catches the public
’s fancy in
England ﬁnds faithful friends there . Take, for instance, Ed . Frere and Henriette
Browne, who remain as interesting now as they were when their work was ﬁrst
shown there .
But to have success, one must give good work, and be sure of keeping up to
the standard of what one has set .
I was glad to
see from your letter that you approve
of the Drenthe plan ;
that
’s enough for me, the advantages it will bring will be apparent later . For me,
it i s directly connected with my trying to become a member of the Society of
Draftsmen, and then going to England— because I know for sure that ifI succeed
in putting some sentiment into the subjects out there, they will ﬁnd sympathy in
England .
Well, I must carry out the Drenthe plan, be it with more or less money . A s
soon as I can pay the fare, I shall go, even if I have only a small supply ofpainting
materials .
Because the moment of the autumn effects i s already there, and I must catch
some of them .
But I hope I shall be able to leave something behind for the woman, to help
her through the ﬁrst weeks . But as soon as I can go, I will .
I tell you that I intend to help the woman a little at ﬁrst ; I may not do much,
nor can I, but I mention this only to you .
And you may depend on it that whatever may happen to her, I neither can nor
ever will live with her again, for she is incapable of doing what she ought to do .
I also dropped Father a line to tell him that I had parted company with her,
but that for all that, my letter to Father about my continuing to be true to her
and being willing to marry her remained a fact . And another fact i s that Father
avoided the issue at the time, and did
not reply to the fundamental question .
And I do not know how it will appear to me in later years— for instance, whether
this might not have been better than leaving her
now we are too close to the facts
to get the right view of the basic interrelation and consequences of all the things .
I do bope everything will come out right, but her future as well as my own
looks gloomy. I am inclined to believe there i s some latent good in her still, but
the trouble i s, it
oug bt to bave been roused already. Now, as
she has nobody to
rely on, it will be more difﬁcult forher to follow her good imp ulses .
N ow she never cared to listen ;
tben she will long
to speak with me,
and
I shall no longer be there . As long as she was with me, she had no other standard
of comparison, and in other surroundings
she will remember things which
she
does not care for and which
she did not pay attention to . N ow by contrast she
will be reminded of them.
Sometimes it i s an anguishing thought, that we both feel it is impossible for
us to struggle along together in the future, and yet are so much attached to each
other . Of late she has been more trustful with me than usual, and she has refused
to play
some ugly tricks which her mother had instigated . Th ings of the kind
you mentioned when you were here, of starting a row and the like .
16 2

Y ou
see there i s a seed of more seriousness in her, if that might only stay .
I wish
she could marry, and when I tell you I am keeping an eye on her, it i s
because I advi sed her to do tbat .
If she could only ﬁnd a man who was not altogether bad, that would do ; the
foundation that was laid here would then develop, namely that ofa more domestic,
simpler disposition ; and if she sticks to that, in the future I need not leave her
quite to her fate, for then I at least remain her friend, and a true one too .
Write soon again and believe me,
Yours sincerely, Vincent
3 24
Dear Theo,
Drenthe, September
-November
1 8 8 3
Now that I have been here a few days, and have strolled about in different
directions , I can tell you more about the neighborhood where I have taken up
my quarters . I enclose a little scratch of my ﬁrst painted study in these parts :
a cottage on the heath . A cottage made only of sods
of turf and sticks . I also
saw the interior of about six of that kind, and more studies of them will follow .
I cannot express how their outside looks in the twilight,
or just after sunset,
more directly than by reminding you of a certain picture by Jules Dupre, which
I think belongs to Mesdag
— two cottages , their moss-covered roofs standing out
very deep in tone against a hazy, dusky evening sky.
Tbat
’
s tbe way it is bere. Inside those cottages, dark as a cave, i t i s very beautiful .
I ﬁnd what I observe here shown most realistically in drawings by certain English
artists who worked on the moors in Ireland .
Alb . Neuhuys gives the same, but a little more poetically than it ﬁrst strikes
the eye in reality ; but he never makes a thing that i s not basically true .
I
saw splendid ﬁgures out-of-doors— striking because
of a sober quality. A
woman
’s breast, for instance, has that heaving movement which i s quite the
opposite
of voluptuousness , and sometimes, when the creature is old or sickly,
arouses pity or respect . And the melancholy which things in general have here i s
of a healthy kind, like in Millet
’s drawings . Fortunately, the men here wear short
breeches, which show the shape
of the leg and make the movements more
expresswe .
In order to give you an idea of one of the many things which gave me new
sensations and feelings
on my excursions , I will tell you that here one may see
peat barges in the very middle of tbe beatb, drawn by men, women, chi ldren, white
or black horses , just as in Holland, for instance, on the Rijswijk towpath .
The heath i s splendid . I
saw sheepfolds and shepherds more beautiful than
those in Brabant .
The ovens are more or less like the one in Th . Rousseau
’s
Four Communal .
They stand in the gardens under old apple trees or between cabbages and celery .
In many places there are beehives too . In many faces one can see that the people
are not in good health ; it
’
s not exactly healthy here, I believe ; perhaps because
of foul drinking water . I have seen a few seventeen—year—old girls , or even
younger, who look very fresh and beautiful, but generally they look faded at a

very early age . But this does not interfere with the great noble aspect
of some
ﬁgures , which, close up, are already very faded .
In the village there are four
or ﬁve canals to Meppel , to Dedemsvaart, to
Coevorden, to Hollands Veld .
As one goes down them, one occasionally sees a curious
old mill, farmyard,
wharf, or lock, and always the bustle of peat barges .
To give you an idea
of the quaintness
of these parts— while I was painting
that cottage, two sheep and a goat came to browse on tbe roof of the house . The
goat climbed onto the top and looked down the chimney. Hearing something
on the roof, the woman rushed
out and threw her broom at said goat, which
jumped down like a Chamois .
The two hamlets on the heath where I have been, and where thi s incident
occurred, are called Driftsand and Blacksheep
. I have been in several other places
too, and now you can imagine the originality here, as after all Hoogeveen i s a
town, and yet quite near by there are already shepherds,
those ovens ,
those
peat huts , etc .
I often think with melancholy
of the woman and the children, if only they
were provided for ; oh, it
’
s the woman
’s own fault, one might say , and it would
be true, but I am afraid her misfortunes will prove greater than her guilt . I knew
from the beginning that her character was spoiled, but I hoped she would im
prove ; and now that I do not see her any more and ponder some things I saw
in her, it seems to me more and more that she was too far gone for improvement .
And this only increases my feeling of pity, and it becomes a melancholy feeling
because it i s not in my power to redress it .
Theo, when I meet on the heath such a poor woman with a child on her arm,
or at her breast, my eyes get moist . It reminds me of her, her weakness ; her
untidiness , too , contributes to making the likeness stronger .
I know tbat sbe is not g ood, that I have an absolute right to act as I do, that I could
not stay with herb ack there , that I really could not take her with me, that what
I did was even sensible and wise, whatever you like ; but, for
all that, it cuts
right through me
_when I
see such a poor little ﬁgure feverish
an d mi serable,
and it makes my heart melt inside .
H ow much sadness there i s in life, nevertheless one must not get melancholy,
and
one must seek distraction in other
.
,
things and the right thing i s to work ;
but there are moments when one only ﬁnds rest in the conviction :
“Misfortune
will not spare me either .
” Adieu, write soon . Believe me,
Yours sincerely, Vincent
3 3 0
Dear Theo,
N . Amsterdam, September-November
1 8 83
This once I write to you from the very remotest part of Drenthe, where I came
after an endless expedition on a barge through the moors . I see no possibility of
describing the country as it ought to be done ; words fail me, but imagine the
banks of the canal as miles and miles of Michels or Th . Rousseaus , Van Goyens
or Ph . de Konincks .
1 64


and if you send your letter at the usual time to tbe same address, I shall ﬁnd it
there, on the
1 2th , in Hoogeveen .
The place where I am now i s New Amsterdam .
Father sent me a money order for
1 0 guilders, which, along with the money
from you, enables me to paint a little now .
I intend to settle at the inn where I am now for a long
time, provided that
from there I can easily reach the district with the large old sod huts , as I shoul d
have better light and more space there . As to that picture by that Englishman
you mention, with the lean cat and the small coffin ; though he got his ﬁrst
inspiration in that dark room, he would hardly have been able to paint it in that
same spot, for if one works in too dark a room, the work usually becomes too
light,
so that when one brings it into the light,
all the shadows are too weak .
I just had that experience when I used the barn to paint
an open door and a
glimpse of the little garden . Well, what I wanted to say i s that there will be a
chance to remove that obstacle too, for here I can get a room with good light
that can be heated in winter .
Well , boy, if you do not think any more about America, nor I of H arderw1jk,
I
I hope things will take care of themselves . I admit your explanation for C . M .
’
s
silence may be right, but sometimes one can purposely be careless . On the back
of the page you will ﬁnd a few scratches . I write in haste, it i s already late .
How I wish we could walk here together, and paint together . I think the
country would charm and convince you . Adieu, I hope you are well
and are
having some luck . I have been thinking of you continually during thisexcursion .
With a handshake,
Yours sincerely, Vincent
Postscript to number 3 3 2 , Drenthe, fall
1 8 8 3
I am sending you the enclosed sketches to give you an idea ofthe many extremely
different things this apparently monotonous country presents . You
see, I am
just sampling at random— I catch hold of one thing
and
another ; later things
will arrange themselves and settle into shape of their own accord . But here I will
not begin with a
”prearranged plan ; on the contrary, I want my plan to result
from my studies
. A s yet I do not know the real character of the country ; now
I draw everything that presents itself, but later on, after some experience, I shall
try to reproduce it in its real character .
One thing depends so much onanother that one must catch hold of everything ;
however much one should like to concentrate on a single subject, not one thing
can be left out .
So there i s work enough . I now have a pretty large room (where a stove has
been put) , which happens to have a small balcony, from which I can
see the
heath with the huts . In the distance I see a very curious drawbridge .
Downstairs there is the inn , an d a farmer
’s kitchen with a peat ﬁre on the hearth,
very cosy in the evening . Such a ﬁreplace with a cradle beside it is an excellent
place for meditation . When I am feeling melancholy or worried about something,
I just run downstairs for a while .
A garrison town where the volunteers for the East Indi an army used to enli st.
166

I can tell you that in a roundabout way I haveheard something about the woman .
I could not imagine why she did not write me .
So I wrote the carpenter next door, if the woman had not been to ask my
address . And the scoundrel answered :
“Oh yes,
sir, but I thought you wouldn
’t
like her to know your address, so I pretended not to know it .
The damned wretch .
S o I wrote her at once, though it was not as good as the express arrangement
I had made with him and with her ; but I do not want to hide myself now or
ever, and I would rather write her at her family
’s address than conceal myself
in any way . That
’s my opinion about it . And I also sent her some money ; if
this should have bad consequences , I am not responsible for it . I will
not act
falsely . I found that scoundrel
’s letter at Hoogeveen on my last visit there .
Friend Rappard has written to me again from Terschelling, and now today
from Utrecht— he is home again . He has brought studies from there, especially
of the almshouse . I don
’t understand it exactly, he told me the doctor had pre
scribed sea ai r for hi m during the winter ; besides , he longed to spend a winter in
the country, but it seems to have turned out differently in the end .
You wrote to me about Liebermann : his palette consists of slate-gray tones,
principally running from brown to yellowish-gray . I have never seen anything of
hi s, but now that I have seen the landscape here, I can understand perfectly how
logically he is led to it .
Often the color
of things reminds me
of Michel ; you know, he also has a
gray
sky (slate-colored sometimes) , a brown soil with yellowish-grays . It i s
absolutely true, and according to nature .
There are Jules Dupreeffects , to be sure, but in this autumn season it is exactly
that— as you describe Liebermann
’s palette . An d if I may ﬁnd what I seek— and
why shouldn
’t I ﬁnd it
—I shall certainly often do it in the same way, in that
same chromatic gamut .
Mind you, to
see it like that, one must not look at the local color by itself,
but in conjunction with the color of the sky !
That sky i s gray— but so iridescent that even our pure white would be unable
to render tbis light and shimmer . Now , if one begins by painting this sky gray,
thus remaining far below the intensity of nature, how much more necessary it i s
to tone down the browns and yellowish-grays of the soil to a lower key, in order
to be consistent . I think if once
one analyzes it thus , it i s so logical,
one
c an
hardly understand not ha ving always seen it so .
But it is the local color of a green ﬁeld, or a ruddy brown heath, which, c on
sidered apart, easily leads one astray .
Write soon again, for your last letter was remarkably brief, too brief, but it
was obviously written in the office .
What about that Triennial Exhibition ? There will be many beautiful things .
I long to hear about it, because these certainly are the characteristic things of the
present, and not of past years . So if you have a moment, tell me about it .
There is a rumor that Liebermann is somewhere here in the neighborhood .
I should like to meet him .
I must
say I am very glad to have found a better place to work in,
so that
1 67

I needn
’t
sit idle at home now that there is
so much rain and bad weather i s
expected . I wish you could see the country here . In the evening it i s inexpressibly
beautiful .
An d I think, with snow, it will also be splendid .
I read a very beautiful little book of Carlyle
’s, H eroes
and H ero Worsbzp, ni ce
sayings , as, for instance : we have the duty to be brave, though in general this i s
wrongly considered to be an exception . In life it is the same, goodness rises
so
high above everything that of course we cannot reach such a height . The most
reasonable thing , and the thing that makes life less impossible, is to put our
gamut in a lower key, and yet to try to be luminous, and not to subside into
dullness .
One ﬁnds here the most wonderful types of Nonconformist clergymen, with
pigs
’ faces and three-cornered hats . Also adorable Jews, who look uncommonly
ugly amidst Millet-like types or on this naive, desolate moor . But they are very
characteristic. I traveled with a party of Jews who held theological discussions
with some farmers . How is it possible for such absurdi ties to exist in a country
like this ? Why couldn
’t they look out of the window or smoke their pipes, or at
least behave as reasonably as , for instance, their pigs , which make no disturbance
whatever, though they are pigs , and are in place in these surroundings
and in
harmony with them . But before the clergymen of the type I saw here reach the
cultural and rational level
of ordinary pigs, they must improve considerably,
and probably it will take ages before they arrive at this point . Now any pig is
better, as far as I can see .
Well, I am off again for a walk, write me if you can spare a moment, and look
out for something of Liebermann
’
s at the exhibition .
Good-by, my address is here for the present . Best wishes , with a handshake,
Yours sincerely, Vincent
3 3 5
Dear brother,
Drenthe, September-November
1 8 83
Thi s morning I receivedyour letter ; in many respects the contents does not surprise
me . It does surprise me a little that you should credit me with the slightest
insight into business , as I am considered a dreamer in that respect, as you know,
and I could not suppose that you thought differently about it . I think your idea
of changing your situation i s a very rational one . In the ﬁrst place,
one i s not
obliged to wait for the moment when the employers will arrive at a better insight
and in the second place, if one considered oneself obliged to do
so, one might
go
on waiting forever and ever, and a young employee might doubt whether,
when that moment came, he would not be too tired to redress things ; how
much more would this be the case with the old
“pochards pleins” themselves .
The latter will have lost their wits entirely by then ;
and decadence being deca
dence, a deserved ruin of a business will follow, the fatal consequence of certain
mistakes . I don
’t mean to say it i s if it happens through thoughtlessness , but if it
happens through that odious , wanton, capricious , reckless way ofoutliving one
’s
fame, and through supposing that everything i s only a question of money, and


general, and now speak about what you say further about a project of your own .
Under the circumstances— always taking the necessity ofa change for granted
excellent—
a modern business, i n which energy might achieve something— where
one is not hampered by so much routine and so complicated an administration
that everything, absolutely everything is paralyzed by it . You tell me there i s
capital there i s (and this means more than capital) a good apparatus for reproduc
tions— and if in addition the directors of this concern are people who mean well ,
and who intend to sell good things, quand meme to seek their success in honesty,
then, as I said, it i s excellent . But Wisseling h at Collier
’s collided too
violently
with hi s employer
’s character (although be never told me
or anybody else
so,
but I have drawn this conclusion independently, which tallies with Wi sseling h
’
s
saying,
“I wasted my time at Collier
’s
And I am disposed to think that the
latter
’s character i s the kind that will talk grandly rather than
act grandly,
so
I say : Are tbose people at the head of the other concern willing ?
The being
able is rather more the result
of these two items than people are
ready to admit in most cases . After all, one should know one
’s own mind .
Now I come to what you write about myself.
Ofcourse I should very much like to spend some time in Paris, because I think I
should ﬁnd there that intercourse with artists which I shall need someday or other .
Is that possible It would be ifit did not get you into too much trouble . I should
like it well enough .
I should love to talk with you about what you wrote, but what would be the use ?
It i s better to lend a helping hand when there i s a chance .
“N
’
importe comment .
”
For I think that it would greatly help me in my work if I had an opportunity
t o see more of printing, for instance . I have had some years
’ practice in painting
now,
so I stick to that . But if I could get some work in a printer
’s ofﬁce
or
something, that would be a help rather than a hindrance— but I should have to
learn all that. I think, however, I should be able to draw reproductions myself,
for instance . And I am willing to try my hand at anytbing
of that kind, especially
if a living may be earned in that way over there . Indeed, I believe that the time
will come when I will not have to earn a living in any other way than by painting
but be sure that I shall not have the slightest objection to going to Paris , when
ever you think it would be useful or necessary for some reason or other .
.My advising y ou in business matters would hardly be the thing . I have been
o ut of it too long, but if I came into it again, we would be of the same opinion
in a great many things . And I do know I have seen what I have seen, and in
matters of reproduction or publication I daresay I know what i s good . And I am
willing to lend a helping hand as to carrying things out, no matter in what way .
But I need not tell you that here on thi s beautiful moor I haven
’t the slightest
longing for Paris, an d I wouldn
’t think about it at all if it hadn
’t been for your
letter . And I simply
say this, If it must be,
all right, I shall go to Paris ; if it
must be, all right, I shall stay on the moors .
I shall ﬁnd things to paint everywhere . It is splendid here, and I think I learn
to paint somewhat better while painting . And my beart is in it, I need not tell
y ou that .
1 70

Besides, I believe that knowing a handicraft is the most solid profession after
all, one reason more for me to stick to it .
But if it might happen for some reason or other— on account of its being more
c onvenient to you,
or because of urgent necessity— that we should be together
in Paris— I dare predict that I shall tell you, start drawing, and I would give y ou
a few hints in the beginning .
I know how much I still have to learn myself, yet I begin to see light, an d in
some way or other, by practice
or by learning from others what can be of use
to me, I will stick to my painting with all my heart . And if it might be that you
c ame to a point where you saw lnt, well , so much the better .
You say your heart i s in the art business, all right, but even more in art itself,
I believe .
Well, boy , write soon again— if you kept silent about it now, I should imagine
all kinds
of worries . So if something i s the matter, write that ; if nothing i s the
matter, write that ; but don
’t keep it all to yourself, for that
’s not worth while .
Oh, I have had a letter from the poor woman ;
she was glad that I wrote her,
but she i s worried about the children, and she goes out working as a charwoman .
She is obliged to live with her mother . Poor things .
But we must keep courage notwithstanding everything .
I enclose a few scratches from here . The country is so beautiful that I cannot
describe it . A s soon as I
c an paint a little better— then ! Y ou c an arrange things
for me exactly as you think best, I shall learn here, and I should learn out there,
too, I think .
However things may go, I don
’t suppose it will make you more
unhappy,
and perhaps you have already put up with things too long . The best thing would
be, if it turned out
so, that you were more appreciated by your directors, and
that they left y ou more liberty to do business as you think best . But I should
be surprised if things took this turn, seeing that Uncle Vincent himself was not
treated very fairly when he left .
But leaving that out of it, it seems to me that the whole art business i s rotten
— to tell you the truth, I doubt if the present enormous prices, even for master
pieces, will last . A
“je ne sais quoi
has passed over it which has chilled every
thing— and enthusiasm has been put to ﬂight . Is this
of great inﬂuence
on the
artists
Not at
all, for generally the greatest
of them personally proﬁted but
little from those enormous prices, except in their last period, when they were
already famous , and they— Millet and others, particularly Corot— would not have
painted less, or less beautifully, without that enormous rise . And whatever may
be said of art business, for the present it will remain so that he who can make a
thing worth seeing will always ﬁnd certain persons interested in it , who will
make it possible for him to earn a living .
I would rather have
1 5 0 francs a month as a painter than
1 5 00 francs a month
in another position, even as an art dealer.
I think
one feels more a man among other men as
a painter, than in a life
which i s founded
on speculation, and in which one has
to heed conventions .
I wonder how it wi ll all turn out, but it is all the same to me, one way or another .
I

And as to you, I don
’t consider it would be such bad luck if the consequences
were that you became a painter in your thirtieth year . I should consider
.
it great
good fortune . One
’s real life begins at thirty, in fact, that i s to say, its most ac tive
art .
P Friends and family may consider you old, or I don
’t know what, but you can
feel a renewal of energy for all that .
But then it is necessary to reﬂect well, and to have a will , and to be wide
awake . But in that period, a change i s really necessary ;
one must wipe out the
whole thing and start anew. j ust as one does wben a boy— but more maturely . Tom,
Dick and Harry, who drowse away in the same old way , think this foolish, and
say they don
’t see any good in it ;
all right, leave Tom, Dick and Harry alone,
as long as they don
’t attack you ; they are as little awake as a somnambulist . For
oneself one must not doubt that it is the way ofnature, and that one works against
nature only by not changing . There i s an
old saying, They have ears but they
hear not, they have eyes but they see not, they have a heart but feel not ; their
heart is hardened, and they have closed their ears and eyes because they do not
want to bear and do not want to see. I think that in any case you and I are honest
enough so that we need not be afraid to open our eyes and look at things as they
are and as they occur . That little old saying means
so much, expresses it
all so
exactly, that I cannot help thinking of it again and again.
This little scratch is
of peat gatherers who were eating their lunch behind a
mound of peat, with a ﬁre in the foreground ; the others are loading peat, but
I am afraid the scratches are absolutely indecipherable .
These are two evening effects ; I am still working on that weed burner
, which
is better than before in a painted study,
so that
i t renders more strongly the
immensity of the plain and the gathering twilight, the ﬁre with a bit
of smoke
being the only spot of light . I went ag ain and again to look at it in the evening ,
and I found this cottage on a muddy evening after the rain ; seen on the spot,
it is splendid
I repeat, I think that there are things for me to learn in Paris as well as here
on the moor ; in the city , I should have an opportunity to learn from other people
and to see what they are doing, and that is worth something ; but working here,
I think I can make progress even without seeing other painters . And for my
own pleasure I would much rather stay here . But if a change in your position
made it desirable for me to g o to you, perhaps to earn something in the same
business , it i s all right, an d I haven
’t the slightest objection .
Be sure to write me about all these things , which of course I shall not mention
to anybody else . If my affairs might change somewhat for the better, if I could
count on C . M .
’
s buying my studies for instance, then the best thing for me would
be to stay here, as it i s cheaper here ; and after I had made some more progress ,
and if you decided to become a painter, it would be an excellent place for study
here— excellent .
Has C . M . been to see you already ? Once more, keep good courage, I will try
to do the same ; and if you ever decide to become a painter, do so with inner
cheerfulness
and
all possible optimism . Then, taking a broad vi ew of things ,
1 72


Oh, I said I should give Tom, Dick and Harry their due— by all means— let
’
s
do ; but having done justice to those things , aren
’t they absurd, those formalities
and conventions— in fact, aren
’t they really bad?
In order to maintain a certain rank, one i s obliged to commit certain villainies,
falsehoods— willingly and knowingly, premeditatedly. That
’s what I call the
fatal side, even of the rayon noir, let alone when there is no rayon at all .
Now take, for instance, the painters of Barbizon : not only do I understand
them as men, but in my opinion
every tbing — the smallest, the most intimate
details— sparkles with humor and life . The
“painter
’s family life,
” with its great
and small miseries, with its calamities, its sorrows and griefs, has the
advan
tage of having a certain good will, a certain sincerity, a certain real human
feeling . Just because of that not maintaining a certain standing, not even thinking
about it .
If you take
amusera
” in the highly serious sense of thinking it interesting,
then I say , it will amuse you .
And as to the safe position, there i s
embétera,
”
“abrutira
[(will) stupefy]
.
Do I
say this because I despise culture ? On the contrary, I say it because
I look upon the real human feelings , life in harmony with, not against, nature,
as the true civilization, which I respect as such . I ask, What will make me more
completely human ?
Zola says,
“Moi artiste, je veux vivre tout haut— veux vivre [I, as an artist, want
to live as vigorously as possible— (I) want to live] , without mental reservation
nai ve as a chi ld, no, not as a child, as
an artist
—with good will , however life
presents itself, I shall ﬁnd something in it, I will try my best on it . Now
‘look at all
those studied little mannerisms , all that convention, how exceedingly conceited
it really i s, how absurd, a man thi nking he knows everything and that things go
according to hi s idea, as if there were not in all things of life a
“je me sais quoi
”
of great goodness, and
also
an element of evil, which we feel to be inﬁnitely
above us, inﬁnitely greater, inﬁnitely mightier than w e are .
How fundamentally wrong is the man who doesn
’t feel himself small , who
doesn
’t realize he is but an atom .
Is it a loss to drop some notions , impressed on us in childhood, that maintaining
a certain rank
or certain conventions i s the most important thing
I myself
do not even think about whether I lose by it or not . I know only by experience
that those conventions and ideas do not hold true, and often are hopelessly,
fatally wrong . I come to the conclusion that I do not know anything, but at
the same time that this life i s such a mystery that the system of
“conventionality
”
i s certainly too narrow . So that it has lost its credit with me .
What shall I do now ? The common phrase i s,
What i s your
aim, what are
your aspirations ?” Oh, I shall do as I think best
—how
I can
’t say that before
hand— you who ask me that pretentious question, do you know whaty our aim is,
whaty our intentions are ?
Now they tell me,
“Y ou are unprincipled when you have no aim, no aspirations .
My answer is, I didn
’t tell you I had no aim, no aspirations, I said it is the height
of conceit to try to force one to deﬁne what is indeﬁnable . These are my thoughts

about certain
vital questions . All that arguing about it is one
of the things of
which I say
“
embétera .
”
Live— do something— that i s more amusing, that is more positive . In short
one fnust of course give Society its due, but at the same time feel absolutely free,
believing not in one
’s own judgment, but in
“reason
” (my judgment i s human,
reason i s divine, but there is a link between the
one and the other), and that
my own conscience i s the compass which shows me the way, although I know
that it does not work quite accurately .
I should like to refer to the fact that, whenever I recall the past generation
of painters, I remember an expression of yours ,
“they were
surprising ly gay .
”
What I want to
say i s that, if y ou become a painter, you should do it with this
same rarpririﬂg gaiety . You will need this to offset the gloomy circumstances . It
will be a greater help to you than anything else . What you want is a spark of
genius ; I know no other word for it, but what I mean is the exact opposite of
being ponderous,
” as people call it . Please don
’t tell me that neither you nor
I could have this . I
say this because I am of the opinion that we must do our
best to become like that I do not claim that either I myself or you have sufﬁciently
captured it— but what I say is, Let
’s do our best to get it . And I say this to show
you— writing these things down, although I think you will be able to understand
what i s in my mind anyway— that you are not mistaken in my ideas . I believe
the whole plan would be enhanced immeasurably if your remaining with the
woman you are with now were combined with it .
And if it is in your nature as well as hers to feel even a certain pleasure— a
surprising gaiety— in the face of circumstances— a je ne sais quoi of surprising
y ouilifu/ﬂem— and I do
not count this among the impossibilities , for you said
she i s intelligent— well then, you will be able to do more together than alone .
And in this case, if persons
of the same sentiment, persons who have the same
pretty serious misery, combine to see things through, what I say i s, the more the
merrier .
And what I say is— ifthis had come about or should come about, this combining
to carve your own way in the world means inﬁnitely more than any standing on
form, an d rises above all gossip, all qu
’en dira-t-on .
I know
all these things have a perilous money side, but what I
say i s, let
’
s
weaken this perilous money side as much as possible, in the ﬁrst place by not
being under its sway too long, an d then by feeling that if one will only set about
things with love, with a certain understanding
of each other
and
c o-operation
and mutual helpfulness, many things which would otherwise be insupportable
would be softened— yes, even totally changed .
As for me, if I could ﬁnd some people whom I could talk to about art, who
felt for it and wanted to feel for it— I should gain an enormous advantage in my
work— I should feel more myself, be more myself. If there i s enough money to
keep us going in the very ﬁrst period, by the time it i s gone I shall be earning
money . The more I think it over, the more it appears to me in the way I felt it
in the beginning .
Your heart i s partly with the ﬁrm of Goupil
Co . , but in their presumption
I 7

G .
Co . demand unreasonable things . In the ﬁrst place, they are doing you a
great wrong, which causes you much grief. This is not only a question of money,
your heart is in it, for you it means heartache . Y ou would start on a new career
with the same heartache, and possibly with a similar result . Look, i s this possible ?
What I
say i s, I doubt it .
It seems to me that you, who are very young, do not act recklessly when you
argue, I have had enough of the art-dealing business but not of art ; I
’ll drop
the business, and aim at the very heart of the profession .
That i s what I ought to have done at the time . My making a mistake was
perhaps a nat ural error of judgment, because then I did not know anything about
teaching or about the Church— did not know anything about it, and cherished
ideals about it .
You will say , Doesn
’t one sometimes have ideals about art that are incompatible
with existing conditions ?
Well, answer that question for yourself. I also answer it for myself by asking,
Is Barbizon, i s the Dutch school of painters a fact or not ?
Whatever may be said of the art world, it is not rotten . On the contrary, it has
improved and improved, and perhaps the summit has already been reached ; but
at all events we are still quite near it, and as long as you and I live, though we
might reach the age of a hundred, there will be a certain real vitality . So he who
wants to paint— must put his shoulder to the wheel . If the woman came, of
course she would have to paint too .
Everybody would have to paint here— the wife of one of the Van Eycks also
had to do it . And I tell you that the people don
’t seem disagreeable or\intrig ui ng
.
There is a kind of benevolence in thi s place, and I think you can do exactly what
you think best . There is a suprisingly youthful atmosphere in existence here .
One should begin by saying with
all possible courage, gaiety, enthusiasm, I
know none of us can do a thing, but for
all that, we are painters . Our waﬂfiﬂg
in itself means
action. Thi s i s what I believe should be the main idea . We are
alive— if we do not work
“comme plusieurs negres,
we shall di e of want, and
we shall cut a most ridiculous ﬁgure . However, we happen to abhor this mightily
— because ofthat same thing which I call surprising youthfulness— and in addition,
a seriousness that i s damned serious .
That
y mettre sa peau .
Well, if this were mere speculation,
-I should not want to think of it— but in
this case it means a ﬁght to free ourselves from the world of conventions and
speculation . It is something good, something peaceful , an honest enterprise . Most
certainly it will be our intention to try to earn our bread, but only in the literal
sense of the word . Money, as far as it is not used for the absolute necessaries of
life, leaves us cold . We shall do nothing we need be ashamed of ; with what
Carlyle calls
“quite a royal feeling,
” we shall be able to roam about in nature
freely, an d to work— we shall be able to work, because we are honest. We shall
say , When we were children we made a mistake, or rather, We had to obey, and
do certai n things to earn our bread . Later such and such things happened, and
then we thought it advisable to turn handicraftsmen . Because certain things were
1 76


that is in you, and have a more peaceful life altogether. Neither of us would be
alone, our work would merge . In the beginning we should have to live through
anxious moments , we should have to prepare ourselves for them, and take
measures to overcome them ; we should not be able to go back, we should not
look back nor be able to look back ; on the contrary, we should force ourselves
to look ahead . But it
’
s in this period that we shall be far removed from all our
friends and acquaintances , we shall ﬁght this ﬁght without anybody seeing us,
and this will be the best thing that can happen, for then nobody will hinder us .
We shall look forward to victory— we feel it in our very bones . We shall be so
busy working that we shall be absolutely unable to think
of anything else but
our work .
I don
’t suppose I
’m telling you anything at all new, I only ask, Don
’t thwart
your own best thoughts . Think that idea over with a certain good-humored
optimism instead of looking at things gloomily and pessimistically. I see that
even Millet, just because he was so serious, couldn
’t help keeping good courage .
Thi s i s something peculiar, not to
all styles of painting, but to Millet, Israels ,
Breton, Boughton, H erkomer and others .
Those who seek real simplicity are themselves
so simple, and their view of
life is so full of willingness and courage, even in hard times .
Think these things over, write me about them . It must be
une
revolution
qui est, puisqu
’il faut qu
’elle soit
” [a revolution that i s, because it must be]
.
With a handshake,
Yours sincerely, Vincent
3 3 7
Dear brother,
Drenthe, September-November 1 8 83
I cannot count the grains in a sack
of corn just by smelling it— I cannot look
through the planks
of the barn door— but sometimes I can see by the lumps
whether it i s a sack of potatoes
or of corn, or, though the barn door be closed,
I can tell when the pig i s killed from the squealing .
Only in this way can I and will I judge the circumstances in which you ﬁnd
yourself just now, from the indications I have, however vague they may be, and
it is not a prophecy I am making .
But now to the point IJust consider coolly whether you are not faced by what
they call fatality on the battleﬁeld . Just consider the faces of your friends, your
sham friends and your enemies, just consider the je ne sais quoi s— just consider
whether a certain void is not developing around you, so that you are losing your
hold on things, or at any rate so that it i s less easy for you to put through business
deals . In short, consider whether this fatality is in your favor or decidedly against
you .
Tell me this one thing, am I mistaken when I conclude from some symptoms
that there i s a question of one of those malignant crises which at times arise in
large businesses in the big cities ? Do things have a desperate aspect ? Do you
feel this cannot be redressed ? Or do you feel redress is possible, and that therefore
this crisis is no reason to change your position ?
1 78

Unless you write me,
No, it is not so bad as that,
I personally think matters
have a rather desperate aspect .
Think it over cool-headedly— I know you have your composure, your presence
of mind, I know you try to analyze things, and for this reason I should like to
know if you yourself see something which Ifear i s there .
Y ou know, boy— as long
as the position was tolerable— as long as business
was possible, I have never dared to advise you openly, Give it up, especially out
of respect for your position, which you kept, not for your own pleasure, but for
the welfare of us all .
But your former duties, which, moreover, you have taken on yourself of your
own free will , cease to be duties when business conditions become such that to
continue would not only be a hopeless struggle, but at the same time would
inevitably bring about your own ruin .
In short, there are limits , and my intuition tells me you have almost reached
that point .
Look here— as regards now or never— making oneself scarce or disappearing,
neither you nor I should ever do that, no more than commit suicide .
I too have my moments of deep melancholy, but I
say again, both you and
I ought to regard the idea of disappearing or making oneself scarce as becoming
neither you nor me .
And notwithstanding
all, one should take the risk
of going on, even when
one feels that it i s imporrible, of going on with the desperate feeling that it will
end in disappearance— but
on the other hand, in our consciences there i s that
“beware1l I
”
Should I be mistaken— should my presentiment be at variance with the facts ,
about which I
ask you the question, Have they a decidedly desperate aspect or
not
-very well, then I am willing to believe your simple assurance, I expect
things to come out right, or some such words , a; more ary oa write me i bai
.
In the event of your being faced with a fait accompli in one of those venomous
crises such as Paris and London produce— if this i s so deﬁnitely to be expected
that you feel it i s a power that would crush you if they should try to force the
worst to happen by resorting to a maneuver of opposition— well , under these
circumstances leave the sinking ship, and concentrate your mind and energy,
not on clinging to your present position, but on creating something wholly new .
For a long time your a
’
az
‘y has seemed too complicated to me ; your duty ought
to be something simple, and your present duty would grow more and more
involved and doubtful , leaving the question of whether I think it i s really and
truly your duty out of it . By starting to paint, you will ﬁnd a very clear duty and
a very simple, straight path for your feet.
My idea i s that going on in your present sit uation would prove to be not only
more and more unbearable, but also less and less proﬁtable . I do not
say thi s
only as far as Goupil
Co . i s concerned, but also in general with regard toy ou
as a dealer . I do not say that you and I will get rich together, but in an y case we
shall be able to preserve our aplomb and our balance, although— I cannot deny
this— we shall have a very hard time of it during the ﬁrst few years .

But I see not the unfavorable but thefavorable fatality hovering over our painting
enterprise, but you would crush not only yourself but me too, I am afraid, by
carrying through something which in my opinion goes utterly against the grain .
In the ﬁrst place we shall not be able to assist each other, and we shall be too
much cast upon ourselves, and in the second place we shall make each other
waver by working in diametrically opposite directions, so that notwithstanding
our friendship, at times we shall have to turn our backs on each other .
Well , my dear fellow, to me painting i s too logical, too reasonable, too straight
forward to allow me personally ever to change my course . Besides, you yourself
helped me realize the idea of a handi craft, and I know that basically it i s your
idea too, so I think we ought to c o
-operate from now on .
My reason, my cons cience, compel me to tell you what i s partially your own
View too ; there i s nothing to fall back on but a raa
’ieal renewal .
I know that my words will be in strange contrast to those of others you might
consult, who want to pass the matter off with,
“It will come out all right,
” “The
desired changes will occur .
” I do
not wish to ﬂatter you,
all right, I do
not
ﬂatter . A s to rousing your courage, yes, I dare to, I dare rouse the very highest
courage and serenity in y ou, but only as regards painting ; an d about Paris , I can
only say this , Look well , and see iffate i s not against you on that battleﬁeld .
As far as I can see, going on in Paris , even if y ou were able to stick it out for
many years , will not grant y ou peace, and there would not be so much opport uni ty
for being as useful to others as if you were a painter .
I see that Paris will put you into what I would call a crooked position in regard
to y our own a
’
aly
. Leaving your being useful to others out of it for the moment,
seeing that I do not know if in ibe long
ran I myself should remain truly ﬁrm,
because you are directing the simpler minds
of others toward Paris , a thought
which will disturb exactly ibere people because they
inig bt be intoxicated by it .
Understand clearly what I
say : Until now everything has had its reason, but
now the signs of the times suggest a change of direction, as I
see it, in a way
quite different from and far more decisive than anything in the past .
There is no question of slackening or giving in here ; on the contrary, in this
there i s an attacking the calamity at the core : the same energetic principle as
that of sowing superior plants in better soil .
The calamity leaves us our
old courage and our
old earnest energy . Let the
world say venomously what it cannot refrain from saying
it will leave you an d
me cold . On the contrary, we are counting on the possibili ty of a hard life which
will have a purpose other thanearning as much money as possible .
Our purpose i s in the ﬁrst place self-reform by means of a handicraft and of
intercourse with nature, believing as we do that thi s is our ﬁrst duty in order to
be honest with others and to be consistent—
our aim i s walking with G od— the
opposite of living in the midst of the doings of the big cities .
We shall not harm anybody by this .
Though some people may think it hypocritical to say so, our belief i s that
G od will help those who help themselves , as long as they turn their energy and
attention in this direction, and set to work to ibir ena
’
.


What is before you is something terrible, something
awful
— those things
are so inexpressible that I can ﬁnd no words for them ; and if I were not your
brother and your friend, who considers being silent ungrateful as well as in
human, I should
say nothing . But seeing that you say, First, inspire me with
courage, and second, do not ﬂatter me, I
say now, Look, I
see all these things
here on the silent moor, where I feel G od high above you and me . With a warm
handshake,
Yours sincerely, Vincent
3 3 8
Theo,
Drenthe, September-November
1 8 8 5
Some time ag o you wrote me about a certain difference i n our respective phy siog
nomies . All right . And your conclusion was that I was more of a thinker . What
c an I say to that ? I do feel in myself a faculty for thinking, but that faculty i s
not what I feel specially organized in me . I think myself to be something other
than specially a thinker . When I think of you, I see very characteristic ac tion,
that is well and good, but also most decidedly not isolated but on the contrary
accompanied by so much sentiment, and real tboag bt too, that for me the conclusion
is that there is more resemblance than difference between you and me . I do
nOt
say there i s no difference— but having learned to know you better of
late, the difference seems smaller to me than I used to think sometimes in former
years .
When I consider our temperament and type of physiognomy, I ﬁnd similarity,
and a very pronounced resemblance between, for instance, the Puri tans and
ourselves besides . I mean the people in Cromwell
’s time
or thereabouts , the
little group
of men and women who sailed from the Old World to America in
the Mayﬂower, and settled there, ﬁrmly resolved to live simple lives .
Times are different— they cut down forests— we would turn to painting . I know
that the initiative taken by a small group, called in history The Pilgrim Fathers,
however small in itself, had great consequences ; and as to ourselves , I think
that in the ﬁrst place we should phi losophize but little about great consequences ,
and only try to ﬁnd a path for ourselves to travel through life as
straig htfor
wardly as possible . To meditate on consequences is not our way,
neitber y our:
nor mine.
If I mention The Pilgrim Fathers, it is because of the physiognomy, to show
you that certain reddish-haired people with square foreheads are neither only
thinkers nor only men of action, but usually combine both elements . In one of
Boug hton
’
s pictures I know a little ﬁgure of one of those Puritans, for which
I should think y ou had posed if I didn
’t know better . It i s exactly, exactly the
same physiognomy—
a small silhouette
on a rock against a background
of sea
and fog ; I
can show you myself also, that i s to
say , that variation of the same
physiognomy, but my proﬁle i s less characteristic .
Father used to ponder over the story of Jacob and Esau with regard to you and
me
—not quite wrongly— but fortunately there is less discord, to mention only
one point
of difference, and in the Bible itself there are plenty
of examples
of

better relations between brothers than existed between the venerable patriarchs
mentioned above .
I myself have sometimes thought about that being a thinker, but more and
more it becomes clear to me that it was
not my vocation, and because of the
unfortunate prejudice that a man who feels the need to think things over is not
practical, and belongs only among the dreamers, because this prejudice i s greatly
respected in Society, I often met with rebuffs because I didn
’t keep things to
myself enough .
But since then that very hi story of the Puritans, and the history of Cromwell ,
as for instance Carlyle gives it, made me
see that thinking and acting do not
exclude each other, and that the sharp dividing lines which are drawn nowadays
between thinking
and acting— as if the
one excluded the other— do not really
exist . As to doubting whether one i s an artist or not— that question i s too much
of an abstraction .
I confess , however, that I don
’t object to thinking
it over, provided I can
draw and paint at the same time .
And my
aim in 772]
life i s to make pictures and drawings , as many and as well
as I can ; then, at the end
of my life, I hope to pass away, looking back with
love and tender regret, and thinking,
Oh, the pictures I might have made !
But this does not exclude making what is possible, mind you . Do you object to
this, either for me or for yourself ?
I wish painting would become such a ﬁxed idea in your mind that the problem
of Am I an artist or am I not ?
” would be placed in the category of abstractions ,
and the more practical questions of how to put together a ﬁgure or a landscape,
being more amusing, would come to the fore .
Theo, I declare I prefer to think how arms, legs, head are attached to the
trunk, rather than whether I myself am more or less an artist or not .
I suppose that you prefer thinking of a sky with g ray clouds , and their silver
lining above a muddy ﬁeld, to being engrossed in the question of your
own
personality . Oh, for all that, I know sometimes the mind i s full of it , which is
only natural . But look here, brother, even if our mind i s now and then full of
the problem,
“I:
tbere a God or i:
tbere not?
” it i s no reason for us to commit an
ungodly act intentionally.
In the same way, in the matter ofart, the problem, Am I an artist or am I not ?”
must not induce us not to draw or not to paint . Many things defy deﬁnition, and
I consider it wrong to fritter one
’s time away on them . Certainly when one
’s
work does not go smoothly and one is checked by difficulties, one gets bogged
in the morass
of such thoughts
an d insoluble problems . And because one feels
sorely troubled by it, the best thing to do is to conquer the cause of the distraction
by acquiring a new insight into the practical part of the work .
Now I , for my part, seeing both in you and in myself something of the Puritan
character, which
so
unites thinking and acting and i s
so far removed from
wanting to be only a thinker or only a machine, which needs principles of sim
plicity a: well a:
of sensible work, I do not admit a difference or divergence, much
less a contrast between y ou and me .

In my opinion, it would be an error of judgment ifyou continued doingbusiness
in Paris .
So the conclusion is both brothers painters .
Whether it ﬁts your character
It might well be that you are ﬁghting hard
and futilely
ag ainst your character, frustrating your own liberation just because
you doubt whether you can do it .
Alas , I know all about this from experience . After all— however much we may
be our own enemies— I am beginning to realize more
and more that l
’homme
s
’
ag ite, Dieu le mene, that man proposes and God disposes . Above our doing the
right thing and doing the wrong thing there i s an inﬁnitely powerful force . The
same is true of your circumstances— act wisely in them— perhaps wisely enough
to become a painter, to cut matters short . In the depth of my heart I should be
so greatly reassured if I saw you taking up the paintbrush that I should consider
the calamity and the shipwreck
of the moment of less
importance than the
certainty of a future in a direction you would never regret .
But I wish that at the same time you may ﬁnd rest for your heart in the matter
of women . If thi s were possible, you would be even strong er, as being loved gives
one certain wings , a certain surprising courage and energy . Then one i s more of
a oornplete man than otherwise . And the more one i s this , the better .
At all events , I count it among the possibilities that you yourself may become
conscious that painting i s your vocation, and then,
clear brother, Puritan
“sans
le savoir
” [without knowing it] , it might be that your days in Paris werenumbered,
that an
old world closed itself to you, in a rather ungenerous way— but that at
the same time a new world opened itself to you .
Well, think it over, a long or a short time . But it would be of little use if you
said, Vincent, keep silent about it ; for to that my answer i s : Theo, it will not
keep silent withinj oarrelf
.
On le contient plus malaisément
Que la source des grands fleuves .
[It i s more difficult to repress
Than the source of great rivers ]
Theo, I have heard from the poor woman a few times ;
she seems to be doing
her best, working, washing for people, going out as a charwoman . Her writing i s
almost indecipherable and incoherent,
she seems
to regret some things in
the
past . The children are well and happy
.
My pity and affection for herare certainly not dead, and I hope that a bond
of affection may remain between us , though I do not
see the possibility or the
good of living together again— pity may not be love, but for all that it can be
rooted deeply enough .
Well, brother, to change the subject, it i s snowing here today, in the form of
enormous hailstones . I call it snow because of the effect .
I don
’t speak about the beauty of the scenery here because I shoul d have to
say too inaob about it to you . As to the work, I am almost too preoccupied with
the idea that you should take it up too, which quite absorbs me . I wish it were
1 84


With a sky over it of a delicate lilac-white, which gives an effect— I don
’t think
it can be painted, but which i s for me the keynote that one must know in order
to understand the keynotes of other effects .
A black patch of earth— ﬂat— inﬁni te—a clear sky
of delicate lilac-white . The
young corn sprouts from that earth , it i s almost moldy-looking with that corn .
That
’s what the good fertile parts of Drenthe are basically ; the whole in a hazy
atmosphere . Think of Brion
’
:
“Le dernier jour de la c reation
”
; yesterday it seemed
to me that I understood the meaning of that picture .
The poor soil of Drenthe i s just the same— but the black earth is even blacker
still— like soot— not lilac-black like the furrows, and drearily covered with ever
rotting heather and peat. I
see that everywhere, the incidentals on the inﬁnite
background : on the moors , the peat sheds
in the fertile parts, the very primi tive
gigantic structures
of farms and sheepfolds , with low, very low little walls
and
enormous mossy roofs . Oak trees all around them .
When one has walked through that country for hours and hours, one feels
that there is really nothing but that inﬁnite earth— that green mold of corn or
heather, that inﬁnite sky
. Horses and men seem no larger than ﬂeas . One i s not
aware
of anything, be it ever
so large in itself ; one only knows that there is
earth and
sky
. However, in one
’s quality
of a little speck noticing other little
specks— leaving the inﬁnite apart— one ﬁnds every little speck t o be a Millet .
I passed a little old church exactly, exactly
“The Church at Greville
” in Millet
’s
little picture in the Luxembourg ; instead of the little peasant with his spade in
that picture, there was here a shepherd with a ﬂock of sheep walking along the
hedge . There was not a glimpse of the true sea in the backg roundfbut only of
the sea of y oung corn, the sea of furrows instead of the sea of waves .
The effect produced was the same . Then I saw plowers , very busy— a sandcart,
a shepherd, road menders , dung c arts . In a little roadside inn I drew an
old
woman at the spinning wheel, a dark little silhouette out of a fairy tale— a dark
little silhouette against a light window, through which
one saw the clear
sky,
and a small path through the delicate green, and a few geese pecking at grass .
And then when twilight fell— imagine the quiet, the peace of it all ! Imagine
then a little avenue of high poplars with autumn leaves , imagine a wide muddy
road, all black mud, with an inﬁnite heath to the right and an endless heath to the
left, a few black triangular silhouettes of sod-built huts ,through the little windows
of which shines the red light of the little ﬁre, with a few pools of dirty yellowish
water that reﬂect the sky , andu
‘in which trunks lie rotting ; imagine that swamp
in the evening twilight, with a white
sky over it, everywhere the contrast
of
black and white . And in that swamp a rough ﬁg ure— the shepherd— a heap
of
oval masses, half wool, half mud, jostling each other, pushing each other— the
ﬂock . Y ou see them coming— you ﬁnd yourself in the midst of them— you turn
around and follow them . Slowly and reluctantly they trudge
along the muddy
road . However, the farm looms in the distance—a few mossy roofs and piles of
straw and peat between the poplars .
The sheepfold is again like the
silhouette
of a triangle— dark . The door is
wide open like the entrance to a dark cave . Through the chinks of the boards
1 86

b ehind it gleams the light of the sky
. The whole caravan of masses of wool and
mud disappear into that cave— the shepherd and a woman with a lantern shut
the doors behind them .
That coming home of the ﬂock in the twilight was the ﬁnale of the symphony
I heard yesterday .
That day passed like a dream, all day I was so absorbed in that poignant music
that I literally forgot even food an d drink— I had taken a piece of brown bread
and a c
f
iﬁ
of coffee in the little inn where I drew the spinning wheel . The day
w as over, and from dawn till twilight, or rather from one night till the other,
I had lost myself in that symphony.
I came home, and sitting by the ﬁre, I felt I was hungry, yes , very hungry.
But now you see how it i s here . One i s feeling exactly as if one had been to an
exhibition of the Cent chef-d
’
oeuvres, for instance ; what does
one bring home
from such a day? Only a number of rough sketches . Yet there is another thing
o ne brings home—
a calm ardor for work .
Do write soon, today it i s Friday, but your letter has not yet arrived ; I am
longing to get it . It also takes some time to get it changed, as I have to go to
Hoogeveen for it, and then return here . We do not know how things will g o,
otherwise I should
say,
now the simplest thing would be perhaps to send the
money once a month . At all events, write soon . With a handshake,
Yours Sincerely, Vincent
3 45
Dear Theo,
Nuenen, 5
- 5 December 4 8 83
I was lying awake half the night, Theo, after I wrote you last night .
I am sick at heart about the fact that, coming back after two years
’ absence,
the welcome home was kind and cordial in every respect, but basically there has
been no change whatever, not the slightest, in what I must call the most extreme
blindness and ignorance as to the insight into our mutual position . And I again
feel ahn ost unbearably disturbed and perplexed .
The fact i s that things were going extremely well
until the moment when
Father— not just in the heat
of passion, but
also because he was
“tired
of it”
— bani shed me from the house . It ought to have been understood then that this
w as supremely important to my success
or failure— that things were made ten
times more difﬁcult for me by thi s— almost insupportable .
If I had not had the same feeling at the time which I now have again, namely
that notwithstanding
all good intentions, notwithstanding
all the kindness
of
the reception, notwithstanding anything you like, there is a certain hardness in
Father, like iron, an i cy coldness— something that gives the impression of dry
sand or glass or tinplate— for all hi s outward gentleness— if, as I said, I had not
had this feeling already, I should not have resented it so much .
[Written in the margin] I am not
so much interested in a kind
or an unkind
reception— it grieves me that they do not regret what they di d at the time .
Now I am again in an almost unbearable state of wavering and inner struggle .
1 87

You understand that I should not write as I do— having undertaken the
journey hither
of my own free will, having been the ﬁrst to swallow my pride
- if I did not ﬁnd real obstacles in my way .
If I had now noticed some eagerness to do as the Rappards di d, with the best
results, and as we began here with good results too— if I had noticed that Father
had also realized that he ought not to have shut hi s house to me, then I should
have felt some conﬁdence in the future .
Nothing, nothing of all that .
In Father
’s mind there was not then, there i s not now, the faintest shadow of
a doubt that what he did was the right thing .
Father does not know remorse like you and me and any man who is human .
Father believes in hi s own righteousness , whereas you and I and other human
creatures are imbued with the feeling that we conrirt of errors and efforts
of the
lost souls . I commiserate with people like Father— ia my beart of beartr I cannot be
ang ry witb birn— because I think they are more unhappy than 1. Why do I thi nk
them unhappy
—because the good within them i s wrongly applied, so that it
acts like evil— because the lnt within them i s black and spreads darkness ,
obscurity around them .
Their cordial reception grieves me— their indalg ence without acknowledging
their error i s, for me, perhaps worse than the error itself. Instead of a ready
understanding and a certain eager contribution to my, and indirectly their own,
well-being, I feel in everything a hesitation and delay whi ch paralyze my
own
ardor and energy like a leaden atmosphere .
My masculine intellect tells me that I must consider it an irrevocable, fatal fact
that i n the depth of our souls Father and I are irreconcilable . My compassion for
Father as well as for myself says to me,
“Irreconcilable
—
“Never
—indeﬁ
nitely , for ever and ever, there i s the possibili ty of, and one should have faith in the
possibility
of, a decisive reconciliation . But this— ah, why i s
“ it probable, alas,
that it will t urn out
“an illusion
” ?
Do you call this moroseness on my part ?
Our life i s an appalling reality, and we ourselves are inﬁnitely driven, things
are— as they are— and whether we take them more or less gloomily does not in
any way alter the nature of things . I think about it this way , for instance at night
when I lie awake, or I think about it this way in the storm on the heath, in the
evening, in the dreary twilight .
In the daytime, in ordinary life, I may sometimes look as thick-skinned as a
wild boar, and I can understand perfectly well that people think me coarse. When
I was younger I thought, much more than now, that things depended on chance,
on small things
or misunderstandings that had no reason . But getting older,
I feel it more and more differently, and see deeper motives . Life i s
“a queer
thing
” too, brother .
You see how agitated my letters are, one moment I think that it can be done,
the next, that it cannot. One thing i s clear to me,
“that things don
’t go readi ly,
that there i s no eagerness .
”
I have decided to go and see Rappard, and tell him that I myself should be
1 8 8


And then— the dog might bite— he might become rabid, and the constable
would have to come to shoot him .
Yes, all this i s very true .
On the other hand, dogs are guardians .
But that i s superﬂuous , there i s peace, and there is no question of any danger,
they say
. So I keep silent about it .
The dog i s only sorry that he di d not stay away, for it was less lonely on the
heath than in this house, notwithstanding all the kindness . The dog
’s visit was a
weakness , which I hope will be forgotten, and which he will avoid committing
in the future .
As I have had no expenses since I have been here, and as I have twice received
money from you, I have paid the journey myself, and also paid for the clothes
Father bought because mine were not good enough, and at the same time I
returned the 2 5 guilders to friend Rappard .
I think you will be glad of this , it seemed so careless .
Dear Theo, enclosed you will ﬁnd the letter I was writing when I received
yours , which I will now answer after reading what you say carefully.
I begin by saying, I think it noble of you that, thinking I bnrt Father, y ou take
hi s part, and give me a good scolding .
I appreciate thi s in you, though you are ﬁghting against one who i s neither
.
Father
’s nor your own enemy, but who most decidedly wants to submit a number
of serious problems to Father
’s and your consideration, telling you what I tell
you because I feel that way, and asking, Why is this
so
In many respects
your remarks in answer to various passages in my letter are not foreign to my
own thoughts . Your objections are partly my own objections , but they are not
conclusive . Once again I see your good will in it, and at the same time your
longing for reconciliation and peace— which for that matter I do not doubt .
But, brother, on the other hand I could raise a lot of objections to your remarks ,
only I think thi s would be tedious , and I think there i s a shorter way
. There i s
a desire for peace and reconciliation in _Father and in you and in me . And yet we
do not seem able to bring about peace .
Now , I believe that I am the stumbling block, and so I must try to ﬁnd a way
not to
“botber
” you or Father any longer . So you also think that I hurt Father
’s
feelings and that I am a
coward. Really ? Well, in the future I shall try to keep
everything to myself, I shall not visit Father again, and shall stick to my proposal
to put a stop to our arrangement about the money toward March, if you agree,
in order to keep our mutual freedom of thought, in order not to botbery oa any
longer (which I fear i s going to be your unintentional conclusion too)
. I ask for
a little time for the sake of order, and to allow myself some time to take a few
measures which, though they have very little chance of success , for conscience
’s
sake I may not put off. You must take this calmly and in kindness , brother— ir i s
not an ultimatum I am sending you . But if our feelings differ
too widely, we
must not force ourselves to avoid calling things by their names . Isn
’t that your
opinion too ?
But you know, don
’t you, that I consider you to bave raved my life. I shall never

forget that ; tbong b wepat an end to relations which I am afraid would bring us
into a false position, I am not only your brother, your friend, but at the same
time, I have inﬁnite obligations of gratitude to you for the fact that you lent me a
helping hand at the time, and have continued to help me . Money can be repaid,
not kindness such as yours .
Let me g o my own way
— it is a di sappointment to me that there has not been
a thorough reconciliation now ; I wish it could happen still , but y ou people do
not understand me, and I am afrai d y ou never will .
Send me the usual amount by return of mai l if possible, then I need not ask
Father for anything when I g o away, which I must do as soon as possible . I gave
all
the
guilders
of December
1
to Father, for
14 g uilders borrowed, and
shoes and trousers .
I gave all the 2 5 guilders of December
1 0 to Rappard .
I have just a quarter an d a few cents in my pocket . That i s the account, whi ch
you will understand, if y ou know besides that I paid my expenses in Drenthe for
a long time
out of the money of November
2 0, which arrived December
1 ,
because there had been some delay then that was set right later, and that I paid
for my journey, etc . , out of the
14 g uilders (which I borrowed from Father and
have since given back)
.
I shall go from here to Rappard .
And from Rappard, perhaps to Mauve .
So my intention i s to try to arrange everything in calmness and order.
There is much in my frankly stated opinion about Father which I cannot take
back under the circumstances . I appreciate your objections, but many of them
I cannot consider conclusive ; of others I have already thought myself, though
what I have written I have written . I expressed my feelings in strong terms, and
it stands to reason that they are modiﬁed by the appreciation
of much that i s
good in Father— of course this modiﬁcation i s considerable .
Permit me to tell you that I di d not know a man of thirty was a boy , especially
not if he has gone through more experiences than most during those thirty years .
But if you like— consider my words the words
of a boy . I am not responsible
for your interpretation of my words , am I
That i s your own business .
Also as to Father— I shall venture not to take to heart what he thinks of me,
as soon as we part .
It may be politic to be silent about one
’s feelings— but on the other hand it
has always appeared
to me that serenity i s a duty, parti cularly for a painter .
Whether they understand me or not, whether I am judged rightly or wrongly,
leaves me unchanged, as you once pointed out to me yourself.
And brother, even if there i s a separation or whatever else, I am your friend
perhaps inacb rnore tbany on know or g ueu
. With a handshake,
Yours sincerely, Vincent
In any case I am neither Father
’s enemy nor yours, and I never shall be .

3 47
Dear Theo,
Nuenen,
1 6 December
1 8 83
Mauve once said to me,
You will ﬁnd yourself if you go
on painting, if you
penetrate more deeply into art than y ou have up to
now
”
; he said that two
years ago .
Of late I often think about these words of hi s.
I have found myself— I am that dog .
This idea may be a little exag g
a erated— reality may be less pronounced in its
contrasts , less starkly dramatic, but I believe the rough character outline i s true
after all
. The shaggy shepherd dog which I tried to describe to you in yesterday
’s
letter i s my character, and the life of that animal i s my life, that i s to say , omitting
the details and only stating the essentials .
This may seem exaggerated to you— but I will not take it back . Without being
personal, just for the sake of an impartial character st udy, as if I did not speak
about y ou and me but about strangers, for the sake of analysis , I point out to
you once more how it was last summer . I see two brothers walking about in
The Hague (roe tbein a:
.rtrang err, do not think of yourself and me)
.
One says ,
“I must maintain a certain standing , I must stay in business , I don
’t
think I shall become a painter.
”
The other says ,
“I am getting to be like a dog, I feel that the future will prob
ably make me more ugly and rough, and I foresee that
‘a certain p overty
’ will be
my fate, but, but I
.rball be a painter .
S o the one—
a certain standing as an art dealer .
The other— poverty and painter .
And I see those same brothers in former years , when you had just entered the
world of pictures , when you just began to read, etc . , etc .— I see them near
the mill at Rij swijk or, for instance, on a walk to Chaam in winter across the
snowy heath early in the morning !
Feeling ,
tbinéing and
believing
so exactly
alike that I
ask myself, Are those the
The question is, How will
things turn out— will they separate forever, or will they forever follow the same
path
I tell you, I consciously choose tbe dog
’
s patb tbroag b life; I will remain a dog ,
I shall be poor, I shall be a painter, I want to remain barnan— going into nature . In
my opinion the man who goes oat of nature, whose head i s always stuffed with
thoughts of maintaining this and maintaining that, even if this causes him to go
out of nature to such an extent that he cannot but acknowledge it— oh— in this
way one i s apt to arrive at a point where one
c an no longer distinguish white
from black— and— and one becomes the exact opposite of what one i s considered
and of what one thinks oneself to be . For instance—
at present you have a manly
fear of medi ocrity in the unfavorable sense of the word— why then are you going
to kill, to extinguish, what i s best in your soul ? Then, aye, in tbat care your fear
might come true . How does
one become medi ocre
By compromising and
making concessions, today in this matter, tomorrow in another, according to the
dictates of the world— by never contradicting the world, and by always following
public opini on l Please do not misunderstand me— ou the contrary, I mean to say
1 9 2


thinking matters
out appear to me . This i s the core of the problem— Father
does not feel there is anything to be reconciled about, anything that ought
to be redressed— all right— leave him to hi s
“other things .
” Father says ,
“But
we have always been good to you,
and I say , Really ? Are y ou contented
I am not .
Something better than the time of the Rijsw1jk mill— namely the same thing
for ever and ever : two poor brothers— artists— absorbed in the same feeling for
the same nature— will it ever end in this
The secure social position, the secure
wealth, will they be victorious ? Oh, let them be victorious— but let it only be
for a time, which will surely lead you to disappointment in
ﬂ
them ; this is what
I expect will happen before y ou are thirty years
old . And if not— well, if not,
then— then— then— J o rnncb tbe worse.
With a handshake,
Yours sincerely, Vincent
[Enclosed in thi s letter] Dear brother, these are certainly ticklish questions to
discuss, but do not take offense at my being unable to ﬁnd better words for what
i s in my mind, and look upon my attempts to speak to you conﬁdentially
an d
unreservedly as a brother toward a brother, as a friend toward a friend .
Theo, in the past I often quarreledwith Father, because Father said dictatorially
It i s like this ,
” and I told him,
“Pa, you are contradicting yourself, what y ou
say militates absolutely against what you vaguely feel at your heart
’s core, even
if you do not want to feel it .
Theo, I
stopped quarreling with Father wholly
and completely long ago, because it i s now clear to me that Fathef
‘ has never
reﬂected upon certain very important things, and never will reﬂect upon them,
and that he clings to a system and does not reason, nor did he ever, nor will he
ever reason
on the basis
of the naked facts . There are too many who do as he
does,
so that he
always ﬁnds certain support and strength in the thought,
Everyone thinks thi s aboutit (namely primarily all the well -regulated, respectable
clergymen)
. But he has no other strength, and it i s all built on convention and a
system, otherwise it would collapse like any other vanity. Father does not wrestle
with the plain truth . But now I am of the opinion that one is one
’s own enemy if
one does not want to think things
out, if one does not say (especially in one
’s
youth) : Look here, for myself I do not want to be sustained by a system, I want
to attack things according to reason and conscience . I take less notice of my own
father, though he i s not a bad
,man, and though I do not speak about him, than
I do of people in whom I ﬁnd
J
more truth .
You see, dear brother, I feel a deep , deep, deep respect for Millet, Corot, Dau
bigny, Breton, H erkomer, Boughton, Jules Dupre, etc. , etc . , Israels— I am far
from confusing rny i elf with tbern— I do not consider myself their equal— no— yet
I say, however conceited or whatever else people may think me— for
all that
I say, Y ou will show me the way, and I am ready to follow your example rather
than Father
’s , or some schoolmaster
’s , or whoever else
’s .
I myself ﬁnd in Father and Tersteeg something
of the school
of Delaroche,
Muller, Dabuffe, and
so
on— I may think it clever, I may be silent about it,
194

I may take it at its face value, I may even have a certain respect for it— but all
thi s does not prevent my saying, The least painter or man who wrestles directly
with the naked truths of nature is more than you are .
In short, my dear fellow, neither Father nor Tersteeg has given other than a
spurious tranqui llity to my conscience, and they have not given me freedom,
nor have they ever approved of my desire for freedom and plain truth
and
of
my feeling of ignorance and darkness .
Now , left to myself, I have not attained the light or what I wanted to do yet,
never mind ; but by resolutely rejecting their systems I think I have gained a
certain hope that my exertions will not be unavailing .
And that, before I close my eyes forever, I shall see the rayon blank . However
ﬁerce the struggle in my mind may have been because of my not having found
it, I have never regretted saying that I considered the rayon noir the rayon noir,
and having deﬁnitely avoided it— except that
one should
not quarrel over it ,
and if I ever quarreled over it,it was a mistake .
Now for myself, knowing what I know, I look at y ou and ask the question,
What shall he do with it ?
” Theo, when we quarreled a little some time ago in
The Hague,
an d you said, I feel more and more drawn to Father, I told you,
Boy , this i s a difficult question, follow your
own conscience . But since then I
have tried to explain to y ou
too that for myself I cannot ﬁnd tranquilt
in
Father
’s and H . C . Tersteeg
’
s way of thinking, the latter
’s being about the same,
I think— and that I have become increasingly aware
of the fact that there is a
rayon noir and a rayon blanc and that I have found their light to be black and a
mere convention compared to the cool honesty of Millet and Corot, for instance .
Now I have been thinking
all thi s over four years longer than y ou have, as
I am four years older and calmer— in any case time and experience have induced
me to reject and avoid certain things . And I do not want to inﬂuence you, but
on the other hand I do not want to conceal myself from you, or to do otherwise
than speak openly.
I come to the following conclusion
What Father and Tersteeg tried to force on me as a dnty was the
.rpecter of a
duty . What they really said was (though not in
so many words)
“Earn money,
and your life will become straight .
” Millet says
to me : M akey oar life straigbt
(at least try to do
so and to wrestle with the naked truth) , and even earning money
can be manag ed, and in ts
‘ tooy ou will not be disbonert .
And I felt then, and I feel more and more strongly
now , that Father and
Tersteeg, and for instance C . M . and I don
’t know who else (although they
thought their intentions straight, and I do not suspect them of dishonesty— but
as
-I said, I take them at their face value— and leave them alone) , that they and
all th e inﬂuences of the past dragged me more and more
oat
of nature . N ow ,
whatever may be said of Millet, at least it was he who took me back into nature,
more than any other might have been able to do in my desperate state of mind .
My youth was gloomy and cold and sterile under the inﬂuence ofthe rayon noir .
And, brother, essentially your youth too . My dear fellow, thi s time I will not
ﬂatter you . After all, I will reproach nobody but myself with it— yet the rayon
I 9 S

noir i s unutterably cruel— unutterably
And at thi s moment I feelwithin myself
as many repressed tears as there are in a ﬁgure by M onteyne !
But, brother, my very grief over so much proves to me that I myself have
deﬁnitely done with the systems in question . I have suffered from them, but in my
heart of hearts I no longer belong to that side of life . And now I say to you, as
brother to brother and as friend to friend, Though your youth was gloomy and
frustrated, in tbe fatare let
us seek that soft light for which I know
no better
name than the white ray of light or the good .
Not looking upon ourselves as having obtained it, of course, but as seeking it,
believing in it with the foi de charbonnier . Whatever may be true of my losing
patience with Father as well as with Tersteeg, etc . , etc . , do not think of me as
being in the least inﬂuenced by hate or spitefulness toward them . I do not envy
them, in my opinion they are not happy themselves , and in my heart of hearts
I am certainly not their enemy nor do I bear them malice, neither do I look upon
them as my enemies , although it is a fact that I do
not recall their inﬂuence
with much pleasure . I do not suspect them of wicked intentions . I think they do
follow their conscience, but that it i s haunted by ghosts . An d I do not
see in
Millet
or Corot that there were ghosts haunting tbeir consciences . There I
see
greater calm and serenity
of a higher quality. Once again : I am far removed
from thi s myself. However, every study I make, every attempt in the direction
ofpainting, every new love for or struggle with nature, successful or unsuccessful ,
gets me one little unsteady step nearer . A s far as religion i s concerned, I ﬁnd less
of it in Father than in Uncle Jan, for instance, though it stands to reason that
many would say the reverse . I think Father the opposite of a man of faith. Well ,
look here, going in for painting requi res a certain foi de charbonni er because one
cannot prove at the outset that it will succeed and everyone takes a gloomy view
of it . But, Theo, though it be true that you as well as I begin with as many
repressed tears as the ﬁgures by Monteyne and Grollo, at the same time we have
a little quiet hope mixed with all our sadness . In the ﬁrst years of hard struggling
it may even be a sowing of tears , so be it, but we shall check them, and in the far
distance we may have a little quiet hope of the harvest .
With a handshake,
Yours sincerely, Vincent
Since I wrote the enclosed letter, I have again thought over your remarks, and
have again spoken with Father, My decision not to stay here was al most taken,
no matter what they might think of it, or what the consequences might be ; but
then the conversation took another turn, by my saying,
“I have been here two
weeks , and do not feel a bit more advanced than the ﬁrst half hour ; now if we
had understood each other better, we should have things arranged by now
I have no time to lose, and I must make a decision . A door must be either open
or closed . I do not understand anything between the two, an d it does not really
exist in fact .
S o the result i s that the little room at home where the mangle stands will be
at my disposal to put away my things— to use as a studio too , in case this might


My trying to get Father to take me in again, even to have a studio here, was
not done primarily out of egoism . I see in it that, though we do not understand
each other in many things , there will be, either always or by ﬁts
and starts ,
good will between you, Father and myself. As the estrangement between us ha s
already lasted so long , it can do no harm to try to put some weight on the other
side, so that in the eyes of the world w e shall not appear more divided than we
really are, so that in the eyes of the world we shall not lapse into extremes .
Rappard said to me,
“A man i s not a lump of peat, that i s to say, he cannot
bear to be ﬂung away in a loft, and to be forgotten there
” —
'
and he insisted that
he thought it a great misfortune for me not to be able to live at home . Just think
thi s over, please .
I think it has been taken rather too much for granted that I acted willft
or
recklessly, well, you know it better than I do ; whereas in reality I was forced
to some things , and could not act differently . And the very method used to
accuse me of base intentions made me very cool and rather indifferent to many
eople .
P
Brother, I repeat—
reﬂec t deeply at this time of your life, I think you will
have to verify the perspective of your life
all over again, and that tbeny oar life
will bave a better arp ect . I do not say so as if I know it, nor do you ; I say it because
I begin to see more and more how terribly difficult it i s to know where one i s
right or where one i s wrong .
3 48
Dear Theo,
Nuenen,
a o Dec ei nber
1 8 8 5
I received your letter today, and also one from friend Rappard in the same mail .
Let me begin by thanking you for the money .
And let me add at once that I appreciate it that both you and Rappard approve
of my coming here . This gave me courage at a moment when I myself w as
hopelessly di scouraged about my coming here, and bitterly regretted it, because
on my part I perceived deep in the background of all the discussions I had with
Father a je ne sais quoi of cold reticence over reconciliation, a cold evasiveness,
which made me desperate because I
saw that there would remain a cancerous
root which would later make everything as impossible as in
_the past .
But your letter and a very intelli gent, very kind, very cordial letter from friend
Rappard, and both your opinions that my journey hither might bring about
some good, have induced me not to consider the case as lost yet, but to practice
patience and wisdom .
Have patience with me, brother, and do not suspect me of ill will
.
As for me, in many respects I know Father very intimately and thoroughly,
and in the matter we are faced with it i s impossible for me to leave things as they
are . I had to get Father
’s opinion about this and that in order to compare it with
certain precedents . For instance, I directed the conversation to subjects that had
nothing to do with the matter in question, and then I got enough troubles .
Do you know, your advice
“do not speak to them about certain things
” makes
me think you refer to one particular thing ,
of which you take a correct view.

But in reality that question
of long
ag o was
of the utmost importance (at
least to me personally, I mean)— entering upon a new future with Father is once
again a hig hly important thing , which nobody can
ask me
to engage
upon,
leaving things as they are .
At the moment, particularly after the receipt of your letter, Father and I are
on the best possible terms, and Father is not even disinclined to make certain
arrangements .
Besides, I want y ou to know I quite agree with you that they mean well— I do
not
suspect them of consciously wirbing any adversity to befall me, although at
times
they bring it
on me,
or of intentionally putting obstructions in my way,
although occasionally I am thwarted by them (
“not without good intentions ,
” as
Mauve would express it)
. But Father
’s character i s highly variable and at the
same time highly obstinate
- (I know, most people do not know this)
— Father
’s
character i s dark (rayon noir, I once reminded y ou) , Father has a very narrow
minded or rather icy cold quality. I cannot express this , I can only feel it . I have
often thought thi s problem over, I have pai d a great deal of attention to Father,
I know Father from various angles , very often I have tried to come to an agree
ment with Father, yet I do not think Father g ood. I cannot declare that I think Father
straightforward or simple or clear-headed enough .
And now there i s, and there will remain, a je ne sais quoi that worries me, and
at the back of it all I am aware of the same fatal atmosphere as in the past .
I was struck by the fact, Theo, that friend Rappard
now writes that he had
perceived that during the summer of the year I stayed at Etten I changed
so
much (it was then that I met her)
. And at the same time he hints that he under
stands
.rometbing happened then, tbong b be does not know wbat . As I
see it, Father
and Mother and some others acted with very little delicacy at the time .
If you should be able to agree with me on that, Theo, I should like to say to
y ou, They show the same lack of delicacy now, and you should know something
of it .
So, although you need not attach much importance to some conversations
with Father in the beginning, by which I only attempted to discover what Father
thought of things , although all this means nothing , and at the present moment
some arrangement might be made, which in many respects would make my
work easier for me and give me the inner quiet to work, yet I
see at the outset
a je ne sais quoi , especially in Father, which ﬁlls me with anxiety, a heavy, still
anxiety about the future .
Keeping the peace with Father is a hard job . Once again I understand my
own rebellious attitude in the previ ous period . I do not say it will lead to nothing,
but I point
out— it will be diﬂi cul t . Y ou will point out to me what I know ful l
well myself, that in many respects I personally am very difficult to deal with .
Y es, that i s true, and I must take it into account, too . There i s an excuse for me,
and that i s the passion and the frequent absorption whi ch everyone who paints ,
writes, or composes must needs have .
Does the same apply to Father ? No— it is something else . If you should
say , But Father i s
al so a thinker and a writer— then I answer, I wish he were

this in another w ay , for now I cannot call him happy . I say this more sadly
than you may think ; what I say is serious . Is it impossible for you to enter into my
feelings
I wrote you my last letter in a moment
’s desperation, of which the real purport
was,
“I cannot do it after all .
” And I thought a decisive separation from Father,
irrevocable and with e
'
clat, the only thing I could do .
“If I do not do this , I should
seem to be of one mind with a person whose principles I do not even respect,
and I cannot stand the least appearance of being in agreement with him, for
I am dead against him, absolutely in opposition to him.
”
But now today I received your letter, and at the same time a letter from Rap
pard, written in a tone which I can understand and appreciate . And after another
discussion with Father, we have arrived ataprovisionalarrangementand calmness .
A calmness which perhaps i s
“It,
” but which to a far greater extent is not
“It.
” Que faire ?
I hereby declare that, for myself, I agree with Rappard when he says,
Stay
at home for a long time
” —he stresses this .
There are a lot
of reasons for this, Theo . Oh, if only you could
see all that
I see in it— how much security it mig ht grant us for the future
— I hope it will
prove to be possible .
In Father
’s case there i s an eternal contrast between what he says and what he
does, but it took me a long time to discover it and to understand that usually
Father i s not conscious of it,
so that one is often unable to decide whether he
really wanted to do what he actually di d . I shall tell y ou frankly, brother, what
I think of it . Father does not always know what he deer— though he chooses
hi s words awfully systematically, his actions are most haphazard .
In short, it will be a bardj ob to get good results from my stay here .
However, the circumstances are such as to make it urgently necessary that an
arrangement is brought about that will really be carried through .
I have proposed that the room that can most easily be spared shall be used to
keep my things in , and if necessary as a studio, in case not only I buty ou and I
think it necessary and suitable that I work at home for a time, especially when
there are ﬁnancial reasons to force us to it . Business i s business, and it i s clear
enough to you as well as to me that this is a good arrangement .
I have been too long without this resting place, and I think that it must be
settled in this way if we want to succeed in our enterprise .
I believe it is possible, and I shall have the courage to start it when you and
I agree that we must carry it through and settle that you will
not be vexed with
me if, in case of some disagreement with Father, I do not take it as seriously as
I did two years ag o.
I will g o my own way quietly and follow your advice not to speak with Father
about several things provided only that I ﬁnd in you the person to whom I can
speak about them, and to whom I can say , I should like to do this or that, for
thi s or that reason.
Tben I
can leave Father out of it, and not discuss
the problems with Father.
But it was necessary to break the ic e, and this I did by going to Nuenen, and on


well , and Rappard writes me,
I considered it y oarg reatest misfortane that you
could not live at home .
” And this is true, and I felt it terribly, not only after
ward, but also at the moment, two years ago now , when I had to face it . Father
did not do thi s intentionally— I say Father has li ttle delicacy of feeling, and even
now, although I at last told him so for the ﬁrst time, Father does not yet know
that it was a great difficulty for me. Father still says— and this is something so
i cy cold that I shudder when I think of ir— Father says after two years tbat in tbe
past be acted according
to bis conviction and principles . An ordinary person, you or I ,
if we had done something like that, we should, I believe— I hope— I trust— have
already regretted it for a long, long time, whether it was our fault or not . If y ou
say Father did not mean to do so much harm, it may be true, but what one means
to do is one thing, and the result of what one does is another . However Father
’s
convictions are undoubtedly well-intentioned and
all that— but as for myself
I hope hi s Honor is not going to acquire new convictions
of the same kind .
[Enclosed in letter 3 48] What Father i s like you may
see from what he went on
to say , for instance, after stating that he could not take back anything of what he
did in the past and
so on, which in fact embodies a basic implacability . He
immediately followed up with,
“But we do not lack indulgence .
”
Indulgence combined with implacability .
This too i s in reality a
“desolation du juste .
In short, tbis i s what Father is
-he i s
“
a stapid one.
To speak with whom i s
unutterably hopeless for me .
If Father were not Father, I should not worry, but can one always act as if
one
’s father di d not exist ? This i s impossible for me too .
But the fact i s that I am not the man to swallow
“indulgence
when basically
I see implacability.
Every once in a while C . M . also used to trot out the word
unpardonable .
And people like Father and C . M . stick to ir— and act upon it year after year
save for
“indulgence .
”
Bah, I think it
’
s utterly disgusting . Approving
of it , and entering into it
no ! Then I prefer a refreshing row , and I personally will not mince words . Y ou
see what I am, brother, and think whatever you like, but never suppose that
I will have anything to do with that sophism of indulgence together with i m
placability .
f r
Iwant to be reconciled
eﬁcacioa sly
-ej
'
ectively , thoroughly, else I prefer an open
disagreement, a conﬂict, in such a way that the world can perceive it— ah well .
Vivre toat boat is simply one
’s duty—
one should not act like the Jesuits and
their kind .
Vincent
3 5 8
Dear Theo ,
Nuenen,
1 8 - 24 February 1 8 84
Thanks for your letter— Mother is getting on well ; at ﬁrst the doctor said it
would take half a year before the leg would be cured— now he speaks of three
months - and he told Mother :
But we have your daughter to thank for this ,

for it i s very seldom that I ﬁnd such good nursing .
What Wil does is exemplary,
exemplary, I shall not easily forget it .
From the beginning nearly everything fell on her shoulders , and Mother was
spared a lot of misery by what she did .
To mention only one thing by way of example, it i s most decidedb
f owing to her
that Mother is so li ttle troubled with bedsores (which began to look very serious
at ﬁrst, and were really in an advanced state)
. And I assure you the jobs she has
to do are not always pleasant .
Just listen— after having read your letter about the drawings , I at once sent
you a new water color of a weaver, and ﬁve pen drawings . For my part I will
also tell y ou frankly that I think it true what y ou say , that my work must become
much better
still , but at the same time, that your energy to sell them for me
may become somewhat stronger too .
Y ou have never sold a sing le onefor me— neither for much nor for little— and in
facty ou bave not even tried.
Y ou
see, I am not
ang ry about it, but— we must call things by their names .
In the long run , I would certainly not put up with that .
Y ou, on your part, can also continue to speak out frankly.
A s to being salable or unsalable, that is an old ﬁle, on which I do not intend
to blunt my teeth . Well , you see my answer i s that I send you some new ones ,
and I will go on doing so very willingly— I ask no better .
But I insist
on your speaking
out quite frankly— that is what I like best
whether you intend
to interest yourself in them henceforth,
or whether your
dignity does not allow it . Leaving the past for what it was , I must face the future,
and apart from what you think of it , I decidedly intend to try and sell them .
Not so long ago you told me yourself you
ar e a mercbant—
all right— with a
merchant one does not lapse into sentimentality,
one says , Sir, if I give y ou a
number of drawings on commission, may I then count on your showing them ?
The merchant should know for himself whether he would say
“yes
”— or
“no
”
to this ,
or something in between. But the painter would be crazy to send them
on commission if he observed that the merchant considered hi s work something
which could not bear the light of day.
Well , old fellow— we are both living in a real world, and as we do not want
to put a spoke in each other
’s wheel, we must speak frankly. If y ou say , I cannot
occupy myself with it— excellent— I shall not get angry— but on the other hand
I am not obliged to believe y ou are an infallible oracle, am I ? Y ou say the public
will take offense at thi s or that little spot, etc . , etc . Now listen, thi s may be true,
buty on in your capacity as merchant take even more offense at it than the public in
question— I have observed this so often— and you start i t .
I must make my own way , Theo, and with you I am exactly as far as I was a
few years ag o ; what you say about my work now,
it is almost salable, bat
”— is
literally
tbc same as wbaty oa wrote me wben I sent y ou my ﬁrst Brabant sketcbes from
So I repeat, that i s
an old ﬁl e, and my conclusion is that I suppose you will
always
say the same thing— and that I , who was systematically wary of trying
zo;

my luck with dealers up to now, will change my tactics now, and try hard to get
my work sold .
By thi s time I understand that my doings are indifferent to you, but ify oa are
indifferent, I for my part always think it rather rotten, and I look forward with
pain to certain things that will hardly fai l to present themselves
for instance,
when they ask me, H ow queer, don
’t you do business with your bro cher or with
Goupil ? Well, in that case I shall
say ,
“It i s beneath the digni ty
of ces M essiears
G .
Co . —Van Gogh
Co .
” That will probably make a bad impression as far
as I am concerned— something I am prepared for by this time— yet I foresee I shall
get colder and colder in my feelings toward you too .
I have now painted the little old church and another weaver . Are those studies
from Drenthe so y ery bad then ? I do not feel greatly inclined to send you the
painted studies from here, no, we shall just leave them where they are— you can
see them when you perhaps come here in spring .
What you write about Marie i s quite comprehensible— if a woman i s not very
milk-and-watery, I can well understand she does not feel much inclined to sit and
mope in the company of an ill -natured father and
of spiritual sisters besides ;
then at all events the temptation, for a man as well as for a woman , to shatter the
stagnation at all cost i s fairly pressing— the stagnation that begins with what may
be beautiful resignation, but which one will be forced to regret in the long run , as
soon as one feels one would freeze to death if it went on . Once I read something
by Daudet about spiritual women—
“The two faces looked at each other— they
exchanged an evil, cold, secretive glance— what i s the matter with her
Always
the same thing .
” There you have that particular look of the Pharisees and devout
ladies . Yes , as for as— what i s the matterwith ustoo is always
“la mime cbose.
”
Yes— what must I conclude from what you say about my work? Let me take
the studies from Drenthe, for instance— there are some that are very superﬁcial ,
I said that myself ; but what do you reproach me with about those that are painted
simply and quietly from nature, trying to express notbing bat wbat I saw2 Y ou say ,
“Aren
’t you too preoccupied with Michel ?
” (I am speaking now of that study of
the cottage in the twilight, and of the largest of th e sod huts, that is to say the
one with the green plot in the foreground .) Y ou would certainly say exactly the
same of the old churchyard .
And yet neither before the churchyard nor before the sod huts did I think of
Michel, I thought only of thef subject I had before me . A subject which, I think,
would have stopped Michel if he had passed, and would have struck him .
I do not put myself at
all on the same line with Master Michel, but imitate
Michel is what I decidedly do not do .
Well, perhaps I will try to sell something in Antwerp, and I am going to put
a few of those very studies from Drenthe in a black wooden frame, which the
carpenter here is making for me . I prefer to see my work in a deep black frame,
and he makes them cheaply enough .
Y ou must not take offense at my speaking about it, brother . I want something
sober and characteristic in my work ; I approve as little of its being neglected as
I want to see my work in ﬂuted frames , in ﬁrst-class galleries .


for your not wanting to busy yourself with it, but it i s not kind if my work i s
stowed away in a dark corner and you do not show it, accompanying this with
the assurance— wbicb cannot be considered trae— that you yourself see something in
it . I do not believe it— your sincerity in saying it i s about nil . And from the very
fact that you say y ou know my work better than anybody else, I can justly con
cla de that your opinion of it must be very low indeed if y ou will not soil your
hands with it . Why should I obtrude myself upon y ou
Now, if I only saw that, thinking me not far enough advanced, you did some
thing to help me to make progress , for instance, now that Mauve i s out
of the
question, to bring me into contact with some other soundpainter, in short any tbing ,
some sign that proved to me that you really believed in my progress , or wanted
to further it . But instead there is— the money, yes, but for the rest, nothing except
that
“just keep on working,
” “have patience I
”
I cannot live on that, it i s getting too lonesome, too cold, too empty and too
dull for me .
I am no better than anybody else, and I have my needs and wishes as everybody
else, and obviously one must protest when onefeels clearly that one i s kept on
too tight a rein and is underrated .
If one goes from bad to worse— in my case, this would not be impossible
what does it matter after all ? If one i s badly off, one has to take a chance to better
oneself.
Brother— I must remind you once more how I was when we ﬁrst worked
together . From the very ﬁrst I have also drawn your attention to the question of
women, I still remember seeing you
off at the station at RozendaaPin the ﬁrst
year, and that I told you then that I hated being alone so much that I preferred
being with a bad whore to being alone . Perhaps you remember that ?
Except for the few years which I can hardly understand myself, when I was
confused by religious ideas—
a kind of mysticism— leaving that period out of it ,
I have always lived with a certain warmth .
Now it i s getting grimmer and colder and duller around me . And when I tell
you that, in the ﬁrst place, I will not stand it, leaving the question of whether
I can out of it, I refer to what I said at the very beginning of our relation .
What I have objected to in you during the past year i s your kind of relapsing
into a cold respectability, which I think sterile and useless— diametrically opposed
to what i s action and, in particular, what i s artistic .
I tell -you so because I mean it, an d not in order to make you wretched, but
I want you to see and if possible to feel what i s wrong, what makes me no longer
able to think with the same pleasure of you as a brother and a friend .
My life must become more stimulating if I want to get more brio into my
work ; I do not advance a hair
’s breadth by practicing patience . If on your part
you relapse into the above-mentioned condition, y ou cannot take offense at my
not being the same toward you as I was during the ﬁrst year, for instance . Well,
good-by
.
Yours sincerely, Vincent

As to my drawings— at thi s moment it seems to me that the water colors , the
pen-and-ink drawings of weavers , the last pen-and-ink drawings , on which I am
working
now , are not altogether
so dull that they are qui te worthless . But
if
I myself come to the conclusion that they are no good, and Theo i s right not to
show them to anybody— then— then it will be additional proof to me that I have
reason for disapproving of our present false position, and I shall try all the more
to change it— for better or worse, but not let it stay the way it i s . If you write,
“Y ou remind me of the
old people who
say that things were better in their
youth than they are now, forgetting that they themselves have changed,
” it would
not put me out . And if you ask me in your letter how it i s that you never hear
me say
“I wish I were like thi s or like that”— it i s because I think that those who
cry
“I wish I were like this or like that
” loudest, try least to reform themselves .
Those who talk so much about it generally don
’t do it .
At ﬁrst the idea that our relation would cease seemed almost unbearable to me,
and I wished so ardently that we might have found some way
out— but on the
other hand I am not always able to make myself believe without rhyme or reason
that it i s possible .
The depression about it was one of the causes of my writing
so positively
from Drenthe, urging you to become a painter .
Which calmed down at once when I
saw your dissatisfaction with business
disappear when you were on a better footing with Goupil once more . At ﬁrst
I only half approved of it : then afterward, and even now, I ﬁnd it quite natural,
and consider it more a mistake on my part to have written you, Become a painter,
than a mistake on your part to have resumed your business activities with gusto
at the moment when they were ﬁt for resumption and the machinations intended
to make things impossible for you had ended .
But for
all that I remain quite dejected by the falseness
of our position. For
the moment, it i s of much more importance to me to earn 5 guilders than to get
1 0 g uilders by way of protection .
Now , most decidedly it i s a fact that y ou repeatedly wrote that, in the ﬁrst
place as
,a dealer (I leave thi s aside and do not take it ill
of you) , but in the
second place also privately (which I do take ill of y ou a little) , y ou di d not, you
do not, and in the near future you will
not, exert yourself in behalf of my
work .
In this I must not be spineless or an impotent dullard
so, to put it bluntly,
ify oa do not do anytbing witb my work, I do not cberisby oarprotection. I state the reason
for this without reserve ; and
so I shall too, when I can hardly avoid giving a
reason for it .
So the fact i s not that I ignore the help you have given since the beginning,
or wish to belittle it . Here the fact i s that I expect more good from the most
miserable drudgeryand poverty than fromprotection, into which it i s deteriorating .
At the very ﬁrst one cannot do without it , but now in Heaven
’s name I must
try to wriggle through— God knows how— rather than accede to something that
after all would not get us any further .
Brotherly
or not brotherly, if you can give me nothing more than ﬁnancial
Em

help , you may keep that too . As things have been during this lasty ear, I almost
venture to
’
say , it has been limited exclusively to money.
And it has become evident to me that— a lthough you say you leave me abso
lutely free— a s a matter of fact, when for instance I have some affair with a woman
which you and others do not approve of, perhaps rightly so, a thing that once in a
wbile I do not give a damn about, there comes such a little tug at the ﬁnancial
bridle in order to make me feel that it is
“in my own interest
” to conform to
your opini on .
In the matter
of that woman you also g o what you wanted,
but I am
damned if I care to receive a little bit
of money if I have to practice morali ty
in exchange .
After all , in itself I do not think it absurd of you not to approve of my insisting
on going through with it last summer . But in time to come I foresee the follow
ing
: Suppose I should again enter into relations with one belonging to what you
call a lower station in life— then I shall meet with the same opposition if I am
still involved with you .
An opposition that you might
all persevere in with a semblance
of fairness
only if I received so much from you that I could live differently— which you do
not give, cannot give, and as a matter of fact will not give, neither you, nor
Father, nor C . M
nor any others who are the very ﬁrst to disapprove of thi s or
that— and which, when it comes to the point, I do not want from you, seeing
that I do not give much thought to higher or lower station in life .
Do y ou see why it would not be a reckless act on my part if I tried it again ?
Although in the ﬁrst place I have no pretensions to maintain a soft of station
in society, as you call it, and do not in tbc least feel the call to do so, and because
in the second place I do not receive the means from anyone nor do I earn them,
I count myself absolutely free to enter into relations with a so
-called inferior if it
should come my way .
We should be faced with the same problem forever .
Now ask yourself the question whether I am the only one among those of the
same profession who most decidedly declines protection if it entails obligations
to maintain a sort of social station, whereas the money obtained i s below the
level
of making it possible,
so that instead of making progress
one has to run
into debt . Were it possible 9n the money, perhaps I should no more refuse to
resign myself to it than others . But we certainly have not got that far yet— you
say yourself that I have a number of years to look forward to in which my work
will have wretchedly little commercial value . A ll rnt— tben I woald ratber toil and
livefrom band to moatb and mang er de la vacbe enrag e
'
e— which I have done before
now— than fall into the hands of Messrs . Van Gogh .
I regret that I quarreled with Father at the time only to the extent that I did
not do so ten years before . If you continue following in the footsteps of Father,
etc . , y ou will live to see how much you will gradually be bored— and— how you
will become a bore to certain persons . But this is ill -tempered grumbling,
and
you will say, Thi s carries no weight .
Just because we began as friends and with a mutual feeling of respect, I know
208


probable that in a few years
’ time we should
I
most probably have a
violent
quarrel, which might end in hatred.
Now there is still time for me to try and ﬁnd a hold elsewhere— and if I should
be forced to ﬁght it out elsewhere, at least it will not be with my brother. And
this— isn
’t it thought out and calculated well and coolly ?
I shall not get melancholy over it, believe me, but at the same time I do not
act recklessly. I have found calm now that I am ﬁrmly resolved upon a separation,
and I have gained the conviction that afterward, if we went
on, we should be
more of a hindrance than a help to each other.
Rappard said, Don
’t go to Antwerp unless you are sure you will ﬁnd something
there— but how can one know what one will ﬁnd in advance ? And if I keep my
studio here as a refuge, then now i s the time to start. However, this will always
be possible, and therefore it is certainly not my intention to leave this region for
good and
all . I think you understand, Theo, that
on my long rambles I have
thought things over often and at length : I do
not want to be mixed up in a
second series of quarrels (such as I had with Fatber N o. I) with Fatber N o. II .
A nd Fatber N o. II would bey oa . One is enoag b— the expression i s unvarni shed and
the center of my ideas
draw your own conclusions . Moreover, you should know
that I was never aggressive in my actions toward Father, nor do I want to become
aggressive toward you, my brother . I have often restrained myself, whereas if
I had been dealing with other people, I should have fought in quite a different
way and much more violently. But thi s i s exactly what renders me powerless
under the circumstances . I shall ﬁnd a new ﬁeld abroad,
one where I can do
whatever I take it into my head to do, as a stranger among
strang ef s ; abroad
I shall have neither rights nor obligations . And I shall be able to make shorter
work of people— bonne volonté d
’étre inoffensif, certitude de résister [good will
to be inoffensive, certainty to resist]
—that i s my ideal, and I am seeking it with
all that is in me . But taking everything lying down i s something you smart for
afterward— c onsequently action is necessary . Working here and at the same time
looking for a
‘new connection i s the way to get on . Unfortunately for both of us ,
money i s indispensable,
an d prospects for being able to break loose are bad .
And— time i s also money—
and— going on in the way I do— I do not get richer .
However, you know my motives— if I should go on, you would become Father
No . II in my life, and although I know you mean well, you do not understand
me at all, and so it i s impossible to make headway .
R 43
Amice Rappard,
Nuenen, April
1 8 84
Thanks for your letter ; it gave me much pleasure . I was delighted to hear that you
saw something in my drawings .
I am not going to discuss generalities about technique, but I most decidedly
expect that, as I gain in what I will call expressive force, people will not say less
frequently, but on the contrary even more frequently, that I have no technique .
Consequently, well, you see— I quite agree with you that what I am expressing
in my present work will have to be expressed more vig orously— and I am working

hard to try to gain strength in this respect— but that, wbenI baveg ainedit, the general
public will understand me better
no
But this does not alter the fact that in my opinion the reasoning of that virtuous
fellow who asked with reference to your work
“Does he paint for money?” i s
the reasoning of a f
fool— as this intelligent creature evidentlyreckons among
the axioms the maxim that originality prevents one from making money .
Passing this offas anaxiom— becameit canmost decidedly notbeprovedas a tbesis
i s, as I said, one of the usual tricks of such f
fools— those l ag y little Jesuits .
Do you think that I do not care about technique, that I do not seek it ? Most
certainly I do— but only insofar as I want to say what I have to say— and ifI cannot
do it or cannot do it sufficiently well, I am doing my best to correct and improve
myself— but I don
’t care a damn whether my language i s in conformity with that
of the grammarians . (You know that you yourself used this simile— if somebody
had something useful , something true, something necessary to say, and he did it
in terms that were hard to understand, would this be of any great advantage to
either the speaker or to hi s listeners ?)
I want to stick to this point for a while, especially as I have found a rather
curious phenomenon in hi story over and over again .
Let thi s be distinctly understood, that it i s obvious one must speak in the native
language of the audience— if thi s audience knows only
one language— and it
would be absurd not to accept this as a matter of course .
But now the second part of the problem . Suppose a man has something to say ,
and that he speaks a language which hi s audience knows instinctively— then
every now and then there will be the phenomenon that the speaker of tratb has
little oratorical eleg ance, and that what he says is not to the liking of the majority of
his audience— nay, that he will be called a man
“
of slow speech and
of a slow
tong ue,
” and be despised as such .
He may consider himself fortunate if there i s one, or at the most a very few, who
are ediﬁed by hi s words, because what these listeners were looking for was— not
oratorical tirades— but most decidedly the true, the useful , the necessary content
of his words , whi ch enlightened them and broadened their minds , made them freer
and more intelligent .
And now as regards painters— i s it the purpose, the non plus ultra, of art to pro
duce those peculiar spots of color— that capriciousness of drawing— that are
called the distinction
of technique ? Most certainly not . Take a Corot, a Dau
bigny, a Dupre, a Millet or an Israels— fellows who are undoubtedly the great
leaders— well, their work i s oatside tbepaint ; it i s as different from that of the ele
gant fellows as an oratorical tirade by Numa Roumestan , for instance, i s different
from a prayer— or a good poem .
So it i s necessary to work at the techni que, as it i s one
’s duty to express better,
more accurately, more earnestly what one feels— a nd the less verboseness , the
better . As for the rest— one need not bother about that . Why do I
say this
because I think I
’ve noticed that you sometimes disapprove of things in your
own work whi ch are in my opinion decidedly good . In my eyesy oar technique i s
better than Haverman
’
s, for instance— because already the stroke of your brush
2

often has something personal, characteristic, accounted for and willed, while in
Haverman
’
s work it i s an everlasting convention, reminding one always of the
studio and never of nature .
For instance those sketches of yours which I saw
The Poor Little Weaver
and the
“Females of Terschelling
— they hit the core of things . Haverman makes
me feel uncomfortable and bored, and little else .
I am rather afraid that you— and I congratulate you on the fact— are going to
hear the same
old remarks about your technique too in the future, apart from
remarks on your subjects and i n short everything else— even when that stroke
of your brush, which already has so much character, acquires even more
of it .
Nevertheless there are art lovers who sincerely appreciate things that are
painted with emotion— although we are no longer living in the days of Thoreand
Theophi le Gautier, alas
Just think over whether i t i s particularly wise to speak about technique much
nowadays— but you will say that
’s what I am doing myself— as a matter of fact I
regret it .
As for me, what I intend to do— even when I have a much more thorough
command of my brush than I have now— i s to tell those fellows systematically tbat
I cannotpaint . Do you hear
—even wben I have achieved a manner of my own, more
complete and concise than the one I have now . I thought what H erkomer said
when he opened hi s own art school— for a number of fellows wbo coald already
paint— was excellent ; he urgently begged hi s pupils to be so kind as not to paint
the way he di d himself, but according to their own selves .
“What I want to do,
”
he said,
“is to set originalities free, not to recrui t disciples for Herkomer
i s tbeory
.
Entre lions on ne se singe pas [Lions don
’t ape each other]
.
Well, I have been painting quite a lot recently— a girl sitting winding bobbins
for the weavers , and the separate ﬁgure of a weaver.
I am rather eager for you to
see my painted studi es one of these days ,
not
because I am satisﬁed with them, but because I believe theywill convince you that
I am most certainly training my hand, and that, when I say I attach comparatively
little importance to technique, I don
’t say it because I want to avoid taking pains
or grappling with difficulties— for this i s hardly my method .
Moreover, I want very much for you to get acquainted someday with this
corner of Brabant— in my opinion much more beautiful than the Breda district.
Right now it i s really marvelous .
There is a village here called
“Zon en Breugel
which i s amazingly like Cour
ri eres , where the Bretons live— but the ﬁgures are even more beautiful over there .
A s one
’s love for the form increases , one may happen to come to hate
“the Dutch
Costumes ,
” as they are called on the books
of photographs which are sold to
foreigners .
Rappard , I di slike writing or speaking about tecbniaae in general— although I
may be eager to discuss the manner of executing some idea of mine either with
you or with somebody else, and I never make light of the practical usefulness of
such discussions . But the latter does not invalidate my ﬁrst thought— which per
haps I di d not formulate accurately . This thought— I cannot ﬁnd the correct words
2 1 2


I am sending you a little booklet about Corot. I thi nk that if you don
’t know it
you will read it with great pleasure ; it contains some accurate biographical details
I have seen the exhibition for which this little book is the catalogue .
What I think remarkable i s the long time it took thi s man to achieve inner
security and to ripen . Do pay special attention to what he did at different ages .
I have seen things among hi s ﬁrst works which were the result ofyears of study
and in the real sense of the term as pure as gold, thoroughly sound— but how
people must have despised them ! Corot
’
s studies were a lesson for me when I saw
them ; I was already struck then by the difference between these studies and those
of many other landscapists .
If I did not
see more technique in your little
Village Churchyard
than in
Corot
’
s studies, I should draw a comparison between them . The
sentiment i s
identical— an earnest endeavor to give only the intimate and the essential .
What I am saying in this letter amounts to this . Let us try to master the mysteries
of technique to such an extent that people are deceived by it and will swear by all
that is holy that we have no technique . Let our work be so savant that it seems
naive and does not stink of our sapience .
I do not believe that I have reached this point, which I so much desire, nor do
I believe that even you, who are more advanced than I , have reached it yet . I hope
you will see something more than trivial faultﬁnding
i n this letter .
I believe that the more one has intercourse with nature itself— the more deeply
one penetrates her— the less one ﬁnds any attraction in the tricks of the studio,
and yet I want to give them all the credit they deserve and to see others paint ;
actually I myself often feel the urge to visit studios .
Niet in boeken heb ik het g evonden
En van
“
g eleerden
”— och, weinig g eleerd .
[N ot in books have I found it
And of the
“learned
” —ah, learned but li ttle ]
G enestet, as you know. We might make a variation of it by saying,
Niet in
’t atelier heb ik het g evonden
En van de
u
schilders
de kenners
[Not in the studio have I found it
And of the painters
the connoisseurs j
ah, learned but little ]
och, weinig g eleerd .
Perhaps y ou are shocked that I indi scriminately put in
painters
an d
c onnoi s
sc urs .
But to talk of something else— it is damned difficult not to feel anything, not to
undergo some inﬂuence when those f
fools say,
“Does he paint for money?
”
I hear this drivel every blessed day, and one gets annoyed with oneself later for
having been worried by it . This is how matters stand with me— an d I imagine it
must be pretty much the same with you . It
’s true one doesn
’t give a damn, but

it makes one nervous all the same— just as if one heard someone sing out of tune,
or as If one werepursued by a malevolent barrel org an. Don
’t you think that barrel organ
mean, particularly as it seems to have singled you out especially?
Wherever you go you hear the same old tune .
Oh, as for me— I am going to do as I tell you now when people say such-and
such a thing to me— I am going to ﬁnish their sentence for them before they have
had their say— the same way I treat a person who I know i s in the habit of giving
me a ﬁnger instead of frankly shaking hands (I played that trick on a venerable
colleague
of my father
’s yesterday), for then I myself also have a single ﬁnger
ready with which to touch hi s very carefully, with a perfectly straight face, when
we
“shake hands”— in such a manner that the man can ﬁnd nothing wrong with
it, although he damn well feels that I
’m making a fool of him i n return .
The other day I put a fellow into a very nasty mood with a similar trick. Does
one lose anything by that
-no, for by God such fellows hinder and do not help
and when I write you about certain expressions of yours , I do so only to ask you,
Are you quite convinced of the good faith of those who are forever extolling tech
nique to the skies ?
I ask you this exactly becaase I knowit isy our aim to avoid
“
stadio eleg ance.
3 61
Dear Theo,
Nuenen, 2 2 - 26 February
1 8 84
I just received your letter . As your letter crossed
one
of mine, written in the
same tone as the one you answered today, y ou will see that I am speaking in a
different mood than the rash one which you suppose . Just because I say what I have
to say quietly, be it not in the tone which is used every day (it i s a serious question
here) , I cannot avail myself of your kindness in considering it sai d
“in haste .
”
That very idea
of yours (that I should have spoken in haste, and rashly) is
sufficient proof to me that we have come to a point where more words won
’t do
any good, and I think it better to let this question rest .
Y ou say, you mast speak about the ﬁnancial side . So must I .
Brother, know it well, I repeat what I said before about your noble help without
any alteration— and that
money can be repaid, but not kindness such as yours .
”
But this is what I want, and what you yourself will call reasonable . I must
take such measures as are necessary to have freedom in disposing
of what I
“receive .
I mean that I can only accept sacb money as I can spend as I like, without having
to ask anybody
’s opinion .
I would rather have
1 00 francs a month and the free use of it, than
zoof ranc s
without that freedom .
If we were more of one mind in our way of looking at things , I should think
an agreement like the one between y ou and me up to now by far the best .
But because of too great a difference in our ways of looking at things , because
of our understanding each other too little, an agreement like the
one between
you and me is neither tenable nor sensible .
Supposing that your character as well as mine wants to avoid disorderliness or

outbreaks of violence after all ; we must part company quietly and collectedly
but decisively, in such a way that neither you nor I can be reproached with
foolishness or recklessness .
I should like to receive the usual amount until March . That wi ll enable me
to pay everything I have to pay, and to lay up a supply of necessary things . Thi s
i s the ﬁrst measure to be taken.
Last year, the year
’8 5 , was a hard,
sad year for me, and the
” end especially
was bitterly, bitterly sad .
Well, we will not speak of that any more .
After March we shall both be free . But if you could pay Father some allowance
for a time, as I do not want to be too great a burden to him, that will be wise
and well, I think .
However, this must be between Father and you . If necessary, I shall then try
and get a job . I do not even care what kind . But bear in mind that, realizing the
fact that obviously we could not agree sufficiently if we continued together,
I am absolutely serious about trying not to accept favors from you in the form
of money any longer if they should not leave me quite free in my concept of life .
You will
say that you leave me free, yes— but there i s a certain restraint after
all . And I prefer to have less from somebody else, when after all I
am not free in
tbing s tbat are nobody
’
s basiness bat my
own.
You must not infer from this that I want to have done with you, on the c on
trary
— you are an art dealer, very well, when I make something which you think
salable, I should prefer to sell it to you rather than to somebody else, but it must
be an arrangement which does not put me in a false position ; but i n point of
fact what I want i s to sell in the literal sense .
I thank you for your letter, I appreciate many things in it . Good-by , and
believe me,
Yours sincerely, Vincent
3 71
Dear Theo ,
Nuenen, June 1 8 84
I think I already told you in my last letter that I also wanted to start a large
man
’s ﬁgure besides that woman spinning . Enclosed you will now ﬁnd a sketch
of it . Perhaps you remember two studies of the same nook, which I already had
in the studio when you were here .
I have read Les Maitres d
’A atrefois [The Masters of the Past] by Fromentin
with great pleasure . And that book frequently deals with the same questions
which have greatly preoccupied me of late, and which, in fact, I am continually
thinking of, especially because when I was last in The Hague I heard
things
Israels had said about starting with a deep color scheme, thus making even
relatively dark colors seem light . In short, to express light by opposing it to
black . I already know what you
’re going to
say about
“too black,
” but at the
same time I am not quite convinced yet that a gray sky, for instance, must always
be painted in the local tone . Mauve does it, but Ruysdael does not, Dupre does
not . Corot and


sometimes worth while not only to read it but even to buy it, particularly now.
And then in the time of Thoreand Blanc there were people who wrote things
which, alas , are already being forgotten .
To give you an example .
Do you know what
“
an ton entier
and
‘‘
an ton rompa
i s ? Of course y ou can
s ee it in a picture, but can you also explain what you
see ? What i s meant by
rompre
. Such things one ought to know theoretically also, either practically as a
painter, or in disc ussing color as a connoisseur.
Most people give it wbatever meaning they like, and yet these words , for instance,
have a very deﬁnite signiﬁcance .
The laws
of the colors are unutterably beautiful, just because they are
not
accidental . In the same way that people nowadays no longer believe in fantastic
miracles , no longer believe in a God who capriciously and despotically ﬂi es from
one thing to another, but begin to feel more respect and admiration for and faith
in nature— in the same way , and for the same reasons , I think that in art, the old
fashioned idea of innate genius, inspiration, etc . , I do not say must be put aside,
but thoroughly reconsidered, veriﬁed— and greatly modiﬁed . However, I do not
deny the existence of genius ,
or even its being innate . But I certai nly do deny
the inference that theory and instruction should, as a matter of course, always be
useless .
Tbe same tbing which I applied in the woman spinning and the old man spooling
yarn, I hope, or rather I shall try, to do much better later on .
But in these two studies from life I bave been a little more my selfthan I succeeded
in being in most of the other studies— except perhaps in some of my
’drawing s.
With regard to black— accidentally I did not use it in these studies , as I needed,
among other things, some stronger effects than black ; and indigo with terra
sienna, Prussian blue with burnt sienna, really give much deeper tones than pure
black itself. When I hear people
say
“there i s no black in nature,
” I sometimes
think, There i s no real black in colors either .
However, you must beware
of falling into the error
of thinking
that the
colorists do not use black, for of course as soon as an element of blue, red, or
yellow i s mixed with black, it becomes a gray, namely, a dark, reddish, yellowish,
or bluish gray. I found very interesting, for instance, what Ch. Blane says about
Velasquez
’ technique in Les A rtistes de mon temps
hi s shadows and half tones
consist mostly of colorless , cool g ray s, the chief elements of which are black and a
little white . In these neutral, colorless mediums, the least cloud or shade of red
has an immediate effect .
Well, good-by , do write soon if you have anything to tell me .
It sometimes surprises me that you do not feel
as macb for Jules Dupre as
I should like you to do .
I am ﬁrmly convinced that, if I again saw what I saw of hi s work in the past,
far from thinking it less beautiful, I should think it
even more beautiful than I
always instinctively did . Dupre is perbaps even more
of a colorist than Corot
and Daubigny, though these two are that too , an d Daubigny especially i s very
daring in this color . But in Dupre
’s color there i s something of a splendid sym
2 1 8

phony
, complete, studied, manly
. I imagine Beethoven must be something like that
.
That symphony i s
enormoasly calculated, and yet simple, and inﬁnitely deep as
nature itself. That i s what I think ofDupre
.
Well, good-by , with a handshake,
Yours sincerely, Vincent
La Berc euse (Mme . Roulin) , oil,
1 8 8 8
3 78
Dear Theo ,
Nuenen, October
1 884
Thanks for your letter, thanks for the enclosure . Now just listen . What you say
is all very well, and as to a scandal, I am now somewhat better prepared to meet
it than I used to be .
No fear of Father and Mother leaving, for instance .

Now there are people who say to me,
Why did you meddle with ber,
that
’s
one fact . Now there are people who say to her,
“Why did y ou meddle with bim,
”
that
’s another fact .
Both she and I have sorrow enough, and worries enough, but neither
of us
feels regret . Look here, I certainly believe, or know for sure, that she loves me .
I certainly believe, or know for sure, that I love her, I have been sincere .
Was it foolish, etc .
Perhaps so, ify oa like, but aren
’t the wisepeople who never
do a foolish thing more foolish in my eyes than I am in theirs ?
Tbat
’
s my answer to your argument and to other people
’s arguments .
I say all this simply to explain, not in anger or in spite .
You say that you like Octave M oaret, you say , Y ou are like him ; since last year
I have also read the second volume, in which he pleases me much better than in
the ﬁrst.
Recently I heard somebody say that A n Bonbear des dames would
not greatly
enhance Zola
’s reputation . I ﬁnd the g reatest and best things in it .
I have looked it up again, and I copy for you some sayings of Octave Mouret
’
s .
You— of late, this past year and a half, haven
’t you developed in Boar
doncle
’
s direction .9 You should have stuck to Mouret, that was and still is my
opinion. But for the enormous difference in circumstances , yes , direct difference
in circumstances , I inclin e, however, more toward Mouret
’
s direction tbany oa
may think in the matter of my belief in women, and that one needs them, must
love them . Mouret says,
“
cbeznoas on aime la clientéle.
”
Please think thi s over, and remember my regret at your saying that you had
cooled down .
I repeat moreemphatically than ever all that I said by way of bitter warning
against the inﬂuence of what I called Guizot- esqueness. Why ? Because it leads
to mediocrity. And I do not want to see you among the medi ocrities , because
I loved you too much for that, and I still love you too much for that— I cannot
endure to
see you congeal . I know it i s difficult . I am aware that I know too
little about you— I know that perhaps I am mistaken . Never mind . In any case
just read your Mouret over again .
I spoke
of the difference
and y et the similarity between Mouret and what
I should want . Look here, Mouret worships the modern Parisian woman,
all
right .
But Millet, Breton, worship the peasant woman witb tbe samepassion.
Those two passions are one and the same .
Read Zola
’s description of a room with women in the twilight, women often
already over thirty, up to ﬁfty, such a dim, mysterious corner.
I think it splendid, yes, sablime.
But to me, Millet
’s
“Angelus” i s just as sublime, tbat same twilight, that same
inﬁnite emotion, or that single ﬁgure of Breton
’s in the Luxembourg
or hi s
“Source .
”
You will say that I have no success— I don
’t care to conquer or to be conquered,
in any case one has emotion and action, and that i s more the same thing than it
appears , or is said .
2 20


Well, I prefer stupefying myself, to perish in orderto perish, I woald ratbor die of
passion tban die of boredom.
It i s not only I who say this in spite of difficulties , but she also, that i s why I saw
something grand in her from the very beginning ; but it i s a confounded pity
for her that in her youth she let herself be crushed by disappointments , crushed
in the sense that the orthodox religious family tboag bt tbey bad to sappress
the
active, aye, brilliant quality in her, and have made her utterly passive .
If only they hadn
’t broken her in ber y oatb! or if only they had stopped
at
that, and five or
six
or more women, ﬁg bting
ag ainst ber
alone, had not driven her
to distraction !
fast read in L
’Evang éliste by D andet aboat tbose women
’
s intrigaes
tbey were different
bere, yet of such a kind .
Oh, Theo, why should I change myself? I used to be very passive and very
soft-hearted and quiet ; I
’m not any more, but it
’
s true, I am no longer a child
now that I sometimes feel my eg o .
Take Mauve, why i s he quick-tempered andfarfrom meek at times ? I have not
got as far as b e, but I too shall get further than I am now .
I tell you , if one wants to be active,
one must not be afraid of failures , one
must not be afraid of making some mistakes . Many people think that they will
become good by doing
no barm; that
’s a li e, and y ou yourself used to call it a lie .
It leads to stagnation, to mediocrity .
fast dasb sometbing down when you
see a blank canvas staring you in the face
with a certain imbecility .
You do not know how paralyzing that staring of a blank canvas i s ; it says to
the painter, Y oa
can
’t do any tbing
. The canvas stares at you like an idiot, and it
hypnotizes some painters , so that they themselves become idiots . Many painters
are afraid ofthe blank canvas , but the blank canvas i s afraid ofthe really passionate
painter who i s daring— and who has once and for all broken that spell of
“you
cannot .
”
Life itself i s also forever turning toward a man an inﬁnitely vacant, discour
aging, hopeless , blank side on which nothing i s written, no more than on a blank
canvas . But however vacant an d vain and dead life may present itself, the man of
faith, ofenergy, ofwarmth, and who knows something, does not let himselfbe led
astray by it . He steps in and acts and builds up , in short he breaks—
rains they call it .
Let them talk, those cold theologians . Theo , I feel such damned pity for this
woman , just because her age, and perhaps a disease of the liver and gallbladder
menace her so terribly . And the emotions have aggravated this . But we shall see
what can be done or what fatally cannot ; however, I shall
not do anything
without a very good physician, so I shall do her no harm .
For the very reason that I foresee that , zf our roads should lead us to one and
the same spot, we might disagree to a rather large degree— for this reason I do
not want you to be able to reproach me with anything, and at the same time be
dependent on you .
I am still of two minds about what I shall try to do, but after all I shall most

probably not stay here, but the question remains where I shall eventually g o .
I do not think you will appreciate my coming to Paris , but what can I do about
that ? You damn well refuse to look after my interests— all right, but on my part
I cannot possibly leave things as they are . If you had written less positively that
it was beneath y ou, it would never have occurred to me— but now, well, now
I cannot pay attention to what you say any longer .
In short, I do not intend to exchange the cbance (although it be no more than
a cbance) of pulling through on my own for the certainty of a protection that i s
a bit stiﬂing after all .
Since I see that I am losing my chance of selling by continuing to take the
money from you , we must separate .
Don
’t y ou think it quite understandable that, when I hear you say it will be
impossible for you to do anything with my work during the next few years ,
I get a sort of feeling that if you persist in pretending to be so high and mighty
in this respect, it i s rather in contradiction with its invariably appearing to be
impossible,when— because I cannot possibly sell anything, however hard I work
— I am forced to say, Theo, I am
2 5 guilders short, can
’t you see your way to
letting me have a little extra ?
That i s very inconsistent ofy ou— for when one sends y ou anything, or begs , Do
try and ﬁn d an opening for me with
one of the illustrated papers , so that I can
earn something— one does not hear a single word in reply andy oa do not lift aﬁng er .
But one i s not allowed to say, I can
’t make both ends meet .
And as things have been up to now, don
’t let
’s talk about it— but it won
’t do
to g o on like this .
And I want to add that I am not going to
ask you whether y ou approve or
disapprove of anything I do or won
’t do, I shall not stand on ceremony .
If
I should feel like going to Paris, for instance, I should not ask you whether you
like it or not .
3 81
Dear Theo,
Nuenen, October
1 8 84
Here are two photographs
of the weavers— next week I hope to send you two
more sketches for Hermans
’ decorations .
Y ou know well enough that your criticism of this past year and a half only
seems like some kind
of vitriol to me . But never suppose I don
’t know it i s
possible to protect oneself from such vitriol by a sort
of leather whi ch it cannot
pierce
so easily, and that as soon as one
’s hide i s tanned so as to keep it out , it
does not matter so much—
so— what do I care?
Apart from thi s I believe you mean well . So what more do you want ?
But I declare that it i s not in the least my fault if the money you give me yields
such a poor interest, not only to you, but also a poor interest to me . The former
— that it yields a poor interest to you— grieves me more
than the latter, its
yielding a poor interest to me too .
Things may improve, you will say— yes , but in that case not only I but you
too would have to change a good deal .

I just want to tell you that this winter, perhaps next month, I intend to leave
here for a time ; I have thought of Antwerp— I have thought of The Hague .
But during the last few days I have thought of something that i s perhaps even
better . In the ﬁrst place I now want at all events some city life, some change of
surroundings , having been either in Drenthe
or in Nuenen for a full year
or
more . And I believe this will be a good distraction for me, for my spirits in
general, which have not been and could not be as cheerful as I should like,
especially recently.
Look here now, the sculptor Stracke lives in Bois-le-Duc ; at the same time
he i s director of the drawing academy there . I
saw a terre c uite by a pupil of hi s,
and heard
on that occasion that Stracke i s not at
all unkind
or indifferent to
anyone who practices art in this vicinity . That at Bois-le-Duc he has several
models for the academy,and that there are people to whom he affords the opportu
mity to draw from the nude or to model i n clay.
Probably, however, one would have to pay tbc model oneself, but thatis not so
very expensive, and then one has a spacious room for which
one doesn
’t pay
aiy tbing
. I am going to see for myself how things are, and then it is not impossible
that, just as Breitner, for instance, went to Cotmon, I shall go to Stracke
. It i s in
the neighborhood, and would be the cheapest thing too .
I have bought a very beautiful book on anatomy, A natomy for A rtists by John
Marshall . It was in fact very expensive, but it will be of u se to me all my life,
for it i s very good . I have also what they use at l
’Ec ole des Beaux-Arts, and what
they use in Antwerp .
But such things make great holes in my pocket . I tell you this only to make
y ou understand that my not paying Father and Mother for my board while
I stay here i s not because I do not want to pay, but because I have had many
expenses which I for my part don
’t consider superﬂuous .
The key to many things i s the thorough knowledge of the human body, but it
costs money to learn it . Besides , I am quite sure that color, that cbiaroscaro, that
p erspective, that
tone and that drawing , in short, everything has ﬁxed laws which
one must and can study, like chemistry or algebra . Thi s i s far from being the
easiest view of things , and one who says ,
Oh, one must know it all instinc tively ,
”
takes it very easy indeed . If that were enough ! But it isn
’t enough, for even if
one knows ever so much by instinct, that i s just the reason to try ever so hard to
pass from instinct to reason. That
’s what I think.
You must not imagine that I have earned anything by doing that work for
Hermans
the ﬁrst day I got two bills for the stretchers , canvases an d a number
of tubes , amounting to more than I had received from him to pay for them .
I told him that I di d not want these bills to remain unpaid, and asked him if he
wanted to have them put in hi s name or ifhe would pay me something in advance .
Oh no, he said, let it wait, tbey need not bepaid at once.
I said, Y es, tbey mast bepaid at once. Then he gave me 2 5 guilders .
Then came
all my other expenses for models , not counting my time, work,
etc .
but since then I have not seen any of hi s money, nor bave I askedfor it . On
the contrary, because my work pleased him from ﬁrst to last, I consider myself
2 24


Father back there, at least that the family at Helvoirt i s going to sound Father
out on the subject . But seeing that it was only the day before yesterday that the
dear reverend gentleman over yonder dropped dead, I do not know in the least
whether they are going to call Father or not . However I think it highly probable .
Father i s not going to accept the call, this much i s certain .
As to what I call barricade and you call ditch, it can
’t be helped, but there i s
an old civilization that, in my opinion, i s declining through its own fault— there
i s a new civilization that has been born, and i s growing, and will grow more .
In short, there are revolationary and anti-revolationary principles .
Now I
ask y ou whether you yourself have not often noticed that the policy
of wavering between the
old and the new isn
’t tenable ? Just think thi s over .
Sooner or later it ends with one
’s
standing frankly either
on the right or
on
the left.
It is
no ditcb. And I repeat, then it was
’
48 , now it i s
’84 ; then there was a
barricade of paving stones— now it is not of stones , but all the same a barricade
as to the incompatibility of old and new—
oh, it certainly i s there in
’84 as well
as in
’
48 . Good-by ,
Yours sincerely, Vincent
3 86a
Dear Theo,
Nuenen, 9 December
1 884
One cannot always ﬁnd the right words to speak absolutely straightforwardly
but I am
so ﬁrmly resolved to speak my mind to y oa without reserve— I don
’t
give a damn whether you are suspicious or not— that after some consideration
I have now perhaps found clearer words for the feelings I want to express .
I believe that it i s in oar mataal interest that we separate .
Your position— isn
’t this true
— does not admit of our associating wi th each
other intimately, frequently, cordially. Your position— to mention only one thing
by way
of example— would
not admit
of my going to live at your house in
Paris , let
’s
say , either with the i ntention
of studying or for ﬁnancial reasons,
however necessary and useful it might be, and might become more and more, if
circumstances permitted . For— against my person, my manners , clothes, words ,
you, like so many others , seem to think it necessary to rai se so many objections
— weighty enough and at the same time obviously without redress— that they
have caused our personal, brotherly intercourse to wither and di e off gradually
in the course of the years . To this must be added my past, and that at Goupil
Co .
’s you are quite the plush gentleman, an d I am a black sheep and an ill -natured
fellow. Enough— thi s i s how things are— aren
’t they
— and as here it i s a ques
tion
of analyzing, of manq
y facing a situation, I suppose you are not going
to contradict me in this matter .
Only— but I do
not mention this by way
of reproach— the moment i s not
opportune for this— it is past
—I just mention it for clarity
’s sake— only I had
thought that you had attached some value to our not drifting toofar apart— that
by your being on the qui vive in this ﬁeld, by executing some adroit maneuvers ,
you might have been able to ﬁnd a more satisfactory solution for this ticklish
2 26

problem . For instance, in such a way that I could have got I don
’t say on friendly
terms , but at least into touch with Tersteeg and Mauve again, and so on . But
a struggle i s going on in your mind about this , which you prefer not to be
reminded of. So as to the point in question, you don
’t even dream ofdoing it, and
you don
’t think it nice of me to take the liberty of referring to it . In any case
you think me foolish in these things, and you won
’t touch them with a barge
pole .
This i s the dark side of your character— I think you are mean in thi s respect
but the bright side of your character i s your reliability in money matters .
Ergo conclusion— I acknowledge being under an obligation to you with the
greatest pleasure . Only— lacking relations with you, with Tersteeg, or with whom
ever I knew in the past— I want sometbing
else by way of compensation .
For— personally I have to think
of my future— I want to get on . If a hussy
won
’t have me, it
’
s all right with me ; I can hardly take it ill of her— but nothing
i s more certain than that I shall try to ﬁnd compensation elsewhere . And the
same i s true of other relations . I shall not obtrude myself upony oa, neither shall
Iforce you to be affectionate toward me— but— a s a friend— let alone as a brother
— you are too cool for my taste . Not as to money,
old fellow ; I am not speaking
of that . But personally you aren
’t of the slightest use to me, nor am I to you .
And it i s possible, and it ought to be, that we should mean more to each other
personally .
Well, we won
’t quarrel over it— things have their periods— the period
of
quarreling i s over— the period
of parting follows , I think . But remember that
there are fellows who most certainly love you, and whom you
oag bt not to be
suspicious
of, whose sympathy becomes powerless because
of your di strusting
them too much, whereas you would do better if you strengthened a man
’s self
c onﬁdenc e . So much for that .
I do not think it impossible that Marie— you know whom I mean, the one you
helped when she was sick— notwithstanding full appreciation of your character
and assistance, must have felt something
of what I feel . Instinctively I dare
suppose it .
Now I will take the liberty to say one thing— we sball separate— for me thi s i s a
precarious transition— a nd one coupled with ﬁnancial diffic ulties that will certainly
be a g reat worry to me . However, I shall try to see things through— but I most
decidedly demand
of you that at thi s moment, which i s critical for me, yqu
on your part will be very frank . I know tbat y oa will ag ree to oar separation— for the
very reason that it will be settled peacefully.
Tell me without reserve whether you approve
of Antwerp— including my
retaining my studio here in the country, which i s too cheap to let go, and which
for that matter I cannot do without as a storeroom and a refuge if necessary.
And, if it i s not asking too much, help me to
see things through— ﬁn ancial
embarrassment in this period, toward the end of the year, i s always worse for me .
I should wish the period
of the transition to be short if possible, because it is
torture to feel that
one thing i s disappearing and you haven
’t g ot the other .
I cannot help thinking of the reason for Marie and y ou parting company . I don
’t
2 27

know any details, do I
— but you di d not think she was a good woman . Maybe
y ou are right, but it may also be that you did not understand her . And as for me,
it i s quite possible that similarly I am not a good man— this may well b e— but
in my case too, are you sure that you understand and feel the right way ? I neither
can nor will be the judge of this .
In Proudhon you may read
“la femme est la desolation du juste
— but isn
’t it
possible to answer this with, Tbejust is tbc desolation of woman ? Quite possible .
And ditto ditto one might
say ,
“Tbe artist is tbe desolation of tbc ﬁnancier,
”
and
converse!
Tbeﬁnancier is tbc desolation of tbe artist .
”
You see— I do not know the ﬁnal solution myself— but I
see tw o sides to one
and the same problem .
So you know my irrevocable intentions— for both our sakes I hope the time
of transition will be short, and— because I knowy ou ag ree to a separation— how can
we act most qui ckly and satisfactorily ?
With a handshake,
Ever yours , Vincent
3 88b
Dear Theo,
Nuenen, February
1 8 8 5
I
’ve a good deal to say about your calling my last letter particularly unpleasant .
”
In the ﬁrst place thi s— some time ago you wrote me quite a number of un
pleasant things which I have been hearing from you and others for over ﬁfteen
years now
-and that
’s a long time— about domestic relations here .
And especially added to thi s
“that you are suspicious .
” If it had only been the
former, it is probable that I should have paid no more attention to it .
But your additional remark about your suspiciousness was a bit too much for
me, and I have repeatedly begged you to withdraw the word or to explain it, for
I will not tolerate such a thing being said to me without my asking for an explana
tion .
In my last letter I compared suspiciousness in general to looking through
black glasses .
And I said the ugliest misunderstandings were caused by it .
And this is true .
If you on your part turn tbis inside out now, and write me,
You make me think
of old people who are always saying that in their young days everything was
better, meanwhile forgetting that they themselves have changed,
” thi s does not
stagger me in the least .
The thing we were di scussing was suspiciousness , wbicb was not menti oned by me
but byy ourself, i . e. on your part with regard to me ; ﬁrst apply what y ou say about
old people to this , and after that see whether it may apply to me . If it does apply
to me after that— then I shall have to reform .
As to what I wrote about a certai n atmosphere at home, which I have more
opportunity to observe than I care for, I am much afraid it i s only too true .
As in your letter you ask me how it is that you no longer hear me say,
“I should
like to be like thi s or like that
” —tbefact is that in my opinion those who proclaim
2 2 8


3 93
Dear Theo ,
Nuenen, January
1 8 8 5
Y ou would greatly oblige me by trying to get for me
Illustration No .
2 1 74,
24 October
1 8 84
.
It i s already an old issue, but you will probably be able to get it at the office .
There i s a drawing by Paul Renouard in it, a strike of weavers at Lyons . Also
one from a series of Opera sketches (of which he has also published etchings)
—called
“Le Harpiste,
which I like very much .
Then just recently he also did
“Le Monde Judiciaire,
which I got from
Rappard ; you probably know it from the P aris Illustre
’ by Damas .
But I think the drawing of the weavers the most beautiful of all ; there i s so
much life and depth in it that I think this drawing might hold its own beside
Millet, Daumier, Lepage .
When I think how he rose to such a height by working from nature from the
very beginning, without imitating others , and yet i s in harmony with the very
clever people, even in technique, though from the very ﬁrst he had hi s own style,
I ﬁnd him proofagain that by truly following nature the workimproves everyyear .
And every day I am more convinced that people who do not ﬁrst wrestle with
nature never succeed .
I thi nk that if one has tried to follow the great masters attentively, one ﬁnds
them all back at certain moments, deep i n reality, I mean onewill see their so-called
creations in reality if one has similar eyes, a similar sentiment, as they had . And
I do believe that if the critics and connoisseurs were better acquainted wi th
nature, their judgment would be more correct than it i s now, whent he routine
i s to live only among pictures, and to compare them mutually. Which of course, as
one side
of the question, i s good in itself, but lacks a solid foundation if one
begins to forget nature and looks only superﬁcially . Can
’t you understand that
I am perhaps not wrong in this , and to say what I mean even more clearly, isn
’t
it a pity that you , for instance, seldom or hardly ever go into those cottages , or
associate with those people,
or see that sentiment in
the landscape, which i s
painted in the pictures you like best ? I do not say that you can do this in your
position, just because one must look much and long at nat ure before one becomes
convinced that the most touching things the great masters have painted still
originate in life and reality itself. A basis of sound poetry, which exists eternally
as a fact, and can be found if one digs and seeks deeply enough .
“Ce qui ne passe pas dans c e qui passe,
it exists .
And what Mi chelangelo said in a splendi d metaphor, I think Millet has said
without metaphor, an d Millet can perhaps best teach us to see, an d get
“a fai th.
When I do better work later on, I certai
nly shall not work diﬂerently than now,
I mean it will be the same apple, only riper ; I shall not change my mind about
what I have thought from the beginning . And that
’s the reason why I say for
my part, If I am no good now, I won
’t be any good later on ei ther ; but if later
on, then now too . For corn i s corn, though city people may take it for grass at
ﬁrst, an d also vice versa .
In any case, whether people approve or do not approve of what I do and how

I do it, I personally know no other way than to wrestle with nature long enough
for her to tell me her secret .
I am working at various heads and hands all the time .
I have also drawn some again, perhaps you would ﬁnd something in them,
perhaps not I can
’t help it . I repeat, I know no other way
.
But I can t understand that you
say , Perhaps later
on we shall admire even
the things done now .
If I were you, I should have so much self-c onﬁdenc e and independent opinion
that I should know whether I could see now what there i s in a thing or not .
Well, you must know those things for yourself.
Though the month i s not quite over, my purse i s quite empty. I am working
on as hard as I can, and I for my part think that I shall keep a straight course
by constantly studying the model .
I wish you could send me the money a few days before the ﬁrst for the same
reason that the end of the month is always hard, because the work brings such
heavy expenses , and I don
’t sell any of it . But this will
not g o on forever, for
I work too hard and too much not to succeed eventually at least in defraying my
expenses without being in a dependent position . For the rest, nature outside and
the interiors
of the cottages are splendid in tone and sentiment just now ; I try
hard not to lose time .
Good
-by ,
Ever yours , Vincent
3 94
Dear Theo,
Nuenen, February
1 8 8 5
Many thanks for the Illustrations y ou sent, I am much obliged to you . I think
all the various drawings by Renouard beautiful and I did not know one of
them .
However— thi s i s not to give you extra trouble, but because I wrote things
about them which perhaps cannot quite be applied to other drawings of hi s— the
real Renouard composition I meant i s not among them, perhaps that issue is
sold out . The breadth of the ﬁgure in it was superb , it was an
old man and
some women and a child, I believe, sitting idle in a weaver
’s cottage where the
looms stood still .
I had not yet seen
any tbing in reproduction from the Salon
of
’84, and
now
I at least got some idea of a few interesting pictures from the Salon number . For
instance of that composition by Puvi s de Chavannes .
I imagine that the Harpig ni es with the setting
sun must have been splendid .
And the pict ures by Feyen—Perrin which they give sketches of.
I was also struck by the ﬁgure of a girl by Emile Levy,
“Japonaise, and the
picture by Beyle,
“Brﬁl eu ses de Varech
[Women burning seaweed] , and the one
by Cottin ,
L
’Eté,
” three ﬁgures of nude women .
I am very busy painting those heads . I paint in the daytime and draw in the
evening . In this way I have already painted at least some thirty and drawn as
many .

With the result that I see a chance of doing it even better before long, I hope .
I think that it will belp mefor tbc ﬁg ure in g eneral . Today I had one white and
black against the ﬂesh color.
And I am also looking for blue all the time . Here the peasants
’ ﬁgures are as
a rule blue . That blue in the ripe corn or against the withered leaves of a beech
hedge—
so that the faded shades
of darker and lighter blue are emphasized and
made to speak by contrast with the golden tones of reddish-brown— i s very
beautiful and has struck me here from the very ﬁrst . The people here instinctively
wear the most beautiful blue that I have ever seen .
It is coarse linen which they weave themselves , warp black, woof blue, the
result of which i s a black and blue striped pattern . When thi s fades and becomes
somewhat di scolored by wind and weather, it i s an inﬁnitely quiet, delicate tone
that particularly brings out the ﬂesh colors .
Well, blue enough to react to all colors in which hidden orange elements are
to be found, and di scolored enough not to jar .
But thi s is ! a question
of color, and what matters more to me at the point
I
’m at now i s the question of form . I think the best way to express form i s with
an almost monochrome coloring, the tones of which differ principally in intensity
and in value . For instance
“La Source
” by Jules Breton was painted almost in
one color. But one really ought to study each color separately in connection
with its contrast before one can be positively sure of being harmonious .
When there was snow, I also painted a few studies of our garden . The landscape
has changed much since then ; now we have splendid evening skies of lilac with
gold over dark silh ouettes of cottages between the masses of ruddy-colored
brushwood— above which rise the spare black poplars , while the foregrounds
are
of a faded and bleached green, varied by strips
of black earth
and pale,
withered rushes along the ditch edges .
I certainly see all this too— I think it just as superb as anybody else, but I am
even more interested in the proportion
of a ﬁgure, the division
of the oval of
the head, and I cannot master the rest before I have a better grip on the ﬁgure .
Well— ﬁrst comes the ﬁgure ; I personally cannot understand the rest without
it , and it i s the ﬁgure that creates the atmosphere . I can understand, however,
that there are people, like Daubigny and Harpig ni es and Ruysdael and so many
others , who are absolutely and irresistibly carried away by the landscape itself ;
their work satisﬁes us fully because they themselves were satisﬁed with sky an d
earth and a pool of water and a shrub .
But I think it a mighty clever saying of Israels
’
, when he remarked of a Dupre,
It i s just like
“a picture of the ﬁgure .
”
Good-by and many thanks again for the Illustrations .
Ever yours , Vincent
3 99
Dear Theo,
Nuenen, April
1 8 8 5
I have wondered a little at not having heard from you yet . Y ou will
say that
you have been too busy to think of it, and of course I understand this .
2 3 2


There are people, as you know, who support painters during the time when
they do not yet earn anything, very well !
But how often doesn
’t it happen that it ends miserably, wretchedly, for both
parties , partly because the protector i s annoyed about the money, which i s or at
least seems quite thrown away, whereas , on the other hand, the painter feels
entitled to more conﬁdence, more patience and interest than is given him
But
in most cases the misunderstandings arise from carelessness on both sides .
I hope this will not be the case between us .
And I hope that by and by my studies will give you some new courage . Neither
you nor I are contemporaries of that race which Gigoux, in that book you sent
me, rightly calls
“Les vaillants .
”
But it seems to me right after all to keep the enthusiasm of those days in the
present time, for it i s often true that fortune favors the bold, and whatever may
be true about fortune or
“la
de vivre,
” as it i s called,
one must work
and dare if one really wants to live .
I repeat, let us paint
as much as we can and be productive, and, witb all
our
faults
and qualities, be ourselves; I
say
us , because the money from y ou, which I
know costs you trouble enough to get for me, gives you the right, if there i s
some good in my work, to consider half of it your own creation .
Try to speak to somebody at Le Cbat N oir and ask them if they want a sketch
of those potato eaters , and if so, ofwhat size, for it
’
s all the same to me . Good-by ,
with a handshake,
Ever yours, Vincent
402
Dear Theo,
Nuenen, April 1 8 8 5
By the same mail you will receive a number of copies of the lithograph . Please
give Mr. Portier as many as he wants . And I enclose a letter for him, which I am
afraid you will think rather long, and consequently, unbusinesshke. But I thought
that what I had to say couldn
’t be expressed more concisely and that the main
thing i s to give him arguments for hi s
own instinctive feelings . And in fact,
I also say to you what I write to him.
Tbere is
a scbool— I believe—
of impressionists . But I know very little about it . But
I do know who the original and most important masters are, around whom— as
around an axis— the landscape and peasant painters will revolve . Delacroix,
Corot, Millet and the rest . That is my own opinion,
not properly formulated .
I mean
there are (rather than persons) rules
or principles
or fundamental
truths for drawing as well as for color, whi ch one proves tofall back
on when one
ﬁnds out an actual truth .
In drawing, for instance— that question
of drawing the ﬁgure starting with
the circle— that i s to say, using the elliptical planes as a foundation . A thing which
the ancient Greeks already knew, and which will remain valid till the end of the
world . As to color, those everlasting problems , for instance, that ﬁrst question
Corot addressed to Francai s when Francai s (who already had a reputation) asked
Corot (who then had nothing but a negative or rather bad reputation) when he

(F
came to Corot, to get some information
Qu
’est—c e que c
’est un ton rompu ?
Qu
’est—c c que c
’est un ton neutre
Which c an be shown better on the palette than expressed in words .
So what I want to tell Portier in this letter is my ﬁrm belief in Eugene Delacroix
and the people of that time .
And at the same time, as the pic tufe I am working on is different from lamplight
scenes by Dou
or Van Schendel, it i s perhaps not superﬂuous to point out that
one
of the most beautiful things thi s country
’s painters have done i s to paint
darkness which nevertheless has ligbt in it . Well , just read my letter and you will
see that it i s not unintelligible, and that it treats of a subject that just occurred
to me while painting .
I hope to have some luck with that picture of the potato eaters .
I am also working on a red sunset .
One must be master of so many things to paint rural hfe. But on the other
hand, I don
’t know anything at whi ch one works with so much calmness, in the
sense of serenity, however much one may be worried by material things .
I am rather worried just now
’ about the moving ; it
’
s
no easy job,
on the
contrary . But it had to happen sometime— if not now, then later— and the fact is
that in the long run it i s better to have a place of one
’s own .
To change the subject . H ow striking that saying about Millet
’s ﬁgures is
S onpay san semblepeint avec la terrequ
’il ensemence
[His peasant seems to be painted
with the earth he i s sowing
How exact and how true . And how important it i s
to know how to mix on the palette those colors which have no name and yet are
the real foundation of everything . Perhaps, I daresay positively , the questions of
color, and more precisely of broken an d neutral colors, will preoccupy you anew .
Art dealers speak so vaguely and arbitrarily about it , I think . In fact, painters do
too . Last week I saw at an acquaintance
’s a decidedly clever, realistic study of an
old woman
’s head by somebody who i s directly,
or indirectly, a pupil of The
Hague School . But in drawing, as well as in color, there was a certain hesitation,
a certain narrow-mindedness— much greater, in my opinion, than one sees in an
old Blommers or Mauve or Maris . And this symptom threatens to become more
and more widespread . If one takes realism in the sense
of literal truth, namely
ex act drawing and local color . There are other things than that . Well , good-by ,
with a handshake,
Ever yours, Vincent
404
Dear Theo,
Nuenen, 5 0 April
’8 5
On your birthday I am sending you my best wishes for good health and serenity.
I should have liked to send you the picture of the potato eaters on that day, but
though it is getting on well , it i s not quite ﬁnished yet .
Though the ultimate picture will have been painted in a relatively short time
and for the greater part from memory, it has taken a whole winter of painting
studies of heads and hands .
And as to those few days in which I have painted it now, it has been a real
2 3 5

battle, but
one for which I feel great enthusiasm. Although I was repeatedly
afraid I should never pull it off. But painting i s also
“agir-créer .
”
When the weavers weave that cloth, which I think i s called Cheviot, or also
the peculiar Scottish plaids , then you know their aim i s, for the Cheviot, to get
special broken colors and grays , and for the multicolored checkered cloth, to
make the most vivid colors balance each other so that, instead of the issue being
crude, the eﬁ
'
et p roduit of the pattern i s harmonious at a distance .
A gray woven from red, blue, yellow, dirty white and black threads , a blue
that i s broken by a green, and orange-red, or yellow, thread, are quite different
from plain
colors , that i s to
say they are more iridescent, and primary colors
become bard, cold and dead in comparison . But for the weaver, or rather the
designer of the pattern
or the combination
of colors , it i s not always easy to
determine hi s estimation of the number of threads and their direction, no more
than it i s easy to blend the strokes of the brush into a harmoni ous whole .
If you could compare the ﬁrst painted studies I made on my arrival here at
Nuenen and the picture I
’m now working on , I think you would see that things
are getting a little more lively as to color .
I believe that the question
of the analysis
of colors will preoccupy you too
someday, for as a connoisseur and expert, I think one must also have
a ﬁx ed
opinion, and possess certain convictions .
At least for one
’s own pleasure, and in order to substantiate one
’
s
opinion, and
one must also be able to explain it in a few words to others who sometimes ask
a person hke you for information when they wish to know something more
about art .
I have still something to say about Portier—
of course I am not at all indifferent
to hi s private opinion, and I highly appreciate hi s saying that he did not retract
anything of what he had said .
Neither do I mind its appearing that he had not hung those ﬁrst
studies .
But if I send a picture intended for him if he likes , be can only g et it on condition
tbat be will sbow it .
As to the potato eaters , it is a picture that will show well in gold, I am sure of
that, but it would show as well on a wall, papered in the deep color of ripe corn .
It simply cannot be seen without such a setting .
It does not show up well against a dark background, and not at all against a
dull background . That
’s because it gives a glimpse
of a very gray interior . In
reality too it stands in a gold frame, as it were, because the hearth and the glow
of the ﬁre
on the white wall would be nearer to the spectator, now
they are
outside the picture, but in reality they throw the whole thing into perspective .
I repeat, it must be shut
off by framing it in something
of a deep gold or
brass color .
If you yourself want to see it as it must be seen, don
’t forget thi s , please . Thi s
putting it next to a gold tone gives , at the same time, a brightness to sp ots wbere
y ou would not expect it, and takes away the marbled aspect it gets when unfortu
nately placed against a dull or black background . The shadows are painted in blue,
and a gold color puts life into this .
2 3 6


not minding criticisms such as
nasty, coarse, dirty , stinking, etc . , etc . ,
so it
would be a shame to waver .
No, one must paint the peasants as being one of them, as feeling, thinking as
they do .
Because one cannot help being the way one i s.
I often think how the peasants form a world apart, in many respects so much
better than the civilized world . Not in every respect, for what do they kn ow
about art and many other things ?
I still have a few smaller studies , but you will understand that the large one
has preoccupied me so much that I have been able to do very little else . As soon
as it is qui te ﬁni shed and dry, I shall send you the picture in a box, and add a
few smaller ones
.
I think it will be well not to wai t long before sending it, therefore I shall do
so ; probably the second lithograph will not be ready then, but I understand
that, for instance, Mr . Portier must be somewhat strengthened in hi s opini on, so
that we c an ﬁrmly count on him as a friend . I sincerely hope this will succeed .
I have been so absorbed in the picture that I literally almost forget my moving,
which has to be looked to after all .
My cares will not become less, but the lives of all painters of that kin d are so
full of them that I should not wish to have an easier time of it than they. And
seeing that they made their pictures in spite of everything, material di ffi culties
will worry me, it is true, but, in short, they will not crush me or make me slacken .
I think the potato eaters will get ﬁnished after
all ; the last daLs are almost
dangerous for a picture, as you know, because when it isn
’t quite dry, one
cannot work on it with a large brush without a great risk of spoiling it . And the
changes must be made quietly and calmly with a small brush . Th erefore I have
simply taken it to my friend and told him to take care that I do not spoil it
in that way and that I come to hi s house to give those ﬁnishing touches . You will
see it has originality .
Good-by , I
’m sorry it was not ready by today ; once more I wish you health
and serenity
. Believe me, with a handshake,
Ever yours, Vincent
Today I am still working on some smaller studies, which are to be sent at the
same time .
Did you send that copy of the Salon edition ?
413
Dear Theo,
Nuenen, June
1 8 8 5
Thanks for your letter and the enclosure . It was just what I wanted, and helped
me to work as hard at the end of the month as I did in the beginning .
I am very glad to hear that Serret i s a painter, about whom y ou had already
written things which I perfectly remember, but the name had escaped me . I should
like to write you much more than I am going to in thi s letter, but lately when
I come home, I don
’t feel like writing after I
’ve been sitting in
' the sun
all day.

As to what Serret says , I quite agree with him— I am just dropping him a line
because I should like to be friends with hi m . A s I already told you , recently I
have been very busy drawing ﬁgures
I will send them especially for Serret
’
s sake
to show him that I am far from indifferent to the uni ty and the form of a ﬁgure .
Do you ever see Wallis , i s that water color of the auction perhaps something
for him
If it were something for Wi sselin g h, be would be the one to take it .
I once gave a few heads to Wi sseling h , and recently sent him that lithograph .
But as he di d not answer a single word, I think if I sent him something again,
I should get nothing but an insult .
It just happened to me that Van Rappard, with whom I have been friends for
years , after keeping silent for about three months , wrote me a letter, so haughty
and so full of insults and so clearly written after he had been in The Hague that
I am almost sure I have forever lost him as a friend .
Just because I tried it ﬁrst at Th e Hague, i .e. in my own country, I have the
full right and cause to forget all those worries and to try something outside my
own country .
You know Walli s well ; perhaps y ou
c an broach the subject apropos
of that
water color, but do what y ou think best . If I could earn something with my
work, if we had some ﬁrm ground— no matter how little
-under
our feet for
our daily existence, and if in your case then the desire to become an artist took
the form of, let me
say , H ennebeau in Germinal, apart from difference in age,
etc .— what pictures you could make then ! The future i s always di fferent from
what one expects ,
so one never can be sure . The drawback to painting i s that,
even if one does
not sell one
’s pictures ,
one still needs money for colors and
models in order to make progress . And that drawback i s a bad thing . But for the
rest, painting and, in my opinion, especially painting
rural life gives sereni ty,
though one may have all kinds of superﬁcial worries and miseries . I mean painting
is a bome, and one does not have that homesickness , that pec uliar feeling Henne
beau had .
That passage I copied for you lately struck me particularly, because at the time
I had almost literally the same longing to be something like a g rassmower or a
navvy . And I was sick of the boredom of civilization . It is better, one is happier,
if one carries it out— literally though—
at least one feels one i s really alive . And it
is a good thing to be deep in the snow in winter ; in aut umn, deep in the yellow
leaves ; in summer, amid the ripe corn ; in spring, in the grass ; it i s a good thing
to be always with the mowers and the peasant girls, with a big
sky overhead in
summer, by the ﬁreside in winter, and to feel that it has always been
so and
always will be .
One may sleep on straw, eat black bread ; well, one will only be the healthier
for it .
I should like to write more, but I repeat, I am not in a mood for writing, and
I also wanted to enclose a note for Serret, which you must read too, because in
it I write about what I want to send before long, especially as I want to show
Serret my ﬁnished ﬁgure studies . Good-by ,
Ever yours , Vincent

Serret may agree with you that painting good pictures and selling them are two
separate things . But it i s not at all true . When the public at last
saw Millet, all
hi s work together, then the public was enthusiastic, both in Paris and London .
And who were the persons who had kept hi m in the shade and refused Millet
The art dealers , the so-called experts .
418
Dear Theo,
Nuenen, July
1 8 8 5
I wish the four pictures I wrote about were gone .
If I keep them here long, I might paint them over again, and I think it would
be better if you got them just as they came from the heath .
The reason I do not send them i s that I don
’t want to send them collect at a
moment when you yourself are pinched perhaps , and yet I cannot pay the carriage
myself .
I have never seen the little house in which Millet lived, but I imagine that
those four little human nests are of the same kind .
One i s the residence of a gentleman who i s known by the name of the mourn
ing peasant
”
; the other i s inhabited by a
“good woman
” who, when I came
there, did nothing more mysterious than turn over her potato pit , but she must
also be able to do witchcraft—
at any rate she bears the name of
“the witch
’s head .
”
You remember in Gig oux
’
s book how it happened that 1 7 ofDelacroix
’s pictures
were refused at the same time . One sees from this—
ar least I do— that he and
others of that period
placed before connoisseurs and non-connoisseurs , whom
none of them either understood or would buy— one sees from thi s that those
who in the book are rightly called
“the valiant,
” did not call it a hopeless
struggle , but went on painting . What I wanted to tell you once more i s that if w e
take that story about Delacroix as a starting point, we still have to paint a lot .
I am forced to be the most disagreeable of all persons , namely I have to ask
for money . And as I do not think that, as to selling, things will immediately take
a turn for the better, thi s i s bad enough . But I ask you, isn
’t it better after all for
both of us to work hard, though it will bring difficulties , than to sit and philos
ophi ze at a time like this ?
I do not know the future, Theo, but I do know the eternal law that everything
changes
go back ten years , and things were di fferent, the condi tions , the mood
of the people, well , everything . And ten years from now things will have changed
again, I am sure .
But the thing one does remains , and one does not easily regret having done a
thing . The more active one i s, the better, and I would rather have a failure than
sit and do nothing .
Whether Portier may or may not be the man to do something with my work,
we want him now at any rate . And thi s i s what I believe . After having worked
for a year or so, we shall have a larger collection than now, an d I know for sure
that my work will show better the more I complete it . People who now have
some sympathy for it, who speak of it as he does an d show it , are useful because
after my having worked, for instance,
an other year, they will have collected a
240


But just go and paint out-of-doors on the spot itself ! then all kinds of things
happen ; for instance, I had to wipe off at least a hundred or more ﬂi es from the
four paintings you will receive, not counting the dust and sand, not counting
that when one carries them across the heath and through the hedges for several
hours , some thorns will scratch them, etc . Not counting that when one arrives
on the heath after some hours
’ walk in this weather, one i s tired and exhausted
from the heat . Not counting that the ﬁgures do not stand still like professional
models , and that the effects
one wants to catch change with the progressing
day .
I don
’t know how it i s with you, but as for myself, the more I work in it, the
more I get absorbed in rural life . And I begin to care less and less either for
those Cabanel—like things among which I also include Jacquet and the present
day Benjamin Constant, or the
so highly prai sed but so inexpressibly dry tech
nique oftheItalians and Spaniards . Imagiers ! I oftenthink ofthatphrase ofJacque
’s .
Yet I have no parti pris , I feel for Raffaelli who paints quite other things than
peasants , I feel for Alfred Stevens , for Tissot, to mention something quite
different from peasants ; I feel for a beautiful portrait .
Though i n my opinion he makes colossal blunders i n hi s judgment of pictures ,
Zola says a beautiful thing about art in general in M es H aines ,
“dans le tableau
(l
’muvre d
’art) je cherche, j
’aime l
’homme— l
’
arti ste” [in the picture (work of art)
I seek, I love the man — the artist]
.
Look here, I think this perfectly true ; I
ask y ou what kind
of a man, what
kind of a prophet, or phi losopher, observer, what kind of a human character i s
there behind certain paintings , the technique of which 1S praised P— infact, often
notbing
. But a Raffaelli i s a personality, Lhermitte i s a personality, and before
many pictures by almost unknown artists,
one feels that they are made with a
will, with feeling , with passion and love . The technique of a painting from rural
life
or— like Raffaelli— from the heart of the city workmen— brings difficulties
quite different from those of the smooth painting and pose of a Jacquet or Ben
jamin Constant . It means liying in those cottages day by day, being in the ﬁelds
like the peasants , in summer in the heat of the sun , in winter suffering from snow
and frost ; not indoors but outside, and not during a walk, but day after day like
the peasants themselves .
And I
ask you if one considers these things , am I then
so far wrong when
I ﬁnd fault with the criticism of those critics who, these days more than ever,
talk humbug about thi s
so
often misused word, techni que (its signiﬁcance
i s
getting more and more conventional)
. Considering all the trouble and drudgery
needed to paint the
“
rouwboerke
”I and his cottage, I dare maintain that this i s
a longer and more tiring journey than many painters of exotic subjects (maybe
“La Justice au Harem,
”
or
“Reception at a Cardinal
’s
”) make for their most ex
qui sitely eccentric subjects . For in Paris any kind ofArabic or Spanish or Moorish
models i s to be had provided only that one pays for them . But he who paints ,
like Raffaelli , the ragpickers of Paris in their own quarter has far more difficulties ,
and hi s work i s more serious .
I
“Mourning peasant .

N otbing
seems simpler tbanpainting peasants, rag pickers and laborers of all kinds, but
—no subj ects inpainting
are so diﬁ
'
cult as tbese commonplaceﬁg ures I
A s far as I know there isn
’t a single academy where one learns to draw and
paint a digger, a sower, a woman putting the kettle over the ﬁre or a seamstress .
But in every city of some importance there i s an academy with a choice of models
for hi storical , Arabic, Loui s !
V, in short, all realb
/ nonexistentﬁg ures .
When I send you and Serret some studies of diggers or peasant women weed
ing , gleaning , etc . ,
as tbe beg inning
of a whole series of all kinds of labor in the
ﬁelds , then it may be that either you or Serret will discover faults in them which
will be useful for me to know, and which I may even admit myself.
But I want to point out something whi ch i s perhaps worth while . All academic
ﬁgures are put together in the same way and, let
’s say , on nep eut mieux . Irreproach
able,faultless . You will guess what I am driving at, they do not revealanything new .
This i s not true of the ﬁgures of a Millet, a Lhermitte, a Rég amey , a Daumier ;
they are also well put together, but after all in a different way than the academy
teaches .
But I think that however correctly academic a ﬁgure may be, it will be super
ﬂuous in these days , though it were by Ingres himself (hi s
“Source,
however,
excepted, because that really was , and i s, and will always be, something new) ,
when it lacks the essential modern note, the intimate character, the real
action.
Perhaps y ou will
ask : When will a ﬁgure
not be superﬂuous , though there
may be faults , great faults in it in my opinion ?
When the digger digs , when the peasant i s a peasant and the peasant woman,
a peasant woman .
Is thi s something new
— yes
—even the ﬁgures by O stade, Terborch, are not in
action like those painted nowadays .
I would like to say a lot more about this , and I would like to
say how much
I myself want to improve my work and how much I prefer the work of some
other artists to my own .
I ask you, do you know a single digger, a single sower in the
old Dutch
Did they ever try to paint
“a laborer” ? Did Velasquez try it in hi s
water carrier or types from the people
No .
The ﬁgures in the pictures of the old masters do not work . I am drudging just
now
on the ﬁgure
of a woman whom I saw digging for carrots in the snow
last winter .
Look here, Millet has done it, Lhermitte, and in general the painters of rural
life in this century— Israels for instance— they think it more beautiful than any
thing else .
But
even in thi s century, how relatively few among the innumerable painters
want the ﬁg ure— yes , above all— for the ﬁg ure
’
s sake, that i s to say for the sake of
line and modeling, but cannot imag ine it otherwise than in action, and want to do
what the old masters avoided—e ven the old Dutch masters who clung to many
conventional actions—and I repeat— want to paint tbe actionfor tbc action
’
s sake.
So that the picture or the drawing has to be a drawing
of the ﬁgure for the
sake of the ﬁgure and the inexpressibly harmonious form
of the human body,
243

but at the same time a digging of carrots in the snow . Do I express myself clearly
I hope
so, and just tell this to Serret . I can say it in a few words : a nude by
Cabanel, a lady by Jacquet and a peasant woman, not by Bastien L epag e bimself, but
a peasant woman by a Parisian who has learned hi s drawing at the academy,
will always indicate the limbs and the structure of the body in one selfsame way ,
sometimes charming— correct in proportion and anatomy. But when Israels, or
when Daumier or Lhermitte, for instance, draws a ﬁgure, the shape of the ﬁg ure
will be felt much more, and yet— that
’s why I hke to include Daumier— the
proportions will sometimes be almost arbitrary , the anatomy and structure often
quite wrong
“in the eyes of the academician .
” But it will live. And especially
Delacroix too .
It is not yet well expressed . Tell Serret that I sbould be desperate ifmy ﬁg ures
correct, tell him that I do not want them to be academically correct, tell him that
I mean : If one photographs a digger, be certainly
would not be dig g ing
tben. Tell
hi m that I adore the ﬁgures by Michelangelo though the legs are undoubtedly
too long, the hips and the backsides too large . Tell him that, for me, Mi llet and
Lhermitte are the real artists for the very reason that they do not paint things as
they are, traced in a dry analytical way, but as tbey— Millet, Lhermitte, Michel
angelo— feel them . Tell him that my great longing i s to learn to make those very
incorrectnesses, those deviations , remodelings , changes in reality, so that they
may become, yes, lies if you like— but truer than the literal truth.
i
f! ! And now I shall have to ﬁnish, but I wanted to say once more that those who
paint rural life or the life of the people, though they may not belong
to the men
of the moment, may wear better i n the long run than the painters of the exotic
harems and Cardinal
’s receptions , painted i n Paris .
I know that it i s being very disagreeable to
ask for money at inconvenient
moments ; my excuse, however, i s that painting the apparently most ordinary
things is sometimes most di fficult and expensive .
Tbe expenses I must make if I want to work are sometimes very high in proportion
to what I have at my disposal . I assure you, if my constitution had not become,
in all winds and weather, like that of a peasant, I should not be able to stand it,
as absolutely nothing i s left for my own comfort .
But I don
’t want comfort for myself, just as little as many peasants want to
live differently than they do .
But the money I ask i s for colors, and especially for models .
From what I write about drawings
of the ﬁgure, you can perhaps judge
sufficiently how passionately I want to carry them out.
You recently wrote me that Serret had spoken to you
with conviction
about
certain faults in the structure of the ﬁgures of the potato eaters .
But you will have seen from my answer that my own criticism also disapproves
of them on that score, but I pointed
out that thi s was an impression after my
having seen the cottage in
the dim lamphg ht for many evenings, after having
painted forty heads ,
so it is clear that I started from a di fferent point of vi ew .
But now that we begin to talk about ﬁgure drawing, I have a great deal more
to
say
. In Raffaelli
’
s words I ﬁnd hi s opinion about
“character
what he says


least on my part,
I feel impelled to repeat again that you should know once and
for all that there i s at your disposal,
or at the disposal of any painter whatever
who wants to come here to make studies , a spare bedroom in the house where I
have my studio . And I for my part want to advise you, as well as W enkebach,
whom I shall probably see tomorrow, to come here once in a while, as there are
enough beautiful things here . If you are inclined to appreciate this, very good ; if
not, very good just the same . But if you come, eacbg oes bis separate way
.
Here i s my explanation of the lithograph. I di d it entirely from memory and in a
single day ; I thought a certain composition somewhat forced, and was using an
altogether different process in an attempt to ﬁnd a new idea to put it together.
Besides , it was only an experiment and nothing more, and I used corrosives on the
stone later on .
Originally— although the faulty drawing of an arm or a nose that made you ﬂy
into a rage remains— the chiaroscuro was much better, as it i s in the composition
that I painted later . And as for the latter, although there are faults in it too, there
are still things in it that keep me from regretting that I painted it .
I cannot say that your letter of today was the least bit useful or necessary to me .
Only I assure you that your saying your belief in me was shaken and all that leaves
me pretty indifferent— you are no exception in this as far as certain others are
concerned . I let people say
of me and tbink of me wbatever tbey like and treat mejust as
tbey like—
that i s their business ; I am not obligated to listen to their everlasting
drivel . My parents , my teachers , Messrs . Goupil
Co . , and furthermore all kinds
of friends and acquaintances have said so many unpleasant things tomi e for my
own good and with the best intentions that in the end the burden has become a
little too heavy for me ; and since I let people talk without paying any attention to
it, I have not fallen off, my friend— tbis macb I tbink I knowfor sure.
In reply to your remarks , however, this . It i s a fact that your work i s good ; but
this does not mean, amice, that you are always right in thinking that there are no
other ways and methods of arriving at something good and sound than yours ; I
should like very much to talkthings over with you— but please don
’t gather from
this that it would mean consulting you— but our di scussions are becoming less
and less successful . Speaking of self-knowledge— who has it ? Here again it is a
matter of
“la science—
nul ne l
’
a,
only dela science— everyone greatly needs it for
himself, as regards hi s good or bad propensities— and I started with myself. But
don
’t think that you never deceive yourself because of a lack of i t, don
’t think that
you never hurt others horribly and undeservedly with superﬁcial
I know, everyone does this, and yet we must try to put up with each other. But
fory ou to speak about self-knowledge— no, my friend, I am awfully sorry thaty ou
should touch upon the subject, as I am afraid it i s the very weakest side of your
character, from a human point of view . Oh well— but I will try to state clearly
wbat I tbink about wben I tbink abouty ou.
As far as your work goes— here you are — I think your present work is excellent
— but here comes a thought exactly as it i s in my mind, without concealing any
thing— I have known you for a pretty long time . There was a time— immediately
before and immediately after your illness— when you were much less dry as a human
246

being than you have been at other times— fuller, milder, broader, more generous
— more straightforward and ingenuous .
Now you are speaking to me and behaving to me exactly as a certain abominably
arrogant Rappard studying at a certain academy di d at one time .
I am sorry that tbis acquaintance has come back to me, and I am still more sorry
for the loss of you as afriend, which you were in the exceptional period when I
found you changed and improved ; and seeing that I have observed this , I can
’t
help thinking, What about hi s work? ?— will that too be broader, fuller, nobler
for only a sbort time? ? Do you know the answer to that ?
I have taken only half a sheet of paper to express this thought, but you will see
from it that I am afraid at times that your work too may lose the nobler quality .
I think I am stating this idea clearly and simply .
Whatever my faults of character may be, it i s my sincere desire to do well in my
efforts as a painter, and I also have the sincere desire to treat others well— I have
too much heart to be as frivolous in my work as you are always reproaching me
with being . I need not take what you wrote to heart, and I don
’t do so . And as for
your saying that I am in need of someone who will tell me some home truths , that
may be true, but it may also be true that I my selfam the one to tell me some home
truths , and that I c an do without other people, especially if they are as prosy as
you are .
Greetings . But your letter,
as a whole, was unfair, even though there are
details in it that are more or less accurate .
Vincent
Y ou do not write me anything about your work, nor do I about mine .
423
Dear Theo,
Nuenen,
1 September
1 8 8 5
Th anks for your letter and the enclosed
1 5 o francs . I also received the
two
Lhermittes today. He is the absolute master of the ﬁgure, he does what he likes
with it— proceeding neither from the color nor from the local tone but rather
from the light— as Rembrandt did— there i s an astonishing mastery in everything
he does , above
all excelling in modeling, he perfectly satisﬁes
all that honesty
demands .
People talk a great deal about Poussin . Bracquemond also speaks of him . The
French call Poussin the very greatest painter among the old masters . Well , it i s
certainly true that what i s sai d about Poussin, of whom I know so very little, i s
also true of Lhermitte and Millet . But with this difference, that Poussin seems
to me the original grain ; the others, the full c ar. As for me, I think the modern
ones tbc most superior .
These last two weeks I have been worried a lot by the Roman Catholic priests ,
who told me, evidently with th e best intentions, an d feeling obliged, like all the
others, to meddle with it, that I ought not to get too familiar with people below
my rank ; expressing themselves to me in these terms but using quite a different
tone toward
“the people of lower rank,
” namely, threatening them about having
themselves painted . I simply told the Burgomaster at once, and pointed out to
2

him that it was a thing that did not concern the priests at all, who have to keep
to their own territory of more abstract things . At all events, they stopped their
opposition for the moment and I hope it will remain so .
A girl I had often painted was with child, and they suspected me, though I was
innocent . But I had heard the real state of affairs from the girl herself, and as it
was a case in which a member of the priest
’s congregation at Nuenen had played
a very ugly part, they cannot, at least for this once, get at me .
But you see that it i s not easy to paint or draw people in their own houses
and at their work .
Well, they will not easily get the better
of me in thi s case, and this winter
I hope to keep the very same models , who are thoroughly typical of the
old
Brabant race .
I again have a few new drawings . But I could by no means get anybody to
pose for me in the ﬁelds these days .
Happily for me, the priest i s getting rather unpopular . But it i s a bad thing,
and if it continued, I should have to move . Y ou will ask, What
’s the use
of
making yourself disagreeable
—but sometimes it cannot be avoided . If I had
argued gently with them, they would undoubtedly have g ot the better of me .
And when they hinder me in my work, I sometimes do not see any other way
than an eye for an eye, and a tooth for a tooth . The priest even went so far as
.
to promise the people money if they refused to be painted : but they an swered
quite spiritedly that they would rather earn money from me than beg some from
But you see they do it only for the sake of earning money, and they do notbing
for notbing here .
Y ou ask me if Rappard has ever sold anything . I know that at present he i s
better off than he used to be, that, for instance, for some time he took models
for the nude every day, that now, for the picture
of a brickyard, he rented a
small house on the spot itself, and had it improved with a skylight ; I know that
he made another trip through Drenthe, and that he will also go
' to Terschelling .
All these things are
rathe
‘f expensive, and the money for it must come from
somewhere . Though he may possess some money of hi s own, he must certainly
earn something too, otherwise he couldn
’t do what he does . Perhaps his family
buys , or friends— that may be— but somebody must .
But tonight I am too much occupied with Lhermitte
’s drawings to go
on
writing about other things . When I think of Millet or of Lhermitte, I ﬁnd modern
art as great as Michelangelo and Rembrandt—
ancient art i s inﬁnite, modern art
inﬁnite too— the ancient masters are g eniuses— the modern ones are g eniuses too .
A person like Chenavard does not think so perhaps . But I, for my part, am con
vinc ed that in this respect one can have fai th in modern art .
The fact that I have a deﬁnite belief about art makes me sure of what I want
in my own work, and I shall try to reach it even at the risk of my own hfe .
Good-by ,
Ever yours , Vincent


by Blai sse Desg offeI— really like Van Beyeren . I couldn
’t help thinking that those
simple still lifes of hers had far more artistic value than many pretentious pictures
by other Amsterdam painters .
They struck me as very well done . Especially one with a golden vase, a few
empty oyster shells , a broken coconut shell
an d a crust
of bread . I will send
you the book by Blane ; I hope soon to get L
’A rt
au !
VIIIme
I
especially longing to hear something from de Goncourt about Chardin. Lac aze
’
s
Rembrandt is really also in the sentiment of Rembrandt
’s last period ; it i s about
twelve years since I saw it, but I still remember it because it struck me, just like
that head by Fabritius in Rotterdam . If I remember correctly, that nude woman
in the Lacaze Collection is also very beautiful, also of a later period . The frag
ment, Rembrandt
’s
“Lesson in Anatomy,
” yes , I was absolutely staggered by
that too . Do you remember those ﬂesh colors— it i s— de la terre— especially the
feet .
You know, Frans H als
’
s ﬂesh colors are also earthy, used here in the sense that
you know . Often at least. Sometimes, I almost dare
say always , there i s also a
relation of contrast between the tone
of the cost ume and the tone
of the face .
Red and green are opposites
“The Singer
” (Dupper Collection), who has tones
of carmine in the ﬂesh color, has tones of green in hi s black sleeves , and ribbons
on those sleeves
of a
red otber than that carmine . The orange-white—blue fellow
I wrote about has a relatively neutral complexion, earthy-pink,
vi oletish, in
contrast with hi s Frans-Hals-yellow leather suit .
They ellowfellow, citron amorti , decidedly has dull violet in hi s mug . Well— the
darker the costume, the lighter the face i s sometimes— not accidentally—
at least
hi s portrai t and that of his wife in the garden contain two blackish violets (blue
violet and reddish-violet) and a plain black (yellow-black
I repeat, reddish
violet and blue-violet, black and black, the three gloomiest things , as it were ;
well, the faces are very fair, extremely fair, even for Hals .
Well, Frans Hals i s a colorist
among
colorists, a colorist like Veronese, like
Rubens , hke Delacroix, hke Velasquez .
Of Millet, Rembrandt and, for instance, Israels , it has truly been said that they
are more harmonists than colorists .
But tell me, black and wbite, may they be used or may they not, are they for
bidden fruit ?
I don
’t think so ; Frans Hals has no less than twenty-seven blacks . White— but
y ou know yourself what striking pictures some modern colorists make of white
on white . What i s the meaning of that phrase : onemust not? Delacroix called them
rests , used them as such . You must not have a prejudice against them, for if
used only in their places , and in harmony with the rest, one may of course use
all tones .
I can tell you that I often think the things by Apol, for instance, white on
white, very well done .
His sunset in The Hague Wood, for instance, which is in Amsterdam . That
thing i s damn good indeed .
I A French still-life painter of the mid -nineteenth c entury .

No— black and white have their reason and signiﬁcance, and when one tries
to suppress them, it turns out wrong ; to consider both neutral i s certainly the
most logical thing to do, white— the highest combination
of the lightest red,
blue, yellow ; black— the highest combination of the darkest red, blue, yellow .
I have nothing to
say against that theory, I ﬁnd it perfectly true . Well, lig bt and
brown, the tone in its value stands in direct relation to that 4th color scale from
wbite to black . For one ﬁnds there
a fourth sc ale
(that of the neutral tones,
that of red ! blue! yellow)
extreme light)
That i s how I understand the blacks and the whites .
When I mix red with green to a red-green or green-red, by mixing it with
white, I then get pink-green or green-pink . And if you like, by adding black,
I get brown-green
or green-brown . Isn
’t that clear ? When I mix yellow with
violet to a violet-yellow or yellow-violet, in other terms a neutralized yellow or a
neutralized violet, by adding white and black, I get grays .
Well, g ray s and browns, there i s especially question
of them when
one makes
colors ligbter or darker, whatever their nature and their gradation of red, yellow
or blue may be .
It i s quite correct to speak of light and dark grays and browns , I think . But
how beautiful what Silvestre says about Delacroix is— that he put a fortuitous
tone on hi s palette, une nuance innommable violace
'
e, that he put that one tone down
somewhere, eitberfor big best ligbt orfor deepest sbadow, but that of this mad he made
something which either sparkled like light or was gloomily silent like a deep
shadow .
So I have heard of an experiment with a sheet of neutral colored paper
which became greenish against a red background, reddi sh on a green one, blui sh
on orange, orange on blue, yellowish on violet, and violetish on yellow.
Just listen, suppose one wants such a muddy tone or drab color to become lig bt
in the picture, like Delacroix said of Veronese, that he could paint a blonde nude
woman with a color like mud in such a way that she comes out fair and blonde
in the picture— then the question arises— how i s this possible, unless by contrast
of great forces in bluish-blacks or violets , or reddi sh-browns ?
You— who are looking for dark shadows somewhere, and think that when the
shadows are dark, aye, black, that it i s
all wrong then, i s this right ? I don
’t
think
so . For then, for instance, the
“Dante
” by Delacroix, the “Fisherman of
Zandvoort,
” for instance, would be wrong . For indeed, they contain the most
vigorous blue-black or violet-black values . Rembrandt and Hals , didn
’t they use
black
and Velasquez ?
Not only one, but twenty-seven blacks, I assure you . So as to
one must not
use black,
” are you yourself quite sure that y ou know what you mean by it
2

and do you know what you want with it ? Really, think it over carefully, for you
might come to the conclusion— I think this very probable— that you have learned
and understood that question of tones quite wrongly, or rather have learned it
vag uely and understood it vag uely
. Many people do, most of them do . But in the
long run Delacroix and others of hi s time will teach you better .
Tell me— have you noticed that those studi es
of mine that have black back
grounds have their big best ligbt put in a low color scale? 22 And when in thi s way I
put my st udy in a lower color scale than nature, I yet keep the harmony of tones
because I become darker, not only in my shadows , but also in the same degree
I painted my studies just as a kind of gymnastics , to rise and fall in tone, so
don
’t forget that I painted my white and gray moss literally with a mud color,
and yet it looks light in the study.
Good-by ,
Ever yours , Vincent
These things concerning complementary colors , Simultaneous contrast, and th e
neutralizing of c omplementals, this question i s the ﬁrst and principal
one ; the
second is the mutual influence
of two kindred colors , for instance, carmine on a
vermilion, a pink-violet on a blue-violet . The third question i s a light blue against
the same dark blue, a pink against a brown-red, a citron yellow against a chamois
yellow, etc . But the ﬁrst question i s the most important.
If y ou come across some good book on color theories , mind you send it to me,
for I too am far from knowing everything about it, and am searching for more
every day.
429
Dear Theo,
Nuenen,
2 October
1 8 8 5
I read your letter about black with great pleasure, and it convinces me that you
have no prejudice against; black .
Your description of Manet
’
s st udy,
Le Tore
’ador Mort,
was well analyzed .
And the whole letter proves the same thing that your sketch of Paris suggested
to me at the time, namely that if you set yourself to it , y ou
can paint a thing
in words .
It i s a fact that by studying the laws of the colors one can go from an instinctive
belief in the great masters to
, the analysis of why one admires— what one admires
— and that i s indeed necessary nowadays when onerealizes how terribly arbitrarily
and superﬁcially people criticize .
Y ou just have to let me stick to my pessimism about the present-day art trade,
for it does not at all include di scouragement . Thi s i s my way of reasoning . Suppos
ing I am right in considering that curious haggling about prices of pictures
more and more like the bulb trade . I repeat, supposing that, like the bulb trade
at the end of the last century, the art trade, together with other branches
of
speculation, will di sappear at the end of this century the same way they came,
namely rather quickly . The bulb trade may disappear— theﬂower-g rowing remains .


painfuﬂy exact imitation ; one keeps it by recreating in a parallel color scale
which may be not exactly, or even far from exactly, hke the model .
Always intelligently making use of the beautiful tones which the colors form
of their
own accord when one breaks them
on the palette, I repeat— starting
from one
’s palette, from one
’s knowledge
of the harmony of colors i s quite
different from following nature mechanically and servilely.
Here i s another example : suppose I have to paint an autumn landscape, trees
with yellow leaves . All right— when I conceive it as a symphony in yellow, what
does it matter if the fundamental color of yellow i s the same as that of the leaves
or not ? It matters very little.
Mucb,
everytbing depends
on my perception of the inﬁnite variety of tones
of
one samefamily
.
Do you call thi s a dangerous inclination toward romanticism, an inﬁdelity to
realism,
’
a
“
peindre du chic
” a caring more for the colorist
’s palette than for
nature ? Well , que soit . Delacroix, Millet, Corot, Dupre, Daubigny, Breton, thirty
names more, aren
’t they the heart and soul of the art of painting ofthis century,
and aren
’t they
all rooted in romanticism, though they surpassed romanticism ?
Romance and romanticism are of our time, and painters must have imagination
and sentiment . Fortunately realism and naturalism are not free from it . Zola
creates , but does not hold up a mirror to things , he creates wonderful!
but creates ,
poetizes , that i s why it i s so beautiful . So much for naturalism and realism, which
are still connected with romanticism .
And I repeat that I am touched when I see a picture of about the years
’
5 o
a Paul Huet, an
old Israels like the
“Fisherman of
Cabat, an
Isabey.
But I ﬁnd
so much truth in that saying,
Ne pas peindre le ton local,
that
I greatly prefer a picture in a lower key than nature to one which i s exactly like
nature .
Rather a water color that is somewhat vague and unﬁnished than one which
i s worked up to simulate reali ty
.
That saying,
“Ne pas peindre le ton local,
has a broad meaning, and it leaves
the painter free to , seek colors whi ch form a whole and harmonize, which stand
out the more in contrast to another color scheme .
What do I care whether the portrait of an honorable citizen tells me exactly
the milk-and-watery blui sh, insipid color of that pious man
’s face— which I would
never have looked at. But the citizens of the small town where the above-men
tioned individual has rendered himself so meritorious that he thought himself
obliged to impress hi s physiognomy on posterity are highly ediﬁed by the correct
exactness .
Color expresses sometbing in itself, one cannot do without this , one must use it ;
what i s beautiful , really beautiful — i s also correct . When Veronese had painted
the portraits
of hi s beau-monde in the
“Noces de Cana,
” he had spent on it all
the richness of hi s palette in somber violets, in splendid golden tones . Then— he
still thought of a faint azure and pearly white— which does
not appear in the
foreground . He hurls it on in the background— and it was right, spontaneously

it changes into the surrounding atmosphere
of marble palaces and
sky , which
characteristically complete the cluster of ﬁgures .
That background i s so beautiful that it arose spontaneously from a calculation
of colors .
Am I wrong in this ?
Isn
’t it painted dzﬁ
'
erently than it would be by somebody who had thought at
the same time of the palace and of the ﬁgures as one whole ?
All that architecture and
sky i s conventional and subservient to the ﬁgures ,
it i s calculated to make the ﬁgures stand out beautifully.
Surely tbat is real painting,
and the result i s more beautiful than the exact
imitation ofthe things themselves . Thinking ofone thing and letting the surround
ings belong to it and result from it .
To study from nature, to wrestle with reality— I don
’t want to do away with
it, for years and years I myself have done just that, almost fruitlessly and with all
kinds of sad results .
I should not like to have missed that error .
I mean that it would be foolish and stupid to always go on in that same way,
but not that all my pains should be absolutely lost .
“On commence par tuer, on ﬁni t par g uérir,
” i s a doctor
’s saying . One starts
with a hopeless struggle to follow nature, and everything goes wrong ; one ends
by calmly creating from one
’s palette, and nature agrees with it , and follows .
But these two opposites cannot be separated . The drudging, though it may seem
futile, gives an intimacy with nature, a sounder knowledge of things . And a
beautiful saying of Doré
’s (who sometimes i s so clever !) i s,j e me souviens . Though
I believe that the best pictures are more
or less freely painted by heart, I
can
’t
help adding that one can never study nature too much and too hard . The greatest,
most powerful imaginations have at the same time made things directly from
nature that strike one dumb .
In answer to your description of the study by Manet, I send you a still life of
an open—
so a broken white— Bible bound in leather, against a black background,
with yellow-brown foreground, with a touch of citron yellow .
I painted that in one rusb, on one day .
This to show you that when I say that I have perhaps not plodded entirely in
vain, I dare say this because at present I ﬁnd it quite easy to paint a given subject
unhesitatingly, whatever its form
or color may be . Recently I painted a few
st udies out- of-doors , autumn landscapes .
I
’ll write again soon, and I am sending this letter in haste to tell you that I was
qui te pleased with what y ou say about black .
Good-by ,
Ever yours , Vincent
N uenen [Personal reminiscence of Van Gogh by Anton Kerssemakers]
It w as some years after his stay in the Borinag e— when, after having worked in
The Hague and in Drenthe, he had come to stay in Nuenen, about the year
1 8 84
— that I made the painter
’s acquaintance .
2 5 5

At the time I was engaged in painting a number of landscapes on the walls of
my office, instead
of having them covered with wallpaper, and in hi s peculiar
way my house painter, who furnished me with colors, thought this
so nice that
one day he brought Van Gogh along to show him my work .
Van Gogh w as of the opini on that I could draw, and kind-heartedly, as was
hi s way , he at once showed himself willing to help me on with my painting .
The consequence was our more intimate acquaintanceship and,
on hi s friendly
invitation, my visit to hi s studio at Nuenen, to which I shall revert later on .
My house painter had quite a lot
of conﬁdence in Van Gogh, and prepared
for him the colors hemost needed, such as the whites and the ochers and some
others .
Seeing that the house painter was no expert at thi s job, these colors often left
much to be desired in the matter of consistency, but Van Gogh had to content
himself with them because of a lack of money .
I still have a little study as a souvenir of thi s unmanageable paint .
He painted it in a great hurry at my house, to instruct me ; it was a view from
my window in winter with melting snow, and the thin white color ran all over
the landscape .
On the occasion of my ﬁrst visit to hi s studio at Nuenen it was impossible for
me to get the right insight into hi s work ; it was
so totally different from what
I had imagined it would be up to then,
so rough and unkempt,
so harsh and
unﬁni shed, that with the best will in the world I was unable to think it good or
beautiful ; and, badly disappointed, I decided not to go and see him again, and
g o my own way.
However, shortly afterward I di scovered that hi s work had made a certain
impression on me after all, whi ch it was impossible for me to dismiss from my
mind ; every now and then hi s studies rose up before my mind
’s eye again ,
so
that I resolved to pay him another visit ; it was as if I were drawn to it .
At my second visit the impression I g ot was considerably better, although in
my ignorance I still thought that either he could not draw or that he carelessly
neglected to draw hi s ﬁgures , an d so on, and I took the liberty of telling him so
straight out .
He was not at all cross at thi s , he only laughed a little and said quietly, Later
on you will think differently. When I went away, he gave me some engravings
from Tbe Grapbic and some by Adolf Menzel and others to take with me, saying
that he advised me to look them over carefully and unhurriedly at home,
an d
study them and draw copies of them.
“You will learn a thing or two from this .
On another occasion I took along a number of small studies that I had painted
in the meantime, so as to hear what he would have to say about them.
Probably in order not to discourage me he said :
“Well, after all there i s some good in it . But now I advise you to try and make
a few still lifes ﬁrst instead of landscapes ; you will learn a lot from that . After
you have painted some ﬁfty of them, you will see how much progress you have
made . And I am willing to help you and to paint the same subjects along with
y ou , for I myself still have a good deal to learn, an d there i s nothing to equal
2 5 6


On the other hand he liked to have some brandy in hi s ﬂask on hi s rambles ,
and he would not have liked to do without it ; but as far as I know this was the
only luxury he permitted himself. His st udio
too— he had rented a couple of
rooms in the sexton
’s house— had quite a Bohemian look .
One was amazed at the way
all the available hanging or standing room was
ﬁlled with paintings , drawings in water color and in crayon, heads of men and
women whose clownish turned-up noses, protruding cheekbones and large ears
were strongly accentuated, the rough paws calloused and furrowed, weavers and
weaving looms , women spooling yarn, potato planters , women weeding, innumer
able still lifes , certainly as many as ten studies in oils
of the little old chapel at
Nuenen that I mentioned, whi ch he was so enthusiastic about that he had painted
it in all seasons and in all weathers . (Later thi s little chapel was pulled down by
the Nuenen vandals , as he called them .)
A great heap of ashes around the stove, which had never known a brush or stove
polish, a small number of chairs with frayed cane bottoms, a cupboard with at
least thirty di fferent bird
’s nests ,
all kinds
of mosses and plants brought along
from the moor, some stuffed birds, a spool, a spinning wheel, a complete set
of
farm tools , old caps and hats , coarse bonnets and hoods , wooden shoes, etc . , etc .
Paintbox and palette he had had made in Nuenen according to hi s directions ,
as well as a perspective frame ; thi s consisted of an iron bar with a long sharp
point, on which he could mount, by means of screws, an empty frame hke a
small window . He said, The painters of old used a perspective frame at times,
so why shouldn
’t we
Some time later I visited a number of museums in hi s company, the National
Museum at Amsterdam being the ﬁrst .
A s I was unable to spend the night away from home for domestic reasons , he
went the day before and made an appointment to meet me the next day in the
thi rd-class waiting room of the Central Station at Amsterdam .
When I came into this waiting room I saw quite a crowd of people of all sorts ,
railway guards , workmen,travelers ,
and
so
on and
so forth, gathered near the
front windows of the waiting room, and there he was sitting, surrounded by
this mob , in
all tranqui llity, dressed in hi s shaggy ul ster and hi s inevitable fur
cap , industriously making a few little city views (he had taken a small tin paintbox
with him) without paying the slightest attention to the loud di srespectful observa
tions and critical remarks of the esteemed (P) public . As soon as he caught sight
of me, he packed up hi s things quite calmly, and we started for the museum .
Seeing that the rain was coming down i n torrents , and Van Gogh i n hi s fur cap
and shaggy ulster soon looked hke a drowned tomcat, I took a cab, at which he
grumbled considerably, saying,
“What do I care about the opinion of all Amster
dam, I prefer walking ; well, never mind, have it your own way.
”
In the museum he knew where to ﬁnd what interested him most ; he took me
chieﬂy to the Van Goyens , the Bols and the Rembrandts ; he spent the longest
time in front of the
“Jewish Bride
”
; I could not tear him away from the spot ;
he went and sat down there at hi s ease, whi le I myself went on to look at some
other things .
“You will ﬁnd me here when you come back,
” he told me .
2 5 8

When I came back after a pretty long while and asked him whether we should
not get a move on, he gave me a surprised look and said,
“Would you believe it
—and I honestly mean what I
say— I should be happy to give ten years of my
life if I could go on sitting here in front of this picture for a fortnight, with only
a crust of dry bread for food ?
” At last he got up .
Well , never mind,
” he said,
“we can
’t stay here forever, can we ?
”
After that we went to Van Gogh
’s Fine Art Establishment, where at hi s rec
ommendation I bought
two books , Muse
’
es de H ollande and Tre
’
sors d
’
art
en
A ng leterre by W . Burger (Thore) ; when I asked him if he would g o inside with
me, he replied,
“No , I must not be seen on the premises of such a genteel, rich
family.
” He still seemed to be on bad terms with hi s family ; he remained standing
in the street, waiting for me .
Some time later we visited the museums at Antwerp , and I still remember one
characteristic incident vividly . It was when he caught sight of the ﬁsherboy
carrying a basket on hi s back (I think it i s by Velasquez)
. Suddenly he di sappeared
from my side, and I
saw him run to the picture ; and of course I ran after him .
When I reached him, he was standing in front of the picture with folded hands
as if in devout prayer, and muttered,
G od
damn it, do you see that ?
” After
a while he said,
“That i s what I call painting, look
”— and, following with his
thumb the direction of the broad brush strokes— “he was one to leave what he
had once put down alone,
” and indi cating the gallery with a wide, all -embracing
gesture :
“All the rest belongs to the periwig-and-pigtail period .
”
He felt a deep veneration for Corot, Daubigny, Diaz, Millet, and further the
whole Barbizon school, he was always full of it, and in hi s di squi sitions
on hi s
beloved art he invariably reverted to them .
However, he never spoke about art with totally uninitiated persons , and he
was terribly annoyed when a so—called picture lover from his entourage told him
that he thought a thing of hi s was beautiful ; then he knew for certain, he Was
in the habit of saying, that it was bad, and as a rule such studies were destroyed
or repainted . Only with a few chosen friends , to whom I also had the good
fortune
of belonging— although in those days these friends were also unable
fully to agree with hi s manner of painting— di d he hke to talk about painting ,
drawing, etching and so on, and many a time I have reproached myself for not
having understood him better at the time, for if I had, how much more might
I have learned from him .
He was always drawing comparisons between the art of painting and music,
and in order to get an even better understanding of the values and the various
nuances of the tones, he started taking pian o lessons with an
old music teacher
who was at the same time an organist in Eindhoven. This , however, di d not last
long, for seeing that during the lessons Van Gogh was continually comparing
the notes of the piano with Prussian blue and dark green and dark ocher, and so
on , all the way to bright cadmium-yellow, the good man thought that he had to
do with a madman, in consequence of which he became so afraid of him that he
discontinued the lessons .
I was also present at the painting
of the water mill at Gestel, whi ch picture

I later saw again at Oldenzeel
’
s and in the Boyman s Museum at Rotterdam.
At the time he thought he had found a means
of preventing the, to him,
so
hateful, sinking in of the colors by using copaiba balsam, but seeing that he w as
rather lavish in the use of this ingredient, as he was of hi s colors too, he used
too much of i t, and the result was that the whole sky of the picture came ﬂoating
down, so that he had to remove it with his palette knife, as may still be seen in
the picture on close examination .
Only a few pieces were signed by him. When I once asked him why he di d not
sign his name in full, he replied :
“Van Gogh i s such an impossible name for
many foreigners to pronounce ; if it should happen that my pictures found their
way to France or England, then the name would certainly be murdered, whereas
the whole world can pronounce the name Vincent correctly.
”
He came to my house in Eindhoven very often . Once when I was sitting painting
in my garden, I suddenly heard behind me :
“Look here, yes, you are right to
paint in the open air , you should do it
. Yes , do you see the slant of that
roof ? It m
ust be an angle of at least forty-ﬁy e degrees ; it
’
s far too steep like
that . And then I don
’t know how you are going to handle your colors, but all
this is of no importance, just go ahead . There i s nothing from which one learns
so much as from painting in the open air. In particular you should compare the
objects with each other, especi ally for the tone . Painting i s like algebra something
i s to this as that is to the other . And above all , st udy your perspective carefully ;
if you start by making things green in the background, how can you expect to
get them green in the foreground ?
”
Whenever he saw a beautiful evening
sky , he went into
ec stasiesfif one may
use the expression. Once, when we were tramping from Nuenen to Eindhoven
toward evening, he suddenly stood stock-still before a glorious sunset, and using
hi s two hands as if to screen it off a little, and with hi s eyes half closed, he ex
claimed,
“God bless me, how does that fellow— or God, or whatever name you
give him— how does he do it ? We ought to be able to do that too . My God,
my God, how beautiful that i s ! What a pity we haven
’t got a prepared palette
ready, for it will be gone in a moment .
“Do let us sit down here for a minute . Take care you never forget to half-shut
your eyes when y ou are painting in the open air. Once in a while those clodhop
pers in Nuenen say that I am mad when they
see me shuffling about over the
moor, and stop , and crouch down in a half-sitting position, every now and then
screwing my eyes half-shut, holding up my hands by my eyes , now in this way ,
now in that, in order to screen things
off. But I don
’t give a damn about that,
I just go my own way .
”
Forweeks onendhewould occupyhimselfexclusivelywith the drawing ofhands,
feet or wooden shoes .
“That i s something I mustget a ﬁrmgrip on,
” he used to say
.
One of the female models whom he used for painting studies of heads was hi s
Dulcinea, according
to village gossip . One repeatedly encounters her in hi s
paintings of heads . It had even happened that this was objected to by one of the
guardians of the villagers
’ salvation, and moreover, he blamed the same person
for hi s having been given notice to quit hi s studi o . As he himself recounted, he
260


later on, and write about me when I
’m dead and gone . I shall take care of that,
if I can keep alive for some little time . ”
[Reprinted from the Amsterdam weekly D e Groene (The Green One) of April
14
and 2 1 ,
43 7
Dear Theo,
Antwerp , November
1 8 8 5
-February
1 8 86, Saturday evening
I want to write you a few more impressions of Antwerp .
Thi s morning I took a most satisfactory walk in the pouring rain, the object
of this excursion being to get my things at the customhouse ; the various dock
yards and warehouses on the quays are splendid .
I have walked along the docks and
the quays several times already, in
all
directions . Especially when
one comes from the sand and the heath and the
qui et of a peasant village, and has been in none but quiet surroundings for a
long time, the contrast i s curious . It i s an unfathomable confusion . One of de
G onc ourt
’
s sayings was
“Japonaiserie forever .
” Well , those docks are a famous
Japonaiserie, fantastic, peculiar, unheard of— at least one can take this view of it .
I should like to walk there with you, just to know whether we see alike . One
could make everything there, city views— ﬁg ures of the most varied character
— the ships as the principal things , with water and
sky a delicate gray— but
above all— Japonaiserie . I mean, the ﬁg ures are always in action, one sees them
in the queerest surroundings, everything fantastic, and at all moments interesting
contrasts present themselves .
A white horse in the mud, in a corner where heaps of merchandi se are lying
covered with oilcloth— against the
old smoky black walls
of the warehouse .
Quite simple, but an effect of Black and White .
Through the window of a very elegant English bar, one will look out on the
dirtiest mud, and on a ship from which, for instance, attractive merchandise like
hides and buffalo horns is being unloaded by hideous dock hands
or exotic
sailors ; a very dainty, very fair young English girl IS standing at the window
looking at i t,
or at something else . The
interior with the ﬁgure altogether in
tone, and for light— the silvery
sky above
that mud, and
the buffalo horns,
again a series
of rather sharp contrasts . There will be Flemish sailors , with
almost exaggeratedly healthy faces , with broad shoulders , strong and plump, and
thoroughly Antwerp folk, eating mussels ,
or drinking beer, and
all this wi ll
happen with a lot of noise and bustle— by way of contrast— a tiny ﬁgure in black
with her little hands pressed against her body comes stealing noiselessly along
the gray walls . Framed by raven-black hair— a small oval face, brown ? orange
yellow
I don
’t know. For a moment she lifts her eyelids, and looks with a slanting
glance out of a pair of jet black eyes . It i s a Chinese girl, mysterious , quiet like
a mouse
—small, bedbug-like in character . What a contrast to that group ofFlem
i sh mussel eaters .
Another contrast— one passes through a very narrow street, between tremen
dously high houses , warehouses , and sheds .
But down below in the street pubs for
all nationalities with masculine
and

feminine individuals to match, shops selling eatables , seamen
’
s clothes , glaringly
colorful and crowded .
That street i s long, every moment one sees something striking . Now and
again there is a noise, intenser than anywhere else, when a quarrel i s going on ;
for instance, there you are walking, looking about, and suddenly there i s a loud
cheering and all kinds of shouting . In broad daylight a sailor i s being thrown
out
of a brothel by the girls, and pursued by a furious fellow and a string
of
prostitutes , of whom he seems rather afraid— at least I saw him scramble over a
heap of sacks and di sappear through a warehouse window .
Now, when one has had enough of all this tumult—
at the end of the landing
stages where the Harwich and Havre steamers are moored— with the city behind
one, one sees nothing in front, absolutely nothing but an inﬁnite expanse of ﬂat,
half-inundated ﬁelds , awfully dreary and wet, waving dry rushes , mud, the river
with a single little black boat, the water in the foreground gray, the sky , foggy
and cold, gray— still like a desert .
As to the general view
of the harbor
or a dock— at one moment it is more
tangled and fantastic than a thorn hedge, so confused that one ﬁnds no rest for
the eye, and gets giddy, is forced by the whirling
of colors and lines to look
ﬁrst here, then there, without being able, even by looking for a long time at one
point, to di stinguish one thing from another. But when
one stands
on a spot
where one has a vague plot as foreground, then
one sees the most beautiful
qui et lines , and the effects which Mols, for instance, often paints .
Now one sees a girl who i s splendidly healthy, and who looks or seems to
look loyal, simple and jolly then again, a face so sly and false that it makes one
afraid, hke a hyena
’s . Not to forget the faces damaged by smallpox, having the
color of boiled shrimps, with pale gray eyes , without eyebrows , and sparse sleek
thin hair, the color of real pigs
’ bristles or somewhat yellower Swedi sh or Danish
types . It would be ﬁne to work there, but how and where ?
For one would very soon get into a scrape .
However, I have trudged through quite a number of streets and back streets
without adventure,
and I have sat and talked quite jovially with various girls
who seemed to take me for a sailor.
I don
’t think it improbable that I shall get hold of good models by painting
portraits .
Today I g ot my things and drawing materials, for whi ch I w as longing very
much. And so my studio i s all ﬁxed up . If I could get good models for almost
nothing, I should not be afraid of anything .
I do not think it so very bad either that I have not got so much money as to
be able to force things by paying for them . Perhaps the idea of making portraits
and having them paid for by posing i s the safer way, because in a city it i s not
the same as it i s with the peasants . Well,
one thing i s sure, Antwerp i s very
curious and ﬁne for a painter .
My studi o i s not bad, especially as I have pinned a lot of httle Japanese prints
on the wall, which amuse me very much . Y ou know those little women
’s ﬁgures
in gardens , or on the beach, horsemen, ﬂowers , knotty thorn branches .

I am glad I went, and hope not to
sit still this winter. Well , I feel safe now
that I have a little den where I can sit and work when the weather i s bad .
But of course I shall not exactly live in immense luxury these days .
Try and send your letter off on the ﬁrst, because I have provided myself with
bread till then, but after that I should be in something of a ﬁx .
My little room i s better than I expected, and it certainly doesn
’t look dull .
Now that I have the three studies I took with me here, I shall try to approach
the picture dealers , who seem to live in private houses , however, with no show
window on the street .
The park i s ni ce too , I sat and drew there one morning .
Well,
so far I have had no bad luck ; as to my lodgings , I am well off, as by
spending a few francs more I have g ot a stove and a lamp .
I shall not easily get bored, I assure you . I have also found the
October by
Lhermitte, women in a potato ﬁeld in the evening, beautiful . But I have not
seen
“November,
” have you got it perhaps ? I have also noticed that there i s a
Fig aro illustrated with a ﬁne drawing by Raffaelli .
My address you know i s
1 94 Rue des Images ,
so please forward your letter
there, and the second part of de Goncourt when you have ﬁnished it .
G
d-b
00
Y,
Ever yours, Vincent
It i s curious that my painted studies seem darker in the city than in the country .
Is that because the light is less bright everywhere in the city ? I don
’t know,
but it may make a greater difference than one would say offhand ; it\struck me,
and I could understand that things you have look darker than I in the country
thought they were . However, the ones I have with me now don
’t come
out
badly for all that, the mill, avenue with autumn trees and a still life and a few
little ones .
43 9
Dear Theo,
Antwerp , November
1 8 8 5
-February 1 8 86
I must write you again to tell you that I have succeeded in ﬁnding a model .
I have made two fairly big heads , by way
of trial for a portrait. First, that old
man whom I wrote you about, a kind of head like Hugo
’s ; then also a study of
a woman . In the woman
’s portrait I have brought lighter tones into the ﬂesh,
white tinted with carmine, vermilion, yellow and a light background
of gray
yellow, from which the face i s separated only by the black hair . Lilac tones in
the dress .
Rubens is certainly making a strong impression on me ; I think hi s drawing
tremendously good— I mean the drawing
of heads and hands in themselves .
I am quite carried away by hi s way of drawing the lines in a face with streaks of
pure red, or of modeling the ﬁngers
of the hands by the same kind of streaks .
I go to the museum fairly often, and then I look at httle else but a few heads and
hands of hi s and of Jordaens
’
. I know he is not as intimate as Hals and Rem
brandt, but in themselves those heads are so alive .
2 64


I like Rubens just for hi s ingenuous way
of painting, hi s working with the
simplest means .
I don
’t count Henri de Braekeleer among those who look for mother-of—pearl
effects everywhere, because hi s is a curious , very interesting endeavor
to be
literally true, and he stands quite apart. I also saw various gray paintings , includ
ing a printing shop by Mertens , a picture by Verhaert representing his own studi o,
where he himself i s sitting etching and hi s wife standing behind him.
By La Rivi ere— an Amsterdam hired mourner after a funeral, very ﬁne in the
black tones , a Goya-hke conception ; that little picture was a masterpiece . In
both collections I
saw very beautiful landscapes and marines . But as
to the
portraits— those I remember best are the
“Fisherboy
” by Frans Hals ,
“Saskia
”
by Rembrandt, a number of smiling or weeping faces by Rubens .
Ah, a pic ture
e must be painted— and then why not simply
Now when I look
into real life— I get the same kind of impressions . I
see the people in the street
very well, but I often think the servant girls
so much more interesting and
beautiful than the ladies , the workmen more interesting than the gentlemen ;
and in those common girls and fellows I ﬁnd a power and vitality which, if one
wants to express them in their peculiar character, ought to be painted with a
ﬁrm brush stroke, with a simple technique .
Wauters understood thi s , used to at least, for so far I haven
’t seen any work
of hi s here . What I admire so much in Delacroix, too, i s that he makes us feel
the life ofthings, and the expression, and the movement, that he absolutely dominates
And in a great many of the good things I saw, though I admire them, there i s
often far too much paint . At present I am getting more and more in the habit of
talking to the models while painting, to keep their faces animated .
I have discovered a woman— she i s old now— who used to live in Paris and
provided the painters with models , for instance, Scheffer, Gigoux, Delacroix and
another one who painted a Phryne .
Now she i s a washerwoman and knows a lot
of women, and could always
supply some, she said .
V
It has been snowing, and the city was splendid early this morning in the snow,
ﬁne groups of street cleaners .
I am glad I came here, for I am already full of ideas, also for the time when
I shall be in the country again .
It was in the E toile Belg e, I think, that I read an article by Eugene Battaille,
reprinted from the Fig aro, about conditions in Paris, an article which impressed
me as being very well thought out ; but according to him conditions in general
are very bad . This Mr . Battai lle has, contrary to the opinion of the Dutch jour
nali sts, expressed himself in Amsterdam pessimistically about the state of affai rs
in Holland .
As to art dealing— as I have already written you, the dealers here complain
like misere ouverte . And yet I believe that so much might still be done . To mention
one thing, for instance, one sees
no pictures in the cafe
's , restaurants , cafe
chantants, at least hardly any . And how contrary this is to nature . Why don
’t
266

they hang still lifes there, like the splendid decorations Fijt, Hondekoeter and so
many others made in times
of old ? Why not women
’
s portraits, if they want
prostitutes ? I know one must work cheaply for such purposes, but
one can
work relatively cheaply . Raising prices to such a height is the trade
’s ruin , and
leads to no good after all .
Good-by , write again between times if you can. As to the money, do what
y ou can, but remember that we must try our utmost to succeed . And I won
’t let
that idea
of painting portraits g o, for it i s a good thing to ﬁght for, to show
people that there is more in them than the photographer can possibly get out of
them with hi s machine .
Good-by , with a handshake,
Ever yours, Vincent
I have noticed the great number of photographers here, who are just about the
same as everywhere, and seem to be pretty busy .
But always those same conventional eyes , noses, mouths— waxlike and smooth
and cold .
It cannot but always remain lifeless .
And the painted portraits have a life of their own, coming straight from the
painter
’s soul , which the machine cannot reach . The more one looks at photo
graphs, the more one feels this, I think .
442
Dear Theo,
Antwerp , 2 8 December
1 8 8 5
It i s high time I thanked you for the 5 0 fr . you sent, which helped me get through
the month, though from today on it will be pretty much the same .
But— there are a few more studies made, and the more I paint, the more
progress I think I make . As soon as I received the money, I took a beautiful
model and painted her head life-size .
It i s quite light except for the black, you know. Yet the head itself stands
out simply against a background in which I tried to put a golden shimmer
of light.
Here follows the color scheme
- a well-toned ﬂesh color, in the neck rather
bronze-hke, jet-black hair— black which I had to make with carmine and Prussian
blue, dullish white for the little jacket, light yellow, much lighter than the white,
for the background . A scarlet note in the jet-black hair and another scarlet ribbon
in the dullish white .
She is a girl from a café-chantant, and yet the expression I sought was rather
Ecce Homo-like .
But as I want to remain true, especially in the expression, though my
own
thoughts are in it too, this is what I wanted to express in it .
When the model came, she had apparently been very busy the last few nights ,
and she said something that was rather characteristic :
“Pour moi le champagne
ne m
’ég aye pas, il me rend tout triste” [A s for me champagne does not cheer
me up, it makes me qui te sad]
.

Then I understood, and I tried to express something volupt uous and at the
same time cruelly tormented .
I began a second study of the same model in proﬁle .
Then I made that portrait which I mentioned, the one that was promised me,
and I painted a study of that head for myself, and now these last days
of the
month I hope to paint another head of a man .
I feel quite cheerful, especially about the work, and it i s good for me to be here .
I imagine that whatever those tarts may be, one can make money out of them,
sooner than in any other way. There i s
no denying that they are sometimes
damned beautiful and that it i s the spirit of the time that this kind of picture i s
gai ning more and more ground .
And even from the highest artistic point of view, nothing can be said against
it ; topaint buman being s, that was the old Italian art, that is what Millet di d and
what Breton does .
The question i s only whether
one starts from the soul
or from the clothes ,
and whether the form serves as a clothes peg for ribbons
an d bows
or if one
considers the form as the means
of rendering impression and sentiment, or if
one models for the sake of modeling, because it i s so inﬁnitely beautiful in itself.
Only the ﬁrst i s transitory, and the latter two are both high art .
What rather pleased me was that the girl who posed for me wanted me to
paint a portrait for her to keep herself, exactly hke the things I made for myself.
And she has promised to let me paint a study of her in her room, in a dancer
’s
dress , as soon as possible . She cannot do thi s now, because the owner of the cafe
where she 13 objects to her posing, but as she is going to take a room with another
girl, both she and the other girl would like to have their portraits painted . And
I fervently hope that she will come back, for she has a striking face and is witty .
But I must train myself, seeing that it all depends on skill and qui ckness ; for
they haven
’t much time or patience, though for that matter, the work need not
be less well done for being done qui ckly, and one must be able to work even if
the model does not sit rigidly still . Well, you see that I am at work with full vigor .
If I sold something so that I earned a little more, I should work even more
vigorously.
As to Portier, I do not lose courage yet, but poverty is hounding me, and at
present all the dealers rather suffer from the same evil, that of being more or less
une nation retirée du monde,
” i .e. in hiding . Th ey have too much spleen, and
how can
one be expected to feel inclined to grub in
all that indifference and
dullness ? Besides , thi s complaint i s catching .
For it is all nonsense that no business can be done, but in any case one must
work with conviction and with enthusiasm, in short with a certain warmth .
As to Portier, you wrote me yourself that he was the ﬁrst to exhibit the im
pressioni sts, and that he was completely crowded out by Duran d Ruel . Well , one
might conclude from this that he i s a man of initiative, not just saying things
but doing them . Perhaps it i s the fault of hi s sixty years , and for the rest it may
be one of the many cases in which at the time when pictures were the fashion
and business prospered, a lot of intelligent persons were wantonly put aside, as
268


Something about my constitution which made me very glad was what a doctor
in Amsterdam told me, whom I consulted once about a few things which some
times made me fear that I was not long for this world, and whose opinion I di d
not ask strai ght out, but just to know the ﬁrst impression of somebody who
absolutely di d not know me . It was like this
. making use of a small complaint
I had then, in the course
of the conversation I referred to my constitution in
general— how glad I was when this doctor took me for an ordinary working
man and said,
“I suppose you are an ironworker .
That is just what I have tried
to change in myself ; when I was younger, I looked hke one who was intellectually
overwrought, and now I look like a bargeman or an ironworker.
And to change one
’s constitution
so that one gets
“a tough hide
is no easy
matter.
But all the same I must be careful, and try to keep what I have, and g ain in
strength .
Above all I want y ou to write me if the idea seems so absurd to you that one
should gain in courage if one planted the seed of a business of one
’s own ?
As to my present work, I feel that I can do better ; however, I need some more
space and
air, I mean— I ought to be able to spend a little more . Above
all ,
above all I cannot take enough models . I could produce work of a better quali ty,
but then my expenses would be heavier. But oughtn
’t one to aim at something
lofty, something true, something distingui shed ?
The women
’
s ﬁgures I see here among the people make a tremendous impres
sion on me, much more to paint them than to possess
them, though indeed,
I should like both.
I reread the book by de Goncourt . It i s excellent . The preface to Cbe
’
rie, whi ch
y ou will read, tells the story of what the de Gonc ourts went through, and how
at the end of their lives they were melancholy, yes , but felt sure of themselves ,
knowing that they had
accomplisbed something, that their work would remain .
What fellows they were ! If we were more of one mind than we are now , if we
could agree completely, why shouldn
’t we do tbc same?
By the way , because in any case I shall have four or ﬁve days of absolute fast
in all respects at the end of this year, do send your letter on the ﬁrst of January
and not later . Perhaps y ou will not be able to understand, but it is true that when I
receive the money my greatest appetite is not for food, though I have fasted, but
the appetite for painting is even stronger, and I at once set out to hunt for models ,
and continue until all the money i s gone . While all I have to live on is my break
fast served by the people I live with, and in the evening for supper a cup of coffee
and some bread in the dairy, or else a loaf of rye bread that I have in my trunk .
As long as I am painting it is more than enough, but a feeling of weakness
comes when the models have left .
I am attached to the models here because they are so different from the models
in the country . And especially because the character i s so entirely different, and
the contrast gives me new ideas , especially for the ﬂesh colors . And what I have
now achieved in the last head I painted, though it i s not yet so that I am satisﬁed
with it, i s different from the previous heads .

I know that you are sufficiently convinced of the importance of being true so
that I can speak out freely to you .
If I paint peasant women, I want them to be peasant women ; for the same
reason, if I paint harlots I want a harlot—like expression.
That was why a certain harlot
’s head by Rembrandt struck me so enormously.
Because he had caught
so inﬁnitely beautifully that mysterious smile, with
a
gravity such as only he possesses , the magician of magicians .
This i s a new thing for me, and it is essentially what I want . Manet has done
it, and Courbet, damn it, I have the same ambition ; besides , I have felt too
strongly in the very marrow of my bones the inﬁnite beauty of the analyses
of
women by the very great men of literature, a Zola, Daudet, de Goncourt, Balzac .
Even Stevens does not satisfy me, because hi s women are not those I know
personally. And those he selects are not the most interesting, I think . Well ,
however that may be— I want to get
on a tout prix— and I want to be myself.
I feel quite obstinate, and I no longer care what people say about me or my work .
It seems very difficult to get models for the nude here, at least the girl I painted
refused .
Of course that
refused
i s perhaps only relative, but at least it would not be
easy ; but I must say she would be splendid . From a business point of view I can
only say that we are already in what they are starting to call la ﬁn d
’un siecle— that
women have a charm as in a time of revolution— in fact have as much inﬂuence
—and
one would be outside the world if one kept them outside one
’s work .
It i s the same everywhere, in the country as well as in the city ; one must take
the women into account if one wants to be up
-to-date .
Good—by , good wishes for the New Year . With a handshake,
Ever yours, Vincent
444
Dear Theo,
Antwerp , early in
1 886
Last Sunday I saw for the ﬁrst time the two large pictures by Rubens , and as
I had looked at those in the museum repeatedly and at my ease, these two—
“The
Deposition from the Cross
” and
“The Elevation of the Cross
”
-were the more
interesting .
“The Elevation of the Cross
” has a peculiarity that struck me at once,
and that i s— there i s no female ﬁgure in it . Unless
on the side panels of the
triptych . Consequently, it i s none the better for it . Let me tell you that I love
“The Deposition from the Cross .
” But not because of any depth of feeling such
as one would ﬁnd in a Rembrandt or in a picture by Delacroix or in a drawing
by Millet.
Nothing touches me less than Rubens expressing human sorrow
.
To explain my meaning more clearly, let me begin by saying that even hi s
most beautiful weeping Magdalenes
or Mater Dolorosas always simply remind
me
of the tears
of a beautiful prostitute who has caught a venereal disease
or
some such small misery of human life .
As such they are masterly, but one must not look for more in them .
27

Rubens i s extraordinary in painting ordinary beautiful women. But he is not
dramatic in the expression .
Compare hi m, for instance, to that head by Rembrandt in the Lacaze Collee
tion ; to the man
’s ﬁgure in
“The Jewish Bride
”— y ou will understand what
I mean, as for instance, that hi s eight pompous ﬁgures of fellows performing a
feat
of strength with a heavy wooden cross in
The Elevation
of the Cross
”
seem absurd to me from the standpoint of modern analysis
of human passions
and feelings . That Rubens
’
s expressions, especially of the men (the real portraits
always excepted) , are superﬁcial, hollow, pompous, yes— altogether
c onven
tional, like those of Jules Romain and even worse fellows of the decadence .
But I still love it because he, Rubens , is the very man who tries to express,
and really succeeds in expressing, a mood of cheerfulness, of serenity, of sorrow,
by the combination of colors— though sometimes hi s ﬁgures may be hollow, etc .
Thus in
“The Elevation of the Cross
” the pale spot of the corpse in a high
accent of hg ht— is dramatic in its contrast to the rest, which is kept in such a
low color scale .
Of the same order, but in my opinion far more beautiful , is the charm of The
Deposition from the Cross ,
” where the pale spot i s repeated in the blonde hair,
the fair face and neck of the female ﬁgures , whereas the somber surroundings are
enormously rich because of the various low-toned harmonizing masses
of red,
dark green, black, gray and violet .
And once again Delacroix has tried to make people believe in the symphonies
of the colors . And one would ahnost say in vain, if one remembers how almost
everybody understands by good color the correctness
of the local
” color,
the
narrow—minded exactness which neither Rembrandt nor Millet nor Delacroix nor
whoever else, neither Manet nor Courbet, has aimed at, as little as Rubens or
Veronese .
I have also seen several other pictures by Rubens in various churches .
And it i s very interesting to study Rubens , because hi s technique i s so very
simple, or rather seems fo be so . Hi s means are
so simple, and he paints ,
and
particularly draws , with such a quick hand and without any hesitation. But
portraits and heads and ﬁgures of women are his specialty. There he i s deep and
intimate too . And how fresh hi s pictures remain because of the very simplicity
of hi s technique .
What more shall I
say ? That I feel increasingly inclined to do all my ﬁgure
studies over again, very c ahnly and quietly, without any nervous hurry. I want
to progress
so far in the knowledge of the nude and the structure of the ﬁgure
that I might be able to work from memory.
I should still hke to work sometime either at Verlat
’
s or in some other studio,
besides working for myself as much as possible from the model .
For the moment I have deposited ﬁve pictures , two portraits , two landscapes ,
and one still hfe in Verlat
’
s painting class at the academy . I have just been there
again, but he was not there either time .
But I shall soon be able to tell you the result, and I hope that I shall be allowed
to paint from the model all day at the academy, which will make things easier
272


great changes in the art trade . And, consequently, many new chances will present
themselves too if one has something original to show.
But tbat i s certainly necessary if one wants to be of some use . It i s no fault or
crime of mine if I must sometimes tell you we must put more vigor into such
and such a thing, and if we haven
’t got the money ourselves , we must ﬁnd friends
and new relations . I must earn a little more or have some more friends, prefer
ably both . That i s the way to success, but recently it has been too hard for me .
As for this month, I absolutely must insist on your sending me at least another
5 0 fr.
At present I am losing weight, and moreover my clothes are getting
too
shabby, etc . Y ou know yourself that it isn
’t right as it i s. Yet I feel sort of con
ﬁdent that we shall pull through.
But you wrote that if I fell ill, we should be worse off. I hope it will not come
to that, but I should hke to have a httle more c ase, just to prevent illness .
Just think how many people there are who exist without ever having the
slightest idea what care i s, and who always keep on thi nking that everything will
turn out for the best, as if there were no people starving or completely ruined !
I begin to object more and more to your pretending to be a ﬁnancier, and thinking
me exactly the opposite . All people are not alike, and if one does not understand
that in drawing up accounts some time must have passed over the account before
‘
one can be sure to have counted right, if one does not understand this , one is no
calculator . And a broader insight into ﬁnances i s exactly what characterizes many
modern ﬁnanciers . Namely not pinching, but allowing freedom of action .
I know, Theo, that you may also be rather hard up . But
“your life has never
been so hard as mine has these last ten or twelve years . Can
’t you make allowances
for me when I say, Perhaps it has been long enough now ? Meanwhile I have
learned something that I di d not know before, that has renewed all my chances ,
and I protest against my always being neglected . And if I should like to live
again in the city for some time, and afterward perhaps to work in a studio in
Paris too, would you try toprevent thi s ?
Be honest enough to let me go my own way , for I tell you that I do not want
to quarrel, and I will not quarrel, but I will not be hampered in my career . And
what can I do in the country, unless I g o there with money formodels and colors ?
There i s no chance, absolutely none, of making money with my work in the
country, and there i s such a chance in the city . So I am not safe before I have
made friends in the city— and that comes ﬁrst . For the moment this may complicate
things somewhat, but after all it is the only way , and going back to the country
now would end in stagnation .
Well, good-by
. De G onc ourt
’
s book is ﬁne .
Ever yours, Vincent
45 3
Dear Theo,
Antwerp , January-February
1 8 86
I write y ou often these days , and I often write the same thing, but let it prove
to you that I have one thing especially in mind— the necessity of entering that
period of ﬁgure drawing .
274

And then it may be egoistic if you like, I want my health restored . My impres
sion
of the time I have spent here does not change either ; in a certain sense
I am very much di sappointed by what I have made here, but my ideas have
been modiﬁed and refreshed, and that was the real object
of my coming here .
But as I have perceived that I relied too much on my health, and that, though the
core i s still all right, yet I am but a ruin compared to what I might have been,
so it would not astonish me at
all if you , too , were absolutely in need of that
same more hygienic life that was prescribed for me .
If I am not mistaken i n this , I think we cannot join each other soon enough,
and I keep objecting to a stay in the country. For though the
air i s bracing,
I should miss there the distraction and the pleasant company of the city, which
we should enjoy
so much more if we were together . And if we were together
soon, I should disappoint you in many things, yes , to be sure, but not in every
thing, and not in my way of looking at things , I suppose .
Now that we are disc ussing things , I want
to tell you to begin with that
I wish both of us might ﬁnd a wife in some way or other before long, for it i s
high time, and if we should wai t too long, we should not be the better for it .
But I
say
this in
all calmness . However, it i s
one
of the ﬁrst requisites for
our more hygienic life . And I mention it because in that respect we may have
to overcome an enormous diﬂi c ul ty , on which a great deal depends . And here
with I break the ic e on the subject ; w e shall always have to return to it . And in
the intercourse with women one especially learns so much about art .
It i s a pity that, as
one gradually gains experience, one gradually loses one
’s
youth. If that were not so, life would be too good .
Have you already read that preface to Cbe
’
rie by de Goncourt ? The amount of
work those fellows have achieved i s enormous when one thinks of it .
It i s such a splendid idea that working and thinking together. And every day
I ﬁnd new proof of the theory that the main reason for much misery among the
artists lies in their discord, in their not c o-operating, not being good but false
to each other . And now, if we were more sensible in that respect, I do not doubt
for a moment that within a year
’s time we should make headway, and be happier .
I am not getting on very well with my work, but I do not force things , because
in fact I am almost completely forbidden to .
And I want to keep up my strength for that ﬁrst time in Paris , if that i s to
follow ﬁrst, without any other interval than that one month in the country. For
I should like to go there in good condition .
It was Sunday today, almost a spring day. This morning I took a long walk
alone all through the city, in the park, along the boulevards . The weather was
such that I think in the country they will have heard the lark sing for the ﬁrst time .
In short, there was something of resurrection in the atmosphere .
Yet what depression there i s in business and among the people . I do not think
it exaggerated to be pessimistic about the various strikes , etc . , everywhere .
They will certainly prove not to have been useless for the following generations ,
for tben they will have proved a success . But now it i s of course hard enough for
everybody who must earn hi s bread by hi s work, the more
so because we can
2

foresee that it will get worse and worse from year to year. The laborer against
the bourgeois i s as justiﬁable as was the tiers état against the other two a hundred
years ago . And the best thing to do is to keep silent, for fate i s not on the bour
g eoi s side, and we shall live to see more of it ; we are still far from the end . So
although it
’
s spring, how many thousands and thousands are wandering about,
desolate .
I
see the lark soaring in the spring
air as well as the greatest optimist ; but
I also see the young girl of about twenty, who might have been in good health,
a victim of consumption, and who will perhaps drown herself before
she dies
of any illness .
If one i s always in respectable company among rather well-to-do bourgeois,
one does not notice this so much perhaps , but if one has dined for years
on la
vache enragée, as I have, one cannot deny that great misery i s a fact that weights
the scale .
One may not be able to cure orto save,but one can sympathizewith andpity them .
Corot, who after all had more serenity than anybody else, who felt the spring
so deeply, was he not as simple as a workingman all hi s life, and so sensitive to
all the miseries of others ? And what struck me in hi s biography was that when
he was already very old i n 1 870 and
1 87 1 , he certainly looked at the bright sky ,
but at the same time he visited the ambulances where the wounded lay dying .
Illusions may fade, but the sublime
remains . One may doubt everything, but
one does not doubt people like Corot and Millet and Delacroix . And I think
that in moments when one does not care for nature any more, one still cares for
humanity.
If you can, send me something extra this month, be it more or less , even if it
’
s
only 5 francs , do so . If you can
’t, then it can
’t be helped .
I am greatly longing to know your decision, if perhaps you would approve of
my coming to Paris already about April
1 . At
all events write soon about it .
Good-by
. With a handshake,
Ever yours, Vincent
45 8a
[Pierard, pp .
1 5 5
—1 5 9] On the subject of Van Gogh
’s arrival at the academy in
Antwerp , here are the reminiscences noted down from the lips
of Mr. Victor
Hageman (who died in October,
1 9
At the time I was a pupil in the drawing class . There were only a few weeks left
until the end of the course . I remember quite well that weather-beaten, nervous ,
restless man who crashed like a bombshell into the Antwerp academy, upsetting
the director, the drawing master and the pupils .
Van Gogh, who was then thirty-one years
old, ﬁrst went into the painting
class taught by Verlat, the director of the academy, the perfect type of the official
painter, whose duty it was to transmit to posterity, by means of the interpretative
realizations
of the art of painting, memories of great patriotic solemnities . One
morning Van Gogh came into the class , in which there were about sixty pupils,
more than a dozen
of whom were German
or English ; he was dressed in a


them about those rough and kind-hearted miners of the Borinag e, whom he had
catechized and cared for and helped and nursed with so much love. During the
tragic strikes of 1 886 he even wanted to g o back to that Black Country .
The above was conﬁrmed by Emanuel de Bom in an article published in the
Rotterdam newspaper N ieuwe Rotterdamse Courant of November 3 , 1 93 8 , in which
he quotes a letter written by Victor Hageman . In thi s may be found (Tralbaut,
P
1 5 4)
He was told to do a drawing of the Venus de Milo,
De Bom writes .
“He was
of the opinion that
‘that woman must have hips ,
’ and he gave her very un-Grecian
ones , they were
‘
comme la
’ l The drawing master (I will not mention hi s name
moreover, he is dead
now) sent Van Gogh down to a lower class, and there
Vincent, who scorned nothing, di d drawings of
‘noses and ears .
’
And Baseleer told Charles Bernard in the interview already quoted that Vincent
was reported to have said of the Venus de Milo :
“Fine female, nice hips . ” And
he continues
I can still see before me that thickset Venus with an enormous pelvis, that
extraordinary, fat-buttocked ﬁg ure which had issued from Vincent
’s drawing
pencil . Antiquity as seen by Rembrandt, Greece through the
of a
distorting Windowpane on the Keizersg racht in Amsterdam .

1 8 8 7
—
1 8 8 8 P A R I S A N D A R L E S
Y ears
of c olor and lig ht
45 9a
[Letter written in English by Vincent van Gogh to the English painter Levens .
The text is reproduced without alterations ]
1
My dear Mr. Levens ,
Paris , Aug
—Oct .
1 8 87
Since I am here in Paris I have very often thought of yourself and work. Y ou
will remember that I liked your colour, your ideas on art and hterature and I add,
most of all your personality. I have already before now thought that I ought to let
you know what I was doing where I was. But what refrained me was that I ﬁnd
living in Paris i s much dearer than in Antwerp and
not knowing what your
circumstances are I dare not
say come over to Paris from Antwerp without
warning you that it costs
one dearer, and that if poor,
one has to suffer many
things
-as you may imagine
But on the other hand there i s more chance of
selling . There is also a good chance of exchanging pictures with other artists .
In one word, with much energy, with a sincere personal feeling of colour i n
nature I would say an artist c an get on here notwithstanding the many obstrue
tions . And I intend remaining here still longer.
There i s much to be seen here— for instance Delacroix, to name only
one
master. In Antwerp I did
not even know what the impressionists were,
now
I have seen them and though not being one of the club yet I have much admired
certain impressionists
’ pictures— D eg as nude ﬁg ure— Claude M onet landscape .
And now for what regards what I myself have been doing, I have lacked money
for paying models else I had entirely given myself to ﬁgure painting . But I have
made a series of color studies in painting, simply ﬂowers , red poppies, blue corn
ﬂowers and my osotys, white and rose roses , yellow
Chrysanthemums— seeking
oppositions of blue with orange, red and green, yellow and violet seeking les tons
rompus et neutres to harmonise brutal extremes . Trying to render intense colour
an d not a grey harmony.
Now after these gymnastics I lately di d two heads which I dare say are better
in light and colour than those I di d before .
So as we sai d at the time : in colour seeking life the true drawing i s modelling
with colour .
I did a dozen landscapes too, frankly g reen frankly blue.
And so I am struggling for life and progress in art .
Ac c ording to John Rewald of New Y ork, thi s letter was ﬁrst published in Tbe S unday
London , February 1 7,
1 9 29 (edited by E . V . Luc as)
. Levens painted mainly “farmyards .
The
letter was written in
1 8 86 (not

Now I would very much like t o know what you are doing an d whether you
ever think of going to Paris .
If ever you did come here, write to me before and I will , if you like, share my
lodgings and studi o with you so long as I have any . In spring—
say February or
even sooner I may be going to the South of France, the land of the blue tones and
gay colors .
And look here, if I knew you had longings for the same we might combine .
I felt sure at the time that you are a thorough colourist and since I
saw the
impressionists I assure you that neither your colour nor mine as it is developping
itself, i s
ex actly the same as their theories . But
so much dare I say we have a
chance and a good
one ﬁnding friends .— I hope your health i s all-right . I was
rather low down . in health when in Antwerp but got better here .
Write to me i n any case . Remember me to Allen, Briet, Rink, Durant but
I have not often thought of them as I di d think of you— almost daily .
Shaking hands cordially .
Yours truly Vincent
My present address i s
Mr. Vincent van Gogh
5 4 Rue Lepic, Paris .
With regard my chances of sale look here, they are certai nly not much but still
I do bave a beginning .
At the present moment I have found four dealers who have exhibited studies
of mine . And I have exchanged studies with many artists .
Now the prices are 5 0 francs . Certainly not much
—but —as far as I
c an see
one must sell cheap to rise and even at costing price . And mind my dear fellow,
Paris i s Paris . There i s but one Paris and however hard living may be here, and
if it became worse and harder even— the french air clears up the brain and does
good—
a world of good .
I have been in
, Cormons studi o for three or four months but I did not ﬁnd that
so useful as I had expected it to be . It may be my fault however, anyhow I left
there too as I left Antwerp and since I worked alone, and fancy that since I feel
my own self more .
Trade i s slow here . The great dealers sell Millet, Delacroix, Corot, Daubigny,
Dupre, a few other masters at exorbitant prices . They do little
or nothing for
young artists . The second class dealers contrariwise sell those at very low prices .
If I asked more I would do nothing , I fancy . However I have faith in colour .
Even with regards the price the public will pay for it in the long run . But for the
present things are awfully hard . Therefore let anyone who risks to go over here
consider there i s no laying on roses at all .
What i s to be gained i s prog ress and what the deuce that i s, it i s to be found
here . I dare say as certain anyone who has a solid position elsewhere let him stay
where he i s . But for adventurers as myself, I think they lose nothing in risking
more . Especially as in my case I am not an adventurer by choice but by fate, an d


point of view of business I should not blame her for choosing to be top dog ,
and not underdog . If she tramples on my toes a bit in order to get on, well, she
has my leave . When I saw her again, she di d not trample on my heart, which she
would have done if she had been as bad as people said .
I saw Tanguy yesterday, and he has put a canvas I
’ve just done in hi s window.
I have done four since you left, and am working on a big one .
I know that these big long canvases are difficult to sell , but later on people
will see that there is open ai r in them and good humor .
So now the whole lot would do for the decoration
of a dining room or a
country house .
And if you fall very much in love, and then get married, it doesn
’t seem
impossible to me that you will rise to a country house yourself someday like so
many other picture dealers . If you live well, you spend more, but you gain
ground that way , and perhaps these days one gets on better by looking rich than
by looking shabby. It
’s better to have a gay life of it than commit suicide . Re
member me to all at home .
Ever yours, Vincent
469
My dear Theo,
Arles,
1 7 February 1 88 8
Thank you very much for your letter, which I had not dared to expect so soon,
as far as the 5 o-fr. note which you added was concerned .
I
see that you have not yet had an answer from Tersteeg . I don
’t think that
we need press him in another letter . However, if you have any official business
to transact with B . V.
Co . in The Hague, you might mention in a P .S . that
you are rather surprised that he has in no way acknowledged the receipt of the
letter in question.
As for my work, I brought back a size 1 5 canvas today. It i s a drawbridge with
a httle cart going over it, outlined against a blue
sky— the river blue as well,
the banks orange colored with green grass and a group of women washing linen
in smocks and multicolored caps . And another landscape with a httle country
bridge and more women washing linen .
Also an avenue of plane trees near the station . Altogether twelve studies since
I
’ve been here .
The weather here i s changeable, often windy with murky skies , but the almond
trees are beginning to ﬂower everywhere . I am very glad that the pictures should
g o to the Independents . You are right to go to see Signac at hi s house . I was very
glad to
see from your letter of today that he made a better impression on you
than he did the ﬁrst time . In any case I am glad to know that after today you
will not be alone in the apartment.
Remember me kindly to Koning . Are you well ? I am better myself, except
that eating i s a real ordeal, as I have a touch of fever and no appetite, but it
’
s
only a question of time and patience .
I have company in the evening, for the young Danish painter who is here i s a
decent soul : hi s work i s dry, correct and timid, but I do not object to that when

the painter i s young and intelligent . He originally began studying medicine : he
has read Zola, de Goncourt, and Guy de Maupassant, and he has enough money
t o do himself well . And with all this , a very genuine desire to do very different
work from what he is actually producing now .
I think he would be wise to delay hi s return home for a year, or to come back
here after a short visit to hi s friends .
But, old boy, you know, I feel as though I were in Japan— I say no more than
that, and mind, I haven
’t seen anything in its usual splendor yet.
Th at
’s why— e ven although I
’m vexed that just now expenses are heavy and
the p ictures worthless— that
’s why I don
’t despair of the future success
of this
idea of a long sojourn in the Midi
.
Here I am seeing new things, I am learning, and if I take it easy, my body
doesn
’t refuse to function .
For many reasons I shoul d like to get some sort of little retreat, where the
poor cab horses of Paris— that i s, you and several of our friends , the poor im
pressioni sts— could go out to pasture when they get too beat up .
I was present at the inquiry into a crime commi tted at the door of a brothel
here ; two Italians killed two Zouaves . I seized the opportunity to go into one
of the brothels in a small street called
“des ric olettes.
”
That i s the extent of my amorous adventures among the Arlésiennes . The mob
all but (the Southerner, like Tartarin, being more energetic in good intentions than
in action)— the mob , I repeat, all but lynched the murderers conﬁned in the town
hall, but in retaliation all the Italians— men and women, the Savoyard monkeys
included— have been forced to leave town.
I should not have told you about this , except that it means I
’ve seen the streets
of this town full of excited crowds . And it was indeed a ﬁne sight.
I made my last three studies with the perspective frame I told you about .
I attach some importance to the use of the frame because it seems not unlikely
to me that in the near future many artists will make use
of it, just as the
old
German and Italian painters certainly di d, and, as I am inclined to think, the
Flemi sh too . The modern use of it may differ from the ancient practice, but in
the same way isn
’t it true that in the process
of painting in oils
one gets very
different effects today from those of the men who invented the process, Jan and
Hubert van Eyck ? And the moral of this i s that it
’
s my constant hope that I am
not working for myself alone . I believe in the absolute necessity of a new art of
color, of design, and—
of the artistic life . And if we work in that faith, it seems
to me there i s a chance that we do not hope in vain.
Y ou must know that I am act ually ready to send some studies
off to you,
only I can
’t roll them yet . A handshake for you . On Sunday I shall write Bernard
and de Lautrec, because I solemnly promised to, and shall send you those letters
as well . I am deeply sorry for Gaug uin
’s plight, especially because now hi s health
i s shaken : he hasn
’t the kind of temperament that proﬁts from hardships— o n the
contrary, thi s will only exhaust him from here
on ,
an d that will spoil him for
hi s work . Good-by for the present .
Ever yours , Vincent

B 4 [4]
My dear comrade Bernard,
Arles, About 2 0 April
1 8 8 8
Many thanks for the sonnets you sent me ; I very much hke the form and the
sonorous melody of the ﬁrst one
S ous les do
‘mes dormeurs des arbres g ig antesques .
[Beneath the somnolent domes of the gigantic trees ]
However, with regard to idea an d sentiment it may be that I prefer the last one
Car l
’
esp oir dans mon sein a verse
'
sa ne
’
vrose.
[For hope has poured it s neurosis into my bosom .]
But it seems to me that you do not say clearly enough what you want to make
felt— the certainty that one seems to have, and which one c an in any case prove,
of the nothingness, the emptiness , the betrayal ofthe desirable good an d beautiful
things ; and that, despite thi s knowledge, one lets oneselfbe eternally fooled by the
charm which external hfe, the things outside ourselves , exercises on our six senses,
as if one did not know anything, and especially not the difference between object
ivity and subjectivity . Fortunately for us we remain stupid and hopeful in thi s way.
Now I also like :
L
’biver, n
’
avoir ni sou, ni fleurs
[Winter, having neither a sou nor ﬂowers
and
Me
'
pris
[Contempt]
.
I think
“Coin de cbap elle
[Corner of a Chapel] an d
D essin d
’A lbrecbt D urer
less clear ; for instance, which exactly i s the drawing by Albrecht Dii rer ? But
nevertheless there are excellent passages in it :
”Venus des plaines bleues
Ele
’mis par la long ueur des lieues .
[Come from the blue plains ,
Paled by the length of the leagues ]
renders very smartly the landscapes bristling with blue rocks, between which
the roads meander, as in the backgrounds of Cranach and Van Eyck .
Tordu sur sa croix
en spirale
[Twisted on his spiraled cross]
conveys very well the exaggerated leanness of the mystic Christs . But why not
add that the anguished look of the martyr i s, like the eye of a cab horse, inﬁnitely
sad ; that would make it more Parisian
of Paris , where one sees such looks in
the eyes of the superannuated nags
of the little carriages as well as in those of
the poets, artists .
In short it is not as good as your painting yet ; never mind, it will come ; you


So get your blood in good condition in advance ; here, with the bad food, it i s
difficult to pull through, but once one i s in good health again it i s less difficult
to remain so than in Paris .
Write to me soon, always the same address :
Restaurant Carrel, Arles .
A handshake,
Sincerely yours, Vincent
481
My dear Theo,
Arles, 4 May
1 8 88
Yesterday I went to the furniture dealer
’s to see if I could hire a bed, etc . Un
fortunately they would not hire, and even refused to sell on a monthly installment
plan . This i s rather awkward .
I thought perhaps if Koning leaves after seeing the Salon, which I believe was
hi s original intention, that y ou might send me the bed that he now occupies
after hi s departure . One must take into account that if I sleep at the studio, it
will make a difference of 3 00 frs . a year, which would otherwise have to be paid
to the hotel . I know that it i s impossible to say in advance that I shall stay here
so long, but all the same I have many reasons for thinking that a long stay here
i s probable .
I was in Fontvieilles yesterday at McKnig ht
’
s ; he had a good pastel— a pink
s
tree— and two water colors just started, and I found him working on the head
of an old woman in charcoal . He has reached the stage where he i s plag ued by
new color theories, and while they prevent him from working on theold system,
he i s not sufficiently master of hi s new palette to succeed in this one . H e seemed
very shy about showing me the things , I had to go there for that express purpose,
and tell him that I was absolutely set on seeing hi s work .
It i s not impossible that he may come to stay for some time with me here .
I think we should both beneﬁt by it .
I think very often of Renoir and that pure clean line of hi s. That
’s just how
things and people look i n this clear air.
We are having a tremendous lot
of wind and mistral here, just
now three
days out of four, though the sun shines anyway : but it makes it diﬂi c ul t to work
out- of-doors .
I think there would be something to do here in portraits . Although the people
are blankly ignorant of painting in general, they are much more artistic than in
the North in their own persons and their manner of life . I have seen ﬁgures here
quite as beautiful as those of Goya or Velasquez . They will put a touch of pink
on a black frock, or devise a garment of white, yellow and pink , or else green
and pink, or else blue andy ellow, in which there i s nothing to be altered from the
artistic point
of view . Seurat would ﬁnd some very picturesque men
’s ﬁgures
here in spite of their modern clothes .
Now , as for portraits , I am pretty sure they
’d take the bai t.
But ﬁrst before I dare start along that line, I want my nerves steadier, and also
to be settled in so that I could have people in my studio . And if I must tell you
roughly what I ﬁgure it would take to get me quite well and acclimatized for
2 86

good, it will mean a year, and to set me up completely, a cool thousand francs .
If during the ﬁrst year— the present year— I spend
1 00 francs on food and
1 00
francs on this house per month, you see there won
’t be a cent left in the budget
for painting .
But at the end of that year I should have a decent establishment and my own
health to show for it— of that I am sure . And in the meantime I should spend
my time drawing every day, with two or three pictures a month besides .
In ﬁguring what it would cost to set me up , I am also counting in a complete
new set of linen and clothes and shoes .
And at the end of the year I should be a different man .
I should have a home of my own and the peace to get back my health.
(Needless to
say , if you have got canvases that take up too much room, you
can send them here by goods service, and I will keep them in the studi o here . If
this i s not yet the case, it will be later on , and I am keeping a good many studies
which don
’t seem good enough to send to you .)
And then I can hope not to get exhausted before my time . Monticelli was
physically stronger than I , I think, and if I had the strength for it, I
’d live from
hand to mouth as he did . But if even he was paralyzed, and that without being
such a tremendous drinker, there
’d be precious little hope for me .
I was certainly going the right way for a stroke when I left Paris . I paid for it
ni cely afterward ! When I stopped drinking, when I stopped smoking so
_much,
when I began to think again instead
of trying not to think— Good Lord, the
depression and the prostration of it Work in these magniﬁcent natural surround
ings ha s restored my morale, but even now some efforts are too much for me
my strength fails me . And that was why , when I wrote you the other day, I said
that if you left the Goupils , you would feel healthier in mind, but that the cure
would be very painful
. Whereas one does not feel the disease itself.
My poor boy , our neurosis etc . , comes, it
’
s true, from our way
of living,
which i s too purely the artist 5 life, but it i s also a fatal inheritance, since in
civilization the weakness increases from generation to generation . If we want to
face the real truth about our constitution, we must acknowledge that we belong
to the number of those who suffer from a neurosis which already has its roots
in the past .
I think Gruby
I is right about such cases— to eat well, to live well , to see little
of women, in short to arrange one
’s life in advance exactly as if one were already
suffering from a disease of the brain and spine, without counting the neurosis
which i s actually there . Certai nly that i s taking the bull by the horns, whi ch i s
never a bad policy. And Degas di d it, and succeeded . All the same, don
’t y ou
feel, as I do, that it i s frig htq
y hard
And after
all, doesn
’t it do
one all the
good in the world to listen to the wise advice
of Rivet and Pangloss ,
those
excellent optimists of the pure and jovial Gallic race, who leave you your self
respect
However, if we want to live and work, w e must be very sensible and look
after ourselves . Cold water, fresh ai r, simple good food, decent clothes , a decent
An old physician in Paris, who in hi s time had treated Heine .

bed, and no women . And not to let oneself go with women, or with life that
is hfe, as much as one would like to .
I
am not set on sleeping at the studi o, but if I went to sleep there, it would be
because I
saw a possibility
of settling down pretty deﬁnitely for a long time .
Now that I need take up no more room in the hotel, seeing that I have the
studio, I shall beat these people down to 3 francs a day, whether they like it or
not . Consequently there i s nothing urgent . But if it
’
s all the same to you, send
me
1 00 francs next time anyway, as I want to get some drawers made, just as
I have had the shirts and shoes , and must send ahn ost all my clothes to be cleaned
and mended . Then they will be quite all right again . This i s urgent in case I have
to g o to Marseilles or see people here . The more precautions we take now , the
surer we are of being able to hold out in the long run, and of getting the work
under control .
I have got ten canvases that I
’m looking for a case for, and I
’ll send them one
of these days .
A handshake for you, and Koning too . I got a postcard from Koning saying
that he had had a letter telling him to take back the pictures from the Independ
ents
’ show . Naturally it was the only thing to do, and what could I do about it ?
Ever yours, Vincent
482
My dear Theo,
Arles , 5 May
1 88 8
I write you a line to say that, on consideration, I think it would be best simply
to get a rug and a mattress and make a bed on the studio ﬂoor . Fo
\
r during the
summer it will be so hot that thi s will be more than enough .
In winter we can see whether we
’ll have to get a bed or not . As for the bed
in your place, I think that the idea of having a painter stay with you i s to the
advantage
of both the painter and yourself, from the point of view
of having
company and someone to talk to, so that when Koning goes , somebody might
come in hi s place . And why shouldn
’t you keep t he bed i n any case ?
It i s really quite possible that as far as the house goes , I might ﬁnd something
even better either in Martig nes on the coast or some other place . Only what i s so
delightful in this studio i s the garden opposite .
But there, we
’ll put off doing any repairs or furnishing it better ; it would be
wiser, especially because, if we get cholera here in summer, I may pitch my camp
in the country .
It i s a ﬁlthy town this , with the old streets . A s for the women of Arles that
there
’s so much talk about— there is, isn
’t there
— do you want to know my
real opinion of them ? They are, no question about it, really charming, but no
longer what they must have been . As things are now, they are more often like a
Mignard than a Mantegna, for they are in their decadence . That doesn
’t prevent
them from being beautiful— very beautiful , and I am talking
now only
of the
type in the Roman style— rather boring and commonplace . But what exceptions
there are !
There are women like a Fragonard and like a Renoir. And some that can
’t be
2 8 8


Supposing you agree, we need be in no hurry to ﬁx up the studio . It will do
well enough as it is in the meantime, and if I sleep there, as I
’
ve said, it will cost
me nothing, I save 3 0 francs at the hotel and I pay
1 5 for rent,
so that there i s
clear proﬁt .
With a handshake for you and Koning ; I have another drawing .
I saw a heap of boxes for my purpose in the market and am going back to take
measurements . Was the subject of the De Groux which you mention the same as
that in the Brussels gallery, the “Bénédicité
” It
’s true what you say ofBraekeleer .
Have you heard that he suffered from a disease of the brain which left him im
I have heard this , but wasn
’t it only temporary ? Y ou talk
of another
one of hi s which I do not know.
My dear Bernard,
Arles , Second half of May
1 8 8 8
I just received your last letter . You are quite right to see that those Negresses
were heart-rending . Y ou are qui te right not to think such a thing innocent .
I have just read a book— not a beautiful
one and
not well written for that
matter— about the Marquesas Islands, but
sad enough when it tells of the ex
termination
of a whole native tribe— cannibal in the sense that once a month,
let us say , an individual got eaten— what does it matter !
The whites, very Christian and all that
in order to put a stop to this bar
barity(
really not very cruel
could ﬁnd no better means than the extermination
of the tribe of cannibal natives as well as the tribe against which the latter fought
(in order to provide themselves from time to time with the necessary palatable
prisoners of war)
.
After which they annexed the two isles, which then became unutterably lugu
brious l!
Those tattooed rac es
eg roes, Indians,
all
of them, all, all
are disappearing
or degenerating . And the horrible white man with hi s bottle of alcohol, hi s money
and hi s syphilis— when shall we
see the end
of him? The horrible white man
with hi s hypocrisy, hi s greediness and hi s sterility.
And those savages were so gentle and so loving !
Y ou are damned right to think
of Gauguin . That is high poetry, those Ne
g resses, and everything hi s hands make has a gentle, pitiful, astonishing character.
People don
’t understand him yet, and it pains him so much that he does not sell
anything, just like other true poets .
My dear comrade, I should have written you before, only I had a lot of things
to attend to . I have sent a ﬁrst batch
of studies to my brother, that
’s number
one. And I have been having trouble with my health, that
’s number two.
And number three i s that I have rented a house, painted yellow outside,
whitewashed within, in the full sun (four rooms)
.
On top
of all that I am working
on new studies . And in the evening I was
often too beat to write . That
’s why my answer has been delayed .
290

Listen, that sonnet about the women of the boulevard has some good in it,
but it isn
’t the real thing, the end i s banal . A
“
sublime
I don
’t know
what you mean by that, neither do you when it comes right down to it .
Furthermore
D ans
.le clan des vieux
et desj eunes maraude
Ceux qu
’
elle amminera coucber lo soir, tris tard.
[Ensnaring among the tribe of the old and young ones
Those whom she will take to bed with her that night, very late ]
Something like this i s not characteristic at all, for the women of our boulevard
— the httle
one— a usua lly sleep alone by night, for they have ﬁve
or
six hauls
during the day or in the evening, and tres tard there i s that honorable carnivore,
their maquereau [pimp] , who comes and takes them home, but he does not sleep
with them (or rarely)
. Th e worn-out stupeﬁed woman usually goes to bed alone
and sleeps a leaden sleep .
But if you alter two or three hues , it will be all right.
What have you painted recently? As for me, I have done a still life of a blue
enameled iron coffeepot, a royal-blue cup and saucer, a milk jug with pale cobalt
and white checks, a cup with orange and blue patterns on a white ground, a blue
majolica jug decorated with green, brown and pink ﬂowers and leaves . The whole
on a blue tablecloth, against a yellow background, and among thi s crockery
two oranges and three lemons. I
So it i s a variation
of blues, livened up by a series
of yellows that go as far
as orange .
Then I have an other still life, lemons in a basket against a yellow background.
Further a view of Arles . Of the town itself one sees only some red roofs and a
tower, the rest i s hidden by the green foliage of ﬁg trees , far away in the
‘back
ground, and a narrow
strip
of blue
sky above it . The town i s surrounded by
immense meadows all abloom with countless buttercups— a sea of yellow— in the
foreground these meadows are divided by a ditch full
of violet irises . They were
mowing the grass while I was painting, so it is only a study and not the ﬁni shed
picture that I had intended to do . But what a subject, hein ! That sea of yellow
with a band of violet irises, and in the background that coquettish little town of
the pretty women ! Then two studies of roadsides— later— done with the mistral
raging .
If you were not expecting my prompt reply I should make you a sketch . Keep
your courage up, good luck. A handshake . I am exhausted tonight . I shall write
you again in the next few days, more at my ease .
Vincent
p .s. The portrait of a woman in your last letter but one i s very pretty. My address
2 , Place Lamartine, Arles.
.S
'
ee letter 489 to Theo .

489
My dear Theo,
Arles ,
20 May 1 8 8 8
What you write about your visits to Gruby has distressed me, but all the same
I am relieved that you went. Has it occurred to you that the dazedness- the
feeling
of extreme lassitude— may have been caused by thi s weakness
of the
heart, and that in this case the iodide
of potassium would have nothing to do
with the feeling of collapse ? Remember how last winter I was stupeﬁed to the
point ofbeing absolutely incapable of doing anything at all , excepta httle painting,
although I was not taking any iodide of potassium . So if I were you, I should
have it out with Rivet if Gruby tells you not to take any. I am sure that in
any
case you mean to keep on being friends with both.
I often think of Gruby bere and now, and I am completely well, but it i s having
pure
air and warmth that makes it possible . In
all that racket and bad
air
of
Paris , Rivet takes things as they are, without trying to create a paradise, and
without in any way trying to make us perfect . But he forges a cuirass , or rather
he hardens one against illness , and keeps up one
’s morale, I do believe, by making
light of the di sease
one has got . If only you could have one year of life in the
country and with nature just now, it would make G ruby
’
s cure much easier .
I expect he will make you promise to have nothing to do with women except in
case of necessity, but anyhow as httle as possible .
Now as for me, I am doing very well down here, but it is because I have my
work here, and nature, and if I didn
’t have that, I should grow melancholy. If
work had any attraction for you where you are, and if the impressioni sts were
getting on, it would be a very good thing . For loneliness , worriesj diﬂi c ul ti es,
the unsatisﬁed need for kindness and sympathy— that i s what i s hard to bear,
the mental suffering
of sadness
or disappointment undermines us more
than
dissipation— us, I say , who ﬁn d ourselves the happypossessors ofdisordered hearts .
I believe iodide of potassium puriﬁes the blood and the whole system, doesn
’t
it ? And can you do without it ? Anyway you must have it out frankly with Rivet ;
he oughtn
’t to be jealous .
I wish you had company more roughly, warmly alive than the Dutch. All the
same, Koning with hi s caprices i s an exception, better than most. And it i s
always a good thing to have someone . But I should like you to have had some
friends among the French as well .
Will you do something which will give me great pleasure ? My Danish friend
who i s leaving for Paris
on Tuesday will give you two little pictures , nothing
much, which I should hke to give to Mme. la Contesse de la Boissi ere at Asni eres .
She lives in the Boulevard Voltaire, on the ﬁrst ﬂoor of the ﬁrst house, at the
end of the Pont de Clichy. Old Perruchot
’
s restaurant i s on the ground ﬂoor.
Would you care to take them there for me in person, and say that I had hoped
to see her again this spring, and that even here I have not forgotten her ; I gave
them two httle ones last year, her and her daughter.
I hope that you will not regret making
these ladies
’ acquaintance, for it is
really afamily
. The countess i s far from young, but she i s countess ﬁrst and then
a lady , the daughter the same .
29 2


I
’m getting rid of. I do not feel so much need ofdistraction, I am less harassed by
my passions, and I can work more calmly, I could be alone without getting bored.
I have come through rather older in the way I look at things , but no sadder .
I shall not believe you if in your next letter you tell me there
’s nothing wrong
with you . It is perhaps a more serious change, and I should not be surprised if
you were a triﬂe low during the time it will take you to recover. In the fullness
of artistic life there i s, and remains, and will always come back at
times, that
homesick longing for the truly ideal life that can never come true .
And sometimes you lack all desire to throw yourself heart and soul into art, and
to get well for that . Y ou know you are a cab horse and that it
’
s the same old cab
you
’ll be hitched up to again : that you
’d rather live in a meadow with the sun , a
river and other horses for company, likewise free, and the act of procreation .
And perhaps , to get to the bottom of it, the di sease of the heart i s caused by
this ; it would not surprise me . One does not rebel against things , nor i s
one
resigned to them ; one
’s ill because of them, and one does not get better, and it
’
s
hard to be precise about the cure .
I do not know who it was who called this condi tion— being struck by death
and immortality . Th e cab you drag along must be of some use to people you do
not know. And so, if we believe in the new art and in the artists
of the future,
our faith does not cheat us . When good
old Corot said a few days before hi s
death
Last night in a dream I saw landscapes with skies all pink,
” well, haven
’t
they come, those skies
all pink, and yellow and green into the bargain, in the
impressionist lan dscapes ? All
of which means that there are
things one feels
coming, and they are coming in very truth .
And as for us who are not, I am inclined to believe, nearly so close to death,
we nevertheless feel that this thing is greater than we are, an d that its life i s of
longer duration than ours.
We do
not feel we are dying, but we do feel the truth that we are
of small
account, and that we are paying a hard price to be a link in the chain of artists ,
in health, in youth, in liberty, none
of whi ch we en]oy , any more than the cab
horse that hauls a coachful of people out to enjoy the spring .
So what I wish for you, as for myself, i s to succeed in getting back your
health, because y ou must have that. That
Espérance” by Puvis de Chavannes i s
so true . There i s an art of the future, and it is going to be so lovely and so young
that even if we give up our youth for it, we must gain in serenity by it . Perhaps
it is very silly to write all this , but I feel it so strongly ; it seems to me that, hke
me, you have been suffering to see your youth pass away like a puff of smoke ;
but if it grows again, and comes to life in what you make, nothing has been lost,
and the power to work is another youth. Take some pains then to get well , for
we shall need your health.
A handshake for you and the same for Koning .
Ever yours , Vincent

497
My dear Theo,
Arles,
1 2 June
1 8 88
I am writing you another line because I have not yet received your letter. But
I suppose you sai d to yourself that I was probably at Stes.-Maries .
As the rent of the house and the painting of the doors and windows and the
purchase of canvas came on me all at once and cleaned me out , you would do
me a great kindness if y ou would send me some money a few days earlier.
I am working on a landscape with c ornﬁelds, which I think as well of as, say ,
the white orchard ; it is in the style of the two landscapes of the Butte Montmartre
which were at
the Independents , but I think it has more ﬁrmness and rather
more style . And I have another subject, a farm and some ricks , which will prob
ably be a pendant .
I am very curious to know what Gauguin i s going to do . I hope he will be
able to come . Y ou will tell me that it is no good thinking about the future, but
painting goes slowly and in it y ou must reckon well in advance . It would not
be Gauguin
’s salvation, any more than mine, to sell a few canvases . To be able
to work, you must order your life, as much as possible, and it takes a fairly ﬁrm
basis if existence i s to be secure .
If he and I stay here long, our pictures will be more and more individual ,
just because we shall know our country through and through .
I do not ﬁnd it easy to think of changing my direction now that I have begun
on the South. It i s better never to budge— but to get deeper and deeper into the
scenery .
I think I have more chance of getting away with things , and of even bigger
results , if I don
’t cramp myself by working on too small a scale . And for that
very reason I think I am going to take a larger sized canvas and launch out boldly
into the 3 0 square : they cost me 4 francs apiece here, and it isn
’t expensive c on
sidering the carriage .
Th e last canvas absolutely kills all the others ; it is only a still life, with coffee
pots and cups and plates in blue and yellow ; it i s something quite apart .
It must be because of the drawing .
Instinctively these days I keep remembering what I have seen
of Cézanne
’s ,
because he has rendered so forcibly— as in the
“Harvest
” we saw at Portier
’s
the harsh side
of Provence . It has become very different from what it was in
spring, and yet I have certainly no less love for thi s countryside, scorched as it
begins to be from now on . Everywhere now there is old gold, bronze, copper, one
might say, and this with the green azure of the sky blanched with heat : a delicious
c olor, extraordinarily harmoni ous , with the blended tones of Delacroix .
If Gauguin were willing to join me, I think it would be a step forward for us .
It would establish us squarely as the explorers
of the South, and nobody could
c omplain of that . I must manage to get the ﬁrmness of coloring that I g ot in the
pict ure that kills the rest. I
’m thinking of what Portier used to say , that seen by
themselves the Cézannes he had didn
’t look like anything, but put near other
pictures , they washed the color out of everything else . He also used to say that
the Cézannes did well in gold, which means that the color scheme was pitched
29 5

very high. S o perhaps , perhaps I am on the right track, and I am getting an eye
for thi s kind of country . We must wait and make sure .
This last picture can bear the surroundings of red brick, with which my studi o
i s paved . When I put it
on the ground, with this background
of red, very
red
brick, the color of the picture does not become hollow or bleached . The country
near Aix where Cezann e works i s just the same as this , it i s still the Crau . If
coming home with my canvas , I
say to myself,
“Look ! I
’ve got the very tones
of old Cezann e !
” I only mean that Cezanne hke Zola i s so absolutely part of the
countryside, and knows it so intimately, that you must make the same calculations
in your head to arrive at the same tones . Of course, if you saw them side by side,
mine would hold their own , but there would be no resemblance
With a handshake, I hope that you will be able to write one
of these days .
Ever yours , Vincent
5 06
My dear Theo,
Arles ,
1 6 July 1 8 8 8
I have come back from a day in Mont Majour, and my friend the second lieutenant
was with me . We explored the old garden together, and stole some excellent ﬁgs .
If it had been bigger, it would have made me think of Zola
’s Paradou, hi gh
reeds , and vines , ivy , ﬁg trees, olives , pomegranates with lusty ﬂowers
of the
brightest orange, hundred-year- old cypresses , ash trees , and willows , rock oaks,
half-broken ﬂights of steps , ogive windows i n ruins, blocks of white rock covered
with lichen, and scattered fragments
of crumbling walls here and there among
the green . I brought back another big drawing, but not of the garden. That
makes three drawings . When I have half a dozen I shall send them along .
Yesterday I went to Fontvieill es to visit Bock and McKnig ht , only these
gentlemen had gone on a httle trip to Switzerland for a week .
I think the heat i s still doing me good, in spite
of the mosquitoes and ﬂies .
The grasshoppers— not hke ours at home, but like those you
see in Japanese
sketchbooks , and Spanish ﬂies , gold and green in swarms
on the olives . The
grasshoppers (I think they are called cicadas) sing as loud as a frog .
I have been thinking too that when you remember that I painted old Tang uy
’
s
portrait, and that he also had the portrait of the old lady (which they have sold),
and of their friend (it i s true that I got 20 francs from him for this latter portrait) ,
and that I have bought without discount
2 5 0 francs
’ worth of paints from Tan
guy, on which he naturally made something, and ﬁnally that I have been his
friend no less than he has been mine, I have good reason to doubt hi s right to
claim money from me ; and it really is squared by the study he still has of mine,
all the more so because there was an express arrangement that he should pay
himself by the sale of a picture .
By some queer freak
of nature, ! antippe, Mother Tanguy, and some other
good ladies have heads of silex
or ﬂint. Certai nly these ladies are a good deal
more dangerous in the civilized world they go about in than the poor souls
bitten by mad dogs who live in the Pasteur Institute . And old Tanguy would be
296


paints and canvas in reserve for when Gaug uin comes . I wish paint was as little
trouble to work with as pen and paper. I often spoil a painted study for fear of
wasting color.
With paper, whether it
’
s a letter I
’m writing or a drawing I
’m doing, it doesn
’t
make much difference— so many sheets of Whatman, so many drawings . I thi nk
that if I were rich, I
’d spend less than I do now .
Well , old Martin would say, then it
’
s up to y ou to get rich, and he is certainly
right, just as he is about the masterpiece .
Do you remember in Guy de Maupassant the gentleman who hunted rabbits
and other game, and who had hunted so hard for ten years , and was so exhausted
by running after the game that when he wanted to get married he found he was
impotent, whi ch caused the greatest embarrassment and consternation. Without
being i n the same situation as this gentleman as far as its being either my duty or
my desire to get married, I begin to resemble him physically. According to the
worthy Ziem, man becomes ambitious as soon as he becomes impotent . Now
though it
’
s pretty much
all the same to me whether I
’m impotent or not, I
’m
damned if that
’s going to drive me to ambition . It
’
s only the greatest philosopher
of hi s place and time, and consequently
of all places and
all times , good
old
master Pangloss , who could— ifhe were here— give me advice and steady my soul .
There— the letter to Russell i s in its envelope, and I have written as I intended .
I asked him if he had any news of Reid, and I ask you the same question .
I told Russell I left him free to take what he likes, and from the ﬁrst lot I sent
as well . And that I was only waiting for hi s explicit answer, telling me whether
he preferred to make hi s choice i n your place or hi s; that in the ﬁrst place if he
wanted to see them at hi s own house, you would send him along some orchards ,
and fetch the lot back again when he had made hi s choice . So he cannot quarrel
with that . If he takes nothing from Gauguin, it i s because he cannot . If he can,
I am inclined to expect that he will ; I told him that if I ventured to press him
to buy, it was not because nobody else would if he didn
’t, but because Gauguin
having been ill , and with the further complication of hi s having been laid up
and having to pay hi s doctor, the burden became rather heavy for us,
and we
were all the more anxious to ﬁnd a purchaser for a picture .
I am thinking a lot about Gauguin, and I would have plenty
of ideas for
pictures, and about work in general .
I have a charwoman now for one franc, who sweeps and scrubs the house for
me twice a week. I am counting heavily on her, expecting her to make our beds
if we decide to sleep in the house . Otherwise we could make some arrangement
with the fellow where I am staying now . Anyhow, we
’ll try to manage so that
it would work out as an economy instead of an extra expense .
H ow are you now? Are you still going to Gruby? What you tell me of the
conversation at the Nouvelle Athenes i s interesting . You know the httle portrait
by Desboutin that Portier has ?
It certainly is a strange phenomenon that all artists , poets , musicians , painters,
are unfortunate in material things— the happy ones as well— what you said lately
about Guy de Maupassant i s fresh proof of it . That brings up again the eternal
298

question : Is the whole
of life visible to us,
or isn
’t it rather that this side
of
death we see only one hemisphere ?
Painters— to take them alone— dead and buried speak to the next generation
or to several succeeding generations through their work .
Is that
all, or is there more to come? Perhaps death is not the hardest thing
in a painter
’s life .
For my own part, I declare I know nothing whatever about it, but looking at
the stars always makes me dream, as simply as I dream over the black dots
representing towns and villages
on a map . Why , I
ask myself, shouldn
’t the
shining dots of the sky be as accessible as the black dots on the map of France?
Just as we take the train to get to Tarascon or Rouen, we take death to reach a
star. One thing undoubtedly true in this reasoning i s that we cannot get to a star
while we are alive, any more than we can take the train when we are dead .
So to me it seems possible that cholera, gravel, tuberculosis and cancer are the
celestial means
of locomotion, just as steamboats , buses and railways are the
terrestrial means . To di e qui etly of old age would be to go there on foot .
Now I am going to bed because it i s late, and I wish you good night and good
luck .
A handshake,
Ever yours , Vincent
B 6 [5 ]
My dear comrade Bernard,
Arles, Second half of June
1 8 8 8
More
and more it seems to me that the pictures which must be made so that
painting should be wholly itself, and should raise itself to a height equivalent to
the serene summits which the Greek sculptors, the German musicians, the writers
of French novels reached, are beyond the power of an isolated individual ; so they
will probably be created by groups of men combining to execute an idea held in
common .
One may have a superb orchestration of colors and lack ideas . Another one is
cram-funof new concepts, tragically sad or charming, but does not know how to
express them in a sufficiently sonorous manner because of the timidity
of a
limited palette . All the more reason to regret the lack of corporative spirit among
the artists, who criticize and persecute each other, fortunately without succeeding
in annihilating each other.
Y ou will
say that this whole line
of reasoning i s banal—
so be it ! How
ever, the thing itself— the existence of a renaissance— thi s fact is certainly no
banahty
.
A techni cal question . Just give me your opinion
on it in your next letter.
I am going to put the black and the wbite, just as the color merchant sells them
to us, boldly on my palette and use them just as they are . When— and observe
that I am speaking of the simpliﬁcation of color in the Japanese manner— when
in a green park with pink paths I see a gentleman dressed in black and a justice
of the peace by trade (the Arab Jew in Daudet
’
s Tartarin calls this honorable
functionary zoug e de paix) who i s reading L
’Intransig eant
Over him and the park a sky of a simple cobalt .

then why not paint the said zoug e de paix with ordinary bone black and the
Intransig eant with simple, quite raw white ? For the Japanese artist ignores reﬂected
colors, and puts the ﬂat tones side by side, with characteristic lines marking off
the movements and the forms .
In another category of ideas— when for instance one composes a motif of
colors representing a yellow evening
sky , then the ﬁerce hard white of a whi te
wall against this sky may be expressed if necessary— and this i n a strange way
by raw white, softened by a neutral tone, for the sky itself colors i t with a delicate
lilac hue . Furthermore imagine in that landscape which i s so naive, and a good
thing too, a cottage whitewashed
all over (the roof too) standing in an orange
ﬁeld— certainly orange, for the southern sky and the blue Mediterranean provoke
an orange tint that gets more intense as the scale
of blue colors gets a more
vigorous tone— then the black note of the door, the windows and the little cross
on the ridge of the roof produce a simultaneous contrast of black and white just
as pleasing to the eye as that of blue and orange .
Or let us take a more amusing motif: imagine a woman in a black-and—white
checked dress in the same primitive landscape with a blue
sky and
an orang e
soil— that woul d be a rather funny sight, I think . In Arles they often do wear
black and white checks .
Suffice it to
say that black and white are al so colors, for in many cases they
c an be looked upon
as colors, for their
simultaneous contrast i s as striking as
that of green and red, for instan ce .
The Japanese make use of it for that matter . They express the mat and pale
complexion of a young girl and the piquant contrast of the black hair marvelously
e
w ll by means of white paper and four strokes of the pen . Not to mention their
black thornbushes starred al l over with a thousand white ﬂowers .
At last I have seen the Mediterranean, which you will probably cross
so
than I shall .
I spent a week at Saintes-Maries, and to get there I drove in a diligence across the
Camargue with its vineyards, moors and ﬂat ﬁelds like Holland . There, at Saintes
Maries, were girls who remin
’ded
one
of Cimabue and Giotto— thin, straight,
somewhat
sad and mystic . On the perfectly ﬂat, sandy beach httle green, red,
blue boats,
so pretty in shape and color that they made one think
of ﬂowers .
A single man i s their whole crew, for these boats hardly venture
on the high
seas . They are offwhen there i s no wind, and make for the shore when there is
too much of it .
Gauguin, it seems , i s still sick .
I am very eager to know what you have been working at lately
- I myself am
still doing nothing but landscapes— enclosed a sketch [see the sketch of the
boats]
. I should also very much like to see Africa, but I hardly make any deﬁnite
plans for the future, it will all depend on circumstances .
What I should like to ﬁnd out i s the effect of an intenser blue in the sky.
Fromentin and Gerome see the soil of the South as colorless, and a lot of people
see it hke that . My God, yes, if you take some sand in your hand, if you look at
it closely, and
also water,
and also
ai r, they are
all colorless, looked at in this


The Bible i s Christ, for the Old Testament leads up to this culminating point.
St . Paul and the evangelists dwell on the other slope of the sacred mountain .
H ow petty that story i s ! My G od, only think . So there are only Jews in the
world, who begin by declaring everything which i s not themselves impure .
Why don
’t the other peoples under the great sun ofthose parts —the Egyptians,
the Indians, the Ethiopians, Babylon, Nineveh— why don
’t they have their an
nals, written with the same care ! The study ofit i s beautiful for all that, and being
able to read everything would be tantamount to not being able t o read at all.
But the consolation of that saddening Bible which arouses
our despair
and
our indignation— which distresses us once and for all because we are outraged by
its pettiness and contagious folly— the consolation which i s contained in it, like
a kernel in a hard shell , a bitter pulp, i s Christ .
The ﬁgure
of Christ, as I feel it , has been painted only by Delacroix and
Rembrandt
and later Millet painted
the doctrine of Christ .
The rest makes me smile a little, all the rest of religious painting— from the
religious point of view, not from the point of view of painting . And the Italian
primitives— Botticelli ;
or
say the Flemish primitives— Van
Eyck ; Germans
Cranach— they are nothing but heathens who interest me only in the same respect
as the Greeks, as Velazquez an d so many other naturahsts.
Christ alone-
of all the phi losophers, Magi, etc .— has affirmed, as a principal
certainty, eternal life, the inﬁnity of time, the nothingness of death, the necessity
and the raison d
’etre of serenity and devotion . He lived serenely, as ag reater artist
tban all otber artists, despising marble an d clay as well as color, working i n living
ﬂesh . That i s to say , this matchless artist, hardly to be conceived of by the obtuse
instrument of our modern, nervous ,
stupeﬁed brains, made neither statues nor
pictures nor books ; he loudly proclaimed that he made
living men, immortals .
This i s serious, especially because it i s the truth .
This great artist did not write books either ; surely Christian literature as a
whole would have ﬁlled him with indignation,
an d very rare in it are literary
products that would ﬁnd favor
k in discerning eyes beside Luke
’s Gospel or Paul
’
s
Epistles—
so simple in their hard, militant form . Though this great artist— Christ
disdained writing books
on ideas (sensations) , he surely disdained the spoken
word much less— particularly the parable . (What a sower, what a harvest, what a
ﬁg tree ! etc .)
And who would dare tell us that he lied
on that day when, scornfully fore
telling the collapse of the Roman ediﬁce, he declared, Heaven and earth shall pass
away, but my words shall not pass away.
These spoken words, which, hke a prodigal g rand seig neur, he did
not even
deign to write down, are one of the highest summits— the very highest summit
— reached by art, which becomes a creative force there, a pure creative
power.
These considerations, my dear comrade Bernard, lead us very far, very far
aﬁeld ; they rai se us above art itself. They make us
see the art of creating hfe,
the art
of being immortal and alive at the same time . They are connected with
painting .
3 02

The patron saint of painters— St . Luke, physician, painter, evangelist— whose
symbol i s, alas, nothing but an ox, i s there to give us hope .
Yet our real an d true lives are rather humble, these lives
of us painters, who
drag out our existence under the stupefying yoke of the difficulties of a profession
which c an hardly be practiced on this thankless planet on whose surface
“the love
of art makes us lose the true love .
”
But seeing that nothing opposes it— supposing that there are also lines
and
forms as well as colors
on the other innumerable planets
and suns— it would
remain prai seworthy
of us
to maintain a certain serenity with regard to the
possibili ties of painting under superior and changed conditions of existence, an
existence changed by a phenomenon no queerer and no more surprising than the
transformation
of the caterpillar into a butterﬂy,
or
of the white grub into a
cockchafer .
The existence of painter-butterﬂy would have for its ﬁeld of action one of the
innumerable heavenly bodies, which would perhaps be no more inaccessible to us ,
after death, than the black
'
dots which symbolize towns and villages on g eog raphi
c al maps are in our terrestrial existence .
Science—
scientiﬁc reasoning— seems to me an instrument that will lag far, far
behind . For look here : the earth has been thought to be ﬂat . It was true,
so it
still i s today, for instance between Paris and Asni eres . Which, however, does not
prevent science from proving that the earth is principally round . Which no one
contradicts nowadays .
But notwithstanding this they persist nowadays in believing that life isﬂat and
runs from birth to death . However, life too i s probably round, an d very superior
in expanse and capacity to the hemisphere we know at present .
Future generations will probably enlighten us
on this
so very interesting
subject ; and then maybe Science itself will arrive— willy-ni lly— at conclusions
more or less parallel to the sayings of Christ with reference to the other half of
our existence .
However this may be, the fact i s that we are painters in real life, and that the
important thing i s to breathe as hard as ever we can breathe .
Ah ! that lovely picture by Eug
. Delacroix :
“Christ in the Boat on the Sea [sic]
of Gennesaret .
” He— with hi s pale citron-colored aureole— luminously asleep
against
that patch
of dramatic violet, somber blue, blood red, the group
of
mortally frightened di sciples—
on that terrible emerald
sea, rising up, rising up
to the very height of the frame . Oh ! that sublimely brilliant conception . I should
make some sketches of it for you if I were not so beat after drawing and painting
from a model—
a Zouave— for three or four days ; but on the contrary, writing
rests and di stracts me .
What I have dashed off i s very ugly : a drawing
of a seated Zouave, a painted
sketch
of the Zouave against a completely white wall, and ﬁnally his portrait
against a green door
and some orange bricks
of a wall . It is hard and utterly
ugly and badly done . All the same, since it means attacking a real difficulty, it
may pave the way for me in the future .
The ﬁgures I do are nearly always detestable in my own eyes, and all the more

so in the eyes of others ; yet it i s the study of the ﬁg ure that strengthens one
’s
powers most, if one does it in a manner other than the
one taught us, for
instance, at Mr . Benjamin Constant
’s .
Your letter dehg hted me, the sketch i s very, very interesting ; many thanks for
it . On my part I shall send you a drawing one of these days— tonight I am too
exhausted ; my eyes are tired even if my brain i s not .
Just tell me, do you remember
John the Baptist
by Puvi s [de Chavannes] ?
I myself think it amazing an d as magical as Eugene Delacroix .
That passage you dug up in the Gospels about John the Baptist is absolutely
what you have seen . People crowding around a man :
“Are you the Christ? Are
you Elias ?
” Just as it would be now, if one asked Impressionism or one of it s
seeking representatives :
“Have you found it ?
” It
’
s just like that .
At present my brother i s having an exhibition of Claude Monet—
1 0 pictures
painted at Antibes from February to May— it i s very beautiful , it seems .
Did you ever read a life ofLuther ? For Cranach, Durer, Holbein belong to him.
H e— hi s personality— i s the high light of the Middle Ages .
I don
’t like the Roi -Soleil any more than you do — to me he seems more of an
extingui sher, thi s Loui s !
IV— my G od, what a lousy bore in general, this sort
of Methodist Solomon . I don
’t like Solomon either, just
, as I don
’t like the
Methodists the least little bit— Solomon seems a hypocritical heathen to me ;
indeed, I have no respect for hi s architecture—
an imitation of other styles— and
still less for hi s writings , for the pagans have done better than that .
Just tell me, what about your military service ? Do you want me to speak to
that second lieutenant of the Zouaves , or don
’t you ? Are you going to Africa
or not ? Do the years in your case count double in Africa or not ? Above all, try
to get blood ; one makes no progress with
anemia, painting goes slowly. You
must try to cultivate a temperament which can stand a lot
of wear
an d tear, a
temperament which enables you to hy e to a great age ; you ought to live hke a
monk who goes to a brothel once every two weeks— that
’s what I do myself;
it
’
s not very poetic, but I feel it my duty after all to subordinate my life to painting .
If I were in the Louvre with you, I should very much hke to look at the
primitives in your company .
As for me, when I
’m in the Louvre, I still go, with a great love in my heart,
to the Dutch, Rembrandt ﬁrst of
all . Rembrandt, whom I used to study
so
much— and then Potter, for instance, who ventures
to paint a single white
stalli on on a size 4 or 6 panel—
a stallion neighing and rutting— forlorn under a
sky pregnant with a thunderstorm, tragically sad in the delicately green immensity
of a damp meadow . In short, there are marvels in those old Dutchmen which
have no connection with anything else whatever .
A handshake, and once again thanks for your letter and your sketch .
Sincerely yours, Vincent
P .S . The sonnets are doing well— that is to say, their color i s ﬁne ; the drawing i s
less strong, or rather less sure, the drawing i s still hesitant— I don
’t know how
to express it— their moral purpose i s not clear .


a study of a nude man, realistic and simple . He stands leaning against a door or a
pillar, in a gloomy interior ; a shaft
of light from above ﬂeeting ly touches the
face, which i s bent forward, and the mass
of reddish hair . One might call it a
Degas
on account of the true and deeply felt animality of that body . But look
here, di d you ever realb
r look at the
“Ox
”
or
“The Interior of a Butcher
’s Shop
in the Louvre? You haven
’t really looked at it, and Baudelaire inﬁnitely less . It
would be a huge pleasure for me to spend a morning with you in the Gallery of
the Dutch Painters . One c an hardly describe all that, but with the pic tures before
us I could show you marvels and miracles, which are
the reasons why the
primitives don
’thave my admiration at all, that i s to sayprimarily andmost directly.
What do you expect — I am not so very eccentric ; a Greek statue, a peasant
by Mi llet, a Dutch portrait, a nude woman by Courbet
or Degas, those calm
modeled perfections, are the reason why a lot
of other things— the primitives
like the Japanese— seem to me so much p enwambz
’
p
. It interests me enormously,
but a complete thing, a perfection, renders the inﬁnite tangible to us ; and the
enjoyment of a beautiful thing i s like coitus, a moment of inﬁnity .
For instance, do you know a painter called Vermeer who has painted, among
other things, a very beautiful preg nant Dutch lady? The palette
of this strange
painter i s blue, citron yellow, pearl gray, black, white . There are certainly,
on
close examination,
all the riches of a complete palette in his rare pictures ; but
.
the combination of citron yellow, pale blue, pearl gray i s as characteristic of him
as black, white, gray and pink are of Velazquez .
Oh well, I know— Rembrandt an d the Dutch painters are widely scattered over
[public] museums and [private] collections, and it is not so easy to ga
an idea of
them if one knows only the Louvre . And yet the fact i s that Frenchmen— Charles
Blanc, Thore, Fromentin and certain others— have, better than the Dutch them
selves, written about that special art .
Those Dutchmen had hardly any imagination or fantasy, but their good taste
and their scientiﬁc knowledge of composition were enormous . They have not
painted Jesus Christ, the Good God and so on— a lthough Rembrandt did in fact
—but he i s the only
one (and Biblical subjects are, relatively speaking, not
numerous in hi s work)
. He i s the only one, the exception, who has done Christs,
etc.
And in hi s case it i s hardly like anything whatever done by the other
religious painters ; it i s metaphysical magic.
Thus Rembrandt has painted angels . He paints a self-portrait, old, toothless,
wrinkled, wearing a cotton cap, a picture from nature, in a mirror . He i s dreaming,
dreaming, and his brush resumes hi s self-portrait, but only the head, whose
expression becomes more tragically sad, more tragically saddening . He is dream
ing , still dreaming,
and, I don
’t know why
or how, but just as Socrates
and
Mohammed had their familiar spirits, Rembrandt paints behind this
old man ,
who resembles himself, a supernatural angel with a da Vinci smile .
I am showing you a painter who dreams
and paints from imagination, and
I began by contending that the character of the Dutch painters i s such that they
do not invent anything, that they have neither imagination nor fantasy.
Am I illogical? No .
3 06

Rembrandt did not invent anything, that
angel, that
strange Christ, the fact
is that he knew them ; he felt them there .
Delacroix paints a Christ by means of the unexpected effect of a bright citron
yellow note, a colorful luminous note which possesses the same
un speakable
strangeness and charm in the picture as a star does in a corner of the ﬁrmament ;
Rembrandt works with tonal values in the same way Delacroix works with colors .
Now there i s a great distance between Delacroix
’s
an d Rembrandt
’s method
and that of all the rest of religious painting .
I will write again soon . The present i s to thank y ou for the drawings, which
delight me enormously. I have just ﬁni shed a portrait of a girl of twelve, brown
eyes, black hair and eyebrows , gray-yellow ﬂesh, the background heavily tinged
with malachite green, the bodice blood red with violet stripes, the skirt blue
with large orange polka dots, an oleander ﬂower in the charming little hand .
It has exhausted me
so much that I am hardly in a mood for writing . Till
soon again, and once more many thanks .
Sincerely yours, Vincent
B 13 [8]
My dear comrade Bernard,
Arles, End of July
1 8 8 8
I don
’t have the slightest doubt that you
’ll admit that neither y ou nor I can have a
complete idea of Velazquez and Goya, of what they were as men and as painters,
for neither
of us has seen Spain, their country, and
so many beautiful things
which are still left i n the South . But what one knows of them i s already something
nevertheless .
Of course as for the people of the North, Rembrandt ﬁrst of all, it i s highly
desirable, when judging these painters, to know their work as a whole as well as
their country, and also the somewhat intimate and concise history of the period
and of the customs of the old country.
I emphatically repeat that neither Baudelaire nor you has a sufﬁciently clear
idea of Rembrandt .
As for you, I cannot encourage you strongly enough to spend a long time
looking at the great and minor Dutchmen before forming a ﬁxed opinion . It i s not
merely a question of gems, but a question of selecting marvels among the marvels .
And then there i s not a little paste among the diamonds .
So, as for me, who have been studying the school of my country for twenty
years now, I shouldn
’t even answer if it were being di scussed, because in general
I hear too much talk which i s beside the point, when the painters of the North
are under discussion .
So that my only answer to you i s, Bah ! look a little closer than that
it will
truly repay your trouble a thousandfold .
Look here, for instance, if I declare that the O stade in the Louvre representing
The Painter
’s Family” (man, wife and a dozen children) i s a picture inﬁnitely
worthy of study and reﬂecti on, as well as
“The Peace of Mun ster
” by Terborch
— and then, when those pictures in the gallery of the Louvre which I personally
prefer and think most astonishing are overlooked very often by artists, even by
5 07

those who have come to see the Dutchmen, then I am not very surprised, as
I know that my choice in that gallery is based on a knowledge of thi s subject
which the majority of the French could not possibly share .
But if I di sagreed with you, for instance, about these subjects, I should c on
ﬁdently expect you to grant that I was right later
on . But what pains me
so
terribly in the Louvre is to see their Rembrandts going to ruin and the idiots of
the administration letting
so many beautiful pictures decay. So the annoying
yellow tone of certain Rembrandts i s the result of deterioration from moisture or
some other causes ; in some cases I could point it out to you with a wet ﬁnger.
It i s as diffi cult to say what Rembrandt
’s color i s as it i s to give a name to
Velazquez
’ gray. For want of a better name one might call it
“Rembrandt gold .
”
An d this i s what they have done, but it i s pretty vague.
Coming to France as a foreigner, I, perhaps better than Frenchmen born and
bred, have felt Delacroix and Zola, and my sincere an d wholehearted admiration
for them i s boundless .
Since I had a somewhat complete notion
of Rembrandt,
one, Delacroix, got
hi s results by colors, the other, Rembrandt, by tonal values , but they are on a par . I
In their quality as painters
of a society,
of a nature in its entirety, Zola and
Balzac produce rare artistic emotions in those who love them, just because they
embrace the whole of the epoch they depict .
When Delacroix paints humanity, life in general, instead ofan epoch, he belongs
no less to the same family of universal geniuses .
I very much like the last words
of, I think, Silvestre, who ended a masterly
article in this way :
“Thus died— almost smiling— Delacroix, a painter of a noble
race, who had a
sun in hi s head and a thunderstorm in hi s heart, who turned
from the warriors to the saints, from the saints to the lovers, from the lovers to
the tigers , and from the tigers to the ﬂowers .
”
Daumier i s also a great genius .
And then Millet, the painter of a whole race and the environment it lives in
.
It is possible that these great geniuses are only madmen, and that one must be
mad oneself to have boundless faith in them and a boundless admiration for them .
If this i s true, I should prefer my insanity to the sanity of the others . Perhaps the
most direct road i s to approach Rembrandt indirectly. Let
’s talk about Frans Hals .
He never painted Christs, annunciations to
the shepherds,
angels, c ruciﬁxion s
or resurrections ; he never painted nude, voluptuous and bestial women .
He di d portraits, and nothing, nothing else .
Portraits of soldiers , gatherings of officers, portraits of magistrates assembled
to debate the affairs
of the republic, portraits
of matrons with pink
or yellow
skins, wearing white caps
and dressed in wool
and black satin, discussing the
budget of an orphanage or an almshouse . He painted the portraits of middle-class
men in their homes
. the man, the woman, the chi ld . He painted the drunken
toper, an
old ﬁshwife in a mood of witchlike hilarity, the pretty gypsy whore,
babies in their diapers , the dashing, self-indulgent nobleman with hi s mustache,
1 In his haste Vinc ent must have left part of this sentenc e out, but hi s meani ng is clear none
theless .
3 08


5 14
My dear Theo,
Arles, 29 July 1 8 88
Many thanks for your kind letter . If you remember, mine ended with
“we are
getting
old, that i s what it is , the rest i s imagination and doesn
’t exist .
” Well,
I said that more for myself than for you . And I sai d it because I felt the absolute
necessity
of behaving accordingly,
of working, perhaps
not more, but with a
deeper understanding .
Now you talk of the emptiness you feel everywhere, it is just the very thing
I feel myself.
Considering, if you like, the time in which we live a great and true renai ssance
of art, the worm-eaten ofﬁcial tradition still alive but really impotent and inactive,
the new painters isolated, poor, treated like madmen, and because of this treat
ment actually becoming so, at least as far as their social life i s concerned :
Then remember that you are doing exactly the same work as these primitive
painters , since you provide them with money and sell their canvases for them,
which enables them to produce others . If a painter ruins hi s character by working
hard at painting, a thing which leaves him useless for many other things , for
family life, etc
etc . , if therefore he paints not only with colors , but with self
denial and self-renunciation and with a broken heart— a s far as you are concerned,
your own work i s not only no better paid than hi s, but it costs you exactly what
the painter
’s costs him, thi s sacriﬁce
of the individuality, half voluntary, half
accidental .
That is to say that if you paint indirect!
you are more productive than I am,
for instance . The more irrevocably you become a dealer, the more you become
an artist .
And in the same way I hope the same thing for myself. The more I am spent,
ill, a broken pitcher, by so much more am I an artist—
a creative artist— in this
great renaissance of art of which we speak .
These things are surely so, but thi s eternally living art, and this renai ssance,
this green shoot springing fromthe roots of the old felled trunk, these are such
abstract things that a kind of melancholy remains within us when we think that
one could have created life at less cost than creating art .
If possible, you ought to make me feel that art i s alive, you who love art
perhaps more than I do . I tell myself that it depends not on art but on myself, that
the only way to get back my conﬁdence and peace of mind i s to improve my work .
And there we are again, back at the end of my last letter— I am getting
old,
it
’
s sheer imagination if I should think that art i s old lumber too .
And now, if you know what a
“mousmé” i s (you will know when y ou have
read Loti
’s M adame Cbry ram
‘beme) , I have just painted
one. It took me a whole
week, I have not been able to do anything else, not having been very well either .
That i s what annoys me ; if I had been well , I shoul d have attacked some land
scapes between times , but I had to reserve my mental energy to do the mousmé
well . A mousmé i s a Japanese girl— Provencal in this case—
1 2 to
14 years old .
That makes two portraits now, the Zouave and her.
Take care of your health, above all take baths if Gmlgy reeommerzds it, for in the
3 1 0

four years by which I am older than you, you will see how necessary comparatively
good health i s for being able to work. Now for us who work with our brains ,
our one an d only hope of not breaking down too soon i s this artiﬁcial eking-out
by an up
-to-date hygienic regimen rigorously applied, as much as we can stand .
Because I for
one do not do everything I ought. And a bit of cheerfulness is
better than all the other remedies .
I have had a letter from Russell . He says that he would have written me before
if he hadn
’t been busy
.moving to Belle Isle . He is there now, and says that he
would be pleased if sooner or later I would g o and spend some time there . He
still wants to repaint my portrait. He says too— “I should have gone to Boussod
’
s
to
see Gauguin
’s
‘Negresses Talking
’ if the same thing had not prevented me
from that too .
”
In short, he does not refuse to buy one, but makes it clear that he does not
want anything inferior to the one we have . You see that at
all events that is
better than nothing .
I will write this to Gaug uin and ask him for sketches
of pictures . We must
hurry things and give up R. for the moment, but regard it as a matter that will
come off, but is in abeyance now.
And the same goes for Gui llaumin .
I wish he [Russell] would buy a ﬁgure from G . He says that he has had a very
beautiful bust of hi s wife done by Rodin, and that on this occasion he lunched
with Claude Monet and saw the 1 0 pictures ofAntibes . I am sending him G effroy
’
s
article . He criticizes the Monets very ably, begins by liking them very much, the
attack on the problem, the enfolding tinted air, the color . After that he shows
what there i s to ﬁnd fault with— the total lack of construction, for instance one
of hi s trees will have far too much foliage for the thickness
of the trunk, and
so always and everywhere from the standpoint
of the reality
of things , from
the standpoint of lots
of natural law , he i s exasperating enough . He ends by
saying that thi s quality of attacking
the difficulties i s what everyone ought
to have .
Bernard has sent me 1 0 sketches like hi s brothel ; three of them were ala Redon ;
I do not altogether share the enthusiasm he has for that . But there i s a woman
washing herself, very Rembrandtesque, an effect like Goya, and a landscape with
ﬁgures , very strange . He expressly forbade me to send them to you, but all the
same you will get them by the same post .
I think that Russell will buy something more from Bernard .
Meanwhile I have seen this Bock
’s work ; it i s strictly impressionistic, but not
powerful, it i s the stage where this new technique still preoccupies him so much
that he cannot be himself. He will gain in force and then hi s individuality will
break free, I think . But McKnig ht does water colors of the quality of those by
Destree, you remember that Dutchman we used
to know . However, he has
washed some small still lifes ; a yellow pot on a violet foreground, a red pot on
a green, an orange pot on blue, better, but very poor .
The village where they are staying i s real Millet, poor peasants and nothing
else, absolutely rmtz
'
e and homely. This quality completely escapes them . I think
3 1 1

that McKnig ht has civilized and converted to civilized Christiani ty hi s brute of a
landlord . Anyway the swine and hi s worthy spouse, when you go there, shake
hands with you— ir i s in a café, of course— when y ou ask for drinks , they have a
way
of refusing money—
“Oh ! I could
not take money from
an
arti ss
”— with
two
ses . Anyway, it i s their
own fault that it i s
so abominable, and this Bock
must get pretty well stultiﬁed in McKnig ht
’
s company.
I think that McKni g ht has some money but not much . So they contaminate
the village ; but for that, I
’d go there to work often. What one ought to do there
is not to talk to the civilized people ;
now they know the station master and a
score of bores, and that i s partly why they get nowhere . Naturally these simple
and artless country folk laugh at them and despise them . But if they did their
work without taking up with these village loungers with their starched collars ,
then they could go into the peasants
’ homes and let them earn a few pence . And
then this blessed Font vieill es would be a gold mine for them ; but the natives are
like Zola
’s poor peasants , innocent and gentle beings , as we know.
Probably McKnig ht will soon be making little landscapes with sheep for choc
olate boxes .
Not only my pictures but I myself have become haggard of late, almost like
Hugo van der Goes in the picture by Emil Wauters .
Only, having g ot my whole beard carefully shaved
off, I think that I am as
much like the very placid priest in the same pict ure as like the mad painter so in
tellig ently portrayed therein .
And I do not mind being rather between
’ the two, for one must live, especially
because it i s no use ignoring the fact that there may be a crisis some day or other
if you were to change your relations with the Boussods . Another reason for
keeping up this connection with artists , on my part as much as on yours .
Besides , I think I have spoken the truth, but if I should succeed in replacing
in goods the money spent, I should only be doing my duty. An d then, something
practical I can do i s portrait painting .
As for drinking too much
if it is bad, I can
’t tell . But look at Bismarck,
who i s in any case very practical and very intelligent, hi s good doctor told him
that he was drinking too much, and that all hi s life he had overtaxed hi s stomach
and hi s brain . Bismarck immediately stopped drinking . After that he got run
down and couldn
’t pick up . Secretly he must be laughing heartily at hi s doctor,
because fortunately for him he did not consult him sooner .
So much for that, a good handshake .
Ever yours , Vincent
Mind, as to Gauguin we must not give up the idea of coming to hi s ai d if the
suggestion i s acceptable as it stands , but we do not need bim. So do not think that
working alone bothers me, and do not push the affair on my account, be very
rare
The portrait of the girl i s against a background of white strongly tinged with
malachite green, her bodice i s striped blood red and violet, the skirt i s royal
blue, with large yellow-orange dots . The mat ﬂesh tones are yellowish-gray ; the
3 1 2


Oh, my dear boy
and the ni ce people will only
see the exaggeration as a
c aricat ure .
But what has that to do with us ? We
’ve read La Terre and Germinal, and if we
a re painting a peasant, we want to show that in the end what we have read has
c ome very near to being part of us .
I do not know if I can paint the postman as Ifeel bim; thi s man i s like
old
Tanguy in so far as he i s a revolutionary, he i s probably thought a good republican
because he wholeheartedly detests the republic which we now enjoy, and be
c ause
on the whole he is beginning to doubt, to be a little disillusioned, as
to
the republican principle itself.
But I once watched hi m sing the Marseillaise,
and I thought I was watching
’89, not next year, but the one 99 years
ag o . It was a Delacroix, a Daumier,
straight from the old Dutchmen .
Unfortunately he cannot pose, and yet to make a picture you must have an
intelligent model .
And now I must tell you that these days , as far as material things go, are
c ruelly hard . Life, no matter what I do, i s pretty expensive here, almost like
Paris , where you can spend 5 or 6 francs a day and have very little to show for it .
If I have models , I suffer a good deal for it . But it doesn
’t matter, and I
’m
g oing to continue . And I can assure you that if you should happen to send me a
little extra money sometimes , it would beneﬁt the pictures , but not me . The only
choice I have is between being a good painter and a bad one . I choose the ﬁrst . But
the needs
of painting are like those of a wasteful mistress, you can do nothing
without money, and you never have enough of it . That
’s why painting
'
oug ht to
be done at the public expense, instead of the artists being overburdened with it .
But there, we had better hold our tongues , because no one if forcing
us to work,
fate having ordained that indifference to painting be widespread and by way
of
being eternal .
Fortunately my digestion is so nearly all right again that I have lived for three
weeks in the month on ship
’s biscuits with milk and eggs . It is the blessed warmth
that i s bringing back my strength, and I was certai nly right in g oing
at onoe to the
South, instead
of waiting until the evil was past remedy. Y es, really, I am as
well as other men now, which I have never been except for a short while in
Nuenen for instance, and it i s rather pleasant . By other men I mean something
like the navvies , old Tanguy, old Mi llet, the peasants . When you are well , you
must be able to live on a piece of bread whi le you are working all day, and have
enough strength to smoke and to drink your glass i n the evening, that
’s necessary
under the circumstances . And all the same to feel the stars and the inﬁnite high
and clear above you . Then life i s
almost enchanted
after
all . Oh ! those who
don
’t believe in this sun here are real inﬁdels .
Unfortunately, along with the good god sun three quarters
of the time there
is the devil mistral .
Saturday
’s post has gone, damn it,
and I never doubted but I should get
your letter. However, you see I am not fretting about it .
With a handshake .
Ever yours, Vincent
3 14

5 22
My dear Theo,
Arles ,
1 3 August
1 8 88
I have to thank you for a lot
of things , ﬁrst for your letter and the 5 o-fr. note
enclosed, but
also just as much for the package
of paints and canvas , which
I have been to the station to get (the geranium lake has come too), and lastly for
the Cassagne book, and for La ﬁn de Lneie P elleg rin.
If Tasset divided hi s parcels better, it would make a difference in the cost of
carriage ; there were three parcels this time, two
of them weighing more than
5 kilos . If he had kept back a few tubes , the whole would have cost about 5 francs .
But I am very glad to have them all the same .
Lurie P elleg rinis very ﬁne, it i s quick with life and is still exquisite and moving,
because it keeps the human touch . Why should it be forbidden to handle these
subjects , unhealthy and overexcited sexual organs seek sensual delights such as
da Vinci
’s . Not I , who have hardly seen anything but the kind of women at
z francs, originally intended for the Zouaves . But the people who have leisure
for love-making, they want the da Vinci mysteries . I realize that these loves are
not for everyone
’s understanding . But from the point of view of what i s allowed,
one could write books treating worse aberrations of perversion than Lesbianism,
just as it would be permissible to write medical documents on this sort of story,
surgical disquisitions .
At all events, law and justice apart, a pretty woman i s a living marvel, whereas
the pictures by da Vinci and Correggio only exist for other reasons . Why am
I
so little an artist that I always regret that the statue and the picture are
not
alive? Why do I understand the musician better, why do I
see the raison d
’etre
of hi s abstractions better?
At the ﬁrst opportunity I will send you an engraving after a drawing by
Rowlandson, representing two women, as beautiful as a Fragonard or a Goya .
Just now we are having a glorious strong heat, with no wind, just what
I want . There i s a sun, a light that for want
of a better word I
c an only call
yellow, pale sulphur yellow, pale golden citron . H ow lovely yellow i s ! And
how much better I shall see the North !
Oh ! I keep wishing for the day when you will see and feel the sun of the
As to studies , I have tw o studies of thistlesin a vague ﬁeld, thistles white with
the ﬁne dust
of the road . Then a little st udy
of a roadside inn, with red
and
green carts ; and also a little st udy of Paris-Lyons-Mediterranee carriages ; these
last two studies have been approved of as having
“quite the modern touch
” by
the young rival of good old General Boulanger, the very resplendent
and lieu
tenant of Zouaves .
Th is valiant warrior has given up the art of drawing, into the mysteries
of
which I endeavored to initiate him, but it was for a plausible reason, namely
that he had unexpectedly to take an examination, for which I am afrai d he was
anything but prepared .
Always supposing the aforesaid young Frenchman
always speaks the truth,
he has astonished
his examiners by the conﬁdence
of his answers , a
c onﬁ
3 1 5

dence he had reinforced by spending the
eve
of the examination in a brotheL
As Francois Coppée, I think, says in a sonnet, one might have
“a despairing
doubt
”
on the subject of
“my lieutenant to be,
” for, Coppée goes
on,
“my
thoughts are on
our defeat .” The fact remains that I have nothing to complain
of in him, and if it i s true that he will shortly be a full-ﬂedg ed li eutenant, one must
anyhow acknowledge hi s luck . He i s literally like the good old general in that he
has often frequented the pretty ladies of the so-called café-chantant type . It will
be enough for me to write you, or rather he will send you a wire telling y ou by
what train he will arrive on the 1 6th or i 7th . Then he will hand over the painted
studies, which will save us the cost of carriage . He owes me all that anyhow for
my lessons . He will only stay in Paris one or
,two days , as he is going North, but
on hi s return he will stop there longer.
After such coolness it i s rather kind
of Uncle to have left you a legacy, but
I cannot easily get it into my head that C . M . and he did not actually condemn
you
to penal servitude for life that time they refused to
lend you the capital
necessary to set you up in business for yourself. This will always remain a grave
error on their part. But I won
’t harp on that. All the more reason for trying to
do the utmost in art, even if we shall always be in comparatively straitened
circumstances as far as money is concerned. Well , my boy , at the time you were
ready for y our part to set up in business, and consequently you have a perfect
right to feel that you are doing y our duty for y our part . Considered as a whole,
y ou have taken up this business
of the impressionists with their help . Without
their help the thing can
’t go on ; or will g o on in some di fferent way
. If you have
made no proﬁt yet, you have deserved something, and if the Dutch confoun d
these two very different things , having only their word
‘‘verdienen” for both
meanings, so much the worse for them.
I am writing a line to Mourier too— you can read ir —and I give you a hearty
handshake .
Ever yours , Vincent
With regard to Gauguin, however much we appreciate him, I think
that we
must behave like the mother of a family and calculate the actual expenses . If one
listened to him,
one would g o
on hoping for something vague in the future,
and meantime stay on at the inn, and g o
on living in a hell with no way out .
I would rather shut myself up in a Cloister like the monks , free as the monks
are to g o to the brothel or the wine shop if the spirit moves us . But for
our
work we need a home . Altogether Gauguin leaves me quite in the dark about
Pont-Aven ; he tacitly accepts my suggestion ofcoming to him if necessary, but he
writes nothing about any means of ﬁnding a studio of our own , or about what it
would cost to furnish it . And I can
’t help feeling there
’s something queer about it .
So I have decided not to go to Pont-Aven, unless we could ﬁnd a house there
at a low rent like the one here ( 1 5 fr. per month is what mine costs) and could
arrange it so that we could sleep in it .
I am going to write our sister this evening if I can ﬁnd time.
A handshake .
Vincent
3 1 6


I could do without the mistral and without the fatal condi tions of vani shed youth
and comparative poverty. For my part I am in no way set
on changing my
condition, and I count myself only too happy to be able to go on as I do .
N0 answer from friend Russell , and Gauguin certainly deserved one .
I have put in thi s package a drawing after a picture which I am working on
now— the boats with the man unloading sand . If some studies are not quite dry,
so much the worse for them . They must be left to dry out, then washed with
plenty
of water, and retouched if necessary . But they cannot come to much
harm, and it was a good opportuni ty for sending them .
A good handshake, and I do hope to hear from you by Friday or Saturday.
Ever yours, Vincent
5 3 1
My dear Theo,
Arles , 3 September
1 8 8 8
I spent yesterday with the Belgian, who also has a sister among the
“
ving ti stes .
The weather was not ﬁne, but a very good day for talking ; we went for a walk
and al l the same saw some very ﬁne things at the bullﬁg ht and outside of town.
We talked more seriously about the idea that if I keep a place in the South, he
ought to set up a sort of post among the coal mines . Then Gauguin and I and
he, if the importance of a picture made it worth the journey, could change places
—thus being sometimes in the North, but in familiar country with a friend in it,
and sometimes in the South .
You will soon see him, this young man with the look of Dante, because he i s
going to Paris, and if you put him up
— if the room i s free— you will be doing
him a good turn ; he i s very distinguished-looking, and will become so, I thi nk,
in hi s painting .
He likes Delacroix, and we talked a lot about Delacroix yesterday . He even
knew the violent cartoon for the
“Bark of Christ .
Well, thanks to him I at last have a ﬁrst sketch of that picture which I have
dreamed of for so long— the poet . He posed for me . His ﬁne head with that keen
gaze stands
out in my portrait against a starry sky
of deep
ultramarine ; for
clothes , a short yellow coat, a collar of unbleached linen, and a spotted tie . He
gave me two sittings in one day.
Yesterday I had a letter from our sister, who has seen a great deal . Ah, if she
could marry an artist, it wouldn
’t be such a bad thing for her .
I have ﬁni shed L
’Immortel by Daudet . I rather like the sculptor Vedrine
’s
saying , that achieving fame i s something like ramming the live end of your cigar
into your mouth when you are smoking . But I certainly like L
’Immortel less , far
less than Tartarin.
You know, it seems to me that L
’Immortel i s not so ﬁne in color as Tartari n,
because with its mass of true and subtle observations it reminds me of the dreary
pictures by Jean Berend, which are so dry and cold . Now Tartarin is realbrg reat,
with the greatness of a masterpiece, just like Candide.
I beg you to keep my studies
of this place as well aired
as possible, because
3 1 8

they are not yet thoroughly dry . If they remain shut up or in the dark, the colors
will lose their quality. S o the portrait
of
“The Young Girl,
”
“The Harvest”
(a wide landscape with the ruin in the background and the line of the Alps) , the
“Little Seascape,
” the
“Garden
” with the weeping trees and clumps of conifers
it would be a good thing if you could put these on stretchers . I am rather keen
on them . You will easily see from the drawing of the little seascape that it i s the
most thought-out piece .
I am having two oak frames made for my new peasant
’s head and for my Poet
study. Oh, my dear brother, sometimes I know so well what I want. I can very
well do without God both in my life and in my painting, but I cannot, ill as I
am, do without something which is greater than I, which is my life— the power
to create .
And if, frustrated in the physical power, a man tries to create thoughts instead
of children, he i s still part of humanity .
And in a picture I want to say something comforting, as music i s comforting .
I want to paint men and women with that something of the eternal which the
halo used to symbolize, and which we seek to convey by the act ual radiance and
vibration of our coloring .
Portraiture
so understood does
not become like an Ary Scheffer just because
there i s a blue sky in the background, as in
“St . Augustine .
” For Ary Scheffer
is so little of a colorist .
But it would be more in harmony with what Eug
. Delacroix attempted and
brought off in hi s
“Tasso in Prison,
” and many other pictures, representing a real
man . Ah ! portraiture, portrai ture with the thoughts, the soul of the model in it,
that is what I think must come .
The Belgian and I talked a lot yesterday about the advantages and disadvantages
of thi s place . We qui te agree about both . And on the great advantage it would
be to us if we could more now North, now South.
He is going to stay with McKni g ht again
so as to live more cheaply. That,
however, has
one di sadvantage, I think, because living with a slacker makes
one slack .
I think you would enjoy meeting him, he i s still young . I think he will
ask
your advice about buying Japanese prints and Daumier lithographs . A s to these
—the Daumi ers— it would be a good thing to get some more of them, because
later on there won
’t be any more available .
The Belgian was saying that he pai d 8 0 francs for board and lodging with
McKnig ht . So what a difference living together makes , since I have to pay 45 a
month for nothing but lodging . I always come back to the same calculation, that
with Gauguin I should not spend more than I do alone, and be no worse
off.
But we must consider that they were very badly housed, not for sleeping , but
for the possibili ty of working at home .
So I am always between two currents of thought, ﬁrst the material di fficulties ,
turning round and round to make a living ; and second, the study of color. I am
always in hope of making a di scovery there, to express the love of two lovers by
a wedding
of two complementary colors, their mingling and their opposition,
3 1

the mysterious vibrations
of kindred tones . To express the thought
of a brow
by the radiance of a light tone against a somber background .
To express hope by some star, the eagerness
of a soul by a sunset radiance .
Certainly there is no delusive realism in that, but isn
’t it something that actually
exists ?
Good-by for now . I
’ll tell y ou another time when the Belgian may be leaving,
because I
’ll see him again tomorrow.
With a handshake,
Ever yours , Vincent
The Belgian told me that they have a De Groux at home, the cartoon for the
“Bénédicité” in the museum in Brussels .
The execution
of the portrait of the Belgian i s something like the portrait of
Reid which you have .
5 3 3
My dear Theo,
Arles , 8 September
1 8 88
Thank you a thousand times for your kind letter and the 3 00 francs it contained ;
after some worrying weeks I have just had one of the very best . And just as the
worries do not come singly, neither do the joys . For just because I am always
bowed under this difficulty of paying my landlord, I made up my mind to take
it gaily . I swore at the said landlord, who after
all isn
’t a bad fellow, and told
him that to revenge myself for paying him so much money for nothing, I would
paint the whole of hi s rotten joint so
as to repay myself. Then to the great joy
of the landlord,
of the postman whom I had already painted,
of
\the visiting
night prowlers and of myself, for three nights running I sat up to paint and went
to bed during the day. I often think that the night i s more alive and more richly
colored than the day .
N ow , as for getting back the money I have paid to the landlord by means of
my painting, I do not dwell on that, for the picture i s one of the ugliest I have
done . It i s the equivalent, though different, of the
“Potato Eaters .
”
I have tried to express the terrible passions of humanity by means of red and
green.
The room i s blood red and dark yellow with a green billiard table in
the
middle ; there are four citron-yellow lamps with a glow of orange and green .
Everywhere there i s a clash and contrast of the most disparate reds and greens
in the ﬁgures
of little sleeping hooligans, in the empty, dreary room, in violet
and blue . The blood-red and the yellow-green of the billi ard table, for instance,
contrast with the soft tender Loui s !
V green of the counter, on whi ch there i s
a pink nosegay . The white coat of the landlord, awake in a corner of that furnace,
turns citron-yellow, or pale luminous green.
I am making a drawing
of it with the tones in water color to send to you
tomorrow to give you some idea of it .
I wrote this week to Gauguin and Bernard, but I di d not talk about anything
but pictures , just so as not to quarrel when there i s probably nothing to quarrel
about.
3 20


already bought many other things besides the beds and the bedding, I have
already spent the greater part of the 5 0 francs for the week, and I have partly
economized on both beds by having one of them somewhat plainer.
I am convinced that in the end we shall do well by furni shing the studi o . And
I already feel freer in my work, and less harried by unnecessary annoyances than
I have been .
Only if, as I hope, I take more pains with the style and quality of my work ,
it will go a little more slowly,
or rather I shall have to keep the pictures with
me longer. That is , if they are subjects that are connected and complement each
other. And also because there will be some pictures which I certainly do not
want to send you till they are bone dry
.
In this last category there is a square size 3 0 canvas , a corner of a garden wi th
a weeping tree, grass, round clipped cedar shrubs and an oleander bush. The
same corner of the garden, that i s, which you have already had a study of in the
last parcel . But as this
one i s bigger, there is a citron sky over everything, and
also the colors have the richness and intensity of autumn . And besides it i s in
even heavier paint than the other one, plain and thick . That i s picture number
one this week .
The second represents the outside of a café, with the terrace lit up by a big
gas lamp in the blue night, and a corner of a starry blue sky.
The third picture thi s week i s a portrait of myself, almost colorless, in gray tones
against a background of pale malachite .
I purposely bought a mirror good enough to enable me to work from my
image in default of a model, because if I can manage to paint the coloring of my
own head, which is not to be done without some diffic ulty, I shall likewise be
able to paint the heads of other good souls , men and women.
The problem of painting night scenes and effects on the spot and actually by
night interests me enormously. This week I have done absolutely nothing but
paint and sleep and have my meals . That means sittings of twelve hours , of six
hours and so on, and then a sleep of twelve hours at a stretch.
I read in the literary supplement of Saturday
’s Fig aro (1 5 September) the de
scription of an impressionist house . This house wasbuilt with bricks— as it were
like the bottoms
of bottles— of convex glass,
violet glass . With the sunshine
reﬂected in it, and the yellow refractions , the effect was incredible . To support
these walls of glass bricks , shaped like violet-colored eggs, they had invented a
support
of black and gilt iron representing the weird branches of Virginia
creeper and other climbing plants . Th is violet house was right in the middle of a
garden where
all the paths were of bright yellow sand . The ornamental ﬂower
borders were
of course most unusual in coloring . The house i s, if I remember
correctly, in Auteuil .
Without changing anything in this house either now
or afterward, I want all
the same to make it an artist
’s house through the decorations . That will come .
A g ood handshake . I went for a splendid walk by myself today among the
vineyards .
Ever yours, Vincent

My dear comrade Bernard,
Arles, Beginning of August
1 8 8 8
I see I forgot to answer your question as to whether Gaug uin i s still in Pont
Aven . Y es, he i s still there, and if you should like to write to him, I am inclined
to think he will be pleased . He has been staying there till now , but he will
probably join me here before long, as soon as he himself or both of us can get
the money for the journey .
I don
’t believe that this question ofthe Dutch painters , whi ch we are discussing
at the moment, i s without interest . A s soon as virili ty, originality, naturalism of
whatever kind come into question, it i s very interesting to consult them
“
. But
I must speak to you again ﬁrst of all about yourself, the two still lifes you have
done an d the two portraits of your grandmother . Have you ever done anything
better than that, and have y ou ever been morey ourselfand a personality ? I think
not . The profound study of the ﬁrst thing whi ch came to hand, of the ﬁrst person
who came along was enough to ereate really . Do you know why I like these three
or four studies so much? Because of that unknown quality of deliberateness , of
great wisdom, that inexpressible quali ty of being steady and ﬁrm and self-assured,
of which they give evidence . Y ou have never been closer to Rembrandt,
old
fellow, than in these studies .
In Rembrandt
’s studio that incomparable sphinx, Vermeer of Delft, found thi s
extremely solid technique which has never been surpassed, which at present
we are burning
to ﬁnd . Oh, I know we are working and reasoning with eolors,
just as they were with ebiaroseuro, tonal values.
But what do these differences matter, when the great thing after all i s to express
oneself strongly?
At present you are studying the methods of the Italian and German primitives ,
the symbolic signiﬁcance which the abstract mystical drawing of the Italians may
contain . Go abead. I myself rather like that anecdote about Giotto . There was a
contest for painting some picture or other representing a Virgin . A lot of cartoons
were submitted to the Admini stration of Fine Arts
of the time . One of these
cartoons, signed Giotto, was simply an oval, an egg shape . The Admini stration,
perplexed— a nd
c onﬁdent— entrusted the Virgin in question to Giotto . I don
’t
know whether it i s true or not, but I like that anecdote quite a lot .
However, let us return to Daumier an d your grandmother .
When are you going to show us studies
of such vigorous soundness again ?
I urgently invite you to do it,
although I most certainly do not despise your
researches relating to the property of lines in opposite motion— as I am not at all
indifferent, I hope, to the simultaneous contrasts of lines, forms . The trouble i s
— you
see, my dear comrade Bernard— that Giotto
and Cimabue, as well as
Holbein and Van Dyck, lived in an obeliscal— excuse the word— solidly framed
society, architecturally constructed, in which each indivi dual was a stone, and all
the stones clung together, forming a monumental society . When the socialists
construct their logical social ediﬁc e— which they are still pretty far from doing
I
am sure mankind will
see a reincarnation
of thi s society.
we are in the midst
of downright laisser-aller and
anarchy .

love order and symmetry, isolate ourselves and are working to deﬁne
only
one
”Puvi s [de Chavannes] knows thi s all right, and when he, so just and so wise
forgetting hi s Elysian Fields— was so good as to descend amiably into the intimacy
of our time, he painted a ﬁne portrait indeed : the serene
old man in the clear
light of hi s blue interior, reading a novel with a yellow cover— beside him a glass
of water with a water-color brush and a rose in it . Also a fashionable lady, as the
de Conc ourts have depicted them .
Now we
see that the Dutch paint things just as they are, apparently without
reasoning, ju st as Courbet painted his beautiful nude women . They painted por
traits, landscapes, still lifes . Well , one
c an be stupider than that, and commit
greater follies .
If we don
’t know what to do, my dear comrade Bernard, then let
’s do as they
di d, if only not to let our rare intellect ual power evaporate in sterile metaphysical
meditations which cannot possibly put the chaos into a goblet, as chaos i s chaotic
for the very reason that it contains no glass of our caliber .
We can— and thi s was done by these Dutchmen who are so desperately naughty
in the eyes of people with a system— we c an paint an atom of the chaos,a horse,
a portrait, your gran dmother, apples, a landscape .
Why do you say Degas i s impotently ﬂabby? Degas lives like a small lawyer
and does not like women, for he knows that if he loved them and fucked them
often, he, intellectually di seased, would become insipid as a p ainter .
Degas
’s painting i s virile and impersonal for the very reason that he has
resigned himself to be nothing personally but a small lawyer with a horror
of
going on a spree . He looks on while the human animals, stronger than himself,
get excited and fuck, and he paints them well, exactly because he doesn
’t have
the pretention to get excited himself.
Rubens ! Ah, that one ! he was a handsome man and a good fucker, Courbet too .
Their health permitted them to drink, eat, fuck
A s for you, my poor dear
comrade Bernard, I
already told y ou in the spring : eat a lot, do your military
exc ercises well , don
’t fuck too much ; when you do this your painting will be all
the more spermatic .
Ah ! Balzac,
that great and powerful artist, has rightly told us that relative
chastity fortiﬁes the modern artist . The Dutchmen were married men and beg ot
ebildren, a ﬁn e, very ﬁne craftsmanship , and deeply rooted in nature .
One swallow does not make a summer . I don
’t say that among your new
Breton studies there are none which are virile an d sound ; I have not seen them
yet, so I could not possibly discuss them . But what I have seen were those virile
things : the portrait of your grandmother, those still lifes . But judging from your
drawings, I have vague misgivings that your new studies will not have the same
vigor, exactly in point of virility .
Those studies, which I am speaking about ﬁrst, are the ﬁrst swallow of your
artistic spring .
If we want to be really potent males in our work, we must sometimes resign
ourselves to not fuck much, and for the rest be monks or soldiers , according to


B 17 [74]
My dear comrade Bernard,
Arles, Second half of September
1 8 88
Just a word to thank you for your drawings ; I think they were done a little too
hastily, and I like the drawings of the whores better ; but for the rest there i s an
idea in all of them . I have been overwhelmed with work lately, for the weather i s
glorious, and I must make the most of the ﬁne days, which are short .
I cannot withdraw what I said about the price : three francs, just for food, and
then the extras ! But I have no doubt that all that Gaug uin told you about the
prices here i s correct. But all that I c an see i s that the moment ofyour departure to
do your military
service is drawing near,
and I very much wish to induce your
father to provide you with what
’s necessary to fortify yourself with good food,
without your work suffering under it . Let him do the handsome thing and give
you all that i s reasonable in the interval between now and the time ofyour servi ce .
I have written you insistently and repeatedly that, if y ou g o to Africa, y ou will
work there, and you will see the very scenery which you ought to see to develop
your talent as a painter and a colorist to its full extent . But thi s c an only be done
at the expense of your poor carcass, unless before your African hardships your
father enables you to avoid getting anemic or catching a debilitating dysentery as
a result of a lack of strengthening food .
It i s hardly possible to fortify one
’
s body over there ; far be it from me to say
that when one i s going into a hot climate one ought to fatten oneself up ﬁrst,
but what I do say is that one should attend to one
’s nourishment some time in
advance ; and I abide by this through thick and thin, as this regimen agrees with
me so well here, because there i s some diﬂ
'
erenc e between the heat ofAfrica and
the heat of Arles .
Y ou will eithercome out of thi s trial of your service much stronger, strong
enough for a whole artistic career— or a broken man .
However that may be, I should be enormously delighted if you came here,
an d if Gauguin came too ; and then the only thing to be regretted will be that it
i s winter
and not the season of ﬁn e weather . I am coming to believe more and
more that the cui sine has something to do with our ability to thi nk and to make
pictures ; as for me, when my stomach bothers me it i s not conducive to the
success of my work .
In short, I think that, if your father made up hi s mind quietly to preserve your
pictures and grant you a somewhat generous credit, he would lose less in the end
than if he acted differently. In the South one
’s senses get keener, one
’s hand be
comes more agile, one
’s eye more alert, one
’s brain clearer, however on condition
that all this i s not spoiled by dysentery or something else of a debilitating nature .
But apart from that I venture to believe most ﬁrmly that anyone who loves
artistic work will find hi s productive faculties develop in the South ; but take care
of your blood and take care of everything else .
And now you will tell me perhaps that I am boring you with
all this— that
you want to go to the brothel without giving a damn about all the rest . Good
heavens, it all depends, but I cannot speak differently than I do . Art i s long and
life i s short, and we must be patient, while trying to sell our lives dearly . H ow

I wish I were your age, an d could g o off, knowing what I know, to do my military
“service in Africa ; but then I should get myself a better body than I have now,
and no mistake !
If Gauguin and I are here together, which will probably happen, then we shall
certainly do
our utmost to save you expense ; but then your father, on hi s part,
ought to do hi s utmost too, and have conﬁdence in us, an d realize that we are
not trying to do him out of more money than necessary. To do good work one
must eat well, be well housed, have one
’s ﬂing from time to time, smoke one
’s
pipe and drink one
’s coffee in peace .
I do not say that all the other things are without value, I want to leave every
body free to do what he likes ; but what I do say i s that thi s system seems prefer
able to me to a good many others.
A hearty handshake .
Sincerely yours, Vincent
B 19a
My dear comrade Bernard,
Arles, End of October
1 88 8
We have worked a lot these days, and in the meantime I read Le ré
'
oe[The Dream]
by Z ola, an d because of this I had hardly any time to write . Gauguin interests
me very much as a man— very much .
For a long time now it has seemed to me that in our nasty profession ofpainting
we are most sorely in need of men with the hands and the stomachs of workmen .
More natural tastes— more loving and more charitable temperaments— than the
decadent dandies of the Parisian boulevards have .
Well , here we are without the slig htest doubt in the presence
of a virgin
creat ure with savage instincts . With Gauguin blood and sex prevail over ambition .
But enough, y ou have seen him at close range for a longer time than I have ;
I only wanted to tell you in a few words what my ﬁrst impressions are . Moreover,
I do not think y ou will be greatly amazed if I tell y ou that our discussions tend
to treat of the terrible subject of an association of certain painters . This associa
tion must or may have, yes or no, a commercial character . We haven
’t arrived at
an conclusion yet, nor have we set foot on a new continent .
ﬁm
w
m
w
m
m
pg ssilaility of an immense renaissance
of art . Whoever believes in this new art
will have the tropics for a home .
I have the impression that we ourselves serve as no more than intermedi aries.
by experience and nothing else . I am a bit surprised at the fact that I have not yet
received the studies you promised me in exchange for mine .
Now something that will interest you —we have made some excursions to the
brothels , an d it i s probable that in the end we shall often go and work there .
At the moment Gaug uin i s working
on a canvas
of the same
night café I
painted too, but with ﬁgures seen in the brothels . It promises to turn out beautiful .
I myself have done two studies
of the fall of leaves in an avenue of poplars,
and a third study of this whole avenue, entirely yellow.

I must say I cannot understand why I don
’t do studies after the ﬁg ure, seeing
that it i s often so difficult for me to imagine the painting of the future theoretically
as otherwise than a new succession of powerful, simple portrai tists,
c omprehen
sible to the general public . Well, perhaps I shall g o do the brothels before long .
I leave a page open for Gauguin , who will probably write to you too,
and I
heartily shake your hand in thought .
Sincerely yours, Vincent
Milliet, the second lieutenant of the Zouaves, has gone to Africa ; he would like
you to write him a letter one of these days .
[Underneath thi s letter there is a postscript by Gaugui n, in whi ch he says that
he agrees with Vincent
’s idea of a new generation of painters in the tropics . He
intends to go there as soon as he gets a chance . The two pictures by Vincent of
the falling leaves are hanging in hi s room, an d Bernard would think them ﬁne ]
5 3 8
My dear Theo,
Arles ,
1 8 September
1 8 88
Many thanks for your letter and the 5 0-franc note which it contained .
I also received Maurin
’
s drawing, which i s magniﬁcent . That man i s a great
artist . Last night I slept in the house, and though there are some things still to
be done, I feel very happy i n it . Besides, I feel that I can make something lasting
out of it, from which others can proﬁt as well . Now money spent will
not be
money lost, and I think that you will soon see the difference . At present it reminds
me of Bosboom
’s interiors , with the red tiles , the white walls , the furniture of
white deal and walnut and the glimpses of an intense blue sky and greenery
through the windows . Its surroundings , the public garden, the night cafés and
the grocer
’s, are not Millet, but instead they are Daumier, absolute Zola .
And that i s qui te enough to supply one with ideas , isn
’t it ?
Yesterday I had already written to you, saying that if I ﬁgure the two beds at
3 00 francs, the price will not allow of any further reduction. If I have already
bought more than that anyway, it i s because I put half oflast week
’s money into it .
Y esterday again I had to pay
1 0 francs to the innkeeper and 3 0 francs for a
mattress .
At the moment I have 5 francs left, so I must beg you to send me what you
can,
or else— but do let it be by return mail— a louis
to last me the week, or
indeed 5 0 francs if it
’
s possible .
In
one way or another I
’d like to be able to count on getting this month,
meaning the whole month, another
1 00 instead
of the 5 0, as I asked you in
yesterday
’s letter .
If I myself save 5 0 francs during the month, and add the other 5 0 to that,
I should have spent altogether 400 francs on furniture . My dear Theo, here we
are on the right road at last . Certainly it does not matter being without hearth or
home and living in cafés like a traveler so long as one i s young, but it was be
coming unbearable to me, and more than that, it did not ﬁt in with thoughtful
work . So my plan is all complete, I will try to paint up to the value of what y ou


artists and their art . At present I do not think my pictures worthy of the advan
tages I have received from you . But once they are worthy, I swear that y ou will
have created them as much as I , and that we are making them together.
But I will
not
say more about that, because it will be as clear as daylight to
you when I begin to do things more seriously. At the moment I am working on
another square size 3 0 canvas , another garden
or rather a walk under plane
trees , with the green turf, and black clumps of pines .
Y ou did well to order the paints and the canvas, because the weather i s
magniﬁcent . We still have the mistral, but there are calm intervals and then it
i s wonderful .
If there were less mistral, this place would really be as lovely as Japan, and
would lend itself as well to art .
As I was writing, a very kind letter arrived from Bernard ; he i s thinking of
c oming
to Arles thi s winter, just a whim, but it i s possible that Gauguin i s
sending him as a substitute, and would rather stay in the North himself. We
shall soon know, because I am convinced that he will write you one way
or
the other.
In hi s letter Bernard speaks of Gauguin with great respect and sympathy, and
I am sure that they understand one another.
And I really think that Gaug uin has done Bernard good .
Whether Gauguin comes or not, he will remain friends with us, and if he does
not come now, he will come another time.
I feel instinctively that Gauguin i s a schemer who, seeing himself at the bottom
of the social ladder, wants to regain a position by means which will certainly be
honest, but at the same time, very politic .
Gauguin little knows that I am able to take all this into account . And perhaps
he does not know that it i s absolutely necessary for him to gain time, and that
with us he will gain that, if he gains nothing else.
If someday he decamps from Pont—Aven with Laval or Maurin wi thout paying
hi s debts , I think in hi s case he would still be justified, exactly like any other
creature at bay. I do not think it would be wise to offer Bernard straight OH 1 5 0
francs for a picture every month, as you did Gauguin. And Bernard, who has
evidently been over and over the whole business with Gauguin— isn
’t be rather
counting on taking Gauguin
’s place ?
I think it will be necessary to be very ﬁrm and very explicit about the whole
thing .
And without giving any reasons , to speak very plainly.
I cannot blame Gauguin— speculator though he may be as soon as he wants to
risk something in business, only I will have nothing to do with it . I would a
thousand times rather go on with you, whether you are with the Goupils or not.
And in my opinion, you know, the new dealers are exactly and in every way the
same as the old .
In principle, and in theory, I am for an association of artists who guarantee
each other
’s work and living, but in principle an d in theory I am equally agai nst
attempts to destroy old , established businesses . Let them rot in peace, and di e a

natural death . It is pure presumption to hope to regenerate trade . Have nothing
to do with it ; let
’s guarantee a livi ng among ourselves , live like a family, like
brothers and friends , and this even if it should not succeed— I would like to be
in this , but I will never have any thing to do with an attack on other dealers .
With a handshake, and I hope that what I have been obliged to ask you will
not be too terribly inconvenient. But I di d not want to postpone sleeping at
home . And in case you are short yourself,
2 0 francs more will get me through
the week, but it i s urgent .
Ever yours, Vincent
I
am keeping
all Bernard
’s letters, they are sometimes really interesting . Y ou
shall read them someday, there i s quite a bundle already.
When I said that we must be ﬁrm with Gauguin, it i s only because you had
already given your opinion when he told you hi s plan of action in Paris . Y ou
made him a good answer then without committing yourself, but also without
wounding hi s self-respect .
And the same thing may become necessary again .
I think I shall see Milliet today. Thank you in advance for the Japanese things .
5 42
My dear Theo,
Arles , 26 September
1 88 8
The ﬁne weather of the last few days has gone and we have mud and rain instead,
but it will certai nly come back again before winter .
Only the thing will be to make use of it, because the ﬁne days are short . Espe
cially for painting . This winter I intend to draw a great deal . If only I could manage
to draw ﬁgures from memory, I should always have something to do . But if
you take the cleverest ﬁgure done by all the artists who sketch on the spur of
the moment, Hokusai , Daumier, in my opinion that ﬁgure will never come up
to the ﬁg ure painted from the model by those same masters ,
or other portrait
painters .
And in the end, if models , especially intelligent models , are doomed to fail us
too often, we must not despair for this reason or grow weary in the struggle .
In the studio I have arranged
all the Japanese prints and the Daumiers, and
the Delacroixs and the Gericaults . If you ﬁnd the
“Pieta
” by Delacroix again
or the Gericault, I strongly advise you to get as many of them as you can . What
I should love to have in the st udio too i s Millet
’s
“Travaux des Champs ,
”
and
Lerat
’
s etching
of his
“Sower,
” which Durand Ruel sells at
francs . And
lastly the little etching by Jacquemart after Meissonier, the
Man Reading,
” a
Meissonier that I have always admired . I cannot help liking Meissonier
’s things .
I am reading an article in the Revue des deux M ondes on Tolstoi . It appears that
Tolstoi i s enormously interested in the religion of hi s race, like George Eliot in
England .
There must be a book by Tolstoi about religion . I think it is called [M
y Relig ion,
it must be very ﬁne . In it he i s trying to ﬁnd, so I understand from this article,
what remains eternally true in the religion of Christ, and what all religions have
5

in common . It appears that he does not admit the resurrection of the body, nor
even of the soul, but says , hke the nihilists , that after death there i s nothing more,
yet though the man dies, and dies thoroughly, humanity, living humani ty, abides .
Anyway, not having read the book itself, I can
’t say what hi s concept i s, but
I think that hi s religion cannot be a cruel one which would increase our sufferings ,
but that on the contrary, it must be very comforting, and would inspire sereni ty
and energy and courage to live and many other things .
I think the drawing of the blade of grass and the carnations and the Hokusai
in Bing
’s reproductions are admirable .
But whatever they say , the most common prints colored with a ﬂat wash are
admirable to me for the same reason as Rubens and Veronese . I know perfectly
well that they are not real primitive art . But even if the primitives are admirable,
that
’s no reason whatever for me to say,
as it i s becoming the fashion to do,
“When I go to the Louvre, I cannot get beyond the primitives .
”
If one said to a serious; collector of Japanese prints , to Levy himself,
My dear
sir, I cannot help admiring these prints at 5 sous ,
” he would probably be rather
shocked, and would pity one
’s ignorance and bad taste . Just as formerly it was
considered bad taste to like Rubens , Jordaens and Veronese .
I think I shall end up not feeling lonesome in the house, and that during the
bad days in the winter, for instance, and the long evenings , I shall ﬁnd some
occupation that will take
all my attention . Weavers and basket makers often
spend whole seasons alone or ahnost alone, with their handicraft their only di s
traction.
But what makes these people stay in one place i s feeling at home, th e reassuring
familiar look
of tbing s . I
’d certainly like company, but if I haven
’t got it, I shall
not be unhappy because of it ; and then too the time will come when I shall
have someone with me . I have little doubt of it . I think that if you were willing
to put people up in your house too , you would ﬁnd plenty of artists for whom
the question of lodgings i s a very serious problem . For my part I think that it i s
absolutely my duty to try to make money by my work, and
so I
see my work
before me very clearly.
Oh, if only every artist had something to live on, and to work on, but as that
s not so, I want to produce, to produce a lot and with the utmost energy. And
perhaps the time will come when we can extend our business and be more of a
help to the others .
But that i s a long way off, and there is a lot of work to get through ﬁrst .
If you lived in time
of war, you might possibly have to ﬁght ; you would
regret it, you would lament that you weren
’t living in times of peace, but after
all the necessity would be there, and you would ﬁght .
And in the same way we certainly have the right to wish for a state of affairs
in which money would not be necessary in order to live .
However, as everything is done by means of money now, one has to think
about making it as long as one spends it , but I have more chance of making it
by painting than by drawing . On the whole a good many more people can do
clever sketches than paint readily and attack nature with color . That will
always


same author who wrote the book on Wagner. H ow one needs the same thing in
painting .
It seems that in the book My Relig ion, Tolstoi implies that whatever happens
in the way of violent revolution, there will also be a private and secret revolution
in men, from which a new religion will be born, or rather something altogether
new, which will have no name, but which will have the same eﬂ
'
ect of comforting,
of making life possible, which the Christian religion used to have .
'
It seems to
me that the book ought to be very interesting .
In the end we shall have had enough of cynicism and skepticism and humbug,
and we shall want to live more musically. H ow will that come about, and what
will we really ﬁnd ? It would be interesting to be able to prophesy, but it i s even
better to be able to feel that kind of foreshadowing, instead of seeing absolutely
nothing in the future beyond the disasters that are all the same bound to strike
the modern world and civilization like terrible lightning, through a revolution
or a war, or the bankruptcy of worm-eaten states . If we st udy Japanese art, we
see a man who i s undoubtedly wise, philosophic and intelligent, who spends hi s
time doing what? In studying the distance between the earth and the moon? No .
In studying Bismarck
’s policy? No . He studies a single blade of grass .
But this blade of grass leads him to draw every plant and then the seasons ,
the wide aspects of the countryside, then animals , then the human ﬁgure . So he
passes hi s life, and life i s too short to do the whole .
Come now, isn
’t it
ahn ost a true religion which these simple Japanese teach
us, who live in nature as though they themselves were ﬂowers ?
And you cannot st udy Japanese art, it seems to me, without becoming much
gayer and happier, and we must return to nature in spite of our education and
our work in a world of convention .
Isn
’t it
sad that the Monti c elli s have never yet been reproduced in good litho
g raphs or in etchings which vibrate with life ? I should very much like to know
what artists would say if an engraver like the man who engraved the Velasquez
made a ﬁne etching of them . Never mind, I think it is more our job to try to
admire and know things for ourselves than to teach them to other people . But
the two can g o together.
I envy the Japanese the extreme clearness which everything has in their work.
It i s never tedious , and never seems to be done too
- hurriedly. Their work i s as
simple as breathing, and they do a ﬁgure in a few sure strokes with the same
ease as if it were as simple as buttoning your coat .
Oh ! someday I must manage to do a ﬁgure in a few strokes . That will keep
me busy all winter. Once I can do that, I shall be able to do people strolling on
the boulevards , in the street, and heaps of new subjects . While I have been
writing this letter I have drawn about a dozen. I am on the track of it , but it i s
very complicated because what I am after i s that in a few strokes the ﬁgure of a
man, a woman, a chi ld, a horse, a dog, shall have a head, a body, legs , all in the
right proportion .
Good-by for the present and a good handshake from
Ever yours , Vincent

Mme . de Lareby Laroquette once said to me
But Monticelli , Monticelli , why
he was a man who ought to have been at the head of a great studio i n the Sou
I wrote to our sister and to you the other day, you remember, that sometimes
I thought that I was continuing Montic elli
’
s work here . Well, don
’t you
see,
that studi o in question, we are founding it . What Gaug uin does , what I do, will
be in line with that ﬁne work
of Montic elli
’
s, and we will try to prove to the
good people that Monticelli did not di e sprawled over the café tables
of the
Cannebiere, but that the good
old boy i s still alive . And the thing won
’t end
even with us , we shall set it going on a pretty solid basis .
544a
My dear Gauguin,
Arles , 29 September 1 88 8
This morning I received your excellent letter, which I sent on to my brother ;
your concept of impressionism in general , of which your portrait is a symbol, i s
striking . I can
’t tell you how curious I
am to see it— but this much I know in
advance : this work is too important to allow me to make an exchange . But if you
will keep it for
us, my brother will take it at the ﬁrst opportunity— which I
asked him directly— if you agree, and let
’s hope that it will be soon.
For, once again, we are trying to hasten the possibility of your coming here .
I must tell you that even while working I keep thinking incessantly of that plan
to found a studio, which will have you and myself as permanent residents , but
which the two of us would turn into a refuge and place of shelter for comrades
at moments when they are encountering a setback in their struggle .
After you left Paris , my brother and I stayed together for a time, which will
forever remain unforgettable to me ! The discussions covered a wider ﬁeld— with
G uillaumin, with the Pissarros, father and
son, with Seurat, whose acquaintance
I had not made (I visited hi s studio only a few hours before my departure)
.
Often these discussions had to do with the problems that are so very near my
brother
’s heart and mine, i . e. the measures to be taken to safeguard the material
existence of painters and to safeg uard the means of production (paints, canvases)
and to safeguard, in their direct interest, their
share in the price which, under
the present circumstances , pictures only bring a long time after they leave the
artists
’ possession .
When you are here, we are going to g o over all these discussions .
However thi s may be, when I left Paris , seriously sick at heart and in body,
an d nearly an alcoholic because of my rising fury at my strength fai ling me— then
I shut myself up within myself, without having the courage to hope !
Now , however, hope i s breaking for me vaguely on the horizon ; that hope in
intermittent ﬂashes , like a lighthouse, which has sometimes comforted me during
my solitary life .
And now I am longing so much to give you a large share in that faith, namely
that to a certain extent we shall succeed in laying the foundations of something
that will endure.
When we are talking over those strange days
of di scussions in the poverty
stricken studios and the cafés of the
“little boulevard,
”
you will get a clear insight
5 5

into that idea of my brother
’s and mine, whi ch until now has not been realized
at all , at least as far as starting a company i s concerned . Nevertheless , y ou will
see that this idea is such that all that will have to be done to end the terrible
situation
of the last few years is precisely what we said,
or something along
parallel lines . When y ou hear the whole explanation, you will
see that we have
put things on an unshakable basis . And you will admit that we have gone a long
way beyond the plan we communicated to you . That we have gone beyond it i s
no more than our duty as picture dealers , for perhaps you know that in the past
I was in the art-dealing business for years , and I do not despise the profession in
which I once earned my bread.
Suffice it
to
say that, although apparently you have isolated yourself from
Paris , yet you will not stop feeling in fairly direct contact with Paris .
These days I have an extraordinary feverish energ y ; at the moment I am
struggling with a landscape that has a blue
sky over an immense vine, green,
purple, yellow, with black and orange branches . Little ﬁgures of ladies with red
sunshades and of vintagers with their cart enliven it even more . In the fore
ground, gray sand . Yet another square size 3 0 canvas for the adornment of the
house .
I have a portrait of myself, all ash-colored . The ashen-gray color that i s the
result of mixing malachite green with an orange hue, on pale malachite ground,
all in harmony with the reddish-brown clothes . But as I
also exaggerate my
personality, I have in the ﬁrst place aimed at the character
of a simple bonze
worshiping the Eternal Buddha . It has cost me a lot of trouble, yet I shall have
to do it all over again if I want to succeed in expressing what I mean
. It will even
be necessary for me to recover somewhat more from the stultifying inﬂuence
of our so-called state of civilization in order to have a better model for a better
picture .
One thing gave me enormous pleasure : yesterday I received a letter from
Bock (hi s sister belongs to the Belgian
who writes to tell me that
he has settled down in the Borinag e to paint the miners an d coal mines there . Yet
he intends to return to the South— in order to vary hi s impressions— an d in that
case it i s certain that he will come to Arles .
I always think my artistic conceptions extremely ordinary when compared to
yours .
I have always had the coarse lusts of a beast.
I forget everything in favor of the external beauty of things , which I cannot
reproduce, for in my pictures I render it as something ugly and coarse, whereas
nature seems perfect to me .
However, at present the élan of my bony carcass i s such that it goes straight
for its goal . The result of this i s a sincerity, perhaps original at times, in what
I feel, if only the subject can lend something to my rash and clumsy execution .
I think that if, from now
on, you begin to feel like the head
of the studio,
which we shall try to turn into a refuge for many— little by little, as our strenuous
work furnishes us with the means to complete the thing— I think that then you
willmfeel more or less comforted after the present miseries of poverty an d illness ,
3 3 6


he would like to have
one like it, though he already has
one of me, which I
exchanged with him some time ag o for the portrait of hi s grandmother.
And I am pleased to hear that they did not dislike what I have done in ﬁgure
painting .
I have been and still am nearly half dead from the past week
’s work . I cannot
do any more yet, and besides, there i s a very violent mistral that rai ses clouds of
dust which whiten the trees on the plain from top to bottom . So I am forced to
be quiet. I have just slept sixteen hours at a stretch, and it has restored me c on sid
erably
.
And tomorrow I shall have recovered from this queer turn .
But I have done a good week
’s work, truly, with ﬁve canvases . If that some
what takes it
out on this
one, well, it
’
s natural . If I had worked more quietly,
you can easily see that the mistral would have caught me again . If it i s ﬁn e here,
you must take advantage of it, otherwise you would never do anything .
Say, what i s Seurat doing ? If you
see him, tell him once more from me that
I am working on a
scheme of decoration which has now got to
1 5 square size
3 0 canvases , and which will take at least
1 5 others to make a whole, and that in
this work on a larger scale, it i s often the memory of his personality and of the
visit we made to hi s studio to see hi s beautiful great canvases that encourages
me in this task .
I wish we had the self—portrait of Seurat . I told Gauguin that if I urged him
to make an exchange of portraits it was because I thought that Bernard and he
were sure to have made several studies
of each other
already. An\d since that
was not so and he had done the portrait expressly for me, I di d nof want it
as
an exchange, as I thought it was too important for that . He wrote to say that he
was determined I should have it in exchange, his letter i s againverycomplimentary ;
as I don
’t deserve it, we will
say no more .
I am sending you an article on Provence which seems well written to me .
These Félibres are a literary and artistic society, Clovis Hugues , Mi stral and
others , who write fairly good, sometimes very good, sonnets in Provencal and
sometimes in French .
If the Fe
’libres stop being unaware of my existence someday, they will all come
to the little house . I would rather thi s did not happen before I have ﬁnished
my decorations . But since I love Provence as unreservedly as they do, I perhaps
have a right to their attention. If I ever insist
on that right, it will be
so that
my work may remain here
or in Marseilles, where as you know I should so
much like to work . Because I believe that the artists of Marseilles would do well
to continue what Monticelli began .
If Gauguin and I were to write an article in one of the papers here, that would
be enough to get in touch with them .
A handshake,
Ever yours , Vincent

1 8 8 9
—
1 8 9 0 A R LE S , S T . R EM Y
, A N D A UV E R S
Calm even in the catastrophe .
574
My dear Theo,
Arles , 2 8 January 1 8 89
Only a few words to tell you that my health and my work are not progressing
so badly .
It astonishes me already when I compare my condi tion today with what it was
a month ago . Before that I knew well enough that one could fracture one
’s
legs and arms and recover afterward, but I did not know that y ou could fract ure
the brain in your head and recover from that too .
I still have a sort of
“what i s the good ofgetting better?
” feeling about me, even
in the astonishment aroused in me bymy getting well , whichI hadn
’t dared hopefor .
During your visit I thi nk you must have noticed the two size 3 0 canvases of
sunﬂowers in Gauguin
’s room . I have just put the ﬁnishing touches to copies ,
absolutely identical replicas of them . I think I have already told you that besides
these I have a canvas
of
“La Berceuse,
” the very
one I was working on when
my illness interrupted me . I now have two copies of thi s one too .
I have just said to Gauguin about this picture that when he and I were
talking about the ﬁshermen of Iceland and of their mournful isolation, exposed
to all dangers , alone on the sad
sea— I have just said to Gauguin that following
those intimate talks of ours the idea came to me to paint a picture in such a way
that sailors ,
'
who are at once children and martyrs , seeing it in the cabin of their
Icelandic ﬁshing boat, would feel the old sense of being rocked come over them
and remember their own lullabys .
Now, it may be said that it i s like a chromolithograph from a cheap shop .
A woman in green with orange hair standing out against a background of green
with pink ﬂowers . Now these discordant sharps
of crude pink, crude orange,
and crude green are softened by ﬂats of red and green .
I picture to myself these same canvases between those of the sunﬂowers , which
would thus form torches
or candelabra beside them, the same size, and
so the
whole would be composed of seven or nine canvases .
(I should hke to make another duplicate for Holland if I could get hold of the
model again .)
Since it i s still winter, look here, let me g o quietly on with my work ; if it i s
that of a madman, well, so much the worse . I can
’t help it .
However,
the
unbearable hallucinations have ceased, and are now getting
reduced to a simple nightmare, in consequence ofmy taking bromide ofpotassium,
5 5

It i s still beyond my powers to g o into the details of this money question, and
yet I wantto do that very thing, and I am furiously at work from morning till night,
to prove to you (unless my work is another hallucination) , to prove to you that
indeed and indeed we are following Monti c elli
’
s track, and what
’s more, that we
have a light before our feet and a lamp upon our path in the powerful work of
Brias of Montpellier, who di d so much to create a school in the South .
Only don
’t be too amazed if during the next month I shall be obliged to ask
you for the month
’s money in full and some extra money as well .
After all it i s only right that during periods of productivity, on which I spend
all my vital warmth, I should insist on what i s necessary in order to take a few
precautions .
Even in that case the difference in expenditure i s certainly not excessive
on
my part .
And once again, either shut me up in a madhouse right away— I shan
’t oppose
it , for I may be deceiving myself— or else let me work with
all my strength,
whi le taking the precautions I speak of. If I am not mad, the time will come
when I shall send you what I have promised you from the beginning . Now
perhaps the pictures are alas bound to be dispersed, but when you for
one see
the whole that i s in my mind, I dare hope it will make a comforting impression
on you .
You saw, as I did, part of the Faure collection being passed in review one by
one in the little window of that picture framer
’s shop in the Rue Laﬁtte, didn
’t
you ? Like me, you saw that thi s slow succession of once despised canvases was
strangely interesting .
Good . My great desire would be that sooner or later you should have a series
of canvases of mine whi ch might likewise march past in just that same window.
Now by continuing thi s furious work during next February and March, I shall
hope to have ﬁnished the quietly composed repetitions
of a number of studies
I made last year . And these together with some canvases you have already had
from me, such as the
Harvest
” and the
“White Orchard,
” will form a tolerably
ﬁrm foundation . By that same time, not later than March, that i s, we can arrange
what there i s to arrange on the occasion of your marriage .
But during February and March, though working, I shall g o on considering
myself an invalid, and I tell you beforehand that for those two months I shall
perhaps have to take
2 5 0 a month from the year
’s allowance .
You will perhaps understand that what would reassure me in some fashion as
to my illness and the possibility of a relapse would be to see that Gaug uin and
I had not exhausted our brains for nothing, but that some good canvases have
come out of it.
And I dare to hope that someday you will
see that by keeping steady
and
straight in this money business , in the long run it will prove to be impossible
that you have acted against the interests of the Goupils .
But ifI should have eaten their bread indirectly through you as an intermedi ary,
in that case my integrity would be directly involved .
Then, however, far from going on feeling more or less embarrassed by each
3 40


Now in the play that woman, led before the mystic crib , began to sing in her
quavering voice, and then the voice changed, changed from the voice of a witch
to that of an angel, and from an angel
’s voice to a child
’s , and then the answer
came in another voice, strong and warm and vibrant, the voice
of a woman
behind the scenes .
It was amazing . I can tell you these
so-called
Félibres
had certainly put
themselves to expense .
As for me, being in thi s little country of mine, I have no need at all to go to
the tropics . I believe an d I shall always believe in the art that i s to be created in
the tropics , and I think it will be marvelous, but personally I am too
old and
(especially if I have a papier maché ear put on) too jerry-built to g o there .
Will Gauguin do it ? It i s not essential . For if this ought to be done, it will
happen of itself.
We are nothing but links in a chain .
Old Gauguin and I understand each other basically, and if we are a bit mad,
what of it ? Aren
’t we also thoroughly artists enough to contradict suspicions on
that score by what we say with the brush?
Perhaps someday everyone will have neurosis , St . Vitus
’ dance, or something
else .
But doesn
’t the
antidote exist ? In Delacroix, in Berlioz, and Wagner ? And
really, as for the artist
’s madness of all the rest of us, I do not say that I especially
am
not infected through and through, but I
say and will maintain that
our
antidotes and consolations may, with a little good will , be considered ample
compensation .
Ever yours , Vincent
See
Hope
by Puvis de Chavannes .
5 77
My dear Theo,
Arles , 1 7 February
1 8 89
I have been so completely out of sorts mentally that it would have been useless
to try to write an answer to your kind letter. Today I have just come home
provisionally, I hope for good . I feel quite normal so often, and really I should
think that if what I am suffering from is only a di sease peculiar to this place,
I must wait here quietly till it is over, even if it returns again (and let
’s
say that
it won
’t)
.
But this i s what I told M . Rey once and for all . If sooner or later it i s desirable
that I go to Aix, as has already been suggested, I consent beforehand and I will
submit to it .
But in my character as a painter and a workman it is not permissible for
anyone, not even you
or a doctor, to take such a step without warning me and
consulting me about it , also because since up till now I have always kept a compar
ative presence of mind in my work, I should have the right to say (or at least to
have an opinion
on) whether it would be better to keep my studio here
or to
move to Aix altogether . This so as to avoid the expenses and loss of moving as
much as possible and not to do it except in case of absolute necessity.
3 42

It seems that people here have
some superstition that makes them afrai d of
painting, and that they have been talking about it in the town . Very good,
I know it is the same thing in Arabia, but nevertheless we have loads of painters
in Africa, haven
’t we
Which shows that with a little ﬁrmness you can modify these prejudices , at
least as far as painting in spite of it is concerned .
The unfortunate thing i s that I am rather inclined to be affected by the beliefs
of others , and to feel them myself, and I cannot always laugh atwhatever founda
tion of truth there may be in the absurdity
.
As I have already been staying here for more than a year, and have heard
ahnost all the ill that could
what place worse could I g o than where I have twice been : in the madhouse ?
The advantages I have here are what Rivet used to say ,
“They are a sickly lot ,
all of them,
”
so that at least I do not feel alone .
Then, as you well know, I am
so fond
of Arles, though Gaug uin has
un
commonly good reason to call it the dirtiest town in the whole South.
An d I have already met with such friendliness from my neighbors, from M . Rey,
an d from everyone at the hospital besides , that really I would rather be always ill
here than forget the kindness there is in the very people who have the most
incredible prejudices against painters and painting, or at any rate have no clear,
sane idea of it as we have .
Then they know me now at the hospital, and if it comes on again, nothing
would be said, and they would know what to do at the hospital . I have no desire
at all to be treated by other doctors , nor i s there any necessity .
The only thing I should like
to be able to do i s to g o on earning with my
hands what I spend . Koning wrote me a very ni ce letter saying that he and a
friend would probably be coming South to me for a long time . It was in reply
to a letter I wrote him some days ago . I do not dare persuade painters to come
here after what has happened to me, they run the risk of losing their wits like
me ; the same applies to De Haan and Isaacson. Let them go to Antibes, Nice, or
Mentone, it is perhaps healthier .
Mother and our sister have also written, the latter was terribly distressed
about the patient she was nursing . At home they are very, very glad about your
marriage .
Now mind, you must not think too much about me, not fret yourself. It will
probably have to take its course, and we cannot change much in our fate by taking
precautions .
Once more let us try to resign ourselves to our fate whatever it is. Our sister
wrote that your ﬁanc ée had just been staying some time at home . That is good .
Well, I send my love with all my heart, and don
’t let
’s lose courage .
Believe me,
Ever yours, Vincent
Address next letter to Place Lamartine .
Kind regards to Gauguin . I hope he i s going to write me . I shall write him too .
5 4

5 79
My dear brother,
I
Arles ,
19 March 1 8 89
I seemed to see
so much brotherly anxiety in your kind letter that I think it my
duty to break my silence . I write to you in the full possession of my facul ties
and not as a madman, but as the brother you know. This i s the truth . A certain
number of people here (there were more than 8 0 signatures) addressed a petition
to the Mayor (I think hi s name i s M . Tardieu) , describing me as a man not ﬁt to
be at liberty, or something like that.
The commissioner of police or the chief commissioner then gave the order to
shut me up again .
Anyhow, here I am, shut up in a cell all the livelong day, under lock and key
and with keepers , without my guilt being proved or even open to proof.
Needless to say , in the secret tribunal ofmy soul I have much to reply to all that.
Needless to say , I cannotbe angry, and it seems to me a case of qui s
’
exc use s
’
ac cuse.
Only to let you know that as for setting me free— mind, I do not ask it , being
persuaded that the whole accusation will be reduced to nothing— but I do
say
that as for getting me freed, y ou would ﬁnd it difﬁcult . If I did not restrain my
indignation, I should at once be thought a dangerous lunatic . Let us hope and
have patience . Besides , strong emotion can only aggravate my case . That i s why
I beg you for the present to let things be without meddling .
Take it as a warning from me that it might only complicate and confuse things .
All the more because you will understand that, while I am absolutely calm at
the present moment, I may easily relapse into a state
of overexcitement on
account of fresh mental emotion.
So you understand what a staggering blow between the eyes it was to ﬁnd so
many people here cowardly enough to join together against one man, and that
Very good—
so much for your better guidance ; as far as my mental state i s
concerned, I am greatly shaken, but I am recovering a sort of calm in spite of
everything, so as not to get angry.
Besides , humility becomes me after the experience of the repeated attacks . So
I am being patient .
The main thing, I cannot tell you this too often, is that you should keep calm
too, and let nothing upset you in your business . After your marriage w e c an set
ourselves to clearing all this up, and meanwhile I beg you to leave me quietly
here . I am convinced that the Mayor as well as the commissioner i s really rather
friendly, and that they will do what they can to settle all this . Here, except for
liberty, and except for many things that I could wish otherwise, I am not too
badly off.
Besides, I told them that we were in no position to bear the expense . I cannot
move without expense, and here are three months that I haven
’t been working,
and mind, I could have worked if they had not vexed and worried me .
H ow are our mother and sister?
As I have nothing else to distract me— they even forbid me to smoke— though
On Feb . 27, 1 8 89 , Theo wrote to his wife that Vinc ent had been taken to the hospital ag ai n .


Once more kind regards to your ﬁanc ée an d Bonger .
I would rather not have written to you yet for fear of dragging you into it and
upsetting you in what is before you . Things will settle down, it i s too idiotic to last .
I had hoped that M . Rey would have come to see me so that I could talk to
him again before sending oﬂ
' this letter, but though I sentword that I am expecting
him, no one has come . I beg you once more to be cautious . Y ou know what it
means to g o
to the civil authorities with a complaint. At least wait till after
you
’ve been to Holland .
I am myself rather afraid that, if I were at liberty outside, I shoul d not always
keep control of myself if I were provoked or insulted, and then they would be
able to take advantage of that. The fact remains that a petition has been sent to
the Mayor. I answered roundly that I was quite prepared, for instance, to chuck
myself into the water if that would please these good folk once and for all , but
that in any case if I had in fact inﬂicted a wound on myself, I had done nothing
of the sort to them, etc .
So cheer up, though my heart fails me sometimes . For you to come just now ,
honestly, would precipitate everything . I shall move
out,
of course, as soon as
I see how to manage it .
I hope thi s will reach you all right . Do not be afraid of anything , I am quite
calm now . Let them alone . Perhaps it would be well if you wrote once more, but
nothing else for the time being . If I have patience, it can only strengthen me so as
to leave me in less danger of a relapse . Of course, since I really had done my best
to be friendly with people, an d had no suspicion of it , it was rather a bad blow.
Good-by , my dear boy, for a little whi le, I hope, and don
’t worrﬁPerhaps it
i s a sort of quaran tine they are forcing on me, for all I know .
5 81
My dear Theo,
Arles ,
24 March
1 8 89
I am writing to tell you that I have seen Signac, and it has done me quite a lot
of good . He was so good and strai ghtforward and simple when the difficulty of
opening the door by force or not presented itself— the police had closed up the
house and destroyed the lock . They began by refusing to let us do it, but all the
same we ﬁnally got in . I gave him as a keepsake a still dife which had annoyed
the good gendarmes of the town of Arles , because it represented two bloaters ,
and as you know they, the gendarmes , are called that . Y ou remember that I did
this same still life two or three times in Paris , and exchanged it once for a carpet
in the old days . That i s enough to show you how meddlesome and what idiots
these people are .
I found Signac very quiet, though he i s said to be so violent ; he gave me the
impression
of someone who has balance and poise, that i s all . Rarely or never
have I had a conversation with an impressionist
so free from discords or conﬂict
on both sides . For instance he has been to see Jules Dupre, and he admires
him. Doubtless you had a hand in hi s coming to stiffen my morale a bit, and
thank you for it .
I took advantage of my outing to buy a book, Ceux de la Glibe, by Camille
5 46

Lemonnier . I have devoured two chapters of it— it has such gravity, such depth !
’Wait till I send it to you . This i s the ﬁrst time in several months that I have had a
book in my hands . That means a lot to me and does a good deal toward curing me .
Altogether there are several canvases to be sent to you, as Signac could see,
he was not frightened by my painting as far as I saw . Signac thought, an d it is
perfectly true, that I looked healthy.
And with it I have the desire and the inclination for work . Still, of course, if
I had to endure my work and my private life being interfered with every day by
gendarmes and poisonous idlers ofmunicipal electors petitioning the Mayor whom
they have elected and who consequently depends
on their votes , it would be
no more than human of me to relapse all over again . I am inclined to think that
Signac will tell you very much the same thing . In my opinion we must ﬁrmly
oppose the loss of the furniture, etc . Then— my Lord— I must have liberty to
carry on my handicraft.
M . Rey says that instead of eating enough and at regular times , I kept myself
going on coffee and alcohol . I admit all that, but all the same it i s true that to
attain the high yellow note that I attained last summer, I really had to be pretty
well keyed up . And that after all , an artist is a man with hi s work to do, and it
i s not for the ﬁrst idler who comes along to crush him for good .
Am I to suffer imprisonment or the madhouse? Why not? Didn
’t Rochefort
and Hugo, Quinet and others give an eternal example by submitting to exile,
and the ﬁrst even to a convict prison? But all I want to say i s that thi s i s a thing
above the mere question of illness and health .
Naturally one i s beside oneself in parallel cases . I do not say equivalent, being
in a very inferior and secondary place to theirs , but I do say parallel .
And that is what the ﬁrst and last cause of my aberration was . Do you know
those words
of a Dutch poet
’s— “1k ben aan d
’
aard g ehecht met meer dan
aardse banden
” [I am attached to the earth by more than earthly ties]
.
That i s what I have experienced in the midst of much suffering—a bove all— in
my so-called mental illness .
Unfortunately I have a handicraft which I do not know well enough to express
myself as I should like .
I pull myself up short for fear of a relapse, and I pass on to something else .
Before you leave, could you send me
This in case— probable enough if I ﬁnd a way of resuming my work again
I should
set to work shortly
on the orchards again . Oh, if only nothing had
happened to mess up my life !

Let
’s think well before going to another place . Y ou see that I have no better
luck in the South than in the North . It
’s pretty much the same everywhere .
I am thinking of frankly accepting my role of madman, the way Degas acted
the part of a notary . But there it i s, I do not feel that altogether I have strength
enough for such a part .
Y ou talk to me of what you call
the real South .
The reason why I shall
never g o there i s above . I rightly leave that to men who have a more well-balanced
mind, more integrity than I . I am only good for something intermediate, and
second rate, and self-effaced.
However intense my feelings may be, or whatever power of expression I may
acquire at an age when physical passions have lessened, I could never build an
imposing structure on such a moldy, shattered past.
S o it i s more or less all the same to me what happens to me— even my staying
here— I think that in the end my fate will be evened up . So beware of sudden
starts— since you are getting married and I am getting too old— that i s the only
policy to suit u s.
Good-by for now, write me without much delay, and believe me after asking
you to give my kindest regards to Mother, our sister and your ﬁancee, your very
affectionate brother,
I will send the book by Camille Lemonnier pretty soon .
5 85
My dear Theo,
Arles , 2 2 April 1 8 89
Y ou will probably be back in Paris at the moment when this letter arrives . I wish
you and your wife a great deal
of happiness . Thank you very much for your
kind letter and for the
1 00-franc note it contained .
Out of the 6 5 francs which I owe, I have paid only 2 5 francs to my landlord ,
having had to pay three months
’ rent in advance for a room whi ch I shan
’t be
living in, but where I have sent my furni ture, and having besides had expenses
of 1 0 francs or so for moving, etc .
Then as my clothes were not in too brilliant a condition and I had to have
something new to go
out in the street in , I g ot a suit for 3 5 francs
an d spent
4 francs on six pairs
of socks . So
out of the note I have onl y a few francs left,
and at the end of the month I must pay the landlord again, though he might be
kept waiting for a few days .
I settled my bill at the hospital today, and there i s still almost enough for the
rest of the month out
of the money I still have on deposit. At the end
of the
month I should like to go to the hospital in St. Remy, or another institution of
thi s kind, of which M . Salles has told me . Forgive me if I don
’t go into details
and argue the pros and cons of such a step .
Talking about it would be mental torture .
It will be enough, I hope, if I tell you that I feel quite unable to take a new
studio and to stay there alone— here in Arles or elsewhere, for the moment it i s
3 48


I should think that with an allowance of 75 francs
or so a month there must
be a way of interning me so that I should have everything I need .
Then, if it i s possible, I
’d very much like to be able to g o out in the daytime
and draw or paint outside .
Seeing that I go out every day now here, and I think that this coul d continue .
Paying more, I warn you, would make me less happy. The company of other
patients , y ou understand, i s not at
all disagreeable to me ;
on the contrary,it
distracts me .
Ordinary food suits me quite well, especially if they gave me a little more
wine there, as they do here, usually a half-liter instead of a quarter, for in
stance .
But a private room— it remains to be seen what the arrangements of an instit u
tion like that would be Mind you , Rey is overburdened with work, overburdened .
If he writes to you, or M . Salles , better do exactly what they say
. After all we
must take our share, my boy, of the diseases of our time— in a way it i s only fair
after all that, having lived some years in comparatively good health, w e should
have our share sooner or later. As for me, you know well enough that I should
not exactly have chosen madness if I had had a choice, but once y ou have
an
affliction of that sort, you can
’t catch it again . An d there
’ll perhaps be the con
solation of being able to go on working a bit at painting .
How will you manage not to speak too well or too ill of Paris and many other
things to your wife? Do you feel in advance that you will be qui te capable of
keeping exactly the golden mean
all the time and from all points of view?
I shake your hand in thought . I do not know if I shall write very, very often
because not all my days are clear enough for me to write fairly logically .
All your kindness to me seemed greater than ever to me today. I can
’t put
the way I feel it in words , but I assure you that this kindness has been pure gold,
and if you do not
see any results from it, my dear brother, don
’t fret about it
your own goodness abides . Only transfer this affection to your wife as much as
possible . And if we correspond somewhat less , you will
see that if she i s what
I think her, she will comfort you . That i s what I hope .
Rey is a very nice fellow, a tremendous worker, always on the job . What
men the modern doctors are !
If y ou see Gauguin or write to him , remember me to him.
I shall be very glad to hear any news you can give me of our mother and sister,
and if they are well ; tell them to look upon this affair of mine— I mean it— as
nothing to be inordinately distressed about, because I may be comparatively
unfortunate, but after all , in spite of that, I may still have some almost normal
years before me . It i s a disease hke any other, and now almost everyone we know
among
our friends has something the matter with him . So is it worth talking
about? I am sorry to give trouble to M . Salles , and Rey, an d above all to you
too, but what is one to do ? My head isn
’t steady enough to begin again as before
— then the important thing i s not to cause any more scenes in public, and naturally,
being a little calmer now , I distinctly feel that I was mentally and physically in
an unhealthy condition . And then people have been kind, those I remember,

and as for the others , after all I caused some uneasiness , and if I had been in a
normal condition, things would never have happened the way they di d .
Good-by , write when you can .
Ever yours , Vincent
5 88
My dear Theo,
Arles , 3 0 April
1 8 89
Tomorrow being the ﬁrst ofMay, I wish you a tolerable year, and above all health .
I should so like to be able to pass some physical strength on to you . At the
moment I feel that I have more than enough. That doesn
’t mean that my head i s
still all that it ought to be .
H ow right Delacroix was, who lived on bread and wine only, andwho succeeded
in ﬁnding a manner of life in harmony with his profession . But the fatal question
of money remains— Delacroix had property, Corot too . And Millet— Millet was
a peasant and the son of a peasant. Y ou will perhaps read with some interest the
article which I have c ut out of a Marseilles paper, because you will catch a glimpse
of Monticelli in it, and I think the description of the pict ure representing a corner
of the cemetery very interesting . But alas , that i s still another lamentable story.
How sad it i s to think that a painter who succeeds , even only partially, involves
in hi s turn half a dozen other artists who are worse failures than himself.
However, think of Pangloss , think of Bouvard et P e
'
euebet . I know it , then even
that becomes clear, but perhaps these people do not know Pangloss or else forget
all they know of him in the face
of the fatal bite of actual despair and great
grief.
And besides , under the name of optimism we are falling back once more into a
religion which looks to me hke the tai l end of a kind of Buddhism . No harm in
that ; on the contrary, if you like .
I do not much like the article on Monet in the Fig aro. How much superior that
other article was in the !
] !
m Sieele! There y ou saw the pictures and this only
contains commonplaces that depress me .
Today I am busy packing a case of pictures and studies . One of them i s ﬂaking
off, and I have stuck some newspapers
on it ; it i s one of the best, and I think
that when you look at it you will
see better what my now shipwrecked studi o
might have been.
This study, like some others, has g ot spoiled by moisture during my illness .
The ﬂood water came to within a few feet
of the house, and on top of that,
the house itself had no ﬁres in it during my absence, so when I came back, the
walls were oozing water and saltpeter .
That touched me to the quick, not only the studio wrecked, but even the
studies which would have been a souvenir of it
ruined ; it i s
so ﬁnal, and my
enthusiasm to found something very simple but lasting was
so strong . It was
a ﬁght against the inevitable, or rather it was weakness of character on my part,
for I am left with feelings of profound remorse, difficult to describe . I think that
was the reason why I have cried out so much during the attacks , it was because
I wanted to defend myself and could not do it . For it was not for myself, it was
3 5 1

just for painters like the
unfortunates the enclosed article speaks
of that that
studio would have been of some use .
Anyhow, we haven
’t been the only ones .
Brias at Montpellier gave a whole fort une, a whole life to it, and without the
slightest apparent result .
Yes— a cold room in the municipal gallery, where you see a heartbroken face
and many ﬁne pictures, where you are certainly moved, but moved, alas , as in a
graveyard .
Nevertheless it would be difﬁcult to walk through a graveyard that showed
more clearly the existence of that Hope which Puvi s de Chavannes painted .
Pictures fade like ﬂowers— even some of the Delacroixs have suffered in the
same way, the magniﬁcent
“Daniel,
” the
“Odalisques
” (quite different from
those in the Louvre, it was in a single scale of purple shades) , but how they
impressed me, those pictures fading there, little understood by most
of the
visitors , who look at Courbet and Cabanel and Victor Giraud, and
so
on .
What are we worth, we painters ? Well, I think Richepin i s often right, for
instance when he brutally bursts in and sends them all back to the madhouse
with hi s blasphemies .
Now, however, I assure you that I know of no asylum where they would be
willing to take me in for nothing, even supposing I took on myself all the ex .
penses of my painting and left the whole of my work to the hospital . And perhaps
thi s i s, I do not say a great, but still a small injustice . I shoul d be resigned if I
found it . If I were without your friendship, they would remorselessly drive me to
suicide, and however cowardly I am, I should end by doing it . There , as y ou too
will
see, I hope, i s the junct ure where it i s permissible for us to protest against
society and defend ourselves . You can be fairly sure that the Marseilles
artist
who committed suicide di d not in any way do it as the result of absinthe, for the
simple reason that no one woul d have offered it to him and he couldn
’t have had
anything to buy it with . Besides, he would drink it, not solely for pleasure, but
because, being ill already, he needed it to keep himself going .
M . Salles has been to St . Remy— they are not willing to let me paint outside
the institution, nor to take me for less than
1 00 francs .
Thi s information i s pretty bad . If I could get out
of it by enlisting in the
Foreign Legion for ﬁve years , I think I
’d prefer that .
For on the one hand, if I
am shut up and not working, I shall recover wi th
difficulty, and
on the other hand, they woul d make us pay
1 00 francs a month
during the whole long life of an incurable madman .
It i s serious , and what is one to think? But will they be willing to take me as
a soldier? I feel very tired after the conversation with M . Salles and I do not
quite know what to do .
I myself advised Bernard to do hi s service, so is it surprising that I think of
going to Arabia as a soldier myself?
I say this to make sure that y ou will not blame me too much if I g o . It
’
s all
so
vague and strange . And you know how doubtful it i s that we shall ever recover
what it costs to g o on painting . For that matter, I think that physically I am well .
5 5 ?


Serret can say nothing about the circumstances under which Vincent left Arles
at ﬁrsthand . The fact is that before that time he had gone on a world tour which
lasted several years , and of which he gave a description— Serret i s a writer— in a
several-volume work . When he came back, the star of the dead painter had risen
gloriously. Then, at hi s own expense, he had a memorial tablet put up in the front
of the house where Van Gogh had worked and suffered, whi ch tablet contains
the simple words :
“The Dutch painter Vincent van Gogh lived in this house
-in
1 887—1 8 8 8
(Lepeintre bollandais V .v. G . babita rettemaison en 1 887
At the appointed hour we, Professor Julius Seyler and I , called
on Dr.
Felix Rey . As hi s daughter had already told him what kind of information w e
wanted from him, he started talking without any circumlocution :
“First and foremost Vincent was a miserable, pitiful man, small
of stature
(please get up for a moment ! about your size) , lean . He always wore a sort of
overcoat, smeared
all over with colors— he painted with his thumb and then
wiped it on hi s coat— and an enormous straw hat without a hatband, of the type
usually worn by the shepherds
of the Camargue as a protection against the
scorching sun . He often used to complain of being the only painter in the region,
so that he could not talk to anybody about painting . In the absence ofany colleague
he used to converse with me on the nature of the complementary colors . But for
the life of me I could not understand that red should not be red, and green not
In exactly the same way as Serret, Dr . Rey now described how Vincent used
to take his food .
“In the morning, before setting out to work with hi s easel and
canvases , he would put a pot of chick peas on the coal ﬁre . Then, wh en he came
back, generally in the evening, dead tired and hungry, the ﬁre had gone out, of
course, and the mess
of peas was usually only half done and in fact inedible.
All the same, he consumed the hardly inviting food, unless he preferred to drink
spirits to relieve hi s stomach .
”
5 91
My dear sister,
St . Remy,
1 5 May
1 8 89
Many thanks for your letter in which I especially looked for news of my brother .
AndI ﬁnd it excellent . I see you have alreadynoticed thathelikes Paris ,and this more
or less surprises you, since you do not like it at all, or rather like mostly the ﬂowers
there, such as the wisterias , I suppose, which are probably coming into bloom .
Might it not be a fact that when you are fond of something, you see it better
and more truly than when you are not fond ofit ? For him and me Paris i s certainly
already something like a graveyard where many artists have perished whom we
once knew directly or indirectly.
Certainly Millet, whom you are learning to like so very much, an d many others
with him, tried to get out of Paris . But as for Eugene Delacroix, for instance, it
is difﬁcult to imagine him, as a man, otherwise than as a Parisian .
All this i s to urge you— with all caution it i s true— to believe in the p ossibility
that there are bomes in Paris and not just apartments .
Anyway— fortunatelyy ou are yourself hi s home .
3 5 4

It i s rather queer perhaps that the result of this terrible attack i s that there is
hardly any very deﬁnite desire or hope left in my mind, and I wonder if thi s i s
the way
one thinks when, with the passions lessened,
one descends the hill
instead
of climbing it . And anyhow, my si ster, if you can believe,
or
ahn ost
believe, that everything i s always for the best in the best of worlds , then perhaps
you will also be able to believe that Paris is the best of the cities in it .
Have you noticed that the
old cab horses there have large beautiful eyes , as
heartbroken as Christians sometimes have ? However it may be, we are neither
savages nor peasants , and it i s perhaps even a duty to hke civilization (so called)
.
After all it would probably be hypocrisy to
say
or think that Paris i s bad when
one i s living there . Besides, the ﬁrst time one sees Paris , it may be that everything
in it seems unnatural, foul and sad .
Anyway, if y ou do not like Paris , above
all do not like painting
nor those
who are directly or indirectly concerned in it, for it i s only too doubtful whether
it is beautiful or useful .
But what i s to be done
—there are people who love nature even though they
are cracked or ill , those are the painters ; then there are those who like what i s
made by men
’s hands , and these even go so far as to like pictures .
Though here there are some patients very seriously ill , the fear and horror of
madness that I used to have has already lessened a great deal . And though here
you continually hear terrible cries and howls like beasts in a menagerie, in spite
of that people get to know each other very well and help each other when their
attacks come on . When I am working in the garden, they all come to look, and
I assure y ou they have the di scretion and manners to leave me alone— more than
the good people of the town of Arles , for instance .
It may well be that I shall stay here long enough— I have never been so peaceful
as here and in the hospital in Arles— to be able to paint a little at last . Quite
near here there are some little mountains , gray and blue, and at their foot some
very, very green c ornﬁelds and pines .
I shall count myself very happy if I can manage to work enough to earn my
living, for it worries me a lot when I think that I have done
so many pictures
and drawings without ever selling
one . Do not be in too much of a hurry to
think that this i s an injustice . I myself don
’t know in the least .
Thanking you again for having written to me, I am so very glad to think that
now my brother i s not going home to an empty apartment when he goes back
in the evening .
I shake your hand in thought, and believe me,
Your brother, Vincent
5 92
My dear Theo,
St . Remy, 2 2 May
1 8 89
The letter I have just received from you gives me great pleasure . You tell me
that J
. H. Weissenbruch has two pictures at the exhibition— but I imagined he
was dead— am I wrong ? Certainly he
’
s a mighty good artist and a decent big
hearted fellow too .
3 5 5

What you say about La Berceuse
” pleases me ; it i s very true that the common
people, who are content with chromos and melt when they hear a barrel organ,
are in some vague way right, perhaps more sincere than certain men about town
who g o to the Salon .
If he will accept it, give Gauguin the copy
of
La Berceuse
” that was
not
mounted on a stretcher, and another to Bernard as a token of friendship . But if
,“ n
.
v u é
.‘ J ﬂl a
a m
u
u
’ u
l
,
U
c
o m
a
L
,
u-A
QM
)
n
o “
2
‘
lu ﬂ)
,4
7
M
a
y ‘v u
s
J ti
a ' W 'w
w
u
J en n a‘ s .
1m
.
I
t
he ‘M
m
l o m
w
c
g ~
4
a .
ec u
“
s uq
‘ Q .‘Q ’
Cl u
b
l o ch :
( lg .
Pl al .-l o s s la
h m
[ l b k
t u
t
9 . to “
t h
.
Q Q u ﬂ
C u .red o
( L i pm k
.
t u n n el-sq ,
l
a te s t “
I
d
u n
lu
C o w
rw
a \u
o
t
a. ‘ M
l o.
.
‘
CM
C C ' CVA M
Q u a . .
W
O u
e ou
a
v “
a
t
,
( A M
A
3 0
'
Q O Q L '
00 0
C O M
M
J
4
1 ¢ s l |
t
u m
r h
‘g l
g
h
a 0
.
M
( “Coﬁﬁ
w “
M
ex v t t l
( d a
t a
( a l
o t -w a d
J
d
M
3 M 'M
Pw
a J
u
i
u
t
o v u
y i 'm
!
Q “
3 “
J “ ”
J
.
I o w
a -3
1
.
(
I [ a
an “
;
l v n
c u ”
u
s
o t
w
e c .
t o “
c m
»;
M
e n
u !
J
C
u M l u
.
T
u
V u t
’ q w
u
!
Q
M
C
N M
M
A J
W
Gauguin wants the sunﬂowers , it i s only fair that he should give you something
you like equally well in exchange .
Gauguin himself liked the sunﬂowers better later on when he had been looking
at them for a good while .
Y ou must realize that if you arrange them this way, say
La Berceuse
in the
middle and the two canvases of sunﬂowers to the right and left, it makes a sort
of triptych .
And then the yellow and orange tones
of the head will gain in brilli ance by
the proximity of the yellow wings .
And then you will understand what I wrote y ou, that my idea had been to
make a sort of decoration, for instance for the end of a ship
’s cabin. Then, as the
size increases , the concise composition is justiﬁed . The frame for the central piece


sufficed for my work, and I have not yet gone outside . However, the country
round St. Remy i s very beautiful
and little by little I shall probably widen my
ﬁeld of endeavor .
But if I stay here, the doctor will naturally be better able to see what is wrong,
and will, I hope, be more reassured as to my being allowed to paint.
I assure you that I am quite all right here and that for the time being I see no
reason at all for going to a boardinghouse in or near Paris . I have a little room
with greenish-gray paper with two curtains of sea-green with a design of very
pale roses, brightened by slight touches of blood-red .
These curtains , probably the relics of some rich and ruined deceased, are very
pretty in design. A very worn armchair probably comes from the same source ;
it i s upholstered with tapestry splashed over like aDiazor a Monticelli ,withbrown,
[
t
i m
O m
n
0
o ~o w
v
v
-T
n r w - v
f o u
r! ”
I
!
l
’
u w e n
ru
1“
Q
( oa CL a QW
.
‘ m
w
l i m
051“
9
1 .
1
n
d
. ’
Ct
'w
(
O ‘U l l l 'c o u
J
'
cw
t a l b s s ’
u
n
K
O O .
9 \t
’
»
‘ l o
u
c .
u
u
1 e 0 \u
.
I:
(
Q
M
)
‘AA
1. ”C "l
U
‘ .
a
, ,d ‘ ,
‘ M
Q/D
? o eu
b f
u
n d u
. J
a m
a
a l
c
'
C
'l a
of M
w
a y
l
[ M
u d
I n
6 12 9
di n t " 4 4 4 1 ‘
(
M
A / 2 3 1 0
0
7k
e 7
M
l ’ m
M
i
n n
b
/‘ M
L/ W
red, pink, white, cream, black, forget-me-not blue and bottle green . Through
the iron-barred window I see a squareﬁeld of wheat in an enclosure, a perspective
like Van Goyen, above which I see the morning sun rising in all its glory. Besides
thi s
one— as there are more than thirty empty rooms— I have another one to
work in .
The food i s so- so . Naturally it tastes rather moldy, like in a cockroach-infested
restaurant in Paris or in a boardinghouse . As these poor soul s do absolutely
nothing (not a book, nothing to di stract them but a game of bowls and a game
of checkers) they have no other daily distraction than to stuff themselves with
chick peas , beans , lentils, and other groceries and merchandi se from the colonies
in ﬁxed quantities and at regular hours .
As the digestion of these commodi ties offers certain difﬁculties , they ﬁll their
days in a way as inoffensive as it i s cheap .
But
all joking aside, the fear of madness i s leaving me to a great extent, as
I see at close quarters those who are aﬂec ted by it in the same w ay as I may very
easily be in the future .
3 5 8

Formerly I felt an aversion to these creatures , and it was a harrowing thought
for me to reﬂect that
so many
of our profession, Troyon, Marchal, Méryon ,
Jundt, M . Maris , Monticelli and many more had ended like this . I could
not
even bring myself to picture them in that condition . Well , now I think
of all
thi s without fear, that is to
say I ﬁnd it no more frightful than if these people
had been stricken with something else, phthisis
or syphilis for instance . These
artists, I see them take on their old serenity again, and i s it a httle thing, I ask
you, thus to meet the old ones of our profession again ? That, joking aside, i s a
thing I am profoundly thankful for .
For though there are some who howl or rave continually, there i s much real
friendship here among them ; they say we must put up with others so that others
will put up with us, and other very sound arguments , which they really put into
practice . And among ourselves we understand each other very well . For instance
I
c an sometimes chat with
one
of them who
c an only answer in incoherent
sounds , because he is not afraid of me .
If someonehas an attack,the others look after him and interfere so that he does
not harm himself.
The same for those whose mania is to ﬂy often into a rage . The old inhabit
ants of the menagerie come running and separate the combatants , if combat there
i s .
It i s true there are some whose condition i s more serious , who are either dirty
or dangerous . These are in another ward .
I take a bath twice a week now, and stay in it for two hours ; my stomach i s
inﬁnitely better than it was a year ago ; so as far as I know, I have only to go on .
Besides , I shall spend less here, I think, considering that I have work in prospect
again, for the scenery i s lovely .
What I hope i s that at the end of a year I shall know what I can do and what
I want to do better than now . Then little by little the idea of a fresh start will
come to me . Going back to Paris
or anywhere at
all in
no way attracts me .
I think my place i s here . Extreme enervation i s, in my opinion, what most
of
those who have been here for years suffer from . Now my work will preserve me
from that to a certain extent .
The room where we stay on w et days is hke a third-class waiting room in
some stagnant village, the more so as there are some disting uished lunatics who
always wear a hat, spectacles , and a cane, and traveling cloak,
ahn ost like at a
watering place, and they represent the passengers .
I am forced to ask you again for some paints and especially for canvas . When
I send you the four canvases of the garden I am working on, you will
see that,
considering my life is spent mostly in the garden, it i s not so unhappy.
Yesterday I drew a very big , rather rare night moth, called the death
’s head,
i ts coloring of amazing distinction, black, gray, cloudy white tinged with carmine
or vaguely shading off
, into olive-green ; it i s very big
. I had to kill it to paint it,
and it was a pity, the beastie was so beautiful . I will send you the drawing along
with some other drawings of plants .
When they are dry enough, you could take the canvases at Tang uy
’
s or at
3 5 9

your place off the stretchers , and then put any new ones that you think worth it
on to them.Gaug uin ought to be able to tell y ou the address of a man who could
recanvas the canvas of
“The Bedroom,
”
and not too expensively. That, Iimag ine,
ought to be repaired for 5 francs ; if it i s more, then don
’t have it done . I do not
think that Gauguin paid more when he had hi s own canvases rec anvased pretty
often, or Cézanne
’s , or Pi ssarro
’
s .
I am again— speaking of my condi tion—
so grateful for another thing . I gather
from others that during their attacks they have also heard strange sounds and
voices as I did, and that in their eyes too things seemed to be changing . And that
lessens the horror that I retained at ﬁrst of the attack I have had, and which,
when it comes on you unawares, cannot but frighten you beyond measure . Once
you know that it i s part of the disease, y ou take it like anything else . If I had
not seen other lunatics close up, I should not have been able to free myself from
dwelling
on it constantly. For the ang ui sh and suffering are no joke once you
are caught by an attack . Most epileptics bite their tongue and injure themselves .
Rey told me that he had seen a case where someone had mutilated hi s own ear,
as I did, and I think I heard a doctor here say , when he came to see me with the
director, that he also had seen it before . I really think that once you know what
it i s, once you are conscious of your condition and of being subject to attacks ,
then you can do something yourself to prevent your being taken unawares by
the suffering or the terror. Now that it has gone on decreasing for ﬁve months,
I have good hope of getting over it, or at least of not having such violent attacks .
There is someone here who has been shouting and talking like me all tbe time
for a fortnight, he thinks he hears voices and words in the echoes of the corridors
probably because the nerves of the ear are diseased and too sensitive, and in my
case it was my sight as well as my hearing, which according to what Rey told
me one day is usual in the beginning of epilepsy. Then the shock was such that
it sickened me even to move, and nothing would have pleased me better than
never to have woken up again. At present this borror of life is less strong
already
and the melancholy less acute . But I have no will, hardly any desires or none at
all, and hardly
any wish for anything belonging to ordinary life, for instance
ahnost no desire to see my friends , although I keep thinking about th
.
em That i s
why I have not yet reached the point where I ought to think of leaving here
I should have this depression anywhere .
And it i s only during these very last days that my aversion to life is in
any
way being radically modiﬁed . There is still some way
to go from that to will
and action .
It is a pity that you are always condemned to stay in Paris and that you never
see the country except the immediate environs
of Paris . I think that it i s not
more unfortunate for me to be in the company I
am in than for you to have
always to do with the inevitable Goupil
Co . From this point of view we are
pretty much even . For in your case you can only carry out your ideas partially.
However, once we have g ot used
to these annoyances , it becomes second
nature .
I think that though the pictures cost canvas, paint, etc. , nevertheless at the


That is why , as far as painting goes, a household loaf is especially good when
it i s painted by Chardin .
Now what makes Egyptian art, for instance, extraordinary— isn
’t it that these
serene, calm kings , wise and gentle, patient and kind, look as though they could
never be other than what they are, eternal tillers
of the soil, worshipers
of
the
sun?
I should so have liked to have seen an Egyptian house at the exhibition c on
structed by Jules Garnier the architect— painted in red, yellow, and blue, with a
garden regularly divided into beds by rows ofbricks— the dwelling place ofbeings
whom w e know only as mummies or in granite .
But then to come back to the point, the Egyptian artists , having afait/7, working
by feeling and by instinct, express
all these intangible things— kindness , inﬁnite
patience, wisdom, serenity— by a few knowing
c urves and by the marvelous
proportions . That i s
to
say once more, when the thing represented and the
manner of representing it agree, the thing has style and quality.
So also the servant girl in Leys
’
s great fresco, once she i s engraved by Braque
mond, becomes a new work of art— or the little
“Reader
” by Meissonier, when
it is Jacquemart who engraves it— since the manner
of eng raving i s one with the
thing represented .
As I wish to preserve this study of the
Bedroom,
” if you would send it back
‘
to me, rolled up , when you send me the canvas, I will repaint it .
At ﬁrst I had wished to have it rec anvased because I did not think I could do
it again . But as my brain has grown c ahri er since, I can quitewell do it
v ag ain now .
The thing i s that among the number of things you make, there are
always
some that you felt more or put more into and that you want to keep in spite of
everything . When I see a picture that interests me, I can never help asking myself,
“In what house, room, corner
of a room, in whose home would it do well ,
would it be in the right place?”
Thus the pictures of Hals, Rembrandt, Van der Meer [Vermeer], are only at
home in an old Dutch house .
Now as to the impressioni sts— once again, if an interior i s not complete with
out
a work
of art, neither i s a picture complete if it i s not in harmony with
surroundings originating in and resulting from the period in which it was pro
duc ed . And I do not know if the impressionists are better than their time
or,
on the contrary, are not yet so good . In a word, are there minds and interiors of
homes more important than anything that has been expressed by painting ? I am
inclined to think so .
I have seen the announcement of a coming exhibition of impressioni sts called
Gauguin, Bernard, Anquetin and other names . So I am inclined to think that a
new sect has again been formed, no less infallible than those already existing .
Was that the exhibition you spoke of? What storms in teacups .
My health i s
all right, considering ; I feel happier here with my work than
I could be outside . By staying here a good long time, I shall have learned regular
habits and in the long run the result will be more order in my life and less susc ep
tibility
. That will be so much to the good . Besides, I should not have the courage
3 6 2

to begin again outside . I went once, still accompanied, to the village ; the mere
sight of people and things had such an effect on me that I thought I was going
to faint and I felt very ill
. Face to face with nature it i s the feeling for work that
supports me . But anyway, this i s to show you that there must have been within
me some too powerful emotion to upset me like that, and I have no idea what
can have caused it .
I get bored to death sometimes after working, and yet I have
no desire to
begin again . The doctor who has just called says that he i s not going to Paris
for several weeks , so do not expect hi s visit yet.
I hope you will write me soon .
During this month I shal l really again be in need of
It i s queer that every time I try to reason with myself to get a clear idea of things ,
why I came here and that after all it i s only an accident like any other, a terrible
dismay and horror seizes me and prevents me from thinking . It i s true that this
i s tending to diminish slightly, but it also seems to me to prove that there i s qui te
deﬁnitely something or other deranged i n my brain, it i s astounding to be afraid
of nothing like this , and to be unable to remember things . Only you may be sure
I shall do all I can to become active again and perhaps useful, at least in the sense
that I want to do better pictures than before .
In this country there are many thing s that often make you think
of Ruysdael,
but the ﬁgures of the laborers are absent.
Everywhere at home and at all times of the year you see men, women, children
and animals at work, and here not a third of that, and besides, it i s not the genuine
worker of the North. They seem to work here with languid, clumsy hands, with
out energy. Perhaps this i s a wrong idea I have got hold of, not belonging to the
country, anyhow I hope so . But thi s makes things colder than one would think
when reading Tartari n but perhaps he had been exiled with hi s whole family
for many long years .
Above all, write me soon, because your letter i s very slow in coming ; I hope
y ou are well . It i s a great consolation to me to know that y ou are not living
alone any more .
If some month or other it should be too difficult to send me paint, canvas , etc . ,
then do not send them, for believe me it i s better to live than to work at art in
the abstract.
And above all your home must not be sad or dull . That ﬁrst and painting after .
3 6

Then I feel tempted to begin again with the simpler colors, the ochers for
instance .
Is a Van Goyen ugly because it is painted entirely in oils with very little neutral
color,
or a Michel ? The shrubbery with the ivy is completely ﬁnished . I very
much want to send it to you as soon as it
’
s dry enough to be rolled up .
With a right good handshake for y ou and your wife .
Ever yours, Vincent
5 96
My dear Theo,
St . Remy,
2 5 June
1 889
Enclosed you will ﬁnd an order for paints to replace the one in my last letter.
We have had some glorious days and I have set even more canvases going,
so
that there are twelve size 3 0 canvases in prospect . Two studies
of cypresses
of
that difﬁcult bottle-green hue ; I have worked their foregrounds with thick layers
of white lead, which gives ﬁrmness to the ground .
I think that very often the Monti c elli s were prepared like this . Y ou put other
colors
on that . But I do
not know if the canvases are strong enough for that
sort of work .
Speaking of Gauguin and Bernard, and that they may well give us painting of
‘
greater consolation, I must however add what I have also said many a time to
Gauguin himself, namely that we must not then forget that others have done it
already . But however it may be, outside Paris you quickly forget Paris, when
throwing yourself into the heart
of the country, your ideas change ; but I for
one cannot forget
all those lovely canvases
of Barbizon, and it seems hardly
probable that anyone will do better than that, and unnecessary besides .
What is AndreBonger doing ; y ou have not mentioned him in the last two or
three letters .
A s for me, my health remains very good and work distracts me. I have received
— probably from one of our sisters— a book by Rod, which is not bad, but the
title Le S ens de la vie i s really a little pretentious for the contents, it seems to me .
It certainly i s not very cheering . I think the author must be suffering a good
deal from hi s lungs and consequently a little from everything .
Anyway, he admits that he ﬁnds consolation in the companionship of hi s wife,
which is all
to the good, but after all, for my own use he teaches me nothing
about the meaning
of hfe, whatever i s meant by it . For my part I might well
think him a little trite and be surprised that he has had a book like that published
these days and gets it sold at
fr . Altogether I prefer Alphonse Karr, Souvestre
and Droz because they are a bit more alive than this . It
’s true that I am perhaps
ungrateful , not even appreciating Abbé Constantin and other literary works ,
which gave luster to the gentle reign of the naive Carnot . It seems that this book
has made a great impression on our good sisters . At least, Wil had mentioned it
to me, but good women and books are two different things .
I have reread with much pleasure Z
adig
on Io destinée by Voltaire . It i s like
Candide. Here the mighty author gives at least a glimpse of the possibility that
3 64


sky with a crescent moon . The foreground especially i s painted very thick,
clumps of brambles with touches of yellow, violet and green .
I will send you the drawings of it with two other drawings that I have done too .
That will keep me busy these days . The great question here i s to ﬁn d occupation
for the day.
What a pity one cannot shift this building here . It would be
'
splendi d to hold
an exhibition in, all the empty rooms , the large windows .
I should have very much liked to
see that picture by Rembrandt which you
spoke of in your last letter .
Some time ago I
saw in Braun
’s window a photo
of a picture which must
belong to the ﬁne last period (probably in the Hermitage series)
. In this were
great ﬁgures of angels , it was
“Abraham
’s Meat,
” ﬁve ﬁgures , I think. That was
extraordinary too . As moving as the
“Men of Emmaus,
” for instance .
If later on there should ever be a question of giving something to M . Salles
for the trouble he has taken
-we should give hi m Rembrandt
’s
“Men ofEmmaus .
Is your health good? A handshake for you and your wife, I hope to send you
some new drawings next week .
Ever yours, Vincent
5 99
Dear brother and sister,
St . Remy, 6 July
1 8 89
Jo
’
s letter told me a very great piece of news thi s morning, I congratulate you
on it and I am very glad to hear it . I was much touched by your thought when
you said that neither
of you being in such good health
as seems dé sirable on
such an occasion, you felt a sort of doubt, and in any case that a feeling of pity
for the child who i s to come passed through your heart .
Has the child in this case even before its birth been less loved than the chi ld of
very healthy parents , whose ﬁrst movement must have been quick with joy ?
Certainly not . We know life so little that it i s very little in our power to distin
guish right from wrong, just from unjust, and to
say that
one is unfortunate
because one suffers , which has not been proved . Remember that Roulin
’
s child
came to them smiling and very healthy when the parents were in straits . So take
it as it comes , wait in conﬁdence and possess your soul in great patience,
as a
very old saying has it, and with good will . Leave nature alone . As for what you
say about Theo
’s health, although, my dear sister, I share your anxiety with all
my heart, I must comfort you, just because I have realized that hi s health i s,
like mine too, more changeable and uneven than feeble .
I very much like to think that illness sometimes heals us , that i s to say , when
the discomfort comes to a crisis , it i s necessary for the recovery of the body
’s
normal condition. No, after he has been married for some time, he will recover
hi s strength, as he still has a reserve of youth and power to restore him .
I am very glad that he i s not alone, and truly I do not doubt but that after
some time he will recover his old temperament . And then above all, when he i s a
father
and the sense
of his fatherhood has come to him, it will be
so much
gained .
3 66

In my life as a painter, and especially when I am in the country, it is less di ﬂi c ul t
for me to be alone, because in the country you feel more easily the ties that unite
us all . But in town, as he has been for ten years on end with the Goupils in Paris ,
it i s impossible to exist alone . So with patience it will all come back .
I am going to Arles tomorrow to get the canvases which are still there, and
which I will send you soon . And I am going to send some of them as soon as
possible to try to give you, even though you are in town, a peasant
’s thoughts .
This morning I talked a little with the doctor here— he told me exactly what
I already thought— that I must wait a year before thinking myself cured, since
the least little thing might bring on another attack .
Then he offered to store my furni ture here,
so that we should not be paying
double . Tomorrow I am going to Arles to talk it over with M . Salles . When
I came here, I left M . Salles 5 0 francs to pay the hospital in Arles ; he is sure to
have some of it left . But as I was still pretty often in need of various things here,
the surplus which M . Peyron had i s exhausted . I am rather surprised, myself,
that while I have been living with the greatest possible frugality and reg ularity
for six months , not counting having my st udio free, I spend no less and produce
no more than the previous year, which was comparatively less frugal, and in
wardly I feel neither more nor less remorseful, as it i s called . That i s as much as
to say that what i s called good and bad i s, however— as it seems to me— pretty
relative .
I hve soberly because I have a chance to, I drank in the past because I di d not
quite know how to do otherwise . Anyway, I don
’t care in the
Very
deliberate sobriety— it
’
s true— leads nevertheless to a condition in which thoughts ,
if you have any, move more readily. In short, it i s a difference like painting in
gray or in colors . I am going to paint more in gray, in fact.
Only instead of paying money to a landlord, you give it to the asylum, I do
not
see the difference— and it i s hardly any cheaper . The work i s a thing apart
and has always cost me a lot .
Thank you very much for the package of colors and canvas , whi ch I am very
glad to have . I hope to go and do the olives again . Unfortunately there are very
few vineyards here .
I am well , however, and I have a feeling rather hke I had when I was younger,
when I was very sober, too sober they used to
say then, I think . But it doesn
’t
matter, I shall try to overcome my diﬂi culti es .
As for being godfather to a
son
of yours , when to begin with it may be a
daughter, honestly, in the circumstances I would rather wait until I am away
from here .
Then Mother would certainly rather
set her heart on its being called after
our father. I for one would think that more logical in the circumstances .
I enjoyed myself very much yesterday reading M easurefor M easure. Then I read
H enry VIII , in which there are such ﬁne passages , such as that of Buckingham,
and W olsey
’
s words after hi s fall .
I think that I am lucky to be able to read
or reread this at leisure and then
I very much hope to read Homer too at last.
3 67

Outside the cicadas are singing ﬁt
to burst, a harsh screeching, ten times
stronger than that of the crickets, and the scorched grass takes on lovely tones
of old gold. And the beautiful towns of the South are in the same state as our
dead towns along the Z uyder Zee that once were so bustling . Yet in the decline
and decadence of things , the cicadas dear to the good Socrates abide . And here
certainly they still sing in ancient Greek . If our friend Isaacson heard them, it
would rejoice his heart .
What Jo writes about your having all your meals at home is splendid . Altogether
I think it i s all going very well, and once more, while sharing with all my heart
all possible uneasiness about Theo
’s health, with me the hope predominates that
in this case a more or less sickly condition is only the result of nature
’s efforts to
right herself. Patience . Mauve always asserted that nature was good and even
much more so than is generally believed ; was there anything in hi s life that proves
he was wrong ? The ﬁts of depression during hi s last days, do you think? I should
be inclined to think otherwise .
Good-by for the present, but I wanted to write straight off and tell y ou how
pleased I am with this morning
’s news .
A handshake from
Ever yours , Vincent
6011
My dear Theo,
St . Remy,
1 8 August
1 8 89
I thank Jo very much for having written, and knowing that you want me to drop
you a line, I must let you know that it i s very difficult for me to write, my head is
so disordered . So I am taking advantage of an interval . Dr . Peyron is very kind
to me and very patient . Y ou can imagine that I am terribly di stressed because the
attacks have come back, when I was already beginning to hope that it would not
return .
It would perhaps be a good thing if you wrote a few words to Dr. Peyt on to
tell him that working on my pictures i s almost a necessity for my recovery, for
these days without anything to do, and without being able to go to the room they
had allotted me to do my painting in, are almost unbearable .
(My friend Roulin has written me too .)
I have received a catalogue of the Gaug uin, Bernard, Schuffenecker, etc . , ex
hibition, which I ﬁnd interesting . Gauguin has also written a kind letter, though
a little vague and obscure, but after all I must say that I think they are right to
have an exhibition among themselves .
For many days my mind bas been absolutely wandering , as in Arles , quite as much if
not worse, and presumably the attacks will come back again in the future ; it is
abominable.
For four days I have been unable to eat because of a swollen throat.
I hope it i s not complaining too much if I tell you these details, but I do it to
show you that I am not yet in a condition to g o to Paris or to Pout-Aven, unless it
were to Charenton. I no longer see any possibility of having courage or hope, but
1 Written in black crayon .
3 68


the idea you might get into your head of thi s necessary and salutary quarantine
would have little justiﬁcation when we need a slow and patient recovery. If we
can manage that, we will save our strength for next winter . Here I imagine the
winter must be rather dismal . Anyway, I must try to occupy myself
all the
same . I often think that next winter I might retouch a lot
of last year
’s studi es
from Arles . So just lately, having kept back a big study of an orchard which
had given me great difﬁculty (it i s the same orchard y ou will ﬁnd a variant
of, but very vague, in the package) , I set myself to work it over again from
memory, and I have found the way to express the harmony of the tones more
strongly.
Tell me, have you received those drawings of mine? I sent you half a dozen
once by parcel post and ten or so later on . If by chance you have not received
them yet, they must have been lying at the station for weeks on end .
The doctor here said to me about Monticelli that he always thought him an
eccentric, but that as for madness , he had only been a little that way toward the
end . Considering all the misery of Montic elli
’
s last years , i s there any reason to
be surprised that he gave way under too heavy a load, and has one any right to
deduce from thi s that artistically speaking he fell short in hi s work?
I do not believe it, he had such a power of logical calculation and originality
as a painter that it i s still regrettable that he hadn
’t the stamina to make its ﬂower
ing more complete .
I am sending y ou enclosed a sketch of the cicadas here .
Their song in the great heat here has the same charm for me as the cricket on
the hearth for the peasants at home . Old man— don
’t let
’s forget that the li ttle
emotions are the great captains
of our lives, and that we obey them wi thout
knowing it . If it i s still hard for me to take courage again in spite of faults c om
mitted, and to be committed, which must be my cure, don
’t forget henceforth
that neither our spleen nor our melancholy, nor yet our feelings of good nature or
common sense, are our sole gui des , and above all not our ﬁnal protection, andthat
if you too ﬁnd yourselffaced with heavy responsibilities to be risked if not under
taken, honestly, don
’t let
’s be too much concerned about each other, since it so
happens that the circumstances of living in a state so far removed from our youth
ful conceptions
of an artist
’s life must make us brothers in spite of everything, as
we are in so many ways companions in fate . Things are so closely connected that
here you sometimes ﬁnd cockroaches in the food as if you were really in Paris ;
on the other hand, it may be that in Paris y ou sometimes catch a real feeling of
the ﬁelds . It certainly i s not much, but after
all it i s reassuring . So take your
fatherhood as a good soul on our old heaths would take it, those heaths which,
through all the noise, tumult and fogginess of the cities, still remain with us, in
expressibly dear— however timid our tenderness may be . That i s to say, let this
be your notion
of fatherhood, exile
an d stranger and poor man
that y ou are,
and henceforth, ﬁnd strength, with the instinct of the poor, in the probability of
a real, real life of one
’s fatherland, a life real at least in memory, even though we
may forget it every day. Sooner or later, such as it is, we meet our destinies , but
certainly it would be a sort of hypocrisy if I were to forget all the good humor,

the happy-g o-lucky carelessness
of the poor devils that we were, coming and
going in this Paris that has become so strange, and to let it weigh us down out
of proportion to our real load of cares .
Indeed, I am so glad that if there are sometimes cockroaches in the food here,
you have your wife and child at home .
Besides , it i s cheering that Voltaire, for instance, has left us at liberty not to
believe absolutely in everything we imagine .
Thus , while sharing your wife
’s anxiety about your health, I am not going so
far as
to believe what
now and then for a moment I imagined— namely that
worry on my account was the cause of your comparatively long silence— though
that i s
so easily explained when
one realizes how her condition must occupy
your mind . But it is quite all right, and it i s the road that everyone must take
in our world .
Good-by for now and a good handshake for you and Jo
.
Ever yours , Vincent
In haste, but I wanted
not
to delay sending the letter for
old Gauguin, you
surely have the address .
605
My dear Theo ,
St . Remy,
1 0 September
1 8 89
I like your letter very much, what y ou say ofRousseau and artists such as Bodmer,
that they are in any case men, and men such as you would like to see the world
peopled with— yes , certainly that i s what I feel too .
And that J
. H . Weissenbruch knows and does the muddy towpaths, the stunted
willows , the foreshortening, the strange and subtle perspective of the canals as
Daumier does lawyers , I think that i s perfect .
Tersteeg has done well
to buy some
of hi s work ; I think the reason why
people like that don
’t sell i s because there are too many dealers trying to sell
different stuff, with which they deceive the public and lead it astray.
Do you know that even now, if by chance I read an account of some energetic
manufacturer or even more of a publisher, that then I feel the same indignation,
the same wrath as I used to feel when I was with Goupil and Co .
Life passes like this , time does not return, but I am dead set on my work, for
just this very reason, that I know the opportunities of working do not return .
Especially in my case, in whi ch a more violent attack may forever destroy my
power to paint .
During the attacks I feel a coward before the pain and suffering— more of a
coward than I ought to be, and it i s perhaps thi s very moral cowardice which,
whereas I had no desire to get better before, makes me eat like two now, work
hard, limit my relations with the other patients for fear of a relapse— altogether
I am now trying to recover like a man who meant to commit suicide and, ﬁnding
the water too cold, tries to regain the bank .
My dear brother, y ou know that I came to the South and threw myself into
my work for a thousand reasons . Wishing to see a different light, thinking that
5 7 I

looking at nature under a bright sky might give us a better idea of the Japanese
way of feeling and drawing . Wishing also to
see this stronger sun, because one
feels that one could not understand Delacroix
’s pictures from the point of view
of execution and technique without knowing it, and because one feels that the
colors of the prism are veiled in the mist of the North.
All this is still pretty true . Then added to this is the natural inclination toward
this South which Daudet described in Tartarin, and that occasionally I have also
found friends and things here that I love .
Can you understand then that while ﬁn ding this disease horrible, I feel that
all the same I have formed ties to the place which are perhaps too strong— ties
which may later induce me to long to work here again— and yet in spite
of
everything, it may be that in acomparatively short time I shall return to the North ?
Yes , for I will not hide from you that in the same way that I now eat my food
eagerly, I have a terrible desire coming over me to
see my friends again and to
see the northern countryside again .
My work i s going very well, I am ﬁnding things that I have sought in vain
for years , and feeling this , I am always thinking
of that saying
of Delacroix
’s
that you know, namely that he discovered painting when he no longer had any
breath or teeth left.
Well, I with my mental disease, I keep thinking of so many other artists suffer
ing mentally, and I tell myself that thi s does not prevent one from exercising
the painter
’s profession as if nothing were amiss .
When I realize that here the attacks tend to take
an absurd
rehg ious turn,
I should almost venture to think that this even neeessitates a return to the North .
Don
’t talk too much about this to the doctor when you see hi m— but I do not
know if this i s not caused by living in these old cloisters so many months, both
in the Arles hospital and here . In fact, I really must not live in such an atmosphere,
one would be better in the street. I am not indifferent, and even when suffering,
sometimes religious thoughts bring me great consolation . So this last time during
my illness an unfortunate accident happened to me— that lithograph ofDelacroix
’s
“Pieta,
” along with some other sheets , fell into some oil and paint and was ruined .
I was very di stressed— then in the meantime I have been busy painting it, and
you will
see it someday
. I made a copy of it
on a size 5
or 6 canvas ; I hope it
has feeling .
Besides, having seen the
Daniel
and the
Odalisques
and the portrait
of
Brias and the
“Mulatto Woman” at Montpellier not long
ag o, I still feel the
impression they made on me .
That i s what braces me, just hke reading a ﬁne book, like
one by Beecher
Stowe or Dickens ; but what annoys me i s continuing to see these good women
who believe in the Virgin of Lourdes , and make up things like that, and thinking
that I am a prisoner under an administration of that sort, which very willingly
fosters these sickly religious aberrations , whereas the right thing would be to
cure them . So I say again, better to g o, if not to prison, at least into the army.
I reproach myself with my cowardice, I ought rather to have defended my
studio, even if I had had to ﬁght with the g endarmes and the neighbors . Others in
5 72


thing, but I do not think I belong to that category of souls who are ready to
live and also at any moment ready to suffer .
What a queer thing the toueb i s, the stroke of the brush .
In the open air, exposed to the wind, to the sun, to the curiosity
of people,
you work as you
c an , y ou ﬁll your canvas anyhow. Then, however, you catch
the real and essential— that i s the most difficult . But when after a time you again
take up thi s study and arrange your brush strokes in the direction of the objects
—certainly it i s more harmonious and pleasant to look at, and you add whatever
you have of serenity and cheerfulness .
Ah, I shall never be able to convey my impressions of some faces that I have
seen here . Certam this i s the road on which there i s something new, the road
to the South, but men
of the North ﬁnd penetrating it difﬁcult . And already
I can see myself in the future when I shall have had some success, regretting my
solitude and my wretchedness here, when I
saw the reaper in the ﬁeld below
between the iron bars of the cell . Misfortune i s good for something .
To succeed, to have lastin g prosperity, you must have a temperament different
from mine ; I shall never do what I might have done and ought to have wished
and pursued .
But I cannot live, since I have this dizziness
so often, except in a fourth
or
ﬁfth-rate situation . When I realize the worth and originality an d the superiority
“
of Delacroix and Millet, for instance, then I am bold enough to
say— yes, I am
something, I can do something . But I must have a foundation in those artists ,
and then produce the little I am capable of in the same direction
v
So
‘
old Pissarro is cruelly smitten by these two misfortunes at onee . l
A s soon as I read that, I thought of asking him if there would be any way of
going to stay with him .
If you will pay the same as here, he will ﬁnd it worth hi s while, for I do not
need much— except work .
Ask hi m offhand, and if he does not wish it, I could quite well go to Vig non
’
s .
I am a little afraid of Pont-Aven, there are so many people there, but what y ou
say about Gauguin interests me very much . And I still think that Gauguin and
I will perhaps work together again .
I know that Gauguin i s capable of better things than he has done, but to make
that man comfortable !
I am still hoping to do hi s portrait .
Have you seen that portrai t that he di d
of me, painting some sunﬂowers ?
Afterward my face got much brighter, but it was really me,very tired and charged
with electricity as I was then .
And yet to
see the country, you must live with the poor people and in the
little cottages and public houses , etc .
And that was what I told Bock, who complained
of seeing nothing that
tempted him or impressed him . I went for walks with him for two days and
I showed him how to make thirty pictures as different from th e North as Morocco
would be . I am curious to know what he i s doing now .
1 Pissarro had lost his mother and was having trouble with his eyes .

And then do you know why the pictures
of Eug
. Delacroix
’s— the religious
and hi storical pictures, the
“Bark of Christ,
” the
“Pieta,
” the
“Crusaders ,
” have
such a hold on one ? Because when Bug
. Delacroix di d a
“Gethsemane,
” he had
ﬁrst gone to
see ﬁrsthand what an olive grove was , and the same for the
sea
whipped by a strong mistral, and because he must have said to himself— These
people whom history tells us about, doges
of Veni ce, Crusaders, apostles, holy
women, were of the same character and lived in a manner analogous to that of
their present descendants .
And I must tell you— and y ou will see it in
La Berceuse,
however much of
a failure and however feeble that attempt may be— if I had had the strength to
continue, I should have made portraits of saints and holy women from hfe who
would have seemed to belong to another age, and they would be middle-class
women of the present day, and yet they would have had something in common
with the very primitive Christians .
However, the emotions which that rouses are too strong, I shall stop at that,
but later on , later on I do not say that I shall not return to the charge .
What a great man Fromentin was
-for those who want to see the East— he
will always remain the g uide. He was the ﬁrst to establish a link between Rem
brandt and the Midi , between Potter and what he saw himself.
You are right a thousand times over— I must not think
of all that— I must
make things, even if it
’
s only studies
of cabbages and salad, to get calm, and
after getting calm, then— whatever I am capable
of. When I
see them again,
I shall make duplicates of that study of the
“Tarascon Diligence,
” of the
“Vine
yard,
the
“Harvest,
”
and especially of the
Red Cabaret,
that night café which
i s the most characteristic
of all in it s color . But the white ﬁg ure right in the
middle must be done all over again as to color, and better composed . But that
I venture to say
— i s the real Midi , and a calculated combination of greens with
reds .
My streng th has been exhausted too qui ckly, but in the distance I
see the
possibility of others doing an inﬁnite number of ﬁn e things . And again and again
this idea remains true, that to make the journey easier for others, it would have
been a good thing to found a studio somewhere in this vicini ty. For instance, to
make the journey from the North to Spain in
one stage i s not good, you will
not
see what you
sbould see there— you must g et y our
ey es
aeoustomed ﬁrst and
gradually to the different light .
I haven
’t much need to see Titian an d Velasquez in the galleries , I have seen
some living types which have enabled me to know better what a Mi di picture i s
now than before my poor journey.
Good Lord, Good Lord, the good people among the artists who
say that
Delacroix i s not
of the real East . Look here, i s the real East the kind of thing
that Parisians hke Gerome do ?
Because you paint a bit ofa sunny wall from nature and well and truly according
to our way of seeing in tbeN ortb, does that also provethatyou have seenthepeople
of the East ? Now that i s what Delacroix was seeking, but it in no way prevented
him from painting walls in the
“Jewish Wedding” and the Odalisques .
” Isn
’t that
3 7 5

true — and then Degas says that drinking in the cabarets while you are painting
pictures i s paying too dearly for it ; I don
’t deny it , but would he, like me, then
g o into cloisters or to church — it i s there that I am afraid . That i s why I make
an attempt to escape by writing thi s letter ; with much love to y ou and Jo
.
Ever yours, Vincent
I still have to congratulate you on the occasion of Mother
’s birthday. I wrote to
them yesterday, but the letter has not yet gone off because I have not had the
brains to ﬁni sh it . It i s queer that already, two or three times before, I had had
the idea of going to Pi ssarro
’
s ; this time, after your telling me
of hi s recent
misfortunes, I do not hesitate to ask him .
Yes, we must be done with thi s place, I cannot do the two things at once,
work and take no end of pains to live with these queer patients here— it i s up
setting .
I tried in vain to force myselfto go downstairs . And yet it i s nearly two months
since I have been in the open air.
In the long run I shall lose the faculty for work, and that i s where I begin to
call a halt, and then I shall send them- i f you agree— about their business . And
then to go on paying for it, no, then some artist who i s hard up will agree to share
a home with me .
It i s fortunate that you can write that you are well, and Jo too, an d that her
sister i s with you .
I very much wish that when your child comes, I should be back— not with
y ou, certai nly not, that i s impossible, but in the vicinity
of Paris wi th
another
painter . To mention a third possibility, I might g o to the Jouves, who have a
lot of chi ldren an d quite a household .
Y ou understand that I have tried to compare the second attack with the ﬁrst,
and I only tell you this, it seemed to me to be caused more by some outside
inﬂuence than by something within myself. I may be mistaken, but however it
may be, I think you will feel it quite right that I have rather a horror of all religious
exaggeration . The good M . Peyron will tell you loads ofthings, probabilities and
possibilities,
and involuntary acts . Very good, but if he i s more deﬁnite than
that, I shall believe none of it . And we shall see then wbat be will be deﬁnite about,
if it i s deﬁnite .
The treatment of patients in this hospital is certainly easy, one could follow it
even whi le traveling, for they do absolutely notbing ; they leave them to vegetate
in idleness and feed them with stale and slightly spoiled food . And I will tell you
now that from the ﬁrst day I refused to take this food, and until my attack I ate
only bread and a little soup, and as long as I remain here I shall continue to do
this . It i s true that
after this attack M . Peyron gave me some wine and meat,
which I accepted willingly the ﬁrst days, but he didn
’t want to make an exception
to the rule for long, and he is right to respect the regular rules of the establish
ment . I must also say that M. Peyt on does not give me much hope for the future,
an d I think this right, he makes me realize that
everytbing i s doubtful, that
one
can be sure of nothing beforehand . I myself rather expect it to return, however


607
My dear Theo,
St . Remy, 20 September
1 8 89
Many thanks for your letter. First of all, I am very pleased to hear that you too
had already thought of old Pissarro . You will see that there are still some chances,
if not there, then elsewhere . Meanwhile business i s business, and you ask me to
answer you categorically— and you are right— about going into a home in Paris
in case
of an immediate departure thi s winter . I answer Y es to that, with the
same calm and for the same reasons I had when I came to this place— even if
this home in Paris should be a makeshift arrangement, which might easily be
the case, for the opportunities to work are not bad here, and work is my only
distraction .
But having said this , please note that in my letter I gave a very serious reason
as a motive for wishing to make a change .
And I insist on repeating it . I am astoni shed that with the modern ideas that
I have, and being so ardent an admirer of Zola and de Goncourt and caring for
things of art as I do, that I have attacks such as a superstitious man might have
and that I get perverted
and frightful ideas about religion such as never came
into my head in the North.
On the supposition that I am very sensitive to surroundings, the already
prolonged stay in those old cloisters such as the Arles hospital and the house
here would be enough in itself to explain these attacks . Then— even as a last
resort— it might be necessary for the moment to g o into a private asylum instead .
Nevertheless, to avoid doing, or having the appearance ofdoing, any thing rash,
I assure you, after having thus warned you
of what I might wi sh
\
at a given
moment— that i s, to go away— I assure you that I feel calm and conﬁdent enough
to wait here another length of time to see if a new attack materializes this winter .
But if I write you iben—
“I want
to g o away from here
”— you should not
hesitate, and things should be arranged beforehand, for you woul d know then
that I had a serious reason or even several for going into a home not run , as this
one i s, by nuns , however excellent they may be .
Now if by some arrangement or other, sooner or later, I should make a move,
then let
’s begin as if practically nothing was wrong, being very cautious all the
same and ready to listen to Rivet in the smallest matters, but don
’t let
’s begin
by taking too formal measures straight off, as if it were a lost cause . As for eating
a lot, I do— but if I were my doctor, I
’d forbid it . I don
’t see any advantage for
myself in enormous physical streng th, because it would be more logical for me
to get absorbed in the thought of doing good work and wishing to be an artist
and nothing but that .
Both Mother and Wil have changed their surroundings after Cor
’s departure
-they were damned right . Grief must not gather in
our heart like water in a
swamp . But it i s sometimes both expensive and impossible to change . Wil wrote
very nicely, it i s a great grief to them, Cor
’s departure .
It i s
odd, just when I was making that copy
of the
Pieta
by Delacroix,
I found where that canvas has gone . It belongs to a queen
of Hungary, or of
some other country thereabouts, who has written poems
under
the name of

Carmen Sylva . The article mentioning her
and the picture was by Pierre Loti,
and he made you feel that this Carmen Sylva as a person was even more touching
than what she wrote— and yet
she wrote things like this : a childless woman i s
like a bell without a clapper— the sound of the bronze would perhaps be beautiful,
but no one will ever hear it . I have now seven copies out of the ten of Mill er
’
s
Travaux des Champs .
”
I can assure you that making copies interests me enormously,
and it means
that I shall
not lose sight
of the ﬁgure, even though I have no models at the
moment .
Besides, this will make a studio decoration for me or someone else .
I should also like to copy
“The Sower
” and
“The Diggers .
”
There i s a photograph of the drawing after
“The Diggers .
”
And there i s Larat
’
s etching of
“The Sower
at Durand Ruel
’s .
Among these same etchings i s the snow-covered ﬁeld with a harrow . Then
the
“Four Hours of the Day
”
; there are copies of them in the collection
of
wood engravings .
I should like to have all these, at least the etchings and the wood engravings .
It i s a kind of study that I need, for I want to learn . Although copying may be
the old system, that makes absolutely no difference to me . I am going to copy
the
“Good Samaritan” by Delacroix too .
I have done a . woman
’s portrait— the attendant
’s wife— which I think you
would like . I have done a duplicate of it which i s less good than the one from life .
And I am afraid they will take the latter ; I should have liked you to have it .
It i s pink and black .
I am sending you my own portrait today, you must look at it for some time ;
y ou will see, I hope, that my face i s much calmer, though it seems to me that
my look i s vaguer than before . I have
another
one whi ch is an attempt made
when I was ill, but I think thi s will please you more, and I have tried to make it
simple . Show it to old Pissarro when you see him.
Y ou will be surprised at the effect
“Les Travaux des Champs
takes
on in
color, it i s a very profound series of hi s. I am going to try to tell you what I am
seeking in it and why it seems good to me to copy them . We painters are always
asked to eomp ose ourselves and be notbing but eomposers .
So be it— but it isn
’t like that in music— and if some person
or other plays
Beethoven, he adds hi s personal interpretation— in music and more especially in
singing— the interpretation of a composer i s something, and it i s not a hard and
fast rule that only the composer should play hi s own composition .
Very good— and I, mostly because I am ill at present, I am trying to do some
thing to console myself, for my own pleasure .
I let the black and white by Delacroix or Millet or something made after their
work pose for me as a subject .
And then I improvise color on it , not, you understand, altogether myself, but
searching for memories of tbeir pictures— but the memory,
“the vague consonance
of colors which are at least right in feeling”— that i s my own interpretation .
Many people do not copy, many others do —I started on it accidentally, and I
5 7

ﬁnd that it teaches me things, an d above all it sometimes gives me consolation .
And then my brush goes between my ﬁngers as a bow would
on the violin, and
absolutely for my own pleasure . Today I tried the
“Woman Shearing Sheep
” in a
color scheme ranging from lilac to yellow . They are little canvases of about size 5
.
Thank you very much for the package of canvas and paints . In return I am
sending you with the portrait the following canvases
Moonrise (ricks)
Study of Fields
Study of Olives
Study of Night
The Mountain
Field of Green Wheat
Olives
Orchard in Bloom
Entrance to a Quarry
Th e ﬁrst four canvases are studies without the effect ofawhole that the others have .
I rather like the
“Entrance to a Quarry
”
—I was doing it when I felt this
attack coming on— because to my mind the somber greens g o well with th e ocher
tones ; there i s something sad in it which i s healthy, and that i s why it does not
bore me . Perhaps that i s true
of the
“Mountain
” too . They will tell me that
mountains are not like that and that there are black outlines of a ﬁnger
’
3 width .
But after all it seemed to me it expressed the passage in Rod
’s book— one of the
very rare passages
of hi s in which I found something good— about a desolate
country
of somber mountains, among which are some dark goatherds
’ huts
where sunﬂowers are blooming .
The
“Olives
” with a white cloud and a background of mountains , as well as
the
“Moonrise
” and the night effect, are exaggerations from the point of view of
arrangement, their lines are warped as in old wood . The olives are more in char
acter, as in the other study, and I tried to express the time of day when you see
the green rose beetles and the cicadas ﬂying about in the heat . The other canvases ,
the
“Reaper,
” etc . , are not dry.
And now in the bad weather I am going to make a lot of copies , for really
I must do more ﬁgures . It i s the study of the ﬁgure that teaches you to seize the
essential and to simphfy
.
When you say in your letter that I have always only been working, no— I can
not agree— I am myself very, very dissatisﬁed with my work, and the only thing
that comforts me i s that people of experience
say you must paint ten years for
nothing . But what I have done i s only those ten years of unfortunate studies that
didn
’t come off. Now a better period may come, but I shall have to get the ﬁgure
stronger and I must refresh my memory by a very close study
of Delacroix and
Millet . Then I shall try to get my drawing clearer . Yes, misfortune i s good for
something, you gain time for study . I am adding a study of ﬂowers to the roll of
canvases— nothing much, but after all I do not want to tear it up .
Altogether I think nothing in it at all good except the
“Field of Wheat,
the


you, I have conﬁdence enough to wait for the winter and the attack which will
perhaps come back then . But if it i s a ﬁt of religious exaltation again, then no
delay, I would like to leave
at
onee, without giving reasons . Only we are not
permitted, at least it would be indiscreet, to meddle with the sisters
’ management
or even to criticize them . They have their
own beliefs and their own ways of
doing good to others , sometimes it does very well .
But I do not warny ou ligbtly
.
And it i s not to recover more liberty or anything else that I don
’t have . So
let
’s wait very calmly till an opportunity to settle things presents itself.
It i s a great advantage that my
stomach i s behaving well, and then I do not
think I am so sensitive to cold . And besides I know what to do when the weather
i s bad, having this project of copying several things that I like .
I should very much like to see Millet reproductions in the schools . I think
there are children who would become painters if only they saw good things .
Regards to Jo and a handshake . Good-by for now .
Ever yours , Vincent
B 21 [27]
My dear friend Bernard,
Saint Remy, Beginning of December
1 8 89
Thanks for your letter and especially for the photographs, which give me an
:
idea of your work .
My brother wrote to me about it the other day for that matter, and told me
that he liked the harmony
of the colors and a certain nobility in many of the
ﬁgures very much .
Now look here, I am too charmed by the landscape in the
“Adoration of the
Magi
’ to venture to criticize, but it i s nevertheless too much of an im
possibility
to imagine a conﬁnement like that, right on the road, the mother starting to pray
instead of giving suck ; then there are those fat ecclesiastical frogs kneeling down
as though in a ﬁt of epilepsy, God knows how, and why !
No, I can
’t think such a thing sound, but personally, if I am capable of spiritual
ecstasy, I adore Truth, the possible, and therefore I bow down before that study
— powerful enough to make a Mi llet tremble— of peasants carrying home to the
farm a calf which has been born in the ﬁelds . Now this, my friend, all people
have felt from France to America ; an d after that are you going to revive medieval
tapestries for us ? Now honestly, i s this a sincere conviction ? No ! you can do
better than that, an d you know you must seek after the possible, the logical, the
true, even if you should have to forget the Parisian things ala Baudelaire a little .
H ow much I prefer Daumier to that gentleman !
An
“Annunciation,
”
of what ? I see ﬁgures of angels— dear me, quite elegant
— a terrace with two cypresses which I like very much ; there i s an enormous
amount of ai r,
of brightness in it ; but, once this ﬁrst impression i s past, I ask
myself whether it is a mystiﬁc ation ,
and those secondary ﬁgures
no
longer
mean anything to me .
But it will be enough if you will just understand that I am yearning to know
such things
of yours as that picture which Gauguin has, those Breton women

strolling in a meadow, so beauti q y ordered, so naively distingui shed in color .
And y ou will trade this for what is— must I say the word — c ounterfeit, affected !
Last year you di d a picture— according to what Gauguin told me— whi ch I
think was something like this :
on a grassy foreground a ﬁgure of a young girl
in a blue or whitish dress, lying stretched out full length ; on the second plan e
the edge of a beech wood, the ground covered with fallen red leaves , the ver
dig ri s-colored tree trunks forming a vertical barrier .
I suppose the hai r i s an accent of a color tone which i s necessary as a color c om
plementary to the pale dress, black if the dress i s white, orange if it i s blue . But
what I said to myself was , what a simple subject, an d how well he knows how to
create elegance with nothing .
Gauguin told me about another subject, nothing but three trees, an effect
of
orange foliage against a blue
sky ; but then very clearly designed, and very
categorically divided into planes of contrasting and candid colors— bravo !
And when I compare such a thing with that
nightmare
of a
“Christ in the
Garden of Olives,
” good Lord, I mourn over it , and so with the present letter
I ask you again, roaring my loudest, and calling you all kinds of names with the
full power of my lungs— to be so kind as to become your own self again a little .
The
“Christ Carrying His Cross
” i s appalling . Are those patches of color in it
harmoni ous I won
’t forgive you the spuriousness— yes, certainly, spuriousness— in
the composition .
As you know, once or twice, while Gauguin was in Arles, I gave myself free
rein with abstractions , for instance in the
“Woman Rocking,
in the
“Woman
Reading a Novel,
” black in a yellow library ; and at the time abstraction seemed
to me a charming path . But it i s enchanted ground, old man, and one soon ﬁnds
oneself up against a stone wall .
I won
’t say that one might not venture on it after a virile lifetime of research,
of a hand-to-hand struggle with nature, but I personally don
’t want to bother
my head with such things . I have been slaving away on nature the whole year,
hardly thinking of impressionism or of thi s , that and the other . An d yet, once
again I let myself go reaching for stars that are too big — a new failure
—and
I have had enough of it .
So I am working at present among the olive trees, seeking after the various
effects of a gray sky against a yellow soil, with a green-black note in the foliage ;
another time the soil and the foliage all of a violet hue against a yellow sky ; then
again a red-ocher soil and a pinkish green sky. Yes, certai nly, this interests me far
more than the above-mentioned abstractions .
If I have not written you for a long while, it i s because, as I had to struggle
against my illness, I hardly felt inclined to enter into discussions— and I foun d
danger in these abstractions . If I work
on very qui etly, the beautiful subjects
will come of their own accord ; really, above all, the great thing i s to gather new
vigor in reality, without any preconceived plan or Parisian prejudice . Apart from
that, I am very discontented with this year
’s work ; but perhaps it will prove to
be a solid foundation for next year . I have let myself be saturated with the air

My ambition i s limited to a few clods of earth, sprouting wheat, an olive grove,
a cypress— the latter, for instance, by no means easy to do . I ask myself why
you, who like the primitives, and st udy them, do
not seem to know Giotto .
Gauguin and I
saw a tiny panel of his at Montpellier, the death of some good
holy woman . The expression of pain and ecstasy in it i s so utterly human that
however nineteenth century one may be, one feels as though one were present
—
so strongly does one share the emotion .
If I saw the pictures themselves, I think it possible that I might be enraptured
with the colors all the same ; but you also speak of portraits you have done and
which you have worked hard on ; that
’s what will be good and where you will
have been yourself.
Here i s the description
of a canvas which i s in front
of me at the moment .
A view of the park of the asylum where I am staying ; on the right a gray terrace
and a side wall of the house . Some deﬂowered rose bushes, on the left a stretch
of the park— red—ocher— the soil scorched by the sun , covered with fallen pine
needles . This edge of the park i s planted with large pine trees, whose trunks an d
branches are red-ocher, the foliage green gloomed over by an admixture of black .
These high trees stand out against an evening sky with violet stripes on a yellow
ground, which higher up turns into pink, into green . A wall— also red-ocher
shuts offthe view, and i s topped only by a violet and yellow-ocher hill. Now the
nearest tree i s an enormous trunk, struck by lightning and sawed off. But
one
side branch shoots up very high and lets fall an avalanche of dark green pine
needles . This somber giant— like a defeated proud man— contrasts, when con
sidered in the nature of a living creature, with the pale smile of a fast rose
on
the fading bush in front of him . Underneath the trees, empty stone benches,
sullen box trees ; the sky i s mirrored— yellow— in a puddle left by the rain . A
sunbeam, the last ray of daylight, rai ses the somber ocher almost to orange . Here
and there small black ﬁgures wander around among the tree trunks .
Y ou will realize that this combination of red-ocher, of green gloomed over by
gray, the black
streaks surrounding the contours , produces something
of the
sensation of anguish, called
“noir-rouge,
” from which certain of my compani ons
in misfortune frequently suffer . Moreover the motif of the great tree struck by
lightning, the sickly green-pink smile
of the last ﬂower
of autumn serve to
conﬁrm thi s impression .
Another canvas shows the sun rising over a ﬁeld of young wheat ; lines ﬂeeting
away, furrows rising up high into the picture toward a wall and a row of lilac
hi lls . The ﬁeld i s violet and yellow-green . The white
sun i s surrounded by a
great yellow halo . Here, in contrast to the other canvas, I have tried to express
calmness, a great peace .
I am telling you about these two canvases, especially about the ﬁrst
one, to
give an impression of angui sh without
straight at the historic Garden of Gethsemane ; that it i s not necessary to
the characters of the Sermon on the Mount in order to produce a conso
it is wise and proper to be moved by the Bible, but modern


The latter wrote me that your military service has been postponed for a year
because of your health . Thanks all the same for your description of the Eg yptian
house . I should have liked to know too whether it i s larger
or smaller than a
rural cottage in this country—i n short, its proportions in relation to the human
ﬁgure . But it i s above all about the coloration that I am asking for information .
615
My dear Theo,
St . Remy,
1 6 November
1 889
I have to thank you very much for a package of paints, which was accompanied
by an excellent woolen waistcoat .
How kind you are to me, and how I wish I coul d do something good, so as to
prove to you that I would like to be less ungrateful . The paints reached me at
the right moment, because what I had brought back from Arles was almost
exhausted . The thing i s that this month I have been working in the olive groves,
because their Christs in the Garden, with nothing really observed, have gotten
on my nerves . Of course with me there i s no question of doing anything from
the Bible—
an d I have written to Bernard and Gauguin too that I considered that
our duty i s thinking, not dreaming, so that when looking at their work I was
astoni shed at their letting themselves go like
that . For Bernard has sent me
photos of hi s canvases . The trouble with them i s that they are a sort of dream ~
or
nightmare— that they are erudite enough— you can
see that it i s someone
who i s gone
on the primitives— but frankly the English Pre-Raphaelites di d it
much better, and then again Puvi s and Delacroix, much more healthily than the
Pre-Raphaelites .
It is not that it leaves m
e cold, but it gives me a painful feeling
of collapse
instead of progress . Well, to shake that
off, morning and evening these bright
cold days , but with a very ﬁne, clear
sun, I have been knocking about in the
orchards,
and the result i s ﬁve size 3 0 canvases, which along with the three
studies of olives that you have, at least constitute an attack on the problem . The
olive i s as variable as our willow or pollard willow in the North, you know the
willows are very striking, in spite
of their seeming monotonous, they are the
trees characteristic of the country. Now the olive and the cypress have exactly
the signiﬁcance here as the willow has at home . What I have done i s a rather
hard and coarse reality beside their abstractions, but it will have a rustic quality,
and will smell of the earth . I should so like to see Gauguin
’s and Bernard
’s studies
from nature, the latter talks to me
of portraits— which doubtless would please
me better .
I hope to get myself used to working in the cold— in the morning there are
very interesting effects of white frost and fog ; then I still have a great desire to
do for the mountai ns an d the cypresses what I have just done for the olives and
have a good g o at them .
The thing i s that these have rarely been painted, the olive and the cypress, an d
from the point of view of disposing of the pictures, they oug bt to g o in England,
I know well enough what they look for there . However that may be, I am almost
sure that in this way I
’ll do something tolerable from time to time . It i s really

my opinion more and more, as I sai d to Isaacson, if you work diligently from
nature without saying to yourself beforehand—
“I want to do thi s
or that,
” if
y ou work as if you were making a pair of shoes, without artistic preoccupations,
you will not always do well , but the days you least expect it, you ﬁnd a subject
which holds its own with the work of those who have gone before . You learn
to know a country which i s basically quite diﬂerent from what it appears at
ﬁrst sight .
On the contrary, you
say to yourself
I want to ﬁnish my pictures better,
I want to do them with care,
” lots of ideas like that, when one i s confronted by
the difﬁculties of weather an d of changing effects, are reduced to impracticability,
and ﬁnally I resign myself an d say, It i s the experience and the poor work of every
day which alone will ripen in the long run and allow one to do something truer
and more complete . So slow, long work i s the only way, and
all ambition and
keenness to make a good thing
of it, false . For you must spoil quite as many
canvases, when you ret urn to the charge every morning, as you succeed with .
To paint, a regular tranqui l existence would be absolutely necessary, and at the
present time, what can you do, when y ou see that Bernard for instance i s hurried,
always hurried by hi s parents ? He cannot do as he wishes, an d many others are
in the same ﬁx .
Tell yourself, I will not paint any more, but then what i s one to do ? Oh, w e
must invent a more expeditious method of painting, less expensive than
oil, and
yet lasting . A pict ure
"
. that will end by becoming as commonplace as a sermon,
an d a painter will be like a creature left over from the last century. All the same,
it i s a pity it should be this way. Now if the painters had understood Millet
better as a man, as some, e.g
. Lhermitte and Roll, have now grasped him, things
would not be like this . We must work as much and with as few pretensions as a
peasant if we want to last .
And instead
of grandiose exhibitions , it would have been better to address
oneself to the people and work
so that each one coul d have in his home some
pictures or reproductions which would be lessons, like the work of Millet .
I am quite at the end of my canvas and I beg you to send me ten meters as
soon as you
c an . Then I am going to attack the cypresses
an d the mountains .
I think that thi s will be the core of the work that I have done here and there in
Provence, and then we can conclude my stay here when it i s conveni ent . It i s
not urgent, for after all Paris only di stracts . I don
’t know, however— not always
being a pessimist— I think that I still have it in my heart someday to paint a
book shop with the front yellow and pink, in the evening, and the black passers
by
— it i s such an essentially modern subject . Because it seems to the imagination
such a rich source
of light— say, there would be a subject that would g o well
between an olive grove and a wheat ﬁeld, the sowing season of books and prints .
I have a great longing to do it like a light in the midst of darkness . Yes, there is
a way of seeing Paris beautiful . But after all, book shop s do not run away like
hares, and there i s no hurry, and I
am quite willing to work here for another
year , which will probably be the wisest thing to do .
Mother must have been in Leyden for a fortnight now . I have delayed sending
3 87

you the canvases for her, because I will put them in with the picture
of the
“Wheat Field
” for the Ving tistes.
Kindest regards to Jo , she i sbeingvery good to go onbeingwell . Thank you again
for the paints, and the woolen waistcoat, and a good handshake in thought .
Ever yours, Vincent
620
My dear brother,
St . Remy, 3 1 December
1 8 89
Many thanks for your letter of December 2 2 , containing a 5 0-fr . note . First of all
I wish you and Jo a happy New Year and regret that I have perhaps, though
quite unwillingly, caused you worry, because M . Peyron must have informed
you that my mind has once more been deranged .
At the moment of writing, I have not yet seen M . Peyron, so I do not know if
he has written anything about my pictures . While I was ill , he came to tell me
that he had heard from you an d to ask whether or not I wanted to exhibit my
pictures . I told him that I would rather not exhibit them . There was no justiﬁca
tion for that and so I hope they were sent off anyway . But anyway I am sorry
not to have been able to
see M . Peyron today, to ask him what he has written
you . Anyway, it doesn
’t seem very important on the whole, since you say that
it starts as late as January 3 , so that thi s will still reach you in time .
What a misfortune for Gauguin, that child falling out of the window and hi s
not being able to be there . I often think of hi m, what mi sfortunes that man has
in spite of hi s energy an d
so many unusual qualities . I think it i s splendid that
our sister i s coming to help you when Jo has her conﬁnement .
May that g o well— I think about you two a great deal, I assure you .
Now what you say about my work certainly pleases me, but I keep thinking
about thi s accursed trade in which one i s caught as in a net, and in which one
becomes less useful than other people . But there, it
’
s no use, alas ! fretting about
that— and we must do what we c an .
Odd that I had been working perfectly calmly on some canvases that you will
soon see, and that suddenly, without any reason, the aberration seized me again .
I do not know what M . Peyron i s going to advise, but while taking what he
tells me into account, I think that he will dare less than ever to commit himself
as to the possibility of my living as I used to . It i s to be feared that the attacks
will return . But that i s
no reason at
all for not trying to di stract oneself a
For cooping up all these lunatics in thi s old cloister becomes, I think, a danger
ous thing, in which you risk losing the httle good sense that you may sti ll have
kept . Not that I am set on thi s or that by preference . I am used to the life here,
but one must not forget to make a httle trial of the opposite .
However that may be, you see that I write comparatively calmly.
What you write about M . Lauzet
’
s visit i s very interesting . I think that when
I send the canvases which are still here, he wi ll certainly come back once more,
and if I were there, I think I also should start lithographing .
Perhaps these canvases in question will be the very thing for Reid.
3 88


that thi s be the end . Ah, well— it would seem that we are not the masters of
this— of our existence— ir seems that what matters i s that one should learn to
want to go on living, even when suffering . Oh, I feel so cowardly in this respect ;
even when my health has returned, I am still afraid . So who am I to encourage
others, you will say, for actually this i s hardly my style . Well , it i s only to tell
you, my dear friends, that I hope so ardently, and even dare believe, that Mrs .
Ginoux
’
s illness will be of very short duration,
and that
she will rise from her
sickbed a much stronger fellow, but she knows only too well how fond we all
are of her, and how much we wish to
see her in good health . In my own case
my disease has done me good— it would be ungrateful not to acknowledge it .
It has made me easier in my mind , and i s wholly different from what I expected
and imagined ; this year I have had better luck than I dared hope for .
But if I had not been so well cared for, if people had not been so good to me
as they have been, I am convinced I should have dropped dead or lost my reason
completely . Business i s business, and in the same way duty i s duty, an d therefore
it i s only fair that I go back to see my brother soon, but I assure you that it will
be hard for me to leave the South ; I say this to all of you who have become my
friends— my friends for a long time .
I have forgotten to thank you for the olives you sent me some time ago, they
were excellent ; I shall bring back the boxes in a little while
So I write you this letter, my dear friends , in order to try and di stract our dear
patient for a moment,
so that
she may once again show us her habitual smile
and give pleasure to all who know her . As I told you, within a fortnight I hope
to visit y ou, wholly recovered .
Diseases exist to remind u s that we are not made
of wood,
and it seems to
me thi s i s the bright side of it all .
And
after that
one dreams
of taking up one
’s dai ly work again, being less
afraid
of obstacles, with a new stock
of serenity ; and even at parting one will
tell oneself,
“And when you are friends, you are friends for a long time
”— for
this i s the way to leave each other.
Well, we shall be seeing each other soon, and my best wishes for Mrs . Gin oux
’
s
swift recovery.
Beli eve me
Ever yours, Vincent
626a
Dear Mr . Aurier,
St . Remy,
1 1 February 1 890
Many thanks for your article in the Mereure de Franee, which greatly surprised me .
I like it very much as a work of art in itself, in my opinion your words produce
color, in short, I rediscover my canvases in your article, but better than they are,
richer, more full of meaning . However, I feel uneasy in my mind when I reﬂect
that what you say i s due to others rather than to myself. For example, Monticelli
in particular. Saying as you do :
“As far as I know, he i s the only painter to per
c eive the chromatism of things with such intensity, with such a metallic, gemlike
luster, be so kind as to go an d see a certain bouquet by Monticelli at my brother
’s
— a bouquet in white, forget-me-not blue and orange— then you will feel what

I want to
say
. But the best, the most amazing Monti c elli s have long been in
Scotland and England . In a museum in the North— the one in Lisle, I believe
there i s sai d to be a very marvel, rich in another way and certainly n o less French
than W atteau
’
s
“Départ pour Cythere.
” At the moment Mr . Lauzet i s engaged in
reproducing some thirty works of Monti c elli
’
s .
Here you are ; as far as I know, there i s no colorist who i s descended
so
straightly an d directly from Delacroix, and yet I am of the opini on that Monticelli
probably had Delacroix
’
8 color theories only at secondhand ; that i s to
say , that
he got them more particularly from Diaz an d Ziem . It seems to me that Monti
c elli
’
s personal artistic temperament i s exactly the same as that of the author of
the D eeameron— Boccaccio— a melancholic, somewhat resigned,
unhappy man,
who saw the wedding party ofthe world pass by, painting and analyzing the lovers
of hi s time— he, the one who had been left out of things . Oh ! he no more imitated
Boccaccio than Henri Leys imitated the primitives . Y ou see, what I mean to say
i s that it seems there are things whi ch have found their way to my name, which
you could better say of Monticelli , to whom I owe so much . And further, I owe
much to Paul Gauguin, with whom I worked in Arles for some months, and
whom I already knew in Paris, for that matter .
Gauguin, that curious artist, that alien whose mien and the look in whose eyes
vaguely remind one of Rembrandt
’s
“Portrait of a Man
” in the Galerie Lacaze
—this friend of mine likes to make one feel that a good picture i s equivalent to a
good deed ; not that he says
so, but it i s difficult to be on intimate terms with
him without being aware of a certain moral responsibility . A few days before
parting company, when my di sease forced me to g o into a lunatic asylum, I tried
to paint
“hi s empty seat .
”
It i s a study of hi s armchair of somber reddi sh-brown wood, the seat of greeni sh
straw, and in the absent one
’
3 place a lighted torch and modern novels .
If an opport uni ty presents itself, be
so kind as to have a look at this study,
by w ay of a memento of him ; it i s done entirely in broken tones of green and red .
Then you will perceive that your article would have been fairer, and consequently
more powerful, I think, if, when discussing the question of the future of
“tropical
painting
” and of colors, you had done justice to Gauguin and Monticelli before
speaking
of me . For tbe p art wbieb is
allotted to me,
or will be allotted to me, will
remain, I assurey ou, very seeondary
.
And then there i s another question I want to ask y ou . Suppose that the two
pictures
of sunﬂowers, which are now at the Ving tistes
’ exhibition, have certain
qualities
of color, and that they also express an idea symbolizing
“gratitude .
”
Is thi s different from so many ﬂower pieces, more skillfully painted, and which
are not yet sufﬁciently appreciated, such as
“Hollyhocks,
”
“Yellow Irises
” by
Father Quost ? The magniﬁcent bouquets of peoni es whi ch Jeannin produces
so
abundantly ? You
see, it seems
so diﬂi c ul t to me to make a distinction between
impressioni sm and other things ; I do not see the u se of so much sectarian spirit
as we have seen these last years, but I am afraid of tbep rep osterousness of it .
And in conclusion, I declare that I do not understand whyy ou shoul d speak of
Meissonier
’s
“Infamies .
It i s possible that I have inherited from the excellent

Mauve an absolutely unlimited admiration for Meissoni er ; Mauve
’
s eulogies on
Troyon and Meissonier used to be inexhaustible— a strange pair .
I say this to draw your attentionto the extent to whichpeople in foreign countries
admire the artists of France, without making the least fuss about what divides
them, often enough so damnably. What Mauve repeated so often was something
like thi s :
“If one wants to paint colors , one should also be able to draw a chimney
corner or an interior as Meissonier does .
”
In the next batch that I send my brother, I shall include a study ofcypresses for
you, if y ou will do me the favor of accepting it in remembrance of your article .
I am still working on it at the moment, as I want to put in a little ﬁg ure . The
cypress i s so characteristic of the scenery of Provence ; you will feel it and say :
“Even the color i s black .
” Until now Ishave not been able to do them as I feel
them ; the emotions that grip me in front of nature c an cause me to lose conscious
ness, and then follows a fortnight during which I cannot work . Nevertheless,
before leaving here I feel sure I shall return to the charge and attack the cypresses .
The study I have set aside for you represents a group of them in the corner of a
wheat ﬁeld during a summermistral . So it i s a note of a certain nameless black in the
restless gusty blue of the wide sky, and the vermilion of the poppies contrasting
with thi s dark note .
Y ou will
see that thi s constitutes something like the combination of tones in
‘
those pretty Scotch tartans of green, blue, red, yellow, black, whi ch at the time
seemed so charming to you as well as to me, and which, alas, one hardly sees any
more nowadays .
Meanwhile, dear Sir, accept my gratitude for your article . When I go to Paris
inthe spring,I certainly shall not fai l to call on y ou to thank you in person.
It
'will be a year before the study that I am going to send you will be thoroughly
dry, also in the thick layers of paint ; I think you will do well to lay on a goodly
coat of varni sh .
In the meantime it will be necessary to wash it a good many times with plenty
of water in order to get the oil out . The study i s painted with plain Prussian blue,
themuch-maligned colornevertheless used so often by Delacroix . I believe that as
soon as the tones of this Prussian blue are quite dry, you will, by varni shing, get
the black, the very black tones, necessary to bring out the various somber
greens .
I am not quite sure how this st udy ought to be framed, but seeing that it makes
one think of those ni ce Scotch materials, I mention that I have observed that a
very simpleﬂatframe in VIVID ORAN GE LEAD would produce the desired effect in
conjunction with the blues of the background and the dark greens of the trees .
Without it there would not be enough red in the picture, and the upper part
would seem a little cold .


629a
Dear Mother and sister,
St . Remy, 29 April
1 890
After having been unwell for two months, it i s only now that I am able to write
you a letter .
Until today I have not been able either to bring myself to read your letter or
to write one, and the doctor not being at home today, I cannot get the letters
and the package you sent me, but in the meantime I don
’t want to postpone
thanking you both most heartily. With all my heart I hope that all i s well with
you both, and also with Anna and Lies and their families .
Today I wrote Theo and sent him a number
of pictures, some of which I
expect him to send on to you . So you see I have not been able to work during
the most favorable part
of spring, consequently things aren
’t going too well .
But what can a man do about it ? Every change i s not a change for the better,
but I am longing to get away from here ; what one has to endure here i s hardly
bearable .
These last few days I have been working on the picture of a lawn in the blazing
sun with yellow dandelions . I continued painting even when my illness was at
its height, among other things a memory of Brabant, hovels with moss-covered
roofs and beech hedges on an autumn evening with a stormy sky , the sun setting
amid ruddy clouds . Also a t urnip ﬁeld with women gathering green stuff in
the snow .
I have asked Theo to let me have as many of my old drawings as he has kept .
Do you happen to have any of my old studies and drawings at home ? Though
they may not be good in themselves, they may serve to refresh my memory, and
so be the subjects for new work, but I do not want those you have hanging on
the walls, for instance . I should prefer quick sketches of peasant ﬁgures . But it i s
not important enough for you to rummage a long time to ﬁnd them .
With all my heart I hope you are both well ; and before long I shall write more .
Believe me, I often think of you . I embrace you in thought .
Your loving Vincent
As soon as I heard that my work was having some success, and read the article in
question, I feared at once that I shoul d be punished for it ; thi s i s how things nearly
always go in a painter
’s life : success i s about the worst thing that
c an happen .
63 5
My dear Theo and dear Jo,
Auvers-sur-Oise, 20 May
1 890
Having made Jo
’
s acquaintance, henceforth it will be difﬁcult for me to write to
Theo only, but Jo will allow me
—I hope— to write in French ; because
after
two years in the South, I really think that I shall
say what I have to say more
clearly by doing so .
Auvers i s very beautiful , among other things a lot
of old thatched roofs,
which are getting rare . So I should hope that by settling down to do some
canvases of this there would be a chance of recovering the expenses of my stay

— for really it is profoundly beautiful , it i s the real country, characteristic and
picturesque .
I have seen Dr . Gachet, who gives me the impression of being rather eccentric,
but hi s experience as a doctor must keep him balanced enough to combat the
nervous trouble from which he certainly seems to me to be suffering at least as
seriously as I .
He piloted me to an inn where they ask 6 francs a day . All by myself I found
one where I shall pay
fr . a day.
And I think I ought to stay there until a new arrangement i s made . When
I have done some studies, I shall
see if it would be better to move, but it seems
unfair
to me, when you are willing and able to pay
and work like any other
laborer, to have to pay almost double because y ou work at painting . Anyway,
I am going to the inn at
ﬁrst .
Probably you will
see Doctor Gachet this week— he has a very ﬁne Pissarro,
winter with a red house in the snow, and two ﬁne ﬂower pieces by Cézanne .
Also another Cézanne, of the village . And I in my turn will gladly, very gladly,
do a bit of brushwork here .
I told Dr . Ga chet that for 4 francs a day I should think the inn he had shown
me preferable, but that 6 was 2 francs too much, considering the expenses I have .
It was useless for him to say that I should be quieter there, enough i s enough.
His house i s full
of black antiques, black, black, black, except for the impres
sioni st pictures mentioned . The impression I got of him was not unfavorable .
When he spoke of Belgium and the days of the old painters , hi s grief-hardened
face grew smiling again, and I really think that I shall g o on being friends with
him and that I shall do hi s portrait.
Then he said that I must work boldly on , and not thi nk at all of what went
wrong with me .
In Paris I felt very strongly that all the noise there was not for me .
I am so glad to have seen Jo an d the little one and your apartment, which is
certainly better than the other one .
Wishing y ou good luck and good health and hoping to see you again soon, a
good handshake,
Vincent
Dear Mr . Isaacson,
Auvers sur-Oise, 3
—8 June
1 890
Back i n Paris I read the continuation of your articles on impressioni sm .
Without wanting to enter into a discussion of the details
of the subject that
y ou have attacked, I wish to informyou that i t seems to me that y ou are c onscien
ti ously trying to tell our fellow-countrymen how things are, basing yourself on
facts . As it i s possible that in your next article you will put in a few words about
me, I will repeat my scruples, so that you will not g o beyond afewwords, because
it i s absolutely eertain that I shall never do important things .
And this, although I believe i n the possibility that a later generation will be, and
will g o on being, concerned with the interesting research on the subject of colors

an d modern sentiment along the same lines as, and of equal value to, those of
Delacroix, of Puvi s de Chavannes— a nd that impressionism will be their source, if
you like, and future Dutchmen will likewise be engaged in the struggle — all this i s
within the realm of possibility and certainly your articles have their rai son d
’étre .
But I was straying into vag uenesses : so here i s the reason for this letter
I wanted to let you know that in the South I have been trying to paint some
olive groves . You surely know the existing pictures
of olive trees . It seems
probable to me that there are such in Monet
’s
and Renoir
’s work . But apart
from this, I have not seen anything of the work I suppose to exist— apart from
this, not much has been made of olive trees .
Well, probably the day i s not far
off when they will paint olive trees in
all
kinds of ways, just as they paint the Dutch willows and pollard willows, just as
they have painted the Norman apple tree ever since Daubig ny and César de Cock.
The effect of daylight, ofthe sky , makes it possible to extract an inﬁnity of subjects
from the olive tree . Now, I on my part sought contrasting eﬂect s in the foliage,
changing with the hues
of the
sky
. At times the whole i s a pure all-pervading
blue, namely when the tree bears its pale ﬂowers, and big blue ﬂies, emerald
rose beetles and cicadas in great numbers are hovering around it . Then; as the
bronzed leaves are getting riper in tone, the sky i s brilliant
an d radiant with
green
and orang e,
or, more often even, in autumn , when the leaves acquire
something of the violet tinges of the ripe ﬁg, the violet eﬂect will manifest itself
vividly through the contrasts, with the large sun taking on a white tint within
a halo of clear and pale citron yellow . At times, after a shower, I have also seen
the whole
sky colored pink and bright orange, which gave
an exqui site value
and coloring
to the silvery gray-green. And in the midst of that there were
women, likewise pink, gathering fruits .
These canvases, together with a number of ﬂower studies, are all that I have
done since
our last correspondence . These ﬂowers are
an avalanche
of roses
against a green backg round, and a very big bouquet of irises, vi olet against a
yellow background, against a pink background .
I begin to feel more and more that one may look upon Puvi s de Chavannes as
having the same importance as Delacroix, at least that he i s on a par with the
fellows whose style constitutes a
“hitherto, but no further,
” comforting for ever
more .
Among other pictures his canvas, now at the Champ de Mars, seems to contain
an allusion to an equivalence, a strange and providential meeting of very far-off
antiquities and
crude modernity . His canvases of the last few years are vaguer,
more prophetic if possible than even Delacroix, before them one feels an emotion
as if one were present at the continuation
of all kinds of things, a benevolent
renai ssance ordained by fate . But it i s better not to pursue the subject when one
i s standing gratefully enthralled before a ﬁnished painting li ke the
“Sermon on
the Mount .
Ah, he would know how to do the olive trees
of the South, he
ibe S eer . A s for me, I tell you as a friend, I feel impotent when confronted with
such nature, for my Northern brains were oppressed by a nightmare in those
peaceful spots, as I felt that one ought to do better things with the foliage . Yet
3 96


6SZ I
My dear brother,
Auvers-sur-Oise,
2 3 July
1 890
Thanks for your kind letter and for the 5 o-fr. note it contained .
There are many things I should like to write you about, but I feel it i s useless .
I hope you have found those worthy gentlemen favorably disposed toward you .
Your reassuring me as to the peacefulness of your household was hardly worth
the trouble, I think, having seen the weal and woe of it for myself. And I quite
agree with you that rearing a boy on a fourth ﬂoor i s a hell of a job for you as
well as for Jo .
Since the thing that matters most i s going well, why should I say more about
things
of less importance ? My word, before we have a chance to talk business
more collectedly, w e shall probably have a long way to go .
The other painters, whatever they think, instinctively keep themselves at a
di stance from discussions about the actual trade .
Well, the truth i s, we
c an only make
our pictures speak . But yet, my dear
brother, there i s thi s that I have always told you, and I repeat it once more with
all the earnestness that c an be expressed by the effort of a mind diligently ﬁxed
on trying to do as well as possible— I tell you again that I shall always consider
you
to be something more than a simple dealer in Corots, that through my
mediation you have your part in the actual production of some canvases, which
will retain their calm even in the catastrophe .
For thi s i s what we have got to, and this i s all or at least the main thing that
I can have to tell you at a moment
of comparative crisis . At a moment when
things are very strained between dealers in pictures
of dead artists , and
artists .
Well, my own work, I am risking my life for it and my reason has half foundered
because of it— that
’s all right— but you are not among the dealers in men as far
as I know, and you c an still choose your side, I think, acting with humani ty, but
que veux-tu ?
1 Note on the lett er in Theo
’
s handwriting : Letter found on him on July 29
.
3 9 8

