See discussions, stats, and author profiles for this publication at: https://www.researchgate.net/publication/266265008
Well-matchedness in Euler Diagrams
Conference Paper · July 2014
DOI: 10.13140/2.1.2861.9524
CITATIONS
8
READS
212
2 authors:
Some of the authors of this publication are also working on these related projects:
Social Network Visualization View project
Healthcare Technologies View project
Mithileysh Sathiyanarayanan
City, University of London
79 PUBLICATIONS   454 CITATIONS   
SEE PROFILE
John Howse
University of Brighton
129 PUBLICATIONS   1,785 CITATIONS   
SEE PROFILE
All content following this page was uploaded by Mithileysh Sathiyanarayanan on 01 October 2014.
The user has requested enhancement of the downloaded file.

Well-matchedness in Euler Diagrams
Mithileysh Sathiyanarayanan and John Howse
Visual Modelling Group, University of Brighton, UK
{M.Sathiyanarayanan,John.Howse}@brighton.ac.uk
Abstract. Euler diagrams are used for visualizing set-based informa-
tion. Closed curves represent sets and the relationship between the curves
correspond to relationships between sets. A notation is well-matched
to meaning when its syntactic relationships are reﬂected in the seman-
tic relationships being represented. Euler diagrams are said to be well-
matched to meaning because, for example, curve containment corre-
sponds to the subset relationship. In this paper we explore the concept
of well-matchedness in Euler diagrams, considering diﬀerent levels of
well-matchedness. We also discuss how the properties, sometimes called
well-formedness conditions, of an Euler diagram relate to the levels of
well-matchedness.
1
Introduction
An Euler diagram is a collection of closed curves in the plane. Curves repre-
sent sets and the spatial relationships between the curves represent relationships
between the sets. The lefthand diagram in ﬁg. 1 represents the set-theoretic re-
lationships C is a subset of A and A is disjoint from B. The righthand diagram
in ﬁg. 1 is a Venn diagram and has the same semantics as this Euler diagram. A
Venn diagram contains all possible intersections of curves and shading is used to
indicate empty sets. For example, the intersection between the curves labelled
A and B is shaded indicating that the sets A and B are disjoint. The only part
of the curve labelled C that is unshaded is that part within A and outside B
indicating that C is a subset of A.
Fig. 1. An Euler diagram and an equivalent Venn diagram.
16

Peirce classiﬁed syntactic elements into three categories: icon, index and
symbol [2]. In Euler diagrams, closed curves partition the plane into two regions:
that within the curve and that outside; just as a set partitions elements into those
in the set and those not in the set. For this reason, closed curves are considered
to be icons within Euler diagrams, although some people argue that the iconicity
is present only in the relationship between curves [4]. Curve labels indicate the
names of the sets the curves represent. In this sense, a label is an index. In Venn
diagrams, shading is a symbol used to indicate that the set represented is empty.
Peirce thought that ‘A diagram ought to be as iconic as possible’ [2] page 433.
Closely related to iconicity is the notion of well-matched to meaning. A no-
tation is well-matched to meaning when its syntactic relationships reﬂect the
semantic relationships being represented [1]. Euler diagrams are considered to
be a well-matched visualization of sets because subset, set disjointness and set
intersection are represented by enclosure, disjointness, and overlap respectively.
In ﬁg. 1, the curve labelled C is enclosed by the curve labelled A, reﬂecting the
semantics that C is a subset of A, and the curves labelled A and B are disjoint,
reﬂecting that A and B are disjoint sets. For this reason, Euler diagrams are
considered to be well-matched to meaning. However, in a Venn diagram all the
curves overlap and so the notation is not well-matched to meaning.
As well as iconicity and well-matchedness, some notations contain free rides [3].
The semantics of the Euler diagram in ﬁg. 1, in symbolic notation, is C ⊆A and
A ∩B = ∅. From this information, we can deduce that C ∩B = ∅. However, in
the Euler diagram this information comes ‘for free’; we can just read it oﬀfrom
the diagram.
In this paper, we are mainly concerned with the notion of well-matchedness,
which will be considered in section 3. In the next section we will give an informal
deﬁnition of Euler diagrams.
2
Euler Diagrams
An Euler diagram comprises a set of closed curves drawn in the plane, where
each curve has a label. Curve labels can be repeated. The set of curves with the
same label is called a contour. The closed curves partition the plane into minimal
regions. A basic region is a set of minimal regions that are all contained by the
same curves. A zone is a set of basic regions for which the containing curves for
each basic region have the same labels. The diagram D6 in ﬁg. 2 has four curves,
three contours, eight minimal regions, six basic regions and ﬁve zones.
A range of properties have been deﬁned for Euler diagrams, which are some-
times called well-formedness conditions:
1. All of the curves are simple (they do not self-intersect).
2. No pair of curves runs concurrently.
3. There are no triple points of intersection between the curves (i.e. three or
more curves do not meet at the same point).
4. Whenever two curves intersect, they cross.
17

5. Each zone is connected (i.e. consists of exactly one minimal region).
6. Each curve label is used on at most one curve.
Deﬁnitions of these properties can be found in [5]. The Euler diagram in ﬁg. 1
satisﬁes all of these properties. An Euler diagram satisfying all these properties
is said to be “well-formed”.
The semantics of an Euler diagram can be concisely presented as “missing
zones represent the empty set”. The “missing zones” are all the zones that would
be included in a Venn diagram on the given curves of an Euler diagram that are
not in the Euler diagram. We can extend Euler diagrams to include shading. This
can be useful in allowing us to represent some set theoretic statements as well-
formed Euler diagrams with extra zones that are shaded; an alternative way of
representing an empty set. In this sense, all Venn diagrams are Euler diagrams
(possibly with shading). In the next section we will consider the relationship
between these properties and the concept of a diagram being well-matched to
meaning.
3
Well-matchedness
Consider the statement ‘C is a subset of A and C is disjoint from B’. We will
use diﬀerent Euler diagram representations of this statement, such as all of those
given in ﬁg. 2, to explore and illustrate the concept of well-matchedness in Euler
diagrams and how it relates to the properties or well-formedness conditions given
in section 2.
Fig. 2. Six Euler diagrams with equivalent semantics.
18

Diagram D1 in ﬁg. 2 satisﬁes all the properties listed in section 2. The curve
labelled C is enclosed by the curve labelled A reﬂecting the ﬁrst part of the
statement ‘C is a subset of A’, and the curves labelled C and B are disjoint, re-
ﬂecting the second part of the statement ‘A and B are disjoint sets’. Hence D1 is
well-matched to meaning. The diagram D2 contains shading but is well-formed
(it satisﬁes all the properties listed in in section 2). In this diagram, the curve
labelled C is still enclosed by the curve labelled A, but the curves labelled B and
C are no longer disjoint. The diagram still represents C is disjoint from B, but
this is achieved by shading a zone (symbolic notation) rather than disjoint curves
(iconic notation). So, at best, D2 is only partially well-matched to meaning. In
general, an Euler diagram that contains extra zones that are shaded is not (fully)
well-matched to meaning. This gives rise to the concept of well-matchedness at
the zone level.
Well-matchedness Principle 1: An Euler diagram is well-matched at the
zone level if it does not contain any extra zones (zones that must be shaded to
preserve semantics).
We now consider well-matchedness when we break some of the well-formedness
conditions. Diagram D3 in ﬁg. 2 contains two disconnected zones (breaking well-
formedness condition 5). The zone inside A and outside B is represented by two
minimal regions as is the zone inside B and outside A. Is this diagram well-
matched to meaning? It contains all the appropriate zones and none extra. So,
at the zone level, it is well-matched. Now the curve labelled C is enclosed by the
curve labelled A and the curves labelled C and B are disjoint, so the diagram is
well-matched as far as the curves are concerned. This gives rise to the concept
of well-matchedness at the curve level.
Well-matchedness Principle 2: An Euler diagram is well-matched at the
curve level if the subset, intersection and disjointness relationships between
sets are matched by containment, overlap and disjointness of the curves repre-
senting the sets.
However, diagram D3 seems to suggest that some parts of the set A −B are
disjoint from other parts of the same set; this set is represented by a zone con-
sisting of two (disjoint) minimal regions. Having two disjoint regions both rep-
resenting the same set is disconcerting and appears to go against the injective
(one-to-one) nature of a well-matchedness relation. This gives rise to another
well-matchedness principle.
Well-matchedness Principle 3: An Euler diagram is well-matched at the
minimal region level if it is well-matched at the zone level and does not con-
tain a disconnected zone.
19

Diagram D4 in ﬁg. 2 contains two curves with the same label (breaking well-
formedness condition 6). When a diagram contains multiple curves with the same
label, regions within an odd number of curves with the same label are deemed to
be within the set and regions within an even number of curves with that label are
outside the set. D4 is well-matched at the zone level. However, the zone within
A and C consists of two minimal regions, as does the zone within A but outside
B and C – the minimal region inside both curves labelled C is part of this zone.
So D4 is not well-matched at the minimal region level. At the curve level, D4
has two curves labelled C which intersect. Having two curves representing the
same set again goes against the injective nature of well-matchedness. So D4 is
not well-matched at the curve level. However, the contour labelled C, consisting
of the two curves labelled C, is enclosed by the contour (a single curve in this
case) labelled A and disjoint from the contour (again a single curve) labelled B.
So at the contour level this diagram is well-matched. This gives rise to the next
well-matchedness principle.
Well-matchedness Principle 4: An Euler diagram is well-matched at the
contour level if the subset, intersection and disjointness relationships between
sets are matched by containment, overlap and disjointness of the contours rep-
resenting the sets.
Diagram D5 in ﬁg. 2 again contains two curves with the same label, with one
enclosing the other. This diagram is again well-matched at the zone level and at
the contour level. However, it is not at the curve level – the two curves labelled
C appear to be in a subset relation to each other – or at the minimal region
level – the zone within A but outside B and C consists of two minimal regions,
one of which is the region within both the curves labelled C.
Diagram D6 in ﬁg. 2 has two curves labelled C, which are placed in diﬀerent
minimal regions of the zone that is inside A and outside B. This diagram is
well-matched at zone level and contour level. However, it seems to indicate that
C is disjoint from itself, and is not well-matched at the curve or minimal region
levels.
There is a well-formed Euler diagram without shading that represents the
statement ‘C is a subset of A and C is disjoint from B’, that is diagram D1 in
ﬁg. 2. Now consider the statement ‘C is a subset of the disjoint union of A and
B’. There is no well-formed Euler diagram without shading that represents this
statement. The diagrams in ﬁg. 3 represent this statement but include shading
or break some of the well-formedness conditions stated in section 2. Diagram D1
in ﬁg. 3 is a well-formed diagram but contains shading, so it is not well-matched
at any level. Diagram D2 in ﬁg. 3 contains two curves with label C; it is well-
matched at the zone, minimal region and contour level, but not at the curve
level.
Diagram D3 in ﬁg. 3 contains a non-simple curve; the curve labelled C inter-
sects itself. D3 also contains triple point where all three curves meet at a point.
There are no extra zones and each zone is a minimal region, so the diagram
20

Fig. 3. Four Euler diagrams with equivalent semantics.
is well-matched at the zone and minimal region level. The curve C is enclosed
exactly in the region inside A but outside B or inside B but outside A. So the
diagram is well-matched at the curve level. Each curve is a contour as there are
no repeated labels, so D is also well-matched at the contour level. This diagram
is a fairly natural way to try and represent the statement ‘C is a subset of the
disjoint union of A and B’ even though it contains the very unnatural non-simple
curve. It is interesting that including a rather counter-intuitive feature allows the
diagram to be presented in a well-matched form.
In diagram D4 in ﬁg. 3, the curves labelled A and B run concurrently for a
part of their route allowing the curve labelled C to be placed in the region inside
A but outside B or inside B but outside A without it also passing through the
region within both A and B. It also contains two triple points where all three
curves intersect. This diagram is well-matched at all levels, although it might be
diﬃcult to work out exactly the relationship between curves A and B.
Finally, we will consider two more examples to complete our analysis of the
relationship between well-formedness and well-matchedness in Euler diagrams.
Diagram D1 in ﬁg. 4 contains a non-simple curve; the curve labelled C intersects
itself. As this curve does not intersect any other curves, the zone within the curve
is divided into two minimal regions. This diagram is well-matched at the zone,
curve and contour levels but not at the minimal region level. In diagram D2 in
ﬁg. 4, curves A and B touch but do not cross, breaking well-formedness property
4, as do curves C and D. The diagram represents the statement ‘A and B are
disjoint and C and D are disjoint’ and is well-matched at all levels. There is no
well-formed diagram without shading that represents this statement.
21

Fig. 4. Two non-well-formed Euler diagrams.
4
Conclusion
We have considered the notion of well-matchedness in Euler diagrams. In partic-
ular, we have considered well-matchedness in Euler diagrams that break some of
the well-formedness properties. From this analysis, we have identiﬁed four levels
of well-matchedness. Two of these concern curves: the curve and contour levels;
and two concern regions: the zone and minimal region levels. Putting these four
levels together we can state a general well-matchedness property.
Well-matchedness Principle 5: An Euler diagram is fully well-matched if
it well-matched at the zone, minimal region, curve and contour levels.
As indicated in the text above, some set relationships cannot be represented
as well-formed Euler diagrams without shading. The analysis in this paper shows
that it is possible to break some of the “well-formedness” conditions but still have
well-matched diagrams at some levels; this could be useful for visualizing these
set relationships, perhaps by balancing well-formedness with well-matchedness.
In well-formed Euler diagrams, each contour is a single simple closed curve and
each zone is a single minimal region. A well-formed Euler diagram without shad-
ing contains no extra zones. Hence, each well-formed Euler diagram without
shading is (fully) well-matched to meaning.
References
1. C. Gurr. Eﬀective diagrammatic communication: Syntactic, semantic and pragmatic
issues. Journal of Visual Languages and Computing, 10(4):317–342, 1999.
2. C. Peirce. Collected Papers, volume 4. Harvard University Press, 1933.
3. A. Shimojima. Inferential and expressive capacities of graphical representations:
Survey and some generalizations. In Proceedings of 3rd International Conference
on the Theory and Application of Diagrams, volume 2980 of LNAI, pages 18–21,
Cambridge, UK, 2004. Springer.
4. S.-J. Shin. The Iconic Logic of Peirce’s Graphs. A Bradford Book, MIT Press, 2002.
5. G. Stapleton, J. Howse, P. Rodgers, and L. Zhang.
Generating Euler diagrams
from existing layouts. In Layout of (Software) Engineering Diagrams, pages 2–16.
ECEASST, 2008.
22
View publication stats
View publication stats

