
Praise for What is Morphology?
“Aronoff and Fudeman have produced a clear and jargon-free  introduction 
to contemporary morphological theory and practice. The book  succeeds 
particularly in clarifying the empirical content, organizational principles 
and analytic techniques that distinguish morphology from other areas 
of linguistics.”
James P. Blevins, University of Cambridge
“This book offers abundant examples of morphological data and 
 illuminating guidance through the classic and fundamental problems 
of morphological analysis. Any student who has worked through this 
book will really know what morphologists do, and how they go about 
doing it . . . I consider What Is Morphology? an indispensable introduction 
to the subject.”
Martin Maiden, FBA, 
Professor of the Romance Languages Faculty of Linguistics
Praise for Previous Edition
“Aronoff and Fudeman have provided an extremely pleasant tour of 
the issues in modern morphological theory for beginning students. The 
rich collection of exercises will be a godsend to instructors and students 
alike, and the thread of discussion of a single language throughout the 
book is a brilliant stroke that other texts should emulate.” 
Stephen R. Anderson, Yale University
“This unusual book combines a basic start on morphology with an 
introduction to Kujamaat Jóola. It is a fine addition to teaching materials 
on morphology: a book for beginners to use with a teacher, yet one from 
which any linguist could learn. The authors intend students to develop 
‘a lasting taste for morphology’. I think many will.”
Greville Corbett, University of Surrey, Guildford
“Morphology has its own organizing principles, distinct from those of 
syntax, phonology, and the lexicon. Too many morphology textbooks 
obscure this fascinating fact, but Aronoff and Fudeman refreshingly 
make it the cornerstone of their exposition.”
Andrew Carstairs-McCarthy, University of Canterbury

Fundamentals of Linguistics
Each book in the Fundamentals of Linguistics series is a concise and 
critical introduction to the major issues in a subfield of linguistics, 
including morphology, semantics, and syntax. The books presuppose 
little knowledge of linguistics, are authored by well-known scholars, 
and are useful for beginning students, specialists in other subfields of 
linguistics, and interested non-linguists.
What is Morphology?
Mark Aronoff and Kirsten Fudeman
What is Meaning? Fundamentals of Formal Semantics
Paul H. Portner
The Fundamentals of Psycholinguistics
Eva M. Fernández and Helen Smith Cairns

What is 
Morphology?
Second Edition
Mark Aronoff
and Kirsten Fudeman
A John Wiley & Sons, Ltd., Publication

This second edition first published 2011
© 2011 Mark Aronoff and Kirsten Fudeman
Edition history: Blackwell Publishing Ltd (1e, 2005)
Blackwell Publishing was acquired by John Wiley & Sons in February 2007. Blackwell’s 
publishing program has been merged with Wiley’s global Scientific, Technical, and 
Medical business to form Wiley-Blackwell.
Registered Office
John Wiley & Sons Ltd, The Atrium, Southern Gate, Chichester, West Sussex, PO19 8SQ, 
United Kingdom
Editorial Offices
350 Main Street, Malden, MA 02148-5020, USA
9600 Garsington Road, Oxford, OX4 2DQ, UK
The Atrium, Southern Gate, Chichester, West Sussex, PO19 8SQ, UK
For details of our global editorial offices, for customer services, and for information about 
how to apply for permission to reuse the copyright material in this book please see our 
website at www.wiley.com/wiley-blackwell.
The right of Mark Aronoff and Kirsten Fudeman to be identified as the authors of this work 
has been asserted in accordance with the UK Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 1988.
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval 
system, or transmitted, in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopy-
ing, recording or otherwise, except as permitted by the UK Copyright, Designs and 
Patents Act 1988, without the prior permission of the publisher.
Wiley also publishes its books in a variety of electronic formats. Some content that appears 
in print may not be available in electronic books.
Designations used by companies to distinguish their products are often claimed as trade-
marks. All brand names and product names used in this book are trade names, service 
marks, trademarks or registered trademarks of their respective owners. The publisher is 
not associated with any product or vendor mentioned in this book. This publication is 
designed to provide accurate and authoritative information in regard to the subject matter 
covered. It is sold on the understanding that the publisher is not engaged in rendering 
professional services. If professional advice or other expert assistance is required, the 
services of a competent professional should be sought.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Aronoff, Mark.
 What is morphology? / Mark Aronoff and Kirsten Fudeman. – 2nd ed.
  p. cm. – (Fundamentals of linguistics)
 Includes bibliographical references and index.
 ISBN 978-1-4051-9467-9 (pbk. : alk. paper) 1. Grammar, Comparative and general–
Morphology. I. Fudeman, Kirsten Anne. II. Title.
 P241.A699 2010
 415’.9–dc22
2010016185
A catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library.
Set in 10/12.5pt Palatino by SPi Publisher Services, Pondicherry, India
Printed in [Country]
1 2011

Contents
Preface 
viii
Acknowledgments 
xiv
Abbreviations 
xv
Remarks on Transcription 
xviii
The International Phonetic Alphabet 
xx
1 Thinking about Morphology and Morphological Analysis 
1
1.1 What is Morphology? 
1
1.2 Morphemes 
2
1.3 Morphology in Action 
4
1.4 Background and Beliefs 
10
1.5 Introduction to Morphological Analysis 
12
1.6 Summary 
22
Introduction to Kujamaat Jóola 
23
Further Reading 
26
Exercises 
27
2 Words and Lexemes 
33
2.1 What is a Word? 
34
2.2 Empirical Tests for Wordhood 
38
2.3 Types of Words 
40
2.4 Inflection vs. Derivation 
47
2.5  Two Approaches to Morphology: 
 
Item-and-Arrangement, Item-and-Process 
49
2.6 The Lexicon 
54

vi  
CONTENTS
2.7 Summary 
57
Kujamaat Jóola Noun Classes 
58
Further Reading 
67
Exercises 
68
3 Morphology and Phonology 
73
3.1 Allomorphs 
74
3.2 Prosodic Morphology 
78
3.3 Primary and Secondary Affixes 
82
3.4 Linguistic Exaptation, Leveling, and Analogy 
86
3.5 Morphophonology and Secret Languages 
93
3.6 Summary 
95
Kujamaat Jóola Morphophonology 
96
Further Reading 
103
Exercises 
104
4 Derivation and the Lexicon 
109
4.1 The Saussurean Sign 
109
4.2 Motivation and Compositionality 
110
4.3 Derivation and Structure 
123
4.4 Summary 
130
Derivation in Kujamaat Jóola 
131
Further Reading 
132
Exercises 
133
5 Derivation and Semantics 
136
5.1 The Polysemy Problem 
137
5.2 The Semantics of Derived Lexemes 
139
5.3 Summary 
147
Derivation and Verbs in Kujamaat Jóola 
148
Further Reading 
151
Exercises 
152
6 Inflection 
157
6.1 What is Inflection? 
159
6.2 Inflection vs. Derivation 
168
6.3 Inventory of Inflectional Morphology Types 
171
6.4 Syncretism 
177

CONTENTS  vii
6.5 Typology 
178
6.6 Summary 
180
Agreement in Kujamaat Jóola 
182
Further Reading 
187
Exercises 
189
7 Morphology and Syntax 
196
7.1 Morphological vs. Syntactic Inflection 
197
7.2 Structural Constraints on Morphological Inflection 
198
7.3 Inflection and Universal Grammar 
201
7.4 Grammatical Function Change 
203
7.5 Summary 
209
Kujamaat Jóola Verb Morphology 
212
A Brief Survey of Kujamaat Jóola Syntax 
219
Further Reading 
222
Exercises 
223
8 Morphological Productivity and the Mental Lexicon 
226
8.1 What is Morphological Productivity? 
227
8.2  Productivity and Structure: Negative Prefixes 
 
in English 
230
8.3 Degrees of Productivity 
231
8.4 Salience and Productivity 
236
8.5 Testing Productivity 
238
8.6  The Mental Lexicon, Psycholinguistics,
 
and Neurolinguistics 
246
8.7 Conclusion 
252
Further Reading 
253
Exercises 
254
Glossary 
258
References 
273
Index 
280

Preface
This little book is meant to introduce fundamental aspects of morphology 
to students with only a minimal background in linguistics. It presup-
poses only the very basic knowledge of phonetics, phonology, syntax, 
and semantics that an introductory course in linguistics provides. If, 
having worked through this book, a student has some understanding 
of the range of basic issues in morphological description and analysis; 
can appreciate what a good morphological description looks like, how 
a good morphological analysis works and what a good theory of mor-
phology does; can actually do morphological analysis at an intermedi-
ate level; and most importantly understands that linguistic morphology 
can be rewarding; then the basic goal of the book will have been met.
The book departs from a trend common among current linguistics 
textbooks, even at the elementary level, which tend to be quite theo-
retical in orientation and even devoted to a single theory or set of related 
theories. We have chosen instead to concentrate on description, analy-
sis, and the fundamental issues that face all theories of morphology. At 
the most basic level, we want to provide students with a grasp of how 
linguists think about and analyze the internal structure of complex 
words in a representative range of real languages. What are the funda-
mental problems, regardless of one’s theoretical perspective? We there-
fore dwell for the most part on questions that have occupied 
morphologists since the beginnings of modern linguistics in the late 
nineteenth century, rather than on more detailed technical points of 
particular theories.
Of course, this means that we assume that there are general questions, 
but in morphology, at least, the early modern masters were grappling 
with many of the same questions that occupy us to this day. Descriptions 
and analyses that Baudouin de Courtenay wrote in the 1880s are not 

PREFACE  ix
merely understandable, but even interesting and enlightening to the 
modern morphologist. The same is true of the work of Edward Sapir 
and Roman Jakobson from the 1920s and 1930s. Yes, the terminology 
and theories are different, but the overall goals are much the same. That 
is not to say that no progress has been made, only that the basic issues 
about word- internal structure have remained stable for quite a long 
time.
One fundamental assumption that goes back to the beginnings of 
modern linguistics is that each language is a system where everything 
holds together (“la langue forme un système où tout se tient et a un 
plan d’une merveilleuse rigueur”: Antoine Meillet). More recent lin-
guists have stressed the importance of universal properties that all lan-
guages have in common over properties of individual languages, but 
not even the most radical universalists will deny the systematicity of 
individual human languages. It is therefore important, from the very 
beginning, that a student be presented, not just with fragmentary bits of 
data from many languages, as tends to happen with both morphology 
and phonology, but with something approaching the entire morpho-
logical system of a single language. To that end, we have divided each 
of the chapters of this book up into two parts. The first part is the con-
ventional sort of material that one would find in any textbook. Here our 
focus is often on standard American English, although we present data 
from many other languages, as well. The second part describes in some 
detail part of the morphology of Kujamaat Jóola, a language spoken in 
Senegal. For each chapter, we have tried to select an aspect of Kujamaat 
Jóola morphology that is close to the topic of the chapter. By the end of 
the book, the student should have a reasonable grasp of the entire 
system of Kujamaat Jóola morphology and thus understand how, at 
least for one language, the whole of the morphology holds together. Of 
course, no one language can be representative of all the world’s lan-
guages, and morphology is so varied that not even the most experi-
enced analyst is ever completely prepared for what a new language 
may bring. But students certainly will benefit from a reasonably com-
plete picture of how a single language works.
The Kujamaat Jóola material complements the material in the main por-
tion of the chapter, but it is not meant to mirror it exactly. Our inclusion of 
particular Kujamaat Jóola topics was dictated in part by the data that 
were available to us. Our primary sources were J. David Sapir’s 
A Grammar of Diola- Fogny, his 1967 revisions to the analysis of the 
Kujamaat Jóola verb (Thomas and Sapir 1967), and his unpublished 

 dictionary. In a number of cases, we have used the Kujamaat Jóola sec-
tion of each chapter to delve into topics not treated in the main portion, 
or treated only superficially. Thus chapters 2 and 7 contain detailed 
examinations of Kujamaat Jóola noun classes and verb morphology, 
respectively, and in chapter 3 we address its rich interactions between 
vowel harmony and morphology.
We chose Kujamaat Jóola for this book because its morphology, 
though complex and sometimes unusual, is highly regular, which 
makes it an excellent teaching vehicle. Some might question this choice, 
preferring a language with a higher degree of morphological fusion. 
Such a language might have led to theoretical issues, for example, that 
we do not explore in any detail here. However, we felt that in a book of 
this type, aimed at the beginning or intermediate- level morphologist, 
Kujamaat Jóola was an ideal choice.
One value of presenting beginning students with the largely com-
plete morphological description of a single language is that descriptive 
grammars (which more often than not concentrate on morphology and 
phonology) form a mainstay of linguistic research, not only at more 
advanced levels of study, but throughout a researcher’s career. The abil-
ity to work through a descriptive grammar is not innate, as many of us 
assume, but an acquired skill that takes practice. The Kujamaat Jóola 
sections taken together comprise an almost complete descriptive mor-
phology of that language, so that by the end of the book students will 
have had the experience of working through an elementary morpho-
logical description of one language and will be somewhat prepared to 
tackle more complete descriptions when the time comes.
This brings us to the topic of how we intend the Kujamaat Jóola sec-
tions of this book to be used. Because of their inherent complexity, it is 
crucial that the instructor not simply assign these sections as readings. 
Instead, each must be gone over carefully in class until the students 
have a good grasp of the material in it. Otherwise, students are not 
likely to extract full value from the Kujamaat Jóola sections. Although 
we feel that these sections will be both useful and rewarding, it is also 
the case that the main portions of the chapter are freestanding, and an 
instructor who prefers not to do some or all of the Kujamaat Jóola sec-
tions does not have to.
Each chapter closes with a set of problems that are cross- referenced 
with the text, and we expect that the solutions to these problems will be 
discussed in detail in class. Some simpler exercises are integrated into 
the text itself, with answers provided. We feel that some exercises, 
x  
PREFACE

 particularly open- ended questions, are especially well suited to class 
discussion, and so instructors may decide not to assign them in written 
form. Most chapters also contain Kujamaat Jóola exercises designed 
to get students to apply the data we have provided creatively and ana-
lytically. Chapter 1 contains two sample problem sets with answers 
(section 1.5.3). We suggest that instructors assign these separately from 
the rest of the chapter reading and that they ask students to write them 
out as they would a regular assignment, without reading the explana-
tion and analysis that go with them. Then students can check their work 
on their own. This should prepare them for doing some of the other 
analytical problems in the text.
Another feature of this book is a glossary. The terms in it appear in 
bold the first time they are used or explained in the text.
New to the second edition are suggestions for further reading at the 
end of each chapter. Some of these suggestions are classic treatments of 
morphological problems, and others represent more recent analyses. 
We have chosen a number of them because of the clear way in which 
they illustrate phenomena raised in the chapter. Finally, some of the 
suggested readings are short enough that instructors might want to 
assign them in an introduction to morphology class. Other, longer read-
ings could be assigned in part or used by students as they work on 
morphological problems on their own, whether independently or as a 
class assignment. While not listed in the further reading for any of the 
chapters, another extremely useful reference work for students is 
Bauer’s A Glossary of Morphology (2004).
Ideally, each class session will be divided into three parts, corre-
sponding to the division of the chapters: exposition of new pedagogi-
cal material; detailed discussion of Kujamaat Jóola; and discussion of 
solutions for the homework problems of the day (we assume that prob-
lems will be assigned daily and that students’ performance on them 
will comprise a good part of the basis of their grades in the course).
We close with a warning to both the instructor and the student: this 
book does not pretend to cover all of morphology, but rather only a 
number of general topics drawn from the breadth of the field that are of 
special interest to its authors. We have purposely not gone deeply into 
the aspects of morphology that interact most with other central areas of 
linguistics (phonology, semantics, and syntax), because that would 
require knowledge of these areas that beginning students might not 
have. Thus there is little discussion of clitics, for example. In this, the 
second edition, we have added more coverage of exciting new work 
PREFACE  xi

xii  
PREFACE
that uses experimental and computational methods, methods that are 
bound to be more central in the future, but we encourage instructors to 
supplement our text with current readings in this cutting- edge field. In 
closing, please permit us to remind the user that our ambitions in writ-
ing this volume are quite modest. We do not expect students who have 
worked through this book to have a full understanding, but to have 
developed a lasting taste for morphology that, with luck, will sustain 
them as it has us.
We owe a debt of thanks to the many people who helped us as we 
worked on this project. We are especially grateful to the various people 
who read drafts of the manuscript and made suggestions on how to 
make it better. These include Harald Baayen, Donald Lenfest, Lanko 
Marusic, and two anonymous Blackwell reviewers. We give special 
thanks to Phil Baldi and Barbara Bullock, who tested the original manu-
script in a morphology class at the Pennsylvania State University, and 
to five anonymous student reviewers. Their comments were particu-
larly thorough and helped us to improve this book on many different 
levels. Harald Baayen and some of our anonymous student reviewers 
also suggested a number of excellent exercises, which we incorporated 
into the current version. Peter Aronoff read the original manuscript 
over his winter break and still took a linguistics course the next semes-
ter. For their input and discussion, we thank Bill Ham, Alan Nussbaum, 
and Draga Zec. We are also grateful to Jane Kaplan, who shared her 
collection of language- related cartoon strips, advertisements, and other 
magazine and newspaper clippings with us.
J. David Sapir generously gave us permission to reproduce copious 
amounts of Kujamaat Jóola data from his published and unpublished 
work, and Eugene Nida allowed us to include exercises first published 
in his classic textbook on morphology. We are pleased that his exercises 
will be introduced to a new generation of students.
We are also grateful to the many people who wrote to us after using 
the first edition of this textbook. Many of them requested an answer 
key. The second edition indeed has one, available on the Wiley website 
at www.wiley.com/go/Aronoff. Jenny Mittelstaedt carefully prepared 
a list of questions and comments that enabled us to make a number of 
corrections and clarifications to the material presented here. Bill Ham 
also offered useful suggestions. Finally, reviews of the first edition in 
print and online by Barli Bram, Malcolm Finney, Margaret Sharp, John 
Stonham, Gregory Stump, and Jonathan White were enormously help-
ful to us in identifying elements of the book, small and large, that 

PREFACE  xiii
needed to be revised or updated. In addition to the addition of sugges-
tions for future reading and the expansion (and renaming) of chapter 8, 
“Morphological Productivity and the Mental Lexicon,” this new edi-
tion has been thoroughly revised for style and clarity; it has been 
updated to reflect current research; its glossary and reference list have 
been expanded; and some exercises have been revised or added.
This book owes a great deal to the guidance and particularly the 
patience of the editors at Wiley- Blackwell over the years: Philip 
Carpenter, Sarah Coleman, Danielle Descoteaux, Tami Kaplan, Julia 
Kirk, Beth Remmes, and Steve Smith. Thanks also to our project man-
ager, Fiona Sewell. Writing this book has been a joint effort, and we 
would like to emphasize that the order of the authors’ names given on 
the title page is alphabetical.
Mark Aronoff [mar.kε.r
e
.nɑf] 
and Kirsten Fudeman [kɪ
e
r.stɪn.fjud.mɪn]

Acknowledgments
The authors and publisher wish to acknowledge the copyright material 
used in this book:
p. xx: The International Phonetic Alphabet. Courtesy of the 
International Phonetic Association (Department of Theoretical and 
Applied Linguistics, School of English, Aristotle University of 
Thessaloniki, Thessaloniki 54124, GREECE).
p. 14: Digital DNA™ advertisement. Copyright of Motorola, used by 
permission.
p. 43: Wizard of Id. By permission of John L. Hart FLP, and Creators 
Syndicate, Inc. Creators Syndicate, 5777 W. Century Blvd., Suite 700, 
Los Angeles, CA 90045.
pp. 52–3: Dinka data from Torben Andersen, ‘Vowel quality alterna-
tion in Dinka verb inflection’, Phonology 10 (1993): 1–42. By permission 
of Cambridge University Press.
pp. 23–6, 58–67, 96–100, 131, 148–51, 182–7 and 219–20: Kujamaat 
Jóola data. From J. David Sapir, A Grammar of Diola- Fogny (Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press, 1965). By permission of Cambridge 
University Press.
p. 98–100: Big–thin distinction in Kujamaat Jóola. From J. David 
Sapir, ‘Big and thin: two Diola- Fogny meta- linguistic terms’, Language 
in Society (1975) 4: 1–15. By permission of Cambridge University Press.
The publisher apologizes for any errors or omissions in the above 
list and would be grateful if notified of any corrections that should be 
incorporated in future reprints or editions of this book.

Abbreviations
A, adj 
adjective
abs 
absolutive
acc 
accusative
act 
active
adv 
adverb
agr 
agreement
an 
animate
apass 
antipassive
app 
applicative
Ar. 
Arabic
asp 
aspect
C 
consonant
caus 
causative
cl 
noun class
ct 
combining with a circumstantial topic
d 
declarative
def 
definite
dem 
demonstrative
dim 
diminutive
dir 
directional
du 
dual
emph 
emphatic
erg 
ergative
excl 
exclusive
f 
feminine
foc 
focus
Fr. 
French
fut 
future

xvi  
ABBREVIATIONS
fv 
final vowel
gen 
genitive
hab 
habitual
imp 
imperfective
imper 
imperative
inan 
inanimate
inc 
dubitive- incompletive
incl 
inclusive
ind 
indicative
inf 
infinitive
irr 
irrealis
loc 
locative
m 
masculine
Mdk. 
Mandinka
n, N 
noun
ne 
noun emphasis
neg 
negative
nom 
nominative
nonfut 
non- future
nonhum 
non- human
NP 
noun phrase
nts 
combining with a non- topical subject
obj 
object
part 
participle
partic 
particulizer
pass 
passive
perf 
perfective
pl 
plural
Port. 
Portuguese
poss 
possessive
pres 
present
prog 
progressive
prtc 
particle
ps 
past subordinate
qm 
question marker
redup 
reduplicative
refl 
reflexive
rel 
relativizer
res 
resultative
sg 
singular

ABBREVIATIONS  xvii
stat 
stative
sub 
subject
subord 
subordinating morph
tns 
tense
tri 
trial
v, V 
verb; vowel; theme vowel
VP 
verb phrase

Remarks on Transcription
Modern linguistics has been struggling with the problem of phonetic 
and phonological transcription since its inception. The International 
Phonetics Association was founded in 1886 with the goal of providing 
for linguistics a worldwide standard system for naming sounds, the 
International Phonetic Alphabet (IPA), akin to that universal standard 
language used in chemistry and physics since the mid- nineteenth cen-
tury to name the elements and their compounds. But linguists have 
long resisted this standardization, especially for phonological tran-
scription, much to the dismay of students over the generations. There 
are many reasons for this resistance. The phonological transcription of 
a language is often driven by the desire to develop a practical orthogra-
phy, in which phonetic accuracy and consistency take a back seat to 
ease of use. Also, phonological theorists since the beginning of that field 
have enjoyed a love–hate relationship with phonetics, arguing over the 
true nature of the connection between a phoneme and its various pho-
netic realizations, leading them to downplay the importance of consist-
ency for phonological transcription across languages, since each 
language has its own unique phonological system. Leonard Bloomfield, 
for example, one of the great linguists of the twentieth century, used the 
symbol U for schwa (IPA 
e
) in his Menomini grammar, largely for typo-
graphical convenience.
In this book, we have made a compromise. Wherever possible or 
practicable, we have used the IPA, a copy of which is included facing 
p. 1. We have deviated from the IPA chiefly in our representation of the 
English approximant rhotic, choosing to use instead the symbol <r> for 
simplicity. (For more on the International Phonetics Association and the 
International Phonetic Alphabet, visit the website of the Association at 
http://www.langsci.ucl.ac.uk/ipa/index.html.) But many languages 

REMARKS ON TRANSCRIPTION  xix
have well- established orthographies or systems of phonological 
 transcription, which we have not disturbed. Most prominently, in 
 transcribing Kujamaat Jóola, we have adopted wholesale the system 
used by J. David Sapir in the grammar from which our data and descrip-
tion are adapted. We have endeavored, though, in all cases where 
 transcription departs from the IPA, to give the IPA equivalent for non- 
standard symbols.
This lack of consistency may be a little confusing for the student at 
first, but we hope that it will teach students to be careful, because the 
symbols used in phonological transcription may sometimes be used in 
arbitrary and even capricious ways, so that it is important to pay close 
attention to the phonetic description that accompanies the symbols at 
their introduction. Reading Bloomfield’s Menomini grammar without 
knowing that U stands for schwa can lead to serious misunderstanding.

The International Phonetic Alphabet
Revised to 2005
@
A ¡
i
u
Ô
e
e
Ô
Â
O
a œ
·
I Y
U
 Front                        Central                            Back
Close
Close-mid
Open-mid
Open
Where symbols appear in pairs, the one
to the right represents a rounded vowel.
Bilabial Labiodental
Dental
Alveolar Postalveolar Retroflex
Palatal
Velar
Uvular
Pharyngeal
Glottal
Plosive
p  b
t  d
‘ ƒ
c  J
k  g
q  G
?
Nasal
m
Õ
n
Ó
Æ
Œ
N
Trill
B
r
R
Tap or Flap
Q
—
Fricative
F  ¬
f
v
θ  D
s
z
S  Z
Û
C  Í
x  Â
X “ 
…  ø
h  »
Lateral
fricative
À Ã
Approximant
υ
–
—
j
M
Lateral
approximant
l
Ï
˘
L
Where symbols appear in pairs, the one to the right represents a voiced consonant. Shaded areas denote articulations judged impossible.
CONSONANTS (NON-PULMONIC)
SUPRASEGMENTALS
VOWELS
OTHER SYMBOLS
Clicks
Voiced implosives
Ejectives
\
Bilabial
‚
Bilabial
P
Examples:
|
Dental
‰
Dental/alveolar pP
Bilabial
!
(Post)alveolar
◊
Á
Palatal
tP
Dental/alveolar
›
Palatoalveolar
Velar
kP
Velar
¤
Alveolar lateral
«
Uvular
sP
Alveolar fricative
'
Primary stress
"
Secondary stress
"foUn@'tIS@n
 :
Long
e:
 ;
Half-long
e;
%
Extra-short
%e
|
Minor (foot) group
¤
Major (intonation) group
.
Syllable break
Wi.{kt
Ÿ
 Linking (absence of a break)
TONES AND WORD ACCENTS
LEVEL
CONTOUR
e≤or °
Extra
high
e
Õ
or
Rising
e2
¢ High
e
6
Falling
e$
£ Mid
e
High
rising
e1
§ Low
e
Low
rising
e±
•
Extra
low
e
Rising-
falling
-
Downstep
ﬂ
Global rise
_
Upstep
≠
Global fall
CONSONANTS (PULMONIC)
 DIACRITICS     Diacritics may be placed above a symbol with a descender, e.g. Œ*
8
Voiceless
n8
d8
3 Breathy voiced 3b
3a
9
Dental
9t
9d
6
6
6
Voiced
s
t
` Creaky voiced
`b
`a
π
Apical
πt
πd
h
Aspirated
th dh
´
Linguolabial
´
t
´
d
0
Laminal
0t
0d
)
More rounded
O)
w
Labialized
tw dw
~
Nasalized
~e
(
Less rounded
O(
j
Palatalized
tj
dj
 n
Nasal release
dn
¥
Advanced
u¥
Â
Velarized
tÂ dÂ
l
Lateral release
dl
4
Retracted
e4
ø
Pharyngealized tø dø
ß
No audible release dß
#
Centralized
e#
∞Velarized or pharyngealized ‡
¯
Mid-centralized e¯
> Raised
>
>
e
(W = voiced alveolar fricative)
"
Syllabic
< Lowered
<e
(<¬ = voiced bilabial approximant)
7
Non-syllabic
n
'7e
©
Advanced Tongue Root ©e
Rhoticity
@‘a‘
® Retracted Tongue Root
®e
˜ Voiceless labial-velar fricative
√ ⁄ Alveolo-palatal fricatives
w Voiced labial-velar approximant
W Voiced alveolar lateral flap
Ë
Voiced labial-palatal approximant ÿ
SimultaneousSand x
H Voiceless epiglottal fricative
ﬁ
Voiced epiglottal fricative
Affricates and double articulations
can be represented by two symbols
joined by a tie bar if necessary.
æ
Epiglottal plosive
kp  ts
(
(
˙
y
È
ı
Ì
o
E
˚
{
∆
ˆ
Â

1  Thinking about Morphology 
and Morphological Analysis
1.1 What is Morphology? 
1
1.2 Morphemes 
2
1.3 Morphology in Action 
4
1.3.1 Novel words and word play 
4
1.3.2 Abstract morphological facts 
6
1.4 Background and Beliefs 
10
1.5 Introduction to Morphological Analysis 
12
1.5.1 Two basic approaches: analysis and synthesis 
12
1.5.2 Analytic principles 
13
1.5.3 Sample problems with solutions 
17
1.6 Summary 
22
Introduction to Kujamaat Jóola 
23
Further Reading 
26
mor·phol·o·gy: a study of the structure or form of something
Merriam-Webster Unabridged
1.1 What is Morphology?
 
■
The term morphology is generally attributed to the German poet,   nov-
elist, playwright, and philosopher Johann Wolfgang von Goethe (1749–
1832), who coined it early in the nineteenth century in a biological 
context. Its etymology is Greek: morph- means ‘shape, form’, and mor-
phology is the study of form or forms. In biology morphology refers to the 
What is Morphology?, 2nd edition, by Mark Aronoff and Kirsten Fudeman © 2011 
Mark Aronoff and Kirsten Fudeman.

2  
MORPHOLOGY AND MORPHOLOGICAL ANALYSIS
study of the form and structure of organisms, and in geology it refers to 
the study of the configuration and evolution of land forms. In linguis-
tics morphology refers to the mental system involved in word formation 
or to the branch of linguistics that deals with words, their internal struc-
ture, and how they are formed.
1.2 Morphemes
 
■
A major way in which morphologists investigate words, their internal 
structure, and how they are formed is through the identification 
and study of morphemes, often defined as the smallest linguistic pieces 
with a grammatical function. This definition is not meant to include all 
morphemes, but it is the usual one and a good starting point. A mor-
pheme may consist of a word, such as hand, or a meaningful piece of a 
word, such as the -ed of looked, that cannot be divided into smaller 
meaningful parts. Another way in which morphemes have been defined 
is as a pairing between sound and meaning. We have purposely chosen 
not to use this definition. Some morphemes have no concrete form or 
no continuous form, as we will see, and some do not have meanings in 
the conventional sense of the term.
You may also run across the term morph. The term ‘morph’ is some-
times used to refer specifically to the phonological realization of a mor-
pheme. For example, the English past tense morpheme that we spell -ed 
has various morphs. It is realized as [t] after the voiceless [p] of jump (cf. 
jumped), as [d] after the voiced [l] of repel (cf. repelled), and as [
e
d] after 
the voiceless [t] of root or the voiced [d] of wed (cf. rooted and wedded). 
We can also call these morphs allomorphs or variants. The appearance 
of one morph over another in this case is determined by voicing and the 
place of articulation of the final consonant of the verb stem.
Now consider the word reconsideration. We can break it into three 
morphemes: re-, consider, and -ation. Consider is called the stem. A stem 
is a base unit to which another morphological piece is attached. The 
stem can be simple, made up of only one part, or complex, itself 
made up of more than one piece. Here it is best to consider consider a 
simple stem. Although it consists historically of more than one part, 
most present-day speakers would treat it as an unanalyzable form. We 
could also call consider the root. A root is like a stem in constituting the 
core of the word to which other pieces attach, but the term refers only 
to morphologically simple units. For example, disagree is the stem of 

MORPHOLOGY AND MORPHOLOGICAL ANALYSIS  3
disagreement, because it is the base to which -ment attaches, but agree is 
the root. Taking disagree now, agree is both the stem to which dis- attaches 
and the root of the entire word.
Returning now to reconsideration, re- and -ation are both affixes, which 
means that they are attached to the stem. Affixes like re- that go before 
the stem are prefixes, and those like -ation that go after are suffixes.
Some readers may wonder why we have not broken -ation down fur-
ther into two pieces, -ate and -ion, which function independently else-
where. In this particular word they do not do so (cf. *reconsiderate), and 
hence we treat -ation as a single morpheme.
It is important to take seriously the idea that the grammatical func-
tion of a morpheme, which may include its meaning, must be constant. 
Consider the English words lovely and quickly. They both end with the 
suffix -ly. But is it the same in both words? No – when we add -ly to the 
adjective quick, we create an adverb that is often synonymous with 
“rapidly”: The students quickly assimilated the concept. When we add -ly 
to the noun love, we create an adjective: What a lovely day! What on the 
surface appears to be a single morpheme turns out to be two. One 
attaches to adjectives and creates adverbs; the other attaches to nouns 
and creates adjectives.
There are two other sorts of affixes that you will encounter, infixes 
and circumfixes. Both are classic challenges to the notion of morpheme. 
Infixes are segmental strings that do not attach to the front or back of a 
word, but rather somewhere in the middle. The Tagalog infix -um- is illus-
trated below (McCarthy and Prince 1993: 101–5; French 1988). It creates an 
agent from a verb stem and appears before the first vowel of the word:
(1) Root 
-um-
 
/sulat/ 
/s-um-ulat/ 
‘one who wrote’
 
/gradwet/ /gr-um-adwet/ ‘one who graduated’
The existence of infixes challenges the traditional notion of a morpheme 
as an indivisible unit. We want to call the stem sulat ‘write’ a morpheme, 
and yet the infix -um- breaks it up. This seems to be a property of -um- 
rather than sulat. Our definition of morphemes as the smallest linguis-
tic pieces with a grammatical function survives this challenge.
Circumfixes are affixes that come in two parts. One attaches to the 
front of the word and the other to the back. Circumfixes are controver-
sial because it is possible to analyze them as consisting of a prefix and a 
suffix that apply to a stem simultaneously. One example is Indonesian 

4  
MORPHOLOGY AND MORPHOLOGICAL ANALYSIS
ke … -an. It applies to the stem besar ‘big’ to form a noun ke-besar-an 
meaning ‘bigness, greatness’ (MacDonald 1976: 63; Beard 1998: 62). 
Like infixes, the existence of circumfixes challenges the traditional 
notion of morpheme (but not the definition used here) because they 
involve discontinuity.
We will not go any more deeply here into classical problems with 
morphemes, but the reader who would like to know more might con-
sult Anderson (1992: 51–6).
1.3 Morphology in Action
 
■
We would like to explore the idea of morphology more deeply by exam-
ining some data. These are examples of morphology in action – mor-
phological facts of everyday life.
1.3.1 Novel words and word play
 
■
If you had been walking down the street in Ithaca, New York, several 
years ago, you might have looked up and seen a sign for the music store 
“Rebop,” a name that owes its inspiration to the jazz term rebop.1 Rebop 
was originally one of the many nonsense expressions that jazz musi-
cians threw into their vocal improvisations, starting in the early 1920s. 
In the 1940s, rebop became interchangeable with bebop, a term of similar 
origin, as the term for the rhythmically and harmonically eccentric 
music played by young black musicians. By the 1950s the name of this 
musical style was quite firmly established as simply bop.2 Today, the 
original use of rebop is known only to cognoscenti, so that most people 
who pass by the store will be likely to interpret the word as composed 
of the word bop and the prefix re-, which means approximately ‘again’. 
This prefix can attach only to verbs, so we must interpret bop as a verb 
here. Rebop must therefore mean ‘bop again’, if it means anything at all. 
And this music store, appropriately, specialized in selling used CDs. 
There’s something going on here with English morphology. Rebop is 
not a perfectly well-formed English word. The verb bop means some-
thing like ‘bounce’, but the prefix re- normally attaches only to a verb 
whose meaning denotes an accomplishment. The verb rebop therefore 
makes little sense. But names of stores and products are designed to 
catch the consumer’s attention, not necessarily to make sense, and this 

MORPHOLOGY AND MORPHOLOGICAL ANALYSIS  5
one does so by exploiting people’s knowledge of English in a fairly 
complex way and breaking the rules so as to attract attention, as verbal 
art often does.
Consider now the following phrases, taken from a Toni Braxton song: 
Unbreak my heart, uncry these tears.
We have never seen anyone unbreak something, and you certainly 
can’t uncry tears, but every English speaker can understand these 
words. We all know what it means to unbreak somebody’s heart or to 
wish that one’s heart were unbroken. If we asked somebody, “unbreak 
my heart,” we would be asking them to reverse the process of having 
our heart broken. We can visualize “uncry these tears,” too – think of a 
film running backwards. We can understand these words because we 
know the meaning of un-, which, when attached to a verb, reverses or 
undoes an action. The fact that these particular actions, breaking a heart 
and crying tears, cannot be reversed only adds poignancy to the song.
All human beings have this capacity for generating and understand-
ing novel words. Sometimes someone creates an entirely new word, as 
J. R. R. Tolkien did when he coined the now-familiar term hobbit. But 
more often than not, we build new words from pre-existing pieces, as 
with unbreak and uncry, or as with hobbitish and hobbit-like, built by 
adding suffixes to the stem hobbit. We could easily go on to create more 
words on these patterns.
Novel words are all around us. Jerry Seinfeld has talked about the 
shushers, the shushees, and the unshushables in a movie theater. Morley 
Safer was dubbed quirkologist – expert on quirky people – on a special 
episode of 60 Minutes. For those who hate buffets, the TV character 
Frasier Crane used the term smorgsaphobia. The longest novel morpho-
logically complex word we have been able to find on our own in the 
daily press is deinstitutionalization, from the New York Times.
These are everyday morphological facts, the kind you run across 
every day as a literate speaker of English. What all these words – rebop, 
unbreak, uncry, hobbit, hobbitish, hobbit-like, quirkologist, smorgsaphobia, and 
deinstitutionalization – have in common is their newness. When we saw 
or heard them for the first time, they leapt out at us. It is interesting that 
novel words do this to us, because novel sentences generally do not. 
When you hear a new sentence, you generally don’t realize that it is the 
first time that you’ve heard it, and you don’t say to yourself, “What a 
remarkable sentence,” unless it happens to be one from Proust or Joyce 
or some other verbal artist. Many people have made the observation 
before that morphology differs from syntax in this way. [Exercises 1–3]

6  
MORPHOLOGY AND MORPHOLOGICAL ANALYSIS
Morphological challenge
As you work through this book, keep an eye – or an ear – out for novel or 
otherwise striking words, on television, in magazines and newspapers, in books, 
and in conversations. Keep a running list of them, then e-mail your list to the 
authors: mark.aronoff@stonybrook.edu or fudeman@pitt.edu.
1.3.2 Abstract morphological facts
 
■
Let’s move to some more abstract morphological facts. These are the 
kind of morphological facts that you don’t notice every day. They are so 
embedded in your language that you don’t even think about them. 
They are more common than the ones we have just looked at, but deeper 
and more complex.
If you speak English and are concerned about your health, you 
might say:
(2) I eat one melon a day.
Let’s imagine that we are even more concerned about our health than 
you are. We don’t just eat one melon a day, rather:
(3) We eat two melons a day.
It is a fact about standard American or British English that we cannot 
say:
(4) *We eat two melon a day.
However, if we were speaking Indonesian or Japanese, we would say 
the equivalent of two melon (three melon, four melon, etc.) because these 
languages don’t use morphological plurals in sentences like this.
(5) Indonesian:
 
Saiga makan dua buah semangka (se) tiaphari
 
I 
eat 
two fruit melon 
every day
 
‘I eat two melons every day.’

MORPHOLOGY AND MORPHOLOGICAL ANALYSIS  7
 
Japanese:
 
mainichi futatsu-no meron-o tabemasu
 
every.day two- gen melon-obj eat.imp
 
‘I eat two melons every day.’
The morphological grammar of English tells us that we have to put an 
-s on melon whenever we are talking about more than one. This fact of 
English is so transparent that native speakers don’t notice it. If we 
happen to be speakers of a language without obligatory plural mark-
ing, however, we will notice and may have trouble with it.
We have now observed something about English morphology. If a 
word is plural, it takes the suffix -s. Living creatures don’t eat only 
melons, however:
(6)  The evil giant at the top of the beanstalk eats two melons, three 
fish, and four children a day.
Everyone agrees that fish is plural, even though there is no plural marker. 
Children is also plural, but it has a very unusual plural suffix, -ren, plus 
an internal change: we say [ʧɪld-] instead of [ʧajld]. We do not always 
mark plural words with an s-like thing; there are other ways in which 
we can mark plurals. Native speakers of English know this, and they 
do not need to think about it before making a plural. [Exercise 4]
Consider the following:
(7)  Today they claim that they will fix the clock tower by Friday, but 
yesterday they claimed that it would take at least a month.
In this example, we use two different forms of the verb claim. One 
is present tense, and the other is past. Again, this is not true for all lan-
guages. If we were speaking Vietnamese, for example, we wouldn’t 
make any distinction between claim and claimed – we wouldn’t mark 
the verb at all. If we were speaking Chinese, we would not distinguish 
between claim and claimed in a sentence like this, because the adverb 
zuótian ‘yesterday’ is sufficient to indicate past tense:
(8) jı-ntia-n tamen 
shuo- 
ta-men 
xı-ngqı-
 
today they 
say 
they 
Friday
 
wuˇ 
ké yıˇ xiu-  haˇo 
 zho-nglóu, 
keˇ shì zuótia-n
 
can 
fix 
 well 
 clock.tower but 
yesterday

8  
MORPHOLOGY AND MORPHOLOGICAL ANALYSIS
 
ta-men  què 
     shuo-     zhì shaˇo 
xu- yào  yíge  yuè
 
they 
 however   say     at least 
need 
 a   month
 
 ‘Today they claim that they will fix the clock tower by Friday, but 
yesterday they claimed that it would take at least a month.’
If we were to leave out zuótia-n ‘yesterday’, we would need to use the 
particle le after the verb to show that the action took place in the past. 
Whether or not a speaker must indicate past tense in Chinese depends 
on context.
Notice what happens in English when we use some other verbs 
besides claim:
(9) Today they say … but yesterday they said …
 
 
tell us 
told us
 
 
know 
knew
That these verbs and others do not add -t, -d, or -
e
d to make their past 
tense is an elementary fact about English morphology. We’ll talk more 
about verbs like these later in the chapter.
The next observation about English morphology has to do with pro-
nouns. Here is an exchange between an American mother, who has just 
watched a billiard ball break through a window, and her 6-year-old boy, 
who is standing inside:
(10) Who just threw a pool ball through the basement window?
 
Not me.
In this context, a 6-year-old wouldn’t respond Not I, though if he were 
to answer with a sentence, the response would be I didn’t, not Me didn’t. 
Without formally knowing anything at all about subjects and objects, 
English-speaking 6-year-olds (and children even younger) master the 
pronoun system of the spoken language. [Exercise 5]
Given the following sentence, how many children does Joan have?
(11)  All of Joan’s children are brilliant and play musical instruments 
surpassingly well.
From this statement you cannot know how many children Joan has, but 
one thing is certain: she has more than two. If Joan had only two chil-
dren, we would normally say both of Joan’s children, because it is a fact 
about English that there is a morphological distinction among universal 

MORPHOLOGY AND MORPHOLOGICAL ANALYSIS  9
quantifiers between the one designating all of two (both) or all of more 
than two (all) of a particular type of entity. In some other languages, 
marking for dual is even more pervasive. This is the case in Ancient 
Greek, as shown by the following examples:
(12) ho 
stratiô:tes 
lambánei tous 
híppous
 
the.nom.sg soldier.nom.sg take.3sg 
the.acc.pl horses.acc.pl
 
‘The soldier takes the horses.’
 
to: 
 
stratió:ta 
lambáneton tous 
híppous
 
the.nom.du soldier.nom.du take.du 
the.acc.pl horses.acc.pl
 
‘The two soldiers take the horses.’
 
hoi 
stratiô:tai lambánousi 
tous 
híppous
 
the.m.pl soldier.pl take.3pl 
the.acc.pl horses.acc.pl
 
‘The soldiers (three or more) take the horses.’
While English does not have special affixes to mark the dual, it keeps 
track of the distinction through words like all and both. There are even 
languages in the world like Manam (Papua New Guinea: Gregersen 
1976) and Larike (Central Maluku, Indonesia: Laidig and Laidig 1990) 
that distinguish not only singular, dual, and plural, but also trial. The 
use of singular, dual, trial, and plural second person subject prefixes in 
Larike is illustrated below:
(13) Ai- 
rala 
iter- 
lawa 
peʔa- o 
?
 
2sg.sub- chop.down 1pl.incl.sub- garden 
finish- qm
 
‘Did you (sg.) finish clearing our garden?’
 
Kalu au- 
ʔanu, irua musti 
iruai- 
ʔanu siʔu.
 
if 
1sg.sub- eat 
 2du certainly 2du.sub- eat also
 
‘If I eat, certainly you both will eat too.’
 
Kalu iridu- 
ta- 
ʔeu, au- 
na- wela.
 
if 
2tri.sub-neg- go 1sg.sub-irr- go.home
 
‘If you three don’t want to go, I’m going home.’
 
Memang iri- 
hise tapi imi- 
ta- ʔariʔi-
 
truly 
3pl.nonhum- exist but 2pl.sub-neg- see-
 
ri.
 
3pl.nonhum.obj
 
‘They really do exist, but you (plural) didn’t see them.’

10  
MORPHOLOGY AND MORPHOLOGICAL ANALYSIS
1.4 Background and Beliefs
 
■
This book is a general introduction to morphology and morphological 
analysis from the point of view of a morphologist. The purpose is not to 
advocate any particular theory or to give the truth (whatever that is), 
but rather to get you, the reader, to where you can look for it by yourself. 
Still, it is inevitable that some of our remarks will be colored by our own 
beliefs and background. We would therefore like to present some of our 
foundational beliefs about linguistics and linguistic methodology.
First, we believe that languages differ from one another. You might 
be thinking, “Of course they do!” But we mean this in a very special 
way. Some linguists are always looking for ways that languages are sim-
ilar, and at times, we do that, too. But we believe that if you focus only 
on the similarities between languages, you miss out on all of the exciting 
ways in which they differ. What’s more, you may find parallels and 
similarities where none really exists. We try to approach linguistic anal-
ysis with as open a mind as possible, and to do this, it is first necessary 
to appreciate the uniqueness and diversity of the world’s languages.
Our second foundational belief is that languages, which we can write 
with a small l, are different from Language, with a capital L. There are 
thousands of individual languages in the world. But we may also speak 
of language in general to mean the general phenomenon of Language 
that encompasses all individual languages. This Language is related to 
Noam Chomsky’s notion of Universal Grammar, which posits that all 
languages are alike in basic ways. Each of these two uses of the word 
language is equally important to linguistics. Individual languages have 
features that are not characteristic of Language in general. For example, 
one feature of English is that its regular way of forming plural nouns is 
to add /z/. We would never claim, however, that this is universally true, 
or that it is a property of Language. To tie this belief in with the preced-
ing one, we strongly believe that morphological theory and morphologi-
cal analysis must be grounded in morphological description. If we want 
to appreciate what morphology really is, it’s best to have some idea of 
what the morphology of individual languages is like. At the same time, 
we must have a reasonably well-thought-out general theory of the mor-
phology of Language, so that we can compare our descriptions of indi-
vidual languages within a wider context. In short, linguists need to pay 
equal attention to both small-l language and capital-L Language.

MORPHOLOGY AND MORPHOLOGICAL ANALYSIS  11
Our next belief is that morphology is a distinct component of lan-
guages or grammars. If you are not already familiar with some of the 
controversy surrounding morphology, this needs an explanation. The 
fact that some languages, such as Vietnamese, do not have morphologi-
cally complex words has led some people to conclude that morphology 
should not be a separate branch of linguistics. The reasoning is that lin-
guistics is generally understood to deal with properties of Language. If 
there are languages that don’t have morphology, then morphology is 
not a property of all languages and of Language, and morphological 
phenomena should be treated in syntax or phonology. We disagree. It 
has been shown elsewhere (e.g., Aronoff 1994) that some aspects of mor-
phology cannot be attributed to syntax or phonology, or anything else.
One piece of evidence that morphology is separate from syntax, pho-
nology, and other branches of linguistics is that words in some lan-
guages are grouped into largely arbitrary classes that determine their 
forms in different environments. Latin nouns fall into five distinct 
classes, called declensions, which have little or nothing to do with 
syntax or phonology and cannot be explained by either. They are purely 
morphological in their significance. The uniquely morphological nature 
of these classes is truly brought home by the fact that Latin nouns also 
fall into syntactic agreement classes (usually called genders), and the 
two systems cross-cut one another: two nouns may belong to the same 
gender but to different declensions and vice versa. We’ll examine cases 
like these in later chapters, but their mere existence in many languages 
shows that morphology must be given some independent status in lin-
guistics. Morphology, probably more than any other component of lan-
guage, interacts with all the rest, but it still has properties of its own.
We also believe that morphologies are systems. This is a very old 
observation. Because of it, it is impossible to talk about isolated facts in 
a language – everything holds together. This belief together with the 
second one, above, are the reasons why we’ll be looking carefully at the 
morphology of a particular language, Kujamaat Jóola, throughout this 
book. Considering the morphology of Kujamaat Jóola in close to its 
entirety will give us a valuable perspective that we would never gain if 
we only studied isolated facts from several languages.
So far, we have given you our beliefs about the nature of language 
and morphology. We also have some that pertain to methodology. The 
first is that we should take an attitude of skeptical realism. Albert 
Einstein said that a physicist must be both a realist and a nominalist, a 
realist in the sense that you must believe what you ultimately find will 

12  
MORPHOLOGY AND MORPHOLOGICAL ANALYSIS
be real, but a nominalist in the sense that you must never believe you’ve 
found what you’re looking for. Martin Joos made a similar statement 
about linguistics. On the one hand, you should always believe that 
what you are looking for is God’s truth, but on the other, you should 
consider all that you have found so far as hocus-pocus. We believe 
strongly in the value of having a linguistic theory, but we believe equally 
strongly that you should never trust it completely.
Our other methodological belief can be summed up as a motto: any-
thing goes. This methodological belief is associated with the Against 
Method of Paul Feyerabend, a twentieth-century philosopher who felt 
that if we insisted on a single rule of scientific methodology, one that 
would not inhibit progress, it would be “Anything goes.” We take a no-
holds-barred approach to linguistics. We’ll use any tool or method that 
will tell us how language works. This attitude stems in part from our 
skepticism about particular theories. People who are wedded to indi-
vidual theories tend to believe in using tools that are rooted in that 
theory. Our tools are not theory-based in that way. If a tool does the job, 
we are happy to use it, whether it is a traditional linguistic tool (e.g., 
native speaker consultants, dictionaries, written grammars), an experi-
mental tool (e.g., imaging technology), or a statistical tool.
1.5 Introduction to Morphological Analysis
 
■
1.5.1 Two basic approaches: analysis and synthesis
 
■
There are two complementary approaches to morphology, analytic and 
synthetic. The linguist needs both.
The analytic approach has to do with breaking words down, and it is 
usually associated with American structuralist linguistics of the first half 
of the twentieth century. There is a good reason for this. These linguists 
were often dealing with languages that they had never encountered 
before, and there were no written grammars of these languages to guide 
them. It was therefore crucial that they should have very explicit methods 
of linguistic analysis. No matter what language we’re looking at, we need 
analytic methods that are independent of the structures we are examin-
ing; preconceived notions might interfere with an objective, scientific 
analysis. This is especially true when dealing with unfamiliar languages.
The second approach to morphology is more often associated with 
theory than with methodology, perhaps unfairly. This is the synthetic 

MORPHOLOGY AND MORPHOLOGICAL ANALYSIS  13
approach. It basically says, “I have a lot of little pieces here. How 
do I put them together?” This question presupposes that you already 
know what the pieces are. Analysis must in some way precede 
 synthesis.
Say that you’ve broken a clock and taken it apart, and now you have 
to put all the little pieces back together. There’s a catch: you don’t know 
how. You could always go by trial and error. But the most efficient way 
would be to have some theory of how the clock goes together. Synthesis 
really involves theory construction.
From a morphological point of view, the synthetic question you ask 
is, “How does a speaker of a language produce a grammatically com-
plex word when needed?” This question already assumes that you 
know what kinds of elementary pieces you are making the complex 
word out of. We think that one of the real problems of a morphological 
theory is that we don’t always have a good idea of what the pieces are. 
Syntacticians can supply us with some tools: case and number, for 
example, are ancient syntactic notions that we can use in our morphol-
ogy. But the primary way in which morphologists determine the pieces 
they are dealing with is by examination of language data. They pull 
words apart carefully, taking great care to note where each piece came 
from to begin with.
We have described analysis and synthesis in terms of the morpholo-
gist studying language, but the two notions are equally applicable to 
speakers of a language. Speakers apply morphological analysis when 
they read or hear a complex word they have never encountered before. 
In order to understand it, they pull it apart and ask themselves whether 
they recognize any of the pieces. Speakers use synthesis whenever they 
create new forms from pre-existing pieces.
1.5.2 Analytic principles
 
■
Before we try out some problems, we would like to give you some basic 
analytic principles used in morphology. They are taken from Eugene 
Nida’s (1949; revised edition 1965) textbook Morphology.3
The first principle is given in (14):
(14) Principle 1
 
 Forms with the same meaning and the same sound shape in all 
their occurrences are instances of the same morpheme.

14  
MORPHOLOGY AND MORPHOLOGICAL ANALYSIS
Step one in morphological analysis is to look for elements that have the 
same form and the same meaning. This is the basic type-token problem. 
Let’s say that we have a bunch of coins. Each is a token, a form. If we 
look at them carefully, we see that three of them look very much the 
same (they are all nickels), and two of them are identical (they both say 
1997). These two coins are tokens of exactly the same type: they have 
Read the caption in the following Motorola ad carefully. It contains an example 
of morphology in action – a striking morphological fact. Comment on it, relating 
it to the discussion of analytic and synthetic approaches to word formation.
Who’d of thought that an electronic chip inside your car could help you 
avoid curbs, other cars, and best of all, Earl in repair.

MORPHOLOGY AND MORPHOLOGICAL ANALYSIS  15
identical forms and identical values. We may further say that the three 
coins are all tokens of a larger type that includes all nickels, not just 
those minted in 1997. But five pennies, though they have the same value 
as a nickel, do not together comprise the same type as the nickel, because, 
although identical in value to the nickel, they are different in form.
Divide the following forms into morphemes. (For answers, turn the page.)
a. password
b. sprayable
c. childhoods
d. autobiography
e. co-educational
To apply this distinction between types and tokens to the morphological 
analysis of words, consider the Spanish words buenísimo ‘very good’ 
(< bueno ‘good’), riquísimo ‘very delicious’ (< rico ‘delicious’), and utilísimo 
‘very useful’ (< útil ‘useful’). In each case, the suffix -ísimo contributes 
the same superlative meaning, and it has the same shape. We logically 
conclude that the suffix is the same for all three words. Note that we 
presented three words, all with the same suffix. It is not enough to look 
at one form when attempting to break it up into its smaller parts. One 
thing that makes a morpheme a morpheme is that it recurs, and thus 
speakers are able to identify it and give it a meaning. [Exercises 6–8]
This isn’t the whole story, as Principle 2 tells us:
(15) Principle 2
 
 Forms with the same meaning but different sound shapes may 
be instances of the same morpheme if their distributions do not 
overlap.
In Kujamaat Jóola, the stem /baj-/ has two possible shapes, [baj-] and 
[b
e
j-], but their distributions don’t overlap. [b
e
j-] occurs in the presence 
of a morpheme with an underlyingly tense vowel, but [baj-] does not. 
This non-overlapping distribution allows us to conclude that the two 
forms are instances of the same morpheme. When two or more instances 
of a given morpheme occur with different shapes, we call them allo-
morphs. Allomorphs were introduced above in section 1.2.

16  
MORPHOLOGY AND MORPHOLOGICAL ANALYSIS
The regular plural marker in English has several allomorphs – voice less 
alveolar fricative /s/, voiced alveolar fricative /z/, schwa plus voiced alve-
olar fricative /z/, syllabic alveolar nasal /n̩/, and Ø – as shown in (16):
(16) seat-/s/
 
shade-/z/
 
hedg-/
e
z/
 
ox-/n̩/
 
fish-Ø
As in the previous example, the distributions of these forms do not 
overlap, and they all have the same meaning. We can infer that they are 
instances of the same morpheme.
(17) Principle 3
 
Not all morphemes are segmental.
Normally, when we think of morphemes, we think of forms that can be 
pronounced in some sense, e.g., chicken, the, un-, -ize. But some mor-
phemes can’t be pronounced on their own. They are dependent on 
other morphemes for their realization. In English, for example, vowel 
alternations may serve to differentiate basic and past forms of the verb. 
We refer to these alternations as ablaut (as in 18):
(18) run 
ran
 
speak 
spoke
 
eat 
ate
Answers to morpheme-breakup exercise:
a. pass/word
b. spray/able
c. child/hood/s
d. auto/bio/graph/y
e. co-/educ/at/ion/al
We know that there is a past tense marker distinguishing the words in 
the second column from those in the first. But what is it? It is not the 
/æ/ of ran or the /o/ of spoke but rather the difference between these 
vowels and the vowels of the basic verb, which is not segmental at all. 
We must look at both the present and past tense forms of these verbs, 

MORPHOLOGY AND MORPHOLOGICAL ANALYSIS  17
because it is the contrast between them that is important. Another type 
of non-segmental morpheme in English is shown in (19):
(19) breathN 
breatheV
 
clothN 
clotheV
 
houseN 
houseV
In each pair, the noun ends in a voiceless fricative ([θ, s]), while the verb 
ends in a voiced fricative ([ð, z]). Assuming that the noun is basic, we 
say that the morpheme that marks the verbs consists of the phonologi-
cal feature [+voice]. [Exercise 9]
Although Principle 3 says that we can apply the term morpheme to 
the non-segmental alternations seen in (18) and (19), doing so is awk-
ward. Pairs like run∼ran or breath∼breathe are more easily explained as 
processes than as concatenations of morphemes. In the next chapter we 
will further address this issue. In section 1.2 we briefly mentioned clas-
sical problems with morphemes in the context of infixation and circum-
fixation. The existence of non-segmental alternations such as those in 
(18) and (19) is another classical problem.
The contrast between forms was crucial in (18) and (19). The notion 
of contrast can be further extended, leading to Principle 4:
(20) Principle 4
 
 A morpheme may have zero as one of its allomorphs provided 
it has a non-zero allomorph.
Fish generally displays no special marking in the plural: one fish, ten 
fish-Ø. We can say that it has a zero plural, and that this zero plural is an 
allomorph of the usual plural [z], because other words in the language, 
like frogs, have non-zero plurals. This is an analytic procedure, not a theo-
retical point. We cannot posit a zero unless it contrasts with some non-zero 
variant. In Japanese, where sakana means both ‘fish (sg)’ and ‘fish (pl)’, we 
cannot posit a zero plural (*sakana-Ø) because nowhere in the language 
does -ØPL contrast with a non-zero allomorph. [Exercises 10–11]
1.5.3 Sample problems with solutions
 
■
Now that you have been introduced to some principles of morphologi-
cal analysis, let us examine a data set. This one comes from the Veracruz 
dialect of Aztec, spoken in Mexico, and is taken from Nida (1965: 11):

18  
MORPHOLOGY AND MORPHOLOGICAL ANALYSIS
(21) Aztec
a. ikalwewe 
‘his big house’ 
i. 
petatci·n 
‘little mat’
b. ikalsosol 
‘his old house’ 
j. 
ikalmeh 
‘his houses’
c. ikalci·n 
‘his little house’ 
k. komitmeh 
‘cooking-pots’
d. komitwewe ‘big cooking-pot’ 
l. 
petatmeh 
‘mats’
e. komitsosol 
‘old cooking-pot’ 
m. ko·yameci·n 
‘little pig’
f. komitci·n 
‘little cooking-pot’ n. ko·yamewewe ‘big male pig’
g. petatwewe 
‘big mat’ 
o. ko·yameilama ‘big female pig’
h. petatsosol 
‘old mat’ 
p. ko·yamemeh 
‘pigs’
Our task is to list all the morphemes and to give the meaning of each. 
Before reading the following discussion, try this out on your own. Then, 
if you run into trouble or want to check your answers, read on.
We begin by looking for recurring pieces that have a consistent 
 meaning or function. The English glosses are useful for this. Consider 
(21a–c, j). All have something to do with ‘house’, and more specifically, 
‘his house(s)’. Examining the forms carefully we find that they all con-
tain the piece ikal- but have nothing else in common. We deduce from 
this that ikal- means ‘his house’. We include a hyphen after ikal- because, 
since it never appears on its own, we cannot know if Aztec requires that 
it be suffixed. The data set does not contain any other examples with an 
English gloss of ‘his’ or another possessive pronoun; nor does it contain 
any examples meaning ‘house’ without the possessor ‘his’. This means 
we cannot break ikal- down further.
Form (21a) ikalwewe ‘his big house’ contains the additional piece 
-wewe. Looking over the rest of the data, we find that -wewe also occurs 
in (21g) petatwewe ‘big mat’, (21d) komitwewe ‘big cooking-pot’, and (21n) 
ko·yamewewe ‘big male pig’. All of these also contain the meaning ‘big’. 
We conclude that -wewe means ‘big’. Again we use the hyphen because 
in this particular data set, -wewe always appears attached to the stem.
One form contains the meaning ‘big’ but not the morpheme -wewe. 
This is (21o) ko·yameilama ‘big female pig’. We recognize the piece ko·yame- 
‘pig’, which also appears in (21m–n, p). From the minimal data we have, 
we can only deduce that like -wewe, -ilama means ‘big’, but that it attaches 
only to a certain class of noun. Both (21o) ko·yameilama ‘big female pig’ 
and (21n) ko·yamewewe ‘big male pig’ appear to have the same stem, but 
one refers to a female animal and the other to a male animal.
On the basis of (21b–c) ikalsosol ‘his old house’ and ikalci·n ‘his little 
house’ we isolate the pieces -sosol ‘old’ and -ci·n ‘little’. This analysis is 
supported by other words in the data set, such as (21e–f) komitsosol ‘old 

MORPHOLOGY AND MORPHOLOGICAL ANALYSIS  19
cooking-pot’ and komitci·n ‘little cooking-pot’, which contain the same 
pieces. We can also isolate komit- ‘cooking-pot’.
In all, we can isolate the following nine morphemes:
(22) ikal- 
‘his house’
 
komit- 
‘cooking-pot’
 
ko·yame- 
‘pig’
 
petat- 
‘mat’
 
-ci·n 
‘little’
 
-sosol 
‘old’
 
-ilama 
‘big’ (occurs with stem meaning ‘female pig’)
 
-wewe 
‘big’ (occurs with stems meaning ‘his house’, ‘cooking- 
 
 
pot’, ‘mat’, ‘male pig’)
 
-meh 
plural marker
This exercise was fairly simple in the sense that there were no allomorphs, 
and the morphology was entirely morphemic – we found no evidence of 
non-segmental phenomena. However, there were a few difficulties. First, 
we did not have enough data to break down ikal- ‘his house’ further, and 
yet, since the English gloss clearly has two parts, you may have been 
tempted to break it into two parts, too. A second difficulty was the pres-
ence of both -ilama and -wewe ‘big’. We did not have enough data to 
describe the difference between them. Morphologists occasionally have 
to accept uncertainty when working with published data sets and writ-
ten grammars. Sometimes there are gaps in what is presented. 
Morphologists doing field research have the advantage of native speaker 
consultants whom they can ask. But in order to ask the right questions, 
morphologists and other linguists must alternate data collection with 
data analysis and not wait to get back home to analyze their findings.
A final observation is that this data set was not presented in the 
IPA. For example, you probably were not familiar with Nida’s con-
vention for marking long vowels: a raised dot, as in -ci·n ‘little’. This 
fact in itself should not have posed any problems. It is sometimes 
possible to isolate morphemes, particularly when there are no allo-
morphs or phonological interactions between them, without fully 
understanding the transcription system. That was the case here, 
although the presence of non-standard transcription symbols may 
have made the problem set seem more daunting.
As explained in the prefatory remarks to this book, we chose to retain 
non-standard transcription systems despite the difficulties they present 

20  
MORPHOLOGY AND MORPHOLOGICAL ANALYSIS
because as a linguist you will be faced with them time and time again. 
We hope the experience you gain in this book will help you deal with 
such systems in your own research.
Our next sample problem set comes from French. It addresses differ-
ent issues than the Aztec data discussed above. The French adjectives in 
the first column are masculine, and those in the second are feminine. 
Your task is to determine how masculine and feminine adjectives are 
differentiated and to outline a possible analysis. You may ignore 
changes in vowel quality.
(23)  
Masculine 
Feminine
 
a. 
gros [ɡʁo] 
grosse [ɡʁos] 
‘fat’
 
b. 
mauvais [movε] 
mauvaise [movεz] 
‘bad’
 
c. 
heureux [øʁø] 
heureuse [øʁøz] 
‘happy’
 
d. 
petit [p
e
ti] 
petite [p
e
tit] 
‘small’
 
e. 
grand [gʁɑ̃] 
grande [gʁɑ̃d] 
‘big’
 
f. 
froid [fʁwa] 
froide [fʁwad] 
‘cold’
 
g. 
soûl [su] 
soûle [sul] 
‘drunk’
 
h. 
bon [bõ] 
bonne [bɔ̃n] 
‘good’
 
i. 
frais [fʁε] 
fraîche [fʁεʃ] 
‘fresh’
 
j. 
long [lõ] 
longue [lõɡ] 
‘long’
 
k. 
premier [pʁœmje] première [pʁœmjεʁ] ‘first’
 
l. 
entier [ɑ̃tje] 
entière [ɑ̃tjεʁ] 
‘entire’
 
m. gentil [ʒɑ̃ti] 
gentille [ʒɑ̃tij] 
‘kind’
 
n. 
net [nεt] 
nette [nεt] 
‘clean’
As with the Aztec set, you should limit yourself to the data provided, 
although some of you may know French.
One way to begin is to see whether there is a single morpheme, which 
may or may not have allomorphs, that signals the difference between 
masculine and feminine. There is not. Masculine and feminine adjectives 
are differentiated by an alternation between Ø and [s] in (23a), Ø and [z] 
in (23b–c), Ø and [t] in (23d), Ø and [d] in (23e–f), Ø and [l] in (23g), Ø 
and [n] in (23h), Ø and [ʃ] in (23i), Ø and [ɡ] in (23j), Ø and [ʁ] in (23k–l), 
and Ø and [j] in (23m). The masculine and feminine forms of [nεt] ‘clean’ 
are identical. (It is important to focus on pronunciation and not spelling. 
Spelling conventions are not part of the mental grammar.) We cannot 
consider the many final sounds of the feminine forms to be allomorphs 
of one another. Phonetically, they are extremely varied. Their distribu-
tion overlaps, too. For example, we find both [ʃ] and [z] after [ε], in (23i) 
fraîche ‘fresh’ (f) and (23b) mauvaise ‘bad’ (f), respectively. There is no 

MORPHOLOGY AND MORPHOLOGICAL ANALYSIS  21
apparent reason why (23n) net, nette ‘clean’ should behave differently 
from the other words in the list in having only one form [nεt].
You may be thinking that the spelling can account for the final sound 
of the feminine forms. However, spelling often reflects the history of a 
word and not its synchronic analysis. Therefore, we cannot base our 
analysis on it.
So far it appears as if the final sound of the feminine forms of the adjec-
tives is arbitrary. And yet, it cannot be wholly arbitrary, or speakers would 
not know which form the feminine takes. We have been treating this 
problem until now as if the feminine form is derived from the masculine 
one. A second possibility is that the opposite is true. We can form a 
hypothesis: perhaps the masculine form results when we remove the 
final sound of the feminine. This accounts for (23a–m). (Recall that we 
asked you to ignore changes in vowel quantity.) But this hypothesis fails 
when we apply it to (23n) net, nette ‘clean’. Both are pronounced [nεt]. 
Our current hypothesis, that we arrive at the masculine form by subtract-
ing the last segment of the feminine form, cannot account for this fact.
At this point in the problem, you need to make a new hypothesis. 
There is room for more than one. One is that in French, adjectives have 
more than one stem, and both the masculine and feminine stems need to 
be memorized. This would mean that for (23b) mauvais, mauvaise, speak-
ers memorize that the first is pronounced [movε] and the second [movεz]. 
A second reasonable hypothesis is that we were on the right track earlier, 
and that speakers arrive at the masculine form by dropping the final seg-
ment of the feminine form. The feminine form is the only one that needs 
to be memorized, then, since the masculine can be derived from it by a 
regularly applying rule. Under this hypothesis, (23n) net, nette ‘clean’, 
both pronounced [nεt], is an exception that speakers must memorize. 
Many would consider it an advantage that, on the basis of our data set, 
this hypothesis requires speakers to memorize fewer forms.
We may not have arrived at a single, neat solution to the French data, 
but we have analyzed them and presented the hypotheses that they 
suggest carefully. Presentation is important whenever you undertake to 
solve a linguistics problem. We close this section with a few tips for 
writing one up. First, when you include examples from a data set in the 
text of your analysis, set them off by underlining them or using italics, 
as we have done. Second, whenever you present a foreign-language 
form, provide its gloss (an explanation of its meaning, a definition). The 
most standard linguistic practice is to put the gloss in single quotation 
marks, like this: ‘definition’. Finally, be sure you know what the prob-
lem is asking. If the problem asks for a list of morphemes, that is all you 

22  
MORPHOLOGY AND MORPHOLOGICAL ANALYSIS
need to provide (but don’t forget to give their glosses, as well). If the 
problem asks for your analysis, present it carefully, as we have done 
above. In order to make your answer more compelling, you may need 
to explore analyses that do not work, as well. This is what we did in 
examining the French data. [Exercises 12–14]
1.6 Summary
 
■
We have given a whirlwind introduction to the field of morphology and 
to some of the phenomena that morphologists study. We introduced a 
key notion, that of the morpheme, but acknowledged some problems 
with its traditional formulation. We presented some basic beliefs of ours 
that underlie this and other chapters of the book, as well as four princi-
ples that will help the reader undertake morphological analysis. Finally, 
we led the reader through two sample problems in order to illustrate the 
steps a morphologist must take when analyzing data, as well as possible 
stumbling blocks that he or she might encounter.
We next turn to an introduction to Kujamaat Jóola, the language we 
have chosen to examine and analyze throughout this volume.

MORPHOLOGY AND MORPHOLOGICAL ANALYSIS  23
Introduction to Kujamaat Jóola
 
■
The Kujamaat Jóola people, who call themselves Kujamaat and their lan-
guage Kujamutay, live in the Basse-Casamance region of Senegal, West 
Africa. Jóola is a cluster of dialects, of which Kujamaat, sometimes called 
Foñy, and Kasa are the most important.4 The total number of speakers in 
1998 was about 186,000 (Grimes 2002). Kujamaat Jóola belongs to the 
Atlantic (sometimes called West Atlantic) language family, of which the 
best-known languages are Wolof, the national language of Senegal, and 
Fula. Looked at in terms of linguistic history, the Atlantic languages form 
a branch descending from the most widespread language family in 
Africa, Niger-Congo, which is also one of the largest language families in 
the world. Kujamaat Jóola has a number of features – most particularly 
its intricate system of noun classes and agreement – which are remark-
ably similar to those of the distantly related but much larger and better-
known subfamily of Niger-Congo, the Bantu languages.
The most pervasive and characteristic morphological features of 
Kujamaat Jóola are (i) a simple and elegant vowel harmony system, 
(ii) an extensive noun class or gender system, (iii) rich agreement 
 morphology, and (iv) agglutinative verbal morphology. Over the course 
of this book we will be exploring these and other topics in Kujamaat 
Jóola morphology as they relate to issues raised in individual chapters.
We have chosen Kujamaat Jóola for this book because its morphol-
ogy, though complex and sometimes unusual, is highly regular, which 
makes it an excellent teaching vehicle. The morphology is also spread 
out across nouns, verbs, and adjectives. The inflection includes some of 
the most common types that one is likely to find: gender and agree-
ment, and verbal tense and aspect. J. David Sapir has written a superb 
grammar from which most of the Kujamaat Jóola data in this book are 
drawn and which provides a wonderfully lucid description of the lan-
guage and especially of the morphology. The grammar has stood the 
test of time: it speaks to us as clearly today as it did when it was written 
over forty years ago.
Of all the distinct aspects of language, morphology is the most 
deeply entwined with the others. There is no way to talk about mor-
phology without also talking about phonology, syntax, semantics, 
and pragmatics. Pho n ology is especially important, for there is no 
way to get at the morpho logy of a language without first stripping 
away the effects of  phonology on the forms of words. For that reason 

24  
MORPHOLOGY AND MORPHOLOGICAL ANALYSIS
our introduction to Kujamaat Jóola  morphology must be preceded 
by a brief introduction to its phonology.
The phonemic inventory of Kujamaat Jóola is given in (1) and (2).5 
Kujamaat Jóola has a set of voiceless and voiced stops in three places of 
articulation – bilabial, alveolar, and velar – and nasal consonants in 
four – bilabial, alveolar, palatal, and velar. It has voiceless and voiced 
postalveolar affricates /ʧ/ and /ʤ/, transcribed here as <c> and <j> 
(following Sapir 1965), voiceless labiodental and alveolar fricatives /f/ 
and /s/, two liquids /l/ and /r/, and labiovelar and palatal glides 
/w/ and /y/. The voiceless glottal fricative /h/ rarely occurs.
(1) Consonants
 
labial alveolar palatal velar glottal
 
p 
t 
 
k
 
b 
d 
 
ɡ
 
m 
n 
ɲ 
ŋ
 
 
c
 
 
j
 
f 
s 
 
 
h
 
 
l
 
 
r
 
(w) 
 
y 
(w)
Vowels occur in tense–lax pairs and may be short or long; what Sapir 
represents as schwa is realized as “a tense unrounded high-mid central 
vowel” under stress (Sapir 1965: 6), and is the tense counterpart to /a/. 
Tense high vowels are underscored (i and u). The lax counterparts of 
tense /e/ and /o/ are /ε/ and /
c
/ respectively:
(2) Vowels (all may be either long or short)
 
i   i 
u u
 
e 
e
 
o
 
 
ε 
c
 
 
a
The organization of this vowel chart follows standard linguistic prac-
tice. It reflects the position of the tongue during articulation and reso-
nance, with the high vowels [i, i, u, u] at the top of the triangle, and the 
low vowel [a] at the bottom. Vowels on the left are articulated toward 
the front of the vocal tract, and those on the right farther back.
Kujamaat Jóola words showing all of the vowels are listed in (3):

MORPHOLOGY AND MORPHOLOGICAL ANALYSIS  25
(3) b
e
sik
e
n 
‘mortar’
 
k
e
si:t 
‘feather’
 
ɡis 
‘tear’
 
i:s 
‘show’
 
ebe 
‘cow’
 
-fe:ɡir 
‘three’
 
εfεl 
‘to untie’
 
εfε:l 
‘to annoy’
 
ek
e
l 
‘type of antelope’
 
ek
e
:l 
‘to be partially ripe’
 
εfal 
‘to continue’
 
εɡ
c
l 
‘stick’
 
εɡ
c
:l 
‘corner’
 
fuko 
‘head’
 
fuko:k 
‘wall’
 
εkuk 
‘to take big handfuls’
 
εku:ku 
‘mouse’
 
k
e
kukul 
‘to cultivate in dry ground’
 
k
e
ku:ku:l ‘type of tree’
Nasal–nasal and nasal–consonant clusters are very common. Of these, 
only /mb/ and /nd/ occur freely, including at the beginning of a word; 
/nn/, /mf/ (transcribed here as <nf>, following Sapir), and /ns/ clus-
ters occur only word-internally. The remaining clusters can occur in 
either internal or final position in a word. In all cases the two conso-
nants have the same place of articulation. Both /lt/ and /rt/ occur in 
word-internal position, as well, though very rarely. There are no other 
consonant clusters. Some examples are given in (4):6
(4) k
e
ɡu:mp 
‘ashes’
 
mba 
‘or’
 
nimammaŋ ‘I want’
 
-buntεn 
‘cause to lie’
 
nicεɲcεŋ 
‘I asked’
 
-maɲj 
‘know’
 
aŋkaŋk 
‘hard’
 
emuŋɡuno 
‘hyena’
 
fanfaŋ 
‘lots’
 
ndaw 
‘a man’s name’
 
-saltε 
‘be dirty’
 
-
e
rti 
‘negative suffix’

26  
MORPHOLOGY AND MORPHOLOGICAL ANALYSIS
Kujamaat Jóola syllables are generally of the shape C(onsonant) V(owel), 
although V, VC, CVC, and CVNC (where N represents any nasal) syl-
lables occur as well. Vowels may be long or short. Stress is stem-initial.
The most salient feature of Kujamaat Jóola phonology is its pervasive 
vowel harmony. Vowel harmony is the agreement among vowels in a 
word with respect to a given feature, such as height, rounding, or back-
ness. We will explore Kujamaat Jóola vowel harmony in depth in chap-
ter 3. Until then, keep an eye out for how certain morphemes influence 
the shape of Kujamaat Jóola stems, and, more often, vice versa.
Further Reading
 
■
Anderson, Stephen R. 1992. A-morphous Morphology. Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press.
Bauer, Laurie. 2003. Introducing Linguistic Morphology, second edition. 
Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press.
Katamba, Francis, ed. 2004. Morphology: Concepts in Linguistics. 6 vols. London: 
Routledge.
Mel’cˇuk, Igor A. 2006. Aspects of the Theory of Morphology. Berlin: Mouton.
Nida, Eugene. 1965. Morphology: The Descriptive Analysis of Words, second edi-
tion. Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press.
Spencer, Andrew and Arnold M. Zwicky, eds. 1998. The Handbook of Morphology. 
Oxford: Blackwell.

MORPHOLOGY AND MORPHOLOGICAL ANALYSIS  27
Exercises
1. Create five new words in English or your native language, if differ-
ent. Give their definitions if they are not obvious.
2. Many product names are novel English forms coined by marketers. 
Look at the following list of product names and make hypotheses 
about how people came up with their names. Possibilities include, 
but are not limited to, the following: (i) combination of elements 
already occurring in English; (ii) combination of Latin or Greek 
morphemes – even without knowing Latin or Greek, you might be 
able to recognize a few; (iii) new use for a term already existing in 
English; (iv) use of a proper name. This is meant to be a fun exer-
cise, ideally one to be discussed in class. It should not be graded.
a. pHisoderm 
A pH-balanced cleanser
b. Nescafé 
Coffee made by Nestlé
c. Ajax 
A strong household cleanser
d. Eucerin 
Moisturizing lotion
e. Friskies 
Cat food
f. 
Tums 
Antacid tablets
g. Trident 
Chewing gum
h. Life savers 
Hard candy shaped like a donut
i. 
Spam 
Canned meat similar to ham
3. New technology creates a need for new words. You may not con-
sider the TV remote control new, but relative to other examples of 
modern technology, it is. Besides “remote control,” it is called by 
many other names. What do you call it? In class, compile a list of 
words that your classmates and instructor use to refer to it. 
Comment on the morphological form of the various words.
4. Choose a language other than English. It may be one you know or 
have studied, or one that you would like to learn more about by 
using library resources. How are nouns marked for plural in that 
language? Are they marked at all? Make a comprehensive list of 
plural types in the language, with examples.
5. We choose the example “Not me” and have it coming out of the 
mouth of a child (someone unlikely to have been exposed to much 
prescriptive grammar) on purpose. While some English speakers 

28  
MORPHOLOGY AND MORPHOLOGICAL ANALYSIS
may consider “Not I” to be more correct, many would agree that 
“Not me” sounds more natural. Can you think of other instances 
where “I” is considered to be more correct, at least by traditional-
ists, but where “me” sounds more natural to you? What does this 
have to do with morphology, in your opinion?
6. Etymologically, the following words contain more than one morpheme. 
Break each of them up into its constituent morphemes, then list at 
least one other word that contains each morpheme. When identifying 
morphemes, it is always useful to identify other forms that contain 
them, and this exercise is to encourage you to begin doing so.
Example:
morphemic 
morph- 
amorphous, polymorphic, metamorphic
 
 
-em- 
phoneme, hypoglycemia, academy
 
 
-ic 
tonic, sonic, academic
a. monologue 
e. decline
b. predispose 
f. television
c. receive 
g. circumscribe
d. phonology 
h. bibliophile
 7. Rewrite the following forms and then separate them into mor-
phemes using a slash or a hyphen. If a form consists of only one 
morpheme, call it monomorphemic.
a. Danny 
e. monkey
b. theorists 
f. 
partnerships
c. multifaceted 
g. hysterical
d. weather 
h. children
 8. Should -ful be analyzed as one morpheme or two different mor-
phemes (ful1 and ful2) in the following examples? Explain your 
answer and bring in further examples if necessary.
a. wrathful
b. handful
 9. English noun and verb pairs
A. The following words can be used as nouns or verbs, but their 
pronunciation changes accordingly. How? State your answer 
as a generalization that contrasts the pronunciation of all the 
nouns with that of the verbs.
a. import 
g. transfer
b. contrast 
h. convict
c. insult 
i. 
project

MORPHOLOGY AND MORPHOLOGICAL ANALYSIS  29
d. insert 
j. 
rebel
e. protest 
k. conflict
f. 
convert 
 
B. For many English speakers, the verb protest has two different 
pronunciations. One fits the pattern that you identified in 
part A as being characteristic of nouns; the other fits the pat-
tern you identified as being characteristic of verbs. If you are 
familiar with the two pronunciations of the verb protest, first 
identify the two possibilities, then come up with a hypothesis 
that might explain their coexistence.
10. English spit has two past tense forms: spit or spat. The second is 
an example of ablaut, mentioned in the discussion of Principle 3. 
What about the first? Should we analyze it as a single morpheme, 
or as two morphemes, spit and Ø?
11. Organize the following set of German nouns into singular–plural 
pairs. Then determine the allomorphs of the plural ending. Ignore 
changes in the stem vowel.
Väter 
‘fathers’ 
Auge 
‘eye’
Kinder 
‘children’ 
Adler 
‘eagle’
Pferd 
‘horse’ 
Kind 
‘child’
Männer ‘men’ 
Augen ‘eyes’
Vater 
‘father’ 
Kuh 
‘cow’
Mann 
‘man’ 
Frauen ‘women’
Adler 
‘eagles’ 
Auto 
‘car’
Kühe 
‘cows’ 
Autos 
‘cars’
Pferde 
‘horses’ 
Frau 
‘woman’
12. Etymologically, the following forms contain more than one mor-
pheme. In your opinion, does your mental grammar treat them as 
such, or does it treat them as monomorphemic forms? Deal with 
each form separately, because your answer may not be the same 
for all. Explain.
a. holocaust
b. parade
c. presence
13. Zoque, Mexico (Nida 1965: 12)
List all morphemes and give the meaning of each.
p
e
n  
‘man’
p
e
ntaʔm 
‘men’

30  
MORPHOLOGY AND MORPHOLOGICAL ANALYSIS
p
e
nk
e
si 
‘on a man’
p
e
nkotoya 
‘for a man’
p
e
nhiʔŋ 
‘with a man’
p
e
nk
e
sitaʔm 
‘on men’
p
e
nk
e
siʃeh 
‘as on a man’
p
e
nʃeh 
‘manlike’
p
e
nʃehtaʔm 
‘like men’
nanah 
‘mother’
nanahtaʔm 
‘mothers’
nanahkotoya 
‘for a mother’
ʔunehiʔŋ 
‘with a child’
ʔunehiʔŋtaʔm 
‘with children’
naka 
‘skin, leather’
nakapit 
‘by means of leather’
nakapitʃeh 
‘as if by leather’
yomo 
‘woman’
yomotaʔm 
‘women’
yomohiʔŋ 
‘with a woman’
yomotih 
‘just a woman’
yomoʔune 
‘girl’
kahʃi 
‘hen’
kahʃiʔune 
‘chick’
libru 
‘book’
libruʔune 
‘booklet’
wetu 
‘fox’
wetuʔune 
‘fox whelp’
teʔ p
e
n 
‘the man’
maŋu teʔ p
e
n 
‘the man went’
maŋpa teʔ p
e
n 
‘the man goes’
maŋkeʔtpa teʔ yomo 
‘the woman also goes’
minpa teʔ ʔune 
‘the child comes’
minu teʔ ʔune 
‘the child came’
maŋkeʔtu 
‘he also went’
maŋutih 
‘he went (and did nothing more)’
14. Congo Swahili, Elisabethville dialect (Nida 1965: 12–13)
A. Identify as many morphemes as possible and give the mean-
ing of each.
B. Imagine that you have the opportunity to do fieldwork on 
Congo Swahili. List a few sentences that you would elicit 

MORPHOLOGY AND MORPHOLOGICAL ANALYSIS  31
from consultants that might enable you to confirm or com-
plete your morphological analysis.
Supplementary information:
a. The future -taka- and the negative -ta- are not related.
b. The final -a may be treated as a morpheme. Its meaning is 
not indicated in this set.
c. The passive morpheme may be described as having two forms, 
-iw- and -w-. Its form depends on what precedes it.
ninasema 
‘I speak’
ninaona 
‘I see’
wunasema 
‘you (sg) speak’
anasema 
‘he speaks’
tunasema 
‘we speak’
munasema 
‘you (pl) speak’
wanasema 
‘they speak’
ninapika 
‘I hit’
ninanupika 
‘I hit you (pl)’
ninakupika 
‘I hit you (sg)’
ninawapika 
‘I hit them’
ananipika 
‘he hits me’
ananupika 
‘he hits you (pl)’
nilipika 
‘I have hit’
nilimupika 
‘I have hit him’
nitakanupika 
‘I will hit you (pl)’
nitakapikiwa 
‘I will be hit’
ninamupika 
‘I hit him’
wutakapikiwa 
‘you (sg) will be hit’
ninapikiwa 
‘I am hit’
nilipikiwa 
‘I have been hit’
nilipikaka 
‘I hit (remote time)’
wunapikizwa 
‘you (sg) cause being hit’
wunanipikizwa 
‘you (sg) cause me to be hit’
wutakanipikizwa ‘you (sg) will cause me to be hit’
sitanupika 
‘I do not hit you (pl)’
hatanupika 
‘he does not hit you (pl)’
hatutanupika 
‘we do not hit you (pl)’
hawatatupika 
‘they do not hit us’

32  
MORPHOLOGY AND MORPHOLOGICAL ANALYSIS
NOTES
1 Conveniently, it happened to blend the first names of the two owners, Renee 
and Bob.
2 We thank Krin Gabbard for the etymology of rebop.
3 Nida has six principles; we present four here.
4 The Kujamaat Jóola data presented here comes almost exclusively from 
J. David Sapir’s 1965 grammar, A Grammar of Diola-Fogny. We also used 
Sapir (1970, 1975), Thomas and Sapir (1967), Hopkins (1990), and Gero and 
Levinsohn (1993).
5 We choose to present the Kujamaat Jóola data in the transcription systems 
used by Sapir because being able to deal with different transcription  systems 
is an essential skill for all linguists. Elsewhere in this book, we generally use 
IPA transcription unless otherwise indicated.
6 In subsequent chapters nasal–consonant clusters will be written <nj>, <nc>, 
<ng>, and <nk>, respectively, following Sapir. We do not represent assimila-
tion in place of the nasal to the following consonant (e.g., we write /nk/ for 
phonetic [ŋk]).

2 Words and Lexemes
2.1 What is a Word? 
34
2.1.1 Defining words syntactically 
35
2.1.2 Defining words phonologically 
36
2.1.3 Grammatical words 
37
2.2 Empirical Tests for Wordhood 
38
2.2.1 Fixed order of elements 
38
2.2.2 Non-separability and integrity 
38
2.2.3 Stress 
39
2.3 Types of Words 
40
2.3.1 Phonological words 
40
2.3.2 Content words vs. function words 
41
2.3.3 Lexemes 
43
2.4 Inflection vs. Derivation 
47
2.5 Two Approaches to Morphology: 
Item-and-Arrangement, Item-and-Process 
49
2.5.1  Affixation in the item-and-process and 
item-and-arrangement models 
50
2.5.2  Non-affixal phenomena and the 
item-and-process model 
51
2.5.2.1 English noun–verb pairs 
51
2.5.2.2 Agar Dinka 
52
2.6 The Lexicon 
54
2.7 Summary 
57
Kujamaat Jóola Noun Classes 
58
Further Reading 
67
What is Morphology?, 2nd edition, by Mark Aronoff and Kirsten Fudeman © 2011 
Mark Aronoff and Kirsten Fudeman.

34  
WORDS AND LEXEMES
A single word can have multiple uses and interpretations. Occasionally 
a headline-writer underestimates this fact and ends up writing amus-
ing headlines when no humor was intended. Here are some oldies but 
goodies that have circulated widely by e-mail:
BRITISH LEFT WAFFLES ON FALKLAND ISLANDS
MINERS REFUSE TO WORK AFTER DEATH
EYE DROPS OFF SHELF
LOCAL HIGH SCHOOL DROPOUTS CUT IN HALF
REAGAN WINS ON BUDGET, BUT MORE LIES AHEAD
SQUAD HELPS DOG BITE VICTIM
JUVENILE COURT TO TRY SHOOTING DEFENDANT
KIDS MAKE NUTRITIOUS SNACKS
The British didn’t really abandon breakfast pastries on the Falkland Islands, 
and zombie miners aren’t acting up. While waffles tends to be interpreted 
more easily as a noun, it’s used in the first headline as a verb. Left, con-
versely, is used as a noun in the headline, but is more often used in speech 
as a verb. Death in the second headline can be understood as ‘the act or fact 
of dying’ or as ‘the death of a specific person’ – the intended meaning. The 
last headline is horrifying until we realize that make is ambiguous in mean-
ing here between two of its thirty-odd meanings: ‘prepare’ and ‘be useful 
as’. The first sense is the one intended in the headline.
Words like noun, verb, adjective, and adverb refer to what linguists 
call lexical category. They are labels that tell us how a word is generally 
used in a sentence. A noun can be the subject of a sentence, but not so a 
verb. In many cases, identical-sounding or identical-looking words can 
belong to multiple categories, and that is what is going on in some of 
these sentences.
Lexical category is basic information about a word, but there is much 
more that, as linguists, we want to say. For example, waffles ‘batter-cake 
baked in a waffle iron’ and waffles ‘vacillates’ sound the same but are 
not semantically related. Death ‘act or fact of dying’ and death ‘the dying 
of a specific individual’ are. In this chapter we address the question of 
what a word is in detail. It will pave the way for the more advanced 
discussions of later chapters.
2.1 What is a Word?
 
■
There are various ways to define a word, but no definition is entirely 
satisfactory. Scholars have acknowledged this fact over and over again. 

WORDS AND LEXEMES  35
Here we present some of the reasons why what seems like a relatively 
simple task (we all think we know what a word is, right?) proves to be 
so problematic.
2.1.1 Defining words syntactically
 
■
One way that people have attempted to define words is to call them the 
smallest unit of syntax. This seems reasonable: sentences are built by 
combining words according to particular patterns. But even this simple 
definition runs into problems. Take a sentence like the following:
(1) Harry coughs every time he steps outside.
Everyone would agree that Harry, every, and outside are words, and that 
-s is not. But at the same time, some people (though not all) would 
argue that -s is indeed a unit of syntax and that it occupies a particular 
position in a syntactic tree. The following diagram illustrates how we 
might break cough off from -s syntactically:
(2) 
V
V
cough
-s
Calling words the minimal units of syntax raises the question, “What is 
syntax?” If we think of syntax as the component of the human grammar 
that governs the ordering of items, then -s should be a word. After all, 
it is subject to ordering principles. It must follow cough; we don’t say 
s-cough. If we respond by saying that syntax governs the ordering of not 
just any item, but only words, then we are back where we started. What 
is a word?
Another characteristic of words is that they are the smallest unit of 
language that can stand alone:
(3) When are you going to the store? 
Tomorrow.
 
What did the emperor wear to the procession? 
Nothing!
We recognize the ability of words to stand alone by saying that they are 
free forms. Units that are incapable of standing alone, such as affixes, 
are correspondingly called bound forms. This characteristic of words 

36  
WORDS AND LEXEMES
also runs into problems. Certain forms that native speakers would 
identify as words are not capable of standing alone and therefore do not 
meet this definition:
(4) Whose book is this? *My.
My is a word, as we would all agree. But it generally does not stand 
alone.1 The reasons why my cannot stand on its own have more to do 
with syntax than with morphology: it is a determiner, and it generally 
appears alongside a noun. Speakers would use mine in this context 
instead. Nevertheless, this example shows that a potential diagnostic 
for wordhood – can it stand alone? – is not universally reliable.
Once in a while we even get a supposedly bound form appearing on its 
own. In the musical Camelot, Queen Guenevere sings the following lines:
(5) It’s May, it’s May, the month of “yes, you may”
 
The time for every frivolous whim, proper or im-
 
…
 
When all the world is brimming with fun, wholesome or un-
The prefix im- is used on its own to rhyme with whim, and un- is used 
to rhyme with fun. We are dealing with a creative word play here. Both 
im- and un- are stressed here, which means that in some sense, the song-
writer has turned them into words. We are not proposing otherwise. We 
present this example to help demonstrate that words are difficult to 
define, and that traditional notions such as bound and free are not 
always reliable.
2.1.2 Defining words phonologically
 
■
Words tend to be important units phonologically as well as syntactically. 
For example, the word is typically the domain of stress assignment. In 
French, stress always falls on the last syllable of a word. In Cairene Arabic, 
stress falls on one of the three final syllables, depending on syllable 
weight. In Polish, main stress falls on the penultimate (next-to-last) or 
antepenultimate (third-to-last) syllable (Hayes 1995: 67–8). Even this gen-
eralization is not absolute. Clitics (from Classical Greek klinein ‘to lean’) 
are grammatical words that are unable to stand on their own phonologi-
cally and must instead ‘lean’ on an adjacent word – be incorporated into 

WORDS AND LEXEMES  37
its prosodic structure. This means that clitics often have an effect on the 
position of word stress. In Modern Greek, for example, stress is always on 
one of the last three syllables of a word. When a genitive clitic such as mas 
‘our’ follows or leans on a word that is stressed on the third-to-last sylla-
ble, stress readjustment occurs (Nespor and Vogel 1986):
(6) a. o ánθropos
 
 
‘the person’
 
b. o ánθropòs mas
 
 
‘our person’
We see in (6) that ánqropos ‘person’ is stressed on the third-to-last syl-
lable. When followed by mas, a secondary stress is inserted on its final 
syllable. This readjustment is understandable if we think of the sequence 
ánqropòs mas as a single word for stress purposes.
Imagine that no secondary stress were added to the sequence *ánqro-
pos mas, which we have just called a word. This hypothetical form bears 
stress only on its fourth-to-last syllable. Greek, however, requires that 
words be stressed no further back than the third-to-last syllable. The 
addition of a secondary stress on the syllable –pòs (the second-to-last 
syllable, the most common position for word stress in Modern Greek) 
creates a well-formed phonological word. This example demonstrates 
that the word-plus-clitic sequence functions as a single word as far as 
stress assignment is concerned in Modern Greek. (See the definition of 
phonological word below.)
2.1.3 Grammatical words
 
■
Despite the elusiveness of a definition of word, speakers – literate and 
illiterate – have clear intuitions about what is and what isn’t a word. 
Children readily learn to break utterances up into words when learning 
to write. Some written languages, such as Chinese, represent words 
with symbols called logograms. For now, we are simply going to assume 
that we know a word when we see one.
The term grammatical word or morphosyntactic word is virtually 
synonymous with word but is generally used to refer specifically to dif-
ferent forms of a single word that occur depending on the syntactic 
context. You would be justified in thinking, for example, that rabbit and 
rabbits are tokens of the same word. But they absolutely must be 

38  
WORDS AND LEXEMES
 considered to be different grammatical words. The first occurs in con-
texts appropriate for a singular noun, and the second in contexts appro-
priate for a plural noun. Even though forms like and, into, and lovely 
have only one form, they are also considered grammatical words.
2.2 Empirical Tests for Wordhood
 
■
While it is difficult to come up with a definition that tells us whether 
something is a word, there are empirical tests that can tell us whether 
something isn’t a word.
2.2.1 Fixed order of elements
 
■
Our first empirical test has to do with the fixed order of elements within 
a word. Take a morphologically complex word like unbreakable. We can’t 
say breakableun or unablebreak. The same doesn’t hold for sentences. To 
use examples from the Mad Hatter and the March Hare in Lewis Carroll’s 
Alice in Wonderland, “I see what I eat” is just as grammatical as “I eat 
what I see,” and “I like what I get” and “I get what I like” are equally 
acceptable. When we change the order of words in a sentence, we gener-
ally also change the meaning. When we change the order of morphemes 
in a word, we generally end up with something ungrammatical.
Of course, in English we cannot change the order of words in a sen-
tence any which way and still have a grammatical result. We don’t say 
*get like I what I, for instance. But there are languages such as Latin 
where you can order the words of particular sentences any possible 
way and still have a grammatical result. In contrast, there are no lan-
guages in which you can arrange morphemes any which way.
2.2.2 Non-separability and integrity
 
■
Two more diagnostics for wordhood involve the notions of non-separability 
and integrity. Words differ from larger units, such as phrases, in that they 
cannot be broken up by the insertion of segmental or phrasal material. (For 
the moment, we’ll ignore infixes.) This characteristic of words is called 
non-separability. Likewise, syntactic processes cannot apply to pieces of 
words. This is integrity. Adjectives and adverbs, for example, modify 

WORDS AND LEXEMES  39
words, not morphemes. Words and phrases are often displaced to the 
beginning of a sentence or questioned, but not morphemes:
(7) a. Now, that one I like.
 
 
Which one do you like?
 
b. *Possible, it’s im-.
 
 
 *Which school did you see bus? (i.e., Which school’s school 
bus did you see?)
Non-separability and integrity diagnostics tell us that compounds like 
doghouse, greenhouse, and school bus consist of a single word, rather than 
a pair of words.
Let’s begin with doghouse. We know this is a single word because we 
can’t put anything inside it or modify the internal components in any 
way. We can’t distinguish between a doghouse and a *dogshouse, where a 
doghouse is a house for one dog and a dogshouse for two or more.
The same restrictions hold for greenhouse. If we break up the compo-
nents in any way (8a) or try to modify only a part (8b), the meaning 
‘warm glassed-in structure for growing plants’ gets lost:
(8) a. a green and blue house
 
 
a greener house
 
b. a very green house
 
 
*a very greenhouse
It happens to be the case that the way we write doghouse and greenhouse 
reflects their status as single words. But orthography cannot always be 
relied upon as a diagnostic. Deer tick is also a compound, but it is gener-
ally written as two words. Modifiers must modify the whole compound, 
not just a part (so a brown deer tick is not a tick that lives on brown 
deer, but is instead itself brown), and its components are non-separable 
(*deer brown tick is impossible, though brown tick is perfectly acceptable, 
because we can’t reach inside a compound and separate its compo-
nents).
2.2.3 Stress
 
■
The diagnostics given in the preceding section, non-separability and 
integrity, establish that hot dog (the edible kind) is a compound. If the 
hot dog you are eating is hotter than mine, you wouldn’t say that you 

40  
WORDS AND LEXEMES
were eating a *hotter dog or a *very hot dog. Given this fact, compare the 
pronunciation of the sequence hot dogs in the following two sentences:
(9) We ate two hot dogs each.
 
The hot dogs ran for the lake.
In the first sentence, the main stress in hot dog is on hot. In a neutral 
pronunciation of the second, both hot and dog are stressed. It is also pos-
sible to emphasize dogs by stressing it more heavily: The hot dógs ran for 
the lake – hot dogs, not hot children, or canines, not frankfurters. These 
two examples suggest that stress can also be used as a diagnostic for 
whether or not a sequence of words is a compound – compounds are 
normally stressed on their first component in English, while phrases 
are normally stressed on their last element. Take care in applying this 
diagnostic, however. As many linguists have noted, some compounds 
like kitchen sink and apple pie are stressed like phrases (see Giegerich 
2004 for discussion and analysis), and sometimes people’s pronuncia-
tion of compounds differs, as with ginger ale, which some people pro-
nounce gínger ale, and others ginger ále. [Exercise 1]
2.3 Types of Words
 
■
As fluent readers of English, we tend to think only in terms of written 
words. Separated by blank spaces, they are easily identifiable. But 
words may be defined in different ways from different perspectives, 
with each perspective picking out a somewhat different object. Linguists 
distinguish phonological words, grammatical words (discussed in 
2.1.3), and lexemes. In this book we are most concerned with gram-
matical words and lexemes, but we begin with phonological words, 
just to make sure that we have made the proper distinctions.
2.3.1 Phonological words
 
■
A phonological word can be defined as a string of sounds that behaves as 
a unit for certain kinds of phonological processes, especially stress or 
accent. For the most part, we don’t have to distinguish phonological words 
from other kinds of words. It makes no difference for the words  morphology, 
calendar, Mississippi, or hot dog whether we think of them as phonological 

WORDS AND LEXEMES  41
words or morphological words. Sometimes we do need to separate the 
two notions. In English, every phonological word has a main stress. 
Elements that are written as separate words but do not have their own 
stress are therefore not phonological words in English. Consider again the 
sentence The hot dogs ran for the lake. Think now in terms of word stress. 
The sentence has seven words, but only four word stresses, there being no 
stress on the or for. In fact, the English written word the receives stress only 
under unusual circumstances, in exchanges like the following:
(10) A: I saw Jennifer Lopez on Fifth Avenue last night.
 
B : Not the Jennifer Lopez?
Prepositions like for sometimes have stress, but as often as not are also 
included in the stress domain of the following word. We therefore say 
that the string for the lake, which we write as three separate words, is a 
single phonological word.
As we noted in 2.1.2 above, items like the and for, which are phono-
logically dependent on adjacent words, are called clitics (see Zwicky 
and Pullum 1983; Zwicky 1985). Syntactically, clitics pattern like  distinct 
words, but they cannot stand alone phonologically and need to be 
incorporated into the prosodic structure of an adjacent word, the host.2 
Proclitics precede their host and enclitics follow it. Well-known 
 examples of clitics are the contracted form of the English auxiliary verb 
be (‘m, ‘s, and ‘re), as in Mary’s here or We’re in this together. We know that 
contracted auxiliaries function just like full words from the point of 
view of the syntax, because they alternate with full forms that have the 
same meaning (cf. Mary is here, We are in this together). But phonologically, 
these auxiliaries are unable to stand on their own. [Exercise 2]
2.3.2 Content words vs. function words
 
■
When talking about words we also need to distinguish between con-
tent words and function words. Finegan (1994: 161) expresses the dif-
ference well, writing that content words “have meaning in that they 
refer to objects, events, and abstract concepts; are marked as being char-
acteristic of particular social, ethnic, and regional dialects and of par-
ticular contexts; and convey information about the feelings and attitudes 
of language users.” Function words also have meaning, but in a differ-
ent way.

42  
WORDS AND LEXEMES
Most nouns, verbs, adjectives, and adverbs are content words. 
Function words are often best defined by their function. Examples 
of 
function 
words 
are 
determiners, 
pronouns, 
conjunctions, 
and  certain verbs – those with little or no meaning such as be, should, or 
must.
Paris
in the
the spring
If you are like many people, the first time you see the graphic above, 
you read, “Paris in the spring.” Look again. It says, “Paris in the the 
spring.” This is a well-known case of expectation affecting perception. 
You expect only one definite determiner, so you don’t realize the stimu-
lus contains two. This trick doesn’t work if we write “Paris Paris in the 
spring,” or “Paris in the spring spring.” The key is to repeat a function 
word because we tend to take words like the for granted. A similar per-
ception trick repeats the “a” of “Once upon a time.” Again, it capitalizes 
on the fact that a is a function word.
Function words are like thumbtacks. We don’t notice thumbtacks; 
we look at what they are holding up. If we were to take the tacks away, 
the calendars and posters would fall down. Likewise, if we took the 
function words out of speech, it would be hard to figure out what was 
going on:
took function words speech hard figure going on
This is what the previous sentence would look like if we took out all of 
the function words.
One generalization we can make is that while content words are 
an open class and it is possible to coin new ones, function words are 
a closed class. A person cannot easily invent a new preposition or 
conjunction. Perhaps most telling is the long history of people trying 
to invent a gender-neutral singular pronoun for English. Suggestions 
have included co, et, hesh, na, e, and thon. Some linguists have recently 
proposed tey (on the analogy of plural they, which is gender-neutral), 
with further forms tem and ter (modeled on them and her). None of 
these novel words has caught on, while novel content words like 
modem and cell phone enter the language relatively smoothly. 
[Exercises 3–5]

WORDS AND LEXEMES  43
Content words
Function words
Nouns: baby, bargain, Josianne
Pronouns: I, him, our
Verbs: publicize, hurtle, sleep
Verbs: am, was, should
Adjectives: peaceful, quick, bright
Determiners: the, an, a
Adverbs: readily, carefully
Demonstratives: this, those
Adverbs:3 very, not
Prepositions:4 in, by
2.3.3 Lexemes
 
■
We need one more distinction, which will allow us to tell grammatical 
words apart from lexemes. Let’s say we run across the word dog and 
notice that we have at least three tokens of the word:
(11) a. dog1: [noun], a canine
 
b.  dog2: [noun], a hooked or U-shaped device used for gripping 
heavy objects
 
c. dog3: [verb], to follow closely and persistently
These three words sound alike: they are tokens of the same phonologi-
cal word. Semantically, the meanings of (11a) and (11c) are related, and 
that of (11b) is not. Despite the semantic relatedness of (11a) and (11c), 
however, all three tokens can be said to have distinct  meanings.
When we want to distinguish among phonologically similar forms 
on the basis of their differing meanings, as in (11), we call each a sepa-
rate lexeme. A lexeme is a word with a specific sound and a specific 
meaning. Its shape may vary depending on syntactic context. Thus we 

44  
WORDS AND LEXEMES
have dog and dogs, distinct grammatical word forms of the same lexeme 
dog1. (For more on the definition of lexeme, see the box opposite.) We 
use the term paradigm to refer to the set of all the inflected forms that a 
lexeme assumes.
A lexeme is a theoretical construct. It is not a sound form (e.g., 
dog), but rather a sign or set of signs, with sound form, syntax, and 
meaning all bound together. Because it stands outside any syntactic 
context beyond the one for which it is lexically specified or subcate-
gorized, it is inherently unspecified for categories that are  determined 
by context and expressed through inflection. Some linguists restrict 
the class of lexemes to the major lexical categories: noun, verb, and 
adjective/adverb (Aronoff 1994: 9–10).
dog1 ‘a canine’ and dog2 ‘a hooked or U-shaped device used for grip-
ping heavy objects’ happen to be homophones or homonyms, words 
that sound alike but have unrelated meanings. However, a word doesn’t 
have to be a homophone in order to be or belong to a lexeme. All words 
either are lexemes or belong to a lexeme’s paradigm. So rotate, moon, 
fast, and gently are all lexemes.
In order to talk about lexemes, morphologists give them each a name, 
and by convention, they put these names in capital or small capital let-
ters. The name is generally the form by which a lexeme would be listed 
in a dictionary, and for this reason, we call it the citation form. The cita-
tion form is useful, but it does not necessarily have any mental status. 
Across languages, the citation form of a noun is most often the singular 
form. The citation form of a verb, however, varies widely. In English it 
is the bare infinitive (the infinitive minus “to”: e.g., read). In French 
and Spanish it is the infinitive (e.g., Fr. regarder, Sp. mirar ‘to look 
at’). In Greek it is the first person singular form (e.g., milo ‘I speak’).
In (11) each of the three lexemes had the same phonological shape 
but a different meaning. In (12) we see just the opposite: a single lexeme 
with more than one possible phonological shape. The verb look appears 
in several different forms, but with a consistent meaning:
(12) I look
 
she looks
 
we looked
 
they were looking
All of these forms are distinct phonological words, for the simple reason 
that they do not each sound exactly alike. In addition, we can label 

WORDS AND LEXEMES  45
them as different grammatical words (discussed in 2.1.3) because each 
plays a distinct grammatical role within a sentence. But at some level 
these different words are all tokens of the same type: they mean the 
same thing and no one would expect a dictionary to give them four 
separate entries. We must be dealing with a single lexeme, but one that 
happens to be realized in several different forms, depending on gram-
matical context. This example shows you that a lexeme is not a single 
form, but rather a set of forms. [Exercises 6–7]
What is a lexeme?
A lexeme is a theoretical construct that corresponds roughly to one of the 
 •
common senses of the term word. Examples include BOOK, EAT, DARK, 
SECRETLY.
It is a sign or set of signs that exists independently of any particular syn-
 •
tactic context.
It has a particular meaning or grammatical function (e.g., ‘a set of written 
 •
or printed pages fastened along one side and encased between two covers’; 
‘consume, as with food’).
Some linguists restrict the class of lexemes to the major lexical categories 
 •
of noun, verb, adjective/adverb.
It is generally referred to by its citation form (e.g., 
 •
BOOK, EAT), but its shape may 
vary systematically according to the syntactic context in which it is used (e.g., 
one book, two books; I am eating right now, I ate a big dinner yesterday).
We have already said that in order to talk about lexemes, morphologists 
give them each a name, and by convention, they put these names in 
small capital letters. In reality the name of a lexeme is much more than 
a name. In English it also happens to be the lexeme’s lexical stem. The 
lexical stem is the form of the lexeme that is most often used in the 
creation of new words.
To illustrate what we mean by lexical stem, let’s look closely at the 
lexeme go. This lexeme has five forms, two of them irregular: go, goes, 
went, gone, going. Of these forms, go has a different status from the rest. 
Lexemes formed from go most often use it as their stem, as opposed to 
an inflected form. You have probably heard the word churchgoer, but 
not church-wenter, someone who used to go to church. Likewise, there 
are go-betweens but not gone-betweens.

46  
WORDS AND LEXEMES
It would be a mistake to overgeneralize and say that the lexical 
stem is always used in creating new words. We could use the word 
went-between and people would understand it. A quick glance at the 
dictionary reveals the forms goner, going-over, and goings-on, derived 
from the past and present participles gone and going. The last two 
examples are phrasal items – phrases that have been turned into 
words.
Have is the name of another lexeme that works the same way as go. 
It has several distinct forms, some of them irregular: have, has, had, and 
having. Only one of them, have, is generally used in forming new 
 lexemes. The haves and the have-nots is a common expression, but not the 
had-nots, people who used not to have any money. (As an exercise, 
though, do an online search for had-nots. What sorts of examples do you 
find?) We generally do not make up words from the inflected forms has, 
had, or having. Exceptions, like has-been, are most likely to be phrasal 
items.
Nouns have two forms, a singular and a plural. The singular form is the 
lexical stem. It is therefore the form that most often appears in compounds. 
We say apple-corer, boathouse, saber-tooth, and songwriter, but never *apples-
corers, *boatshouse, *saber-teeth, or *songswriter. This is only a generalization: 
occasionally we do find the plural form in a compound. Thus we have 
seen antiques store, admissions office, customs house, and sports page.
So that you won’t get away thinking that all languages work like 
English in having one lexical stem per lexeme, consider the case of Latin. 
Latin has the peculiarity of having words, notably verbs, with more than 
one lexical stem. One lexical stem of the verb ‘sing’5 is can-. This is the 
stem found in cano- ‘I sing’. Another lexical stem is cant-, also called the 
participial stem. To form the word meaning ‘singer’, we take the parti-
cipial stem cant- and the agentive suffix -or, giving the form cantor. The 
participial stem is always used in the formation of agentives.
To summarize, a lexeme is an abstract object, not a single concrete 
word, but a set of grammatical words. Cross-linguistically, one of 
those words is generally privileged to be the lexical stem from which 
other words are formed, although some languages permit more than 
one lexical stem. However, in morphology it is often safer to talk of 
tendencies than absolutes. Many phenomena are not categorical, but 
graded. So it is with the creation of new words from lexemes. 
Occasionally, particularly in the case of phrasal items like has-been, a 
form of a lexeme other than the lexical stem is used for creating new 
words. [Exercise 8]

WORDS AND LEXEMES  47
2.4 Inflection vs. Derivation
 
■
Once you understand the difference between words and lexemes, you 
can understand the distinction made by morphologists between inflec-
tion and derivation. We discuss both of these more fully in later chap-
ters of the book.
Inflection involves the formation of grammatical forms – past, present, 
future; singular, plural; masculine, feminine, neuter; and so on – of a 
single lexeme. The use of these grammatical forms is generally dictated 
by sentence structure. Thus is, are, and being are examples of inflected 
forms of the lexeme be, which happens to be highly irregular not only in 
English, but in many other languages as well. Regular verb lexemes in 
English have a lexical stem, which is the bare form with no affixes (e.g., 
select) and three more inflected forms, one each with the suffixes -s, -ed, 
and -ing (selects, selected, and selecting). Noun lexemes in English have a 
singular and plural form. Adjectives, adverbs, prepositions, and other 
parts of speech typically have only one form in English.
As you can tell from the example of select given above, one way 
inflection can be realized is through affixes. Further examples of affixal 
realization of inflection can be found in the following box.
Examples of words + inflectional morphemes
Nouns:   wombat + s
ox + en
Verbs:  brainwash + es
dig + s
escape + d
rain + ing
Derivation involves the creation of one lexeme from another, such as 
selector or selection from select. Compounding is a special type of deriva-
tion, since it involves the creation of one lexeme from two or more other 
lexemes. In the discussion of non-separability above, we had many 
instances of compounds (doghouse, greenhouse, hot dog, and deer tick), all 
of which are formed by combining two lexemes. Many processes can be 
involved with derivation, as we will see in chapter 4. In the box on the 
next page we give only examples of affixal derivation.

48  
WORDS AND LEXEMES
One question you may be asking yourself is how we distinguish 
inflection from derivation. This issue is addressed fully in chapter 6, 
but we give two criteria here: (1) derivation generally results in a change 
in lexical meaning or the lexical category of a particular word, while 
inflection does not; and (2) the application or non-application of inflec-
tional morphology generally depends on the syntactic context (e.g., 
what is the subject of the verb? is the noun singular or plural?), while 
the application of derivational morphology does not.
Examples of words + derivational affixes
Nouns to nouns:
New York + ese
fish + ery
Boston + ian
auto + biography
vice + president
Verbs to verbs:
un + tie
re + surface
pre + register
under + estimate
Adjectives to adjectives:
gray + ish
a + moral
sub + human
il + legible
Nouns to adjectives:
hawk + ish
poison + ous
soul + ful
iron + like
Verbs to nouns:
discombobulat + ion
acquitt + al
digg + er
Adjectives to adverbs:
sad + ly
efficient + ly
Readers will come across the terms word formation and lexeme for-
mation, both referring to derivation, in the morphological literature. 
We avoid the term word formation, since it is used by some linguists 
to refer to both inflection and derivation or to morphology in 
 general.

WORDS AND LEXEMES  49
2.5 Two Approaches to Morphology: 
 
■
Item-and-Arrangement, Item-and-Process
Hockett (1954) distinguishes between two basic approaches to mor-
phology, which he calls item-and-arrangement and item-and-process. 
Both are associated with American structuralist linguistics, codified by 
Bloomfield (1933), but continue to be important today. Item-and-
arrangement and item-and-process represent two distinct points of 
view. Item-and-arrangement proceeds from a picture of each language 
as a set of elements and the patterns in which those elements occur. The 
item-and-process picture gives no independent status to the items, 
which arise instead through the construction of the patterns.
Item-and-arrangement grew out of the structuralists’ preoccupation 
with word analysis, and in particular, with techniques for breaking 
words down into their component morphemes, which are the items. 
Morphology is then seen as the arrangement of these morphemes into 
a particular order or structure. For example, books results from the con-
catenation of the two morphemes book and -s.
Item-and-process, as its name suggests, is an approach to morphol-
ogy in which complex words result from the operation of processes on 
simpler words. Working in an item-and-process model, we might 
say that books results when the lexeme book undergoes the function 
‘make plural’. In regular cases, this function will add the segment /-z/ 
(cf. photos, lions), which is realized as /-s/ after most voiceless  segments 
(cf. giraffes), and as /-
e
z/ after sibilants and affricates (cf. roses).
Item-and-arrangement and item-and-process are almost equivalent to 
one another mathematically. Everything you can express in item-and-ar-
rangement can be expressed in item-and-process, and almost anything 
you can express in item-and-process can be expressed in item-and-arrange-
ment. It just depends on what you regard as an item. For example, if you 
allow items to have a negative value (on the analogy of negative numbers 
like −1), then even subtractive morphology of the sort seen in the forma-
tion of the Papago (Uto-Aztecan) perfective (13) can count as item-and-ar-
rangement (data from Zepeda 1983: 59ff., cited in Anderson 1992: 65):6
(13) Imperfective 
Perfective
 
singular  
plural 
singular 
 
plural
 
him 
‘walking’ hihim 
hi: 
‘walked’ 
hihi
 
hi:nk 
‘barking’ 
hihink 
hi:n 
‘barked’ 
hihin

50  
WORDS AND LEXEMES
 
gatwid ‘shooting’ gagtwid 
gatwi ‘shot’ 
gagtwi
 
‘elpig 
‘peeling’ 
‘e‘elpig 
‘elpi 
‘peeled’ 
‘e‘elpi
In (13) we see that the Papago perfective is generally formed by removal 
of the final consonant of the imperfective, regardless of what consonant 
it is. It might seem counterintuitive to think of this deleted consonant as 
a segment with some particular value, parallel to the English past tense 
marker -ed, but mathematically, such a negative entity is not difficult to 
imagine. We could think of the affix as something like a negative final 
consonant.
Despite the mathematical similarity of the item-and-process and 
item-and-arrangement approaches, many morphological phenom-
ena do not fit neatly into the latter. Papago perfective formation 
is one example. We can imagine a negative affix, but its plausibility is 
 questionable.
2.5.1  Affixation in the item-and-process 
 
■
and item-and-arrangement models
Let’s look at a simple English example of a lexical function within the 
item-and-process model, which we happen to be most comfortable 
with. The following function creates agent nouns from verbs:
(14) X]V er]N
 
Examples: think]V er]N, runn]V er]N, fli]V er]N, hunt]V er]N
We generally think of lexeme-formation functions as having a phono-
logical, a syntactic, and a semantic component. Phonologically, the 
function in (14) takes a pre-existing string of segments and adds the 
suffix /ɚ/. Syntactically, it produces a noun from a verb. Semantically, 
it produces an agent of the verb.
In the function in (14), the phonology, syntax, and semantics are addi-
tive. When we derive an agent noun from a verb via the suffix /ɚ/, we 
add phonological information in the form of an additional segment, 
syntactic information in terms of the lexical category noun, and  semantic 
information (the fact that the new noun represents an agent). 
Furthermore, the old information is preserved, not lost: worker includes 
both the form and the meaning of the verb work, to which the suffix /ɚ/ 
has been added, as well as the fact that work is a verb, not a member of 

WORDS AND LEXEMES  51
some other lexical category. The phonology, syntax, and semantics of 
most derivational functions are additive in this sense.
Additive functions like this one are easily recast in the item-and-
arrangement model. To express (14) in item-and-arrangement, we also 
need to break agent nouns into two parts. Then we put them back 
together. One way we can show this is through a tree structure. There 
will be more on morphological trees in chapter 4:
(15) 
Agent noun
Verb
-er
Worker, then, is represented as follows:
(16) 
Noun
work
-er
This tree illustrates how the affix -er attaches to the stem work to form 
the agent noun worker. [Exercise 9]
2.5.2 Non-affixal phenomena and the item-and-process model
 
■
Many languages have morphological phenomena that do not involve 
affixes. These can be represented within the item-and-process model 
but pose problems for some morphological frameworks based on item-
and-arrangement, as we noted above.
2.5.2.1 English noun–verb pairs
An example of a non-affixal morphological phenomenon is illustrated in 
(17). English possesses a number of noun–verb pairs that are distinguished 
phonologically by the location of stress. Verbs are stressed on the final syl-
lable, and nouns on the first syllable. Examples can be found in Old English 
and in other related Germanic languages, suggesting that the difference 
existed already in proto-Germanic times, over two thousand years ago:
(17) Verb 
Noun
 
overflów 
óverflow
 
condúct 
cónduct

52  
WORDS AND LEXEMES
 
insért 
ínsert
 
rejéct 
réject
 
convíct 
cónvict
It is possible to represent the shift in stress in these examples as an item, 
but the forms in (17) are more amenable to a processual analysis, where 
the appropriate function would be something like ‘shift stress’.
2.5.2.2 Agar Dinka
Non-segmental phenomena make up only a small part of the morphol-
ogy of English and related languages. But non-affixal morphology is 
widespread among the world’s languages. For the Western Nilotic lan-
guage Dinka, non-affixal morphology is the norm. Despite being almost 
entirely monosyllabic, Dinka manages to have rich morphology by 
exploiting alternations in vowel quality, vowel length, voice quality, 
tone, and final consonants, as demonstrated by Andersen (1993) for the 
Agar dialect, spoken in Southern Sudan.
Agar Dinka is characterized by a rich set of vowel contrasts. Vowels 
come with two distinct voice qualities, creaky /v˜/ and breathy /v̤/, 
and may be long /vvv/, half-long /vv/, or short /v/. Furthermore, 
vowels can bear a high tone /v´/, low tone /v`/, or falling tone /vˆ/. 
Vowel quality plays a role as well. For example, the distinction between 
lὲ̰ɛt ‘insult (3sg)’ and là̰at ‘insult (1sg)’ or d
c ͂`c 
k ‘spin (3sg)’ and dà̰ak ‘spin 
(1sg)’ is one of vowel quality. The seven contrastive vowel qualities of 
Agar Dinka are given in the following table (Andersen 1993: 4).
Agar Dinka vowels
 
 Front unrounded 
Central unrounded 
Back rounded
High
i
u
Higher-mid
e
o
Lower-mid
ε
c 
Low
a
Every transitive verb stem in Agar Dinka has 11 inflectionally distinct 
forms. This is illustrated in (18) for the stem bò̤k ‘to throw at’, preceded in 
each case by the declarative proclitic particle [à̰-]. While some of the forms 
contain suffixes (18f–h, j), most morphological distinctions are expressed 
through non-affixal means. In all, there are seven forms of the verb stem:

WORDS AND LEXEMES  53
(18) Agar Dinka inflectional paradigm (Andersen 1993: 6)
 
a. Ø 
d̪
c̈
`
c 
k 
à̰-bò̤k 
dḭ́t
 
boy 
d-throw.at 
bird
 
 
‘The boy is throwing at the bird’
 
b. nts 
dḭ́t à̰-bó̤ok 
d̪
c̈
`
c 
k
 
bird d-throw.at:nts 
boy
 
‘The boy is throwing at the bird’
 
c. 1sg 
dḭ́t à-b
c̈
`
c 
k
 
bird d-throw.at:1sg
 
‘I am throwing at the bird’
 
d. 2sg 
dḭ́t à̰-bò̤k
 
bird d-throw.at:2sg
 
‘You are throwing at the bird’
 
e. 3sg 
dḭ́t à̰-bò̤ok
 
bird d-throw.at:3sg
 
‘He is throwing at the bird’
 
f. 1pl 
dḭ́t à̰-bó̤k-kṳ̀
 
bird d-throw.at-1pl
 
‘We are throwing at the bird’
 
g. 2pl 
dḭ́t à̰-b
c̈
´k-kà̤
 
bird d-throw.at-2pl
 
‘You are throwing at the bird’
 
h. 3pl 
dḭ́t à̰-bó̤k-kè̤
 
bird d-throw.at-3pl
 
‘They are throwing at the bird’
 
i. pass 
dḭ́t à̰-bó̤k
 
bird d-throw.at:pass
 
‘The bird is being thrown at’
 
j. pass: doò̤ot à̰-bô̤ok-è̤ 
dḭ́t
 
 
ct 
stone 
d-throw.at-pass:ct bird
 
‘The bird is being thrown at with a stone’
The seven forms of the verb stem are schematized in (19) for easy inspec-
tion. Andersen (1993: 6) reports that (19a) represents the inflectionally 
unmarked (i.e., default) case. It occurs with topic (preverbal) subjects 
and in the second singular. (19b) is used when there is a non-topical 
(postverbal) subject noun phrase in the clause and differs from the 
unmarked case in having a lengthened vowel and high tone. The first 
singular form (19c) has a half-long low-mid back rounded vowel /
c 
/ in 

54  
WORDS AND LEXEMES
place of the short high-mid rounded vowel of (19a). Other forms differ 
from (19a) in having a lengthened vowel (19d, g), high tone (19e, f), fall-
ing tone (19g), and contrasting vowel quality (19f):
(19) Stems of the verb ‘to throw at’
 
a. bò̤k 
(inflectionally unmarked) Ø, 2sg
 
b. bó̤ok 
nts
 
c . b
c̈
`
c 
k 
1sg
 
d. bò̤ok 
3sg
 
e. bó̤k 
1pl, 3pl, pass
 
f . b
c̈
´k 
2pl
 
g. bô̤ok 
pass:ct
From the perspective of a speaker of English or most other European and 
Asian languages, Agar Dinka morphology is exotic, but it clearly is not 
from the perspective of speakers of the language. There is no evidence that 
these seemingly exotic processes are prone to disappear over time or that 
children of the community experience difficulty in learning to speak the 
language. We must conclude that non-segmental processes are just as nat-
ural as the affixal phenomena so familiar to speakers of English and many 
other languages and that a theory of morphology should be able to treat 
them with equal ease. Item-and-arrangement theories can be made to 
accommodate morphology of the sort that we see in Agar Dinka, but only 
awkwardly. This is one of the primary arguments that proponents of item-
and-process morphology use in support of their general framework, which 
does not give affixation any special pride of place. A fascinating question is 
why one language should use a certain type of morphology and another 
language should not, but we will not attempt to answer it here.
2.6 The Lexicon
 
■
A discussion of words and lexemes would not be complete without a 
brief introduction to the lexicon. The word lexicon is from Greek lexikós 
‘pertaining to words’ and often designates a book containing a list of 
words in a language along with their definitions. Linguists use the 
term in particular to refer to the mental dictionary. Within linguistics, 
lexicon has taken on multiple definitions. This complicates matters, 
particularly because linguists do not always specify which definition 
they assume.

WORDS AND LEXEMES  55
There are two widely accepted views of the lexicon. According to 
one, the lexicon is a list of the indivisible morphological units, or 
morphemes, in a language. This definition comes from Baudouin de 
Courtenay (b. 1845 in Radzymin, Poland; d. 1929 in Warsaw), who, 
despite his French name and his relation to the Belgian royal family, 
was a Polish linguist of the middle to late nineteenth century and a 
very influential theorist of the time.
The second view of the lexicon, due more or less to Bloomfield (1933), 
is a list of irregular or arbitrary forms. Because they are irregular or arbi-
trary, they must be memorized. For example, a speaker of French must 
learn that the sound sequence [arbr] refers to a tree, and a speaker of 
English must learn that the word slide refers to a small square object that 
we put in a slide projector to project an image onto a screen or wall.
It would be an error to assume that the first definition is equivalent 
to the second and that the list of irregular forms is a list of morphemes, 
which is to say a list of indivisible units. If we spoke a perfect language, 
this would be true. Every irregular form in the language would be indi-
visible. But where natural language is concerned, this position is too 
extreme. A great deal of evidence suggests that even morphologically 
complex forms are present in a speaker’s lexicon (see chapter 8).
One morphologically complex word that must be considered to be 
listed in the lexicon is representative. If it were enough to say that re-, 
present, and -ative are stored in the lexicon, we would expect the meaning 
of representative to be a function of its parts, which it is not. A representa-
tive is always a person who represents something, but in the United 
States, the word most commonly refers to an elected member of a spe-
cific state or federal legislative body. Senators may represent us, and thus 
they are representatives, but a United States Senator is not a Representative. 
(If you doubt us, perform the simple experiment of referring to a senator 
as a representative in conversation, and see what happens.)
Digging deeper, we find that most words ending in -ative are adjec-
tives. Representative can be an adjective, but in this specific sense it is a 
noun, again an idiosyncrasy that must be listed in the lexicon along 
with the special meaning it has come to have in the context of United 
States government. In this and many other cases, we are tempted to 
think that the meaning of a complex word is the sum of the meaning of 
its parts, because the difference between the meaning that we expect a 
word to have on the basis of the meanings of its parts and the meaning 
that it actually has is quite subtle. Still, there is no way out. If we know 
the meaning of the word representative, it must be the case that we store 

56  
WORDS AND LEXEMES
the whole word and its very specific meaning. The abstract list or place 
where it is stored is the lexicon.
The lexicon contains more than words. Affixes, such as English re-, 
can be assumed to be in the lexicon. Speakers know and understand 
such affixes and readily attach them to new stems.
Some affixed inflected forms, like says, must also be in a lexicon. We 
know this because says is an exception to the general rule “Add /-z/ to 
the basic stem of a verb to form the third person singular present.” Say 
say and says out loud: say [sej] has a tense vowel, but says [sεz] has a lax 
one. A speaker of English must memorize the third person singular of 
say because it does not follow the normal rules of English. In other 
words, he or she stores it in the lexicon. Is says a simple form or a com-
plex form? We can safely assume that it is complex because it has two 
parts, a stem and a recognizable third person ending /-z/. This tells us 
that complex forms may be stored in the lexicon.
Now consider a famous complex word, antidisestablishmentarianism, 
in which we easily recognize the pieces anti-, dis-, establish, -ment, -ary, 
-an, and -ism. However, these pieces together tell us very little about the 
meaning of the word, ‘opposition to denying special state recognition 
of a particular religion’ (it was used in Irish political discussion in the 
mid-nineteenth century). If you are a speaker of English who happens 
to know and use this word, then it must be stored in your lexicon, 
because its meaning cannot straightforwardly be determined from the 
meaning of its parts.
We have established the need to list inflected forms and complex lex-
emes like representative in the lexicon. We need to list some compounds, 
too. Some people might argue that you don’t need to list doghouse in the 
lexicon. (We would disagree: see exercise 1, chapter 4.) However, there 
is no doubt that the compound cathouse is listed there, because its mean-
ing, ‘brothel’, is not predictable from its form. Fixed phrases (with respect 
to …, butterflies in my stomach), phrasal verbs (run up a bill, catch up with 
Tom), names of people and places (Audrey Hepburn, Gulf of Mexico), and 
proverbs (Don’t count your chickens before they’re hatched) all need to be 
memorized, too, and are arguably in the lexicon. Psycholinguistic stud-
ies have even shown that perfectly regular complex forms, if frequent 
enough, are listed in the lexicon.
In sum, the most accurate conception of the lexicon is as a list of forms 
that you know. The lexicon is in some sense equivalent to your linguis-
tic memory. It cannot simply be a list of indivisible morphological ele-
ments. Instead, it contains irregular forms, forms that are in some way 

WORDS AND LEXEMES  57
unpredictable. Some are indivisible or unanalyzable morphologically, 
and others are not.
We close this section by mentioning a third use of lexicon among 
linguists. Some linguists equate the lexicon with the morphological 
component of the grammar as a whole. We believe that the mental dic-
tionary should be considered separately from the internal mechanisms 
involved in the formation and analysis of words.
2.7 Summary
 
■
We began this chapter by looking at syntactic and phonological defini-
tions of word and found that many definitions of word are problematic. 
Nevertheless, speakers have firm intuitions about what is a word and 
what isn’t, and we were also able to present several empirical tests of 
wordhood involving the order of internal elements, non-separability, 
integrity, and stress. We presented key terms used in the discussion of 
words, particularly grammatical word, phonological word, and lexeme. 
The notion of lexeme led to an introduction to inflection and derivation, 
which will be discussed more fully in chapters 4 and 6. We looked at 
two approaches to morphology, item-and-arrangement and item-and-
process, noting that the latter is better able to account for non-affixal 
phenomena. Finally, we looked at the lexicon, a mental list of forms that 
you know. The Kujamaat Jóola portion of this chapter picks up on the 
notion of word by examining how nouns are organized into classes.

58  
WORDS AND LEXEMES
Kujamaat Jóola Noun Classes
 
■
Kujamaat Jóola is like other Atlantic languages – indeed, most lan-
guages of the Niger-Congo family – in having a complex gender, or 
noun class, system. Linguists use the word gender in a different sense 
from most people, for whom gender is linked to sex and consequently 
for whom there are generally only two (masculine and feminine) or 
perhaps three (masculine, feminine, neuter). For linguists, genders are 
agreement classes of nouns and pronouns, and a language has as many 
genders as the agreement system of the language distinguishes. While 
Indo-European languages like English, French, German, Greek, Russian, 
or Spanish may have two or three genders, Kujamaat Jóola has 19. It is 
not unusual in this regard. Within West Atlantic we can name Gombe 
Fula with 25 noun classes, Serer with 16, Wolof with 10, Manjaku with 
14, and Balanta with seven (Sapir 1971).
The observations that all words of a language, even borrowings, are 
assigned to genders and that speakers of languages with genders rarely 
make mistakes in their use indicate that gender systems are structured 
(Corbett 1991: 7). It is not wholly arbitrary that one noun belongs to one 
gender, and a second noun to another.
One way that gender or noun class systems may be organized is 
 semantically. The Dravidian language Tamil, spoken in Sri Lanka and 
Southeastern India, has a highly regular semantically based gender system. 
Human nouns are assigned to the so-called male rational and female 
rational genders, and non-human nouns to the non-rational gender.
Indo-European gender systems are also organized partially on 
semantic grounds. In French, for example, femme ‘woman’ is feminine 
and homme ‘man’ is masculine. In English, too, although we find gender 
only in pronouns, gender distinctions are largely semantic and sex-
based: he usually refers to males, she to females, and it is usually used 
where there is either no sex distinction or it is unimportant.
Describing gender assignment on the basis of semantics will often 
take us only so far. In describing French, we run into problems when 
we encounter words like personne ‘person’ and victime ‘victim’, which 
are always feminine, even when they have a male referent. Words like 
raisin ‘grape’ (masculine) or chaise ‘chair’ (feminine) have gender that is 
arbitrary from a semantic point of view.
The same is true of other noun class systems. You might not think of 
grouping women, fire, and dangerous things together on semantic 
grounds, but they all belong to a single noun class in the Australian 

WORDS AND LEXEMES  59
language Dyirbal (Dixon 1972) and inspired the title of a book by lin-
guist George Lakoff. In Algonquian languages, which distinguish 
between an animate and an inanimate gender, people and animals fall 
into the animate class as expected, but so do large trees and a number 
of objects including tobacco, apples, kettles, and snowshoes. Some body 
parts, such as the calf and stomach, have animate gender, while others, 
such as the thigh, are inanimate (Bloomfield 1946: 94). [Exercise 10]
As we go through the Kujamaat Jóola noun class system, you will see 
that semantic classes play a central role in noun class assignment, but 
that even so, noun classes can be semantically diverse. Even in English, 
where gender seems to be perfectly predictable, we run into some pecu-
liarities: ships and cars are often treated as feminine in gender (also 
neuter, but never masculine): she won’t start; let’s get her under sail. For 
some (primarily British) varieties of English, the word baby is neuter, but 
not babies in general, since once the baby is called by name, the baby 
must be male or female: it kept on crying, so I fed it ~ Lucinda kept on crying, 
so I fed her/*it.
In order to talk about the gender or noun class systems of a language, 
linguists give them names or numbers. Each of Kujamaat Jóola’s 19 
classes is assigned a number. Speakers of the language do not use such 
numbers. They are able to use the noun classes correctly without articu-
lating such a system. 
Noun class in Kujamaat Jóola is marked by singular and plural pre-
fixes of the shape (C)V-. Every noun generally has a noun class prefix 
in both singular and plural and is said to belong to both a singular 
and a plural class. For instance, the singular word asek ‘one woman’ 
is in class 1, as indicated by the prefix a-, but its plural, kusek ‘more 
than one woman’, is in class 2, as indicated by the prefix ku-. We can 
say that the lexeme sek ‘woman (neither singular nor plural)’ falls into 
one of two classes, depending on whether it is singular or plural. This 
type of system, in which we speak of a particular singular class and a 
matching plural class as forming a pair, so that genders are character-
ized by pairs of classes, is characteristic of the entire Niger-Congo 
family, including the Bantu languages. Together, classes 1 and 2 form 
what we might call the personal gender, since they contain most 
words with human referents. Examples of other class 1/2 nouns are 
given in (1):
(1) Class 1 a- (sg.) 
Class 2 ku- (pl.)
 
asεf 
‘chief’ (< Fr. chef) 
kusεf 
‘chiefs’

60  
WORDS AND LEXEMES
 
e
ku 
‘thief’ 
kuku 
‘thieves’
 
aj
c 
la ‘Jóola person’ 
kuj
c 
la 
‘Jóola people’
Although personal names bear no class prefix, we know that they 
belong to class 1 because they trigger class 1 agreement on adjectives, 
verbs, and so on, as we will see in chapter 6.
The gender consisting of classes 3 and 4 is semantically diverse. 
Words for most animals are assigned to this gender, as are terms for 
various concrete objects. Furthermore, as pointed out by Sapir (1965: 
62), “most loan words that are not persons, fruits, trees, containers, or 
bony objects” are assigned to this pair:
(2) Class 3 e- (sg.) 
Class 4 si- (pl.)
 
εg
c 
l 
‘stick’ 
sig
c 
l
 
εyεn 
‘dog’ 
siyεn
 
emunɡun ‘hyena’ 
simunɡun
 
elu:p 
‘house’ 
silu:p
 
emo:n 
‘trunk of body’ 
simo:n
 
εsεntur 
‘belt’ (< Fr. ceinture) 
sisεntur
 
εbandεlε ‘flag’ (< Port. bandeira) 
sibandεlε
 
εfε:rε 
‘means, affair’ (< Fr. affaire) 
sifε:rε
 
edu:li:ne ‘(peanut) oil’ (< Fr. d’huile)
Classes 3 and 4 contain some nouns with human referents, which a 
priori might have been expected to be assigned to classes 1 and 2. A few 
plural personal nouns, such as siɲa:y ‘mother’s sisters’, belong to class 4 
although, in this case at least, the singular is marked by the class 1 prefix 
(aiɲa:y). Furthermore, at least two forms that refer to “substandard 
people” are marked as belonging to classes 3 and 4: es
c 
ŋ/sis
c 
ŋ ‘fool, psy-
chotic’ and eɡət/siɡət ‘stupid person’. Placing humans in a non-human 
gender is a standard technique across languages for expressing disre-
spect or derogation, and is seen, for example, in Grebo (Kru), Tsova-
Tush (Caucasian), and Yao (Bantu) (Head 1978: 175–7; Corbett 1991: 
322–3). In Kujamaat Jóola the opposite is also possible. A storyteller 
may endow an animal with human qualities by marking it as belonging 
to class 1.
A number of class 3 nouns do not take a class marker, or take one 
only optionally. The former include mbur ‘bread’ and dakar ‘Dakar’. All 
place names belong to this type. Examples of nouns that take a class 
marker optionally are (e)jimukor ‘lion’ and (e)bekan ‘bicycle’, the latter 

WORDS AND LEXEMES  61
from French bécane. As with personal names, which belong to class 1, 
we know that these words belong to class 3 because they consistently 
trigger class 3 agreement on adjectives, verbs, and other words with 
which they enter into an agreement relation.
The gender consisting of classes 5 and 6 includes most words for 
fruit, including borrowings, and most words referring to periods of 
time or to events involving large crowds (Sapir 1965: 63). As usual, 
other semantic types are represented as well:
(3) Class 5 fu- (sg.) 
Class 6 ku- (pl.)
 
fumanɡ 
‘mango’ (< Port. manga) 
kumanɡ
 
fulim
e
n 
‘orange (fruit)’ (< Fr. limon) 
kulim
e
n
 
fufimbar  ‘tomato’ 
kufimbar
 
funak 
‘day’ 
kunak
 
furi 
‘food, mealtime’ 
kuri
 
futamp 
‘circumcision festival’ 
kutamp
 
fubur
e
 
‘duck’ 
kubur
e
 
fuko 
‘head’ 
kuko
Classes 5 and 6 have a derivational role as well: they may be used to 
form augmentatives or augmentative plurals of nouns from other 
classes. So we have eɡ
c 
l ‘stick’ (class 3) and siɡ
c 
l ‘sticks’ (class 4), but 
also fuɡ
c 
l ‘big stick’ (class 5) and kuɡ
c 
l ‘big sticks’ (class 6). Likewise, 
asek ‘woman’ can be placed into class 5 to produce fusek ‘big woman’. 
Note again how the two classes are paired in a single gender, even when 
a quite different meaning is involved.
The next pair, classes 7 and 8, contains words referring to bones, bony 
objects (such as a fish’s fin), and limbs of the body. It includes too most 
words for containers, including borrowings. However, it also contains 
the word for at least one type of frog and for language:
(4) Class 7 
ka- (sg.) 
Class 8 u- (pl.)
 
k
c 
:l 
‘bone’ 
w
c 
:l
 
kaŋaɡ 
‘fin (of fish)’ 
uŋaɡ
 
k
e
sinsiŋ ‘(type of) basket’ 
usinsiŋ
 
kap
c 
t 
‘pot’ (< Port. pote) up
c 
t
 
kajata 
‘(type of) frog’ 
ujata
 
kasankεn ‘language’ 
usankεn
“[W]ords for trees and for objects hollowed out from tree trunks and 
large limbs” are remarkably consistent in mapping onto the 9/8 pair, 

62  
WORDS AND LEXEMES
with only one recorded exception (Sapir 1965: 63). This is not to say that 
the 9/8 pair is semantically homogenous. As seen below, it  contains 
words meaning ‘road’, ‘spitting cobra’, ‘corpse’, and ‘ fertilizer’:
(5) Class 9 bu- (sg.) 
Class 8 u- (pl.)
 
bub
e
:r 
‘general word for tree’ 
ub
e
:r
 
busa:na 
‘silk cotton tree, dugout canoe’ 
usa:na
 
buruŋ 
‘road’ 
uruŋ
 
bulun 
‘spitting cobra’ 
ulun
 
buyiŋ 
‘corpse’ 
uyiŋ
 
buɲulεn 
‘fertilizer’
The fact that two singular classes, 7 and 9, both make their plural in 
class 8 shows the necessity of putting singular and plural nouns of the 
same apparent gender in separate classes in languages like Kujamaat 
Jóola. In Indo-European languages there is generally a one-to-one map-
ping between singular and plural noun classes, with one plural type for 
every singular type, and vice versa.
We turn now to the pair of classes 10 and 11. A number of nouns, 
especially those that denote small animals, consistently appear with 
marking for classes 10 and 11. But these classes serve to form diminu-
tives as well, corresponding to the way in which the 5/6 class pair is 
used to form augmentatives in addition to having a more specific use. 
Stems that typically appear in other classes, such as -ko ‘head’ (5/6) and 
-ɲil ‘child’ (1/2), form singular and plural diminutives by taking class 
10 and 11 prefixes. Which familiar nineteenth-century novel might you 
translate into Kujamaat Jóola as mu-sεk?
(6) Class 10 ji- (sg.) 
Class 11 mu- (pl.)
 
jiko 
‘small head’ 
muko
 
jiɲil 
‘small child’ 
muɲil
 
jib
e
:r 
‘small tree’ 
mub
e
:r
 
jikit 
‘type of small antelope’ 
mukit
 
jimandulit ‘type of snake’ 
mumandulit
Taking the same two stems, -ko ‘head’ (5/6) and -ɲil ‘child’ (1/2), with 
which we formed diminutives above, we can form augmentatives by 
placing them into the pairs 9 and 12 and 5 and 12 respectively. These 
examples show that a single class, 5 in this instance, can be basic for 
some nouns (here -ko ‘head’), but form an augmentative for others 
(here -ɲil ‘child’):

WORDS AND LEXEMES  63
(7) Class 5 fu-; Class 9 bu- (sg.) 
Class 12 ɲi- (pl.)
 
fuɲil ‘large child’ 
ɲiɲil
 
buko ‘large head’ 
ɲiko
No nouns belong specifically to the 9/12 or 5/12 pairs.
Mass nouns are generally assigned to class 11. Class 11 is other-
wise a plural and it may seem odd to English speakers that mass 
nouns should be placed in a class that is normally plural. We should 
keep in mind that what truly sets off mass nouns semantically is that 
they do not distinguish between singular and plural, so whether we 
use an otherwise singular or plural class is not material, and 
indeed diminutives of mass nouns fall into class 10, which is 
 normally  singular:
(8) Class 11 mu- 
Class 10 ji-
 
mumεl 
‘water’ jimεl 
‘a little bit of water’
 
mi:l 
‘milk’ 
jimi:l 
‘a little bit of milk’
 
musis 
‘salt’ 
jisis 
‘a little bit of salt’
 
musana(y) ‘news’ 
jisanay ‘a little bit of news’
Sapir observes that there are also a few recorded instances of other class 
prefixes, including e- (class 3), si- (class 4), bu- (class 9), or fa- (class 14), 
marking mass nouns. Some examples are given below:
(9) Class 3: 
erus 
‘wind’
 
 
eful 
‘cotton’
 
Class 4: 
sambun ‘fire’
 
Class 9: 
bunuk 
‘palm wine’
 
Class 14: f
e
sim 
‘blood’
 
 
fak
c 
r 
‘smoke’
Kujamaat Jóola also has a diminutive collective, which means ‘little 
bunch of, little collection of’. This is formed by assigning a noun stem 
from just about any class to class 13:
(10) Class 13 ba-
 
bakikit (cf. εkikit ‘pit, seed’) 
‘small bunch of seeds’
 
bajaŋata (cf. fujaŋata ‘peanut’) 
‘small bunch of peanuts’
So far we have encountered very few abstract nouns. These are scat-
tered over a number of classes, some of which we have already seen. 

64  
WORDS AND LEXEMES
Many of them, including all color words, fall into class 15. Among the 
forms in (11), note the borrowing -bulore ‘blue’, from French bleu. It has 
been assigned to class 15 because of the important role of semantics in 
the organization of the Kujamaat Jóola noun class system:
(11) Class 15 ma-
 
majilayεt 
‘yellow’
 
malaεnε 
‘black’
 
m
e
bulore 
‘blue’ (< Fr. bleu)
 
malεɡεn 
‘truth’
 
maj
c 
l 
‘rapidity’
 
marapεt 
‘stubbornness, insolence’
Some abstract nouns occur in classes 12, 13, or 14. As we have learned 
to expect, exceptions are possible, and thus we find ɲikul meaning 
‘funeral’:
(12) Class 12 ɲi-: 
ɲikul 
‘funeral’
 
 
ɲiŋ
c 
nk 
‘coldness’
 
Class 13 ba-: bacar 
‘hunger’
 
 
b
e
rir 
‘right (direction)’
 
 
batiay 
‘brotherhood, sisterhood’
 
Class 14 fa-: 
falamat ‘nonsense, bad act’
 
 
falε:t 
‘sulkiness’
Classes 16 (ja-), 17 (wa-), 18 (ti-), and 19 (ri-) are rare, and no examples 
are presented here.
Infinitives, like nouns, take a noun class prefix. The class prefix is 
generally predictable and depends on the number of syllables in the 
stem. We have seen a rough correspondence between noun classes and 
semantics, with each noun class having an association, admittedly not 
consistent, with some semantic class. Here we see a purely  phonological 
criterion at work. Though not common, this sort of phonological condi-
tioning is fairly widespread throughout the languages of the world. In 
Latin, for example, though the genders are correlated to some extent 
with sex, some nouns are assigned to genders purely on phonological 
grounds. Returning to our Kujamaat Jóola infinitives, we see that the 
phonological conditioning of the noun class membership of infinitives 
is highly regular: monosyllabic stems take the class 3 prefix e-, while 
stems of more than one syllable take the class 7 prefix ka-:

WORDS AND LEXEMES  65
(13) a. εɡa 
‘to throw’
 
εis 
‘to show’
 
b. katundo 
‘to lose consciousness, to be in a coma’
 
k
e
tik
e
r 
‘to be without’
Taking a monosyllabic verb and making it polysyllabic by adding a 
derivational affix results in a class 7 infinitive, as seen in the following 
pairs:
(14) a. eɡa:j ‘to smear something with a gooey substance’
 
 
 kaɡa:jen (ɡa:j + causative -en) ‘to slander someone, to befoul 
something’
 
b. eyem ‘to be red, to redden’
 
 
k
e
yemen (yem + causative -εn) ‘to make red’
 
c. ek
c 
f ‘to scratch someone lightly’
 
 
kak
c 
f
c 
c 
:r (k
c 
f + reflexive -
c 
r) ‘to scratch oneself’
Noun class systems can be powerful inflectional and derivational 
mechanisms. We have seen that by changing a noun’s class marker, not 
only can Kujamaat Jóola speakers make important number  distinctions – 
singular, plural, mass, or collective – but they can also create diminu-
tives or augmentatives, personify non-humans, or dehumanize humans. 
Two examples of stems that take on a variety of meanings by moving 
from one noun class to another are given below:
(15) a. 
-sεk 
‘woman’
 
a-sεk 
‘woman’ 
(class 1)
 
ku-sεk 
‘women’ 
(class 2)
 
ji-sεk 
‘small woman’ 
(class 10)
 
mu-sεk 
‘small women’ 
(class 11)
 
ba-sεk 
‘many small women’ 
(class 13)
 
fu-sεk 
‘big woman’ 
(class 5)
 
ɲi-sεk 
‘big women’ 
(class 12)
 
b. -b
e
:r 
‘wood’
 
bu-b
e
:r 
‘tree’ 
(class 9)
 
u-b
e
:r 
‘trees’ 
(class 8)
 
ji-b
e
:r 
‘small tree’ 
(class 10)
 
mu-b
e
:r 
‘small trees, underbrush’ 
(class 11)
 
e-b
e
:r 
‘stick’ 
(class 3)
 
si-b
e
:r 
‘sticks’ 
(class 4)

66  
WORDS AND LEXEMES
The facts seen in this chapter suggest a possible analysis of the Kujamaat 
Jóola noun class system. It is plausible that some noun stems, such as 
-sek ‘woman’ (1/2), -munɡun ‘hyena’ (3/4), -manɡ ‘mango’ (5/6), and 
-bik ‘large pot with wide mouth’ (7/8), are not marked for any noun 
class in the lexicon, and are assigned to the appropriate classes by 
semantic rules. For example, nouns with human referents are automat-
ically assigned to class 1 in the singular and class 2 in the plural, nouns 
referring to animals to classes 3 and 4, nouns referring to fruits to classes 
5 and 6, and containers to classes 7 and 8. Other nouns must be lexically 
marked for a particular noun class. For example, we would expect 
-tunɡuɲ ‘taciturn person’ to be assigned to the 1/2 pair since it has a 
human referent. The fact that it belongs to class 13 is due to its being 
marked as belonging to class 13 in the lexicon. Lexical specification for 
noun class overrides assignment by semantic rule.
The behavior of loanwords, or words borrowed from other languages, 
in Kujamaat Jóola suggests that in the absence of lexical specification or 
an appropriate semantic rule, nouns are assigned to a default gender, 
which appears to be the gender consisting of class 3 in the singular and 
class 4 in the plural. As shown below, most loanwords are assigned to 
these two classes, with the exception of words that refer to persons, 
fruits, trees (no examples available), containers, or bony objects:
(16) Kujamaat Jóola loanwords
 
3/4 pair:
 
εsεntur 
‘belt’ (< Fr. ceinture) 
sisεntur
 
εbandεlε ‘flag’ (< Port. bandeira) 
sibandεlε
 
εfε:rε 
‘means, affair’ (< Fr. affaire) 
sifε:rε
 
εharijε 
‘talisman’ (< Ar. hirz, Mdk. harijéo) siharijε
 
εk
c 
nsε 
‘vacation’ (< Fr. congé) 
sik
c 
nsε
 
1/2 pair (humans):
 
aba:riŋ 
‘kin (general term)’ (< Mdk. bariŋ) 
kuba:riŋ
 
ama:nsa 
‘king, rich man’ (< Mdk. manso) 
kuma:nsa
 
5/6 pair (fruits):
 
fumanɡ 
‘mango’ (< Port. manga) 
kumanɡ
 
fulim
e
n 
‘orange (fruit)’ (< Fr. limon) 
kulim
e
n
 
fun
e
:n
e
 
‘banana’ (< Fr. banane) 
kun
e
:n
e
 
7/8 pair (containers and bony objects):
 
kap
c 
t 
‘pot’ (< Port. pote) 
up
c 
t
 
kaja:m 
‘leg and foot’ (< Fr. jambe) 
uja:m

WORDS AND LEXEMES  67
Because the 3/4 pair is the default gender, it is also the most semanti-
cally diverse. Historically it is possible that because 3/4 happened to 
be the largest or most diverse gender pair, it became the default 
gender.
Three types of noun class assignment – default assignment to 
classes 3 and 4, lexical specification, and semantic rule – can all be 
overridden by the derivational mechanism illustrated by some of the 
nouns in (15). Almost any noun can be assigned to class 10 (ji-) to 
form a diminutive or to class 5 (fu-) to form an augmentative. 
[Exercises 11 and 12]
Further Reading
 
■
Anderson, Stephen R. 2005. Aspects of the Theory of Clitics. Oxford: Oxford 
University Press.
Aronoff, Mark. 1994. Morphology by Itself: Stems and Inflectional Classes. 
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Di Sciullo, Anna-Maria and Edwin Williams. 1987. On the Definition of Word. 
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Dixon, R. M. W. and Alexandra Y. Aikhenvald, eds. 2007. Word: A Cross-Linguistic 
Typology. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Matthews, Peter. 1991. Morphology, second edition. Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press.
Zwicky, Arnold M. and Geoffrey K. Pullum. 1983. Cliticization vs. inflection: 
English n’t. Language 59: 502–13.

68  
WORDS AND LEXEMES
Exercises
1. We have said that speakers use adjectives to modify a compound as 
a whole and not to modify only one of its members. Thus a brown 
deer tick is a brown tick, not a tick that lives on brown deer. 
However, morphological generalizations are often not absolute. We 
heard the first of the following compounds on television, and read 
the second in The Economist (July 11, 2002):
a. German car dealership (a dealership that sells German cars)
b. rich-country club (the OECD, an international organization 
made up primarily of rich countries)
Should these be considered counterexamples to the generalization 
that adjectives cannot modify part of a compound? Explain your 
answer. Then come up with another example that is parallel to these.
2. One English clitic is the possessive morpheme ‘s. Is the host of ‘s a 
word or a phrase? Present data to support your answer.
3. Identify each of the underlined words as a function or content 
word.
Row, row, row your boat
Gently down the stream
Merrily, merrily, merrily, merrily
Life is but a dream.
4. Some speakers of English always pronounce the words in column A 
with the vowel [ε], even when the words are stressed. They pro-
nounce the words in column B with the vowel [æ]. This means that 
for them, can ‘be able’ and can ‘metal container’ are never homo-
phones, as they sometimes are for other English speakers. Make 
two generalizations about the words in column A, one phonologi-
cal and the other morphological, that account for their patterning 
together with respect to the shift from [æ] to [ε]. Disregard the 
number of syllables.
 
A 
B
 
can ‘be able’ 
can ‘metal container’, can’t, cat, camera
 
am 
yam, at, allergy
 
an 
Ann, ant
 
than 
cranberry, thatch

WORDS AND LEXEMES  69
5. Some English speakers use they as a third person singular pronoun, 
as in (b). Using the examples in (a–e), describe the function of 
singular they and describe contexts in which an English speaker 
might choose to use it.
a. Everyone takes their/his time.
b. If it’s part of how a person defines themself, they should be 
allowed to wear it, even if it causes controversy. [High school 
student quoted in the Ithaca Journal ]
c. We did see somebody hanging around the dumpster. They 
were/He was wearing a jean jacket and a black cap.
d. There was only one guy at the party. He/*They looked pretty 
amused.
e. I ran into Cheryl after the play. She was/*They were really 
pleased about her/*their performance.
6. Are the following sets of boldfaced words forms of a single lexeme, 
or examples of different lexemes?
a. roast (verb), roast (noun)
b. roaster ‘piece of equipment used for roasting’, roaster ‘chicken 
packaged and purchased for roasting’
c. roast (verb), roasting (participle of verb with the same mean-
ing: We were roasting chicken halves for the fire station 
 fundraiser), roasting (adverb used to modify ‘hot’: roasting 
hot)
d. roast, roasts, roasted (all verbs with the same meaning)
e. book, books (both nouns with the same meaning)
f. book, bookie, booklet (all nouns)
7. Read the following sentences out loud. Can you find phono-
logical evidence that what we spell have in (a) and (b) corre-
sponds to two different lexemes? (In (a), have is a content word 
meaning ‘possess’, and in (b), it is a function word meaning ‘be 
obligated’.) This task may be difficult for non-native speakers of 
English.
a. I have twelve cats.
b. I have to go.
8. How many phonological words are there in the following set? Put 
all the forms that represent the same phonological word together in 
a list. How many grammatical words are there? List them. Finally, 

70  
WORDS AND LEXEMES
 
how many lexemes are there? List them as well, remembering to 
write them in capital letters.
 
flour (n), flour (v), flours (n), flours (v), floured, flower (n), flower 
(v), flowers (n), flowers (v), flowered
 9. How might you analyze civilization in an item-and-arrangement-
based model? And in an item-and-process-based model? Do the 
same for sing → sang.
10. If you know a language that has noun classes or genders, what is 
it? How many noun classes or genders are there? List them, with 
at least two examples for each. Can the noun class or gender of 
any words be predicted on the basis of their meaning? Explain.
11. Universal Grammar is the hypothesis that all languages are alike 
on some level of analysis. Implicit in this formulation is the idea 
that at other levels of analysis, languages are different. (See the 
discussion of language vs. Language in chapter 1.) Discuss the 
Kujamaat Jóola noun class system in this context. (You may also 
want to bring in examples of other gender systems, if you are 
familiar with any.) How is the Kujamaat Jóola noun class system 
reflective of language and what does it tell us about Language?
12. Chichewa, Malawi (Nida 1965: 141–2)
 
The forms below can be divided into several noun classes. Describe 
the forms by (i) setting up the classes and (ii) describing each by 
means of a composite statement, as best you can given the lim-
ited number of data. (As a model, you can look again at the sec-
tion on Kujamaat Jóola noun classes. For example, Kujamaat 
Jóola class 9 was described as containing the singular forms of 
words for trees and objects made by hollowing out tree trunks or 
large limbs.) Explain the distribution of any allomorphs that you 
encounter.
 
Supplementary information:
● Differences of tone should not be considered in analyzing this 
set. Tones are basic to the stem.
● The penultimate (next-to-the-last) syllable is always long in 
these forms. This is true of these nouns in isolation, but not 
necessarily in context.
● Certain phonologically defined allomorphs occur:

WORDS AND LEXEMES  71
mw- and vj- occur before vowels
m- and a- occur before polysyllabic stems
● The stem of forms (c) and (d) is -ána.
 a. mu:nthu 
‘man’
 b. βa:nthu 
‘men’
 c. mwá:na 
‘child’
 d. βá:na 
‘children’
 e. mú:phwa 
‘man’s sister’s child’
 f. βá:phwa 
‘man’s sister’s children’
 g. mná:si 
‘neighbor’
 h. aná:si 
‘neighbors’
 i. 
mza:mba 
‘midwife’
 j. 
aza:mba 
‘midwives’
 k. dá:mb
c 
 
‘marsh’
 l. 
madá:mb
c 
 
‘marshes’
 m. fu:n
c 
 
‘wish, need’
 n. mafu:n
c 
 
‘wishes, needs’
 o. pemphe:r
c 
 
‘prayer’
 p. mapemphe:r
c 
 
‘prayers’
 q. bwε:zi 
‘friend’
 r. 
mabwε´:zi 
‘friends’
 s. tʃá:ka 
‘year’
 t. vjá:ka 
‘years’
 u. tʃiβá:le 
‘coconut tree’
 v. viβá:le 
‘coconut trees’
 w. tʃipa:nda 
‘calabash’
 x. vipá:nda 
‘calabashes’
 y. tʃis
c 
́:ŋga 
‘wooden arrow point’
 z. vis
c 
́:ŋga 
‘wooden arrow points’
aa. tʃitsú:r
c 
 
‘iron’
bb. vitsú:r
c 
 
‘pieces of iron’
NOTES
1 One exception is in first language acquisition. Some children use my in this 
context before acquiring mine.
2 Single-syllable prepositions in English are normally clitics, except at the end 
of a sentence (e.g. What did you do that for?), a position some prescriptivists 
find unacceptable.

72  
WORDS AND LEXEMES
3 Our use of “adverb” here mirrors that of traditional grammar. Some modern 
linguists would give very and not different labels.
4 In modern syntax, prepositions are considered a lexical category. This does 
not make them content words.
5 The citation form of Latin verbs is the first person indicative singular.
6 The perfective and imperfective are two forms of the verb. As a first approx-
imation, we may say that the perfective expresses an action as being com-
plete, while the imperfective expresses an action as being incomplete.

3 Morphology and Phonology
This chapter explores some of the many interactions that take place 
between morphology and phonology. These interactions and the gram-
mar that describes them are often called morphophonology or mor-
phophonemics. We begin by looking at phonological processes such as 
assimilation and the effect they have on the shapes of morphemes. We 
then consider limitations on the phonological shape of morphological 
entities such as words and stems. From there we move on to two gen-
eral types of affixes that are distinguished, in part, by phonological cri-
teria. Their phonological behavior reveals details about their underlying 
structure and the point at which they attach to their bases. We conclude 
3.1 Allomorphs 
74
3.2 Prosodic Morphology 
78
 
3.2.1 Phonotactic constraints 
78
 
3.2.2 Root-and-pattern morphology 
80
 
3.2.3 Reduplication 
81
3.3 Primary and Secondary Affixes 
82
3.4 Linguistic Exaptation, Leveling, and Analogy 
86
3.5 Morphophonology and Secret Languages 
93
3.6 Summary 
95
Kujamaat Jóola Morphophonology 
96
 
Vowel harmony 
96
 
A secondary affix 
101
Further Reading 
103
What is Morphology?, 2nd edition, by Mark Aronoff and Kirsten Fudeman © 2011 
Mark Aronoff and Kirsten Fudeman.

74  
MORPHOLOGY AND PHONOLOGY
with a look at secret languages in which morphology and phonology 
interact to disguise the shapes of words.
We wrote in the preface that we expect our readers to have the rudi-
mentary knowledge of linguistics that comes from taking an introduc-
tory course. To understand the discussion in this chapter, you need to 
know three terms that are often not introduced in such courses. They 
are onset, nucleus, and coda. The onset of a syllable is made up of the 
first consonant or consonants. The nucleus is the syllable’s core, usually 
a simple vowel or a diphthong. The coda is made up of the consonant 
or consonants that follow the nucleus. All syllables must have nuclei. 
Onsets and codas are optional, though some languages require the 
former.
■ 3.1 Allomorphs
The term ‘allomorph’ was introduced in the first chapter, in two con-
texts. In Kujamaat Jóola, we noted that the stem /baj-/ has two possible 
shapes, [baj-] and [b
e
j-], with [b
e
j-] occurring in the presence of a mor-
pheme with an underlyingly tense vowel, and [baj-] elsewhere. In 
English, the plural marker comes in several shapes, among them [s] as 
in lips, [z] as in balls, [
e
z] as in roses, [n̩] as in oxen, and null as in sheep. 
In this chapter we are most interested in alternations based purely on 
phonological context, as with the Kujamaat Jóola facts. In the English 
data, only the first three allomorphs of the plural suffix depend on pho-
nological context. The last two, as in oxen and sheep, are lexical, and we 
will not be concerned with them here.
Like the English plural suffix -s, the English past tense suffix has 
three forms: [d], [t], and [
e
d]:
(1)  [d]: blamed [blejmd], triggered [trɪɡ
e
rd], realized [rij
e
lajzd], sighed 
[sajd], rubbed [r∧bd]
 
 [t]: jumped [ʤ∧mpt], licked [lɪkt], hushed [h∧ʃt], laughed [læft], 
itched [ɪtʃt]
 
 [
e
d]:aided [ejɾ
e
d], knighted [n∧jɾ
e
d]
The distribution of the three allomorphs is predictable and parallel to the 
distribution of the three allomorphs of the English plural suffix. [d] is 
found on verbs ending in a vowel or a voiced consonant, with the excep-
tion of alveolar stop /d/. [t] is found on verbs that end with a voiceless 

MORPHOLOGY AND PHONOLOGY  75
consonant, with the exception of alveolar stop /t/. In verbs that end with 
/t/ or /d/ (generally realized in speech as [ɾ]), we find [
e
d].
We can formulate the distribution of the allomorphs in even simpler 
terms: the English past tense suffix is /d/. Where we find [t], the /d/ 
has assimilated to the preceding segment in voicing. Where we find 
[
e
d], the [
e
] has been added by an automatic phonological rule of epen-
thesis (i.e., insertion of a phonological segment or segments) that is 
triggered by the fact that the final segment in the verb and the suffix 
itself agree in both place and continuancy. We can call /d/ the basic 
form or the basic allomorph of the English past tense suffix.
It is not always easy, or even possible, to determine the basic form of 
a morpheme. To do so, we must decide which form of a morpheme best 
accounts for the full range of data. Consider the two words from 
Classical Greek given below. The forms on the left are in the nominative 
case, used for subjects, and those on the right are in the genitive case.
(2) aithiops 
‘Ethiopian’ 
aithiopos 
‘of an Ethiopian’
 
phleps 
‘vein’ 
phlebos 
‘of a vein’
On the basis of these two forms, we can hypothesize that the nominative 
in Greek is formed by the addition of -s and that the genitive is formed 
by the addition of -os. What then are the basic forms of the stems mean-
ing ‘Ethiopian’ and ‘vein’? With respect to the first, the answer seems 
simple: comparing the nominative and genitive forms, we isolate aithiop-. 
Finding the basic stem meaning ‘vein’ is more difficult. It might be phlep-, 
the stem of the nominative, or phleb-, the stem of the genitive (cf. phle-
botomist). Theoretically, it could also be neither. However, we want the 
basic form of the allomorph to be one that speakers would be able to 
posit on their own given the available evidence, and when given a prob-
lem set we have to assume that we, too, have all the relevant data.
If the basic form of the stem were phlep-, we would have no explana-
tion for why speakers of Classical Greek did not simply add -os, as with 
aithiopos, yielding *phlepos. Positing an underlying stem of phleb- instead 
makes the genitive form phlebos understandable, and with an additional 
step of assimilation in voicing, it also allows us to explain the nomina-
tive form, phleps. [Exercises 1 and 2]
(3) Formation of Classical Greek phleps
 
a. Stem + nominative suffix: phleb + s
 
b. Voicing assimilation: 
phleps

76  
MORPHOLOGY AND PHONOLOGY
Allomorphs are often the product of assimilations like the one that 
takes /d/ to [t] in words like jumped, baked, or kissed, or that takes *phleb s 
to phleps. In the case of the English past tense suffix, the voicelessness of 
the final consonant in the verb spreads forward to the suffix in what we 
call progressive assimilation. In the Classical Greek example, the voice-
lessness of the nominative suffix moves in the opposite direction. We 
call this regressive assimilation.
Another example of regressive assimilation is found in Spanish. 
Word-final nasal consonants assimilate in place of articulation to a fol-
lowing consonant in many different contexts. For example, the preposi-
tion con ‘with’ has at least three phonetic realizations: [kom], [kon], and 
[koŋ]. (In fact, there are five phonetic realizations of con, but we are 
simplifying for clarity.) Their distribution is predictable, just like that of 
the English past tense suffixes. We find [kom] before labial consonants, 
[kon] before alveolars and vowels, and [koŋ] before velars. Again, we 
can identify a basic form, in this case /kon/. We know it is basic because 
it occurs in two unlike environments: before certain consonants and 
before all vowels.
(4) Castilian Spanish con 
 
a. 
[kom]
 
 
conmigo 
‘with me’
 
 
con María 
‘with Maria’
 
 
con Pedro 
‘with Pedro’
 
 
con Beatríz 
‘with Beatrice’
 
b. 
[kon]
 
 
contigo 
‘with you (sg)’
 
 
con Diego 
‘with Diego’
 
 
con nadie 
‘with no one’
 
 
con él 
‘with him’
 
c. 
[koŋ]
 
 
con Gabriela ‘with Gabriela’
 
 
con Carlos 
‘with Carlos’
Assimilation like that seen with Spanish con is rampant in the world’s 
languages and thus a frequent source of allomorphy.
Epenthesis is another common source of allomorphy. Frequently lan-
guages epenthesize consonants in contexts where a final vowel in one 
word would otherwise come up against an initial vowel in the follow-
ing word, particularly when the two have a strong syntactic bond. We 

MORPHOLOGY AND PHONOLOGY  77
call this unwanted vowel–vowel contact hiatus. French is a language 
that doesn’t tolerate hiatus well, and it has various ways of eliminating 
it in certain syntactic contexts. The plural article les [le] ‘the’ is pro-
nounced [lez] when it is followed by a vowel-initial word (5a); the mas-
culine demonstrative ce [s
e
] becomes cet [sεt], which happens to be 
homophonous with the feminine demonstrative cette (5b); and the fem-
inine genitive adjectives ma [ma], ta [ta], and sa [sa] are replaced by mon 
[mon], ton [ton], and son [son] (5c). The last three forms are identical in 
spelling to the masculine genitive adjectives mon, ton, son. Before a con-
sonant, the vowel of the masculine genitive singular pronouns is nasal-
ized and the final /n/ is not pronounced. It is only pronounced before 
vowel-initial words – another hiatus context (6).
(5) a. les maisons 
[lemezõ] 
‘the houses’
 
 
les ami(e)s 
[lezami] 
‘the friends’
 
b. ce médecin 
[s
e
medsε˜] 
‘this doctor’
 
 
cet âne (m) 
[sεtɑn] 
‘this donkey’
 
c. ma tante 
[matɑ̃t] 
‘my aunt’
 
 
mon analyse (f) 
[monanaliz] ‘my analysis’
(6) a. mon chien 
[mõʃjε̃] 
‘my dog’
 
b. mon oncle 
[monõkl] 
‘my uncle’
In the Vallader dialect of Rumantsch, the prepositions da ‘from’ and a ‘to’ 
become dad and ad respectively before words beginning with a vowel:
(7) a. da Zernez 
‘from Zernez’
 
 
dad Ardez 
‘from Ardez’
 
b. a Cuoira 
‘to Chur’
 
 
ad Arosa 
‘to Arosa’
An instructive case is that of Spanish, as shown by the following set of 
data. We have put stressed syllables in boldface type:
(8) a. el agua 
‘the water’
 
b. el alma 
‘the soul’
 
c. el águila 
‘the eagle’
 
d. el aula 
‘the classroom’
 
e. el ave 
‘the bird’
 
f. 
el hacha 
‘the axe’

78  
MORPHOLOGY AND PHONOLOGY
 
g. el hambre 
‘hunger’
 
h 
la abeja, *el abeja 
‘the bee’
 
i. 
la harina, *el harina ‘the flour’
 
j. 
la isla, *el isla 
‘the island’
 
k. la hora, *el hora 
‘the hour’
All of the Spanish nouns above are feminine, which may surprise you 
if you know already that el is the masculine definite article, and la is the 
feminine. In Spanish, la must be replaced by el before a feminine noun 
that begins with a stressed [a] (8a–g). This does not occur before any 
other vowel sound, as shown by the last two examples (8j, k). We 
include (8h) and (8i) because both abeja and harina begin with [a] but are 
stressed on the penultimate (second-to-last) syllable. This exempts 
them from the la → el rule.
We see that the Spanish anti-hiatus rule has a limited application. It 
applies only at the juncture between the feminine definite article and a 
stressed [a]. What’s more, it has at least two lexical exceptions: it does 
not apply in the case of la a ‘the a’ or la hache ‘the h’ (letters of the alpha-
bet).1 As morphologists, we are used to dealing with cases like this. 
Unlike syntax, which tends to be very regular, morphology is full of 
irregularities and exceptions. [Exercises 3–6]
■ 3.2 Prosodic Morphology
Prosodic morphology deals with the interaction of morphology and 
prosodic structure. Prosodic structure is particularly concerned with 
the timing units of languages, for example, the word and syllable, 
and vowel length. From this general category we present three phe-
nomena: phonotactic constraints, root-and-pattern morphology, and 
reduplication.
■ 3.2.1 Phonotactic constraints
Phonotactic constraints limit the possible phonological shapes of stems 
and words. Phonotactic constraints are often, but not always, connected 
with syllable structure.
At their most basic, phonotactic constraints determine the minimum 
length of content words in particular languages. For example, in 

MORPHOLOGY AND PHONOLOGY  79
Mohawk, each content word contains at least two syllables (Michelson 
1988, cited by Hayes 1995: 47). Other languages require that content 
words consist of at least a heavy syllable, where heavy means that the 
syllable contains a long vowel, diphthong, or a vowel and a weight-
bearing (moraic) consonant.2 Many languages do not have minimal 
word constraints, including Romanian, Hungarian, and Icelandic 
(Hayes 1995: 88–9).
Does English have a minimal word constraint? An analysis of nick-
names suggests that it does (see McCarthy and Prince 1998: 287–8). 
Here is a list of some English first names and their corresponding short 
forms, or nicknames:
(9) English nicknames
 
a. Alexander → Alex
 
 
Caroline → Carrie
 
 
Katherine → Cathy, Kitty
 
b. Josephine → Jo
 
 
Louisa, Louis → Lou
 
 
Susan, Suzanne → Sue
 
 
Tyler → Ty
 
c. Beverly → Bev
 
 
Christopher → Chris
 
 
Robert → Rob, Bob
 
 
Stephanie → Steph
Even if we were to keep going, we would find that any nickname we 
can think of falls into one of these three sets. They are either polysyl-
labic (9a) (in this case, bisyllabic) names or monosyllabic names (9b–c) 
that have either a diphthong, a coda, or both. No native English nick-
names consist of a single, light syllable. From this data, it seems that 
English falls in with the set of languages that have a minimal word 
constraint. Even the shortest of names, nicknames, must consist mini-
mally of a heavy syllable or two light syllables. And it is difficult, if 
not impossible, to find an English content word that contradicts this 
conclusion.
We also find that languages have restrictions on the possible shapes 
of roots. Nida (1965: 66) reports that in the Mayan languages, roots are 
predominantly of the shape CVC and in Bantu they are generally CVCV. 
In Hebrew, Arabic, and other Semitic languages, roots generally consist 
of three consonants: CCC.

80  
MORPHOLOGY AND PHONOLOGY
■ 3.2.2 Root-and-pattern morphology
We ended the last section by saying that in Semitic languages such as 
Hebrew and Arabic, roots generally consist of three consonants. To 
form words, vowels are superimposed on this consonantal pattern. We 
call this type of morphology root-and-pattern.
Hebrew root with sample forms
The following forms share a triconsonantal root, M-L-K. In some, the root 
consonant /k/ is realized as the fricative [x].
M-L-K: melex 
‘king’
 
malkah 
‘queen’
 
malax 
‘he reigned’
 
yimlox 
‘he reigns, he will reign’
 
malxut 
‘royalty, royal power, reign, kingdom’
 
mamlaxah ‘kingdom, sovereignty, dominion’
In root-and-pattern morphology, the root consonants in a given 
inflectional or derivational paradigm combine with vowels and 
sometimes consonants in a fixed pattern. It is possible to think of the 
consonantal root being superimposed on a template. Thus, in the box 
above, malax ‘he reigned’ consists of a root m-l-x and a template 
_a_a_. The consonants fit into the empty slots of the template. Yimlox 
‘he reigns’ can be thought of as the root m-l-x and a template yi_ _o_. 
(We use y here to represent IPA [j] in keeping with traditional Hebrew 
transliteration.)
Words of a given class typically share a single pattern. Referring 
again to the box above, in Hebrew grammar, melex ‘king’ is called a 
segolate noun (if you do not already know this term, you do not 
need to learn it for this course). Segolate nouns consist of two sylla-
bles, and they are stressed on the penultimate (second-to-last) syl-
lable.3 The group of segolate nouns can be subdivided into three 
different classes. All of the nouns in melex’s class share its vocalic 
pattern. Thus we find berex ‘knee’, regel ‘foot, leg’, nefeʃ ‘soul’, and 
ʕeved ‘servant’. The triconsonantal roots of these forms are, in order: 
b-r-k, r-g-l,  n-f-ʃ, and ʕ-b-d. In the word for ‘servant’, the root conso-
nant /b/ is realized as [v], and in the word for ‘knee’, the root 

MORPHOLOGY AND PHONOLOGY  81
 consonant /k/ is realized as [x]. Alternations of this sort are 
 important to the phonology and morphology of Hebrew.
As an aside, the root-and-pattern morphology of Hebrew and Arabic 
is reflected in their writing systems, which use the primary symbols to 
represent consonants and diacritics to represent vowels.
While by definition there are no exceptions to the minimal word con-
straints presented in the previous section, we do sometimes find excep-
tions to generalizations about possible root shapes. In the Semitic 
languages, we do find roots consisting of two consonants (CC) and four 
(CCCC). But these are less numerous than triconsonantal roots.
McCarthy (1981) remains one of the most influential studies of root-
and-pattern morphology and is a good starting point for further explo-
ration of the phenomenon, along with Katamba and Stonham (2006: 
154–77), where root-and-pattern morphology is discussed in detail 
within the context of templatic morphology.
■ 3.2.3 Reduplication
In reduplication, a continuous substring from either the beginning or 
the end of a word is copied. Languages may use reduplication for 
inflection or derivation. Plural reduplication in Ilokano, an 
Austronesian language of the Philippines, is illustrated below 
(McCarthy and Prince 1998: 285). The reduplicated portion of the 
word is in italics:
(10) kaldíŋ 
‘goat’ 
kal-kaldíŋ 
‘goats’
 
púsa 
‘cat’ 
pus-púsa 
‘cats’
 
kláse 
‘class’ 
klas-kláse 
‘classes’
 
jyánitor ‘janitor’ 
jyan-jyánitor ‘janitors’
 
róʔot 
‘litter’ 
ro:-róʔot 
‘litter (pl)’
 
trák 
‘truck’ 
tra:-trák 
‘trucks’
The inclusion of borrowings in the data set above shows that reduplica-
tion is a productive means of forming plurals in Ilokano.
Reduplication bears an important similarity to root-and-pattern 
morphology. The reduplicant typically must follow a certain pattern 
or adhere to some other prosodic requirement. In Ilokano plurals, as 
you can see, the reduplicant is always of the shape C(C)VC or C(C)
VV. [Exercise 7]

82  
MORPHOLOGY AND PHONOLOGY
■ 3.3 Primary and Secondary Affixes
Over the years, our knowledge of morphological structure has been 
enhanced by work in phonology. We learn a lot by observing the pho-
nological processes that take place or do not take place within particu-
lar sets of morphologically complex words.
One distinction that has come out of work that pairs morphology and 
phonology is between primary and secondary affixes, also known as 
level 1 and level 2 affixes or class 1 and class 2 affixes. In English, this 
distinction is intimately connected with language history. Primary 
affixes in English are often of Latin-Romance origin, while secondary 
affixes are often of native Germanic origin. (English is a Germanic lan-
guage.) However, we de-emphasize this fact in the following discus-
sion because etymology can only take us so far in morphological 
analysis. The primary–secondary distinction is a living process, regard-
less of its history, and in English, as in other languages of the world, it 
cannot be explained away as etymological residue.
Below are some examples from Kiparsky (1983) of words bearing 
-(i)an, a primary affix (11), and ones bearing -ism, a secondary affix (12):
(11) a. Mendel 
→ 
Mendelian
 
b. Mongol 
→ 
Mongolian
 
c. 
Parkinson 
→ 
Parkinsonian
 
d. Shakespeare 
→ 
Shakespearian
 
e. grammar 
→ 
grammarian
(12) a. Mendel 
→ 
Mendelism
 
b. Mongol 
→ 
Mongolism
 
c. 
Parkinson 
→ 
Parkinsonism
 
d. national 
→ 
nationalism
 
e. capital 
→ 
capitalism
If you read the words in (11) and (12) to yourself, you hear an important 
difference. Words with -(i)an have a stress shift. The stress in Mendel is 
on the first syllable, while in Mendelian, it is on the second. Likewise, 
Parkinson is stressed on the first syllable, but Parkinsonian is stressed on 
the third. We can generalize by saying that in all words with -(i)an, 
stress is on the syllable that immediately precedes the suffix. Stems suf-
fixed with -ism, on the other hand, are stressed on the same syllable 

MORPHOLOGY AND PHONOLOGY  83
as their unaffixed counterparts. Nationalism is stressed on the first syl-
lable, just like national. This is the first and most famous difference 
between primary and secondary affixes in English. Primary affixes 
cause a stress shift, while secondary affixes do not.
If primary and secondary affixes both occur in the same word, we 
can make a second prediction. The primary affix will occur closer to the 
stem than the secondary affix. Therefore, Parkinsonianism is a possible 
word, but *Parkinsonismian is not.
Now consider the words reparable and repairable. Both have repair 
as their stem, but it is slightly disguised in the first. Semantically, 
both mean ‘capable of being repaired’, but only the second would be 
used to describe a broken appliance. Reparable has the additional 
sense of ‘liable to be paid back or recovered’ as with reparable dam-
ages. These words show that the suffix -able in English is actually two 
suffixes. One is primary, as in reparable, and the other is secondary, as 
in repairable. Traditional usage among morphologists is to use the 
symbol ‘+’ to mark the juncture between a stem and a primary affix 
and to use ‘#’ to mark the juncture between a stem and a secondary 
affix. We use these symbols to differentiate between the two types of 
-able here.
Other word pairs that show the opposition between +able and #able 
are prefer+able [prε´f(
e
)r
e
bl̩] vs. prefer#able [pr
e
f ´
e
˞r
e
bl̩] and compar+able 
[kɑ´mp(
e
)r
e
bl̩] vs. compar#able [kɑmpæ´ r
e
bl̩]. Phonologically, the stem in 
the first is stressed differently in combination with +able than it is in 
isolation: compare the pronunciation of prefer+able and prefer. This is 
typical of primary affixes. In addition, the semantics of the forms con-
taining the primary affix +able are less direct, or less compositional, 
than the semantics of the forms containing the secondary affix #able. If 
two models are not cómparable (contains the primary affix +able), they 
are unlike. If they are not compárable (contains the secondary affix #able), 
it is not possible, in a literal sense, to compare them. The semantics of 
forms containing the secondary affix #able are so predictable that they 
are often not even listed in dictionaries.
Looking at other +able vs. #able pairs, we discover other phonologi-
cal characteristics of primary affixation. Consider the following words:
(13)  
+able 
#able
 
a. defensible 
defendable
 
b. perceptible 
perceivable
 
c. divisible 
dividable

84  
MORPHOLOGY AND PHONOLOGY
Forms with +able in (13) exhibit allomorphy in the stem. They use a 
form that is recognizable from nouns, namely defense, perception, and 
division, instead of the citation form of the lexeme: defend, perceive, and 
divide. The fact that +able can be spelled +ible is unimportant here. 
Further examples of stem allomorphs occurring with the primary affix 
+able are given in the leftmost column of (14):
(14)  
+able 
base 
#able 
base
 
a. cultivable 
cultiv 
cultivatable 
cultivate
 
b. educable 
educ 
educatable 
educate
 
c. irrigable 
irrig 
irrigatable 
irrigate
 
d. navigable 
navig 
navigatable 
navigate
 
e. demonstrable 
demonstr 
demonstratable 
demonstrate
The second pair of columns in (14) show that the secondary affix #able 
differs from +able in attaching to the citation form of the lexeme: culti-
vate, educate, irrigate, navigate, and demonstrate.
Another difference between primary +able and secondary #able is 
that in words of the form X#able, X must be a transitive verb. In (14), 
cultivate, educate, irrigate, navigate, and demonstrate are all transitive. 
+able, on the other hand, is sometimes found on stems that are not tran-
sitive verbs, such as poss- (from Latin posse ‘to be able’), as in possible, or 
ris- (from Latin ride-re ‘to laugh’), as in risible.
We have said that we would de-emphasize etymology in our discus-
sion of primary and secondary affixes, but here it becomes important. 
Many words with primary affixes – including possible and risible – were 
borrowed directly into English from French or Latin. They are fossil-
ized; speakers have learned to use them, not created them on their own. 
However, even such fossilized examples as possible and risible are sig-
nificant, because they illustrate another point: speakers are able to iso-
late both primary and secondary affixes when presented with words 
that contain them. Possible may be stored in the lexicon as a whole, but 
it is nevertheless analyzable. A person, such as a child or a second lan-
guage learner, encountering possible for the first time will recognize it as 
an adjective because it ends in -ible.
In talking about the distinction between primary and secondary 
affixes, we have focused on suffixes. Prefixes can be primary or sec-
ondary as well. An example of a primary prefix is in+, and an example 
of a secondary one is un#. Both mean ‘not’. Phonologically, in+ has 
allomorphs. It surfaces as ir-, im-, in-, and il- in words like  irreplacable, 

MORPHOLOGY AND PHONOLOGY  85
immortal, inoperable, and illegal. Un# does not have any allomorphs. 
Un- is of Germanic origin, with cognates in earlier stages of English, in 
contrast to in-, which came to English from Latin, through French.
In+, like +able, attaches to allomorphic stems:
(15)  
in+ 
un#
 
a. irregulable 
unregulatable
 
b. inviolable 
unviolatable
 
c. imperceptible unperceivable
 
d. indivisible 
undividable
The stems it attaches to are stressed differently than the lexical stem of 
the corresponding lexeme:
(16)  
in+ 
un#
 
a. irréparable unrepáirable (cf. repáir)
 
b. irrévocable unrevókable 
(cf. revóke)
In+ may attach to non-lexical stems, while un# does not. (In+ attaches 
to lexical stems as well, for example, impalpable, impossible.)
(17) a. 
inept *unept, *ept
 
d. inert 
*unert, *ert
Compare well-formed words prefixed with un# such as ungodly, 
unhinge, unlike, unsteady. Godly, hinge, like, and steady are all lexical 
stems. An exception to this general observation is unkempt. There is no 
lexical stem kempt. But as usual, this morphological fact about English 
finds an explanation when we look to the history of the word. Kempt is 
the past participle of Old English cemban ‘to comb’.
Un# is also more productive than in+. You can test this claim yourself 
by thinking of some adjectives that do not usually have an in+ or un# 
prefixed form. Which sounds better, inferocious or unferocious? inwet or 
unwet? indead or undead?
If you are observant, you have noticed a final and very important dif-
ference between in+ and un#. The former has a special relationship 
with +able, and the latter with #able. Words with +able are prefixed 
with in+ and not un#, while words with #able are prefixed with un#.
We have included our discussion of primary and secondary affixes 
in a chapter that deals with the interaction between phonology and 

86  
MORPHOLOGY AND PHONOLOGY
 morphology because that is the context in which this distinction has 
most often been treated and because it led to important work in pho-
nology. Our objective was not to give a comprehensive account of the 
topic, but rather an overview, and thus we have left many issues 
untouched. Under the heading “lexical phonology,” phonologists 
have used the distinction between the two types of affixes to explore 
the possibility that different phonological rules apply at different 
levels of a morphological derivation (for a detailed overview, see 
Kenstowicz 1994). But as we have seen, primary and secondary 
affixes have semantic consequences as well. In particular, the seman-
tics of primary affixes is less likely to be fully compositional. 
[Exercises 8 and 9]
Primary and secondary affixes in English: summary
Primary 
Secondary
Often of Latin-Romance origin 
Often of Germanic origin
Cause a stress shift 
Do not cause a stress shift
Usually occur closer to the stem than Usually occur outside of primary affixes
 secondary affixes  
The semantics of the derived form 
The semantics of the derived form tend
 tend to be less compositional  
 to be compositional
May attach to a non-basic allomorph Attach to a stem’s basic allomorph  
 of the stem
The affix itself may have allomorphs 
 The affix itself does not have  allomorphs
May attach to non-lexical stems 
Attach to lexical stems (i.e., words from 
 
 lexical categories N,  V, Adj/Adv)
■ 3.4 Linguistic Exaptation, Leveling, and Analogy
Rudes (1980) and Lass (1990) have both raised the question of what to 
do with “linguistic left-overs” (Rudes’s term) or “linguistic junk” (Lass’s 
term). In both cases, it has to do with morphemes that lose their seman-
tic content or morphosyntactic function as a result of language change 
and are left as contentless, functionless strings of phonemes floating 
around in the system. Rudes’s and Lass’s investigations on this ques-
tion cover a variety of cases. They show that languages are in general 

MORPHOLOGY AND PHONOLOGY  87
intolerant of useless elements, and speakers reanalyze them as having 
a new role. Lass calls this process linguistic exaptation, extending 
a term originally coined by Stephen Jay Gould and Elizabeth Vrba in 
the context of evolutionary biology to the study of language change. In 
evolutionary biology, exaptation occurs when a structure or feature that 
developed for a certain function through natural selection takes on a 
new and different function.4
Carstairs-McCarthy (1994) and Cameron-Faulkner and Carstairs-
McCarthy (2000), in their work on inflectional classes and gender, and 
stem alternation, respectively, suggest that linguistic exaptation is per-
vasive. Carstairs-McCarthy considers the ingenuity that speakers show 
in assigning new roles to inflectional contrasts whose original purpose 
has been lost as being related to Clark’s (1987: 2) Principle of Contrast, 
“Every two forms contrast in meaning.” Linguistic exaptation is there-
fore a natural consequence of a core psycholinguistic mechanism that 
makes it easier for speakers to master complex inflectional systems or 
to learn the meanings of new vocabulary items, and we expect to find it 
playing an important role in the evolution of inflectional systems cross-
linguistically.
One language family in which linguistic exaptation has occurred is 
Germanic (Lass 1990: 83–7). There, Indo-European vowel alternations 
within verbal paradigms came to encode the present/past distinction 
(e.g., English write, wrote). They had originally been used to encode 
aspectual distinctions. The case that we focus on here, however, is the 
one discussed by Rudes: the development of the verbal suffix -esc in 
Romance. Our story begins with Latin, where the suffix -sc attached to 
sequences of verb stem plus theme vowel to form the inchoative aspect 
(which has the general meaning ‘to begin to’). Compare the Latin verb 
form palleo- ‘I am pale’ with its inchoative counterpart pallesco- ‘I begin to 
pale’. Similarly, amo- in Latin means ‘I love’, while amasco- means ‘I am 
beginning to love’, and flo-re-re is ‘to flower’, while flo-rescere is ‘to begin 
to flower’ (examples from Rudes 1980). English doesn’t have a produc-
tive inchoative aspect, but we do have pairs like white and whiten 
‘become pale; begin to be pale’.
A theme vowel, in the morphology of Latin, is a vowel that 
attaches to the verb stem and can be analyzed as determining its 
 inflection class. One Latin verb class is identified by the theme vowel 
/a/. As Latin developed into the modern Romance languages, the 
inchoative suffix declined in productivity and eventually ceased to 
be productive at all. But while the semantic function of the affix 

88  
MORPHOLOGY AND PHONOLOGY
eroded, the phonological material survived into various Romance 
 languages, including Italian, Romanian, and dialects of Rhaeto-
Romance. It was altered in one significant way: the theme vowel that 
originally fell between the verb stem and the inchoative suffix (which 
had varied among /a/, /i/, and /e/, depending on the verb) ceased 
to be identifiable as a theme vowel and came to be segmented along 
with the suffix in one invariable form. In both Romanian and Rhaeto-
Romance, the suffix was reanalyzed as -esc. In Italian, it was reana-
lyzed as -isc. At this stage, -esc and -isc were both examples of what 
Lass calls “linguistic junk,” strings of phonemes without a function. 
Within Lass’s model, there were three possibilities regarding the 
future development of -esc and -isc:
  i. They could disappear entirely.
    ii. They could be kept as “marginal garbage,” i.e., meaningless idio-
syncrasies of the verbs already bearing them.
iii.  They could be kept, but instead of being relegated to the marginal 
role of (ii), they could be used for something new, taking on a new 
meaning or function.
What happened was (iii). The suffix represented by -esc and -isc became 
productive once again and is a distinctive feature of the verbal mor-
phology of certain Romance languages. Why?
Although the classical conception of morpheme is a pairing between 
sound and meaning, we have defined it as the smallest grammatically 
significant unit in a word. What makes the development of -esc in the 
Romance languages distinctive is that its function was phonological, 
rather than syntactic or semantic. It is meaningless. We can exemplify 
this by looking at the paradigm of a verb that contains this morpheme. 
As seen below, the suffix occurs in the first, second, and third person 
singular and third person plural of the present indicative of the verbs 
that have it (so-called fourth conjugation verbs) in Romanian, illus-
trated here by a citi ‘to read’ (Rudes 1980: 333). (It also occurs in these 
persons in the present subjunctive and imperative.) But the core mean-
ing of verbs does not change depending on the subject:
(18) 1sg 
citésc 
1pl 
citím
 
2sg 
cités¸ti̯ 
2pl 
citíţi̯
 
3sg 
cités¸te 
3pl 
citésc

MORPHOLOGY AND PHONOLOGY  89
We can describe the new-found role of the -esc suffix in (18) as that of a 
stem-extender. The addition of -esc in the singular persons and in the 
third person plural had an effect on word stress. If not for the presence 
of the suffix, verbs like a citi, above, would be stressed on the root in 
the 1–3sg and 3pl forms, and on the suffix in the 1–2pl forms. Since the 
diachronic, or historic, development of vowels in Romanian and other 
languages varies depending on stress, this would have had the effect of 
creating two stems for many verbs. The renewed productivity of the 
suffix -esc long after its original meaning of inchoative aspect was lost 
is due to its regularizing effect on the stress of non-past verb forms. This 
is reflective of a larger tendency cross-linguistically. As languages 
evolve over time, they often show a preference for regularity within 
paradigms.
The story of the evolution of the Latin inchoative affix has another 
twist. Recall from above that one of the languages where it is produc-
tive and phonologically conditioned (appearing where stress would 
otherwise fall on the stem) is Italian. There, it is realized as [isk] or [iʃʃ], 
depending on the following vowel. From Italian, it was borrowed into 
Maltese.
Maltese is a Semitic language. Semitic is known for root-and-pattern 
morphology, as we saw in section 3.2.2. Over the course of time, how-
ever, the productive verbal morphology of Maltese has become affixal, 
with only relics of the original root-and-pattern type remaining 
(Hoberman and Aronoff 2003). One consequence of this change is that 
Maltese easily borrows verbs intact from other languages – especially 
Romance. This is not so straightforward in other Semitic languages like 
Hebrew and Arabic. For example, as noted by Hoberman and Aronoff, 
Hebrew borrows nouns intact (e.g., telefon), but verbs are adjusted to 
the morphological patterns of Hebrew. Thus, one form of the verb ‘to 
telephone’ is tilfen.
When Maltese borrows Italian verbs containing the <-isc-> aug-
ment, it borrows the augment as well, which always takes the shape 
[iʃʃ], written <ixx>. This augment appears under the same conditions 
as in Italian: when stress would otherwise fall on the stem. But since 
the stress patterns of Maltese verbs differ from those of Italian verbs, 
these conditions are met in different tense, person, and number forms. 
This is shown in the box on the next page. Following Hoberman and 
Aronoff, we have indicated stress, though the orthographies of nei-
ther language do so.

90  
MORPHOLOGY AND PHONOLOGY
Italian and Maltese verb paradigms (Hoberman and Aronoff 2003)
 
Italian 
Maltese
 
suggerísco 
issuɡ̇ɡ̇eri
Perfect
sg 1 
suggeríi 
issuġġeréjt
sg 2 
suggerísti 
issuġġeréjt
sg 3m 
suggerí 
issuġġeríxxa
sg 3f 
— 
issuġġeríet
pl 1 
suggerímmo 
issuġġeréjna
pl 2 
suggeríste 
issuġġeréjtu
pl 3 
suggerírono 
issuġġeréw [-éww]
Imperfect
sg 1 
suggerísco 
nissuġġeríxxi
sg 2 
suggerísci 
tissuġġeríxxi
sg 3m 
suggerísce 
jissuġġeríxxi
sg 3f 
— 
tissuġġeríxxi
pl 1 
suggeriámo 
nissuġġeríxxu
pl 2 
suggeríte 
tissuġġeríxxu
pl 3 
suggeríscono jissugɡ̇eríxxu
Imperative
sg 
suggerísci 
suggeríxxi
pl 
suggeríte 
suggeríxxu
In some cases, the augment appears in parallel forms in both languages, 
but in other cases, it doesn’t. Maltese has borrowed a morpheme and the 
rule that governs its distribution, but not the verb forms themselves.
The tendency for languages to prefer regular paradigms over irregu-
lar ones sometimes leads to leveling, the elimination of sound alterna-
tions that do not signal important differences in meaning. A classic 
example of leveling comes from Latin. In Prehistoric Latin, the stems of 
words like colo-s ‘color’ and hono-s ‘worth’ ended in -s throughout the 
nominal paradigm:5
(19) 
Prehistoric Latin
 
Nominative 
col-os
 
Genitive 
*col-os-es
 
Dative 
*col-os-ei
 
Accusative 
*col-os-em
 
Ablative 
*col-os-i

MORPHOLOGY AND PHONOLOGY  91
Through regular sound change, intervocalic /s/ became /r/, a process 
called rhotacism:
(20) Old Latin
 
Nominative col-os
 
Genitive 
col-or-is
 
Dative 
col-or-ei/-e-
 
Accusative 
col-or-em
 
Ablative 
col-or-e
At this point, the paradigm was characterized by two stems, one 
ending in /s/ (the nominative form) and one ending in /r/ (the 
oblique forms). Eventually the final /s/ of the nominative form was 
replaced by /r/ in order to conform with the stem of the oblique 
forms. Note also that the /o/ preceding the /r/ of the nominative 
form shortened:6
(21) 
Classical Latin
 
Nominative 
color
 
Genitive 
col-or-is
 
Dative 
col-or-ı-
 
Accusative 
col-or-em
 
Ablative 
col-or-e
A second example of leveling comes from the history of Spanish. 
Latin, from which Spanish developed, had a class of verbs that was 
characterized by a nasal infix in the present stem. The nasal infix was 
present in some forms of the verb but absent from others (notably the 
past tense):
(22) a. 
rump-o ‘I break’ 
but ru-pı- ‘I broke’
 
b. vinc--o 
‘I defeat’ but vı-cı- 
‘I defeated’
In the history of Spanish, the /n/ infix has been generalized to all forms 
of the verbs that once had it only in a limited number of forms of the 
paradigm. Modern Spanish has romper ‘to break’, rompo ‘I break’, rompí 
‘I broke’, and vencer ‘to defeat’, venzo ‘I defeat’, vencí ‘I defeated’. (Venc- 
and venz- are pronounced alike in these forms.)
In discussions of leveling, we often speak of analogy (A is to B as 
C is to D). The nasal infix of verbs that had it was generalized 

92  
MORPHOLOGY AND PHONOLOGY
throughout the paradigm by analogy with verbs that did not have 
such an alternation and that instead had a single form of the stem 
throughout the  paradigm. Analogy is usually expressed as two equa-
tions, with the missing form represented by a variable X (A : B as 
C : X; solve for X). Using Modern Spanish forms for simplicity, the 
equation would be as follows, where conocer ‘to know’ is chosen ran-
domly as a representative of verbs that did not have the nasal infix, 
and X represents the form that needs to be supplied by analogy to 
conocí:
(23) conocer : conocí
 
vencer : X = vencí
Informally, conocer is to conocí as vencer is to X, solved as vencí. More 
broadly, four-part analogy is used to describe the generalization or 
extension of a morphological pattern across (as opposed to within) 
paradigms (Hock 1991: 168). Through it, whole classes of words come 
to behave more similarly. Hock gives the example of English plurals. 
It is because of four-part analogy that the plural of cow is cows, replac-
ing the earlier form kine. The new plural cows generalizes the plural 
formation familiar from other words, such as stone, stones, as in (24). 
Here, as in most instances of analogy, the pattern that serves as the 
basis of the analogy (in this case the regular plural suffix -s) is more 
productive.
(24) stone : stone-s
 
cow : X = cow-s
Sometimes the older form that existed before analogical leveling 
remains as a relic, used for special meanings. The old plural of brother is 
brethren. These days, it is used only to refer to fellow-members of a 
church or social organization, not to brothers in the literal sense of the 
term. The title of a book about the United States Supreme Court, The 
Brethren, uses this form to emphasize the special nature of the relation-
ship among the members of this most elite of groups.
Leveling and analogy are powerful forces in the development of lan-
guages over time. They are driven by a seemingly innate preference in 
speakers for phonological and morphological similarity between mem-
bers of a paradigm or a class of words. [Exercise 10]

MORPHOLOGY AND PHONOLOGY  93
■ 3.5 Morphophonology and Secret Languages
We now turn to two secret languages that are permutations of existing 
languages. Secret languages are found around the world and have been 
attested in English, French, Spanish, Dutch, Thai, Cuna (Sherzer 1970), 
and Haitian Creole, to name only a few. They can be seen as examples of 
creative language use, and thus they should be considered external to the 
mental grammar. What, then, is the place of these languages in a book on 
morphology? In the examples that we present, speakers go from the exist-
ing language to the secret language through the regular application of 
phonological rules in what might be considered a morphological deriva-
tion. Secret languages also exploit notions that are independently moti-
vated in phonology and morphology, notably the syllable and onset.
One secret language you may already be familiar with is Pig Latin. In 
one variation, words that start with vowels are suffixed with way [wej]. 
Words that begin with a consonant or consonant cluster shift the entire 
onset sequence to the end and are suffixed with ay [ej]:
(25) igpay atinlay 
‘Pig Latin’
 
eefray ormfay 
‘free form’
 
inflectionway 
‘inflection’
When speakers manipulate words in this fashion, they make use of 
their subconscious knowledge of linguistic entities such as onset and 
nucleus. Language games are therefore an instructive union of phonol-
ogy and morphology.
Another secret language is verlan [vεʁlɑ̃], which is based on 
French. The word verlan is derived by reversing the syllables of 
l’envers [lɑ̃vεʁ] ‘the other way around’. Verlan works best with words 
of two syllables, because in these the two syllables can simply be 
reversed:
(26) Standard French 
Verlan
 
a. 
pourri [puʁi] 
ripou [ʁipu] 
‘rotten’ (generally refers 
 
 
 
 
 
to corrupt police)
 
b. branché [bʁɑ̃ʃe] 
chébran [ʃebʁɑ̃] 
‘plugged in, informed’
 
c. 
pétard [petaʁ] 
tarpé [taʁpe] 
‘cannabis joint’
 
d. bagnole [baɲol] 
gnolba [ɲolba] 
‘car’

94  
MORPHOLOGY AND PHONOLOGY
Monosyllables are verlanized differently depending on whether 
they are open or closed. In open monosyllables, such as pue [py] 
‘stinks’, the order of consonant and vowel is reversed, yielding forms 
like [yp]. Closed monosyllables, such as femme [fam] ‘woman’, are 
treated as if they end in a schwa (Bullock 1996: 185) and therefore as 
if they are underlyingly bisyllabic. The syllables are reversed, and 
the final vowel is dropped: [fam
e
] → [fa.m
e
] → [m
e
.fa] → [mœf]. 
Note that the schwa is realized as [œ]; this is because schwa cannot 
be in stressed position in French. Trisyllabic words are put into 
verlan by changing the order of the syllables, but there are no fixed 
rules on how. For simplicity’s sake, we do not deal with trisyllabic 
words here.
For Bullock (1996), the interesting question is how the phonology 
of secret languages like verlan compares to the phonology of the lan-
guage they are based on. We see that verlan respects the basic syllable 
structure of French. French speakers who use verlan are aware on 
some level of prosodic entities such as onset, nucleus, coda, and syl-
lable. (The same can be said of English speakers who use Pig Latin.) 
Nonetheless, Bullock and other researchers who have looked at 
French secret languages note that the phonology of verlan is not the 
same as that of the standard language. We see in (26d) that [ ɲ] is a licit 
onset in verlan. It is not in standard French. Furthermore, in verlan, 
only the liquids [l] and [ʁ] are permitted in the codas of polysyllabic 
words. Bullock presents the example of bifton ‘cash, banknotes’, syl-
labified in standard French as bif.ton. In verlan, it would become fton.
bi [ftõ.bi], because [f] cannot form the coda of a polysyllabic word. 
This example deviates from standard French phonology in another 
way: [ft] is not a possible onset in French. Finally, it is significant 
that we formulated the constraint on codas by referring to “polysyl-
labic words.” In verlan monosyllables, consonants other than [l] and 
[ʁ] are welcome in word codas:
(27)  
Standard French 
Verlan
 
a. disque [disk] 
skeud [skød] 
‘CD, record’
 
b. mec 
[mεk] 
keum [kœm] 
‘man’
In natural languages we would not expect to find a coda constraint that 
holds in polysyllabic words but not monosyllables. It is intimately related 
to the fact that no verlan speaker is monolingual, and there are no native 
speakers of verlan. All of verlan is based on standard French, and 

MORPHOLOGY AND PHONOLOGY  95
 speakers of verlan invariably speak French, if not natively, then under 
more natural conditions. According to Bullock, the ‘rules’ of verlan are 
artificial compared to those of the standard – and natural – language.
Returning to Pig Latin, in the version presented here, words that start 
with a consonant cluster postpose the entire cluster, then add the suffix 
-ay. But another version of the secret language postposes only the first 
letter (e.g., losetcay for closet). Any rule that operates on letters rather 
than on phonological entities such as onsets is unnatural. Languages 
are first and foremost oral, and orthographies are systems imposed on 
them by people. Because of characteristics like these, secret languages 
must be looked upon as somewhat artificial and should not on their 
own be used to draw conclusions about the workings of natural lan-
guages. [Exercise 11]
■ 3.6 Summary
This chapter has taken the reader on a brief tour of morphophonology. 
We began by investigating allomorphs, which were introduced in 
chapter 1, in greater detail. We then turned to the field of prosodic 
morphology, selecting a few topics – minimal word constraints, root-
and-pattern morphology, and reduplication – for discussion. This was 
followed by a descriptive, non-theoretical look at primary and sec-
ondary affixes and the differences between them. The section on lin-
guistic exaptation, leveling, and analogy dealt with a completely 
different type of morphophonological phenomenon. It differs from 
other portions of this book in taking a historical perspective; for the 
most part we have been concerned with synchronic phenomena. 
Lastly we considered some secret languages. In one sense, they are 
artificial, and thus should not be used on their own to draw conclu-
sions about natural language. On the other hand, they reflect the regu-
lar application of rules that we often find in morphological derivation 
and provide external evidence for prosodic notions such as syllables 
and onsets.
In the Kujamaat Jóola portion of this chapter, we continue our focus 
on the interaction of morphology and phonology. We begin by investi-
gating vowel harmony, a process that leads to the creation of allomorphs. 
We then take a look at the derivational affix in Kujamaat Jóola that 
expresses the notion ‘from’. It differs from most derivational affixes in 
the language in behaving as a secondary, as opposed to primary, affix.

96  
MORPHOLOGY AND PHONOLOGY
■ Kujamaat Jóola Morphophonology
■ Vowel harmony
The most salient feature of Kujamaat Jóola’s phonology happens to 
be something that is profoundly related to its morphology – vowel 
 harmony. Vowel harmony is the agreement among some or all of the 
vowels in a word with respect to a given feature, such as height, round-
ing, or backness. In Finnish, for example, vowels harmonize for front-
ness. If all the vowels in a root are front, then vowels in any suffix must 
also be front, as seen by the partial declension paradigm of ‘forest’ in 
the last column of (1) below. If any of the vowels in the root are not 
front, as seen in the partial declension paradigms of words meaning 
‘house’, ‘cat’, and ‘log’ in the first three columns of (1), the suffix vowel 
does not change. Two of the roots below, kissa ‘cat’ and tukki ‘log’, 
undergo degemination in the ablative, inessive, and elative (degemina-
tion is shortening of a long consonant, as in tukki → tuki):
(1)  
‘house’ 
‘cat’ 
‘log’ 
‘forest’
 
Nominative 
talo 
kissa 
tukki 
metsä
 
Partitive 
talo-a 
kissa-a 
tukki-a 
metsä-ä
 
Ablative 
talo-lta 
kisa-lta 
tuki-lta 
metsä-ltä
 
Inessive 
talo-ssa 
kisa-ssa 
tuki-ssa 
metsä-ssä
 
Elative 
talo-sta 
kisa-sta 
tuki-sta 
metsä-stä
The /a/ vowel of the case-endings may be realized as back [ɑ] or front 
[æ] (orthographic <ä>) depending on the backness of the preceding 
vowel.
In Kujamaat Jóola, there are two sets of vowels, tense and lax:
(2)  
Tense 
Lax
 
i 
u 
i  
u
 
e 
o 
ε 
ɔ
 
 
e
 
 a
It may seem strange that schwa is classified as a tense vowel, but as 
explained by Sapir (1975: 3), the tense–lax distinction in West African 
languages is typically different from that of European languages. In 
West African languages, like Kujamaat Jóola, tense vowels are relatively 

MORPHOLOGY AND PHONOLOGY  97
higher and closer to center than lax vowels. This explains why schwa, 
which is higher and more central than /a/, is considered its tense coun-
terpart. The difference between high tense and lax vowels is hard to 
perceive for foreigners, but the same is not true for the lower vowels, 
where distinctions are readily apparent.
All vowels in a word must be either tense or lax. Since tense vowels 
are dominant, whenever any tense vowel is found in a morphologically 
complex word, vowels that are otherwise lax become tense.7 Harmony 
spreads out both ways from a tense vowel:
(3) Lax stem  
Tense stem
 
baj 
‘have!’ 
jitum 
‘lead away!’
 
bajεn 
‘cause to have!’ jitumen 
‘cause to lead away!’
 
nibajεnu 
‘I caused you  
nijitumenu ‘I caused you to be 
 
 
to have’ 
 
led away’
 
b
e
jul 
‘have from!’ 
jitumul 
‘bring!’
 
nib
e
julu 
‘I have for you’ 
nijitumulu 
‘I brought you’
As we see in (3), the process of vowel harmony leads to the existence 
of two allomorphs, or variants, for all morphemes with lax vowels 
that can occur together in a word with morphemes containing tense 
vowels. The stem /baj-/ ‘have’, for instance, may be realized as [baj-] 
or [b
e
j-]. The causative marker /-εn/ also occurs as [-en], and the sub-
ject prefixes /ni-/ ‘I’ and /u-/ ‘you (sg)’ as [ni-] and [u-]. Morphemes 
containing tense vowels, by contrast, never alternate, because tense 
always dominates over lax. The stem /jitum/ ‘bring’ always appears 
with the same shape, because its vowels are underlyingly tense. 
Likewise, the directional marker /-ul/ has an underlyingly tense 
vowel. Both /jitum/ and /-ul/ trigger vowel harmony but are never 
affected by it. We can tell whether a morpheme’s vowels are basically 
tense or lax by whether it alternates; alternating morphemes whose 
vowels are sometimes lax and sometimes tense are underlyingly lax, 
while non-alternating morphemes whose vowels are always tense are 
underlyingly tense.
The importance of the tense–lax distinction in Kujamaat Jóola goes 
well beyond phonology and morphology. In a 1975 article, Sapir 
explores the social role played by tense and lax vowel harmony. It turns 
out that vowel harmony is not absolute. Some speakers make relatively 
more use of it, and their speech is considered to be k
e
l
e
 ‘big’ by other 
Kujamaat Jóola speakers. Those who make relatively less use of it have 

98  
MORPHOLOGY AND PHONOLOGY
speech that is called mis ‘thin’. Big and thin are always relative terms. 
There are no speakers who have only tense vowels or only lax vowels. 
It is a “quantitative tendency … to favor lax or tense pronunciation” 
(Sapir 1975: 5; emphasis his) that determines whether someone’s speech 
is ‘big’ or ‘thin’.
As Sapir relates, he first became aware of the big–thin distinction 
while working with three Kujamaat Jóola speakers, AB (thin), KB (inter-
mediate), and AK (big), on a dictionary project. The big–thin distinction 
came across in three general areas. Of highest importance was variation 
in the application of vowel harmony. While vowel harmony is obliga-
tory in the language, the extent and degree of vowel harmony are not 
fixed. A tense morpheme might affect all of the vowels of a base, or only 
an adjacent vowel (Sapir 1975: 6):
(4)   
pan + a + kan + do ‘he will put it within’
 
Full harmony: 
p
e
n
e
k
e
ndo
 
Partial harmony: 
panak
e
ndo
Likewise, vowels affected by vowel harmony “may only partially tense, 
that is, they may become tainted with tenseness, not completely tense.” 
This observation is especially intriguing, because it suggests that the 
phonological feature [tense] is not an all-or-nothing matter.
A second area in which the big–thin distinction is apparent is suffixes. 
Three Kujamaat Jóola suffixes have regional variants that differ in part in 
containing tense versus lax vowels. AB, Sapir’s ‘thin’ consultant, used 
the lax variants of the three suffixes. KB, the intermediate consultant, 
used the lax variants of two, but the tense variant of the third. AK, Sapir’s 
‘big’ consultant, used the tense variants of two suffixes. The tense and lax 
variants of the third suffix were in free variation (Sapir 1975: 5):
(5) AB, thin 
KB, intermediate AK, big
 
-ati 
-
e
ti 
-
e
ti 
negative infinitive
 
-εrit 
-εrit 
-urit 
‘never’
 
-uli 
-uli 
-oli∼-ɔli 
‘1pl exclusive’
The big–thin distinction also asserted itself in vocabulary. There is quite 
a bit of lexical variation between the Kujamaat Jóola speakers of differ-
ent villages. Sometimes lexical items are completely distinct. Sometimes 
dialectal forms are only slightly different and are due in part or in full 
to the tense–lax distinction. Here are a few examples (Sapir 1975: 5):

MORPHOLOGY AND PHONOLOGY  99
(6) AB, thin KB, intermediate AK, big
 
-kuuk 
-kook 
-kook 
‘take big handfuls of food’
 
-kuntajεn -kuntejen 
-kuntejen ‘to kneel’
 
baɡɔri 
b
e
ɡori 
b
e
ɡori 
‘money’
 
-map 
-map 
-m
e
p 
‘shinny up a tree’
As seen in (6), the intermediate speaker shares the lax variant of ‘shinny 
up a tree’ with the thin speaker, but shares the tense variants of the 
other three forms with the ‘big’ speaker. For more detail on this and the 
other two areas that contribute to the big–thin distinction (harmony, 
variation in the form of suffixes), we refer the reader to Sapir (1975).
The big–thin distinction, as mentioned above, is not absolute, but 
instead must be seen as falling out along a continuum. A Kujamaat 
Jóola speaker will be able to place another’s speech as being bigger or 
thinner than his or her own. Regional dialects differ in terms of their 
relative bigness or thinness, and Kujamaat Jóola speakers even refer to 
other languages as being various degrees of big. The fundamental role 
of the big–thin distinction in Kujamaat Jóola society is identification of 
someone else as being similar or different. The closer in speech a person 
is to another, the more likely it is that that person is “reliable and trust-
worthy, or at least predictable” (Sapir 1975: 10).
Below is part of Sapir’s description of a conversation that he had 
with a Kujamaat Jóola woman, who characterized the speech of Sindian, 
the village of KB, Sapir’s intermediate consultant, as being “heavy” and 
“hard to understand” (1975: 10). Sapir explains that, to his knowledge, 
speakers of the woman’s dialect didn’t have difficulty understanding 
Sindian speech. Sindian speech was simply different:
Although Sindian speech was heavy it was not nearly so heavy as Kasa, a 
different dialect where there are some real difficulties. In turn Kasa was 
not as heavy as Wolof, the dominant language of Sénégal, nor was Wolof 
as heavy as French. English, my speech and the official language of the 
neighboring ex-colony of Gambia, was to this woman unquestionably the 
heaviest speech imaginable, just k
e
k
e
k
e
k
e
k
e
 like so many pied crows.
One of the most interesting aspects of the big–thin distinction is how 
speakers are placed in one category or another. Recall that Sapir had 
three consultants. One talked ‘big’ (AK) and one ‘thin’ (AB), and the 
third fell between them. As Sapir notes, nothing in the speech of the 
third individual placed it closer to that of the ‘thin’ or the ‘big’ speaker. 

100  
MORPHOLOGY AND PHONOLOGY
But this individual, KB, called his speech ‘big’, and the other two agreed. 
The reason for this had nothing to do with the tense–lax distinction. It 
was social. KB and AK, the ‘big’ speaker, were both Muslims, younger, 
and from outlying villages. Furthermore, they had worked with Sapir 
previously. AB, the ‘thin’ speaker, was Catholic, older, and from the 
administrative center. He was also fairly new to the project. KB’s deci-
sion to call himself ‘big’ had more to do with his perceived similarities 
to AK than with the tenseness of his speech.
Because the decision to classify someone as ‘big’ or ‘thin’ is based in 
part on social factors, Kujamaat Jóola people can disagree about whether 
someone talks ‘big’ or ‘thin’. Sapir gives another example, where two of 
his consultants disagreed over whether the speech of Kagnaru, a village, 
was ‘big’ or ‘thin’. KB, who considered his speech ‘big’, classified Kagnaru’s 
dialect as ‘thin’. It was true that the people of Kagnaru spoke ‘thinner’ 
than KB. But they did not speak as ‘thin’ as AB. KB’s labeling of their 
speech as ‘thin’ came more from the difficult relationship between his vil-
lage and theirs. AB disagreed with KB. For him, the speech of Kagnaru 
was ‘big’:
Although he admitted that Kagnaru might speak ‘thinner’ than [KB’s 
village] they were both ‘bigger’ speakers than himself and he saw no 
reason why he should be grouped with them. And socially, didn’t the 
Kagnaru people intermarry with [KB’s village] and quarrel with villages 
connected to his own family? And weren’t they for the most part 
Muslims? (Sapir 1975: 13)
This passage illustrates the way in which the big–thin distinction, 
though it is related to both phonology and morphology, also reflects 
social factors such as intermarriage and religion.
This short excursion into vowel harmony and the metalinguistic role 
of the tense–lax distinction should convince the reader that a morpholo-
gist must also be a bit of a phonologist. An understanding of Kujamaat 
Jóola vowel harmony is essential if we are to identify the morphological 
building blocks of the language – the smallest grammatically significant 
pieces. We need to recognize, for example, that although the first singu-
lar subject prefix may be realized as [ni-] or [ni-], in both cases we are 
dealing with the same underlying form, /ni-/. What’s more, if we were 
out in the field working with Kujamaat Jóola consultants, it would 
be essential to realize that variation in vowel harmony plays a social role. 
What we started off considering as a phenomenon at the intersection of 

MORPHOLOGY AND PHONOLOGY  101
Kujamaat Jóola phonology and morphology turned out to be a tripartite 
issue that brings together phonology, morphology, and sociolinguistics.
■ A secondary affix
In section 3.3 we explored the distinction between primary and secondary 
affixes in detail. In Kujamaat Jóola, most derivational affixes are primary. 
However, one is not: -ulɔ, -ul; -u. This affix, which is secondary, implies 
that an action begins away from the speaker. It can sometimes be trans-
lated ‘from’ or ‘over’. Note that it has a tense vowel in two of its variants.
(7) a. p
e
n- 
e
- 
riŋ 
dakar
 
 
fut-3agr- arrive 
Dakar
 
 
‘He  will 
 arrive at  Dakar’ 
(speaker not at Dakar)
 
b. p
e
n- 
e
- 
riŋ 
-u 
dakar
 
 
fut- 3agr- arrive 
-over Dakar
 
 
‘He will arrive at Dakar’   
(speaker at Dakar)
(8) ni- 
wɔnk 
-ul 
-ɔ 
-wɔnk
 
1agr-call 
-over -3obj -redup
 
‘I called him over’
We will introduce other verbal derivational affixes in chapter 5. We treat 
-u ‘from’ separately from them because, as discussed by Sapir, its mor-
phophonology sets it apart.
First, -u ‘from’ can follow inflectional markers. This makes it excep-
tional not only among Kujamaat Jóola derivational affixes, but among 
derivational affixes cross-linguistically (see section 6.2.1).
(9) n
e
- 
riŋ 
-e 
-u 
-riŋ
 
3agr-arrive 
-hab -from -redup
 
‘He habitually arrives from …’
-u is also exceptional in not acting as an added syllable on the verb stem 
for purposes of calculating the allomorphs of the infinitive. Recall from 
chapter 2 that infinitives, like nouns, are assigned to noun classes, and 
that monosyllabic stems take the class 3 prefix e-, while stems of more 
than one syllable take the class 7 prefix ka-. As seen in (10), other 
 derivational suffixes, represented here by the causative -en, result in the 

102  
MORPHOLOGY AND PHONOLOGY
infinitive being assigned to class 7, while -u ‘from’ does not. (The causa-
tive suffix will be discussed in chapter 5.)
(10) εbaj 
‘to have’ (class 3)
 
ebaju 
‘to have from …’ (class 3)
 
kabajεn 
‘to cause to have’ (class 7)
Finally, the derivational suffix -u ‘from’ differs from other derivational 
affixes in not reduplicating when the verb stem is reduplicated for verb 
emphasis (11b). Other derivational suffixes, again represented by the 
causative, do participate in reduplication:
(11) a. ni- 
pur 
-em 
-purem
 
 
1agr- 
leave -caus 
-redup
 
 
‘I caused to leave’
 
b. ni- 
pur 
-ulo 
-pur
 
 
1agr- 
leave -from -redup
 
 
‘I left from’
All of these properties suggest that -u ‘from’ in Kujamaat Jóola is a sec-
ondary affix. In short:
● It can follow inflectional markers.
● It does not count as an extra syllable of the verb stem when deter-
mining which noun class the infinitive should be assigned to.
● It does not reduplicate along with the verb stem for verb emphasis.
These properties suggest that -u has a more distant relation to the stem 
than other Kujamaat Jóola derivational affixes, which was also true of 
secondary affixes, when compared to primary affixes, in English. 
Nonetheless, this list barely resembles the one we prepared for English 
in section 3.3. There, secondary affixes differed from primary affixes in 
the following ways:
● Secondary affixes occur farther from the stem than primary affixes.
● Secondary affixes do not cause a stress shift, while primary affixes do.
● Secondary affixes are more likely than primary affixes to require 
their stem to be the citation form of the lexeme.
● Secondary affixes are likely to be more productive than primary 
affixes.

MORPHOLOGY AND PHONOLOGY  103
The only parallel between the two bulleted lists is between their first 
members. In both English and Kujamaat Jóola, secondary affixes appear 
farther from the stem than primary affixes.
This section has made two main points. The first is that the primary–
secondary affix distinction is just as valid in Kujamaat Jóola as in English. 
More broadly, while much of this book focuses on English morphology, 
the facts you learn are readily transferable to the study of the morphol-
ogy of other languages. The second major point is that the properties of 
the secondary affix -u ‘from’ in Kujamaat Jóola are different from those 
of secondary affixes in English. While the same phenomena appear in 
the morphology of language after language, the way we come to under-
stand or describe those phenomena must often be different.
■ Further Reading
Booij, Geert. 2000. The phonology–morphology interface. The First Glot 
International State-of-the-Article Book, eds. L. Cheng and R. Sybesma, 
287–306. Berlin: Mouton de Gruyter.
Giegerich, Heinz J. 1999. Lexical Strata in English: Morphological Causes, 
Phonological Effects. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Kiparsky, Paul. 1982. Lexical morphology and phonology. Linguistics in the 
Morning Calm, ed. I. S. Yang, 3–91. Seoul: Hanshin.
McCarthy, John. 1981. A prosodic theory of nonconcatenative morphology. 
Linguistic Inquiry 12: 373–418.
McCarthy, John and Alan Prince. 1995. Prosodic morphology. The Handbook of 
Phonological Theory, ed. John A. Goldsmith, 318–66. Oxford: Blackwell.

104  
MORPHOLOGY AND PHONOLOGY
Exercises
1. Classical Greek (adapted from Nida 1965: 27)
 
We introduced the formation of the Classical Greek nominative 
and genitive forms early in the chapter using two forms. More data 
are given below. For each pair, determine the basic form of the 
stem. What problems do the data raise?
Nominative  
Genitive  
Basic stem
a. aithiops ‘Ethiopian’ aithiopos ‘of an Ethiopian’ aithiop-
b. phleps 
‘vein’ 
phlebos 
‘of a vein’ 
phleb-
c. phulaks ‘watchman’ phulakos ‘of a watchman’
d. aiks 
‘goat’ 
aigos 
‘of a goat’
e. thεs 
‘serf’ 
thεtos 
‘of a serf’
f. elpis 
‘hope’ 
elpidos 
‘of hope’
g. ornis 
‘bird’ 
ornithos 
‘of a bird’
h. gigas 
‘giant’ 
gigantos ‘of a giant’
i. 
hris 
‘nose’ 
hrinos 
‘of a nose’
2. A.  In your opinion, is the best underlying representation of hymn 
/hɪm/ or /hɪmn/? In formulating your response, take into con-
sideration other derivationally or inflectionally related forms.
 
B.  Make a list of words that are similar to hymn in ending in 
orthographic -mn. Would you analyze them in the same way?
3. Huave, Mexico (Nida 1965: 17)
 
Identify the morpheme that has allomorphs and describe their pho-
nologically defined distribution.
a. nahimb ‘broom’
b. nahndot ‘dust’
c. naʃei 
‘man’
d. ahimb 
‘to sweep’
e. -hta 
‘female’
f. 
-ʃei 
‘male’
g. nahta 
‘woman’
h. ahndot ‘to dust’
4. Zoque (Nida 1965: 21)
 
Describe the phonological environment of all allomorphs in the 
following set of data. What accounts for their appearance?

MORPHOLOGY AND PHONOLOGY  105
a. ʔ
e
s mpama ‘my clothes’ 
pama 
‘clothes’
b. ʔ
e
s ŋkayu 
‘my horse’ 
kayu 
‘horse’
c. ʔ
e
s ntuwi 
‘my dog’ 
tuwi 
‘dog’
d. ʔ
e
s mpoco 
‘my younger sibling’ poco 
‘younger sibling’
e. ʔ
e
s ŋkose 
‘my older sister’ 
kose 
‘older sister’
f. 
ʔ
e
s ncin 
‘my pine’ 
cin 
‘pine’
5. Tarahumara, Mexico (Nida 1965: 22–3)
 
Describe the phonological environment of all allomorphs and then 
describe the type of assimilation that determines their  distribution.
a. mitʃiru 
‘to make shavings’
b. mitʃiruku 
‘shavings’
c. sikwiki 
‘ant’
d. ritu 
‘to be icy’
e. rituku 
‘ice’
f. 
reme 
‘to make tortillas’
g. remeke 
‘tortillas’
h. patʃi 
‘to grow ears of corn’
i. 
patʃiki 
‘an ear of corn’
j. 
opatʃa 
‘to be dressed’
k. opatʃaka 
‘garment’
6. Tsotsil, Mexico (Nida 1965: 23)
 
A. 
Identify all morphemes.
 
B. 
List the morphemes that have allomorphs.
 
C. 
Describe the phonological distribution of these allomorphs.
 
Supplementary information: For this problem, it is preferable to 
consider that there are two different verbalizing suffixes, one con-
sisting of the structure −V and the other of −VC.
a. -k'uʃi 
‘to put a wedge in’ 
-k'uʃ ‘wedge’
b. -ʃik'u 
‘to put a prop under’ 
-ʃik' ‘prop used beneath an  
 
 
 
object’
c. -ʃoni 
‘to put a prop against’ -ʃon ‘prop used against an  
 
 
 
object’
d. -vovi 
‘to go crazy’ 
vov 
‘crazy’
e. -t'uʃi 
‘to become wet’ 
t'uʃ 
‘wet’
f. 
-sakub ‘to become white’ 
sak 
‘white’
g. -lekub ‘to become good’ 
lek 
‘good’
h. -ʔik'ub ‘to become black’ 
ʔik' 
‘black’
i. 
-tuib 
‘to become smelly’ 
tu 
‘smelly’

106  
MORPHOLOGY AND PHONOLOGY
7. Hausa, a language spoken in Nigeria, Niger, and other countries, 
including Sudan, employs reduplication as a derivational process. 
If you examine the following data (data from Hodge 1947: 39–40, 
presented in Nida 1965: 70–1), however, you will see that redupli-
cation in Hausa does not always follow the same pattern. Sort the 
following data out into four sets based on reduplication type: 
(i) examples of full reduplication, where the reduplicant and stem 
are identical, (ii) partial reduplication, where the reduplicant is of the 
form C(C)a-, (iii) partial reduplication, where the reduplicant is of 
the form C1(C)V(:)C2 (C2 assimilates to the following consonant), 
and (iv) partial reduplication, where the  reduplicant has the form 
CV and is followed by an additional consonant (which one?). Then 
look at the forms you placed in set (ii). Two of the forms have a 
doubled consonant (the technical term for this is geminate), but 
the third does not. What might explain this difference?
a. ʔayàà 
‘tiger nut’ 
ʔayààʔayàà 
‘a similar but  
  
 
 
inedible nut’
b. sʔawrii 
‘retarded growth’ 
sʔàsʔawraa 
‘one of retarded  
  
 
 
growth’
c. mòòriyaa ‘usefulness’ 
mammooraa ‘usefulness’
d. gawcˇʔii 
‘brittleness’ 
gàggawsʔaa ‘a brittle one’
e. tawrii 
‘toughness’ 
tàttawraa 
‘a tough person’
f. 
muunìì 
‘ugliness’ 
mùmmuunaa ‘an ugly person’
g. kʔumcˇii 
‘dense brush’ 
kʔunkʔumcˇii ‘a narrow oneor  
  
 
 
place’
h. gaašii 
‘hair’ 
gàlgaasàà 
‘hairy person’
i. mààtaa 
‘woman’ 
màlmaatàà 
‘eunuch’
j. kʔibàà 
‘fat’ 
kʔìbààkʔibàà ‘a fat person’
 8. The following words are all suffixed with a primary affix (in bold). 
What are the changes to the stem triggered by the affix? Be as 
thorough as possible. Refer to the basic form of the stem in for-
mulating your answer.
a. diplomacy
b. publicize
c. differential
d. sanity
e. electricity
f. 
pollution

MORPHOLOGY AND PHONOLOGY  107
 9. Determine whether the following English suffixes are primary or 
secondary. Give arguments for your decision and support them 
with several examples.
a. -ness 
(e.g., loneliness)
b. -ive 
(e.g., permissive)
c. -ous 
(e.g., glorious)
d. -ship 
(e.g., partisanship)
10. A.  Examine the following two paradigms. The one on the left is 
from early Old French and the one on the right is from later 
Old French. What difference among the stems of the various 
forms (in bold) in each paradigm has been leveled out? What 
differences still remain? Ignore cross-paradigmatic changes in 
the representation of vowels.
1sg 
truef 
treuve
2sg 
trueves 
treuves
3sg 
trueve 
treuve
1pl 
trovóns 
trouvons
2pl 
trovéz 
trouvez
3pl 
truevent 
truevent
 
B.  Now compare the forms in the right column above with the 
Modern French paradigm given below. How has the stem 
(in bold) of the modern-day paradigm become even more 
regular?
1sg 
trouve 
1pl 
trouvons
2sg 
trouves 
2pl 
trouvez
3sg 
trouve 
3pl 
trouvent
11. The forms in column B are drawn from a secret language based 
on French. The basic French forms are given in column A. Identify 
the morphological process that leads from the forms in column A 
to those in column B. Next, determine what inconsistency, if any, 
there is in the application of the rule (data from Bullock 1996: 
186, citing Plénat 1983: 98–101). In doing this exercise, you may 
find the linguistic term rhyme ‘unit consisting of the nucleus and 
coda of a syllable’ to be useful.
 
A 
B 
a. fois [fwa] 
favwa 
‘time’
b. poignet [pwaɲε] 
pwavaɲavε 
‘fist’

108  
MORPHOLOGY AND PHONOLOGY
c. atelier [at
e
lje] 
avatav
e
lavje 
‘studio’
d. choir [ʃwaʁ] 
ʃavwaʁ  
‘fall’ (v)
e. vieux [vjø] 
vavjø 
‘old’
f. 
derrière [dεʁjεʁ] 
davεʁjav
e
 [sic] 
‘behind’
g. poursuivait [puʁs
h
ivε] pavuʁs
h
avivavε 
‘was pur suing’
h. pointe [pwε̃t
e
] 
pwavε̃tav
e
 
‘point’
i. 
bien [bjε̃] 
bavjε̃ 
‘well’
j. 
ses yeux [sezjø] 
savεzavjø 
‘his/her eyes'
k. point [pwε̃] 
pavwε̃ 
‘point’
l. 
variable [vaʁiabl
e
] 
vavaʁjavaβlav
e
 [sic] 
‘variable’
m. client [klijã] 
klavijavã 
‘client’
NOTES
1 A reader has pointed out that the exceptions of la a ‘the a’ and la hache ‘the h’ 
are reduced from la letra a ‘the letter a’ and la letra hache ‘the letter h’. 
Additionally, names of letters are often linguistically exceptional. In Ancient 
Greek, for example, although letter names are nouns, they do not take any 
inflectional endings.
2 If you are not already familiar with the terms “weight-bearing consonant” 
and “mora,” you do not need to learn them in order to understand this 
chapter or do any of the exercises in this book. We mention them in this 
context only to be complete. If you are interested in reading further on the 
topic, a good starting point is Hayes (1989).
3 One of the first lessons a student learns in solving problems having to do 
with accent or stress is to count not from the beginning of a word, but from 
the end. Most stress systems work that way, though a few, such as that of 
Hungarian, count from the beginning.
4 Some of the discussion in this section is adapted from Fudeman (2004).
5 We thank Alan Nussbaum for help with the Latin data presented in this 
section.
6 In the case of both color and honor, the older nominative forms colo-s and 
hono-s hung around for a long time. We use color here because it has the 
advantage of attesting the old nominative colo-s while still showing the new 
nominative color at a relatively early date. Relic forms are relatively common 
when it comes to analogical change. Unlike regular sound changes, which 
can be accounted for in purely phonetic terms (e.g., Latin rhotacism), 
 analogy is sensitive to morphologic, syntactic, and semantic factors.
7 The picture is complicated by sociolinguistic factors, as we will see later in 
this section.

4 Derivation and the Lexicon
■ 4.1 The Saussurean Sign
Ferdinand de Saussure (1857–1913), one of the first modern linguists, 
believed that language was a system of signs. He defined a linguistic 
sign as an arbitrary pairing between what he called the signifiant ‘signi-
fier’, a particular sequence of sounds, and the signifié ‘signified’, the 
concept that is denoted by the sound sequence. These three terms, sign, 
signifier, and signified, are still standard in linguistics.
4.1 The Saussurean Sign 
109
4.2 Motivation and Compositionality 
110
 
4.2.1 Compounding 
112
 
4.2.2 Zero-derivation 
115
 
4.2.3 Affixation 
117
 
4.2.4 Other derivational processes 
119
 
 
4.2.4.1 Blending 
119
 
 
4.2.4.2 Acronyms 
120
 
 
4.2.4.3 Clipping 
122
 
 
4.2.4.4 Folk etymology 
122
 
 
4.2.4.5 Backformation 
122
4.3 Derivation and Structure 
123
4.4 Summary 
130
Derivation in Kujamaat Jóola 
131
Further Reading 
132
What is Morphology?, 2nd edition, by Mark Aronoff and Kirsten Fudeman © 2011 
Mark Aronoff and Kirsten Fudeman.

110  
DERIVATION AND THE LEXICON
Saussure (1969) distinguished between motivated and unmotivated 
signs. A sign is motivated to the extent that by inspection you can get 
clues as to what it means. A walk signal at a crosswalk is an example of 
a motivated sign, because the stylized image of a person walking indi-
cates whether you should or should not cross the street. A stop sign is 
partially motivated. The fact that it has eight sides is arbitrary, but its 
red color is not. In our culture, red is often associated with danger and 
a call to alertness. Red is also the color lit up on a traffic light when driv-
ers are required to stop. The numeral 8 is an unmotivated sign. Nothing 
about its form represents the number eight.
Signs can lose their motivation: consider the name of the basketball 
team, the Los Angeles Lakers. The team started out in Minneapolis, 
Minnesota – the land of a thousand lakes; so it made perfect sense to 
call it the Lakers. Once the team moved to LA, then Lakers made no 
sense at all, though they kept the name and some have tried to make 
something of it by reinterpreting the first two letters of Lakers as having 
something to do with Los Angeles.
Motivation is not all-or-nothing, and signs can be partially motivated. 
The name of the Ithaca Lakers of central New York, a local baseball 
team, is not a fully motivated sign. After all, when we hear the name the 
Lakers, we think first of basketball. But we don’t want to say that the 
name Ithaca Lakers is completely unmotivated, either, because it is obvi-
ous that this particular name was chosen because the Ithaca Lakers is a 
sports team and because Ithaca, like Minneapolis, is set in a region of 
lakes. Since people can still see the lake in Lakers, and even see it from 
the field where they play, on a good day, we say that Ithaca Lakers is a 
partially motivated sign.
■ 4.2 Motivation and Compositionality
We can relate motivation to the logical notion of composition or com-
positionality. We say that something is logically compositional if it is 
defined entirely in terms of its parts. For example, the word doghouse is 
compositional, at least in its original sense, because its meaning is deriv-
able from its two components, dog and house. Because it is purely com-
positional, we could also call doghouse a motivated sign (although if we 
break it down, the sound shapes of dog and house are purely arbitrary 
and unmotivated). But in the expression in the doghouse ‘in a state of 
disfavor or repudiation’, the word is not compositional, since there is 

DERIVATION AND THE LEXICON  111
nothing in particular about doghouses that suggests that an occupant 
of one should be in disfavor. [Exercises 1–2]
Another example of a compositional form is the Kujamaat Jóola 
dubitive-incompletive, which expresses an action that was never com-
pleted or whose existence is in doubt. For emphasis, the dubitive-
incompletive suffix (inc) is doubled (1b). It can even be repeated several 
times (Thomas and Sapir 1967: 350, note 2):
(1) 
a. 
ni- 
ŋar -ε:n
  
1sg.sub- take -inc
  
‘I was taking’
 b. ni- 
ŋar -ε:n -ε:n
  
1sg.sub- take -inc -inc
  
‘I was taking (emphasis on incompletive aspect of action)’
Expressing emphasis through doubling should be considered composi-
tional.
The following set of English words is particularly significant in light 
of partial motivation and compositionality:
(2) behead 
‘to remove someone’s head’
 befriend ‘to make yourself a friend to someone’
 besiege 
‘to lay siege to’
 bewitch 
‘to place under one’s power as if by magic’
Our first response to this list is to say that these are all morphologically 
complex words formed with the prefix be-. But are they motivated 
signs? In each case, the prefix be- has a different effect on the meaning 
of the stem (head, friend, siege, witch). In the word behead, it indicates 
‘deprive of’ (as in the obsolete verbs beland and belimb), but it means 
nothing of the sort in the other forms. This suggests that these forms are 
not completely motivated. The meanings of the stems in (2) are never 
lost, simply transformed. The forms are therefore partially motivated.
The question of whether or not the forms in (2) are compositional is 
more difficult and depends in large part on our approach to linguistic 
analysis. It is undoubtedly the case that formation of words with the 
prefix be- is no longer productive in English. Some linguists will never-
theless want to analyze forms like behead and bewitch as having two 
parts. Our approach, however, will be to say that these forms are stored 
whole in the lexicon – they are memorized. We would say the same for 

112  
DERIVATION AND THE LEXICON
forms like crayfish, raspberry, boysenberry, and cranberry.1 While the iso-
latability of the stems fish and berry make it possible to isolate cray-, 
rasp-, boysen-, and cran- as affixes, doing so is largely an academic exer-
cise; we will assume so, at least, until the opposite can be shown by 
experimental means.
The preceding data lead into a major issue to be addressed in this 
chapter: the relationship between derivation and the lexicon. Recall 
that although some linguists consider the lexicon to be equivalent to the 
morphology, our definition of lexicon is a list of forms that speakers of 
a language know or memorize. One question we need to ask is whether 
lexemes formed by productive derivational processes are ever stored in 
the lexicon. We address this explicitly in sections 4.2.1 on compounding 
and 4.2.2 on zero-derivation. In the remaining sections of 4.2 we present 
various types of derivational processes, so that students can become 
familiar with them.
■ 4.2.1 Compounding
One derivational process we have already discussed is compounding. 
Here are some basic examples:
(3) English compounds
 tool + bar
 amusement + park
 puppy + love
 coffee + house
To give a more extreme example, if someone asks us what Violet does 
for a living, we might respond:
(4) She’s a high voltage electricity grid systems supervisor.
There is evidence that high voltage electricity grid systems supervisor is a 
single noun. First, its distribution matches that of any other noun, so we 
can insert it into phrases like [a good N] or [N for hire]. Second, high 
voltage electricity grid systems supervisor behaves as a single unit for the 
purposes of wh-movement. Question–answer pairs that break it up are 
at the very least awkward. In chapter 2 we related this characteristic of 
words to the notion of lexical integrity:

DERIVATION AND THE LEXICON  113
(5) a. Q: Which electricity grid systems supervisor did you see?
  
A: ?The high voltage one.
 b. Q: Which systems supervisor did you see?
  
A: *The high voltage electricity grid one.
 c. Q: Which supervisor did you see?
  
A: *The high voltage electricity grid systems one.
Contrast these with syntactic strings of modifier plus noun which are 
easily broken up, as shown in (6):
(6) Q: Which supervisor did you see?
 A: The tall one.
Continuing with the notion of lexical integrity, we can ask whether it 
is possible to describe part of the string high voltage electricity grid 
systems supervisor with a modifier. When we try, the result is very 
awkward (7):
(7) ?A very high voltage electricity grid systems supervisor
The most natural interpretation of (7) is the figurative one whereby very 
high voltage is used as an adjectival phrase modifying a smaller com-
pound [electricity grid] giving the intermediate form very high voltage 
electricity grid, which in turn modifies [systems supervisor], giving the 
entire form in (7).
Finally, we can point to the structure of high voltage electricity grid 
systems supervisor as evidence that it is a single noun formed by com-
pounding. Words in English are generally head-final, meaning that 
the lexical category of the form as a whole matches that of its final 
constituent. A dogsled is a kind of sled, not a kind of dog; the Red 
River Valley is a valley, not a color or a body of water; and affixed 
words like pollution take on the lexical category of the suffix (in this 
case, noun) rather than that of the stem (pollute, a verb).2 As speakers 
of English we know this, and without ever having heard high voltage 
electricity grid systems supervisor before, we know it designates a type 
of supervisor. Phrases, in contrast to words, are less likely to be 
head-final. The head of [NP John’s walking into work without a tie] is 
walking, not tie, and the head of [NP the house on the hill] is house, 
not hill.

114  
DERIVATION AND THE LEXICON
Having established that high voltage electricity grid systems supervisor 
is a single word of the category N, we can ask ourselves, “Is this noun 
in my lexicon?” Probably not. This compound is formed by a very pro-
ductive process and there is nothing irregular involved in it. It is abso-
lutely compositional and fully motivated. [Exercise 3]
Words like this that are used but not stored are called nonce forms or 
hapax legomena (hapax legomenon in the singular). Nonce means ‘a par-
ticular occasion’, and hapax legomena is a Greek term meaning ‘said 
once’ that is used to refer to words that occur only once in the recorded 
corpus of a given language. These are words that somebody made up, 
used, and then threw away. The existence of nonce forms is one type of 
evidence that speakers create words on the fly as they speak.
In discussing compounds, linguists sometimes use the terms endo-
centric and exocentric. These terms are related to the notions of moti-
vation and compositionality presented earlier. An endocentric 
compound is one that has a head. The head expresses the core meaning 
of the compound, and it belongs to the same lexical category as the 
compound as a whole. For example, goldfish is an endocentric com-
pound. It has a head, fish, which determines both the meaning and the 
lexical category – noun – of the compound as a whole. Compounds 
whose lexical category or meaning are not determinable from the head 
are exocentric. Figurehead is just such a compound, because it is not a 
type of head. Whether a compound is endocentric or exocentric is 
sometimes a matter of opinion. Fabb (1998: 67) gives the example of 
greenhouse, which is endocentric if you think of it as a type of house, 
but exocentric if you do not.
(8) Endocentric compounds
 jackknife
 board game
 bluebird
 high chair
 sailboat
(9) Exocentric compounds
 funny farm
 lazybones
 loony bin
 scarecrow
 pickpocket

DERIVATION AND THE LEXICON  115
■ 4.2.2 Zero-derivation
Further evidence that derived words are not necessarily found in the 
lexicon comes from first language acquisition. While English-speaking 
adults typically have production vocabularies of 20,000 to 50,000 words, 
children’s vocabularies are much smaller, ranging from about 50–600 
words at age 2 to about 14,000 at age 6. To make up for this, children 
frequently coin new words (Clark 1995: 393, 399–401). One way  children 
do this is to use zero-derivation, or conversion, a productive deriva-
tional process in English. Zero-derivation changes the lexical category 
of a word without changing its phonological shape. The following are 
all examples of novel verbs formed by 2- to 5-year-olds by zero- 
derivation. These examples are taken from Clark (1995: 402); the 
 children’s ages are given in the format years;months:
(10) 
a. SC (2;4, as his mother prepared to brush his hair): Don’t hair me.
 b. JA (2;6, seated in a rocking chair): Rocker me, mommy.
 c. SC (2;7, hitting baby sister with toy broom): I broomed her.
 d. SC (2;9, playing with toy lawnmower): I’m lawning.
 e. DM (3;0, pretending to be Superman): I’m supermanning.
 f. FR (3;3, of a doll that disappeared): I guess she magicked.
 g. KA (4;0, pretending to be a doctor fixing a broken arm): We’re 
  
gonna cast that.
 h. RT (4;0): Is Anna going to babysitter me?
 i. CE (4;11): We already decorationed our tree.
 j. KA (5;0): Will you chocolate my milk?
Identify each of the following compounds as either endocentric or 
exocentric. For answers, turn the page.
a. lawmaker
b. make-up (i.e., cosmetics)
c. no-hitter
d. mainstream
e. waxwing
f. playpen
g. aftertaste
h. graveyard

116  
DERIVATION AND THE LEXICON
The fact that children, as well as adults, spontaneously create verbs like 
to lawn or to broom that they have never heard before tells us that there 
is more to morphology than the lexicon – there is also a generative com-
ponent. Furthermore, the fact that the verbs in (10) were uttered once 
does not imply that they were automatically inserted into the speaker’s 
lexicon, as we would be able to show if later on we asked the same chil-
dren to describe similar situations and it turned out that they did not 
use the nonce forms in (10).
We must mention directionality of derivation here. How do we 
know that a verb is derived from a noun or vice versa? If it is not obvi-
ous, we must research the answer in a good dictionary, one that con-
tains etymologies.
Answers to endocentric–exocentric exercise:
a. lawmaker: endocentric
b. make-up: exocentric
c. no-hitter: exocentric
d. mainstream: exocentric
e. waxwing: exocentric
f. playpen: endocentric
g. aftertaste: endocentric
h. graveyard: endocentric
It may happen over time that a word formed by zero-derivation or 
any other productive derivational process becomes lexicalized. So it 
is with the English verbs chair, leaf, ship, table, and weather. Another 
example of a verb that was originally derived via zero-derivation but 
is now listed in the lexicon is mail. In this case, we know that the 
noun came first because it was borrowed from the French male 
(Modern French malle) ‘bag, trunk’, referring to the receptacle in 
which letters were carried. Evidence that the verb is now stored in 
the lexicon comes from its frequency, as well as from the fact that its 
existence blocks the coining of potential but non-occurring derived 
forms, such as *mailbox ‘to put in a mailbox in order to send to some-
one’ (e.g., *I’m going to mailbox this parcel). (We say more about block-
ing in section 8.3.5.)

DERIVATION AND THE LEXICON  117
■ 4.2.3 Affixation
The next type of derivational process we consider here is affixation. We 
have already looked at a number of affixes, so in this section we focus on a 
few particular affixes, the types of stems they attach to, and the words they 
produce. We also build on the discussion of primary and secondary affixes 
(chapter 3) by exploring other restrictions on combinations of affixes.
Recall from section 1.2 that affixation may involve prefixes, suffixes, 
infixes, and perhaps circumfixes. Since our primary focus in this section 
is on English, we deal only with the first two types, although as you can 
see in the following box, English does have a productive infixing pro-
cess that incorporates swearwords.
Prefixes: 
un + do
 
cyber + dieter3
 
hemi + sphere
Suffixes: 
rough + age
 
arachno + phobia
 
cut + ie
Infixes: 
fan + fuckin + tastic
 
abso + effing + lutely
Circumfix:  Kujamaat Jóola u- … -al (first person plural inclusive subject):
u-b
c
ɲ-ε:n-ε:n-
c
rut-al-
c
 ‘We had not yet sent him’
We can characterize the stem an affix attaches to as bound or free and as 
belonging to a particular lexical category. Take the following words 
formed via prefixation with re-:
(11) a. reignite 
d. reanalyze
 b. reboot 
e. recertify
 c. reread 
f. rebuild
Re- attaches to stems belonging to the lexical category Verb. It produces 
words that are also verbs. All of the stems to which it attaches in the 
preceding examples are free. Ignite, boot, read, analyze, certify, and build 
may all stand alone; they do not need to bear a prefix or suffix. The 
same cannot be said for all stems that seem to bear the prefix re-, based 
on their meaning. The following words are all formed with re-, which 

118  
DERIVATION AND THE LEXICON
imparts a sense of repetition or doing again. Yet the stems are unable to 
stand on their own. They are bound.
(12) a. repeat
 b. resuscitate
 c. recognize
What is the lexical stem of each the following words? Is the lexical stem 
bound or free? For answers, turn the page.
a. bookish 
e. comfy
b. notable 
f. generalization
c. unfathomable 
g. inky
d. monstrous 
h. archaism
Sometimes an affix may attach to stems of more than one category. One 
such affix is -ish. It may attach to nouns, as in prudish, bookish, girlish, or 
childish, adjectives, as in oldish or smallish, or verbs, as in ticklish. In each 
case, the resulting form is an adjective. [Exercise 4]
So far we have mentioned stem type (bound vs. free) and lexical cate-
gory as two factors that can constrain affixation. Another type of restric-
tion we find is on the combination of affixes. Aronoff and Fuhrhop (2002) 
observe that many English speakers cannot say *dressingless, though both 
-ing and -less are secondary suffixes, and the word has a logical meaning: 
*a dressingless salad. The perceived ungrammaticality of dressingless by 
those speakers can be related to the fact that the combination *-ingless in 
English is vanishingly rare (a notable exception is meaningless).
In German, Aronoff and Fuhrhop observe another type of restriction 
on affixation. The following examples show how affixation can be 
recursive. In (13a) we have a verbal stem ‘teach’, which can be made 
into a noun with the addition of -er. This noun, in turn, can be made 
into an adjective, which can then be turned into a complex noun, 
Lehrerhaftigkeit ‘teacherlikeness’.
(13) a. lehr(en) ‘teach’ (verb) →
 b. Lehrer ‘teacher’ (person term) →
 c. lehrerhaft ‘like a teacher’ (adjective) →
 d. Lehrerhaftigkeit ‘teacherlikeness’

DERIVATION AND THE LEXICON  119
Answers to the bound–free exercise:
a. book: free
b.  not(e): free (here let pronunciation be your guide; don’t be misled by the 
fact that not- is not spelled with an e in notable)
c.  fathomable: free (it is also possible to consider the root fathom to be the 
lexical stem, if you are considering suffixation of -able as well as prefixation 
of un-)
d. monstr-: bound (unless we interpret monstr- as a variant of monster)
e. comf-: bound
f. generalize: free (general is the stem – free – of generalize)
g. ink: free
h. archa-: bound
While some of these forms, including monstrous and archaism, are best consid-
ered as being stored whole in speakers’ lexicons, speakers recognize that they 
are made up of more than one morph. Without having seen monstrous before, 
you know that it is an adjective, on the basis of its similarity with forms like 
glorious, and you know that archaism is a noun, on the basis of words like 
fetishism.
Significantly, Lehrerhaftigkeit cannot undergo further derivational affixa-
tion. In fact, no noun in -igkeit can. Aronoff and Fuhrhop call it a closing 
suffix. The existence of closing suffixes in German means that affixation 
in that language can never be as recursive as German compounding, 
which can go on and on, just like in English. (Recall the word high voltage 
electricity grid systems supervisor from earlier in this chapter.)4
■ 4.2.4 Other derivational processes
So far we have looked at compounding, zero-derivation, and affixation. 
What are other examples of derivational processes?
4.2.4.1 Blending
Blending is a common derivational process in English. Blends, also 
called portmanteau words, are formed by combining parts of more 
than one word.5 Speakers may be aware that a word has been formed 
via blending, as with spork (< spoon + fork), or the history of the word 

120  
DERIVATION AND THE LEXICON
may be obscured, as with motel (< motor + hotel). Further examples of 
blends are given below:
(14) a. smog 
< smoke + fog
 b. chunnel < channel + tunnel
 c. chortle 
< chuckle + snort
 d. bit 
< binary + digit
Neither blending nor any of the other derivational processes we have 
been talking about is limited to English, of course. While blends are rare 
or absent in many Indo-European languages, they are common in Hebrew, 
examples of which are given below (Bat-El 1996), and Japanese:
(15) a. prígurt 
‘fruit yogurt’ 
< prí ‘fruit’ + yógurt ‘yogurt’
 b. kadurégel ‘football’ 
< kadúr ‘ball’ + régel ‘foot’
 c. maškár 
‘cold drink’ 
< mašké ‘drink’ + kár ‘cold’
 d. kalcéfet 
‘easy-to-make  
< kál ‘easy, light’ + kacéfet
  
 
ice cream’ 
 
‘whipped cream’
 e. ramzór 
‘traffic light’ 
< ramáz ‘to hint’ + ʔor ‘light’
 f. 
pomelít 
‘hybrid of pomelo < poméla ‘pomelo’ + 
  
 
and grapefruit’ 
 
ʔeškolít ‘grapefruit’
 g. šmanmúx ‘dumpy’ 
< šmanmán ‘plump’ + 
  
 
 
 
namúx ‘short’
Blending is an example of creative language use. It generally does not 
adhere to strict constraints, as does affixation. For example, we note in (14d) 
that bit comes from ‘binary digit’. Nothing in the grammar would have 
prevented speakers from coining the word *binit from the same parts. The 
word-formation processes discussed below, including acronym formation, 
clipping, folk etymology, and backformation, are treated by linguists sepa-
rately from productive derivational (lexeme formation) phenomena.
4.2.4.2 Acronyms
Acronyms are formed by taking the initial letters of a string of words 
and combining them to form a new one. In linguistics, speech is 
 generally considered primary and writing secondary, and because acro-
nym formation is dependent on orthography rather than pronuncia-
tion, many would consider it to be external to the general phenomenon 
of lexeme formation or at the very least a special case of lexeme 

DERIVATION AND THE LEXICON  121
 formation that we would expect to find only among literate users of a 
 language. If you question our statement that acronym formation is 
orthographically based, just say (16c) NATO aloud, followed by North 
Atlantic Treaty Organization. The pronunciation of the A and O reflects 
the name of the letters, not the initial sounds of the words.
Speakers may be aware or unaware that a particular form originated 
as an acronym. How many acronyms on the left would you have been 
able to break down into their parts on the right?
(16) a. scuba 
self-contained underwater breathing apparatus
 b. radar 
radio detecting and ranging
 c. NATO North Atlantic Treaty Organization
 d. AIDS 
Acquired Immune-Deficiency Syndrome
 e. FBI 
Federal Bureau of Investigation
FBI differs from the other acronyms in (16) in being pronounced letter by 
letter, rather than as a word *[fbi], *[fbaj]. While it is still an acronym, some 
people prefer to call it an abbreviation or alphabetism for this reason.
The following French words are derived from acronyms, as well:
(17) a. DEUG 
diplôme d’études universitaires générales
  
[dœɡ] or [døɡ] (type of diploma)
 b. ONU 
Organisation des Nations Unies
  
[ony] 
(United Nations)
 c. sida 
Syndrome d’Immunodéficience Acquise
  
[sida] 
(AIDS)
 d. ovni 
objet volant non identifié
  
[
c
vni] 
(unidentified flying object)
 e. PDG 
président directeur général
  
[pedeʒe] 
(head of a company)
Like FBI, PDG is pronounced letter by letter.
A characteristic of acronyms in some languages is that they can serve 
as the base for further morphological operations, particularly affixa-
tion, as in the following French examples:
(18) a.  cégétiste  someone from the CGT (Confédération générale du 
 travail)
 b. énarque 
 former student at the ENA (Ecole nationale  
d’administration)
 c. onusien 
bureaucrat of the United Nations (French ONU)

122  
DERIVATION AND THE LEXICON
 d. 
sidologue doctor or biologist specializing in AIDS (French sida)
 e. antisida 
AIDS prevention
4.2.4.3 Clipping
Clipping is the creation of a new word by truncation of an existing one. 
Many nicknames are formed via this process:
(19) Rob (< Robert)
 Trish (< Patricia)
 Sue (< Susan)
Other nouns may also be formed via clipping, as with bra (< brassiere), 
ad (< advertisement), co-ed (< co-educational), typo (< typographical error), 
or fan (< fanatic).
4.2.4.4 Folk etymology
Some words are formed via folk etymology. This happens when speak-
ers reinterpret a form – typically a borrowing from another language – 
on the basis of words or morphemes that already exist in the language. 
Examples of folk etymologies are given in (20):
(20) cockroach 
< Spanish cucaracha
 woodchuck < a pre-existing Algonquian form (e.g., Cree wuchak)
 witch hazel < wych [= weak] hazel
Folk etymology is a historical process of reanalysis. We include it here 
because it is a source of words, but it is not a true derivational process.
4.2.4.5 Backformation
Backformation is the creation of a word by removing what appears to 
be an affix. Like folk etymology, it is an example of historical reanalysis 
and not a productive derivational process. It is responsible for the 
occurrence of words such as surveil, from surveillance, or liposuct, from 
liposuction. Some very familiar words were originally derived by back-
formation. Peddle and edit postdate peddler and editor, although the 
uninitiated might guess that it was the other way around. Historically, 
cherry comes from Old Norman French cherise, minus the s, which 
English speakers mistook for the plural affix. Similarly, pea comes from 

DERIVATION AND THE LEXICON  123
pease, which speakers also reanalyzed as a plural. (You may know the 
rhyme “Pease porridge hot.”)
In order to recognize whether a form has resulted from backforma-
tion or clipping, it is often necessary to know its history.
The words in column B were derived from the forms in column A. Identify 
the word-formation processes responsible for each.
 
A 
B
a. garage, sale 
garage sale
b. refuse + nik 
refusenik
c. promenade 
prom
d. baby-sitter 
baby-sit
e. blanket (n) 
blanket (v)
f. cheese, hot dog 
cheese dog
g. asparagus 
sparrow grass
h. under + estimate 
underestimate
i. 
photo opportunity 
photo op
j. 
chocolate, alcoholic 
chocoholic
k. mothers against drunk driving 
MADD
Answers: a. compounding, b. affixation (suffixation), c. clipping, d. backforma-
tion, e. zero-derivation or conversion, f. blending, g. folk etymology, h. affixa-
tion (prefixation), i. clipping, j. blending, k. acronym formation
■ 4.3 Derivation and Structure
Having considered the issue of lexical storage of derived forms, let’s go 
back to the notion of derivation and structure. We can schematize deri-
vation as follows:
(21) Input 
→ Output
 Lexeme X  
Lexeme Y
If we can have lexeme X as an input and lexeme Y as an output, then it 
should also be possible to take lexeme Y as an input to a second function:
(22) Input 
→ Output
 Lexeme Y  
Lexeme Z

124  
DERIVATION AND THE LEXICON
This is precisely what we do when we form words like unfriendly:
(23) Function 1: add -ly
 friend 
→ friendly
 Function 2: add un-
 friendly → unfriendly
We can even go on to form unfriendliness from unfriendly via a function 
that adds -ness. In each case, the output of one derivation serves as the 
input to the next.
To determine the order of functions leading to a form, it helps to con-
sider other words that contain the same parts. Consider the example of 
unfriendly. Un- attaches to nouns only in exceptional cases (for example, 
uncola, a word once used in an ad campaign for a particular soda). 
However, it regularly attaches to adjectives. We use this fact in deter-
mining that the function ‘Add -ly’, which forms adjectives, must come 
before the function ‘Add un-’.
Let’s go back to the compound we came across earlier: high voltage 
electricity grid systems supervisor. This compound clearly has an internal 
structure. [High voltage] is a compound, as are [electricity grid] and 
[systems supervisor]. [ [High voltage] [electricity grid] ] is also a com-
pound, and in turn, [ [ [high voltage] [electricity grid] ] [systems super-
visor] ]. We have taken English words, made compounds of them, and 
then used those compound words to yield further compound words. 
The output of the first compounding function serves as the input to the 
second and third compounding functions.
The same occurs with any kind of affix, and this gives derivational 
morphology a great deal of power. We can think of derivation as always 
being binary in a sense. We take a form and apply a function to it. We 
then take the output of that function and perform another function on 
it. We can keep on going, getting bigger and bigger things, simply by 
adding one thing at a time. (When we get to inflection, we will see that 
this is not always the case.)
The fact that speakers of many languages can add phonological mate-
rial to either end of a word sometimes leads to complex structures. Take 
the two English words in (24):
(24) a. reinterpretation
 b. poststructuralist

DERIVATION AND THE LEXICON  125
These words have the following structures:
(25) a. [ [re- [interpret]V]V -ation]N
 b. [post- [ [ [structur]N -al]A -ist]A]A
(25a) tells us that reinterpretation is the act of reinterpreting, from reinter-
pret, not re- the act of interpreting. We start out with a verb, interpret, 
form a new verb via the prefix re-, and finally form a noun by adding 
the suffix -ation. In the case of poststructuralist, we start out with the 
noun structure, make an adjective via the adjectival suffix -al, create a 
new adjective by adding the suffix -ist, and a further one by adding the 
prefix post-. Poststructuralist (structuralist, too) can in turn be made into 
a noun by zero-derivation.
The bracketing structures in (25) are convenient, in part because they 
are so compact. But the structure of morphologically complex words is 
made most clear when we use tree diagrams, like the following:
(26)
 
N
V
-ation
re-
interpret
This diagram clearly shows that re- and the verb interpret form a unit, a 
verb, which attaches to the noun-forming suffix -ation. In order to draw 
a tree diagram, it is first necessary to break a word down into its com-
ponents and to fully understand how they fit together.
Draw tree diagrams of the following words. For answers, see p. 127.
a. lawnmower
b. biodefenses
c. insightful
The following argument demonstrates that even identical strings may 
have distinct structures. Consider the structure of the two words pseu-
donaturalistic and supernaturalistic:

126  
DERIVATION AND THE LEXICON
(27) 
(a)
Adj
pseudo
Adj
Adj
natural
-istic
 
(b)
Adj
Adj
-istic
super-
Adj
natural
In both cases we start out with the adjective natural, which we pur-
posely have not broken down into nature and -al, although we could 
have. In (27a) we first make a new adjective, naturalistic, which we 
then modify with the prefix pseudo-, yielding a word with the meaning 
‘falsely naturalistic’. In (27b), however, we take the adjective natural 
and add the prefix super- to it, giving supernatural ‘pertaining to an 
existence outside the natural world’. It is to this form that we add the 
suffix -istic. English morphology is such that we could form a different 
supernaturalistic, this time with the same structure as pseudonaturalistic 
in (27a). This supernaturalistic would mean ‘really naturalistic’.6
Combining prefixation and suffixation leads to other potentially 
ambiguous forms in English. Three famous examples are given in (28):
(28) a. undressed
 b. unpacked
 c. unzipped
The ambiguity of the forms in (28) is due to the fact that the prefix un- has 
at least two distinct roles in English, depending on what it attaches to. 
When prefixed to a verb, un- is a so-called reversative with the basic 
meaning ‘undo the action of the verb’. If you unpack a suitcase, you return 
the suitcase to the state it was in before the packing action took place. If 
you untie a package, you return it to the state it was in prior to being tied. 
When attached to adjectives, including participial adjectives like wounded 
or stressed, un- means ‘not’. If a soldier leaves the battlefield unwounded, 
it is not the case that he was first wounded and then unwounded, because 
it is impossible to unwound a person (we say instead that we cure them). 
The soldier in question is ‘not wounded’. This second un- is the one we 
see in forms like unafraid, uncertain, and un-American.

DERIVATION AND THE LEXICON  127
N
(a)
(b)
(c)
lawn
N
V
mow
-er
N
bio
N
N
defense
-s
Adj
N
-ful
in-
sight
Our analysis of an example like unzipped (28c) depends on our inter-
pretation of its prefix un-. One possibility is that its structure is as 
follows:
(29) [ [un-zip(p)] ed]
Here the prefixation of the reversative un- yields the meaning ‘cause to 
be zipped no longer’. The suffix -ed is then added to create the past 
tense or the past participle. The second possibility is that unzipped has 
the structure in (30):
(30) [un- [zipped] ]
This form has the meaning ‘not zipped’, or, in the case of a computer 
file, ‘having never been stored on a zip disk’. The crucial semantic 
distinction between (29) and (30) is that only (29) requires that a 

128  
DERIVATION AND THE LEXICON
 zipping action have taken place at some past point. Structurally, (29) 
and (30) differ in the ordering of the affixation processes. Morphological 
structure depends not only on the elements you use, but on the order 
in which the elements have been applied.
Let’s look at some other words. Is unwashed ambiguous? It is not; we 
cannot unwash something. Unwashed can only mean ‘not washed’. 
Similarly, undisturbed can only mean ‘not disturbed’. The only word we 
know of that works the other way is unraveled. Although English speak-
ers do not use it very often, there is a verb ravel. But it means the same 
thing as unravel: ‘separate or undo the threads or fibers of something’. 
As a result, if something is unraveled, it cannot mean ‘not raveled’. It 
can only mean that it has come undone. [Exercises 5–7]
Bloomfield (1933) provides us with more complicated examples of 
this sort from Tagalog. Tagalog is like English in that you can add things 
to the front and to the end of a word or stem. But unlike in English, you 
can also put things in the middle. As a result, the order of operations 
and the linear order are not reflective of one another at all.
The following set of examples involves reduplication of the first syl-
lable (31b) and infixation of -um- (31c) (Bloomfield 1933: 221). The fail-
ure of the infix to participate in reduplication tells us that the infix is not 
inserted until after the first syllable has been reduplicated. Otherwise, 
we would expect *tutuma:wa, which we don’t find:
(31) a. ‘ta:wa 
‘a laugh’
 b. ta:’ta:wa 
‘one who will laugh’
 c. tuma:’ta:wa 
‘one who is laughing’
As Bloomfield shows us (p. 222), Tagalog also has forms like those in 
(32) which involve the same operations, reduplication and infixation, 
but in the opposite order:
(32) a. ‘pi:lit 
‘effort’
 b. pu’mi:lit 
‘one who is compelled’
 c. -pupu:’mi:lit 
 in [naɡ-pu:pu’mi:lit], ‘one who makes an 
extreme effort’
We see in (32c) that the reduplicated syllable pu- includes the vowel of 
the infix -um-. This tells us that in this construction, infixation precedes 
reduplication. If reduplication had preceded infixation, we would have 
expected the non-occurring form *pumi:pi:lit.

DERIVATION AND THE LEXICON  129
The next set of examples raises still another issue (p. 222):
(33) a. ‘pu:tul 
‘a cut’
 b. /paŋpu:tul/ → pa’mu:-tul 
‘that used for cutting’
 c. pamu’mu:tul 
‘a cutting in quantity’
We begin with pu:tul ‘cut’ (33a). If we add the prefix paŋ- to it, the final 
nasal /ŋ/ coalesces with the following stop, yielding [m] (33b). We then 
reduplicate the first syllable of the internal stem, giving (33c). The redu-
plication doesn’t take place at the beginning of the word; it takes place 
inside. Ordering reduplication before prefixation yields the wrong form:
(34) a. pu:tul
 b. pu:pu:tul (reduplication)
 c. paŋpu:pu:tul → *pamu:pu:tul (prefixation, coalescence)
With this example, Bloomfield shows that the linear order and the 
structural order of a set of elements can be different.
Once Tagalog speakers form the word pamu:tul (33b), they retain its 
internal structure, and this enables them to reduplicate the initial syl-
lable of a stem, even when it is buried within the layer of an intermedi-
ate derivation. Some linguists claim that this isn’t possible, but their 
view is contradicted by evidence across languages that speakers can 
reach inside morphologically complex forms and pull out an internal 
piece. In the morphological literature this goes by the unfortunate name 
of head operation, because such an operation generally involves the 
head or stem of a word. Consider the following English examples:
(35) flower child → flower children
 frogman → frogmen
The fact that the plural of flower child is flower children instead of *flower 
childs means that speakers apply the pluralization operation to the head 
of the compound, child, which has an unproductive, irregular plural 
ending, instead of to the compound as a whole. Similarly, to pluralize 
frogman, you pluralize its head, leading to frogmen. Head operations are 
possible because word-level morphology is a two-way street where 
creation of word forms is as much a part of the human language faculty 
as is their analysis. Again, we can cite evidence for this from child 

130  
DERIVATION AND THE LEXICON
language acquisition. Clark (1993: 404) uses the examples below to 
illustrate that, at an early age, children are able to analyze the complex 
word forms that they hear:
(36) a. D (2;9,10): You know why this is a HIGH-chair? Because it is high.
b. D (2;9,24): Eve, you know what you do on runways? You run on 
them because they start with “run.”
 c. Mo: We’re going to a place called Sundance.
 
 D (2;11,0): And you dance there. If there is music, we will dance 
there.
d. D (3;2,20), as he climbed into the car, holding both index fin-
gers up to his head): D’you know what headlights are?
  
Mo: No.
  
D: They’re lights that go on in your head!
■ 4.4 Summary
Derivation forms complex lexemes, which may or may not be stored in 
the speaker’s mental lexicon. These complex lexemes, unlike simple 
signs like dog, have internal morphological structure. They may also 
serve as the basis of further derivation, leading to yet more complex 
lexemes. Derived lexemes that are not perfectly compositional must be 
retained in the mental lexicon. As a result, the lexicon does not consist 
solely of simple signs. Many of its members may be partially motivated 
complex words.

DERIVATION AND THE LEXICON  131
■ Derivation in Kujamaat Jóola
We conclude this chapter by taking a look at a few nominal derivational 
suffixes in Kujamaat Jóola. We present verbal derivational suffixes in 
the next chapter.
To our knowledge, all derivational morphology in Kujamaat Jóola is 
suffixal. Sapir (1965: 49) mentions that although there are some com-
pounds in the language, compounding is unproductive.
Illustrated below are -a (1), which attaches to a stem and forms agen-
tive or instrumental nouns, -ay (2), which is used to build abstract 
nouns, and -um (3), which creates nouns that are a result of the stem’s 
action. The vowel in -um is invariably tense, so it has the effect of tensing 
any lax vowel in the stem [Exercise 8]. In reviewing the forms below, 
note how they vary in noun class (as shown by the different prefixes), 
largely on the basis of semantics.
(1) ε-lib-a 
‘knife’
 a-tεb-a 
‘builder’
 a-l
c
b-a 
‘gossip (person)’
 ε-ra:f-a 
‘baby’s bottle (lit. suckler)’
 a-pal-a 
‘friend’
(2) mu-l
c
b-ay 
‘scandal’
 ba-pal-ay 
‘friendship’
 ba-ti-ay 
‘brotherhood’
(3) bulib-um 
‘cut (n.)’
 b
e
-ti-um 
‘group of same-sex siblings’
 mu-lob-um 
‘bad feelings, i.e. result of scandal’
 bu-p
e
l-um 
‘association, i.e. result of friendship’
The instrumental suffix -a can be combined with the resultative suffix 
-um to form a noun meaning ‘instrument of result’. The compound 
suffix, -um
e
, has a free variant -uma that is not shown here.
(4) a. ε-  
ɲit
c
- um-a > eɲito:m
e
 
‘ladder’
  
3cl- climb
 b. bu- 
pal-um-a 
> bup
e
lum
e
 ‘association of friends’
  
9cl- friend

132  
DERIVATION AND THE LEXICON
■ Further Reading
Adams, Valerie. 2001. Complex Words in English. London: Longman.
Aronoff, Mark and Frank Anshen. 1998. Morphology and the lexicon: 
lexicalization and productivity. The Handbook of Morphology, eds. Andrew 
Spencer and Arnold M. Zwicky, 237–47. Oxford: Blackwell.
Bauer, Laurie. 1998. When is a sequence of two nouns a compound in English? 
English Language and Linguistics 2: 65–86.
Bauer, Laurie 2002. What you can do with derivational morphology. Morphology 
2000, eds. S. Bendjaballah, W. U. Dressler, O. E. Pfeiffer and M. Voeikova, 
37–48. Amsterdam: Benjamins.
Beard, Robert. 1998. Derivation. The Handbook of Morphology, eds. Andrew 
Spencer and Arnold M. Zwicky, 44–65. Oxford: Blackwell.
Fabb, Nigel. 1998. Compounding. The Handbook of Morphology, eds. Andrew 
Spencer and Arnold M. Zwicky, 66–83. Oxford: Blackwell.
Giegerich, Heinz J. 2004. Compound or phrase? English noun-plus-noun 
constructions and the stress criterion. English Language and Linguistics 8(1): 
1–24.
Lieber, Rochelle and Pavol Stekauer. 2009. The Handbook of Compounding. Oxford: 
Oxford University Press. 

DERIVATION AND THE LEXICON  133
Exercises
1. We said in the chapter that doghouse, at least in its original sense, 
is compositional. Now compare it to the following forms:
a. whorehouse
b. storehouse
c. teahouse
d. town house
e. nuthouse
All of these could also be called compositional, as well. Still, looking at 
them as a group, alongside doghouse, what problems do they raise?
2. Imagine what a bug house would be. Jot down your definition(s). 
Now do an online search for bug house. Comment on your find-
ings, discussing them in light of the notion of compositionality. 
How predictable was the meaning of bug house a priori?
3. Think of a compound noun that has at least three parts. Now, using 
the diagnostics presented in this section or in chapter 2, establish 
that it is indeed a compound.
4. Examine the following data from English and sort them into groups 
depending on the possible stem types that the adjective-forming suffix 
-ish may attach to (bound vs. free; lexical category) (Nida 1965: 120).
a. reddish
b. oldish
c. childish
d. boyish
e. Spanish
f. 
old-maidish
g. prudish
h. selfish
i. 
doggish
j. 
bookish
k. Turkish
l. 
English
m. foolish
n. purplish

134  
DERIVATION AND THE LEXICON
o. uppish
p. Irish
q. British
r. 
thievish
s. 
flattish
t. 
ticklish
5. Divide the following words fully into morphemes and draw tree 
diagrams or bracketing structures for them.
a. unbelievable
b. stickiness
c. sticky buns
d. unpretentiousness
e. know-it-all
f. 
ungentlemanliness
6. In chapter 2, we said that speakers typically modify a compound as 
a whole with adjectives rather than one member of a compound. 
A brown deer tick is a brown tick, not a tick that lives on brown 
deer. However, morphological generalizations are often not abso-
lute, and in chapter 2, exercise 1, we presented the following two 
compounds that we have come across in the media:
a. German car dealership
b. rich country club
In isolation, both of these are ambiguous between a compound 
reading and a phrasal meaning. First, write out the two possible 
interpretations of each. Then draw tree diagrams or bracketing 
structures that clearly differentiate each interpretation.
7. Two possible analyses of the complex word uncomfortably are given 
below. Which one is correct? Give arguments for your position.
a. [un- [ [ [comfort] -abl] -ly] ]
b. [ [un- [ [comfort] -abl] ] -ly]
8. Draw tree structures for the following two Kujamaat Jóola nouns. 
Refer to the Kujamaat Jóola section of the chapter for more infor-
mation on the affixes, if necessary.
a. ε- 
ɲit
c
-um-a > eɲitom
e
 
‘ladder’
 
3CL- climb
b. bu- pal-um-a 
> bup
e
lum
e
 
‘association of friends’
 
9CL- friend

DERIVATION AND THE LEXICON  135
NOTES
1 
Cran- occurs in the names of some juice products, such as cranapple juice, 
but this form is best seen as a blend. Cran-, rasp-, and to a lesser extent 
boysen- and cray- are often brought up as examples by linguists, but where 
do they come from? Cranberry comes from German kranbeere, etymologi-
cally ‘crane berry’. Rasp- in raspberry is of unknown origin, but it has an 
archaic cognate raspis, a kind of wine. Boysenberry (a hybrid of the logan-
berry and various blackberries) is named for the man who developed it, 
Rudolf Boysen. Finally, crayfish arose through a folk etymology: the original 
form was crevice ‘crab’, borrowed from Old French. (Etymologies courtesy 
of the American Heritage Dictionary and the Oxford Dictionary of English 
Etymology.)
2 
There are exceptions to this generalization, e.g., entomb.
3 
We came across the word cyberdieter in the December 19, 2002, edition of The 
Economist. It was used to refer to the customers of an online dieting firm.
4 
Most speakers of English believe that German has more complex com-
pounds than English does, but this is an illusion, rooted in the typographi-
cal fact that the component words of German compounds are generally 
written together, while English compounds are usually separated by spaces. 
Structurally, compounds in the two languages are almost identical.
5 
We say more about portmanteau words in section 6.1.1.
6 
For expository purposes, we left -istic as it is, although it is of course made 
up of two suffixes, -ist and -ic.

5 Derivation and Semantics
5.1 The Polysemy Problem 
137
5.2 The Semantics of Derived Lexemes 
139
5.2.1 The semantics of affixation 
140
5.2.2 The semantics of zero-derivation 
141
5.2.3 More on the semantics of affixation: English agent 
nouns in -er 
145
5.3 Summary 
147
Derivation and Verbs in Kujamaat Jóola 
148
The stem 
149
Further Reading 
151
The Utne Reader quoted the following Bucharest sign in its March–April 
1996 issue:
The lift is being fixed for the next day.
During that time we regret that you will be unbearable.
Unbearable is a perfectly good English word derived from the verb bear 
‘carry’, or is it? Why is this sign so funny? First of all, unbearable already 
exists in English with the meaning ‘difficult to tolerate’, and this is the 
meaning we first think of when we read the sign. But this isn’t the whole 
story. If we replace unbearable with a similar but unambiguous word, 
like untransportable, the sentence is no longer humorous, but it still 
sounds less than native. It’s because words like unbearable, untrans-
portable, and uneatable describe inherent qualities of people or things, 
What is Morphology?, 2nd edition, by Mark Aronoff and Kirsten Fudeman © 2011 
Mark Aronoff and Kirsten Fudeman.

DERIVATION AND SEMANTICS  137
 qualities that don’t change simply because an elevator is out of order. 
To take another example, the fact that someone is allergic to chocolate 
doesn’t make the chocolate cupcakes in the window uneatable.
In this simple sign, there is a complex interaction between affixa-
tion and semantics going on, and that is the sort of thing that we 
explore in this chapter. We begin by introducing a fundamental prob-
lem in lexical semantics, the study of word meaning: the meanings of 
individual  lexemes can be highly diverse. We then examine in some 
detail the semantics of derived lexemes to see what generalizations 
we can draw.
5.1 The Polysemy Problem
 
■
The most fundamental aspect of a word’s meaning is that it refers to some 
entity or relation (real or imaginary) in the world. We can refer to this 
entity or relation as the word’s semantic type. The word reptile refers to 
all individuals in the world that are reptiles. Verbs like respect or love refer 
to relationships between individuals. Formal approaches to grammar 
have provided us with terminology that allows us to make even more 
fine-tuned distinctions between words. We can differentiate bear from 
teddy bear by saying that the first is animate but the second is not, or foliage 
from leaf and literature from book on the basis of the mass/count distinc-
tion. Verbs are given labels such as ergative, unaccusative, transitive, or 
intransitive. (For a more detailed discussion, see Pustejovsky 1995: 8 ff.)
The main problem of lexical semantics is that the meanings of 
 individual lexemes are highly diverse. We call this the problem of 
polysemy. As an example, take the verb lose. Lose has different mean-
ings in the following sentences: They lost their passports; Jake lost his job; 
Sarah lost her husband to cancer; I lost my temper; We both lost ten pounds. 
But all of the meanings of lose reflected here are related – they are all 
instances of the same lexeme. Because lose has more than one related 
meaning, we say that it is polysemous.
There are many types of polysemy. In the next several examples, we 
present some general types of polysemy, focusing on nouns. While 
some nouns are inherently mass or count nouns, others can be either, as 
with watermelon:
(1) a. I love watermelon. (mass)
b. I sold three watermelons. (count)

138  
DERIVATION AND SEMANTICS
A single form can have two or more related meanings, in which case we are 
dealing with polysemy. Polysemy can be contrasted with homophony, where 
two or more words have different and unrelated meanings. Determine 
which of these relations is exemplified by the forms below. For answers, 
turn to p. 140.
a. check: to verify; a piece of paper used in place of cash
b. snake: a long, slender reptile without legs; a despicable person
c.  head: the part of the human body that sits upon the neck and shoulders; 
the leader of a group or organization
d.  tree: a plant with a woody stem and branches; a diagram showing 
relationships between members of a group, such as a family
e. bat: a wooden club; a flying rodent
f. itch: an uncomfortable tingling sensation on the skin; a desire
Besides the mass/count alternation, there are several other well-known 
alternations we find in noun meaning. A few are illustrated below:
(2) Figure–ground reversal
a. Hugh broke the window.
b. The kids climbed through the window.
(3) Container–contained alternation
a. A hot glass put under cold water will shatter.
b. Franny downed the glass in two seconds flat.
(4) Place–people alternation
a. The president and his family live in the White House.
b. The White House announced yesterday that the peace talks will 
continue.
(5) Characteristic–person alternation
a.  Sarah would have gotten the part if it weren’t for her scratchy 
voice.
b.  It was well known that The Voice didn’t drink … he was sharp, 
he wanted to stay sharp. (Irving 1989: 262)
The sentences in (2–5) contain pairs of words with very different – even 
contradictory – interpretations. Yet they represent single lexemes. 
In (2a) window refers to a solid barrier, but in (2b) an aperture; glass 
(3a–b) can refer to the container or to the liquid inside. Examples like 
these show that the same phonetic string can convey different, but 

DERIVATION AND SEMANTICS  139
related meanings depending on the linguistic and pragmatic context. 
(As seen in section 2.3.3 a given phonetic string may also convey 
 unrelated meanings, in which case we are dealing with homophones.) 
[Exercises 1–3]
This introduction to polysemy leads into the discussion in the 
 following section, which focuses on the semantics of derived lexemes.
5.2 The Semantics of Derived Lexemes
 
■
When somebody makes up a word, they are inventing it for use under 
a particular circumstance. Sometimes the circumstance can be very 
peculiar. Take the sentence in (6):
(6) Joe was Houdini’d and died.
In order to understand this sentence, you have to know something 
about Houdini – a famous escape artist – and how he died. He died 
 following a series of punches to his stomach (a fan was testing the 
strength of his abdominal muscles, which Houdini prided himself on). 
So when we say “Joe was Houdini’d and died,” we mean he was 
punched in the stomach and died in the way that Houdini did. This is 
a dramatic example of how you might need to know pragmatic factors 
in order to understand a particular lexeme. We say more about exam-
ples like (6) below.
The second factor that can affect a word’s meaning is its history. We 
might think of every lexeme not just as a word and its meaning, but as 
the word and every time it has ever been used: every time we hear the 
word, we revise its lexical entry in some way. That this indeed goes on 
is particularly evident from first-language acquisition research. 
Children in earlier stages of language acquisition may underextend a 
word by using it to refer to only a subset of its actual referents, or 
overextend a word by using it to refer to objects or individuals that are 
typically covered by the word, as well as to others that are “perceptu-
ally similar” (Clark 1993: 33). For example, a child might underextend 
the word dog by using it to refer to more typical examples of the spe-
cies, but not to varieties like Chihuahua or Pekingese (Kay and Anglin 
1982), or overextend tree by using it to refer to potted plants, trees, and 
even balsam fir wreaths. Such under- and overextensions are gener-
ally short-lived, which indicates that children revise lexical entries as 
they are exposed to more and more tokens of a word.

140  
DERIVATION AND SEMANTICS
Answers to polysemy–homophony exercise:
a. homophony
b. polysemy
c. polysemy
d. polysemy
e. homophony
f. polysemy
It is not unreasonable to think that the meaning of a word is a compilation 
of every single use of that word that you have ever heard or said. Every 
word has a history. It has your own personal history – how you have 
heard the word. It has the history of the word as it has been used by other 
people. Over time, the meanings of words can become more complex and 
diverse, making the task of the morphologist looking for semantic pat-
terns of word formation more complicated than it would be if the seman-
tics of word formation were purely compositional (as the semantics of 
syntactic constructions are often considered to be). A syntactic construc-
tion may have pragmatics to deal with, but it doesn’t have history.
One question you might want to ask is what kinds of meanings arise 
via lexeme-formation rules. Are derived forms like lexemes, with poten-
tially very complicated meanings? Or are they like syntactic colloca-
tions, with simple meanings? [Exercise 4]
5.2.1 The semantics of affixation
 
■
Let’s take the English suffix -ism. This affix has some very highly lexi-
calized meanings, one of which is ‘doctrinal system of principles’. We 
find this meaning in words like the following, and many others having 
to do with religion, philosophy, science, politics, or the arts:
(7) Catholicism 
Platonism 
romanticism 
McCarthyism
 
Judaism 
Marxism 
realism 
socialism
 
Buddhism 
idealism 
surrealism 
fascism
The suffix -ism has an even more specific and lexicalized meaning: 
‘a peculiarity of speech’. We talk about colloquialisms, spoonerisms, and 
Obamaisms (Obamaism can either be a system of beliefs or a peculiarity 

DERIVATION AND SEMANTICS  141
of speech). So -ism is an example of a suffix with two very highly 
 lexicalized meanings, both of which might be considered to be more 
characteristic of words than of affixes.
The German suffix -ei is like -ism in having at least two very highly 
lexicalized meanings. The first, illustrated by the words in (8), attaches 
to a noun and makes another noun meaning ‘the place in which X 
works’. The second, seen in (9), attaches to a verb stem and creates a 
noun referring to the ‘act of doing X’:
(8) a. Bäcker ‘baker’ 
→ 
Bäckerei ‘bakery’
b. Drucker ‘printer’ → 
Druckerei ‘printing office, print shop’
c. Sattler ‘saddler’ 
→ 
 Sattlerei ‘saddlery, saddler’s workshop’
d. Tischler ‘joiner’ 
→ 
Tischlerei ‘joinery’
(9) a. plaudern ‘chat (v)’ → 
Plauderei ‘chat (n)’
b. zittern ‘tremble’ 
→ 
Zitterei ‘trembling’
c. prügeln ‘clobber’ → 
Prügelei ‘brawl, fight’
d. quengeln ‘whine’ → 
Quengelei ‘whining’
English has a cognate suffix of French origin, -(e)ry, as in bakery, tannery, 
winery; bribery, flattery, foolery. [Exercises 5 and 6]
5.2.2 The semantics of zero-derivation
 
■
We now address a type of word formation which is much more abstract: 
zero-derivation. Zero-derivation results in lexemes whose interpreta-
tion is context-dependent in much the same way as the words we 
looked at in section 5.1 above.1 The data on zero-derived verbs dis-
cussed here come from Clark and Clark (1979), but the analysis is that 
of Aronoff (1980).
The peculiarity of zero-derived verbs is that they often have a wide 
range of meanings. To give you just one example, the verb to sand 
denotes two very different actions. The most common meaning is ‘to 
rub with sandpaper’. The second meaning is ‘to spread or cover with 
sand’, as is done in winter to make roads less slippery.
While sand is well established as a verb, zero-derivation is a  productive 
derivational process in English (cf. 4.2.2), as shown by the following 
nonce forms presented by Clark and Clark. All of these sentences are 
actual quotations:

142  
DERIVATION AND SEMANTICS
(10) a.  Ruth Buzzi houseguested with Bill Dodge (Herb Caen, SF 
Chronicle)
b. He wristed the ball over the net (tennis commentator)
c.  When you’re starting to Sunday School members, then I think 
you’re going too far (a Californian legislator)
d. Will you cigarette me? (Mae West)
e. We all Wayned and Cagneyed (NY Times magazine)
Clark and Clark classify noun-to-verb derivations into various catego-
ries. For each category, they give numerous examples, of which we 
have given only a few:
(11) Location 
(N is at a place) 
blanket, saddle, roof
 
 
 
(put something at N) 
kennel, ground, cellar
 
Duration 
(spend the 
 
 
duration of N) 
summer, holiday,
 
 
 
vacation, weekend
 
Agent 
(N acts) 
jockey, referee, umpire, 
 
 
 
pilot
 
Goal 
(make into N) 
fool, orphan, baby, 
 
 
 
 cripple, pile, loop, 
 
 
 
powder
 
Instrument 
(use N) 
ship, nail, glue, 
 
 
 
shampoo, fork
 
Miscellaneous  
lunch, hay, whale, dog
The descriptions given in (11) for each of the categories are slightly 
vague. One of the meanings given for the Location category is ‘put 
something at N’. To be more precise, verbs like kennel, ground (e.g., a 
teenager), or cellar involve keeping, not simply putting. Likewise, the 
true description of the Instrument category is much trickier than 
‘use N’ because often you don’t use the noun – you use something 
else. For example, while shipping originally took place via ship, 
today we ship things by truck or air. We might redefine this category 
as ‘do what you do with N’. Even this, however, needs to be inter-
preted fairly broadly. Clark and Clark describe a fictional Max, who 
has a strange fetish – he likes to sneak up to people and stroke the 
backs of their legs with a teapot. When one of Max’s friends says to 
another, “Well, this time Max has gone too far. He tried to teapot a 
policeman,” we need to interpret teapot as ‘rub the back of the leg 

DERIVATION AND SEMANTICS  143
with a teapot’. By no stretch of the imagination is this what we think 
of as ‘doing what you do with a teapot’.
The miscellaneous category includes some interesting words. We use 
the verb whale to mean ‘catch whales’ or fish to mean ‘catch fish’ but are 
hard pressed to come up with many other verbs of this type. We don’t 
use a verb deer to mean ‘hunt deer’ or butterfly for ‘catch butterflies’. 
The verb dog patterns with words like clown in having the meaning ‘act 
like a dog’. Cub, foal, and pup all mean to ‘give birth to’ these animals.
The zero-derived verbs with the most extensive semantic possibili-
ties are probably those that are derived from personal names. To under-
stand them, you need to know something about the person and often 
about a particular event. To understand the sentence in (6), repeated in 
(12), you have to know the circumstances of Houdini’s death:
(12) Joe was Houdini’d and died.
To understand the sentences in (13) (from Clark and Clark 1979: 784), 
you have to know other things about Houdini, namely that he was 
famous for sensational and seemingly impossible escapes (13a) and 
that he made a lifetime crusade of showing phony mediums and spir-
itualists to be frauds:
(13) a. My sister Houdini’d her way out of the locked closet.
b. I would love to Houdini those ESP experiments.
The semantic obscurity of verbs derived from personal names results in 
speakers forgetting very rapidly that there even was a zero-derivation. 
While any English speaker can see the connection between nurse (noun) 
and nurse (verb) or bottle (noun) and bottle (verb), most aren’t aware that 
boycott and lynch are of the same ilk.2
Robert Lees, in his classic book on English nominals (1960), derived 
the meanings of denominal verbs from sentences containing them. The 
verb summer would be derived from the phrase spend the summer and 
the verb kennel from keep in a kennel. Marchand (1969) has a similar strat-
egy: he associates a denominal verb with a sentence containing the 
noun from which it is derived. Hale and Keyser (1993) also relate the 
lexical semantics of verbs to a syntactic structure.
Given the sometimes idiosyncratic array of meanings that zero-derived 
verbs may have, what kind of semantics can we write for the noun-to-verb 
rule? We can potentially go two ways. We can either be very inclusive, or 
specific, and formulate precise rules that generate all the cases. Or we can 

144  
DERIVATION AND SEMANTICS
do the opposite and write a very general – what we call a sparse – rule. 
A sparse rule says very little but, as you will see, yields the right answer.
Let’s review all of the examples of zero-derived verbs that we have 
given here and ask what is going on, in general. Each verb has something 
to do with the noun. Because it is a verb, it has the meaning of some action 
or activity, and on basic Gricean principles of cooperation (Grice 1975), we 
know that that action or activity is connected to the noun. Grice tells us 
that when people speak to one another, they have to assume that they are 
being cooperative. We give a more specific answer below, but first we need 
to examine a fact about evaluative adjectives like good, bad, or wonderful.
The meanings of evaluative adjectives may seem to be infinite. Wonderful 
means something very different in the sentences Moby-Dick is a wonderful 
book and George is a wonderful nurse. For one thing, the first sentence is true 
only if Moby-Dick is both a book and wonderful. The second sentence can 
be true even if George is not a nurse but a stockbroker. This is because 
wonderful can be construed as describing either the noun nurse or the 
activity associated with it. George is a wonderful nurse as long as he takes 
care of sick people (such as his kids) quite wonderfully. However, we do 
not need to say that the meanings of evaluative adjectives are infinite or 
even that they are polysemous. Instead, following Katz (1964), we can say 
that evaluative adjectives modify “that component of the meaning of a 
noun which has to do with the particular respect in which evaluations are 
made, within the  language, of things in the extension of the noun” (p. 751). 
(The noun’s extension is the set of entities it picks out in the world.) We 
can refer to this as the evaluative domain of the word.
The evaluative domain of simple lexemes like nurse, knife, or dog is the 
same as the evaluative domain of zero-derived verbs like pilot or shampoo. 
If Mary is good at piloting, it means that she is a good pilot. If this is good 
shampoo, it is good for what you do with shampoo. This tells us that the 
mechanisms by which speakers assign meanings to evaluative adjectives 
and to zero-derived verbs on the basis of context are likely the same.
To restate this analysis, the wide array of meanings of zero-derived 
verbs results from two properties. The first is that the rule by which 
they are formed is very simple, specifying only that we take a noun and 
form a verb. The second is that conversational convention dictates only 
that the verb have something to do with the noun. We can reasonably 
pare this analysis down even further and say that the proper analysis of 
zero-derived verbs is that they are simply verbs. The fact that they 
denote an activity connected with the noun is derivable on purely con-
versational grounds. [Exercises 7 and 8]

DERIVATION AND SEMANTICS  145
While other derivational formations don’t have as dramatic an array 
of potential meanings as zero-derived verbs, we still find variety. 
Aronoff (1976: 38) points out that new English nouns of the form 
X-ousness have three possible meanings, depending on context:
(14) a. ‘the fact that Y is X-ous’
 
 His callousness surprised me ‘The fact that he was callous sur-
prised me’
b. ‘the extent to which Y is X-ous’
 
 His callousness surprised me ‘The extent to which he was callous 
surprised me’
c. ‘the quality or state of being X-ous’
 
 Callousness is not a virtue ‘The quality or state of being callous is 
not a virtue’
The difference between lexemes of the form X-ousness and zero-de-
rived verbs lies in the rules that produce them. While the meaning of 
words like callousness is constrained by the semantics of the suffixes 
-ous and -ness, as well as by the meaning of the stem itself, the mean-
ing of zero-derived verbs is constrained only by the meaning of the 
base noun.
5.2.3 More on the semantics of affixation: 
 
■
 
English agent nouns in -er
We next give you an example of another derivation that works in the 
same way as zero-derived verbs but is a little simpler. Marchand 
gives examples of English agent nouns in -er. He points out that they 
fall into four basic categories, which can be broken down even fur-
ther into two separate sets. The four basic categories are listed 
below:
(15) Persons: 
baker, dancer, gambler, driver
 
Animals: 
pointer, retriever, warbler, trotter
 
Material objects: 
blotter, eraser, fertilizer, shutter
 
Immaterial objects: 
reminder, clincher, thriller, eye-opener
These nouns can be further divided into their habitual and non-habitual 
uses. If we say:

146  
DERIVATION AND SEMANTICS
(16) He is a gambler
we usually mean that he gambles regularly. You can also use agent 
nouns non-habitually:
(17) All ticket-holders may enter
If you are trying to get the meaning of agent nouns in English, you have 
to say that they fall into the four categories listed in (15), multiplied by 
the two categories habitual vs. non-habitual. We need to do this because 
even a word that is normally understood to be habitual, like blotter, can 
be used in a non-habitual sense. If you use something that’s not a  blotter 
as a blotter, then it must be a non-habitual blotter, because it is only 
being used as such on this particular occasion.
There are two possible analyses of agent nouns, both of which are 
reasonable. We won’t try to choose between them here. One is the strat-
egy that we used above with zero-derived verbs, to assign the deriva-
tion a sparse semantic rule. We can follow Marchand in saying that an 
agent noun is ‘someone or something connected with what the base 
denotes’, or alternatively, ‘somebody or something whose function or 
characteristic is to perform a particular act’. For now we assume the 
latter. It permits the categories person, animal, material object, and 
immaterial object, as well as a habitual or non-habitual interpretation.
The other method which linguists might use to account for possible 
meanings of X-er agent nouns involves prototypes, also called arche-
types. The idea is that not all members of a given category are equal. 
You can have prototypical, or typical, members of a category, as well as 
more marginal members. In this case, it is probably reasonable to say 
that the prototypical agentive is a person who habitually performs a 
particular type of action. So the prototypical agentive is a word like 
baker, dancer, gambler, or driver, in the habitual sense. These reflect the 
core meaning of this particular formation. Other forms, like retriever, 
blotter, or clincher, involve relaxation of the core meaning. We use them 
to distinguish one specimen from other members of its class. A pointer 
is a kind of dog that has the characteristic of pointing; specifically, it has 
been bred to stand still and point out the prey to the hunter. A retriever 
is a kind of dog bred to retrieve the prey once it has been killed.
Even within a specific class like that of retrievers, you can get central 
and marginal exemplars. Most people don’t know that poodles (the big 
ones, anyway) are retrievers. The fact that we can make a sentence like 

DERIVATION AND SEMANTICS  147
“You can use a poodle as a retriever,” tells you that retrieving is not a 
salient, central characteristic of poodles – they are best known for being 
fuzzy. [Exercises 9 and 10]
When we claim that persons are the prototypical members of the cat-
egory of agentive nouns, we can also argue that some other members of 
the category – material objects like screwdrivers, for example – aren’t 
agents at all. Instead, they are instruments, because they don’t have 
will. Of course, if there were a special profession for people who drive 
in screws, then one might say that such a person was a screwdriver, and 
then screwdrivers could be agents. In short, the second method of ana-
lyzing agentives is to establish a central case, the prototype, and to 
work out from that to get the others. When it comes to denominal verbs, 
we do not have the option of applying this analysis because there is no 
central case, no prototype.
5.3 Summary
 
■
In this chapter we have explored the semantics of derivation, looking at 
a group of derivational operations in English, some of which are seman-
tically very particular, such as -ism, and others of which are very 
abstract. Our point has been to show that the meanings of morphologi-
cally complex words are partially predictable from the meanings of 
their parts. It is only through use in context that they acquire particular 
meanings. Over time, a single word may acquire a number of distinct 
lexicalized meanings and, as a result, a complex lexical entry.
In the Kujamaat Jóola portion of this chapter, we pursue the theme of 
derivation and semantics further by examining some verbal derivational 
suffixes. These express causative, reflexive, and reciprocal meaning, as 
well as the fact that an action begins away from the speaker. We begin 
with a necessary overview of verbal inflection and derivation in Kujamaat 
Jóola, but the former will be treated in fuller detail in the next chapter.

148  
DERIVATION AND SEMANTICS
Derivation and Verbs in Kujamaat Jóola
 
■
Kujamaat Jóola, like many languages, exploits derivation and inflection 
to express a wide range of syntactic and semantic categories. What we 
would express in English as a sentence is often encompassed by a single 
Kujamaat Jóola verb, as in (1):
(1) u-b
c
ɲ-ε:n-ε:n-
c
rut-al-
c
 
1pl.incl -send-inc-inc-neg-1pl.incl-3sg.obj
 
‘We had not yet sent him’
The core of (1) is a lexical root – b
c
ɲ ‘send’ – which provides the basic 
meaning of the verb. The rest of the meaning is conveyed by affixes on 
either side of the root. The first person plural inclusive  subject is expressed 
by the circumfix u- … -al; the emphatic dubitive- incompletive by repeti-
tion of the dubitive-incompletive suffix -e:n; the meaning ‘not yet’ by 
-
c
rut; and the third person singular object by -
c
. With the exception of the 
circumfixal subject marker, the relationship between meaning and form 
is one to one: the meaning of the word as a whole is the sum of its parts. 
Linguists refer to this type of morphology as agglutinative.
One characteristic of agglutinative morphology, identified by Horne 
(1966), is that affixation is not obligatory. We see this in Kujamaat Jóola 
in that a bare root is used for the positive imperative:
(2) ri 
‘eat!’
 
j
c
l 
‘come!’
 
tεk ‘hit!’
The order of morphemes in any language is typically fairly rigid, and 
Kujamaat Jóola is no exception. The following diagram schematizes the 
basic structure of the verb. At its core is the lexical stem, which may be 
simple or derived. The stem is followed by what Sapir refers to as posi-
tion 1 suffixes, including aspectual, modal, and negative markers, as 
well as a derivational directional suffix and the second members of the 
past subordinate and first person plural inclusive circumfixes. Position 1 
suffixes are followed by the position 2 suffixes: the passive marker, 
object pronominals (direct, indirect, or both), and noun emphasis 
marker. Finally, the third position is filled by verb reduplication and the 
simple subordinate marker. Immediately preceding the verb stem are 
the subject markers and relative pronouns (position 1 prefixes); the left-
most position (position 2) is filled by the resultative, the resultative 

DERIVATION AND SEMANTICS  149
negative, the negative imperative, and the past subordinate markers. 
Many of these terms are probably new to you. They will become more 
familiar over the course of this and the next chapter. [Exercise 11]
 
The Kujamaat Jóola verb
 
2- 
1- 
 
-1 
-2 
-3
 
res 
subject 
STEM 
aspect 
object 
subord
 
res neg 
rel pronoun 
 
mood 
passive redup
 
neg imper 
past subord 
noun
 
past subord 
negation 
emphasis
 
 
directional
The stem
 
■
Some examples of Kujamaat Jóola roots are given below:
(3) tεy 
‘run’
 
juk 
‘see’
 
manj ‘know’
 
cεŋ 
‘ask’
Inflectional affixes may attach to a root, or the root can be extended by 
the addition of derivational affixes. The root plus derivational affixes is 
called a stem. You have already encountered one verbal derivation suffix 
in chapter 3, -u ‘from’. Five more are listed below, with  examples:
(4) 
Productive verbal derivational suffixes
a. -εn 
causative
 
 
lint 
‘make a rumbling noise’
 
 
linten 
‘cause something to make a rumbling noise’
b. -
c
 
reflexive-descriptive
 
 
buŋ 
‘braid someone’s hair’
 
 
buŋ
c
- 
‘braid one’s own hair’
c. -
c
r
c
 
strong reflexive
 
 
buj 
‘kill’
 
 
buj
c
r
c
 
‘kill one’s self’
d. -
c
r 
reciprocal
 
 
jim 
‘forget’
 
 
jim
c
r 
‘forget each other’
e. -um 
directive
 
 
ribεn 
‘follow’
 
 
ribenum 
‘follow by means of’

150  
DERIVATION AND SEMANTICS
We see in (4c) that the root buj ‘kill’ can be suffixed with the strong 
reflexive to form buj
c
r
c
 ‘kill one’s self’. If a speaker were to add the 
reflexive-descriptive suffix (4b) instead, the result is a verb with more 
idiosyncratic semantics, buj
c
 ‘be wounded’. The difference between 
affixation of the reflexive and strong reflexive is not always so striking, 
however, as we see in (5):
(5) 
a. ni- 
p
c
s 
-
c
 
-p
c
s
c
 
i- 
ban
 
 
1agr- wash 
-refl 
-redup 1agr-finish
 
 
‘I have finished washing myself’
 
b. ni- 
p
c
s 
-
c
r
c
 
-p
c
s
c
r
c
 i- 
ban
 
 
1agr- wash 
-refl 
-redup 1agr- finish
 
 
‘I have finished washing myself’
The sometimes idiosyncratic meaning of verbs bearing the reflexive 
suffix reflects a major point of this chapter, that the meanings of mor-
phologically complex words are not always fully predictable from those 
of their parts. Through use in context, morphologically complex words 
may acquire lexicalized meanings and need to be listed in the lexicon. 
This must be true of buj
c
 ‘be wounded’. [Exercise 12]
Evidence that both roots and the roots plus derivational affixes count 
as stems in Kujamaat Jóola verb morphology comes from the following 
observations:
(6) 
Both can be used as the positive imperative
 
 
pur b
c
 
‘go out from there!’
 
 
purum b
c
 
‘go out via that way!’
(7) 
Both participate in full reduplication, which is productive and 
serves as the marker of verb emphasis or verb focus.
 
a. na-[sic] b
c
 [sic] -b
c
l [sic] 
e-[sic] liw -ey [sic]
 
 
3sg.sub- roast 
-redup 
3cl- 
meat-def3
 
 
‘he roasted the meat’
 
b. na- 
b
c
l 
-
c
 
-b
c
l
c
 
 
3sg.sub- roast -refl 
-redup
 
 
‘he burned himself’
(8) 
Both may serve as nominal stems
 
a. ε-j
c
j 
ka-j
c
j-εn
 
 
3cl-assemble, gather 
7cl-assemble-caus
 
 
‘to assemble, gather’ 
‘to cause (people) to assemble’
 
b. fu-j
c
j 
ka-j
c
j -εn-a
 
 
5cl-assemble 
7cl-assemble-caus-agent

DERIVATION AND SEMANTICS  151
 
 
 ‘assembly, gathering’ 
 ‘gatherer of people, leader who 
brings people together by force of 
charisma’
The stem in Bantu languages (also in the Niger-Congo family) may also 
consist of a root plus derivational suffixes (Hyman 1993; Mchombo 1993). 
For example, Mchombo shows that the Chichewa verb stem plus deriva-
tional affixes functions as a unit in that it may be nominalized (but units 
larger than the verb stem may not), undergo reduplication, and be used 
as the bare imperative. Chichewa is similar to Kujamaat Jóola in these 
respects. In addition, the Chichewa verb stem serves as the domain for a 
phonological process, tense–lax vowel harmony. [Exercises 13–15]
Further Reading
 
■
Booij, Geert and Rochelle Lieber. 2004. On the paradigmatic nature of affixal 
semantics in English and Dutch. Linguistics 42: 327–57.
Cruse, D. A. 1986. Lexical Semantics. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Hohenhaus, Peter. 2005. Lexicalization and institutionalization. Handbook of 
Word-Formation, ed. Pavol Štekauer and Rochelle Lieber, 353–373. Dordrecht: 
Springer.
Jackendoff, Ray S. 1975. Semantic and morphological regularities in the lexicon. 
Language 51: 639–71.
Levin, Beth and Malka Rapaport Hovav. 1998. Morphology and lexical seman-
tics. The Handbook of Morphology, eds. Andrew Spencer and Arnold M. Zwicky, 
248–71. Oxford: Blackwell.

152  
DERIVATION AND SEMANTICS
Exercises
1. Look up the word run in the dictionary and read over its many 
 possible meanings. List at least five meanings of run that exemplify 
polysemy. Next, determine whether there are any homophonous 
forms of run, forms with different and unrelated meanings.
2. Write sentence pairs that illustrate the following semantic 
 alternations:
a. figure–ground reversal
b. container–contained alternation
c. place–people alternation
d. person–characteristic alternation
3. The following words do not have plurals or, if they do, their plurals 
have a special meaning. Describe the meaning of the plural form 
of each word, if it exists. Then try to come up with an account of 
the behavior of these nouns as a group.
a. water
b. rice
c. fish
d. air
e. laughter
f. 
courage
g. heat (i.e., hot temperature)
h. humidity
4. Hebrew, as we have already seen, is a language with root-and-
pattern morphology. Rewrite each of the following adjectives, 
replacing the consonants with C. Reproduce the vowels as they are. 
Example (a) has been done for you. Does a semantically based pat-
tern emerge, and if so, what is it? If you find any exceptions, make 
a hypothesis to explain it/them.
a. kaʃeh 
‘hard’ 
CaCeC
b. kaxol 
‘blue’
c. rax 
‘soft’
d. ʔadom 
‘red’
e. nakiy 
‘clean’

DERIVATION AND SEMANTICS  153
f. 
maluax 
‘salty’
g. gaʃum 
‘rainy’
h. varod 
‘pink’
i. 
yarok 
‘green’
j. 
texelet 
‘light blue’
5. Sort the following words into two groups based on the semantics 
of the suffix -ful. How is it used in each set? Is either -ful 
 productive?
a. careful
b. deceitful
c. prayerful
d. handful
e. sorrowful
f. 
earful
g. mouthful
h. playful
i. 
bagful
6. Determine whether the italicized forms in the following pairs are 
related in meaning. If they are, describe the relationship.
a. all-nighter 
dancer
b. dancer 
badger
c. milky 
inky
d. He’s done it 
He’s here
e. funny 
Bobby
f. 
golden 
wooden
g. merriment 
cement
h. friendly 
quickly
i. 
adviser 
governor
j. 
duchess 
sorceress
7. The following was spotted on a sign outside a campus movie 
theater:
The cinema will not be screening films Dec. 13–Jan. 19
 
The dates correspond to the winter break, and from the context we 
can deduce that the sign means that the cinema won’t be showing 
films. What does screening mean more often? (Note that the

154  
DERIVATION AND SEMANTICS
 
 meaning ‘to show a motion picture on a screen’ is indeed attested 
in dictionaries, but not as a primary definition.) Why is the mean-
ing intended here equally acceptable?
 8. Create a new word using zero-derivation and a proper name.
 9. For each of the following pairs, determine which word denotes a 
more prototypical member of the group for you.
a. cheese: 
gorgonzola or cheddar?
b. dwelling: 
house or apartment?
c. bird: 
robin or chickadee?
d. bread: 
sliced American loaf or baguette?
e. bear: 
koala or grizzly?
10. How might cultural, geographic, and socio-economic factors affect 
what one considers a prototype of a tree? A skyscraper? A cat?
11. Consider the diagram of the verb in the section on Kujamaat 
Jóola. How similar are the morphemes within a given position 
class with respect to the type of information they convey?
12. We saw that the Kujamaat Jóola reflexive can have a fairly idio-
syncratic meaning when compared to the stem. Can you think of 
any examples from another language where a reflexive verb has 
acquired a particular meaning that does not immediately reflect 
the meaning of its parts?3
13. How does the Kujamaat Jóola expression of the causative, reflex-
ive, and reciprocal differ from their expression in English and any 
other languages you know?
14. We have identified the Kujamaat Jóola causative, reflexive, strong 
reflexive, and reciprocal as derivational (rather than inflectional) 
affixes. On the basis of the discussion of inflection and derivation 
in section 2.4 and in this chapter, justify this decision.
15. In chapter 2 we wrote:
 
Noun class systems can be powerful inflectional and derivational 
mechanisms. We have seen that by changing a noun’s class marker, 
not only can Kujamaat Jóola speakers make important number 

DERIVATION AND SEMANTICS  155
 distinctions – singular, plural, mass, or collective – but they can also 
create diminutives or augmentatives, personify non-humans, or 
dehumanize humans.
 
While this is true, and noun class systems can indeed be seen as 
both inflectional and derivational mechanisms, it is still the case 
that the noun class prefixes themselves are best considered inflec-
tional morphemes. Keeping this in mind, and referring to the 
 treatment of derivation and semantics in this chapter, outline a 
possible analysis of the Kujamaat Jóola paradigm below. It shows 
that the stem -sek ‘woman’ is associated with a variety of different 
meanings depending on the noun class prefix that it bears. You 
may find it helpful to refer to the discussion of Kujamaat Jóola 
noun classes in chapter 2.
a. -sεk 
‘woman’
b. a-sεk 
‘woman’ 
(class 1)
c. ku-sεk 
‘women’ 
(class 2)
d. ji-sεk 
‘small woman’ 
(class 10)
e. mu-sεk 
‘small women’ 
(class 11)
f. 
ba-sεk 
‘many small women’ 
(class 13)
g. fu-sεk 
‘big woman’ 
(class 5)
h. ɲi-sεk 
‘big women’ 
(class 12)
NOTES
1 Another good example of a morphological process that results in lexemes 
whose interpretation is context-dependent is noun–noun compounding; see 
Downing (1977). In what follows, we focus on zero-derivation of verbs from 
nouns. English also allows zero-derivation of nouns from verbs. Nouns 
derived from verbs generally signify an instance or result of the activity 
denoted by the verb. So the noun hit denotes an ‘instance of hitting’, while 
the noun run can denote either an instance (She went for a run) or a result (She 
scored two runs). It is possible to form a verb from the noun run in this second 
baseball sense of the term: we outrunned them (meaning that we scored more 
runs than they did). The fact that the past tense of outrun in this sense is not 
*outran shows that the verb is derived from the noun in this case. This whole 
sequence (verb to noun to verb) indicates that these rules are directional, 
contrary to what some scholars have claimed.
2 Lynch ‘the punishment of persons suspected of crime without due process of 
law’ appeared in 1811 and comes from Captain William Lynch of Pittsylvania 

156  
DERIVATION AND SEMANTICS
County, Virginia. Lynch and his neighbors were plagued by criminals, but 
couldn’t appeal to the courts because they were too far away. The men drew 
up a contract on September 22, 1780, in which they agreed to deal with the 
criminals themselves, even inflicting corporal punishment if necessary. 
Charles C. Boycott was an English land agent in County Mayo, Ireland. He 
was ostracized in 1880 for preferring to evict his tenants than to reduce 
rents, and found himself and his family without servants, farm help, or even 
mail delivery. His name came to be synonymous with this kind of cold-
shoulder treatment, whether it be abstention from buying a product or deal-
ing with a person, as a means of protest (definitions and etymologies from 
American Heritage Dictionary of the English Language).
3 This would be a good question for discussion, since not all students will 
have the knowledge to do this.

6 Inflection
6.1 What is Inflection? 
159
6.1.1 Exponence 
160
6.1.2 Inherent vs. assigned inflection 
163
6.1.3 Government vs. concord 
164
6.1.4 Inflectional categories 
165
6.2 Inflection vs. Derivation 
168
6.2.1 Differences between inflection and derivation 
168
6.2.2 The formal similarity between inflection
and derivation 
171
6.3 Inventory of Inflectional Morphology Types 
171
6.3.1 Affixation and stem alternations 
171
6.3.2 Apophony 
173
6.3.3 Root-and-pattern morphology 
174
6.3.4 Reduplication 
175
6.3.5 Suppletion 
176
6.4 Syncretism 
177
6.5 Typology 
178
6.6 Summary 
180
Agreement in Kujamaat Jóola 
182
Definite article 
182
Pronouns 
183
Nominal modifiers 
183
Subject–verb agreement 
186
Further Reading 
187
What is Morphology?, 2nd edition, by Mark Aronoff and Kirsten Fudeman © 2011 
Mark Aronoff and Kirsten Fudeman.

158  
INFLECTION
What is the plural of euro, the name of the European currency? The answer 
seems obvious: euros – one euro, two euros, voilà! After all, -s is the pro-
ductive plural marker in English and is normally used with new coinages, 
which is just what we do with words like modem or byte (modems, bytes). 
But spend a little time in Ireland, the only largely English-speaking coun-
try in the euro zone, and you will soon discover that a pint of Guinness in 
the local pub sets you back four euro and not four euros. Why?
The answer lies in the multilingual nature of the euro zone. The name 
of the currency itself bespeaks such multilingualism: its devisers had to 
come up with a name that could be both written and pronounced in all of 
the languages in the zone. Indeed, though it is pronounced differently in 
each of the languages ([ojro] in German, [œro] in French, and [εvro] in 
Greek, for example), it is pronounceable in all of them. But the plural also 
must be not only pronounced but also written in each of the languages. 
Look at a 10-euro bill and you will see the clever solution to this multilin-
gual problem that was found. First, unlike the US 10-dollar bill, where ten 
dollars is written out in full, or the bilingual Canadian bill, which says 
dix·ten dollars, the word for ‘ten’ is written in numerals: 10. The reason is 
simple: 10 can be written identically while still being pronounced differ-
ently in each of the languages of the zone, and still mean exactly the same 
thing. The second problem is that the plural form of euro, which follows 
the numeral, must also be written uniformly on the bill and, though sev-
eral major European languages besides English use the plural marker -s 
(French, German, and Spanish do), not all would tolerate it (Italian, for 
example, never uses an -s plural). A mathematician might have solved 
this problem of uniformity by extending the use of symbols to the nota-
tion >1, which technically means ‘plural’, but the expression 10 euro >1 is 
not only silly-looking, but also redundant. The solution, therefore, was to 
avoid the redundancy and not use any plural marker on euro in writing. 
The bill reads simply 10 EURO/EYPW and the spoken languages have all 
followed the same practice of not using any plural marker either, making 
the plural of euro euro in Ireland.
The linguistic point of this story is that even when several languages 
share the same word, as they do with euro, the inflectional systems of 
the languages differ, and this difference normally affects the forms of 
the words. When blue jeans became the rage in the Soviet Union years 
ago, they were called [dƷinzi], with the plural marker [i] added despite 
the presence of the [s] in the English word, because the -s was not 
 recognized as anything but part of the basic stem. Conversely, when the 
old-fashioned English term for ‘headlight’, sealed beam, was borrowed 

INFLECTION  159
into Israeli Hebrew as [silbim], the final [im] sequence was interpreted 
as a Hebrew plural marker, making [silbim] a plural, with the corre-
sponding singular therefore being [silb]. So [silb], the Israeli Hebrew 
word for ‘headlight’, is borrowed directly from English, in the minds of 
Hebrew speakers who know, to the great surprise of English speakers.
Inflection varies from one language to another more than any other 
systematic aspect of language. This chapter will deal with inflectional 
systems, showing how they vary across languages widely but still 
remain quite relentlessly systematic within themselves.
6.1 What is Inflection?
 
■
We encountered inflection in section 2.4, but here we explore it in more 
detail. The word itself comes from traditional Latin grammar. Its root 
flect-, which we see in the English word flex, means ‘bend’. (The British 
and German spelling, inflexion, is even closer to flex.) We give this ety-
mology to evoke the image of a speaker “bending,” or, perhaps more 
clearly, altering the shape of a word so it will fit in a particular position 
within a sentence. Every sentence is a syntactic frame with positions for 
a series of words. In order to fill one of those positions, you take a 
lexeme from the lexicon and bend it to fit. In this way, inflectional mor-
phology is determined by syntax.
What kinds of things do lexemes express through inflection? In gen-
eral we speak of inflection expressing morphosyntactic information, 
syntactic information that is expressed morphologically. This includes 
the abstract syntactic categories of tense, aspect, number, and case. 
Specific values for these categories, such as past, imperfective, plural, 
or genitive, are generally referred to as morphosyntactic features or 
morphosyntactic properties, the latter a term from Matthews (1991).
Examples of words + inflectional morphemes
Nouns: book + s
 
fox + es
Verbs: 
read + s
 
load + ed
 
see + n
 
drink + ing

160  
INFLECTION
Inflection is the realization of morphosyntactic features through mor-
phological means. What those means are will be addressed later in this 
chapter.
In order to fully understand inflection, we must situate it in the gram-
mar. Since we are claiming that the syntax provides the morphology 
with morphosyntactic features, the job of the morphology must be to 
get from there to the actual phonological realization:
(1) 
Morphosyntactic
representation
Morphology
Phonological
representation
This diagram portrays the relationship between the syntax, morphol-
ogy, and phonology as derivational, but it is equally possible to model 
a non-derivational, parallel relationship. Either way, a diagram like (1) 
is bound to be deceptively simple. We are still left asking precisely how 
words become inflected. We now turn to an exploration of the answers 
to that question.
6.1.1 Exponence
 
■
Exponence, a term coined by Peter Matthews, refers to the realization 
of morphosyntactic features via inflection. In the word seas, the mor-
pheme [z] is the exponent of the morphosyntactic feature plural, and in 
sailed, [d] is the exponent of past tense or past participle (Matthews 
1991: 175). In both cases there is a one-to-one relationship between form 
and meaning, since one morpheme realizes one morphosyntactic fea-
ture, a situation that Matthews calls simple exponence.
When we go beyond simple exponence, we get into data that have 
been central to modern theories of morphology. One type is what 
Matthews first called cumulative exponence. These are cases where 
more than one morphosyntactic feature maps onto a single form. We 
find this in Latin verbal inflections. In the Latin first person singular 
present indicative active form, five features (person, number, tense, 
mood, voice) are spelled out with a single morpheme, -ō:
(2) cant-ō
 
sing-1sg.pres.ind.act
 
‘I sing’
Another example of cumulative exponence is subject–object agreement 
in Cherokee, an Iroquoian language. Verbs in Cherokee bear prefixes 

INFLECTION  161
that agree with their subject and object in person, number, and animacy. 
Some prefixes, including those listed in (3), indicate both subject and 
object simultaneously (Scancarelli 1987: 71):
(3) ski-, skw- 
2sg.sub/1sg.obj
 
sti: 
2du.sub/3sg.inan.obj
 
kaci:y 
1sg.sub/3pl.an.obj
 
ci:y 
1sg.sub/3sg.an.obj
Examples of subject/object prefixes in context are given below (tones 
are not marked; /v/ is a nasalized central vowel). Following Scancarelli, 
verbs are given in both their surface and phonemic forms, with the pho-
nemic forms aligned with the glosses:
(4) a. sv:kthv kaci:ne:lv:ʔi  
(Scancarelli 1987: 68)
 
 
 
/kaci:y- 
ʔne:lv:ʔi/
 
 
apple 1sg.sub/3pl.an.obj-give.perf
 
 
‘I gave them an apple’
 
b. ci:ko:wthiha 
(Scancarelli 1987: 74)
 
 
/ci:y- 
ko:ʔwthiha/
 
 
1sg.sub/3sg.an.obj-see.pres
 
 
‘I see him’
Lastly, inflection for case, number, and gender in many Indo-European 
languages involves cumulative exponence. The -os ending of the 
Greek adjective kalós ‘good’ indicates that it is masculine, nominative, 
and singular. The -á of Russian stolá ‘table’ denotes both genitive and 
singular.
Related to cumulative exponence is the notion of a portmanteau, a 
term coined by Lewis Carroll for words of his own invention that were 
combinations of other words. For example, slithy is his combination of 
slimy and lithe.1 In a portmanteau word, two or more historically dis-
tinct words (they may still be distinct in some contexts) are fused 
together. The French definite determiner occurs in two forms, le (mas-
culine) and la (feminine). The feminine form can be preceded by the 
prepositions à ‘in, to’ or de ‘of, from’, as shown below:
(5) à la plage 
‘to/at the beach’
 
de la plage 
‘from/of the beach’
The masculine form, however, may not follow either of these preposi-
tions. Instead, we get a portmanteau word:

162  
INFLECTION
(6) au [o] marché 
‘to/at the market’ (*à le marché)
 
du [dy] marché ‘from/of the market’ (*de le marché)
The existence of cumulative exponence is very important to a proper 
characterization of the morphology–syntax interface. Fairly complex 
syntactic structures may get reduced morphologically. [Exercise 1]
In extended exponence, the opposite of cumulative exponence, a 
single morphological feature is realized simultaneously on more than 
one form. One example presented by Matthews (1991) is the Ancient 
Greek perfective. The verb elelykete ‘you had unfastened’ (stem -ly-) is 
marked as perfective by reduplication (le-), -k- infixation, and the pres-
ence of a special stem (-ly- versus -ly:-). We cannot single out any one of 
them alone as marking the perfect. They do it together. Likewise, in 
Kujamaat Jóola, deverbal nouns can be formed from some infinitives by 
changing the noun class and tensing the vowels (7). One or the other 
isn’t sufficient. This is another example of extended exponence:
(7) a. ε-ka:y 
‘to divorce’ (a man by a woman)
 
 
bu-k
e
:y 
‘a divorce’ (man by woman)
 
b. ka-k
c 
ɲεn 
‘to send a message’ 
 
 
ku-koɲen ‘a message’ 
 
c. ε-l
c 
k 
‘to cry (of an animal), bark’
 
 
bu-lok 
‘an animal cry, bark’
The most complicated cases are those where we get a combination of 
cumulative and extended exponence. In Latin, the notion perfect is 
realized by having a special verb stem in addition to a special set of suf-
fixes that encode person, number, and mood (we might also want to list 
voice, although the perfect is realized periphrastically in the passive):
(8) a. rēx 
-istı¯
 
 
rule.perf-2sg.act. perf
 
 
‘you ruled’
 
b. rēx 
-ērunt
 
 
rule.perf-3pl.act.perf
 
 
‘they ruled’
Here the mapping from the syntax to the phonology is both many to one 
and one to many. First, the stem rēx- is a perfective stem (compare the 
present stem reg-), and the ending is a perfective ending. This exemplifies 
extended exponence. Second, the endings -istı- and -ērunt simultaneously 
express second person singular, active voice, and perfective, and third 

INFLECTION  163
person plural, active voice, and perfective, respectively. This is cumula-
tive exponence. [Exercise 2]
We now turn to the distinction between context-free and context-
sensitive inflection. We refer to context-free inflection when there is a 
simple directional mapping between a morphosyntactic feature and a 
particular phonological string. Imagine that English has a feature 
[present participle] or [progressive]. Because this feature is always 
realized as /-iŋ/, we refer to context-free inflection: all present partici-
ples in English bear the same suffix.2 In context-sensitive inflection, the 
realization of a morphosyntactic feature varies. For example, the fea-
ture [past] in English corresponds to several possible phonological 
realizations, as seen in the following table.
Phonological realizations of the feature [PAST] in English
a. Ablaut 
ran, sat, won, drank, shone …
b. Suppletion was, went …
c. Ø 
hit, cut, put …
d. /-t/ 
sent, lent …
e. /-d/ 
helped [-t], shrugged [-d], wanted [-ǝd] …
We also find partial suppletion, as with thought and brought, both of 
which also bear the /-t/ suffix seen in the box above. These exemplify 
extended exponence. Inflection for past tense in English is context- 
sensitive in the sense that the feature [past] is realized as many things 
depending on the lexeme it attaches to, with /-d/ suffixation being the 
default case.3 As you continue to look at morphological data from a 
variety of languages, you will discover that context-sensitive inflection 
is much more common than context-free inflection.
6.1.2 Inherent vs. assigned inflection
 
■
We must distinguish between inherent and assigned inflection. Nouns 
and pronouns are marked as having a particular gender in the speak-
er’s mental lexicon. For them, gender is inherent. For any other lexical 
category that reflects the gender of nouns and pronouns, such as adjec-
tive and verb, gender cannot be inherent. It must be assigned.
Number is generally not inherent, hence it is not marked in the lexi-
con. There are exceptions. Some words, like pants, have inherent number 

164  
INFLECTION
that is marked in the lexicon – in this case, plural. In some languages, 
there are even verbs that occur only in the singular or in the plural. 
They can also be said to have inherent number.
An example of assigned inflection is case. Nouns and pronouns in 
the lexicon do not have case. They obtain case by virtue of their position 
in the sentence. For example, nouns in object position will surface with 
an objective case in many languages.
6.1.3 Government vs. concord
 
■
Once we talk about the difference between inherent and assigned, we 
can address the question of how inflection may be assigned, which is 
generally in one of two ways: government or concord. Another word 
for concord is agreement.
Concord or agreement occurs when one element in a sentence takes 
on the morphosyntactic features of another element. One familiar 
example of concord is noun–adjective agreement in the Romance lan-
guages or German. Adjectives take on the number and gender of the 
noun they modify.
Kujamaat Jóola nouns also trigger concord. The adjectives that 
modify them must be like them in gender or noun class. Similarly, verbs 
in Kujamaat Jóola reflect the noun class of their subject. We explore 
Kujamaat Jóola agreement in detail in the second half of this chapter.
The other way in which a word can acquire a category is govern-
ment. Government is more or less what it sounds like: one word dic-
tates the form of another.4 Case assignment by verbs is usually thought 
of in this way. When a noun is required to appear in objective case, for 
example, it cannot be said that it agrees with (reflects the case of) the 
verb. This is because verbs don’t have case. The same holds for preposi-
tions. Prepositions do not have case-marked forms, either, but in many 
languages they require that their object surface with a particular case, 
such as dative or accusative. This is attributed to government of the 
prepositional object by the preposition itself.
We cannot talk about morphosyntactic features themselves as being 
“government features” or “concord features.” It might seem, for 
instance, that case should be described as a “government feature” 
because nouns receive case under government by a verb or preposition. 
In (9), the noun object of the verb is in the accusative case because the 
verb sehen demands that its direct object be accusative:

INFLECTION  165
(9) Wir haben [NPden 
jungen 
Piloten] 
gesehen (German)
 
we have [NPthe.m.acc young.acc pilot.acc] seen
 
Accusative
 
‘We saw the young pilot’
The problem is that the definite article den and the adjective jungen are 
usually thought to acquire this same case via concord with the noun. If 
this is true, then the mechanism of inflection is independent of inflec-
tional features.5
6.1.4 Inflectional categories
 
■
While most languages have morphological inflection of some sort, the 
actual inflectional categories can differ quite widely across languages. 
In this section, we briefly survey both the most common categories and 
some of the ways languages may differ. It is convenient to make a first 
broad cut into nominal and verbal categories, though the nominal cat-
egories often appear on adjectives and verbs through concord. The 
most common nominal categories are number (Corbett 2000), gender 
(Corbett 1991), and case (Blake 2001).
Though some languages do not inflect for number, many languages 
make an obligatory inflectional distinction between singular and plural 
number of nouns and pronouns, which spills over to verbs and adjec-
tives through concord. Less common, but not unusual, is dual number, 
which distinguishes nouns referring to two items from those referring 
either to one or to more than two. Dual inflection is never found in the 
absence of singular and plural, and when a language has the category 
dual, it changes the meaning of the plural from ‘more than one’ to ‘more 
than two’. We see a similar effect in English, where the dual quantifier 
both causes the plural quantifier all to mean ‘more than two’. A person 
who has two children must say both my children, not all my children. 
There are even languages with trial number, marking nouns that refer 
to sets of three, or paucal number (from Latin pauca ‘few’).
Gender is less common than number and more varied. Because of the 
connection of the English word gender to biological sex and because gen-
ders in European languages are sex-based, we tend to think that linguis-
tic genders are always sex-based. For example, the Romance languages 
(e.g., French, Portuguese, and Spanish) have two genders, masculine and 

166  
INFLECTION
feminine, corresponding very roughly to male and female, at least inso-
far as nouns that refer to male persons are almost invariably masculine 
and those referring to females feminine. But just as common among the 
world’s languages are genders based on animacy, shape, or other natural 
properties. Languages of North America, when they exhibit gender, most 
commonly have the two genders animate and inanimate, while the large 
Niger-Congo family of Africa has genders based on shape as well. 
Languages also vary greatly in the number of genders they have, ranging 
from the minimal two up to more than a dozen in some languages of 
Papua New Guinea. And though genders are always semantic in origin, 
most languages with obligatory gender have nouns whose gender 
 assignment is arbitrary, a well-worn example being the German word for 
‘girl’, Mädchen, which is neuter in gender. In languages like French or 
Spanish, with only masculine and feminine genders, objects must also 
have genders, which results in the French word fourchette ‘fork’ being 
feminine, but couteau ‘knife’ masculine. In this particular case, it is possi-
ble to predict these gender assignments on purely morphological grounds, 
but certainly not semantics, unless one has a very good imagination.
The case of a nominal expression is determined by its syntactic func-
tion. The simplest cases are nominative and accusative, usually reserved 
for syntactic subjects and objects respectively (the peculiar names of these 
and other cases are Latin translations of terms from the Greek grammar-
ians).6 Some languages have a case used only for the subjects of transitive 
sentences, the ergative, with an absolutive case reserved for both objects 
of transitives and subjects of intransitives. The genitive and dative (also 
Latin terms) are used for possessors and indirect objects. Other cases are 
more directly semantic and might include such notions as locative (denot-
ing a place) or instrumental. Just as with gender, languages differ widely 
in the number of cases they encode in their morphology. Most languages 
do not show case inflection at all, by which we mean that nominals do not 
differ in their form depending on their syntactic function (some 
 languages – Japanese is an example – have case markers, but they are 
independent words and not inflectional affixes). Languages that have 
only a small number of cases tend to stick to the central syntactic catego-
ries of nominative and accusative (or ergative and absolutive), along with 
genitive and perhaps dative. The ancient Semitic languages, for example, 
had only the basic three nominative, accusative, and genitive.
The last nominal inflectional category that we will discuss is person. 
Universally, there are only three persons, and all spoken languages have 
all three. Nouns are always third person, and first and second person 

INFLECTION  167
forms are always pronouns. The major differences among languages are 
in the plural, especially the first person plural. Here a language may 
distinguish between a form meaning ‘me and others, but not you’, 
which we call an exclusive form, and an inclusive form, meaning ‘me 
and others, including you’. As an inflectional category, person, like 
gender, is often most prominently displayed through agreement, spe-
cifically agreement of verbs with their subject or object, and some lan-
guages have quite elaborate systems of person marking on the verb.
Verbal inflection expresses a number of types of morphosyntactic cat-
egories related to events, which vary quite widely across languages. 
These include tense (Comrie 1985), aspect (Comrie 1976), mood (Palmer 
2001), and voice. A language may express some of these categories 
other than by verb inflection. English, for example, has an elaborate 
system for expressing aspect, mood, and voice, but the only category 
marked directly on the verb is tense, which can be either present or 
past: departs vs. departed. (In truth, the so-called English present tense is 
better thought of as non-past, as seen in expressions like the train departs 
tomorrow at nine.) The others are expressed by a fairly elaborate system 
of auxiliary or helping verbs, resulting in such long expressions as 
should have been being considered. Tense is directly connected to time, and 
languages often express three tenses morphologically: past, present, 
and future. Other tenses are sometimes found, such as remote past. 
Aspect has more to do with the way in which we view the unfolding of 
an event than with its simple position in time. For example, many lan-
guages distinguish imperfective from perfective aspect, where the first 
denotes an action in progress while the second denotes a completed 
action. For example, the Russian imperfect verb lechit ‘treat’ is imper-
fective, while its perfective counterpart is vylechit ‘cure’. Mood reflects 
a speaker’s commitment to a proposition. English modal auxiliary 
verbs include may and must, which express different degrees of com-
mitment to obligation or truth, as in the following two series, the first 
having to do with obligation, the second truth: you may leave vs. you 
must leave; or she may have seen him vs. she must have seen him. Voice has 
to do with the role of the subject as either agent or patient. The most 
common distinction is between the active and passive voices, where 
the subject of the latter is the patient, as opposed to the (unmarked) 
active. Again, English has a distinction between active and passive that 
is expressed through auxiliary verbs. In Latin, the same distinction is 
expressed through inflection directly on the verb: amō ‘I love’ vs. amor 
‘I am loved’. [Exercise 3]

168  
INFLECTION
6.2 Inflection vs. Derivation
 
■
Within a lexeme-based theory of morphology, the difference between 
derivation and inflection boils down to this: derivation gives you new 
lexemes, and inflection gives you the forms of a lexeme that are deter-
mined by syntactic environment. But what exactly does this mean, and 
is there really a need for such a distinction? This section explores the 
answers to these questions, and in the process goes deeper into the rela-
tion between morphology and syntax.
6.2.1 Differences between inflection and derivation
 
■
The first question we can ask about the distinction between inflection 
and derivation is whether there is any formal basis for distinguishing 
the two types of morphology. Can we tell them apart because they do 
different things to words?
One generalization is that inflectional morphology does not change 
the core lexical meaning or the lexical category of the word to which it 
applies. A noun with a plural suffix attached to it is still a noun; slurp 
means ‘eat or drink noisily’ whether it is past or present; and so on. 
Derivational morphology may or may not affect the lexical category of a 
word it applies to, and it typically changes its meaning. Glory is a noun, 
and glorious is an adjective. While their meanings are related, they cannot 
be said to mean the same thing in the way that slurp and slurps do.
A second generalization is that inflection, but not derivation, is deter-
mined by syntax. We discussed this at the beginning of section 6.1. 
Which form of a lexeme surfaces in a given position depends on its 
relationship with the words around it. Perhaps when you were younger, 
you tried mad libs like the following:
Four score and seven ______________ ago our ______________ brought forth,
 
Noun 
Noun
upon this _______________, a new nation, conceived in _______________ …
 
Noun 
Noun
The person eliciting the words for the blanks in the Gettysburg address 
above automatically knows to put the first noun provided by his or 
her partner in the plural because “four score and seven” implies more 
than one (a score is a group of twenty, so “four score and seven” is 

INFLECTION  169
 eighty-seven). There is no need for the mad lib instructions to specify 
“plural noun.” Similarly, if a person eliciting words for a mad lib says, 
“Verb,” the reply will probably come in the citation form of the lexeme: 
read, slurp, love, or kiss. But he or she will know whether it is neces-
sary to add an -s, -ed, or -ing when inserting it into the blank, because it 
will be determined by context. The instructions do not need to specify 
“third person singular” or “present participle.”
A third generalization we can make is that inflectional morphology 
tends to be more productive than derivational morphology. Inflectional 
morphology can apply to words of a given category with relative free-
dom. Virtually any noun in English can be made plural with the addi-
tion of [z] or one of its two phonologically conditioned allomorphs. The 
only exceptions are nouns with irregular plurals, such as children or phe-
nomena, and those that logically do not allow a plural form: mass nouns 
like rice and abstract nouns like intelligence generally fall into this cate-
gory. On the other hand, not every adjective can take the derivational 
affix -ly that forms adverbs. We can say quickly, but not ?friendlily.
Another generalization that has been made is that derivational affixes 
tend to occur closer to the root or stem than inflectional affixes. For 
example, (10) shows that the English third person singular present 
inflectional suffix -s occurs outside of derivational suffixes like the 
deadjectival -ize, and the plural ending -s follows derivational affixes, 
including the deverbal -al:
(10) a. popular-ize-s
 
 
commercial-ize-s
 
b. upheav-al-s
 
 
arriv-al-s
Similarly, Japanese derivational suffixes like passive -rare or causative 
-sase precede inflectional suffixes marking tense and aspect:
(11) a. tabe-ru 
tabe-ta
 
 
eat-imp 
eat-perf
 
 
‘eats’ 
‘ate’
 
b. tabe-rare-ru 
tabe-rare-ta
 
 
eat-pass-imp eat-pass-perf
 
 
‘is eaten’ 
‘was eaten’
 
c. tabe-sase-ru 
tabe-sase-ta
 
 
eat-caus-imp eat-caus-perf
 
 
‘makes eat’ 
‘made eat’

170  
INFLECTION
This generalization is largely true, but there are many exceptions in the 
world’s languages, so it is not a reliable diagnostic for distinguishing 
between inflection and derivation. (In chapter 3, we saw that the Kujamaat 
Jóola derivational suffix -u ‘from’ may follow inflectional suffixes.)
Should the relationship between the words in the left and right columns of 
each example be characterized as inflection or derivation? For answers, see
p. 172.
a. take 
took
b. atom 
atomize
c. scribe 
scribes
d. megabyte 
meg
e. jostle 
jostling
f. 
go 
went
g. logic 
logical
h. shake 
shaken
i. 
ice 
de-ice
j. 
child 
children
Finally, note that some linguists consider derived lexemes, but not 
inflected forms, to be present in the lexicon. This generalization is not 
absolute, since psycholinguistic studies have shown that speakers store 
at least some inflected words in their lexicons. Likewise, many derived 
forms are created on the fly, without ever being recorded in the lexicon. 
[Exercises 4 and 5]
Inflection vs. derivation
Inflection does not change the core lexical meaning or the lexical category 
 •
of the word to which it applies. Derivation does the former and may do the 
latter.
Inflection is the realization of morphosyntactic features, i.e., those that are 
 •
relevant to the syntax, such as case and number. Derivation is not.
Inflectional morphology is more productive than derivational morphology.
 •
Derivational morphology tends to occur closer to the root or stem than 
 •
inflectional morphology.
Derived lexemes are more likely to be stored in the lexicon than inflected 
 •
forms.

INFLECTION  171
6.2.2 The formal similarity between inflection and derivation
 
■
Despite the generalizations made above, the morphological form that 
inflection and derivation may take is very similar. Cross-linguistically, 
both can be expressed through prefixal, suffixal, or non-segmental 
means. The difference between inflection and derivation is therefore 
not so much a difference in form as a difference in function – what they 
do and what they tell us.
6.3 Inventory of Inflectional Morphology Types
 
■
What are the ways in which speakers inflect, or “bend,” lexemes to 
make them fit into a certain syntactic slot? We present a list of inflec-
tional morphology types here. Although it is not comprehensive, it will 
give you a broad understanding of how inflection may be expressed.
6.3.1 Affixation and stem alternations
 
■
Since our focus in the non-Kujamaat-Jóola portions of this book has been 
on English, we have had ample opportunity to look at the expression of 
inflection through affixation. In English, this is the most common means 
by which inflectional categories are expressed. For that reason we do not 
address affixation on its own here. Instead we present it with stem alter-
nations, another means of expressing inflection in the world’s languages. 
We wish to emphasize that just as affixation does not necessarily occur 
with stem alternations, stem alternations do not necessarily occur with 
affixation. We present them together merely for organizational purposes.
Latin, discussed briefly in section 6.1.1, is one language where in 
many cases, affixation interacts obligatorily with stem alternations in 
the expression of inflectional categories. Above we gave the example of 
rēxistı- ‘you ruled’. The perfective stem rēx- can be contrasted with the 
present stem reg-. It supplements affixation in the expression of the per-
fect. Below we give further examples of Latin present stems alongside 
perfective stems. The expression of the perfect would involve not only 
the perfective stem, but also a series of suffixes:
(12)  
Present stem Perfective stem
 
a. am- 
ama¯v- 
‘love’
 
b. pōt- 
pōta¯v- 
‘drink’

172  
INFLECTION
 
c. 
crep- 
crepu- 
‘rattle’
 
d. horr- 
horru- 
‘bristle’
 
e. juv- 
jūv- 
‘help’
 
f. 
aug- 
aux- 
‘increase’
 
g. fīg- 
fīx- 
‘fasten’
 
h. rīd- 
rīs- 
‘laugh’
 
i. 
mord- 
momord- 
‘bite’
 
j. 
spond- 
spopond- 
‘promise’
 
k. prand- 
prand- 
‘lunch’
 
l. 
ascend- 
ascend- 
‘climb’
In (12) we have listed a variety of alternation types that present–perfec-
tive stems fall into in Latin, but we do not attempt to be fully compre-
hensive. (12a–b) show the regular way of forming perfective stems from 
present stems in the so-called first conjugation of Latin (verbs whose 
infinitive ends in -āre). (12c–d) are examples of verbs that have a perfec-
tive stem in -u. In (12e) we see an example of a verb whose stem vowel 
lengthens in the perfective. Examples (12f–h) have a perfective stem 
in -s. (What is written x was pronounced [ks].) (12i–j) display reduplica-
tion in the perfective stem. Finally, in (12k–l) we see that for some verbs, 
the present and perfective stems are identical.
a. inflection
b. derivation
c. inflection
d. derivation
e. inflection (as long as both are verbs)
f. inflection
g. derivation
h. inflection
i. 
derivation
j. 
inflection
Answers to inflection vs. derivation exercise:
Stem alternations are also a major exponent of inflection in the 
Apachean languages, a subset of Athapaskan which includes both 
Navajo and Apache. Active verbs in the Apachean languages are those 
that describe processes (e.g., ‘become white’) or movements and actions 
(e.g., ‘walk’, ‘jump’, ‘throw’). They contrast with neuter verbs, which 
generally express a state of being or position (e.g., ‘be white’, ‘be sit-
ting’). Active verbs are regularly conjugated in several paradigms: 
imperfective, perfective,  progressive, future, customary, iterative, and 

INFLECTION  173
optative. The expression of these inflectional categories can generally 
be described as extended exponence, since it involves both prefixes 
and, sometimes, a special stem. Some active verbs have two conjuga-
tion patterns. The two patterns express aspectual contrasts such as 
momentaneous vs. continuative, which are distinguished principally 
through stem alternations. In (13) we provide the stems of the Navajo 
verb meaning ‘handle a round object’. The first set of stems are those 
that occur in the momentaneous; the second set are those found in 
the continuative. (The discussion in this paragraph is paraphrased 
from Hoijer 1971: 130, and the examples come from there, as well.) In 
the following examples, vowels with hooks under them are nasalized, 
and acute accents mark high tone. This is in accordance with Navajo 
orthography.
(13) Navajo stem alternations: ‘handle a round object’
 
Momentaneous:
 
-ʔaah 
imperfective
 
-ʔá˛ 
perfective
 
-ʔáál 
future, progressive, optative
 
-ʔááh 
customary and iterative
 
Continuative:
 
-ʔá 
imperfective
 
-ʔá˛ 
perfective
 
-ʔaal 
future and progressive
 
-ʔaah 
customary and iterative
 
-ʔaʔ 
optative
We see in (13) that there are four momentaneous stems for the verb 
‘handle a round object’ and five for the continuative. The perfective 
stem is the same in the momentaneous and the continuative. The other 
stems are all different. In all, there are eight different forms of this one 
stem, which would interact with affixation to express the full range of 
verbal inflectional categories. [Exercises 6 and 7]
6.3.2 Apophony
 
■
So far we have seen affixation and stem alternations. In some cases 
affixation is supplemented or replaced by apophony, or vowel changes 
within a root, as shown below for English (14) and the Bernese dialect 
of Swiss German (15):

174  
INFLECTION
(14) a. sing, sang, sung
 
b. drive, drove, driven
(15) a. suuffe [su:f
e
] 
‘drink (inf)’
 
 
gsoffe [°ɡs
c 
f:
e
] 
‘drunk (past part)’
 
b. schwimme [ʃυim:
e
] 
‘swim (inf)’
 
 
gschwomme [°ɡʃυƱm:
e
] 
‘swum’
 
c. pfyffe [pfi:f
e
] 
‘whistle (inf)’
 
 
pfiffe [pfif:
e
] 
‘whistled (past part)’
Other terms for apophony are internal change and, particularly when 
referring to English and other Germanic languages, ablaut. All three of 
these terms are sometimes applied to the vowel changes that apply to 
roots in Semitic languages, a topic that we address in the next section 
under the heading root-and-pattern morphology.
In the context of Germanic linguistics, ablaut is often reserved for 
apophony in verb paradigms, as in (14) and (15). A second term, umlaut, 
is used to describe the apophony found in singular–plural noun pairs 
like goose∼geese or foot∼feet. Umlaut is a phonologically conditioned 
alternation in which a vowel assimilates in part to a succeeding vowel. 
The term is used even when the succeeding vowel has been lost. For 
instance, the umlaut seen in the plural forms of the noun pairs goose, 
geese and foot, feet resulted from vowel harmony with a high vowel in 
the plural suffix, which has since disappeared.
6.3.3 Root-and-pattern morphology
 
■
In the Semitic language family, inflection often involves internal varia-
tions in vocalic and syllabic patterns, while the consonantal frame stays 
fairly stable. We call this root-and-pattern morphology, and it was dis-
cussed in chapter 3. Root-and-pattern is illustrated in (16) for the expres-
sion of number in certain Arabic nouns (examples from McCarthy and 
Prince 1990: 212, 217). The inclusion of the loanword ‘bank’ is to show 
that this particular way of forming the plural (referred to as the broken 
plural) is productive. What all of the plural forms in (16) have in 
common is that they begin with the syllable pattern CVCVV+:
(16) Root 
Singular 
Plural 
Gloss
 
jndb 
jundub 
janaadib 
‘locust’
 
slt
˙
n 
sult-aan 
salaat
˙
iin 
‘sultan’

INFLECTION  175
 
ʕnb 
ʕinab 
ʕanaab 
‘grape’
 
nfs 
nafs 
nufuus 
‘soul’
 
bnk 
bank 
bunuuk 
‘bank’
Root-and-pattern morphology is yet another way of “bending” a form 
to fit a particular syntactic context. [Exercises 8 and 9]
6.3.4 Reduplication
 
■
Another means for expressing inflection that we find in certain 
 languages is reduplication. Like root-and-pattern, reduplication has 
already been discussed, but from a phonological perspective, in chap-
ter 3. We present examples of the Indonesian plural here. It is formed 
via full reduplication (examples are from Sneddon 1996: 16).
(17) kuda-kuda 
‘horses’
 
rumah-rumah 
‘houses’
 
singkatan-singkatan 
‘abbreviations’
 
perubahan-perubahan 
‘changes’
Indonesian plural reduplication is not obligatory. Speakers of 
Indonesian have the option of using the unreduplicated form to refer to 
either singular or plural. So kuda not only means ‘horse’, but also 
‘horses’; rumah can refer to one house or more than one; and so on. The 
reduplicated plural is most likely to be used when the number of the 
noun is not clear from the context, as in the examples below (Sneddon 
1996: 17):7
(18) a. Rumah-nya 
dekat 
pohon-pohon 
mangga 
itu
 
 
house-3sg.poss near 
tree-redup 
mango 
that
 
 
‘His house is near those mango trees’
 
b. Pada pinggang-nya 
terikat 
bumbung-bumbung
 
 
loc 
waist-3sg.poss 
pass.tie 
water.container-redup
 
 
kosong
 
 
empty
 
 
‘At his waist are tied empty bamboo water containers’
Without reduplication of pohon, (18a) would be ambiguous between 
‘His house is near that mango tree’ and ‘His house is near those mango 
trees’. Likewise, if bumbung were not reduplicated in (18b), the sentence 
could have the interpretation, ‘At his waist is tied an empty bamboo 

176  
INFLECTION
water container’, as well as the one given above.8 Such ambiguity is 
not characteristic of plural reduplication cross-linguistically.
It is also the case that reduplication in Indonesian has functions 
beside plural marking. As Sneddon (1996: 16) also notes, the meaning 
of a reduplicated form may be “different but nevertheless related to the 
meaning of the single base.” Among his examples are gula ‘sugar’ and 
gula-gula ‘sweets’, laki ‘husband’ and laki-laki ‘man’, mata ‘eye’ and mata-
mata ‘spy’, and langit ‘sky’ and langit-langit ‘ceiling’.
Children acquiring languages without plural reduplication some-
times spontaneously use reduplication to express the plural. An English-
speaking child may say shoe for one shoe, but shoe shoe for two.
Reduplication can be used to express inflectional categories besides 
number. In section 6.3.1 we saw a few examples where partial redupli-
cation is involved in the formation of the Latin perfective stem from the 
present stem, for example, mordeō ‘I bite’, momordī ‘I bit’. Reduplication 
is also used in some languages as a derivational process. English has a 
derivational process of partial reduplication seen in wishy washy.
6.3.5 Suppletion
 
■
The last type of inflection presented here is suppletion. Suppletion is said 
to take place when the syntax requires a form of a lexeme that is not mor-
phologically predictable. In English, the paradigm for the verb be is charac-
terized by suppletion. Am, are, is, was, were, and be have completely different 
phonological shapes, and they are not predictable on the basis of the para-
digms of other English verbs. We also find suppletion with pronouns. 
Compare I and me or she and her. Suppletion is most likely to be found in 
the paradigms of high-frequency words, as seen in the following box.
Examples of suppletion
French 
aller ‘to go’/vais ‘go (1sg)’
 
être ‘to be’/suis ‘am (1sg)’
Spanish ir ‘to go’/fue ‘went (1sg)’
 
ser ‘to be’/fue ‘was (1sg)’
Finnish hyvä ‘good (nom. sg)’/parempi ‘better’, paras ‘best’
Greek 
[εnas] ‘a, one (m.nom.sg)’/[mja] ‘a, one (f.nom.sg)’
Swedish ett ‘one’, två ‘two’/första ‘first’, andra ‘second’

INFLECTION  177
We can look to historical linguistics for an explanation for how supple-
tive forms arise. The paradigm of the verb ‘to go’ in French, for exam-
ple, comes from three different Latin sources. The infinitive, aller, and 
the first person and second person plural forms in the present, allons 
‘we go’ and allez ‘you (pl) go’, come from Latin ambulāre ‘to walk, to 
walk along’. The stem of future and conditional forms, such as irai ‘will 
go (1sg)’, has evolved from the Latin verb īre ‘to go’. Finally, forms like 
vais ‘go (1sg)’ or vont ‘go (3pl)’ come from Latin vādere ‘to go, to walk’. 
The idiosyncrasies of languages today can often be explained by look-
ing at the languages of yesterday. [Exercise 10]
In certain cases, such as with catch∼caught or think∼thought and other 
verbs like them in English, it is most convenient to speak of partial sup-
pletion. In these cases, the initial phoneme or phonemes of the word 
remain the same, but there is both internal change and change to the end 
of the word (loss of segments and addition of a past tense indicator [t]). 
[Exercises 11 and 12]
Summary of inflection types
Affixation: accuse → accused, apply → applies
Apophony, a.k.a. internal change: foot → feet, see → saw
Partial suppletion: think → thought
Reduplication: Indonesian rumah ‘house’, rumah-rumah ‘houses’
Root-and-pattern: Hebrew lomed ‘studies’, lamad ‘he studied’
Stem alternations: Latin po:t- (present), po:ta:v- (perfective) ‘drink’
Suppletion: go → went, is → was
6.4 Syncretism
 
■
Having inventoried a variety of ways in which inflection is expressed 
cross-linguistically, we now turn to syncretism. We speak of syncretism 
when a single inflected form corresponds to more than one set of mor-
phosyntactic features (this definition is paraphrased from Spencer 1991: 
45). Syncretism is common cross-linguistically, and it raises a number of 
questions relevant to morphological theory. In keeping with the non-
theoretical approach of this book, we limit ourselves to presenting a 
few examples of sycretism from Stump (2001), and, for further discus-
sion, we refer the reader to that work (pp. 212–41).

178  
INFLECTION
The first examples that we present come from Bulgarian (Stump 2001: 
39, 213). In the Bulgarian imperfect and aorist paradigms, the second 
person singular and third person singular forms are identical. (The 
aorist is a past tense.) We show this in (19) for the verbs krad ‘steal’ and 
igráj ‘play’ (these are the citation forms of the lexemes):
(19) Imperfect 
2sg 
krad-é-š-e 
igrá-e-š-e
 
 
3sg 
krad-é-š-e 
igrá-e-š-e
 
Aorist 
2sg 
krád-e 
igrá
 
 
3sg 
krád-e 
igrá
In (19), -š is a preterite suffix and -e is 3sg agreement. We see here that a 
single inflectional form such as kráde may express more than one set of 
morphosyntactic features: 2sg aorist or 3sg aorist.
Romanian also displays widespread syncretism. For many verbs, the 
first person singular in the present indicative paradigm is identical to 
the third person plural form. We show this in (20). Both 1sg and 3pl 
forms are in boldface (data from Stump 2001: 213–14):
(20) Romanian present indicative paradigms
 
 
a umplea 
a face 
a sti
 
 
‘to fill’ 
‘to do’ 
‘to know’
 
 
2 
3 
4
 
1sg 
úmpl-u 
fác 
stí-u
 
2sg 
úmpl-i 
fác-i 
stí-i
 
3sg 
úmpl-e 
fác-e 
stí-e
 
1pl 
úmple-m 
fáce-m 
stí-m
 
2pl 
úmple-ti 
fáce-ti 
stí-ti
 
3pl 
úmpl-u 
fác 
stí-u
In (20), the infinitives are put in small caps because they are used as the 
citation forms of the lexeme. The numbers (2, 3, 4) under the glosses are 
the numbers of the conjugations these three verbs fall into. Syncretism 
in the present indicative does not take place in Romanian verbs of the 
first conjugation.
6.5 Typology
 
■
The term typology refers to a classification based on the comparative 
study of types, and morphological typology was the first systematic 
method used by linguists in the nineteenth century to compare the 

INFLECTION  179
structures of different languages. While other sorts of typology flourish 
today, especially syntactic typology, morphological typology has lan-
guished since it was criticized by the first American structuralists, espe-
cially Edward Sapir in his Language (1921). Still, the traditional terms 
are used often enough to warrant mention, and the distinctions, while 
they may not be valid for entire languages, are still useful for describing 
individual morphological phenomena.
The basic typology has to do with a scale running from analytic to 
synthetic languages, which encodes the degree to which the individual 
meaningful elements in a language are expressed separately. At the 
analytic end we have the isolating languages, of which Vietnamese is 
the prototypical example, because the only morphology it has is com-
pounding. It has no derivational or inflectional processes of any kind. 
The next type is inflective, of which the more analytic subtype is agglu-
tinating. An agglutinating language like Turkish or Hungarian has 
affixes, but they are strung out quite separately, each expressing a single 
notion, and easily identified. Consider the following simple table of 
Hungarian words:
 
 
 
‘house’ 
‘river’
SINGULAR 
NOMINATIVE 
ház 
folyó
 
ACCUSATIVE 
házat 
folyót
PLURAL 
NOMINATIVE 
házak 
folyók
 
ACCUSATIVE 
házakat 
folyókat
The accusative case marker is -at (the vowel is deleted after a stem-final 
vowel), while the plural marker is -ak (with the vowel again deleting 
after a stem-final vowel). When a word is both accusative and plural, 
both affixes appear one after the other. Compare a fusional language, 
like Latin, shown in the next table:
 
 
‘lord’ 
‘garden’
SINGULAR 
NOMINATIVE 
dominus 
hortus
 
ACCUSATIVE 
dominum 
hortum
PLURAL 
NOMINATIVE 
dominī 
hortī
 
ACCUSATIVE 
dominōs 
hortōs

180  
INFLECTION
In these Latin forms, the same four slots, singular and plural nomina-
tive and accusative, are filled by four distinct suffixes: -s, -m, -ī, and -ōs 
(here, the stem vowel deletes before the suffix vowel), so we say that 
the two morphosyntactic features in each of the cells of the table (e.g., 
nominative singular) are fused. Latin is actually much more compli-
cated, since these two nouns represent only one of five main types 
(declensions), each of which has a distinct set of forms.
The last stop on this continuum is polysynthetic languages. The lan-
guages of this type cited most often come from North America. One 
example of a polysynthetic language is Nuuchahnulth (called Nootka in 
earlier literature), a language spoken on Vancouver Island in British 
Columbia (see Stonham 2004, who reanalyzes data originally published 
by Sapir 1921 and recasts them according to modern transcription con-
ventions). In Nuuchahnulth and other polysynthetic languages, speakers 
can build complex words that express what a speaker of English or 
Vietnamese would express using several words or even an entire, multi-
word sentence. Following is an example from Nuuchahnulth (Stonham 
2004: 65). /kw/ is a labialized velar stop; /m̓/ is a glottalized labial nasal 
consonant; /h
˙
/ is a pharyngeal fricative. The final /a/ is a variable-length 
vowel (see Stonham 2004: 24–6), although not marked as such here.
(21) ʔinkw-‘il~-m̓inh
˙
-ʔis-(m)it-ma
 
fire-in.house-pl.dim.past-3ind
 
‘several small fires were burning in the house’
Even English can have one-word sentences. Go! is a perfectly well-
formed such utterance. But compared to English, polysynthetic lan-
guages are able to express much more complex notions using a single 
word, including subject, verb, object, and other information. The 
English gloss of this single Nuuchahnulth word, for example, contains 
a complex subject noun phrase, a progressive verb, and a prepositional 
phrase expressing location.
6.6 Summary
 
■
The term inflection – “bending” a lexeme – means changing its shape to 
meet the demands of its syntactic position or environment. Any change 
in form that is conditioned by syntactic factors counts as inflection, 
whether it involves affixation or not. So far in this chapter we have 

INFLECTION  181
 discussed various types of exponence (simple, cumulative, extended), 
distinguished between inherent and assigned inflection and between 
government and concord, and identified inflectional categories found 
cross-linguistically. We also discussed ways of distinguishing inflection 
from derivation and inventoried possible inflectional morphology 
types, which include affixation, stem alternations, apophony, root-and-
pattern, reduplication, and suppletion. We looked at syncretism and 
finally morphological typology. In the Kujamaat Jóola portion of this 
chapter we explore agreement (concord) in more detail by showing 
how it is realized in that language.

182  
INFLECTION
Agreement in Kujamaat Jóola
 
■
In chapter 2 we presented the Kujamaat Jóola noun classes and used the 
term ‘gender’ to refer to pairings of a singular and a plural class associ-
ated with a given pairing of nouns. No discussion of noun class would 
be complete without also discussing agreement. While gender is a 
property of nouns, it can be reliably detected only by looking at words 
with which the noun enters into an agreement relation. We got a hint of 
this in chapter 2 where we learned that certain Kujamaat Jóola words, 
such as mbur ‘bread’ and dakar ‘Dakar’, bear no noun class prefix, and 
others, such as (e)jimukor ‘lion’ and (e)bekan ‘bicycle’, bear one only 
optionally. Yet these nouns always have gender.
The set of words with which a noun enters into an agreement relation 
varies from language to language. In Kujamaat Jóola this set includes 
the categories in (1):
(1) a. Definite articles
 
b. Pronouns
 
c.  Nominal modifiers (demonstratives, cardinal and ordinal 
 numbers, particularizers, adjectives)
 
d. Verbs
 
e. Relative pronouns
 
f. Genitive markers
In this section we present some of the forms that agreement in Kujamaat 
Jóola may take.
Definite article
 
■
The Kujamaat Jóola definite article has the form -aC, where C is identi-
cal to the consonant of the class prefix. Three noun classes have prefixes 
that consist of a single vowel: class 1 (a-), class 3 (e-), and class 8 (u-). For 
these, the definite article has the form -aw, -ey, and -aw, respectively. 
Examples from Sapir (1965: 68) are given in (2):
(2) Cl. 1 
a-ɲil-aw 
‘the child’
 
Cl. 2 
ku-ɲil-ak 
‘the children’
 
Cl. 3 
ε-yεn-εy 
‘the dog’
 
Cl. 4 
si-yεn-as 
‘the dogs’
 
Cl. 5 
fu-ti:k-af 
‘the war’

INFLECTION  183
 
Cl. 6 
ku-ti:k-ak 
‘the wars’
 
Cl. 7 
ka-si:n-ak 
‘the horn’
 
Cl. 8 
u-si:n-aw 
‘the horns’
 
Cl. 9 
bu-b
e
:r-
e
b 
‘the tree’
 
Cl. 10 ji-sεk-aj 
‘the small woman’
 
Cl. 11 mu-sεk-am 
‘the small women’
 
Cl. 12 ɲi-sεk-aɲ 
‘the large women’
 
Cl. 13 ba-ɲil-ab 
‘the many small children’
 
Cl. 14 fa-k
c 
r-af 
‘the smoke’
 
Cl. 15 ma-kuk-am 
‘the brains’
Pronouns
 
■
The form of first and second person pronouns does not depend on noun 
class. Third person pronouns do. Both subject and object pronouns have 
the shape C
c 
 when free (as opposed to bound), with C corresponding to 
the consonant of the noun class prefix. The forms of third person pro-
nouns for classes 1–15 are listed in (3):
(3) Cl. 1 
c 
-
 
Cl. 2 
k
c 
-
 
Cl. 3 
y
c 
-
 
Cl. 4 
s
c 
-
 
Cl. 5 
f
c 
-
 
Cl. 6 
k
c 
-
 
Cl. 7 
k
c 
-
 
Cl. 8 
w
c 
-
 
Cl. 9 
b
c 
-
 
Cl. 10 
j
c 
-
 
Cl. 11 
m
c 
-
 
Cl. 12 
ɲ
c 
-
 
Cl. 13 
b
c 
-
 
Cl. 14 
f
c 
-
 
Cl. 15 
m
c 
-
Nominal modifiers
 
■
While Kujamaat Jóola has a variety of nominal modifiers, including 
demonstratives, numbers, and particularizers (Sapir 1965: 27–8), 
there is no well-defined category that corresponds to Indo-European 

184  
INFLECTION
adjectives. This is not unusual among the world’s languages. 
Throughout Africa, what might be considered canonical adjectives 
by speakers of Indo-European languages are rare (Welmers 1973). 
Instead, adjectival concepts like ‘small’, ‘beautiful’, or ‘angry’ are 
generally expressed by a verbal element. In Kujamaat Jóola, what at 
first glance appear to be adjectives are often formed with a verbal 
stem prefixed with a relativizer that agrees in noun class with the 
head noun:
(4) a. ε- 
yεn -εy 
ya- 
ɡ
c 
n 
-
c 
 
-ε
 
 
3cl- dog -def3 
3rel- 
be.mad 
-stat -hab
 
 
‘the mad dog’ (lit. ‘the dog which is mad’)
 
b. si- 
b
e
: -s 
sa- 
jak 
-as
 
 
4cl- cow -def4 
4rel- 
be.good -def4
 
 
‘the good cows’ (lit. ‘the cows which are good’)
The relativizer takes the form Ca- when modifying a subject, and Can- 
when modifying an object. We see it again in the forms in (5), where 
the nature of the verb makes it more obvious that we are dealing with 
relative clauses. Note in (5b) that the object relativizer may stand on 
its own:
(5) a. ku- ɲil 
-ak 
ka- 
riŋ 
-ul
c 
m
 
 
2cl- child -def2 
2rel- arrive -from.subord
 
 
‘the children who arrive’
 
b. ε-l
c 
:l 
-εy 
yan ndaw a-sεk-
c 
 
e
- 
pur -en
 
 3cl-chicken -def3 3rel Ndaw 1cl-woman-poss
 
  
 
 
 
 
  1cl-leave-caus
 
 
‘the chicken that Ndaw’s wife brought out’
A second way to form what appear to be adjectives is to attach a prefix 
of the form (C)V- to what Sapir calls a “neutral theme” – that is, a stem 
that can be used as a noun, verb, adjective, or adverb depending on 
context. Again, the initial consonant of the prefix corresponds to the 
consonant of the noun class prefix. We see examples of neutral themes 
being used as adjectives in (6).
(6) a. si- 
jamεn-as 
si- 
lulum 
-
e
s
 
 
4cl- goat -def4 
4cl- 
European -def4
 
 
‘the European goats’

INFLECTION  185
 
b. ε- 
yεn 
e- 
lulum
 
 
3cl- dog 3cl- 
European
 
 
‘a European dog’
 
c. e- 
be 
ε- 
narε
 
 
3cl- cow 3cl- 
woman
 
 
‘a female cow’
Prefixes of the form Ca- (7 ka-; 13 ba-; 14 fa-; 15 ma-) take the form Cu- in 
this construction, perhaps to avoid confusion with the relative pronoun 
presented immediately above.
Demonstratives, which have the form uC(e), and particularizers, 
which have the forms CV-ke(n) (indefinite) and CV-kila (definite), are 
illustrated in (7a–c). As we saw with neutral themes, prefixes of the 
form Ca- surface as Cu-:
(7) a. si-jamεn-as 
usε
 
 
4cl-goat-def4 4dem
 
 
‘these goats’
 
b. ka-rεɡ 
ku-kεn
 
 
7cl-story 7cl-partic
 
 
‘a certain story’
 
c. e-b
e
-y 
ε-kila
 
 
3cl-cow-def3 3cl-partic
 
 
‘the cow (of which I am talking)’
Cardinal numbers up to ‘four’ and ordinals up to ‘fifth’ also agree with 
a head noun (8–9):
(8) a. ε-yεn 
y
e
-kon
 
 
3cl-dog 
3cl-one
 
 
‘one dog’
 
b. u-b
e
:r 
u-ba:kir
 
 
8cl-tree 
8cl-four
 
 
‘four trees’
(9) a. 
ε-yεn-εy 
ε-t
c 
ŋ
c 
ndεy
 
 
3cl-dog-def3 
3cl-first
 
 
‘the first dog’
 
b. si-ɲara:-s 
si-t
c 
kεn-as
 
 
4cl-monkey-def4 4cl-fifth-def4
 
 
‘the fifth monkeys’

186  
INFLECTION
Higher numbers do not agree with a head noun (examples from Sapir 
1970):
(10) butinken 
‘fifteen’ (class 9 invariable)
 
kabanan 
‘twenty’ (class 7 invariable)
 
ceme 
‘one hundred’ (invariable) < Mdk. keme
In languages where numbers agree with a head noun, it is typical for 
agreement marking to be limited to the lower numbers. In many modern 
European languages, for example, only the word for ‘one’ agrees 
in gender with its head noun.
If you speak or have studied a language with gender agreement, do num-
bers agree in gender with a head noun? If so, is agreement marking limited 
to the lower numbers? Which ones?
Subject–verb agreement
 
■
Verbs in Kujamaat Jóola are generally marked for subject agreement. 
When the subject is expressed by a noun or noun phrase (or when a non-
human subject noun phrase is understood), the corresponding noun class 
marker appears. There is an exception: class markers consisting of a single 
vowel are optionally dropped in rapid speech when the subject directly 
precedes the verb. Markers of the form Ca prefix as Cu (cf. (11b–c) ):
(11) a. e-munɡuno ε-jum 
b
c 
 
 
3cl-hyena 
3cl-stop here
 
 
‘Hyena (a hyena) stopped here’
 
b. ka-ɲεn-ak 
ku-tuj-ut
 
 
7cl-arm-def7 7cl-break-neg
 
 
‘The arm didn’t break’
 
c. ba-suwa:b 
bu-i it
 
 
13cl-bird.def13 
13cl- fly
 
 
‘The birds flew off’
A subject noun phrase does not have to be present in order for an agree-
ment prefix to appear on the verb. Verbs may agree with implied 

INFLECTION  187
subjects. In (12a), the verb j
c 
l ‘come’ agrees with the class 4 subject 
si-jamen-as ‘the goats’, as shown by the si- prefix. The verb appears 
with this prefix even when the implied subject ‘goats’ is left unstated 
(12b–e). [Exercise 13]
(12) a. 
si-jamεn-as si-j
c 
l 
‘the goats came’
 
b. si-ɡaba si-j
c 
l 
‘two came’
 
c. 
s-
c 
 si-j
c 
l 
‘they came’
 
d. si-nifan-as si-j
c 
l 
‘the old ones came’
 
e. 
s-εti alasan si-j
c 
l 
‘Alasanne’s came’
Even this brief sketch of agreement in Kujamaat Jóola makes it clear 
that agreement is a pervasive part of its grammar. It is impossible to 
ignore. We close with the sentences in (13), which show how the repeti-
tion of agreement markers may give the impression of alliteration:
(13) a. fu-ɡ
c 
l-af 
f-umb
e
 
f- 
c 
-f-ε
 
 
5cl-stick-def5 5agr-1poss 5cl-here- def5- emph
 
 
‘my stick is here ~ this is my stick’
 
b. si-jamεn-as 
s-umb
e
 
s-
c 
-s-ε
 
 
4cl-goat-def4 4agr-1poss  4cl-here-def4-emph
 
 
‘these are my goats’
 
c. bu-b
e
:r-
e
b 
b
e
-m
e
k-
e
b 
bu-l
c 
l
c 
 
 
9cl-tree-def9 
9rel-be.big-def9 9agr- fall
 
 
‘the big tree fell’
Further Reading
 
■
Aronoff, Mark. 1994. Morphology by Itself: Stems and Inflectional Classes. 
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Aronoff, Mark and S. N. Sridhar. 1984. Agglutination and composition in 
Kannada verb morphology. Papers from the Parasessions, Chicago Linguistic 
Society 3–20.
Blevins, James P. 2003. Stems and paradigms. Language 79(4): 737–67.
Bybee, Joan L., Revere Perkins, and William Pagliuca. 1994. The Evolution of 
Grammar: Tense, Aspect, and Modality in the Languages of the World. Chicago: 
University of Chicago Press.
Corbett, Greville G. 1991. Gender. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

188  
INFLECTION
Dixon, R. M. W. 1994. Ergativity. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Stump, Gregory. 1998. Inflection. The Handbook of Morphology, eds. Andrew 
Spencer and Arnold M. Zwicky. Oxford: Blackwell, 13–43.
Stump, Gregory T. 2001. Inflectional Morphology: A Theory of Paradigm Structure. 
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

INFLECTION  189
Exercises
1. Italian verbs
 
First, analyze the following data and identify all of the morphemes. 
Group suffixes denoting person into one set. Then determine 
whether each suffix or set of suffixes exemplifies simple or cumula-
tive exponence.
parlo 
‘I speak’ 
parlavo 
‘I spoke’
parli 
‘you (sg) speak’ 
parlavi 
‘you (sg) spoke’
parla 
‘he speaks’ 
parlava 
‘he spoke’
parliamo ‘we speak’ 
parlavamo 
‘we spoke’
parlate 
‘you (pl) speak’ 
parlavate 
‘you (pl) spoke’
parlano 
‘they speak’ 
parlavano 
‘they spoke’
2. Zapotec of the Isthmus, Mexico (Nida 1965: 38)
 
Identify all the morphemes in the following set of data. List all 
morphemes that have allomorphs. Describe the distribution of all 
allomorphs having phonologically definable positions of  occurrence. 
Finally, discuss the data in terms of exponence (simple, cumulative, 
or extended).
a. geta
‘corncake’ sketabe
‘his 
corncake’
sketaluʔ
‘your 
corncake’
b. bere
‘chicken’
sperebe
‘his 
chicken’
spereluʔ
‘your 
chicken’
c. doʔo
‘rope’
stoʔobe
‘his rope’
stoʔoluʔ
‘your rope’
d. yaga
‘wood’
syagabe
‘his 
wood’
syagaluʔ
‘your 
wood’
e. diʔiʤa ‘word’
stiʔiʤabe ‘his word’ stiʔiʤaluʔ ‘your word’
f.
palu
‘stick’
spalube
‘his stick’ spaluluʔ
‘your stick’
g. kuba
‘dough’
skubabe
‘his 
dough’
skubaluʔ
‘your 
dough’
h. tapa
‘four’
stapabe
‘his four’
stapaluʔ
‘your four’
3. The following data from Dixon (1994: 9–10) illustrate an  important 
grammatical contrast, that between a nominative– accusative case 
system and an ergative one. Examine the data and explain how 
they illustrate the difference between an accusative language, 
exemplified here by Latin, and an ergative  language, exemplified 
by Dyirbal a language from northeast Australia. ABS stands for 
absolutive case and ERG stands for  ergative case.

190  
INFLECTION
Latin
a. domin-us veni-t 
‘the master (NOM) comes’
b. serv-us veni-t 
‘the slave (NOM) comes’
c. domin-us serv-um audi-t 
‘the master (NOM) hears 
 
the slave (ACC)’
d. serv-us domin-um audi-t 
‘the slave (NOM) hears 
 
the master (ACC)’
e. domin-ı¯ ve¯ni-unt 
‘the masters (NOM) come’
f. serv-ı¯ domin-um audi-unt 
‘the slaves (NOM) hear the 
 
master (ACC)’
g. serv-us domin-o¯s audi-t 
‘the slave (NOM) hears the 
 
masters (ACC)’
Dyribal
a. ŋuma 
banaga-nyu
 
father+ABS 
return-NONFUT
 
‘father returned’
b. yabu 
banaga-nyu
 
mother+ABS 
return-NONFUT
 
‘mother returned’
c. ŋuma 
yabu-ŋgu 
bura-n
 
father+ABS 
mother-ERG 
see-NONFUT
 
‘mother saw father’
d. yabu 
ŋuma-ŋgu 
bura-n
 
mother+ABS 
father-ERG 
see-NONFUT
 
‘father saw mother’
4. Should the relationship between the French words in the left and 
right columns of each example be characterized as inflection or 
derivation? Do each pair separately.
a. saule
‘willow (tree)’
saule pleureur ‘weeping willow’
b. aller
‘to go’
allons
‘go’ (1pl)
c. soûl [su]
‘drunk’ (m.adj)
soûle [sul]
‘drunk’ (f.adj)
d. soûl
‘drunk’ (m.adj)
soûler
‘to make 
someone drunk’
e. souris
‘mouse’
souricière
‘mousetrap’
f. instituteur ‘primary school 
teacher’ (m)
institutrice
‘primary school 
teacher’ (f)
g. le
‘the’ (m)
les
‘the’ (pl)

INFLECTION  191
h. racine
‘root’
déraciner
‘to uproot’
i. aveugle
‘blind’
aveuglément
‘blindly’
j. équilibre
‘balance, 
equilibrium’
équilibriste
‘tight-rope 
walker’
5. Examine the following data from Tzeltal, a language of Mexico 
(Nida 1965: 100). For each pair, indicate whether the formation is 
derivational or inflectional. Then list the characteristics that form 
the basis of your decision.
a. h-cˇamel 
‘sick person’ 
cˇamel 
‘illness’
b. šiwel 
‘fright’ 
šiw 
‘to be afraid’
c. lumal 
‘land’ 
lum 
‘earth’
d. mahk’il 
‘lid’ 
mahk’ 
‘to close’
e. awinam 
‘your wife’ 
ʔinam 
‘wife’
f. cˇenk’ultik 
‘bean patches’ 
cˇenk’ul 
‘bean patch’
g. h-ʔuʔel 
‘influential person’ ʔuʔel 
‘power’
h. cˇ’uunel 
‘offering’ 
cˇ’uun 
‘to believe, obey’
i. k’abal 
‘custody’ 
k’ab 
‘hand’
6. Sudan Colloquial Arabic (Nida 1965: 41)
 
Identify as many morphemes as the data indicate. List all mor-
phemes that have allomorphs. Describe the distribution of all allo-
morphs that have phonologically definable positions of occurrence. 
Although the nouns in the following problem exemplify root-and-
pattern, you should treat the stems as single morphemic units for 
the purposes of this problem.
a. kitabi 
‘my book’
b. kitabak 
‘your (m.sg) book’
c. kitabik 
‘your (f.sg) book’
d. kitabu 
‘his book’
e. kitaba 
‘her book’
f. kitabna 
‘our book’
g. kitabkum 
‘your (m.pl) book’
h. kitabkan 
‘your (f.pl) book’
i. kitabum 
‘their (m) book’
j. kitabin 
‘their (f) book’
k. axuy 
‘my brother’
l. axuk 
‘your (m.sg) brother’

192  
INFLECTION
m. axuki [sic] 
‘your (f.sg) brother’
n. axuhu 
‘his brother’
o. axuha 
‘her brother’
p. axuna 
‘our brother’
q. axukum 
‘your (m.pl) brother’
r. axukan 
‘your (f.pl) brother’
s. axuhum 
‘their (m) brother’
t. axuhin 
‘their (f) brother’
7. Describe how the third person singular present indicative of -er 
verbs in Spanish is formed from the basic stem on the basis of the 
following forms. You should describe the types of allomorphy that 
you encounter (adapted from Nida 1965: 124–5).
 
3sg present indicative 
 
Basic stem
a. pide 
/pide/ 
‘asks for’ ped- 
/ped-/
b. sirve 
/sirbe/ 
‘serves’ 
serv- 
/serv-/
c. vende 
/bende/ 
‘sells’ 
vend- 
/bend-/
d. barre 
/bare/ 
‘sweeps’ 
barr- 
/bar-/
e. come 
/kome/ 
‘eats’ 
com- 
/kom-/
f. aprende /aprende/ ‘learns’ 
aprend- /aprend-/
g. decide 
/deside/ 
‘decides’ 
decid- 
/desid-/
h. siente 
/siente/ 
‘feels’ 
sent- 
/sent-/
i. miente 
/miente/ ‘lies’ 
ment- 
/ment-/
j. duerme 
/duerme/ ‘sleeps’ 
dorm- 
/dorm-/
k. pierde 
/pierde/ 
‘loses’ 
perd- 
/perd-/
l. vuelve 
/buelbe/ ‘returns’ 
volv- 
/bolb-/
m. mueve 
/muebe/ ‘moves’ 
mov- 
/mob-/
8. The following paradigms are from Hebrew. The root associated 
with the meaning ‘sit’ is y-š-v (in IPA, j-ʃ-v), and the root associ-
ated with the meaning ‘write’ is k-t-v. Analyze the formation of the 
following paradigms in the following manner: first, rewrite each 
form, replacing each consonant of the root with C, but retaining 
the value of the vowel and of any non-root consonants. For exam-
ple, ‘I sat’ would be CaCaCti. Then describe the formation of the 
past and present tense for each person (1sg/pl, 2m/f.sg/pl, 3m/f.sg, 
3pl). In the past tense, the stem before the second plural suffixes is 
different. Assume that this difference is for purely phonological 
reasons.

INFLECTION  193
Past
a. yašavti 
‘I sat’ 
katavti 
‘I wrote’
b. yašavta 
‘you (m.sg) sat’ 
katavta 
‘you (m.sg) wrote’
c. yašavt 
‘you (f.sg) sat’ 
katavt 
‘you (f.sg) wrote’
d. yašav 
‘he sat’ 
katav 
‘he wrote’
e. yašva 
‘she sat’ 
katva 
‘she wrote’
f. yašavnu 
‘we sat’ 
katavnu 
‘we wrote’
g. yšavtem 
‘you (m.pl) sat’ 
ktavtem 
‘you (m.pl) wrote’
h. yšavten 
‘you (f.pl) sat’ 
ktavten 
‘you (f.pl) wrote’
i. 
yašvu 
‘they sat’ 
katvu 
‘they wrote’
Present
a. yošev 
‘sit (m.sg)’ 
kotev 
‘write (m.sg)’
b. yoševet 
‘sit (f.sg)’ 
kotevet 
‘write (f.sg)’
c. yošvim 
‘sit (m.pl)’ 
kotvim 
‘write (m.pl)’
d. yošvot 
‘sit (f.pl)’ 
kotvot 
‘write (f.pl)’
 9. Now add the following Hebrew data to those provided in the pre-
vious example. How can we express the formation of the future? 
How does its formation differ from that of the past and present? 
(Note that x alternates with k in Hebrew depending on position. 
You should assume that x in the forms below is the same underlying 
segment as k in the second column of Hebrew in the preceding 
problem, but you do not have to account for its distribution.)
a. ʔextov 
‘I will write’
b. tixtov 
‘you (m.sg) will write’
c. tixtvi 
‘you (f.sg) will write’
d. yixtov 
‘he will write’
e. tixtov 
‘she will write’
f. nixtov 
‘we will write’
g. tixtvu 
‘you (m.pl) will write’
h. tixtovna 
‘you (f.pl) will write’
i. 
yixtvu 
‘they (m) will write’
j. 
tixtovna 
‘they (f) will write’
10. Using an etymological dictionary, investigate the reasons for the 
following suppletive pairs in English:
a. go/went
b. good/better

194  
INFLECTION
11. Identify the morphological process at work in each set of words, 
and think of at least one more English example to add to each set.
a. report/reported, grovel/groveled, purr/purred, saddle/saddled
b. goose/geese, foot/feet, louse/lice, eat/ate, run/ran
c. go/went, good/better, I/me, am/was
12. In the chapter we illustrated a number of different inflectional 
types, but they were not exhaustive. The following data are from 
the Congolese language Mongbandi (Nida 1965: 63). Determine 
the allomorphic alternation between the forms of the left and 
right columns. It consists solely of suprasegmental features.
 
 All forms are in the completive aspect. The forms in the first 
column represent the basic forms of the roots. The tones on the 
forms in the first column are a fundamental part of the root.
 
Forms with singular 
Forms with plural
 
subjects 
subjects
a. ŋgbò 
ŋgbó 
‘swam’
b. gwè 
gwé 
‘went’
c. ma¯ 
má 
‘heard’
d. kpe¯ 
kpé 
‘fled’
e. yó 
yó 
‘carried’
f. yé 
yé 
‘agreed’
g. bàtà 
ba¯tá 
‘guarded’
h. hùlù 
hu¯lú 
‘jumped’
i. ha¯kà 
ha¯ká 
‘taught’
j. dı¯rì 
dı¯rí 
‘answered’
k. ko¯ló 
ko¯ló 
‘pierced’
l. sı¯gí 
sı¯gí 
‘went out’
m. díkò 
dı¯kó 
‘read’
n. gbíŋgà 
gbı¯ŋgá 
‘translated’
13. In his grammar of Kujamaat Jóola, Sapir states that there is some-
times a mismatch between the subject expressed by a noun phrase 
or freestanding pronoun and the subject expressed by agreement 
on the verb. We see below that a plural agreement marker (pro-
nominal or noun class) can be used with a singular subject, imply-
ing that the subject is only partially expressed by the noun phrase.
a. injε 
nu-mimik di 
sulεman
 
I 
1PL-chat 
with 
Souleymane
 
‘I was chatting with Souleymane’

INFLECTION  195
b. e-mungun-ey 
si-lak
c 
 
ε-jaw 
 
3CL-hyena-DEF3 4CL-PROG 3CL-go
 
‘The hyena (and some friends) were going’
In sentence (a), the verb bears 1pl agreement although the subject 
is 1sg; in (b) the verb bears class 4 agreement, although the sub-
ject is class 3.
 Try to formulate a hypothesis about Kujamaat Jóola subject–
verb agreement that accounts for these data, as well as the more 
general subject agreement facts presented in the chapter.
NOTES
1 In Modern English, a portmanteau is a briefcase, borrowed from the French 
for a carrying case for clothing. Carroll thought of blends like his own slithy 
as being two meanings packed together into one word, or carrying case. We 
first introduced the term portmanteau in section 4.2.4.1.
2 Note that the mapping is directional. We cannot work backwards and pair 
up every instance of -ing with the feature [present participle] or [progres-
sive], because there is more than one type of -ing in English. For example, 
babysitting can be a present participle or a noun.
3 When speaking of default cases in morphology, it is often useful to invoke 
the Elsewhere Condition (Kiparsky 1982). We could have discussed the 
Elsewhere Condition here, but instead we have chosen to treat it in section 
8.3.5 in the context of blocking.
4 The traditional notion of government gave rise to the Chomskian notion of 
government, used in certain theories of syntax, but the two are somewhat 
distinct.
5 An alternative is to say that the entire phrase receives accusative case under 
government and that the accusative case feature is distributed over all of its 
members.
6 The Latin term accusativus is a mistranslation of the Greek term aitiatike 
‘causal’. The Greek word aitia means both ‘cause’ and ‘accusation’ and the 
Latin grammarians simply translated the wrong sense.
7 Word-for-word glosses for Sneddon’s examples were provided by Niken 
Adisasmito-Smith.
8 Sneddon (1996: 17) notes further, “It is sometimes stated that reduplication 
of nouns indicates variety rather than plurality (although plurality is implied 
by variety). Indonesian writers disagree on this question, but clearly redu-
plication can be used where variety is of no importance.” As evidence, he 
uses the examples that we have given in (18).

7 Morphology and Syntax
7.1 Morphological vs. Syntactic Inflection 
197
7.2 Structural Constraints on Morphological Inflection 
198
7.3 Inflection and Universal Grammar 
201
7.4 Grammatical Function Change 
203
7.4.1 Passive 
204
7.4.2 Antipassive 
206
7.4.3 Causative 
206
7.4.4 Applicative 
207
7.4.5 Noun incorporation 
208
7.5 Summary 
209
Kujamaat Jóola Verb Morphology 
212
Subject and object marking 
212
Aspect 
214
Negative 
217
Emphasis and subordination 
217
Summary 
219
A Brief Survey of Kujamaat Jóola Syntax 
219
Further Reading 
222
We saw in the previous chapter that inflection and syntax are intimately 
related to one another. Inflection, we said, is the realization of morpho-
syntactic features through morphological means. Morphosyntax deals 
with the relationship and interactions between morphology and syntax. 
In this chapter we explore a variety of topics in morphosyntax,  including 
morphologists’ and syntacticians’ definitions of inflection, structural 
What is Morphology?, 2nd edition, by Mark Aronoff and Kirsten Fudeman © 2011 
Mark Aronoff and Kirsten Fudeman.

MORPHOLOGY AND SYNTAX  197
constraints on morphological inflection, inflection and universal 
 grammar, and grammatical-function-changing morphology. Since our 
target audience consists of students whose only exposure to syntax 
comes from an introductory course in general linguistics, we avoid 
bringing in advanced syntactic analyses.
7.1 Morphological vs. Syntactic Inflection
 
■
We begin by distinguishing between two applications of the word 
inflection, one found chiefly in the morphological literature and the 
other in syntactic literature. For a morphologist, the presence of inflec-
tional morphology in a language depends on the existence of multiple 
forms of a lexeme. If a lexeme has only one form, then there can be no 
morphological inflection. In syntax, there is no such requirement.
Chinese lexemes have only one form, abstracting away from phono-
logically determined alternations (mostly changes in tone). While 
Chinese has a few clitics or particles, including one that expresses past 
tense, these are generally not considered affixes. The same is true of 
Vietnamese, though the two languages are unrelated. For the morphol-
ogist, therefore, these two languages have no inflection.
From a syntactician’s point of view, whether or not Chinese and 
Vietnamese have inflection is an entirely different matter. Even if a lan-
guage does not express a particular notion such as number or case, it is 
typically assumed to be present in the syntax. Likewise, a syntactician 
may argue that a verb always agrees with its subject in an abstract 
sense. This abstract agreement is considered just as real in Chinese, 
where the verb form never depends on its subject, as in Russian, where 
the form of the verb changes depending on the person (first, second, 
third) and number (singular or plural) of the subject. In sum, morpho-
logical inflection is realized overtly, where syntactic inflection may or 
may not be.
The existence of zero allomorphs does not contradict this definition 
of morphological inflection. Recall from the discussion in 1.5.2 that we 
speak of zero allomorphs only if they also have non-zero allomorphs. 
In other words, in some instances the inflectional feature encoded by 
the zero allomorph is realized overtly.
Another difference between the morphological and syntactic usage 
of the term inflection is that morphologists speak of inflection only when 
dealing with bound forms. The reason for this is clear when you 

198  
MORPHOLOGY AND SYNTAX
 consider that in the previous chapter, we defined inflection informally 
as “bending” of a lexeme.
English has a syntactic category of modals, or modal auxiliaries. They 
are used to accompany other verbs and indicate that the action or state 
described by the sentence is something other than simple fact. Alicia 
might go to the birthday party isn’t a simple fact about Alicia’s going to a 
party; there is an element of uncertainty. If we substitute other modals 
for might, the degree of uncertainty changes somewhat with each 
 substitution: Alicia may go to the birthday party; Alicia can go to the birth-
day party; Alicia could go to the birthday party; Alicia must go to the birthday 
party; Alicia should go to the birthday party; Alicia would go to the birth-
day party; Alicia will go to the birthday party.
Should we consider these modals to be morphological inflection? No. In 
order to be classified as morphological inflection, a syntactic category must 
be expressed through bound forms. In the case of the English modals, we 
are not dealing with bound forms, but rather with separate words. Again, 
syntacticians differ from morphologists on this point. Most would treat 
auxiliaries as part of the inflectional system of a language. Morphologists 
are not denying the validity of this treatment, only distinguishing the full-
word modals (i.e., syntactic inflection) from morphological inflection.
Summary: differences between morphological and syntactic inflection
Morphological inflection is realized overtly. Syntactic inflection may or may 
 •
not be overt.
In order to be classified as morphological inflection, morphosyntactic prop-
 •
erties must be expressed by bound forms or other morphophonological 
means (e.g., ablaut, suppletion). Syntactic inflection may be realized by free 
forms (e.g., auxiliaries).
7.2  Structural Constraints on Morphological 
 
■
 
Inflection
Cross-linguistically, we often find constraints on the realization of inflec-
tional morphology. In Russian, for example, verbs show gender agreement 
with their subject (feminine, masculine, or neuter) only in the past tense. 
This fact about Russian has a historical explanation: the past tense form 

MORPHOLOGY AND SYNTAX  199
was originally an adjective, and Russian adjectives agree in gender with 
the nouns they modify. In Modern Hebrew, verbs agree in gender with 
their subjects only in the present tense (and hearing a Hebrew-speaking 
3-year-old girl using correct feminine forms for all her present-tense verbs 
is a truly breathtaking experience). Again, this fact has a historical explana-
tion: as with Russian past tense forms, Hebrew present forms were origi-
nally participles. Gender agreement is not optional in Hebrew and Russian. 
Instead, its morphological realization is context-dependent.
It is surprisingly easy to find languages where verb inflection is 
obligatory in some contexts but impossible in others. We discuss a few 
such cases in the remainder of this section. All depend on syntactic con-
text, rather than on tense, which is expressed as an inflectional part of 
the verb itself in Russian and Hebrew.
In the Kujamaat Jóola portion of this chapter, we will see that subject 
agreement is expressed obligatorily except in the past subordinate and 
positive imperative forms of the verb. In some related languages, like 
Balanta, however, verbs agree with their subject only in certain syntac-
tic contexts. In Balanta, verbs may be marked for subject agreement, but 
generally only in the absence of a subject noun phrase (1a). When a 
subject noun phrase is present, a subject prefix on the verb does not 
express agreement. Instead, it indicates that the subject is focused (1b) 
(data from N’Diaye-Corréard 1970: 30):
(1) a. b
e
- ɲaaŋ 
be-nte
 
 
cl2-people come
 
 
‘The people came’
 
b. b
e
-ɲa-aŋ 
b
e
- do-oló b
e
-beeƟa ma
 
 
cl2-people cl2-few 
cl2-see 
3sg.obj
 
 
‘A few people saw him.’
Another example of a structural constraint on morphological inflection 
comes from the Central Khoisan language //Ani and its system of object 
agreement (Vossen 1985).1 Finite verbs (except in the imperative) bear 
affixes that agree with a pronominal object in person, gender, and 
number (2a) or with a nominal object for number and gender (2b):
(2) a. tî tsá  mu~´-tì-tè
 
 
me you see-1sg-pres
 
 
‘You see me’
 
b.  gúénì=khòè-//ùà ≠xóà 
-mà  -ʔà 
!xóé=!xòè  -m
 
 
hunter-m.pl 
elephant-m.sg-obj run-redup/caus

200  
MORPHOLOGY AND SYNTAX
 
 
-tè
 
 
-m.sg.obj-pres
 
 
‘The hunters make the elephant run’
The catch is this: if a nominal object is not marked for gender and 
number, object agreement does not appear on the verb:
(3) gúénì=khòè-//ùà 
≠xóà 
  !xóé-!xòè  -tè
 
hunter- 
m.pl 
elephant run-redup-pres
 
‘The hunters make the elephant run’
Here, in contrast to (2b), ‘elephant’ does not bear a gender–number 
suffix, and object agreement morphology fails to appear on the verb.
In Arabic, the basic generalization is that subject–verb number agree-
ment appears on the verb when the word order is SV (subject–verb) (4a) 
but not when it is VS (4b) (data from Ouhalla 1994: 43):
(4) a. l-tullaab-u 
  wasal-uu
 
 
the-students-nom   arrived-3pl
 
 
‘The students have arrived’
 
b. wasal-a  
l-tullaab-u
 
 
arrived-3sg 
the-students-nom
 
 
‘The students have arrived’
In (4b) third plural subject agreement is blocked, and instead we get 
default third person singular agreement.
In sum, in Balanta and Arabic subject agreement and //Ani object 
agreement, the realization of agreement is either obligatorily present or 
obligatorily absent, depending on the syntactic context. That this occurs 
in the world’s languages is what we want you to take away from this sec-
tion. If you have had extensive experience with syntax you might want to 
investigate in greater detail the structural analyses behind these facts.
Examples of inflection being dependent on syntactic context
Arabic (Semitic): Verbs agree with their subjects for number when the word 
 •
order is SV but not when it is VS. When the word order is VS, the verb bears 
default 3sg agreement.
//Ani (Central Khoisan): Finite verbs are marked for object agreement only 
 •
if the object NP is marked for gender and number.
Balanta (Atlantic): Verbs agree with their subjects only when there is no 
 •
subject NP or the subject NP is focused (emphasized).

MORPHOLOGY AND SYNTAX  201
7.3 Inflection and Universal Grammar
 
■
Universal Grammar is the theory developed by Noam Chomsky that 
states that all languages are identical at some level of analysis. It has 
had a tremendous influence on the field of linguistics, and most  linguists 
agree with Chomsky that language has an innate component. A key 
phrase in the definition of Universal Grammar that we have provided 
is “at some level of analysis.” What is the level of analysis at which 
languages are identical? At which levels do languages differ? More spe-
cifically, are inflectional categories universal?
In one sense, inflectional categories are universal. In the last chapter 
we gave an overview of inflectional categories that crop up over and 
over again in the world’s languages. Yet it would be a mistake to say 
that the realizations of inflectional categories are stable cross-linguisti-
cally. To see what we mean, consider gender.
Gender is highly problematic from a universalist point of view. As we 
noted in chapter 2, the number of noun classes in the languages of the 
Atlantic family vary widely. Kujamaat Jóola has 19, but Gombe Fula has 25, 
Serer 16, Wolof 10, Manjaku 14, and Balanta seven. Some Atlantic languages 
have multiple dialects, and dialects do not necessarily share the same 
number of noun classes. When we look past Atlantic to other language 
families of the world, we find variation not only in the number of genders 
but also in the entire organization of the gender system. Despite differences 
between gender systems, however, some similarities do emerge.
German has three genders called masculine, feminine, and neuter. 
Examples of nouns belonging to each gender are given in (5):
(5) Masculine  
Feminine 
Neuter
 
Mann 
‘man’ 
Frau ‘woman’ Parlament ‘parliament’
 
Tag 
‘day’ 
Lüge ‘lie’ 
Messer 
‘knife’
 
Zuschlag 
‘surcharge’ Erde ‘earth’ 
Mädchen 
‘girl’
Masculine, feminine, and neuter are obligatory inflectional categories 
of German. This means that every noun in the language, including bor-
rowings like Parlament ‘parliament’, must belong to a gender. A noun 
cannot be genderless. Furthermore, gender is obligatory in that a noun 
cannot simply carry it around: its gender category must be expressed 
through agreement.
We can compare German to Ojibwa, an Algonquian language  discussed 
by Corbett (1991: 20–2). Ojibwa has two genders, animate and inanimate 
(but note that some inanimate objects have grammatically animate forms):

202  
MORPHOLOGY AND SYNTAX
(6) Animate 
 
Inanimate
 
enini 
‘man’ 
essin 
 
‘stone’
 
enim 
‘dog’ 
peka:n 
 
‘nut’
 
mettikumi:šš 
‘oak’ 
pekkwe:šekan ‘bread’
 
a:kim 
‘snowshoe’ 
wa:wan  
‘egg’
 
a:sso:kka:n 
‘sacred story’
 
meskomin 
‘raspberry’
These function in the same way as the German genders in that they are 
obligatory and must be expressed.
How are the noun classification systems of German, Ojibwa, and 
Kujamaat Jóola related to one another? The obvious answer is that they 
are not related at all. For all of them gender is an obligatory inflectional 
category. Every noun must have a gender, and that gender must be 
expressed in the morphology. However, the gender categories them-
selves and the number of them are completely different.
If you look at many languages, you will discover that certain types of 
inflectional categories appear over and over again. For example, nouns 
are regularly inflected for case, number, and gender. Nouns in different 
languages do not necessarily inflect for the same cases – some languages 
will have two and others 20; nor do they inflect for the same genders. 
For verbs, the picture is similarly limited. Verbs might inflect for tense, 
aspect, mood, voice, or agreement, but you generally do not find lan-
guages where verbs inflect for other categories. (See section 6.1.4 for 
more detail.) Our brief overview of the German and Ojibwa gender 
systems, along with our more detailed treatment of the gender system 
of Kujamaat Jóola, should illustrate that although the inflectional cate-
gories themselves may not be universal, universal principles govern 
what is inflectionally possible and what is not. [Exercises 1 and 2]
Examples of inflectional categories
Nominal
Verbal
case
 
•
 (e.g., nominative, accusa-
tive, genitive, dative, ablative, 
ergative, absolutive)
tense
 
•
 (e.g., past, present, future)
aspect
 
•
 (e.g., perfective, imperfective)
mood
 
•
 (e.g., indicative, subjunctive, 
optative)
voice
 
•
 (e.g., active, passive)
subject and object 
 •
agreement
number
 
•
 (e.g., singular, plural, 
dual, trial, paucal)
gender
 
•
 (e.g., masculine,  feminine, 
neuter; animate, inanimate)

MORPHOLOGY AND SYNTAX  203
7.4 Grammatical Function Change
 
■
In English we can say:
(7) The governor broke the law
We can also say:
(8) The law was broken by the governor
In grammatical terms, the sentence in (7) is active and the one in (8) is 
passive. The law, which undergoes the action of breaking, occupies 
object position in (7), but in (8) it occupies subject position. The agent, 
the governor, occupies subject position in (7), but in (8) it surfaces as the 
object of the preposition by. It would have been equally grammatical 
not to mention the governor at all, as in (9):
(9) The law was broken
There are times in life when the passive is convenient. Perhaps the gov-
ernor’s administration needs to acknowledge that the law was broken 
but does not want to admit publicly that the governor was the one at 
fault.
In English we can also say:
(10) Solomon made the governor break the law
Here, the governor is still the agent of the verb break, but it is not the sub-
ject of the sentence as a whole. Solomon has taken over that function. 
Sentences like the one in (10) are called causative because they usually 
express the meaning ‘cause to do something’, or sometimes ‘allow, per-
suade, help to do something’.
In English we can also say:
(11) The governor broke the law for Smith
This sentence resembles the one in (7), but we have introduced another 
participant, Smith, the person for whom the governor broke the law.
We could discuss the morphology of break in the English sentences in 
(7–11), but its forms are fairly limited: broke, broken, break. None of these 

204  
MORPHOLOGY AND SYNTAX
forms is limited to expressing a passive, causative, or ‘for X’ interpreta-
tion. (The -en of broken in (8–9) is sometimes considered a passive mor-
pheme, but it is not limited to passive sentences. We could also say The 
governor has broken the law, which is active.) However, if we look at other 
languages, we often find that the passive, causative, and other types of 
grammatical-function-changing phenomena (we define the term gram-
matical function change immediately below) are associated with particu-
lar morphology. For example, we were introduced to the Kujamaat 
Jóola causative suffix in chapter 5.
Grammatical function change refers to “alternations in the gram-
matical encoding of referential expressions,” to use the definition pre-
sented by Baker (1988: 1). In (7–8), for example, we saw that the agent 
can be encoded as a subject or object, depending on the form of the verb 
used: broke or was broken. Passive, causative, and other phenomena that 
we illustrate in the remainder of this section are grammatical-function-
changing phenomena because they can be seen as triggering the encod-
ing change.
Our goal in this section is to help you recognize various types of 
grammatical-function-changing phenomena that are found cross- 
linguistically. We do not analyze them, beyond presenting basic defini-
tions, because to do so would require us to go too deeply into syntax. 
Grammatical-function-changing phenomena involve morphology–
syntax interactions at their most intimate.
7.4.1 Passive
 
■
The active–passive distinction is traditionally considered one of voice.2 
(12a) represents the active voice, and (12b) the passive:
(12) a. Ashley wrote this article
 
b. This article was written by Ashley
Ashley and this article are considered arguments of the verb. The argu-
ments of a verb are individuals, entities, or items that are required to be 
present because of the verb’s lexical entry. In its transitive use, write has 
two arguments, an agent and a theme. In the active sentence (12a), the 
agent is in subject position, and the theme is in object position. (We have 
assumed throughout the book that readers have at least a passive under-
standing of thematic roles such as agent, instrument, and theme.)

MORPHOLOGY AND SYNTAX  205
Below we give an example of the passive contrasted with the active 
voice from Bajau, an Austronesian language (Donohue 1996: 784):3
(13) a. kita-ku 
uggo’
 
 
see-1sg 
pig
 
 
‘I saw the pig’
 
b. di-kita-ku 
uggo’
 
 
pass-see-1sg 
pig
 
 
‘The pig was seen by me’
With these two sentences we see that although the passive entails a 
change in word order in English, it does not in all languages. In Bajau, 
the passive is formed via the affixation of a passive morpheme, di-, to 
the verb.
Kujamaat Jóola also has a passive that looks very different from the 
English passive. The Kujamaat Jóola passive is used infrequently, and it 
is restricted for the most part to constructions with inanimate subjects. 
It is marked by the suffix -i:
(14) a. ni- 
b
c
ɲ -i 
-b
c
ɲ
 
 
1sg.sub-send-pass -redup
 
 
‘I have been sent’
 
b. w-af 
wa-ri-εrit-i
 
 
17cl-thing 17cl-eat-hab.neg-pass
 
 
‘something uneatable’
Without the passive morpheme -i, (14a) would have the meaning 
‘I sent’.
We said that in Kujamaat Jóola, the passive is used less frequently 
than the active. Another way of saying this would be to call use of the 
active voice neutral, and use of the passive voice non-neutral. 
Whenever a situation like this arises in the world’s languages, we call 
the neutral case the unmarked case and the non-neutral case the 
marked case. This is literally true in the examples we presented from 
Bajau and Kujamaat Jóola. In both cases, the passive is marked by a 
special morpheme, but the active requires no such marker. The terms 
marked and unmarked are frequently encountered in linguistics and 
are by no means limited to describing grammatical-function-changing 
phenomena.

206  
MORPHOLOGY AND SYNTAX
7.4.2 Antipassive
 
■
The antipassive occurs less frequently than the passive in the world’s 
languages and is consequently less familiar. In the antipassive, an object 
of the verb is expressed in an oblique case or becomes null. We illustrate 
it with a pair of sentences from Greenlandic Eskimo (Woodbury 1977, 
cited in Baker 1988: 9). In example (15a), the subject ‘man’ is expressed 
in ergative case, and the object ‘children’ is in absolutive case. In (15b), 
the subject ‘man’ instead bears absolutive case, and the object ‘children’ 
has been demoted, in a sense, to being expressed with instrumental 
case. There is a further difference. In (15a), the object ‘children’ triggers 
agreement on the verb; this is standard for objects in the language. In 
(15b), however, ‘children’, now in instrumental case, does not trigger 
agreement.
(15) a. Aŋut-ip miirqa-t 
paar-ai
 
 
man-erg child-pl(abs) 
care-indic/3sg.sub/3pl.obj
 
 
‘The man takes care of the children’
 
b. Aŋut-Ø 
miirqa-nik 
paar-si-vuq
 
 
man(abs) children-instr care-apass-indic/3sg.sub
 
 
‘The man takes care of the children’
The antipassive morpheme in (15b) is -si. The two sentences given here 
express the same meaning, but they do so by different means.
7.4.3 Causative
 
■
As we mentioned above, the causative typically expresses the meaning 
‘cause to do something’ or sometimes ‘allow, persuade, help to do 
something’. We illustrate it with an example from Kujamaat Jóola. On 
its own, the stem tey- means ‘run’. When suffixed with the causative 
marker -en, however, it means ‘make run’:
(16) ba- 
la:b 
bu- 
tεy -εn 
-
c
la 
-tεy -εn
 
13cl- sun.def13 13cl- run -caus -1pl.incl -run -caus
 
‘The sun made us run (seek shelter)’

MORPHOLOGY AND SYNTAX  207
7.4.4 Applicative
 
■
The term applicative describes a number of different grammatical-
function-changing phenomena cross-linguistically. They involve the 
addition of an applicative affix along with a change in function of an 
oblique object (e.g., locative, instrumental), indirect object, or null 
object. These come to be expressed as a main object of the verb, often 
called the applied object. Depending on the language and the particular 
construction, the applied object may be interpreted as a beneficiary 
(one that benefits), maleficiary (someone or something that is adversely 
affected), goal, instrument, location, or motive. Much of the research on 
applicative constructions has involved the Bantu languages.
We illustrate the applicative construction with a pair of examples 
from the Kivunjo dialect of Kichaga, a Bantu language (Bresnan and 
Moshi 1990: 148):
(17) a. N-a˝-ı˝-ly-à 
k-élyà
 
 
foc-1sub-pres-eat-fv cl7-food
 
 
‘He/she is eating food’
 
b. N-a˝-ı˝-lyì-í-à 
m-kà 
k-élyà
 
 
foc-1sub-pres-eat-app-fv cl1-wife cl7-food
 
 
‘He/she is eating food for the benefit of the wife’ or
 
 
 ‘He/she is eating food to the detriment of the wife (cheating 
on the wife)’
In the glosses for (17a–b), foc is a focus morpheme; 1sub is an agree-
ment morpheme for subject, class 1; pres is a present morpheme; app is 
the applicative morpheme; and fv is a final vowel. Diacritics on the 
Kichaga words represent tones; they are not important here. We see that 
(17b) has an additional object not found in (17a). The appearance of this 
object is made possible by the addition of the applicative suffix -í to the 
verb. (17b) has two possible interpretations, as we have shown. In the 
first, the wife is considered the beneficiary; in the second a maleficiary.
In (18) we show that the same verb allows instrumental, locative, and 
motive applied objects (Bresnan and Moshi 1990: 149). In (18b), <r̩͎> is a 
retroflex r:
(18) a. N-a˝-ı˝-lyì-í-à 
mà-wòko˝ k-êlyâ
 
 
foc-1sub-pres-eat-app-fv cl6-hand cl7-food
 
 
‘He/she is eating food with his/her hands’ (instrument)

208  
MORPHOLOGY AND SYNTAX
 
b. N-a˝-ı˝-lyì-í-à 
m-r̩͎ì-nyì 
k-élyà
 
 
foc-1sub-pres-eat-app-fv cl3-homestead-loc cl7-food
 
 
‘He/she is eating food at the homestead’ (locative)
 
c. N-a˝-ı˝-lyì-í-!á 
njáá 
k-êlyâ
 
 
foc-1sub-pres-eat-app-fv 
cl9.hunger 
cl7-food
 
 
‘He/she is eating the food because of hunger’
In their analysis of the Kichaga applicative construction, Bresnan and 
Moshi write that the applicative construction is the only means by 
which the semantic notions of beneficiary, maleficiary, instrumental, 
locative, and motive can be expressed. There are no prepositions or case 
markers in the language that might provide an alternative means. 
Languages differ in this respect. In some languages with the applicative 
construction, paraphrases of it may be possible.
7.4.5 Noun incorporation
 
■
The last type of grammatical-function-changing phenomenon that we 
illustrate here is noun incorporation. Gerdts (1998: 84) defines incorpora-
tion as “the compounding of a word (typically a verb or preposition) with 
another element (typically a noun, pronoun, or adverb). The compound 
serves the combined syntactic function of both elements.” Noun incorpo-
ration is the most common type. It involves the combination of a noun 
stem and a verb or adjective into a complex derived verb stem. The fol-
lowing examples all illustrate noun incorporation. They are from Gerdts 
(1998: 84–5), who cites Sapir (1911), Woodbury (1975), and Comrie (1992), 
respectively. We have put the incorporated noun stems in boldface type.
(19) Nahuatl, a Uto-Aztecan language of Mexico
 
a. ni-c-qua in 
nacatl
 
 
I-it-eat 
the flesh
 
 
‘I eat the flesh’ 
 
b. ni-naca-qua
 
 
I-flesh-eat
 
 
‘I eat flesh’
(20) 
Onondaga, an Iroquoian language of Canada and the United States4
 
a. waʔhahninúʔ 
neʔ 
oyε´kwaʔ
 
 
tns.he:it.buy.asp prtc it.tobacco
 
 
‘He bought the tobacco’

MORPHOLOGY AND SYNTAX  209
 
b. waʔhay•ʔkwahní:nuʔ
 
 
tns-he:it-tobacco-buy-asp
 
 
‘He bought (a kind of) tobacco’
(21) Chukchee, a Paleo-Siberian language of eastern Russia
 
a. kupre-n 
nant
e
vatgʔan
 
 
net-abs 
set
 
 
‘They set the net’
 
b. kopra-nt
e
vatgʔat
 
 
net-set
 
 
‘They set the net’
It can be shown on the basis of positional and phonological criteria that 
we do not go into here that the noun stems in (19–21b) are incorporated 
into the verb stem, as Gerdts notes. Examples (19–21) illustrate a gen-
eral characteristic of noun incorporation cross-linguistically: incorpo-
rated noun stems do not take a determiner or bear case-marking 
morphology.
Our goal in this section has merely been to present the phenomenon 
of noun incorporation. There is much more that we could have dis-
cussed. Linguists have explored questions such as the following: When 
do speakers of languages with noun incorporation make use of it, and 
when do they use freestanding nouns? What restrictions are there on 
nouns that may be incorporated? Are there syntactic constraints on 
incorporation? We leave you to explore these issues on your own. 
Mithun (1984) and Gerdts (1998) would be good places to start. 
[Exercises 3 and 4]
The table below summarizes the grammatical-function-changing 
phenomena presented in this chapter. The definitions are purposely 
non-theoretical, in line with the inclusive nature of this book, but read-
ers will find that various theoretical frameworks offer more specific 
vocabularies for describing these sorts of phenomena (see, e.g., Baker 
1988; Dixon and Aikhenvald 2000).
7.5 Summary
 
■
Having read this chapter and chapter 6 on inflection you should have 
a better understanding of the ways in which morphology and syntax 
interact. Chapter 6 was primarily concerned with the expression of 

210  
MORPHOLOGY AND SYNTAX
 morphosyntactic features through inflection. This chapter has 
addressed a variety of different topics, including ways in which mor-
phologists and syntacticians may approach inflection differently, 
structural constraints on the morphological realization of morpho-
syntactic features, and grammatical-function-changing morphology 
Grammatical-function-changing types: summary
passive
Construction in which a grammatical subject of the verb 
is subjected to or affected by the action of the verb. The 
verb’s agent may be expressed as an adjunct (in English, 
a by phrase). Example: His memoirs were written by a 
ghost writer.
antipassive
Construction in which the object of the verb is expressed 
in an oblique case or becomes null. Antipassivization in 
an  ergative/absolutive language can be schematized as 
follows (Spencer 1995: 445): Subj-ERG Verb Obj-ABS → 
Subj-ABS Verb-APASS ( Obj-OBLIQUE). (See example from 
Greenlandic Eskimo in  section 7.4.2.)
causative
Construction in which the subject causes an event. The 
 causative may be formed by means of an auxiliary verb or 
an inflectional morpheme that attaches to a verb, but the 
term is also applied to verbs that inherently express a rela-
tionship whereby the subject causes a given event (e.g., to 
kill is to cause to die). Example: Sam makes us smile.
applicative
Construction in which the addition of a morpheme allows 
a verb to take an additional object. This object is often 
 understood as benefiting from or being adversely affected 
by the action of the verb. (Other applicative types exist; 
see  section 7.4.4.) Applicativization can be schematized 
as  follows: Subject Verb Object1 → Subject Verb-APP 
Object2 Object1. (Object2 here is the applied object.) (See 
examples from Kichaga in section 7.4.4.)
noun incorporation
Morphological construction in which a noun stem is 
compounded with a verb stem and yields a derived verb 
stem. Example: Siberian Koryak qoya- ‘reindeer’ com-
bines with the verb stem -nm- ‘to kill’, yielding the 
derived form qoyanm- ‘to reindeer-slaughter’ (Mithun 
1984: 847).

MORPHOLOGY AND SYNTAX  211
found cross- linguistically, including passive, antipassive, causative, 
 applicative, and noun  incorporation.
In the next section we finish our tour of Kujamaat Jóola morphology 
with an overview of its verbal morphology and interactions between 
morphology and syntax.

212  
MORPHOLOGY AND SYNTAX
Kujamaat Jóola Verb Morphology
 
■
For easy reference we repeat here the table that illustrates the basic 
structure of Kujamaat Jóola verbs.5 For discussion see chapter 5. 
[Exercise 5]
 
The Kujamaat Jóola verb
 
2- 
1- 
-1 
-2 
-3
 
res 
subject 
STEM aspect 
object 
subord
 
res neg 
rel pronoun 
mood 
passive 
redup
 
neg imper 
 
 
past subord noun
 
past subord  
 
negation 
emphasis
 
 
 
 
directional
Subject and object marking
 
■
We saw in chapter 6 that Kujamaat Jóola verbs agree with their subjects 
for noun class. Kujamaat Jóola also possesses a set of bound personal 
pronouns. Freestanding personal pronouns, which we won’t present 
here, may be used in place of the bound ones to convey emphasis.
Bound subject pronouns
Singular
Plural
 
 
 
 
Inclusive
 
Exclusive
1
ni- ~ i-
nu- ~ u- … -a ~ -al
nu- ~ a-
2
nu- ~ u-
ji-
3 
na- ~ a-  
ku-  
 
Two forms are given for all but the second person plural and third person 
plural prefixes. In general, the full forms are used with the  initial verb of 
a clause or in the absence of preceding prefixes or proclitics, and the 
shorter forms in other contexts. The alternation in the second portion of 
the first person plural inclusive suffix is morphophonemically deter-
mined, with the final /l/ surfacing before vowels but not  consonants.
The shorter form of the subject prefixes may substitute for the full form, 
as in the following example, to indicate an imperative or interrogative, 

MORPHOLOGY AND SYNTAX  213
or, somewhat surprisingly, to emphasize the subject. A priori, we might 
have expected the longer form to convey greater emphasis. The expla-
nation involves markedness (see section 7.4.1) and the relationship 
between context and form: the short form of the subject prefix is marked, 
and therefore more salient, when it occurs with a verb that is initial in 
its clause:
(1) u- 
tigεr fu- -g
c
l -af
 
2sg- break 5cl- stick -def5
 
‘Did you break the stick?’ or ‘Break the stick!’ or ‘you broke the stick’
The Kujamaat Jóola bound object pronouns are presented below. 
These may be used for direct or indirect objects.
Bound object pronouns
Singular
Plural
 
 
 
 
Inclusive  
Exclusive
1
-
c
m ~ a:m ~ -an
-
c
la ~ -
c
lal
-uli ~ -oli
2
-i
-u ~ -ul
3 
-
c
 ~ -
c
l
 
 
-i: ~ -il  
As with the bound subject pronouns, the alternations shown in the 
table of bound object pronouns are morphophonemically determined, 
with the exception of the two first person plural exclusive pronominals, 
which are regional variants. As seen below, -
c
m is the basic form of the 
first person singular object marker (2). The variant -a:m appears when 
the verb includes a reduplicant or the simple subordinate marker -m/-mi 
(3), but is replaced by -an when immediately followed by a reduplicant 
that begins with a vowel (4). Notice that an indirect object pronoun 
always precedes a direct object pronoun. [Exercise 6]
(2) a. u- 
sa:f -
c
m 
-i:
 
 
2sg.sub- greet -1sg.obj -3pl.obj
 
 
‘greet them for me’
 
b. na- 
sεn -
c
m
 
 
3sg.sub- give -1sg.obj
 
 
‘He gave me’

214  
MORPHOLOGY AND SYNTAX
(3) a. ma- nu- 
sεl -a:m -
c
 
-mi
 
 
rel- 2sg.sub-give- 1sg.obj-3sg.obj-subord
 
 
‘this that caused you to give him to me’
 
b. ku- 
itεn -a:m 
-
c
 
-itεn
 
 
3pl.sub- lift -1sg.obj -3sg.obj -redup
 
 
‘They lifted him for me’
(4) ku- 
itεn -an 
-itεn
 
3pl.sub- lift -1sg.obj -redup
 
‘They lifted me’
Aspect
 
■
Kujamaat Jóola does not have a tense system that expresses time-related 
notions like ‘past’ and ‘present’ directly.6 Instead, it has an aspectual system. 
This means that it expresses notions such as duration, completeness, and 
doubt, which have more to do with the nature of the action of the verb or 
with the speaker’s attitude than with time. The unmarked form of the verb 
can be interpreted as either present or past, as seen in (5):
(5) e- 
b
e
y 
ni- 
ŋar -ε
 
3cl- cow.def3 
1sg.sub- take -ne
 
‘I take/took the cow’
The suffix -e:n, the so-called dubitive-incompletive, is used to indicate 
that an action has not been completed (much like the imperfect aspect 
familiar from English or the Romance languages) or that it is in doubt.7 
In (6), the final /n/ of the past absolute suffix assimilates in place with 
the following labial stop, surfacing as [m]:
(6) sunkεn 
ni- 
baj 
-ε:m -baj 
bu- kori
 
last.year 1sg.sub- have -inc -redup 9cl- money
 
‘Last year I had money’
In (6), it is understood that the subject no longer has money. Thomas and 
Sapir (1967) present another example: Fuken nij••njaw kabaak, emitey des
c
f
c
m m
e
nil
e
ñu ‘Yesterday I was going to Kabâk, but the rain overtook me 
(en route) and I returned (without getting there).’ Here the verb nijeen-
jaw (jeen < -jaw-e:n ‘go’ + inc) ‘was going’ indicates that the action of 

MORPHOLOGY AND SYNTAX  215
going was not completed. Without the dubitive-incompletive marker, 
this sentence would mean instead that the subject went to Kabâk despite 
the rain.
The dubitive-incompletive marker -e:n may co-occur with other posi-
tion-1 suffixes. It may precede or follow -erit (habitual negative), -ut 
(negative), -
c
rut ‘not yet’, -
c
rul
c
:t ‘toward speaker’ (negative), and -ul
c
 
‘toward speaker’. This fact suggests that they are in the same position. 
However, it always precedes the other variants of -ul
c
, -u, and -ul, as 
well as the habitual marker -e and the second portion of the first person 
plural inclusive subject circumfix -a~-al.
Doubling the dubitive-incompletive marker emphasizes it. Such 
doubling occurs only in contrastive constructions. This is a good illus-
tration of compositional semantics: it is as though each suffix contrib-
utes a degree of meaning:
(7) mantε 
a- 
b
c
ɲ -ε:n -ε:n -ut 
si- 
kor 
-
e
s
 
perhaps 3sg.sub- send -inc -inc -neg 4cl- 
money -def4
 
a-    
ɲil 
-aw
 
1cl- 
child   -def1
 
lεt- 
a- 
   y
c
k 
a- 
 
kaɲ -
c
 
res.neg-  3sg.sub- limit 
3sg.sub- hurt-refl
 
 ‘If he had not sent the money the child would not have gotten into 
trouble’
We learned immediately above that there is some flexibility regarding 
the placement of the dubitive-incompletive suffix -e:n with respect to 
other first-position suffixes. The second member of the emphatic con-
struction -e:n … -e:n is even more flexible: it may be placed anywhere 
with respect to the first-position suffixes except directly after the habit-
ual -e.8 It can even follow an object pronoun.
Future in Kujamaat Jóola is expressed by using the resultative and 
resultative negative markers pan- and le-∼let-, which appear outside of 
inflectional morphology for subject, as we see in the following exam-
ples (the /-n/ of pan- is dropped before nasals):
(8) a. pa- 
ni- 
ŋar 
e- 
b
e
y
 
 
res– 
1sg.sub- take 
3cl- 
cow.def3
 
 
‘I will take the cow’
 
b. lεt- 
i- 
maŋ
 
 
res.neg- 
1sg.sub-want
 
 
‘I won’t want’

216  
MORPHOLOGY AND SYNTAX
In relative clauses, the future is expressed by a resultative clitic pi that 
combines with the marker agreeing with the relativized subject or object 
(Sapir 1965: 92). We see this in (9):
(9) a- 
ɲil 
-aw 
a- 
pi 
bakari a- 
p
c
s 
-i
 
1cl- child -def1 1cl- res 
Bakari 1cl- wash -2sg.obj
 
‘the child whom Bakari will wash for you’
Lastly, combining the dubitive-incompletive suffix with the resultative 
prefix let-, a negative marker, results in a construction that indicates an 
action that missed taking place or that will not be accomplished. We 
might translate it as ‘might have’ or ‘might not have’. [Exercise 7]
(10) 
mantεr basεn 
nu- 
ɲεs 
-ε:n -ε 
b- a: 
-b 
-ε,
 
perhaps Bassen 2sg.sub -look -inc -ne 9cl-here -9cl -emph
 
lεt- 
u- 
juk 
-ε:n -
c
l
 
res.neg- 2sg.sub- see 
-inc -3sg.obj
 
‘If you had been looking for Bassen, you might not have seen him’
The Kujamaat habitual marker is seen in (11). Gero and Levinsohn (1993) 
point out that it has a progressive use as well, in which case it occurs 
with the verb ‘be’ (12) (example from Gero and Levinsohn 1993: 82):
(11) a. ni- maŋ -ε 
-maŋ
 
 
1sg- want -hab -redup
 
 
‘I always want’
 
b. nu- 
boɲ -e -u 
-
e
 
-boɲ
 
 
1pl.excl.sub- send-hab -dir 
-1pl.excl.sub 
-redup
 
 
‘we always send from’
(12) 
c
:m- b- 
c
 
e
- 
siil 
-e
 
be- 15cl- inan 3sg.sub- cook -hab
 
‘She is cooking’
The habitual marker combines with the negative marker in a single 
morpheme, -erit:
(13) i- 
ŋar -ε:n -εrit
 
1sg.sub- take -inc -hab.neg
 
‘I did not always take’

MORPHOLOGY AND SYNTAX  217
Negative
 
■
The negative is generally indicated by the suffix -ut (14b). As seen in the 
last section, the resultative and negative are expressed by a single mor-
pheme, le-~let- (cf. (8b)), and the habitual and negative are also expressed 
by a single morpheme, -erit (cf. (13)). Similarly, -ul
c
 ‘toward speaker’ 
and -
c
rut ‘not yet’ combine to produce -
c
rul
c
:t (not shown here).
(14) a. i- 
maŋ
 
 
1sg.sub- want
 
 
‘I want’
 
b. i- 
maŋ -ut
 
 
1sg.sub- want -neg
 
 
‘I don’t want’
Emphasis and subordination
 
■
We have seen two forms of emphasis in the Kujamaat Jóola verb system 
already. The short form of the subject pronoun can be used where the 
full form is expected (e.g., in the first verb in a clause) to emphasize the 
subject. The dubitive-incompletive marker itself can be emphasized by 
reduplication.
Reduplication serves to create emphasis of the Kujamaat Jóola verb stem 
as well. This process highlights its action, in contrast to its arguments:
(15) ba- 
la:b 
bu- 
tεy -εn 
-
c
la 
-tεy 
-εn
 
13cl- sun.def13 13cl- run -caus -1pl.incl -redup -caus
 
‘The sun made us run (seek shelter)’
The noun emphasis (ne) suffix -e places emphasis on either the subject 
or a complement that precedes the verb:
(16) e- 
be 
ni- 
ŋar -ε
 
3cl- cow 1sg.sub-take-ne
 
‘I took a cow’
As might be expected, the use of this marker interacts with word order 
in complex ways, as we will see at the end of this chapter.

218  
MORPHOLOGY AND SYNTAX
The noun emphasis marker occupies the same position class as the 
object and passive markers. This could be accidental, and the fact that 
they never co-occur could be explained as a logical impossibility. A 
second, more enticing possibility is that they share the same position 
because they contribute the same sort of information. The discussion in 
Sapir (1965: 101–2), together with an examination of the sentences in the 
grammar and other published texts, indicates that the presence of either 
the object or the noun emphasis marker prevents a corresponding noun 
phrase from occurring in postverbal position. It is possible that the pres-
ence of an object or noun emphasis marker in the morphology eliminates 
the need for the corresponding noun phrase in the syntax. The same can 
be said, of course, for the passive marker. If this hypothesis is on the right 
track, the positional similarity between the object, noun emphasis, and 
passive markers may correspond to a functional similarity.
Sapir (1965) presents the simple subordinate -m∼-mi with emphasis 
markers because it “shifts emphasis from the verb to its immediate, 
usually post-verb, environment” (p. 35). It occurs most often in relative 
clause constructions or verb strings. The /u/ in (17a) is  epenthetic:
(17) a. wa 
nu- 
rεɡ -u -m
 
 
17cl-thing 
2sg.sub- say -V -subord
 
 
‘What did you say?’
 
b. 
e
-nin-
e
w 
a- 
kεt -mi 
na- 
sεn -a:n  -sεn
 
1cl-man-def1 who- die -subord 3sg.sub- give -1sg.obj -redup
 
 
e-b
e
:y
 
 
3cl-cow.def3
 
 
‘the man who died gave me the cow’
The actual use of -mi is more complicated than what is presented here, 
and in many ways it is akin to the noun emphasis marker (whose usage 
is also more complex than our discussion would indicate), as is brought 
out by Gero and Levinsohn (1993). We refer the reader to that paper, as 
well as to Hopkins (1990), for further information.
The past subordinate (ps), marked by the circumfix ba … er, sets off a 
subordinate clause (18a–c). As its name indicates, the information within 
the subordinate clause typically refers to an event or state that precedes 
the action described by the main verb, although the opposite is true 
when the subordinated verb bears the suffix -
c
rut ‘not yet’ (18b). In nega-
tive constructions, the second element of the circumfix, -er, is dropped 
(18a–b). What might this suggest about the true nature of this circumfix?

MORPHOLOGY AND SYNTAX  219
(18) a. a-mpa-
c
m 
na- 
sεn -
c
m, 
injε ba- baj 
-ut
 
 
1cl-father-1sg.poss 3sg.sub- give -1sg.obj I  
ps- have -neg
 
 
waf
 
 
thing
 
 
‘when my father gave (it) to me, I had nothing’
 
b. bεy 
nu- 
lak
c
 -ε 
aw 
ba- jaw -
c
rut 
dakar
 
 
where 2sg.sub- stay -ne you ps- go -not.yet Dakar
 
 
‘where were you before you went to Dakar?’
 
c. ba- rεɡ 
-εr -ul
 
 
ps- speak -ps -2pl.obj
 
‘having spoken to you’
Although we classify the second portion of the past subordinate as a 
position-1 suffix, following Sapir (1965), it may co-occur with the dubi-
tive-incompletive marker, which it always follows, and the ‘toward 
speaker’ marker -u∼-ul, which it precedes. It does not co-occur with any 
other first-position suffix.
Summary
 
■
The facts presented here highlight the need for a morphological compo-
nent in any theory of grammar. The Kujamaat Jóola verb is complex yet 
highly structured and cannot be accounted for in purely syntactic or 
phonological terms, a fact that is highlighted by exercises 5–7. In seman-
tic terms, the Kujamaat Jóola verb system is based on aspect rather than 
tense. This is not at all unusual. It has been determined, for example, 
that Proto-Indo-European also had an aspectual system. Note that we 
have not presented every Kujamaat Jóola verbal affix here. Sapir 
describes others, including obligative and indefinite markers (see 
Thomas and Sapir 1967). [Exercises 8 and 9]
A Brief Survey of Kujamaat Jóola Syntax
 
■
We have spent a great deal of space in this book discussing Kujamaat 
Jóola morphology. It seems appropriate to conclude with a brief presen-
tation of a few syntactic facts, ones that are related to its morphological 
analysis. We take as our starting point basic word order, which is SVO 
(Sapir 1965: 100; example from Hopkins 1990: 82–3):

220  
MORPHOLOGY AND SYNTAX
(19) ñaa fú-tut-af 
fu-sumbo-e-sumbo 
sumba-ay
 
now 7cl-small.one-def7 7cl-chew.tobacco-hab-redup tobacco- 
 
 
 
 
def10
 
‘The small one always chews tobacco’
As shown in (20), the subject of a finite clause always precedes the verb:
(20) a. 
e
-nine 
na-juk-ε
 
 
1cl-man 3sg-see-hab
 
 
‘A man sees’
 
 
*na-juk-ε 
e
-nine
 
b. 
c
 
na-juk-ε
 
 
3sg 
3sg-see-hab
 
 
‘He sees’
The order of verbal complements, however, is generally free. Any per-
mutation of the sentence in (21a) is permitted, but they differ in what is 
emphasized:
(21) a. 
ε-jamεn-εy 
fu-ri-af 
ni-sεn-ε
 
 
3cl-goat-def3 5cl-food-def5 1sg- give-ne
 
 
‘I gave the food to the goat’
 
b. furiaf εjamεnεy nisεnε
 
c. 
εjamεnεy nisεnε furiaf
 
d. furiaf nisεnε εjamεnεy
 
e. 
nisεnε furiaf εjamεnεy
 
f. 
nisεnε εjamεnεy furiaf
If there is ambiguity, speakers place the direct object closest to the 
verb. In the case of postverbal complements, the direct object directly 
follows the verb; in the case of preverbal complements, it directly 
precedes:
(22) a. ni-sεn-ε 
a-kamban-aw a-jaŋ-aw
 
 
1sg-give-ne 
1cl-boy-def1 1cl-girl-def1
 
 
‘I gave the boy to the girl’
 
b. a-jaŋ-aw 
a-kamban-aw ni-sεn-ε
 
 
1cl-girl-def1 1cl-boy-def1 1sg-give-ne
 
 
‘I gave the boy to the girl’

MORPHOLOGY AND SYNTAX  221
According to Sapir, if a verb is not marked for noun emphasis, a pre-
verbal complement must be restated via a bound person marker or 
postverbal object pronoun. Restatement of the NP object with a pro-
noun, bound or freestanding, is obligatory if it is [+ human] (23). 
Non-human preverbal objects are preferably, but not obligatorily, 
restated (24):
(23) alasan ni-sεn-
c
-sεn 
b
e
-kor-
e
b
 
Alasan 1sg.sub-give-3sg.obj- redup 13cl-money-def13
 
‘I gave Alasanne the money’
(24) a. 
b
e
-kor-
e
b 
ni-sεn-sεn 
(b
c
) 
alasan
 
 
13cl-money-def13 
1sg-give-redup 
(13cl) Alasan
 
 
‘I gave the money to Alasanne’
 
b. e-b
e
:y 
i-sεn 
(y
c
) 
ja fu-ri-af
 
 
3cl-cow.def3 1sg-give 
(3cl.3sg) if 5cl-food-def5
 
 
‘If I give the food to the cow’
If both the direct and indirect object occur preverbally, both may be 
restated by bound pronominals. According to Sapir, only one is oblig-
atorily restated, but he does not specify the indirect or direct object 
(25). The bound indirect object pronoun precedes the direct object 
 pronoun:
(25) a. a-ɲil-aw 
ku-sεk-ak 
ni-sεn-il-
c
-sεn
 
 
1cl-child-def1 
2cl-woman-def2 1sg-give-3pl-3sg-redup
 
 
‘I gave the child to the women’
 
b. a-ɲil-aw 
ku-sεk-ak 
ni-sεn-
c
-i:-sεn
 
 
1cl-child-def1 
2cl-woman-def2 1sg-give-3sg-3pl-redup
 
 
‘I gave the women to the child’
If two [−human] objects precede the verb, one – preferably the indirect 
object – is restated:
(26) ε-jamεn-εy 
fu-ri-af 
ni-sεn-sεn 
y
c
 
3cl-goat-def3 
5cl-food-def5 1sg-give-redup 3cl.it
 
‘I gave the food to the goat’

222  
MORPHOLOGY AND SYNTAX
Further Reading
 
■
Baker, Mark. 1988. Incorporation: A Theory of Grammatical Function Changing. 
Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Baker, Mark. 2001. The Atoms of Language: The Mind’s Hidden Rules of Grammar. 
New York: Basic Books.
Borer, Hagit. 1998. Morphology and syntax. The Handbook of Morphology, eds. 
Andrew Spencer and Arnold M. Zwicky, 151–90. Oxford: Blackwell.
Mithun, Marianne. 1984. The evolution of noun incorporation. Language 60: 
847–94.

MORPHOLOGY AND SYNTAX  223
Exercises
1. Discuss the ways in which the section of this chapter on morphol-
ogy and Universal Grammar relates to the foundational belief we 
gave in chapter 1: languages, which we can write with a small l, are 
different from Language, with a capital L.
2. Can you think of phenomena besides gender that are potentially prob-
lematic from an extreme universalist point of view? Is there any way to 
reconcile them with Universal Grammar, as we have done for gender?
3. Ganja Balanta (Senegal)
 
Identify the derivational morpheme which is common to the itali-
cized verb in (b–d). (Hint: it participates in vowel harmony with the 
root.) Then use the data provided to describe its meaning (data 
from Fudeman 1999).
a. insogma 
‘I will call him’
b. insogudma Sibow 
‘I will call Sibow for him’
c. anin ma wusud ndundugi Segu  ‘The woman bought Segou a 
 
tunic (ndundugi)’
d. aweetid Segu biti ma 
 ‘She/he found Segou the dog 
 
(biti ma)’
e. aweet Segu 
‘She/he found Segou’
4. On the basis of the meaning of the following clauses, identify the 
grammatical-function-changing phenomena at work (data from 
Bajau, an Austronesian language described by Donohue 1996). The 
grammatical-function-changing 
morpheme 
is 
in 
boldface. 
Interlinear glosses have been omitted on purpose.
a. Meoh di-daka asu 
 ‘The cat was caught by some 
 
dogs’
b. Pa’Harun ukir-ang-ku surat 
‘I wrote a letter for Mr Harun’s 
 
benefit’
c. Pa-kang-ku kareo ana’ 
‘I fed the child some shark’ or ‘I 
 
fed the child to the shark’ (Hint: 
 
 ‘feed’ bears what relation to 
 
‘eat’?)
Note that Pa’Harun in (b) means ‘Mr Harun’.

224  
MORPHOLOGY AND SYNTAX
5. The advantage of the table given at the beginning of the section on 
Kujamaat Jóola verb morphology is that it lays out the position classes 
of Kujamaat Jóola verbal morphemes clearly. However, it simplifies 
matters, as a close reading of the remainder of the section reveals. Use 
the data in this chapter to draw up a new diagram of the Kujamaat 
Jóola verb that expresses the complexity of morpheme positioning.9
6. Here are some examples of Kujamaat Jóola bound object pronouns 
in context. These examples show that, unlike derivational suffixes, 
bound object pronouns do not participate in verb stem reduplica-
tion. On the basis of what you have learned in this and the previous 
chapter, why might this be? (It may also help to look at the discus-
sion of Kujamaat Jóola stems in chapter 5.)
a. ku- 
buburεn 
-
c
la 
-buburεn
 
3PL.SUB- grind 
-1PL.INCL.OBJ 
-REDUP
 
‘they ground us (incl.) into the sand’
b. ku- 
sεn 
-a:m 
-i 
-sεn
 
3PL.SUB- give -1SG.OBJ -2SG.OBJ -REDUP
 
‘They gave you to me’
c. na- 
sεn -uli 
-
c
 
-sεn
 
3SG.SUB- give -1PL.EXCL.OBJ 
-3SG.OBJ -REDUP
 
‘He gave him to us (excl.)’
7. Discuss the dubitive-incompletive suffix -ε:n in terms of composi-
tional semantics. (You may want to refer back to chapters 4 and 5.) 
Be sure to discuss both doubling of the dubitive-incompletive suf-
fix and its co-occurrence with the resultative prefix -let. Are these 
unambiguous examples of compositional semantics, or do they 
raise any problems?
8. Find as many examples in the Kujamaat Jóola section of this chap-
ter as you can that exemplify:
a. simple exponence
b. cumulative exponence
c. extended exponence
9. How does the division of labor between morphology and syntax in 
Kujamaat Jóola compare to that of English and other languages 
you know? Give specific examples.

MORPHOLOGY AND SYNTAX  225
NOTES
1 // represents a lateral click, ! a palatal retroflex click, and ʔ an alveolar click.
2 Some people make the mistake of referring to the passive or active as tenses. 
Tense, as we noted earlier in this book, indicates time: past, present, 
future.
3 The active may be expressed in two different ways in Bajau. There is what 
Donohue calls the actor voice and what he calls the object voice. We 
present the object voice here because passives do not occur with the actor 
voice.
4 We have simplified the morpheme-by-morpheme gloss of the Onondaga 
phrases somewhat.
5 This section on Kujamaat Jóola verb morphology, based on Sapir (1965) and 
Sapir’s revised view of the system in Thomas and Sapir (1967), is the longest 
in the book and also the densest. We recommend that instructors lead stu-
dents through it but then have students digest the data by exercising their 
understanding of it creatively. They can begin with the exercises provided at 
the end of this chapter. In order to fully benefit from this section, instructors 
may want to spend two or more classes on it. We believe that what students 
will gain in skills of morphological analysis will be well worth the time and 
effort.
6 Neither does English, in fact.
7 In Sapir (1965), the suffix -e:n is considered a past marker, and its redupli-
cated form, which we learn below is emphatic dubitive-incompletive, is 
considered an indicator of remote past. He revises this analysis in his 1967 
paper.
8 This is probably due to a phonological constraint against superlong vowels, 
which we would have if the habitual e were to merge with e:n. Furthermore, 
if the illicit sequence */ε + ε:n/ were to be reduced to /ε:n/, the habitual 
meaning would be unrecoverable.
9 Instructors should be aware that this task will be time-consuming. 

8  Morphological Productivity 
and the Mental Lexicon
8.1 What is Morphological Productivity? 
227
8.2 Productivity and Structure: Negative Prefixes 
in English 
230
8.3 Degrees of Productivity 
231
8.3.1 Phonological constraints 
231
8.3.2 Morphological constraints 
232
8.3.3 Syntactic constraints 
233
8.3.4 Semantic constraints 
233
8.3.5 Blocking 
235
8.4 Salience and Productivity 
236
8.5 Testing Productivity 
238
8.5.1 English suffixes 
239
8.5.2 The importance of hapax legomena 
242
8.5.3 Regular and irregular English past tense verb forms 244
8.6 The Mental Lexicon, Psycholinguistics, 
and Neurolinguistics 
246
8.7 Conclusion 
252
 
Further Reading 
253
This chapter is based on two observations about morphology:
(1) a.  Though many things are possible in morphology, some are 
more possible than others.
 
b.  Though there are infinitely many potential words in a language, 
some are more likely to become actual words than others.
What is Morphology?, 2nd edition, by Mark Aronoff and Kirsten Fudeman © 2011 Mark Aronoff 
and Kirsten Fudeman.

MORPHOLOGICAL PRODUCTIVITY AND MENTAL LEXICON  227
These two statements, while similar, express slightly different ideas. 
The first (1a) is a general statement about morphological processes. We 
have seen that morphology can take many forms. Limiting ourselves to 
English, regular derivation and inflection might involve affixation, 
internal change (ablaut and umlaut), and category change without any 
overt morphological marking, to name just a few. But some of these 
processes are more possible than others. In the realm of verb inflection, 
a randomly selected verb is more likely to make its past tense by affixa-
tion than by ablaut. The second statement (1b) deals specifically with 
individual words. On a very basic level, words such as pfug, ngu, or 
yawelelulitopikuro are much less likely to become actual words of English 
than fug, ung, or yawel. On another level, a word like mini-burger ‘little 
burger’ is more likely than burgerlet (and may, in fact, already exist), 
even though -let, like mini-, means ‘small’ (cf. booklet, piglet). More subtle 
differences among forms and how likely they are to become actual 
words can be tested only through carefully designed experiments. 
Issues like these fall under the rubric of morphological productivity, 
the topic of this chapter.
8
 
■
.1 What is Morphological Productivity?
To say that a given morphological pattern is more productive than 
another is to say that there is a higher probability of a potential word in 
the first pattern being accepted in the language than there is of a poten-
tial word in the second pattern. We illustrate this with a simple example 
from English: plural formation. English nouns make their plural in a 
number of different ways, as can be seen in the following set of words 
(Bauer 2001: 2):
(2) cats, dogs, horses, oxen, deer, mice, hippopotami, cherubim
In light of all of these ways to mark nouns as plural, what does a speaker 
of English do when confronted with novel words, such as those in (3)?
(3) argaz 
‘crate of specific style’
 
smick 
‘type of cracker biscuit’
 
brox 
‘piece of computer hardware’
 
ceratopus ‘type of dinosaur’
 
cheppie 
‘type of antelope’

228  
MORPHOLOGICAL PRODUCTIVITY AND MENTAL LEXICON
Chances are that, despite the existence of other plural formations, an 
English speaker will mark all of these words as plural by suffixation of 
/z/: argazes, smicks, broxes, ceratopuses, and cheppies. The only likely 
exception is ceratopus, which could plausibly be given the plural cerat-
opi, on the basis of Latin borrowings such as alumni, foci, and nuclei.1
Bauer (2001: 3), to whom we owe the set of words in (3), selected 
them very carefully. The word argaz ‘crate’, for example, is in fact a 
Hebrew noun. It would therefore be possible to pluralize it as argazim, 
on the pattern of cherubim, seraphim, and kibbutzim. But this special 
plural would require that the speaker be familiar with the Hebrew 
plural and that this type of crate be connected somehow with Israel or 
Judaism. Bauer chose the word brox ‘piece of computer hardware’ 
because it rhymes with ox and because for some, the computer called a 
Vax (manufactured in the 1970s) was pluralized as Vaxen (presumably 
on analogy to oxen). Thus, there would be a precedent for pluralizing 
brox as broxen. Even so, the layperson would almost certainly pluralize 
these two words as broxes and Vaxes. To return to the statement in (1a), 
“Though many things are possible in morphology, some are more pos-
sible than others,” the English /z/ plural is more productive than other 
existing plural formations because there is a higher probability that 
speakers will accept and create forms like argazes and broxes (and 
prouses, meers, and vilds) than argazim and broxen (and price, meer, and 
vildren, cf. mice, deer, and children). [Exercise 1]
One term we will be using a lot is potential word. A potential word 
could be a word but isn’t. One example is Mugglehood ‘the state of being 
a non-wizard’, which we created from Muggle ‘non-wizard’, a word 
found in J. K. Rowling’s Harry Potter books, and the English suffix 
-hood. Mugglehood isn’t defined in the dictionary, and it probably is not 
in your working vocabulary. But when we first did an online search for 
it in 2004, we found not only three instances of Mugglehood, but also 
numerous instances of Muggledom and Muggleness. (When we searched 
for it again on January 3, 2010, we got 292 hits, including the first edi-
tion of this book on Google Books.) Apparently we are not alone in 
thinking Mugglehood a potential word. For some speakers, it has already 
passed from being a potential word to being an actual one. Perhaps 
someday it will be included in the dictionary.
The suffix -th creates nouns from adjectives (e.g., deep → depth, 
wide → width). It has a meaning that is similar to -ness. Length means 
the same thing that longness would mean if it were a word; if you could 
say decidedth, it would mean the same thing as decidedness. But only 

MORPHOLOGICAL PRODUCTIVITY AND MENTAL LEXICON  229
-ness can be called productive. In fact, no word in -th has successfully 
been integrated into standard written English since the coining of 
width in 1627. People have certainly tried, coming up with words like 
greenth, illth, and lowth. But they have not been very successful. 
Speakers of standard English simply don’t accept new coinages in -th. 
[Exercises 2–3]
When we study productivity, we study phenomena and distinctions 
like these. One question we need to ask about productivity is whether 
it is part of linguistic competence. Competence is Chomsky’s (1965) 
term for the knowledge that speakers and hearers have of their lan-
guage. It contrasts with performance, or how the language is actually 
used in concrete situations. In actual performance, a speaker may hesi-
tate, stop in mid-sentence, or make one or another slip of the tongue. 
But a linguist, in studying the language, would not regard such hesita-
tions, half-sentences, and speech errors as part of the language. That is 
not to say that these phenomena should be ignored. Slips of the tongue 
have provided great insights into the general structure of language. 
And code mixing, a type of linguistic performance in which fluent 
speakers of two or more languages mix these languages freely in mid-
sentence in conversation, is an area of active research. Though slips of 
the tongue and code mixing are not linguistic competence, but rather 
linguistic performance, both can still be studied fruitfully for what they 
tell us about language.
Some people would say that productivity is not part of linguistic 
competence either, because, in order for something to be considered 
part of competence, it must be structural and ‘all or none’. Productivity 
is a probabilistic notion, as we will see, and some linguists believe that 
if something is probabilistic, it is not structural and hence is not part of 
the grammar. Under this view, productivity would have to be treated 
as a phenomenon that is related to a speaker’s competence, but not 
part of it.
The alternative position, and the one we take here, is that if speakers 
are sensitive to productivity, and if it is part of what they do with lan-
guage and not just a factor that influences language, then it is part of 
their linguistic competence. The question of whether it is structural is 
simply not important. If we let ideology get in the way of linguistic 
investigation, then we will miss out on important generalizations. 
Moreover, while productivity itself is not structural, it is very easy to 
show that it has structural effects that may turn out to be relevant to 
structural theories of language.

230  
MORPHOLOGICAL PRODUCTIVITY AND MENTAL LEXICON
8.2  Productivity and Structure: Negative Prefixes 
 
■
in English
One reason that it is likely that productivity can tell us something about 
language structure is that the more productive a morphological deriva-
tional process is, the more likely it is to have a compositional output, 
one whose meaning is transparently predictable from the meaning of 
its input. The converse is also true: the less productive a derivational 
process, the more likely it is to result in a non-compositional, semanti-
cally idiosyncratic, non-transparent output.
To illustrate this point, consider negative prefixes in English. Zimmer 
(1964) looked at three of them, non-, un-, and in-, and discovered that 
the most productive of the set, non-, also has the most semantically 
transparent derivatives. This is shown by the contrast between the two 
columns in (4):
(4) non-Christian unchristian
 
non-human 
inhuman
What’s the difference? Non-Christian means ‘not Christian’. While 
unchristian can mean that, too, more often than not it means some-
thing like ‘not behaving in a Christian manner’ or even ‘uncivilized 
and barbaric’. Likewise, non-human simply means ‘not human’, while 
inhuman refers to the absence of human qualities like pity or kindness. 
A person can be both human and inhuman, but not human and non-
human. Thus, while the non-words in general simply negate their 
bases, the in- and un- words have the meaning ‘completely opposite to 
X’, where X is the meaning of their bases, in the way that east and west 
or long and short are opposed. To put it in a more technical way, non- is 
a logical or contrary negator. Using logical notation, we could repre-
sent non-Christian as in (5), where ¬ means ‘not’:
(5) ¬ Christian
Un- and in- are contradictory negators, whose addition to a word X 
results in a new word meaning ‘opposite of X’.
Zimmer’s observation extends to other derivational affixes. The 
suffix -ness is more productive in English than -ity (Aronoff 1976). 
Consider the pair collectivity∼collectiveness. While both may mean ‘the 

MORPHOLOGICAL PRODUCTIVITY AND MENTAL LEXICON  231
quality or condition of being collective’, only collectivity has the addi-
tional meaning ‘the people considered as a body or whole’. Overall, 
when we compare many such pairs, the -ness derivative has more trans-
parent semantics. Sometimes the -ity derivative sounds or looks odd, 
while the -ness derivative is pretty much always acceptable. Compare 
conduciveness with conducivity. Most English speakers would say that 
the former is more acceptable than the latter. We can even go beyond 
morphology to make the observation that syntax, which is always pro-
ductive, is by definition compositional.
8.3 Degrees of Productivity
 
■
We began this chapter with two observations, repeated below:
(6) a.  Though many things are possible in morphology, some are 
more possible than others.
 
b.  Though there are infinitely many potential words in a lan-
guage, some are more likely to become actual words than 
others.
Implicit in these two observations is the belief that productivity is not 
absolute. Morphological processes do not fall into two neat categories, 
productive and unproductive. They are best seen as being spread out 
along a scale, with some more productive than others. This is the view 
of the majority of scholars (see Bauer 2001: 126), and we will not con-
sider the alternative view here.
There are a number of types of constraints that limit productivity and 
that contribute to or even determine to what degree a particular forma-
tion is productive. We outline some of those constraints here, following 
Bauer’s (2001: 126–39) discussion.
8.3.1 Phonological constraints
 
■
The first type of constraint on morphological productivity is phono-
logical. We have already seen that phonology is a factor in the distri-
bution of allomorphs (see chapter 3). It is therefore not surprising that 
phonology constrains morphology in other ways. Bauer identifies 
three types of phonological constraints on productivity: (i) those that 

232  
MORPHOLOGICAL PRODUCTIVITY AND MENTAL LEXICON
depend on the segmental make-up of the base; (ii) those that depend 
on the suprasegmental make-up of the base, including stress place-
ment; and (iii) those that depend on the number of syllables in the 
base.
An example of the first type discussed by Bauer is the Modern 
Hebrew pet-name suffix -le, borrowed from Yiddish. It can only attach 
to bases ending in a vowel (Glinert 1989: 437):
(7) ába ‘father’ > ábale ‘daddy’
As an example of the second type, where it is the suprasegmental 
make-up of the base that matters, Bauer presents -al suffixation in 
English. This suffix may attach only to verbs that are stressed on the 
final syllable, as seen in the examples in (8). (Bauer notes that the appar-
ent exception burial should not be considered a counterexample, because 
it has a different etymological source.)
(8) acquittal, arrival, denial, dismissal, rebuttal, referral, revival
Bauer illustrates the last type, instances where the number of syllables 
in the base is important, with Tzutujil (Dayley 1985: 212), where the 
suffix -C1oj ‘-ish’ may attach only to monosyllabic adjectives, as in rax-
roj ‘greenish’. [Exercises 4 and 5]
8.3.2 Morphological constraints
 
■
Productivity can also be limited by morphological constraints. For 
example, a morphological process may require the base to have a cer-
tain structure, to belong to a certain morphologically or syntactically 
defined class, such as a gender, or to end in a particular affix. In chap-
ter 4 we encountered a morphological constraint of the first type: 
 certain English suffixes, such as -ish, attach only to unsuffixed bases. 
(The following box, based on Fabb 1988: 532–3, lists some of them.) As 
an illustration of the second type, we find affixes that attach only to 
bases that have a particular etymological origin. Bauer, citing Mackridge 
(1985: 320), gives the example of Modern Greek, where the suffix -adoros 
may only attach to words of Romance origin. Thus we find kombina-
doros ‘trickster’ from kombina ‘trick’ (< French combine ‘trick’).

MORPHOLOGICAL PRODUCTIVITY AND MENTAL LEXICON  233
Examples of English suffixes that attach only to unsuffixed bases
noun-forming -ant, as in discussant
-ance, as in performance
-hood, as in brotherhood
denominal and deadjectival -ify, as in personify and purify
-ish, as in reddish
denominal -ism, as in communism
denominal -ist, as in communist
-ive, as in passive
deadjectival and denominal -ly, as in slowly and ghostly
-ory, as in sensory
adjective-forming -y, as in peppy
8.3.3 Syntactic constraints
 
■
A basic type of syntactic constraint on word formation requires the base 
to belong to a certain lexical category. Some affixes attach only to nouns. 
Others attach only to verbs, or to adjectives. English re-, for example, 
attaches to verbs. React, reapply, relocate, reread, and rewrite are all pos-
sible words of English, while *represident ‘someone who is elected pres-
ident for the second time’ or *rewhite ‘white (adj.; used of something 
that was once white and is now white again)’ are not. In chapter 3 we 
saw another type of syntactic constraint. The English secondary affix 
#able may attach only to transitive verbs.
8.3.4 Semantic constraints
 
■
Productivity can also be constrained by semantic factors. Barker (1998) 
studies the English suffix -ee found in words like advisee, addressee, enlis-
tee, or employee using a large set of naturally occurring examples such as 
the following (p. 720):
(9) a.  There was the Asian influenza casualty … who was replaced 
gallantly by an influenza recoveree, Mr Robert Harben.

234  
MORPHOLOGICAL PRODUCTIVITY AND MENTAL LEXICON
 
b.  [experiment involving shining lights into the subject’s eyes] 
The adaptee then cannot tell the difference between yellow and 
white, i.e., is yellow-blind.
 
c.  These young musicians were chosen from over 200 auditionees.
 
d.  The ground rules were simple: to find ways to relax that 
required absolutely no effort on the part of the relaxee.
 
e.  The paella didn’t turn out very well, but fortunately my dinees 
were quite understanding.
Barker finds that -ee suffixation is constrained by three semantic factors. 
First, the referent of the newly derived noun must be sentient. Second, 
the referent of the -ee noun is typically characterized by a relative lack 
of volitional control: the dinees in (9e) have no control over the paella 
they are served, and the adaptee (9b) does not manipulate the lights. 
Finally, the -ee noun and the stem must be episodically linked. Barker 
(1998: 712) gives the example of the noun lessee, from the verb lease: 
“every leasing qualifies some individual as a lessee, and for every 
lessee, there must be a leasing event which qualifies them as a lessee.” 
He continues by pointing out that it is not the case that all deverbal 
nouns must be episodically linked to their stems. We can dump a pencil 
sharpener into a wastebasket without the wastebasket qualifying as a 
dump. Someone who consorts does not automatically become a consort, 
and so on. [Exercise 6]
Summary: examples of constraints on morphological productivity
Phonological 
• Hebrew -le attaches only to bases ending in a vowel.
 
•  English -al attaches only to bases that are stressed on 
the final syllable.
 
• Tzutujil -C1oj attaches only to monosyllables.
Morphological 
•  Modern Greek -adoros attaches only to words of 
Romance origin.
 
•  Certain suffixes, such as English -hood, attach only to 
unsuffixed bases.
Syntactic 
• English re- attaches only to verbs.
 
• English #able attaches only to transitive verbs.
Semantic 
•  The referent of English -ee must be sentient and 
 characterized by a relative lack of volitional control; 
the -ee noun and its stem must be episodically linked.

MORPHOLOGICAL PRODUCTIVITY AND MENTAL LEXICON  235
8.3.5 Blocking
 
■
The last type of constraint we mention here is blocking. Blocking involves 
two expressions, one potential and one actual. We say that a potential 
expression is prevented from occurring because another expression with 
the same meaning and function already exists. In the context of inflec-
tion, forms like *childs, *oxes, *mouses, and *foots are blocked by the exist-
ence of children, oxen, mice, and feet. In fact, wherever we find irregular 
inflectional morphology, we can say that the irregular forms block the 
application of the regular, or default, rule. This has been formally articu-
lated in work on Lexical Phonology (Kiparsky 1982) and is related to the 
Elsewhere Condition, which states that a more specific rule or process 
applies before a more general rule. The Elsewhere Condition is impor-
tant in many areas of morphology, not just productivity. For example, we 
can hypothesize that in the creation of the plural form children from child, 
the more specific rule, which we can state as “add the suffix [r
e
n] and 
change the vowel of the root to [i],” applies before the more general plu-
ralization rule, “add /z/.” The application of the more specific rule pre-
vents the more general rule from applying.
Morphological Challenge
Can you think of any potential words of English whose production is blocked 
by actual words?
We also find blocking of derivational formations. In chapter 5 we 
observed that the existence of the verb mail prevents speakers from 
using a zero-derived verb *mailbox ‘to put a letter or package in a mail-
box in order to send it to a recipient’. It would be odd to refer to a piece 
of silverware that is used to cut food as a cutter because the word knife 
already exists, unless the new utensil is somehow special. And *corre-
sponder doesn’t occur, presumably because we already have the word 
correspondent (Barker 1998: 703).
The example cutter is particularly informative, because that word does 
exist, but in different senses – many of them. There are a number of agen-
tive meanings to the word cutter, used for occupations that involve cut-
ting. Someone who castrates animals is a cutter, as is one who cuts fur or 

236  
MORPHOLOGICAL PRODUCTIVITY AND MENTAL LEXICON
cloth to make garments. We also use the word cutter to refer to someone 
who edits and cuts motion picture shots and assembles them into a fin-
ished sequence, someone who pulverizes ore samples so that they may 
be subjected to chemical analysis, or someone who cuts gems, monumen-
tal or building stones, or glass. There are boats and sleighs called cutters. 
Incisors (which are distinguished from the teeth called grinders) are called 
cutters. So are particularly incisive comments. Of particular relevance 
here is the fact that a number of cutting instruments go by the name cutter, 
including rotary cutters and the sapphire or diamond point of a stylus.2 
The meaning ‘piece of silverware used for cutting’ is conspicuous by its 
absence. This suggests that true semantic blocking is going on here.
Blocking is an economy principle that can be thought of informally as 
an injunction to avoid coining synonyms: if you already have a good 
expression for something, don’t invent another one. Clear evidence that 
blocking is based on the avoidance of creating synonyms comes from 
syntax, where it operates just as it does in morphology. Why, for exam-
ple, do we say this morning, this afternoon, this evening, but not *this night? 
This expression is blocked by tonight. Remember that blocking does not 
constrain forming words, but rather forming words with particular 
meanings, which means that a word may be blocked in one sense but 
not in another. And indeed, this night is acceptable when it has a differ-
ent sense from the blocked one, as in the phrase “Why is this night differ-
ent from all other nights?” where this is used in a more purely 
demonstrative way. Similarly, while the day before yesterday or the day 
after tomorrow are both common expressions, we cannot say *the day 
before today or *the day after today, because we already have the words 
yesterday and tomorrow with these exact meanings. French, by contrast, 
has the expression avant hier for the equivalent of the day before yesterday 
and après demain for the equivalent of the day after tomorrow, so French 
also blocks the translationally equivalent expression of these phrases, 
which are perfectly acceptable in English, because we have no word for 
them. The constraint is thus the same across all languages, but its results 
depend on the individual existing words of each one. [Exercises 7–12]
8.4 Salience and Productivity
 
■
We next tackle the oxymoron of productive unproductivity (this last a 
term we coined just now), the evidence that speakers have unproduc-
tive rules or processes at their disposal. For simplicity, we refer simply 

MORPHOLOGICAL PRODUCTIVITY AND MENTAL LEXICON  237
to rules, since the difference between the two terms is more one of per-
sonal preference. The fact that speakers use both unproductive and pro-
ductive rules is a major reason for including productivity in speakers’ 
competence. As we will show, speakers can take advantage of the 
unproductivity of a rule, just as they take advantage of productivity, 
but to different ends.
When a word is formed from an unproductive rule, that word is 
more salient than its productively formed counterpart. If we were to 
use the word coolth in conversation instead of the equivalent pro-
ductively formed coolness, people would notice, and in some con-
texts, that could be a useful thing. This brings us back to the novel 
words we discussed in chapter 1, and the fascinating observation 
that many of them apparently break morphological rules. For exam-
ple, Latin or Greek suffixes are sometimes attached to Germanic 
stems, as in smorgsaphobia (heard in an episode of Frasier) or denog-
ginize (from an episode of Seinfeld), and the adjectival prefix un- is 
sometimes affixed to nouns. Some of our older readers may remem-
ber a past 7-Up advertising campaign, where it was referred to as the 
uncola.
Novel words are called nonce forms or hapax legomenona (we 
encountered both terms in section 4.2.1), and they are particularly 
common in contexts where salience counts, such as advertising or jour-
nalism. One way to create a catchy headline is to include a recognizably 
novel word. The following examples are all from The Economist (empha-
sis ours):
(10) a.  “Subsidized cow chow”
 
 
[noun–noun compound; vol. 362(8263), March 9, 2002, p. 39]
 
b. “Enronitis delights local auditors”
 
 
 [Enron, an oil company, plus -itis; vol. 362(8265), March 23, 
2002, p. 69]
 
c. “George Bush, McCainiac”
 
 
 [blend of McCain and maniac; vol. 362(8266), March 30, 2002, 
p. 30]
 
d. “Farewell eurosclerosis”
 
 
[euro- plus sclerosis; The World in 2002, p. 102]
All of these words stand out, because speakers know immediately 
that they have never seen them before. Words formed by unproduc-
tive processes, like uncola, are even more salient. People who hear 

238  
MORPHOLOGICAL PRODUCTIVITY AND MENTAL LEXICON
them stop in their tracks for a moment, trying to put a finger on 
why they don’t sound quite right.
The relationship between unproductive rules and contexts where 
there is a need for saliency holds in other languages, too. In Modern 
Hebrew, many blends (see discussion in chapter 4) are brand names, 
and are less likely to be created in normal speech (Bat-El 1996). In 
French, blending is fairly rare, but, again, it can be found in contexts 
where saliency is important: a flyer advertising Belfort’s Eurockéennes, a 
blend of Européen ‘European’ and rock, is more eye-catching than one 
that simply proclaims “European Rock Festival.” The same goes for 
Irrockuptibles, which happens to be both the title of a French magazine 
and a rock festival in Spanish-speaking Buenos Aires.
In addition to salience, words formed by unproductive rules have 
another function: they are useful for coining technical terms, which need 
to have a distinctive meaning. Take a word from the title of this chapter, 
productivity. Why don’t we say productiveness? Research on the two suf-
fixes involved has shown that technical terms are more likely to be formed 
with -ity than -ness. We don’t talk about Einstein’s theory of relativeness or 
say to somebody that his analysis lacks objectiveness; we say relativity and 
objectivity. In pottery, one method of firing is called reduction firing. 
Reduction involves removing oxygen from the firing atmosphere and 
results in more interesting colors in the glazing. In order to do reduction 
firing, you have to use special, reductive clays that will not explode under 
reduction. Potters call this property reductivity, rather than reductiveness.
To summarize, if a language has two ways of doing something, one 
of which is less productive, the less productive rule or process has a 
linguistic purpose. The less productive rule may result in a word that 
stands out, useful in newspapers, magazines, and advertisements, or it 
may result in a form that sounds more technical or learned.
8.5 Testing Productivity
 
■
In chapter 1, we said that we take a “no holds barred” approach to lin-
guistics. If we can use a tool, no matter how unconventional, to come to 
a better understanding of how speakers and hearers use and process 
language, we are all for it. Morphological productivity offers many 
opportunities for researchers with this kind of philosophy, and in recent 
years, linguists have used many different tools to come to a better 
understanding of how we produce complex words. These include 

MORPHOLOGICAL PRODUCTIVITY AND MENTAL LEXICON  239
 studies that use standard dictionaries, rhyming dictionaries, and large 
 corpora, on the one hand, and technologically sophisticated techniques 
such as positron emission tomography (PET), on the other. In this sec-
tion we report on some of these studies.
8.5.1 English suffixes
 
■
Aronoff and Schvaneveldt (1978) conducted an experiment to verify 
that productivity figures in individuals’ linguistic competence and to 
judge its consistency across speakers and words. The experiment 
focused on -ness, a native English suffix, and -ity, of Latin-Romance 
origin, which often attach to the same morphological and semantic 
classes of words. We see this in triplets like the following, where all 
three members can be found in a dictionary:
(11) immense 
immenseness 
immensity
 
scarce 
scarceness 
scarcity
 
exclusive 
exclusiveness 
exclusivity
 
porous 
porousness 
porosity
The two suffixes differ, however, in that -ness is more productive over-
all, especially with certain types of stems like those of the shape X-ive.
Aronoff and Schvaneveldt presented speakers with three sets of words: 
(i) actual words, like activity or assertiveness, where actual means listed in 
Webster’s Collegiate Dictionary; (ii) possible words, like effervescivity or 
affirmativeness, where X-ive occurs in the dictionary, but not the -ness or -ity 
suffixed form; and (iii) non-words. Here neither X-ive nor X is listed in the 
dictionary. Examples of non-words are remortiveness and lugativity.
Over the course of the experiment, 141 subjects were asked to judge 
40 words, 100 possible words, and 40 non-words, which were presented 
in randomized lists. For each subject, half of the words were suffixed in 
-ity and half in -ness. The 40 actual words were the same across all sub-
jects, but possible words and non-words were counterbalanced so that 
half of the subjects got, for example, effervesciveness and elaborativity, 
and the other half elaborativeness and effervescivity. This was done to 
ensure that judgments would be based on the felicity of the suffix and 
not some peculiarity of the stem it attached to.
The final variable in the study involved the instructions given to the 
subjects, who were divided into three groups of 47 each. One group 

240  
MORPHOLOGICAL PRODUCTIVITY AND MENTAL LEXICON
was asked to judge whether the items were in their vocabulary; the 
second group was asked whether the items were English words; and 
the third group was asked whether the words were meaningful. As it 
happened, the instructions had little effect on the subjects’ judgments.
It turned out that English speakers preferred the actual words in -ity 
(they were balanced for frequency). When it came to the non-words, 
they didn’t care, and on the potential words, they preferred the -ness 
words. This shows that speakers can tell the difference between a more 
productive and less productive rule.
Another experiment yielded even more interesting results. Anshen 
and Aronoff (1988) tested the productivity of the patterns X-iveness, 
X-ivity; X-ibility, X-ibleness; and X-ional, X-ionary. We follow them in 
ignoring the last two, since the most interesting results have to do with 
the contrast between the behavior of -ity and -ness. Anshen and Aronoff 
asked their subjects, all native English speakers, to list on paper all the 
words they could think of that ended in these strings. They expected 
that speakers would come up with more forms in the more acceptable, 
and therefore more productive, patterns (X-iveness, X-ibility). In fact, 
speakers listed more forms for both the X-ibility and X-ivity patterns 
than for the other two, as shown in the following table (Anshen and 
Aronoff 1988: 644).
Number of words cited by respondents
 
-ness 
-ity
X-ible 
30 
101
X-ive 
61 
 86
The number of nonce words in the subjects’ lists was much higher for 
the patterns ending in -ness than those ending in -ity, as shown in the 
following table.
Extant versus nonce words
 
Extant 
Nonce
X-ibleness 
 9 
12
X-ibility 
38 
 8
X-iveness 
17 
16
X-ivity 
19 
 9

MORPHOLOGICAL PRODUCTIVITY AND MENTAL LEXICON  241
On the basis of their experiment, Anshen and Aronoff hypothesize that 
-ity forms are stored in the lexicon but that -ness forms are built by rule 
as they are needed (on the fly, as psychologists say). In other words, 
there are two ways in which speakers access words: they may find them 
in the lexicon or create them from existing bases. If speakers create -ness 
words on the fly, nothing prevents them from using novel forms. If, on 
the other hand, -ity words are memorized, the forms that the subjects 
retrieve are likely to exist in other people’s lexicons, as well. This 
explains the results in the second table immediately above. It is also 
reasonable to expect a greater variety in the -ness words than in the -ity 
words, because speakers choose the latter from a defined stored set, but 
make up the former as they need them. This also turned out to be the 
case (Anshen and Aronoff 1988: 645).
Anshen and Aronoff’s suggestion that speakers build words in 
-ness on the fly may also explain why rules that were extremely pro-
ductive historically leave few or no traces in the modern language. 
Words in -ness are not stored in the lexicon, so if the productive rule 
disappears, so will the many forms ending in -ness. Anshen and 
Aronoff cite Broselow (1977), who notes that the Old English deadjec-
tival nominalizer u- was the most productive such affix in Old English 
yet has left no reflex in Modern English. Broselow explains this fact 
by hypothesizing that u- forms were never stored in the lexicon but 
were instead built by rule when needed. Once the rule is lost, all the 
forms disappear almost instantaneously.
Anshen and Aronoff propose that -ibleness is like u- in that it was once 
very productive but is now quite marginal. Other affixes that seem to 
have gone the same way include be-, as in beware and bedevil, and prep-
ositional prefixes, like with- or at-. Some of these prepositional prefixes, 
like at-, have left no trace at all. With- appears on only a few words: 
withdraw, withhold, withstand. These affixes all serve as evidence for the 
notion that if a rule dies, people do not remember any of the words that 
were formed with the rule.
The prediction that highly productive affixes disappear with hardly 
a trace can be demonstrated quite easily, particularly for prefixes, by 
using a dictionary. The Oxford English Dictionary is particularly useful 
for this type of investigation because it lists not only the first recorded 
time a word appeared, but also the last.
In the second section of their article, Anshen and Aronoff (1988) dis-
cuss a theory of how speakers of a language find words. Put yourself in 
the position of someone who has to find a word. Let’s say that during a 

242  
MORPHOLOGICAL PRODUCTIVITY AND MENTAL LEXICON
conversation, you need to use a noun that expresses an abstract quality 
having to do with retaining.
We might assume that speakers have three ways in which they can 
find a morphologically complex word to use in speech. The first is to 
search the mental lexicon for words that the speaker has memorized by 
rote. The second is to build a word by rule. And the last way is to create 
a word by analogy. The three methods are then rote, rule, and analogy. 
(For evidence that this goes on, see Kuczaj 1977 and Bybee and Slobin 
1982.) Anshen and Aronoff claim that speakers do all three at the same 
time. If a word is very frequent, it has been reinforced in their memo-
ries, so speakers will find it easily. This may be why irregularities tend 
to persist in the most frequently used words of a language, for example, 
the paradigm ‘to be’ in English. If speakers do not find a word in the 
lexicon quickly, then rule or analogy will win out, depending on how 
quickly each operates, which may vary in a given case, depending on 
complex factors.
This theory sheds some light on -ibleness words and why English 
speakers tend not to like them. While the -ness rule is very productive 
overall, in this particular environment it is not. Speakers can retrieve an 
-ibility word from their mental lexicons more quickly than they can 
create a new word in -ibleness.
8.5.2 The importance of hapax legomena
 
■
According to Baayen (1992), if you want to study morphological pro-
ductivity, it is important to study hapax legomena, words that appear 
only once in a given corpus, preferably a large one. Why? If you adhere 
to the theory discussed immediately above, then a productive rule is 
like a machine that spins out words, throws them into the air, and 
doesn’t bother to keep track of them. Words that appear only once in a 
large corpus are more likely than words that are used repeatedly to 
have been formed by a productive rule.
If this seems counterintuitive to you, then think of it in terms of con-
crete examples. If you look in the dictionary, you probably won’t find 
giggle-gaggle. But it does not sound odd, because semi-reduplicatives 
like this are common in English: chitchat, jingle-jangle, flip-flop, zigzag. If 
giggle-gaggle fell out as a hapax legomenon in a large corpus, it would 
be precisely because it follows a productive pattern, and speakers who 
use it can create it on the fly. Memorized words, ones that are not 

MORPHOLOGICAL PRODUCTIVITY AND MENTAL LEXICON  243
 created on the fly but are stored in the lexicon, are more likely to recur 
in a large corpus. So in a large corpus, we would expect to find multiple 
examples of words like monitor, third, or get. We are not claiming that 
words that follow a productive pattern have to be hapax legomena – we 
would also expect to find multiple examples of inflected forms of 
common words, like argues or arguing. We are saying only that if a 
word is a hapax legomenon, it is more likely to have been formed by a 
productive rule.
If you take a huge corpus – say, 30, 50, or 100 million words – and 
look for words that occur only once, this will be a very good indicator 
of productivity. The formula that Baayen proposes is quite simple: pro-
ductivity  is equal to the number of words occurring only once in a 
corpus divided by the total number of tokens of words of the same 
morphological type:
(12)  = n1/N.
For example, if we are considering the type X-ness (e.g., redness), then 
we look for words that occur only once in our corpus (perhaps decided-
ness), and we divide the total number of such once-only words by the 
total number of occurrences of the type X-ness in our corpus. This will 
be our measure of the productivity of the type X-ness in our corpus. The 
larger and more representative of the language the corpus is, the closer 
this  number comes to the actual productivity of the pattern in the 
language.
Baayen’s formula does not take into consideration how many differ-
ent types of words there are, only the ratio of hapax legomena to actual 
words. If you find a high ratio of words that occur only once in a given 
pattern to the total number of words in the pattern, you demonstrate 
productivity. This is a formula with reasonable predictability and a 
technique for indirectly gaining access to what kind of linguistic knowl-
edge speakers possess.
There are some caveats to Baayen’s formula, as pointed out by Bauer 
(2001), who applied the formula to the Wellington Corpus of Written 
New Zealand English. In that corpus, the suffix -iana occurs only once, 
in the word Victoriana. If we apply the formula, the number of hapax 
legomena is one and the total number of tokens in the corpus is also 
one, so -iana appears to be totally productive – an apparently absurd 
result. This doesn’t reflect a problem with Baayen’s formula, as Bauer 
notes. Instead, the problem lies with the relatively small sample size. 

244  
MORPHOLOGICAL PRODUCTIVITY AND MENTAL LEXICON
The Wellington Corpus of Written New Zealand English contains not 
much more than a million words and only one example of the suffix 
-iana. This is not enough for our purposes. (Baayen’s original corpus 
was about 18 times larger.) It’s also important to keep in mind that the 
numbers we get by applying Baayen’s formula cannot be compared 
across corpora of different sizes. The same affix might garner different 
 results depending on the corpora used. This doesn’t invalidate the 
formula. It comes about because the  value produced is relative to the 
size of the corpus.
8.5.3 Regular and irregular English past tense verb forms
 
■
Jaeger et al. (1996) conducted a study using positron emission tomog-
raphy (PET). Positron emission tomography is a brain imaging tech-
nique that takes advantage of the fact that the brain is extremely hungry 
for glucose and oxygen, both of which are transported by the blood. 
Radioactive isotopes and glucose are injected into the arteries before 
subjects engage in specific cognitive activities. The radioactive glucose 
allows maps of brain activity based on blood flow to be produced. 
Jaeger et al. were interested in the brain activity associated with the 
processing of regular and irregular past tense verb forms in English. 
Should regular and irregular verbs be treated as one and the same by 
linguistic theories and processing models of language, or are they 
intrinsically different?
Early generative theories hypothesized that all past tense verbs, 
whether regular or irregular, are generated by rule (Chomsky and Halle 
1968). This approach is also found in some later work (for example, 
Halle and Mohanan 1985). A problem with it, however, is that the rules 
needed to generate the wealth of possible forms in English can result in 
very abstract underlying representations and few constraints on the 
actual rules themselves. Aronoff (1976) and Hooper (1976) argued that 
only rules formed by productive processes belong in the morphological 
component. Irregular words and words formed by unproductive proc-
esses are stored in the lexicon. When multiple words formed by unpro-
ductive processes exist, speakers are able to see the patterns that relate 
them, but this does not mean that the rule is active in the mental gram-
mar. Although none of these theories claimed to be processing models, 
all of them were based on beliefs about the workings of the human 
mind. Rule-based approaches to irregular and regular verb morphology 

MORPHOLOGICAL PRODUCTIVITY AND MENTAL LEXICON  245
assume that storage space for memorized forms in the brain is at a pre-
mium. Words are therefore argued to be stored in as economical a form 
as possible, with redundant properties eliminated. The second type of 
approach assumes that the brain is capable of memorizing enormous 
numbers of words and also that it is more efficient or economical to 
retrieve memorized lexical forms than to create them anew via a pleth-
ora of different rules (which, in the first approach, must also be 
stored).
Processing models fall into the same two general types. Some treat 
regular and irregular past tense verb forms as being processed by the 
same system. Some treat them as being processed differently from each 
other. More discussion can be found in Jaeger et al. (1996).
Jaeger et al. set out to shed light on these competing types of models, 
which they call single-system theories and dual-system theories (see 
single-route and dual-route models in 8.6 below). Nine subjects viewed 
five lists of words or nonce forms. They were required to give a spoken 
response to each form, one at a time. The five lists were as follows:
(13) 
List contents 
Required task
 
1: English verb forms 
Read them aloud
 
 
Ex: hit, clean, change, dance
 
2: Nonce forms 
Read them aloud
 
 
Ex: mab, gruck, prane, krent
 
3: Verb stems with regular past tenses 
Speak the past tense
 
 
Ex: pull, place, love, count
 
4: Verb stems with irregular past tenses 
Speak the past tense
 
 
Ex: fall, build, shoot, dig
 
5: Nonce verbs 
Speak the past tense
 
 
Ex. baff, pode, gloan, plem
The researchers collected data on the regions and levels of brain activ-
ity, the subjects’ responses, and their reaction time. The idea was that 
patterns of brain activity recorded in the PET scan would be similar for 
all lists if regular and irregular past tense forms are created by the same 
process. If, however, they are generated by different processes, the 
results of the PET scan would be different for the regular and irregular 
past tense formations.
When the study was completed, Jaeger and the others found that 
subjects spoke aloud the past tense forms of regular verbs significantly 
faster than irregular verbs. Response times for the past tense of nonce 

246  
MORPHOLOGICAL PRODUCTIVITY AND MENTAL LEXICON
forms were closest to those of regular verbs. When subjects were asked 
to give the past tense of irregular verb forms, their brains showed larger 
areas of brain activity. Finally, while there was overlap in the areas of 
the brain activated by each activity, it was also the case that the regular 
verb task and the irregular verb task each activated different areas of 
the brain, as well. These results support dual-system theories that claim 
that regular and irregular past tense verb forms are generated by differ-
ent mechanisms.
Seidenberg and Hoeffner (1998) criticize Jaeger and her colleagues 
for presenting regular verb forms and irregular verb forms in com-
pletely separate lists. Since the regular verb forms all work the same 
way, it could be that the subjects predicted the process they had to apply 
and therefore computed them faster than the irregular verbs, which fell 
into no such pattern. Jaeger et al. (1998) disagree with the criticism. This 
contention, however, highlights the care with which experiments must 
be designed. Researchers must try to identify flaws in their experimen-
tal design and correct them prior to executing the study. It also under-
scores the need for multiple studies before we draw hard conclusions 
about the mechanisms of morphological productivity. Any given study 
can advance our understanding of morphological productivity without 
being the last word on the subject. There is a great deal of value in stud-
ies that ask new questions or try out new ways of testing hypotheses. 
Design errors may or may not influence a given set of results. When 
they do, they can often be corrected in follow-up studies, which are just 
as essential to advancing our knowledge.
8.6 The Mental Lexicon, Psycholinguistics, 
 
■
and Neurolinguistics
Studies of the sort just discussed have goals beyond linguistic descrip-
tion and aim rather to describe what is actually going on inside the 
head of a language user when they use complex words. Research about 
what goes on inside people’s heads when they process language is usu-
ally called psycholinguistics, though when the research involves meas-
uring neurological activity, as much modern research does, then it may 
also be termed neurolinguistics or cognitive neuroscience. The goal of 
psycholinguistic and neurolinguistic research on morphology is to 
understand exactly how the mental lexicon works, the lexicon that 
all language users store in their brains. Jarema and Libben (2007) is a 

MORPHOLOGICAL PRODUCTIVITY AND MENTAL LEXICON  247
collection of articles on the mental lexicon from a variety of perspec-
tives. Pinker (1999) is a very lively and informal presentation of the major 
issues in the field. Aitchison (2003) is a more general introduction.
It is important to remember in discussions of the mental lexicon that 
we must distinguish the lexicon itself from how it is used by the speaker 
or hearer. Most studies of the mental lexicon are concerned with word 
recognition, a classic problem in psychology: How do people associate 
the speech or writing signal with the entries in their mental lexicon? 
Until very recently most word recognition studies dealt mostly with 
written words, not speech. Psychologists were interested in how people 
recognize words, both their sound and their meaning, when they read. 
Only in the last twenty years or so have psycholinguists turned their 
attention to spoken word recognition, which, for linguists at least, is a 
much more interesting and certainly more basic problem than reading. 
After all, as linguists have known for over a century, the primary form 
of language is spoken (or signed) and written language is secondary. 
The basic and universal task of word recognition is thus spoken word 
recognition. But from an experimental point of view, it has always been 
much easier to deal with written text than with speech, which is why it 
is only recently, with the advent of tools for regularizing the speech 
signal, that those psycholinguists have begun to turn to spoken lan-
guage recognition.
The other side of accessing the mental lexicon, and in some sense the 
opposite or reverse of word recognition, is word production. When a 
person speaks, how does that person know what words to use, the 
words that will eventually come out of his or her mouth? This is a much 
more difficult problem than word recognition and has received much 
less attention from psycholinguists (the classic presentation is Levelt 
1989). Most psycholinguists assume that there is only one mental lexi-
con and that both word recognition and word production access this 
same lexicon, though in different ways. From an experimental perspec-
tive, though, the mental lexicon is not something that we can study 
directly. We study it rather only through the intermediaries of produc-
tion and recognition, both of which must access this dictionary hidden 
deeply within our heads.
To understand what sorts of issues might arise in the study of the 
mental lexicon, let’s look at some of the aspects of Kujamaat Jóola that 
we have discussed throughout the book. Consider vowel harmony first. 
As we saw in chapter 3, the vowels of Kujamaat Jóola fall into two sets, 
tense and lax, and all the vowels in a word must be either tense or lax. 

248  
MORPHOLOGICAL PRODUCTIVITY AND MENTAL LEXICON
Furthermore, when a suffix is added to a word, the vowel of the suffix 
may be either tense or lax, depending on the vowels of the stem. 
However, if a suffix contains a tense vowel, then the vowels of the stem 
must also become tense. Overall, tense vowels win: as long as a com-
plex word contains one tense vowel, all its vowels must become tense.
There are several conceivable ways in which those stems and suffixes 
that alternate between tense and lax could be represented in a person’s 
mental lexicon. Since morphemes with only tense vowels never alter-
nate, it is reasonable to assume that these morphemes have only one 
form in the mental lexicon. But other morphemes sometimes have lax 
vowels and sometimes tense vowels. We could say that each of these 
morphemes has two alternative forms (allomorphs) in the mental lexi-
con and that the form with lax vowels is selected just in case there are 
no tense vowels in the word. Or we could say that there is a mental 
operation that makes lax vowels tense if there are tense vowels in the 
same word. A psycholinguist or neurolinguist would ask how these dif-
ferent systems might be encoded in a person’s brain and would want to 
devise experimental tests and measures for determining whether a par-
ticular mechanism is actually at work. Remember also that speakers of 
Kujamaat Jóola are aware of the tense–lax distinction and differ in their 
use of tense and lax vowels. How could this awareness be represented 
in a mental lexicon?
What about inflection and derivation? As we noted in chapter 7, the 
description of Kujamaat Jóola verbs is the most difficult part of this 
book. As outlined in that chapter, a Kujamaat Jóola verb has many 
forms, with two prefix slots and three suffix slots. It must agree with the 
noun class of its subject (chapter 6), and there are 19 noun classes 
( chapter 2), so every verb has up to 19 different prefixed forms solely on 
account of noun class agreement, and it also has a number of distinct 
forms if the subject is a pronoun (some of which have a suffix as well as 
a prefix). Verbs can also include bound object pronouns, which are suf-
fixes. And there are prefixes and suffixes that mark categories such as 
aspect, negation, emphasis, and various types of subordinate clauses. 
As a result, every single Kujamaat Jóola verb has several hundred forms 
in its paradigm.
Turning now to derivation, at the end of chapter 5 we discussed a 
number of productive verbal derivational affixes in Kujamaat Jóola, 
each of which can be used productively to form a new verb. For 
example, the suffix -en is causative; we can take a verb root like j
c
j 
‘gather, assemble (intransitive)’ and add -en to it to get the verb j
c
j-en 

MORPHOLOGICAL PRODUCTIVITY AND MENTAL LEXICON  249
‘gather, assemble (transitive)’ as in the infinitive ka-j
c
j-en ‘to cause 
people to assemble’. We can then take this verb and add to it the 
nominalizer -a, resulting in the noun ka-j
c
j-en-a ‘gatherer of people, 
leader who brings people together by force of charisma’. How does a 
speaker produce these two forms, the complex verb and noun, and 
are they both in the mental lexicon of a speaker of Kujamaat Jóola?
In chapter 2, we defined the lexicon as “a list of forms that you know” 
and said that it was “equivalent to your linguistic memory.” 
Psycholinguists take a somewhat broader view. For them, the question 
of interest is how people store and produce the forms of their language. 
What does this question mean for the inflectional and derivational 
forms of Kujamaat Jóola that we have just discussed? Given that every 
Kujamaat Jóola verb has several hundred potential forms, how are 
these forms stored in the mental lexicon? Does every speaker store sev-
eral hundred different forms for every verb? If so, then the speaker 
must also have some mental mechanism for deciding which of these 
several hundred to choose on any given occasion. Or does a speaker 
store only the stem of the verb and then produce whatever form is 
needed at any given moment, on the fly? We certainly know that speak-
ers and signers do not hesitate when speaking or signing, no matter 
how complex the morphology of their language. A Kujamaat Jóola 
speaker does not pause for a moment or even a microsecond before a 
particularly complex verb to either choose or compute the correct form. 
So whatever language users are doing, it is being done at lightning 
speed. Similarly, when a Kujamaat Jóola speaker uses the verb ka-j
c
j-en 
‘to cause people to assemble’, is the speaker recalling this verb from 
memory or constructing it?
We can sometimes call on purely linguistic evidence to at least sug-
gest what is the right answer to some of these questions. For example, 
the noun ka-j
c
j-en-a ‘gatherer of people, leader who brings people 
together by force of charisma’ is not purely compositional or predicta-
ble in meaning. It does not simply mean ‘gatherer of people’ but has the 
added meaning of ‘leader who brings people together by force of cha-
risma’. The fact that this word has this  particular idiosyncratic meaning 
tells us that the word must have its own entry along with its special 
meaning in a speaker’s mental lexicon, and cannot be produced on the 
fly. And if the noun ka-j
c
j-en-a is stored, then presumably so too must be 
the verb ka-j
c
j-en that it is formed from.
Semantics alone thus provides some information about which forms 
must be stored. But semantics does not tell us how they are stored. Let 

250  
MORPHOLOGICAL PRODUCTIVITY AND MENTAL LEXICON
us return to the same three lexemes, the basic verb root j
c
j, ‘gather, 
assemble (intransitive)’, the complex verb j
c
j-en ‘gather, assemble 
(transitive)’ and the noun ka-j
c
j-en-a ‘gatherer of people’. Are these 
stored as three separate lexical entries or are they stored together in 
one place? If they are separate entries, are the complex forms all stored 
as complex structures, in the way that we have represented them (by 
using hyphens to separate their parts), or are they stored without struc-
ture? Most linguists would probably feel that they are stored as com-
plex structures, but there is no purely linguistic evidence to tell us 
whether that is so. Similar questions can be asked about all the inflec-
tional forms of a single verb or noun. Are they all stored? And if so, are 
they stored together or separately and are they stored with or without 
structure?
As it happens, a fairly broad consensus has emerged among psy-
cholinguists in the last decade that “morphological considerations 
need to be introduced into any model of the mental lexicon” (Frost et 
al. 2005: 1). In other words, regardless of whether any particular 
words are stored or not and regardless of whether related words are 
stored together or separately, they do have morphological structure. 
But as to whether related words are stored together or separately, we 
just don’t know.
Even if everyone agrees that all words in the mental lexicon have 
morphological structure, many other issues remain undecided. One of 
the most central is that of the number of different mechanisms speakers 
use to access their mental lexicons, either in recognition or in produc-
tion. The most obvious answer is that there is only one mechanism, but 
in fact, of the theories of accessing the mental lexicon that are out there 
in the literature, we can identify two broad types, called the single-route 
and dual-route models. A very accessible account of both model types 
is provided by Pinker (1999).
It is easy to imagine how a single-route model might work but what, 
we might ask, are the two routes in the dual-route model? They are 
whole-word recognition (sometimes called rote recognition) and rec-
ognition that uses the morphological system of the language (some-
times called rule-based recognition). The basic idea is that, while 
unanalyzed words like be and irregular words like am are recognized as 
whole words, morphologically regular words like being whose internal 
organization is determined by the morphological system of the language 
(in this case English) are recognized by a psychological analogue of this 
morphological system. The model thus instantiates the idea that people 

MORPHOLOGICAL PRODUCTIVITY AND MENTAL LEXICON  251
make a sharp distinction between regular and irregular (rule and rote) 
in accessing their mental lexicon. There is a twist, though: the dual-
route model claims that a person uses both methods (rule and rote) at 
the same time when recognizing a word. There is a race between the two 
and whichever method is faster wins.
For a word like be or am there is no contest. The rote method will 
always win, because the word must be stored as an unanalyzable 
whole and no rule is applicable. At the other extreme, with a word 
like unregisterability, which is totally new to us as we write it and 
hence could not be in our mental lexicon, the only way we could rec-
ognize it as a word of English would be to use the morphology of 
English to analyze its structure and accept it as valid (which is pre-
cisely what we must have done in making the word up just now). So 
the rule mechanism must be at work. For words in between, though, 
matters begin to get interesting. These in-between words are morpho-
logically complex but not unknown to us. Here, frequency or famili-
arity begins to play a role.
It is well known that the more frequent or familiar a word is, the 
faster a speaker can recognize it (Aitchison 2003). An English speaker 
will recognize clean more quickly than glean, even though the two 
differ phonologically in only one distinctive feature, because the first 
is about thirty times more frequent than the second. Most of the 500 
most frequent words in English are simple, but even if a word is 
morphologically complex and perfectly regular, it may still be 
common. Francis and Kucˇera (1982) put the word development at 
number 250 in their list, ahead of develop at 311. All else being equal, 
on the basis of frequency alone, one might expect a speaker to 
respond more quickly to development than to develop, even though the 
first is technically derived from the second. According to the dual-
route model, this is because, even though development is a regular, 
morphologically complex word, it may be stored in the mental lexi-
con and, because it is frequent enough, the rote method of lexical 
access, which is sensitive to frequency, will get to it faster than the 
rule-based method. In this way, a derived word may be detected 
more quickly than its base.
The single-route model can also accommodate the difference between 
rule and rote along with frequency effects, but it does so by assuming 
that the rule–rote difference is more gradual. The two models both have 
strong adherents, and their adherents use more and more sophisticated 
methods to argue their respective sides, including a variety of types of 

252  
MORPHOLOGICAL PRODUCTIVITY AND MENTAL LEXICON
brain-scanning techniques, but the jury is still out. Whichever model 
wins in the end, we hope that we have shown our readers that the prob-
lem of the mental lexicon is fascinating.
Unfortunately, almost all the psycholinguistic and neurolinguistic 
research that has been done to date is based on English or other 
European languages whose inflectional and derivational morphology 
is fairly simple. Let us hope that researchers can broaden the scope of 
their work in the future to include languages like Kujamaat Jóola, whose 
complex morphological systems may help to find answers more quickly 
and more certainly than the relatively simple systems that most research 
on the mental lexicon is devoted to. [Exercise 13]
8.7 Conclusion
 
■
You should now have a general understanding of morphological pro-
ductivity and the phonological, morphological, syntactic, and semantic 
factors that constrain it. We have also introduced you to various ways 
in which morphological productivity can be tested and to models of the 
mental lexicon. This is one of the newest and fastest-developing areas 
of linguistics.
This chapter departs from previous ones in not having a section on 
Kujamaat Jóola. The reason for the lacuna is simply that we do not 
have access to the sort of data that would allow us to discuss produc-
tivity in Kujamaat Jóola. Nor are there enough Kujamaat Jóola speak-
ers living in close proximity to experimental laboratories of the sort 
that are capable of modern psycholinguistic and neurolinguistic 
experimentation. We hope, though, that the small window that we 
have opened will inspire a student to make the journey to Basse 
Casamance that we have not been able to undertake and to begin the 
study of morphological productivity and the mental lexicon in 
Kujamaat Jóola.
Our hope is not entirely baseless. One of us once published a couple 
of articles on Arapesh, a language of Papua New Guinea, based entirely 
on data from the one grammar of the language, published by Reo 
Fortune in the 1940s. Lise Dobrin, then a graduate student in Chicago, 
read the articles and became so fascinated that she went off to Papua 
New Guinea and spent 18 months studying and analyzing the language. 
She wrote her dissertation on Arapesh and continues to do research on 
the language and the community. So keep us posted.

MORPHOLOGICAL PRODUCTIVITY AND MENTAL LEXICON  253
Further Reading
 
■
Aitchison, Jean. 2003. Words in the Mind: An Introduction to the Mental Lexicon, 
third edition. Oxford: Blackwell.
Bauer, Laurie. 2001. Morphological Productivity. Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press.
Frost, Ram, Jonathan Grainger, and Kathleen Rastle. 2005. Current issues in 
morphological processing: an introduction. Language and Cognitive Processes 
20: 1–5.
Gordon, Peter and Michele Miozzo. 2008. Can word formation be understood or 
understanded by semantics alone? Cognitive Psychology 56(1): 30–72.
Hay, Jennifer B. and R. Harald Baayen. 2005. Shifting paradigms: gradient 
structure in morphology. Trends in Cognitive Sciences 9(7): 342–8.
Jarema, Gonia and Gary Libben. 2007. The Mental Lexicon: Core Perspectives. 
Amsterdam: Elsevier.
Levelt, Willem. 1989. Speaking: From Intention to Articulation. Cambridge, MA: 
MIT Press.
Pinker, Steven. 1999. Words and Rules. New York: HarperCollins.
Plag, Ingo and Harald Baayen. 2009. Suffix ordering and morphological 
processing. Language 85(1): 109–52.

254  
MORPHOLOGICAL PRODUCTIVITY AND MENTAL LEXICON
Exercises
1. Ask two native English speakers who do not study linguistics to 
conjugate the following novel verbs. In class, discuss the results. 
Were all informants in agreement on the conjugation of each verb? 
If not, what explains the variation? What do the results of the 
experiment tell you about productive English verbal inflection?
 
e.g.: present: I become, she becomes; past: I/she became; past 
participle [I/she have/has] become
a. treg
b. shing
c. lunacrize
d. plake
2. Highth ‘height, the quality of being high’ has been attested in 
English for centuries, and it occurs today in various dialects of 
English. How might its occurrence today be facilitated by other 
forms in the language?
3. Coolth has also been attested in English for centuries. Among the 
attestations listed in the Oxford English Dictionary are lines from 
Rudyard Kipling (1890) and J. R. R. Tolkien (1926). Look it up either 
in the Oxford English Dictionary or online (i.e., using an internet 
search engine) and comment on your findings. Is coolth equivalent to 
coolness? Would you use coolth? If so, in what types of situations?
4. Use the following list to come up with a phonological hypothesis 
regarding constraints on –ly suffixation in English. (We refer here to 
the –ly that forms adverbs from adjectives.) Formulate your hypoth-
esis as an argument, supplying additional forms of your own.
a. quietly
b. poorly
c. neatly
d. slowly
e. prettily
f. 
ungrammatically
g. vocally
h. ? sillily
i. 
? uglily
j. 
? kindlily
k. ? friendlily

MORPHOLOGICAL PRODUCTIVITY AND MENTAL LEXICON  255
5. Use the following forms to come up with a hypothesis regarding 
the phonological constraint on -en suffixation in English. Formulate 
your hypothesis as an argument, supplying additional forms of 
your own if necessary.
a. blacken
b. whiten
c. redden
d. sadden
e. neaten
f. 
pinken
g. deafen
h. loosen
i. 
roughen
j. 
*happy-en
k. *orangen
l. 
*yellowen
m. *greenen
n. *bluen
6. Signs in the Pittsburgh airport over moving walkways instruct “walk-
ers” to keep left and “standees” to keep right. One of the definitions 
given for standee in the Oxford English Dictionary is “one who is 
compelled to stand; spec[ifically] a standing passenger in a public 
vehicle.” List each of the three semantic factors named by Barker 
(1998) in his analysis of -ee suffixation and determine whether stan-
dee meets each of them. Then summarize your findings by stating 
whether or not standee fits into Barker’s analysis of -ee suffixation.
7. We hope that by now you realize that “Never say never” could eas-
ily be about morphology. The following words are all ones that we 
have heard or seen written:
 
linguisticky, democratical, explanify
 
On the basis of the discussion in section 8.3, why would we not 
expect these words to occur? Formulate a hypothesis to account 
for why they nevertheless do.
8. Consider the following examples from child language acquisition, 
first presented in chapter 4 (data from Clark 1995: 402). Why are 
these examples less likely to be produced by adult speakers? 

256  
MORPHOLOGICAL PRODUCTIVITY AND MENTAL LEXICON
 
(Consider each form separately.) If you consider blocking the 
explanation for any of them, identify the existing form that might 
serve as a blocker.
a. SC (2;4, as his mother prepared to brush his hair): Don’t hair me.
b. JA (2;6, seated in a rocking chair): Rocker me, mommy.
c. SC (2;7, hitting baby sister with toy broom): I broomed her.
d. SC (2;9, playing with toy lawnmower): I’m lawning.
e. DM (3;0, pretending to be Superman): I’m supermanning.
f. FR (3;3, of a doll that disappeared): I guess she magicked.
g. KA (4;0, pretending to be a doctor fixing a broken arm): We’re 
gonna cast that.
h. RT (4;0): Is Anna going to babysitter me?
i. 
CE (4;11): We already decorationed our tree.
j. 
KA (5;0): Will you chocolate my milk?
 9. Which of the following English prefixes are productive? Of those 
that are productive, do some seem more productive than others? 
Give examples to support your answer.
a. re- (e.g., recreate)
b. un- (adjectival prefix; e.g., unstoppable)
c. for- (e.g., forgive)
d. hyper- (e.g., hyperactive)
10. Which of the following English suffixes are productive? Of those 
that are productive, do some seem more productive than others? 
Give examples to support your answer.
a. -ship (e.g., partisanship)
b. -ance (e.g., remittance)
c. -wise (e.g., weatherwise)
d. -ly (adverbial suffix; e.g., quietly)
e. -ling (e.g., earthling)
f. -ster (e.g., youngster)
g. -dom (e.g., kingdom)
11. The following words were all built on the word alcoholic. What is 
special about the affixation process here? Can you create another 
word on the same model?
 
workaholic, chocoholic, shopoholic

MORPHOLOGICAL PRODUCTIVITY AND MENTAL LEXICON  257
12. English -er suffixation is productive. Determine what the -er-suffixed 
nouns that correspond to the following words or phrases would be, 
when possible. Discuss your findings.
a. grip
b. gurgle
c. delouse
d. spiff up
e. cool down
f. inspect rubbish
g. eat squid
13. Think of an issue in morphological productivity that you might 
want to test experimentally, along the lines of the studies dis-
cussed in this chapter. It may involve inflection or derivation. The 
language in question may be English or another one of your 
choice. First state a hypothesis. Then outline an objective, verifi-
able, and reproducible method that you would use to test it.
NOTES
1 Whether or not a Latin noun makes its plural in -i generally depends on its 
declension type. That is why we find choruses, campuses, and geniuses next to 
alumni, foci, and nuclei. Though people often pluralize syllabus as syllabi, this 
was not its Latin plural. It was a fourth declension noun, meaning its plural 
was syllabu-s. Ceratopus is in fact not even Latin in origin, but instead Greek. 
The final syllable (-pus) is the same Greek root meaning ‘foot’ that is found 
in octopus. The etymologically correct plural is therefore ceratopodes, similar 
to the etymologically correct plural of octopus, which is octopodes, though 
most people think it should be octopi or octopuses.
2 This definition is from the American Heritage Dictionary.

Glossary
ablaut See apophony.
absolutive In ergative case systems, the case associated with the 
object of a transitive verb or the subject of an intransitive one.
accusative The morphological case of nouns, pronouns, adjectives, 
and participles that occupy the position of object to the verb or some 
prepositions. Nouns and pronouns are typically assumed to receive 
accusative case by government, while adjectives and participles receive 
it by agreement with the noun.
acronym A word derived by taking the initial letter of all or most 
words in a string and pronouncing them together, e.g., scuba < self-
contained underwater breathing apparatus.
active See voice.
adjective A word that can function as the head of an adjective phrase 
(AdjP). Adjectives qualify or describe the referents of nouns. Examples 
of adjectives include large, quiet, indispensable, and ambiguous.
adverb A word that modifies a verb, an adjective, another adverb, or 
a preposition, or a larger unit such as a phrase or sentence. It often 
expresses some relation of manner or quality, time, or degree. Examples 
include quickly, often, carefully, soon, and very.
affix A bound morpheme that attaches to a root or stem to form a new 
lexeme (derived form) or an inflected form or stem of an existing 
lexeme.
agglutinative Adjective applied to languages or to morphology char-
acterized by words containing several morphemes, of which one 
What is Morphology?, 2nd edition, by Mark Aronoff and Kirsten Fudeman © 2011 
Mark Aronoff and Kirsten Fudeman.

GLOSSARY  259
belongs to a lexical category and the others are clearly identifiable 
affixes, each with a single semantic function.
agreement The process by which one lexical category is inflected to 
express the properties of another, or the result thereof, e.g., a verb bear-
ing person and number morphology that reflect those of the subject. 
Also called concord.
allomorphs Two or more instances of a given sign (morpheme) with 
different shapes; variants. E.g., [t], [d], and [
e
d] are allomorphs of the 
English past tense suffix.
analogy The creation of linguistic forms based on a proportion A : B :: 
C : X.
analytic A language whose words usually contain only one morpheme.
animate gender In languages that divide nouns into classes on the 
basis of animacy, the noun class that consists primarily of words denot-
ing living things. Animate gender contrasts with inanimate gender.
apophony Systematic vowel changes in a root that signal a morpho-
logical contrast; also referred to as internal change. In Germanic lan-
guages such as English, this process is usually called ablaut, e.g. sing, 
sang, sung; swim, swam, swum. Ablaut may be accompanied by suffixa-
tion, as in the past participles of the following sets: give, gave, given; write, 
wrote, written.
archetype See prototype.
aspect An inflectional category that encodes the relationship of an 
event or action to the passage of time, especially in reference to its dura-
tion, completion, or repetition. For example, the perfect is a verb form 
that expresses an action or state that has ceased or been completed at 
the time of speaking or a time spoken of.
assigned Said of inflectional categories, such as case, that are not 
inherent to a word, but that are the result of government or concord 
with another element in an utterance.
assimilation Said to occur when one segment takes on one or more 
phonetic characteristics of another one, such as nasality, place of articu-
lation, or voicing. Progressive assimilation is said to take place when 
the characteristic spreads forward. Regressive assimilation is said to 
occur when the characteristic spreads backwards.

260  
GLOSSARY
augmentative A derived form that indicates an increase in size, force, 
or intensity as compared to the base word; the morpheme that results 
in such a derived form.
backformation A morphological process in which a real or imagined 
affix is removed from an existing word to create another, e.g., editor > 
edit, liaison > liaise.
base The root or stem to which an affix attaches.
blend A word derived by combining parts of two or more other 
words, e.g., smog < smoke and fog.
blocking The process by which a potential word is prevented from 
occurring in a language because another form with the same meaning 
and function already exists.
bound form A morpheme that may not stand on its own and must be 
attached to a stem.
case A morphological category that encodes information about a 
word’s grammatical role, e.g., subject, direct object, indirect object, pos-
sessor.
circumfix A bound morpheme made up of two parts, one that occurs 
before and one that occurs after the root.
citation form Term that refers to the form of a lexeme’s paradigm that 
is used by linguists to refer to the lexeme. Morphologists often give the 
citation form in small capital letters.
class 1 affixes See primary affixes.
class 2 affixes See secondary affixes.
clipping A word-formation process by which a word is created by 
lopping off part of another word, e.g., Will < William.
clitic Morphemes that behave syntactically as words, but, unlike 
words, cannot stand alone phonologically and must be incorporated 
into the prosodic structure of an adjacent word.
closing suffix A suffix that may not be followed by any others. 
Typically, when we say that a derivational suffix is a closing suffix, we 
mean only that it cannot be followed by another derivational suffix. It 
may be followed by inflectional morphology.

GLOSSARY  261
coda The consonant or consonants that follow the nucleus in some 
syllables.
cognitive neuroscience The branch of neuroscience that studies the 
biological foundations of mental phenomena.
coinage The creation of a new word not by any derivational process. 
Also called word manufacture.
competence The knowledge that speakers have of their language. 
Contrasts with performance.
complex word A morphological form that consists of more than one 
morpheme, whether it be two or more stems (compound word) or a 
stem plus one or more affixes, e.g., bookstore, optimality.
compositional Defined (e.g., a word) entirely in terms of its parts.
compound A derived form resulting from the combination of two or 
more lexemes, e.g., space + ship > spaceship.
concatenative Term that describes morphology that builds words by 
the linear addition of morphemes.
concord See agreement.
conjugation The set of forms associated with a verbal lexeme.
content word A word such as calendar, sadness, die, speak, quiet, quickly, 
or tomorrow that refers to objects, events, and abstract concepts; con-
trasts with function word. Also called lexical word.
context-free Inflection that involves a simple directional mapping 
between a morphosyntactic feature and a particular phonological 
string. An example is the suffix -ing on present participles in English, 
because all present participles bear the same suffix. Contrasts with con-
text-sensitive inflection.
context-sensitive Said of inflection when the realization of a morpho-
syntactic feature varies. An example is past in English, which may be 
realized by ablaut, suppletion, or the addition of a suffix. Contrasts 
with context-free inflection.
contradictory negator Affix whose addition to a word X results in one 
that means ‘opposite of X’, e.g., un-, in-.
contrary negator See logical negator.

262  
GLOSSARY
conversion See zero-derivation.
cumulative exponence See exponence.
dative In languages with case, the one likely to be assigned to indirect 
objects.
declension In some languages, the inflection of nouns, pronouns, and 
adjectives for categories such as case, gender, and number.
derivation The creation of a new lexeme from one or more other lex-
emes through the application of some morphological process, such as 
affixation or compounding. Also called lexeme formation and word 
formation. Derivation contrasts with inflection.
dual See number.
dual-route models See single-route and dual-route models.
enclitic A clitic that attaches to the end of a word.
endocentric Said of compound words that have a head. For example, 
the head of school bus is bus; a school bus is a type of bus. See also head.
epenthesis A process that inserts a segment in a given environment. 
For example, native speakers of Spanish sometimes epenthesize an /e/ 
before sC clusters when speaking English, pronouncing squash as if it 
were esquash.
ergative The case associated with the subject of a transitive verb. In 
ergative case systems, subjects of intransitive verbs are assigned absol-
utive case.
evaluative domain The things in the extension of a noun which serve 
to evaluate it.
exaptation Said to occur when phonological material takes on a new 
function unrelated to its original and obsolete function.
exclusive Said of first person plural pronouns whose reference 
excludes the addressee.
exocentric Said of compound words without a head. For example, a 
hot dog is not a type of dog. See also head.
exponence The relation between a morpheme and its signified mean-
ing, which is simple if the meaning is a single concept, cumulative if the 

GLOSSARY  263
meaning is complex, or extended if more than one morpheme combine 
to denote a single concept.
exponent The marker of a given morphosyntactic feature. For exam-
ple, [s] is the exponent of plural in the word kits.
extended exponence See exponence.
extension The set of entities that a word or expression picks out in the 
world. The extension of the currency of the United States of America is 
dollar. The extension of dog would be all the entities to which this word 
refers (poodles, golden retrievers, etc.).
folk etymology A process by which the form of a word is altered to 
make it resemble a word or words which are better known and with 
which speakers may believe the word has a semantic relationship. For 
example, English cockroach comes from Spanish cucaracha. The term also 
refers to speculative or false etymologies based on superficial resem-
blance between forms.
free form A morpheme that can stand alone and/or whose position is 
not entirely fixed by neighboring elements, e.g., berry.
function word A word, such as a determiner, conjunction, or modal, 
that has a grammatical function and is best characterized by this func-
tion. Contrasts with content word.
fusional Characterized by the combination of two or more morpho-
syntactic features in a single morpheme; adjective applied to morpho-
logical systems where this type of morphology is pervasive.
gender See noun class.
genitive Morphological case that denotes possession, measurement, 
or source.
government Term referring to the ability of some elements of a sen-
tence to require other elements in the sentence to bear a certain mor-
phosyntactic feature although the first element itself does not seem to 
possess this feature, e.g., case assignment by verbs.
grammatical function change Alternations in the grammatical encod-
ing of referential expressions.
grammatical word A word that plays a distinct grammatical role 
within an utterance. Distinct grammatical words can belong to a single 

264  
GLOSSARY
lexeme. For example, the grammatical words sing and sings both belong 
to the lexeme sing. Also called morphosyntactic word.
hapax legomenon A form that occurs only once in a corpus (plural: 
hapax legomena). Comes from the Greek for ‘said once’.
head A word in a syntactic construction or a morpheme in a 
 morphological one that determines the grammatical function or mean-
ing of the construction as a whole. For example, house is the head of the 
noun phrase the red house, and read is the head of the word  unreadable.
head operation A morphological operation that acts upon the head or 
stem of a word. For example, man is the head of adman ‘a person who 
writes, solicits, or places advertisements’ (definition from the Merriam-
Webster Online Dictionary). The plural of this word is admen. The opera-
tion ‘make plural’ applies to the head of the word rather than to the 
word as a whole (*admans).
hiatus A situation in which two vowels, typically in different words 
or morphemes, come up against each other. Eliminated in many lan-
guages by epenthesis.
homonym One of two or more forms that sound the same but have 
different meanings, e.g., pear, pare. Also called homophones.
homophone See homonym.
host The element to which a clitic attaches.
imperfect In contrast to the perfect aspect (see aspect), which 
expresses the completedness of an action or state, the imperfect is a 
verb form that expresses an action or state that has not ceased or been 
completed. In many languages, the imperfect is used only to refer to 
actions or states in the past, and thus it encodes both tense and 
aspect.
inanimate gender See animate gender.
inclusive Said of first person plural pronouns whose reference 
includes the addressee.
infix An affix that surfaces within a morpheme.
inflection The formation of grammatical forms of a single lexeme. Is, 
are, and being are examples of inflected forms of the lexeme be.

GLOSSARY  265
inherent Said of inflection that is basic to a word and that does not 
have to be assigned under government or concord. An example is 
gender of nouns.
instrumental The case that expresses means.
integrity Refers to the inability of syntactic processes to apply to 
pieces of words.
internal change See apophony.
intransitive verb A verb that does not take a direct object, e.g., fall.
isolating Term applied to languages with little morphology, where 
grammatical concepts such as tense are expressed by separate 
words.
item-and-arrangement An approach to morphology in which words 
are broken up into their component morphemes.
item-and-process A processual approach to morphology. Instead of 
seeing complex words as arrangements of morphemes, item-and-
process sees a complex word as arising out of a simple form that has 
undergone one or more processes or functions.
level 1 affixes See primary affixes.
level 2 affixes See secondary affixes.
leveling A diachronic, or historical, process by which members in a 
paradigm become more similar to each other.
lexeme A word with a specific sound and a specific meaning. Its shape 
may vary depending on syntactic context. See also citation form.
lexeme formation See derivation.
lexical category Said of notions such as noun, verb, adjective, adverb, 
and preposition.
lexical stem Basic form of a lexeme.
lexical word See content word.
lexicon A speaker’s mental dictionary, containing information about 
the syntactic, semantic, phonological, and morphological representa-
tion of the words of the speaker’s language.

266  
GLOSSARY
loanword A word borrowed from one language into another, e.g., 
English words laissez-faire from French and cognoscenti from Italian.
locative The case that expresses location.
logical negator Affix whose addition to a word X results in one with 
the meaning ‘not X’, e.g., non-. Also called a contrary negator.
marked Said of a non-neutral case. For example, the passive voice is 
marked with respect to the active in most languages. Contrasts with 
unmarked.
mental lexicon See lexicon.
modal An auxiliary verb (see verb) that expresses grammatical 
mood.
monomorphemic Describes a word that consists of a single (i.e., unaf-
fixed) morpheme.
mood A set of morphological categories that express a speaker’s 
degree of commitment to the expressed proposition’s believability, 
obligatoriness, desirability, or reality.
morph The smallest grammatically significant part of a word. 
Generally used to refer to the form itself rather than to a set of forms 
with meaning and function.
morpheme A word or a meaningful piece of a word that cannot be 
divided into smaller meaningful parts. Examples include school, read, or 
the re- and -ing of rereading.
morphological productivity See productivity.
morphology The branch of linguistics that deals with words and 
word formation; the mental system involved with word formation.
morphophonemics The phonological patterning of morphemes.
morphophonology An area of linguistics that deals with the relation-
ship and interactions between morphology (the structure of words) and 
phonology (the patterning of sounds).
morphosyntactic features Notions which are relevant to both mor-
phology and syntax, such as case.
morphosyntactic properties See morphosyntactic features.

GLOSSARY  267
morphosyntactic word See grammatical word.
morphosyntax An area of linguistics that deals with the relationship 
and interactions between morphology (the structure of words) and syntax 
(the structure of larger utterances, such as phrases and  sentences).
motivated Said of signs when there is a relationship between the form 
of the sign and its meaning.
neurolinguistics The study of how language is represented and proc-
essed in the brain.
nominative In languages with grammatical case, the one typically 
used for subjects.
nonce form A word that appears only once in a given corpus or that 
was created on the fly and used only once.
non-separability A property of words. Refers to the observation that they 
cannot be broken up by the insertion of segmental or phrasal material.
noun A word that can function as the syntactic head of a noun phrase 
(NP). For example, book is the head of the noun phrase this excellent book 
about Mars. In many languages, nouns inflect for number, gender, and 
case.
noun class A grammatical grouping of nouns in a language on the 
basis of semantics, phonological shape, arbitrary characteristics, or a 
combination thereof. Also called gender. For example, Spanish and 
French have two noun classes, or genders, referred to as masculine and 
feminine. The term gender is sometimes also applied to a pairing of a 
singular and plural noun class.
nucleus The core of a syllable, usually a simple vowel or a diphthong. 
All syllables must have nuclei.
number The morphological categories that express contrasts involv-
ing countable quantity, which may be singular if the category is associ-
ated with nouns with a single referent; dual if associated with two 
referents; trial if associated with three referents; paucal if associated 
with a small number of referents; or plural if associated with more than 
one referent. Languages vary in which of these categories they encode.
onset The onset of a syllable is made up of the first consonant or con-
sonants. Not all syllables have onsets.

268  
GLOSSARY
overextension Term that refers to the use of a word to refer to objects 
or individuals that are typically covered by the word, as well as to 
others that are perceptually similar. For example, a child might use the 
word dog to refer to all animals that walk on all fours.
paradigm A set of all the inflected forms that a lexeme assumes.
partial suppletion See suppletion.
passive See voice.
paucal See number.
perfect See aspect.
performance How speakers use their language in real-life situa-
tions. Performance may be adversely affected by many factors, 
including fatigue, nervousness, or drunkenness. Contrasts with com-
petence.
person Any of the three relations underlying discourse, which are 
distinguished in all languages: first person (speaker); second person 
(addressee); third person (neither the speaker nor the addressee).
phonological word A word that behaves as a unit for certain phono-
logical processes, including stress assignment.
phonology The branch of linguistics that deals with the patterning of 
sounds; the mental system that governs such patterning of sounds.
phonotactic constraints Constraints on the phonological shape of 
stems and words.
plural See number.
polysemy A situation in which a word has more than one related 
meaning.
polysynthetic A language in which single words are able to express 
complex notions through the addition of inflectional and derivational 
morphemes to stems. The same meaning might be expressed by multi-
word sentences in a more analytic language.
portmanteau A morpheme that expresses more than one morphosyn-
tactic feature, such as both present and first person singular; a blend 
such as chortle, from chuckle and snort.

GLOSSARY  269
positron emission tomography (PET) A brain-imaging technique that 
uses radioactive isotopes to measure cerebral blood flow in order to pro-
duce maps of brain activity associated with specific cognitive functions.
potential word A form that could be a word but is not attested.
pragmatics Study of language within a social and discourse context.
prefix An affix that is attached to the front of its base.
primary affixes Affixes that interact phonologically with their stem, 
e.g., causing a stress shift in the stem. They typically occur closer to the 
root than secondary affixes.
proclitic A clitic that attaches to the front of its host.
productivity The relative freedom with which a morphological proc-
ess may occur. For example, blending is a productive process in English, 
but infixation is not.
progressive assimilation See assimilation.
prototype The best exemplar of a concept. Also called an archetype. 
For example, in the United States, cheddar and American cheese are 
prototypical cheeses, whereas Brie is not.
psycholinguistics The study of the mental processes and representa-
tions involved in language comprehension and production.
reduplication A morphological process that repeats all or part of a 
given base.
regressive assimilation See assimilation.
reversative A morpheme that reverses the meaning of the stem. For 
example, the verbal prefix un- of English has the basic meaning ‘undo 
the action of the verb’.
root The basic form from which another is derived by internal change 
or by addition of inflectional or derivational morphemes.
root-and-pattern A type of morphology found especially in the 
Semitic languages where roots consist of a series of consonants, and 
derived and inflected forms are created by superimposing the root on a 
vocalic pattern. The pattern may also include certain consonants, 
although these can sometimes be analyzed as prefixes or suffixes.

270  
GLOSSARY
rote recognition The recognition of whole words. Contrasts with 
rule-based recognition.
rule-based recognition The recognition of words through the appli-
cation of knowledge of the morphological system of a given language. 
Contrasts with rote recognition.
secondary affixes Affixes that do not trigger the types of changes in 
the stem associated with primary affixes. They typically occur farther 
away from the stem than primary affixes.
semantics The branch of linguistics that deals with meaning in human 
language.
semantic type Used of the entity or relation (real or imaginary) in the 
world to which a word refers.
sign A unit of communication structure that consists of two parts: a 
signifier (such as a sequence of sounds [tri]) and something signified 
(such as a tree in the real world).
signified The concept that is denoted by a sound sequence.
signifier A particular sequence of sounds that denotes an entity or 
concept.
simple exponence See exponence.
simple word A word that is not morphologically complex, i.e., one 
that has not been formed by any process such as affixation, ablaut, etc.
single-route and dual-route models Competing models of how 
speakers of a language comprehend morphologically complex 
words. In a dual-route model, these words are accessed sometimes 
from the mental lexicon as whole units and sometimes in terms of 
their component morphemes. A single-route model uses only one 
mechanism.
singular See number.
stem The part of a word to which affixes attach.
stress Phonological prominence associated with syllables. Its phonetic 
correlates differ from language to language, but may be realized as 
increased duration, increased loudness, or heightened pitch, for example.
suffix An affix that is attached to the end of its base.

GLOSSARY  271
suppletion The replacement of a form that is missing from an inflec-
tional paradigm by one with a different root, e.g., went (exists alongside 
go, goes, going, gone). Thought, caught exemplify partial suppletion 
because, synchronically, their roots are significantly but not completely 
different from think and catch.
syncretism Said to occur when a single inflected form corresponds to 
more than one set of morphosyntactic features.
syntax The branch of linguistics that deals with phrase and sentence for-
mation; the mental system that underlies phrase and sentence formation.
synthetic A language whose words usually contain more than one 
morpheme.
tense The inflectional category that indicates the time an event or 
action took place relative to the time of utterance.
token An individual occurrence of a word or variable.
tone Pitch differences, i.e., differences in the rate of vibration of the 
vocal folds, that result in a difference in meaning.
transitive verb A verb that takes a direct object, e.g., write.
trial See number.
truncation Shortening of a word or stem by removing one end and 
leaving the rest intact.
typology The systematic comparison of languages according to their 
structures.
umlaut The effect of a vowel on the vowel of another syllable, usually 
one that precedes it. This term is used even when the vowel that origi-
nally triggered the change has been lost due to language change (e.g., 
foot, feet). Umlaut is considered a special type of ablaut or apophony.
underextension Term that refers to the use of a word to refer to only 
a subset of its actual referents. For example, a child might underextend 
the word dog by using it to refer to more typical examples of the species 
such as golden or Labrador retrievers, but not to varieties like Chihuahua 
or Pekingese.
unmarked The more neutral case of two or more. For example, the 
active voice is unmarked with respect to the passive in most languages. 
Contrasts with marked.

272  
GLOSSARY
unmotivated Said of signs when the relationship between the form of 
the sign and its meaning is arbitrary. Most linguistic signs are unmoti-
vated.
variable In an experiment, something that varies.
variants Two or more instances of a given sign with different shapes; 
allomorphs.
verb A word that can be the head of a verb phrase (VP). Verbs denote 
actions (e.g., jump), sensations (e.g., taste), and states (e.g., understand). 
In many languages, verbs inflect for tense, mood, aspect, or agreement 
with their subject. We can distinguish between auxiliary and main 
verbs. Auxiliary verbs (also called helping verbs) typically accompany 
another verb and express person, number, mood, or tense. In the sen-
tence He is looking at me, is is an auxiliary verb, and looking is the main 
verb.
voice Distinction in the forms of a verb to indicate the relation of the 
subject to the action of the verb (active, passive, or middle).
vowel harmony A phonological process by which one vowel in a 
word exerts an influence (e.g., rounding, raising) on other vowels.
wh-movement Transformation that moves a question word or phrase 
from a theoretically posited lower position in a sentence to a higher one 
in question formation.
word The smallest free form found in a language.
word formation See derivation.
word production The process by which words are selected to be 
spoken or written; the instantiation of this.
word recognition The association by speakers of a language of the 
speech or writing signal with the entries in their mental lexicon.
zero-derivation A word-formation process that changes the lexical 
category of a word without changing its phonological shape. Also 
called conversion.

References
Aitchison, Jean. 2003. Words in the Mind: An Introduction to the Mental Lexicon, 
third edition. Oxford: Blackwell.
American Heritage Dictionary, second college edition. Boston: Houghton Mifflin, 
2000.
American Heritage Dictionary of the English Language, fourth edition. Boston: 
Houghton Mifflin Company, 2000.
Andersen, Torben. 1993. Vowel quality alternation in Dinka verb inflection. 
Phonology 10: 1–42.
Anderson, Stephen R. 1992. A-morphous Morphology. Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press.
Anshen, Frank and Mark Aronoff. 1988. Producing morphologically complex 
words. Linguistics 26(4): 641–55.
Aronoff, Mark. 1976. Word Formation in Generative Grammar. Cambridge, MA: 
MIT Press.
Aronoff, Mark. 1980. Contextuals. Language 56: 744–58.
Aronoff, Mark. 1994. Morphology by Itself: Stems and Inflectional Classes. 
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Aronoff, Mark and Nanna Fuhrhop. 2002. Restricting suffix combinations in 
German and English. Natural Language and Linguistic Theory 20: 451–90.
Aronoff, Mark and Roger Schvaneveldt. 1978. Testing morphological produc-
tivity. Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences 318: 106–14.
Baayen, Harald. 1992. Quantitative aspects of morphological productivity. 
Yearbook of Morphology 1991, eds. Geert Booij and Jaap van Marle, 109–49. 
Dordrecht: Kluwer.
Baker, Mark. 1988. Incorporation: A Theory of Grammatical Function Changing. 
Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Balhorn, Mark. 2004. The rise of epicene they. Journal of English Linguistics 32(2): 
79–104.
Barker, Chris. 1998. Episodic -ee in English: a thematic role constraint on new 
word formation. Language 74: 695–727.
What is Morphology?, 2nd edition, by Mark Aronoff and Kirsten Fudeman © 2011 
Mark Aronoff and Kirsten Fudeman.

274  
REFERENCES
Bat-El, Outi. 1996. Selecting the best of the worst: the grammar of Hebrew 
blends. Phonology 13: 283–328.
Bauer, Laurie. 2001. Morphological Productivity. Cambridge: Cambridge Univer-
sity Press.
Beard, Robert. 1998. Derivation. The Handbook of Morphology, eds. Andrew 
Spencer and Arnold M. Zwicky, 44–65. Oxford: Blackwell.
Blake, Barry J. 2001. Case, second edition. Cambridge: Cambridge University 
Press.
Bloomfield, Leonard. 1933. Language. New York: Henry Holt.
Bloomfield, Leonard. 1946. Algonquian. Linguistic Structures of Native America, 
eds. Harry Hoijer et al., 85–129. Viking Publications in Anthropology 6. 
New York: Viking Fund.
Bresnan, Joan and Lioba Moshi. 1990. Object asymmetries in comparative Bantu 
syntax. Linguistic Inquiry 21: 147–85.
Broselow, Ellen. 1977. Language change and theories of the lexicon. Proceedings 
of the Chicago Linguistics Society 13: 58–67.
Bullock, Barbara. 1996. Popular derivation and linguistic inquiry. French Review 
70(2): 180–91.
Bybee, Joan L. and D. I. Slobin. 1982. Rules and schemas in the development of 
the English past tense. Language 58: 265–89.
Cameron-Faulkner, Thea and Andrew Carstairs-McCarthy. 2000. Stem altern-
ants as morphological signata: evidence from blur avoidance in Polish 
nouns. Natural Language and Linguistic Theory 18: 813–35.
Carstairs-McCarthy, Andrew. 1994. Inflection classes, gender, and the principle 
of contrast. Language 70: 737–88.
Chomsky, Noam. 1965. Aspects of the Theory of Syntax. Cambridge, MA: MIT 
Press.
Chomsky, Noam and Morris Halle. 1968. The Sound Pattern of English. New 
York: Harper and Row.
Clark, Eve V. 1987. The Principle of Contrast: a constraint on language acquisi-
tion. Mechanisms of Language Acquisition, ed. Brian MacWhinney, 1–33. 
Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Clark, Eve V. 1993. The Lexicon in Acquisition. Cambridge: Cambridge University 
Press.
Clark, Eve V. 1995. Later lexical development and word formation. The Handbook 
of Child Language, eds. Paul Fletcher and Brian MacWhinney, 393–412. 
Oxford: Blackwell.
Clark, Eve V. and Herbert Clark. 1979. When nouns surface as verbs. Language 
55: 767–811.
Comrie, B. 1992. Siberian languages. International Encyclopedia of Linguistics, ed. 
W. Bright, 429–32. New York: Oxford University Press.
Comrie, Bernard. 1976. Aspect. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Comrie, Bernard. 1985. Tense. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

REFERENCES  275
Corbett, Greville G. 1991. Gender. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Corbett, Greville G. 2000. Number. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Dayley, Jon P. 1985. Tzutujil Grammar. Berkeley, CA: University of California 
Press.
Dixon, R. M. W. 1972. The Dyirbal Language of North Queensland. Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press.
Dixon, R. M. W. 1994. Ergativity. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Dixon, R. M. W. and Alexandra Y. Aikhenvald, eds. 2000. Changing Valency: Case 
Studies in Transitivity. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Donohue, Mark. 1996. Bajau: a symmetrical Austronesian language. Language 
72: 782–93.
Downing, Pamela. 1977. On the creation and use of English compound nouns. 
Language 53: 810–42.
Fabb, Nigel. 1988. English suffixation is constrained only by selectional restric-
tions. Natural Language and Linguistic Theory 6: 527–39.
Fabb, Nigel. 1998. Compounding. The Handbook of Morphology, eds. Andrew 
Spencer and Arnold M. Zwicky, 66–83. Oxford: Blackwell.
Finegan, Edward. 1994. Language: Its Structure and Use, second edition. New 
York: Harcourt Brace.
Francis, W. Nelson and Henry Kucˇera. 1982. Frequency Analysis of English Usage: 
Lexicon and Grammar. Boston: Houghton Mifflin.
French, K. M. 1988. Insights into Tagalog reduplication, infixation and stress 
from non-linear phonology. MA thesis, University of Texas, Arlington.
Frost, Ram, Jonathan Grainger, and Kathleen Rastle. 2005. Current issues in 
morphological processing: an introduction. Language and Cognitive Processes 
20: 1–5.
Fudeman, Kirsten. 1999. Topics in the morphology and syntax of Balanta, an 
Atlantic language of Senegal. Unpublished PhD dissertation, Cornell 
University.
Fudeman, Kirsten. 2004. Adjectival agreement vs. adverbial inflection in 
Balanta. Lingua 114(2): 105–23.
Gerdts, Donna B. 1998. Incorporation. The Handbook of Morphology, eds. Andrew 
Spencer and Arnold M. Zwicky, 84–100. Oxford: Blackwell.
Gero, Marcia L. and Stephen H. Levinsohn. 1993. The -mi and -e morphemes in 
Jóola-Foñy. Journal of West African Languages 23(1): 79–90.
Giegerich, Heinz J. 2004. Compound or phrase? English noun-plus-noun con-
structions and the stress criterion. English Language and Linguistics 8(1): 1–24.
Glinert, Lewis. 1989. The Grammar of Modern Hebrew. Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press.
Gregersen, Edgar. 1976. A note on the Manam language of Papua New Guinea. 
Anthropological Linguistics 18: 95–111.
Grice, P. 1975. Logic and conversation. Speech Acts (Syntax and Semantics 3), eds. 
P. Cole and J. Morgan, 41–58. New York: Academic Press.

276  
REFERENCES
Grimes, Barbara, ed. 2002. Ethnologue, fourteenth edition. Summer Institute of 
Linguistics. www.ethnologue.com.
Hale, Kenneth and Samuel Jay Keyser. 1993. On argument structure and the 
lexical expression of syntactic relations. The View from Building 20: Linguistic 
Essays in Honor of Sylvain Bromberger, eds. Kenneth Hale and Samuel Jay 
Keyser, 53–109. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Halle, Morris and K. P. Mohanan. 1985. Segmental phonology and Modern 
English. Linguistic Inquiry 16: 57–116.
Hayes, Bruce. 1989. Compensatory lengthening in moraic phonology. Linguistic 
Inquiry 20: 253–306.
Hayes, Bruce. 1995. Metrical Stress Theory: Principles and Case Studies. Chicago: 
University of Chicago Press.
Head, Brian F. 1978. Respect degrees in pronominal reference. Universals of Human 
Language. Vol. 3: Word Structure, eds. Joseph H. Greenberg, Charles A. Ferguson, 
and Edith A. Moravcsik, 151–211. Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press.
Hoberman, Robert D. and Mark Aronoff. 2003. The verbal morphology of 
Maltese: from Semitic to Romance. Language Processing and Acquisition in 
Languages of Semitic, Root-Based, Morphology, ed. Joseph Shimron, 61–78. 
Amsterdam, Philadelphia: John Benjamins.
Hock, Hans Heinrich. 1991. Principles of Historical Linguistics, second edition. 
Berlin, New York: Mouton de Gruyter.
Hockett, Charles F. 1954. Two models of grammatical description. Word 10: 
210–31.
Hodge, Carleton T. 1947. An Outline of Hausa Grammar. Language Dissertation 
no. 41. Baltimore, MD: Linguistic Society of America.
Hoijer, Harry. 1971. Athapaskan morphology. Studies in American Indian Lang-
uages, ed. Jesse Sawyer, 113–47. Berkeley, CA: University of California Press.
Hooper, Joan Bybee. 1976. An Introduction to Natural Generative Phonology. New 
York: Academic Press.
Hopkins, Bradley. 1990. La phrase complexe en diola-fogny (ouest-atlantique): 
propositions relatives. Journal of West African Languages 20: 81–98.
Horne, Kibbey M. 1966. Language Typology: Nineteenth and Twentieth Century 
Views. Washington, DC: Georgetown University Press.
Hyman, Larry. 1993. Conceptual issues in the comparative study of the Bantu 
verb stem. Topics in African Linguistics 1991, eds. Salikoko S. Mufwene and 
Lioba Moshi, 3–34. Amsterdam, Philadelphia: John Benjamins.
Irving, John. 1989. A Prayer for Owen Meany. New York: Morrow.
Jaeger, Jeri J., Alan H. Lockwood, David L. Kemmerer, Robert D. van Valin, Jr, 
Brian W. Murphy, and Hanif G. Khalak. 1996. A positron emission tomo-
graphic study of regular and irregular verb morphology in English. 
Language 72: 451–97.
Jaeger, Jeri J., Robert D. van Valin, Jr, and Alan H. Lockwood. 1998. Response to 
Seidenberg and Hoeffner. Language 74: 123–8.

REFERENCES  277
Jarema, Gonia and Gary Libben. 2007. The Mental Lexicon: Core Perspectives. 
Amsterdam: Elsevier.
Katamba, Francis and John Stonham. 2006. Morphology, second edition. New 
York: Palgrave Macmillan.
Katz, Jerrold J. 1964. Semantic theory and the meaning of “good.” Journal of 
Philosophy 61: 739–66.
Kay, Deborah A. and Jeremy M. Anglin. 1982. Overextension and underexten-
sion in the child’s expressive and receptive speech. Journal of Child Language 
9: 83–98.
Kenstowicz, Michael. 1994. Phonology in Generative Grammar. Oxford: 
Blackwell.
Kiparsky, Paul. 1982. Lexical phonology and morphology. Linguistics in the 
Morning Calm, ed. I. S. Yang, 3–91. Seoul: Hanshin.
Kiparsky, Paul. 1983. Word formation and the lexicon. 1982 Mid-America 
Linguistics Conference Papers. Lawrence, KA: Department of Linguistics, 
University of Kansas, 3–29.
Kuczaj, S. A. 1977. The acquisition of regular and irregular past tense forms. 
Journal of Verbal Learning and Verbal Behavior 16: 589–600.
Laidig, Wyn D. and Carol J. Laidig. 1990. Larike pronouns: duals and trials in a 
Central Moluccan language. Oceanic Linguistics 29: 87–109.
Lass, R. 1990. How to do things with junk: exaptation in language evolution. 
Journal of Linguistics 26: 79–102.
Lees, Robert B. 1960. The Grammar of English Nominalizations. Indiana University 
Research Center in Anthropology, Folklore, and Linguistics, Publication 
no. 12. Bloomington: Indiana University Press.
Levelt, Willem. 1989. Speaking: From Intention to Articulation. Cambridge, MA: 
MIT Press.
McCarthy, John J. 1981. A prosodic theory of nonconcatenative morphology. 
Linguistic Inquiry 12: 373–418.
McCarthy, John J. and Alan S. Prince. 1990. Foot and word in prosodic morphology: 
the Arabic broken plural. Natural Language and Linguistic Theory 8: 209–83.
McCarthy, John J. and Alan S. Prince. 1993. Generalized alignment. Yearbook of 
Morphology 1993, eds. Geert Booij and Jaap van Marle, 79–153. Dordrecht: 
Kluwer.
McCarthy, John J. and Alan S. Prince. 1998. Prosodic morphology. The Handbook 
of Morphology, eds. Andrew Spencer and Arnold M. Zwicky, 283–305. 
Oxford: Blackwell.
MacDonald, R. Ross. 1976. Indonesian Reference Grammar. Washington, DC: 
Georgetown University Press.
Mackridge, Peter. 1985. The Modern Greek Language. Oxford: Oxford University 
Press.
Marchand, Hans. 1969. The Categories and Types of Present-Day English Word- 
Formation, second edition. Munich: Beck.

278  
REFERENCES
Matthews, Peter. 1991. Morphology, second edition. Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press.
Mchombo, Sam A. 1993. On the binding of the reflexive and the reciprocal in 
Chichewa. Theoretical Aspects of Bantu Grammar, ed. Sam A. Mchombo, 
181–207. Stanford, CA: CSLI.
Merriam-Webster Online Dictionary. www.merriam-webster.com.
Michelson, Karin. 1988. A Comparative Study of Lake-Iroquoian Accent. Dordrecht: 
Kluwer.
Mithun, Marianne. 1984. The evolution of noun incorporation. Language 60: 
847–94.
N’Diaye-Corréard, Geneviève. 1970. Etudes fca ou balante (dialecte ganja). Paris: 
Société pour l’Etude des Langues Africaines.
Nespor, M. and I. Vogel. 1986. Prosodic Phonology. Dordrecht: Foris.
Nida, Eugene. 1965. Morphology: The Descriptive Analysis of Words, second edi-
tion. Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press. (First published 1949.)
Ouhalla, Jamal. 1994. Verb movement and word order in Arabic. Verb Movement, 
eds. David Lightfoot and Norbert Hornstein, 41–72. Cambridge, New York: 
Cambridge University Press.
Oxford Dictionary of English Etymology, ed. C. T. Onions. Oxford: Oxford 
University Press, 1966.
Oxford English Dictionary (computer file). Oxford: Oxford University Press, 
2000.
Palmer, F. R. 2001. Mood and Modality, second edition. Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press.
Pinker, Steven. 1999. Words and Rules. New York: HarperCollins.
Plénat, M. 1983. Morphologie d’un langage secret: le javanais de Queneau. 
Cahiers de Grammaire 6: 152–94.
Pustejovsky, James. 1995. The Generative Lexicon. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Rudes, Blair A. 1980. The functional development of the verbal suffix +esc+ in 
Romance. Historical Morphology, ed. Jacek Fisiak, 327–48. The Hȧgue: 
Mouton.
Sapir, E. 1911. The problem of noun incorporation in American languages. 
American Anthropologist 13: 250–82.
Sapir, Edward. 1921. Language: An Introduction to the Study of Speech. New York: 
Harcourt, Brace.
Sapir, J. David. 1965. A Grammar of Diola-Fogny: A Language Spoken in the Basse-
Casamance Region of Senegal. West African Language Monograph no. 3. 
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Sapir, J. David. 1970. Dictionnaire Jóola Kujamutay. Ms., University of Virginia, 
Charlottesville.
Sapir, J. David. 1971. West Atlantic: an inventory of the languages, their noun 
class systems and consonant alternations. Current Trends in Linguistics, 
vol. 7, ed. Thomas A. Sebeok, 45–112. The Hague, Paris: Mouton.

REFERENCES  279
Sapir, J. David. 1975. Big and thin: two Diola-Fogny meta-linguistic terms. 
Language in Society 4: 1–15.
Saussure, Ferdinand de. 1969. Cours de linguistique générale. Paris: Payot. (First 
published 1915.)
Scancarelli, Janine. 1987. Grammatical relations and verb agreement in 
Cherokee. Unpublished PhD dissertation, University of California, Los 
Angeles.
Seidenberg, Mark S. and James H. Hoeffner. 1998. Evaluating behavioural and 
neuroimaging data on past tense processing. Language 74: 104–22.
Sherzer, Joel. 1970. Talking backwards in Cuna: the sociological reality of pho-
nological descriptions. Southwestern Journal of Anthropology 26: 343–53.
Sneddon, James Neil. 1996. Indonesian: A Comprehensive Grammar. London, New 
York: Routledge.
Spencer, Andrew. 1991. Morphological Theory: An Introduction to Word Structure 
in Generative Grammar. Oxford: Blackwell.
Spencer, Andrew. 1995. Incorporation in Chukchi. Language 71(3): 439–89.
Spencer, Andrew and Arnold M. Zwicky, eds. 1998. The Handbook of Morphology. 
Oxford: Blackwell.
Stonham, John. 2004. Linguistic Theory and Complex Words: Nuuchahnulth Word 
Formation. New York: Palgrave Macmillan.
Stump, Gregory T. 2001. Inflectional Morphology: A Theory of Paradigm Structure. 
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Thomas, Louis-Vincent and J. David Sapir. 1967. Le Diola et le temps. Bulletin de 
l’I.F.A.N. 29, series B(1–2): 339–59.
Vossen, Rainer. 1985. Encoding the object in the finite verb: the case of //Ani 
(Central Khoisan). Afrikanistische Arbeitspapiere 4: 75–84.
Welmers, William. 1973. African Language Structures. Berkeley, CA: University 
of California Press.
Woodbury, A. 1977. Greenlandic Eskimo, ergativity, and relational grammar. 
Syntax and Semantics 8: Grammatical Relations, eds. P. Cole and J. Sadock. 
New York: Academic Press.
Woodbury, Hanni. 1975. Onondaga noun incorporation: some notes on the 
interdependence of syntax and semantics. International Journal of American 
Linguistics 41: 10–20.
Zepeda, Ofelia. 1983. A Papago Grammar. Tucson, AZ: University of 
Arizona Press.
Zimmer, K. 1964. Affixal Negation in English and Other Languages: An Investigation 
of Restricted Productivity. Supplement to Word, Monograph 5. New York.
Zwicky, Arnold M. 1985. Clitics and particles. Language 61: 283–305.
Zwicky, Arnold M. and Geoffrey K. Pullum. 1983. Cliticization vs. inflection: 
English n’t. Language 59: 502–13.

Index
//Ani 199–200
abbreviation 121
ablaut see apophony
absolutive 166, 189–90, 202, 206, 
210, 258*
accent 40, 108n3
accusative 164, 166, 179–80, 195n6, 
202, 258*
acquisition, first-language see child 
language acquisition
acronym 120–1, 258*
active voice 167, 172, 202–5, 
225n2, 272*
additive function 50–1
adjective 3, 20–1, 34, 39, 42–4, 47, 84, 
124–6, 169, 184, 258*
adverb 3, 34, 38–9, 42–5, 47, 184, 208, 
258*; see also -ly (English)
affixes 3, 35, 111–12, 258*
derivational 47–8, 117–19, 169
inchoative 87–9
inflection 47, 169, 171
item-and-arrangement model 50–1
item-and-process model 50–1
primary 82–6, 101
secondary 82–6, 101–3
semantics 140–1, 145–7
and stem alternations 171–3
see also circumfixes; infixes; 
prefixes; suffixes; and entries 
for individual languages
Against Method 12
Agar Dinka see Dinka
agent nouns
English 50–1, 145–7, 235–6
Kujamaat Jóola 131
Latin 46
Tagalog 3
agglutinating language 179
agglutinative morphology 148, 
258–9*
agreement 58, 182–7, 197, 198–200, 
202, 259*
Algonquian languages 59
allomorph 2, 15–17, 74–8, 259*
zero 17, 197
allomorphy
in primary affixes 84, 86
in stems 84–6
alphabetism 121
ambiguity of derived forms 
126–8
Asterisked page numbers refer to items explained in the glossary. Where a 
number of page numbers follow an item, the main reference is indicated by 
page number in bold.
What is Morphology?, 2nd edition, by Mark Aronoff and Kirsten Fudeman © 2011 Mark Aronoff 
and Kirsten Fudeman.

INDEX  281
analogy 91–2, 259*
analytic approach 12–17
analytic languages 179, 259*
animate gender 59, 166, 201–2, 259*; 
see also inanimate gender
antipassive 206
aorist 178
Apachean languages 172–3
apophony 16, 173–4, 177, 181, 259*
applicative 207–8
Arabic 36, 79–81, 89, 174–5, 200
Arapesh 252
archetype 146, 259*
argument 204, 217
aspect 159, 167, 169, 173, 202, 
214–6, 259*
assigned inflection 163–4, 259*
assimilation 73–6, 259*
Athapaskan 172 see also Apachean 
languages, Navajo
Atlantic language family 23, 58
augment -sc- 89–90; see also 
inchoative affix -sc
augmentatives 61, 260*
auxiliary verbs 167, 210, 266, 272
Aztec 17–19
backformation 122–3, 260*
Bajau 205, 223, 225n3
Balanta 58, 199–201, 223
Bantu languages 23, 59, 60, 79, 
151, 207
base 3, 260*
blending 119–20, 135n1, 195n1, 237, 
238, 260*, 268*
blocking 116, 235–6, 260*
Bloomfield, Leonard 49, 55, 128–9
borrowings see loanwords
bound form 35–6, 117–18, 197–8, 
212–13, 260*
Boycott, Charles C. 156n2
brain imaging 244
Bulgarian 178
Carroll, Lewis 38, 161, 195n1
case 159, 161, 165, 166, 170, 179, 197, 
202, 260*
assigned inflection 164
dative 164, 166, 202, 262*
ergative 166, 189–90, 206, 262*
genitive 159, 161, 166, 263*
instrumental 206, 265*
locative 166, 266*
nominative 166, 189–90, 267*
Caucasian 60
causative 169, 203–4, 206, 210
characteristic–person alternation 138
Cherokee 160
Chichewa 70–1, 151
child language acquisition 71n1, 115, 
130, 139
Chinese 7–8, 37, 197
Chomsky, Noam 10, 201, 229
Chukchee 209
circumfixes 3, 117, 260*
citation form of lexeme 44–5, 
72n5, 260*
class 1 affixes see primary affixes
class 2 affixes see secondary affixes
clipping 122, 260*
clitic 36–7, 41, 68, 197, 216, 260*
closed class 42
closing suffix 119, 260*
coda 74, 79, 94, 261*
code mixing 229
cognitive neuroscience 246, 261*
coinages 1, 5, 27, 115–16, 120, 158, 
229, 236, 238, 261*
competence 229, 237, 239, 261*
complex forms 2, 5, 13, 49, 55–6, 
111, 119, 130, 261*
application of phonological 
processes to 82, 97
semantics of 147
see also head operation, tree diagram
compositionality 110–12, 215, 
230, 261*

282  
INDEX
compounds 39–40, 46–7, 56, 112–15, 
119, 124, 129, 131, 155n1, 
208, 261*
concatenation 49, 261*
concord see agreement
conjugation 261*
conjunctions 42
constraints; see also blocking
coda 94
minimal word 78–9
morphological, on morphological 
productivity 232–4
phonological, on morphological 
productivity 231–2, 234
phonotactic 78–9, 81
semantic, on morphological 
productivity 233–4
structural, on inflection 198–200
syntactic, on morphological 
productivity 233–4
container–contained alternation 
138
content word 41, 41–3, 78–9, 261*
context-free inflection 163, 261*
context-sensitive inflection 163, 261*
Contrast, Principle of 87
conversion see zero-derivation
count noun 137–8
Courtenay, Baudouin de viii, 55
Cuna 93
dative case see case, dative
declension 11, 262*
demonstrative 43, 182–3, 185
denominal verb 141–4, 147
derivation 47–8, 51, 65, 80–1, 86, 95, 
112–20, 149–51*
semantics 139–47
and structure 123–30
vs. inflection 47–8, 168–71
descriptive grammars x
determiner 36, 42–3, 161
Dinka 52–4
directionality 116, 155n1; in 
context-free inflection 163
discontinuous morphemes 3–4; 
see also circumfixes
Dravidian language family 58
dual number 9, 165, 202, 267*
dual-route models (dual-system 
theories) 245–6, 250–1
Dutch 93
Dyirbal 59, 189–90
-ei (German) 141
Einstein, Albert 11
Elsewhere Condition 195n3, 235
enclitic 41, 262*
endocentric compounds 114–15, 262*
English ix, 3, 4–9
affixes 56, 111, 117, 119, 140; see also 
examples of individual affixes
agent nouns in -er 50–1, 145–7, 
235–6
apophony (ablaut) 173–4
aspect 167
blending 119
blocking 235–6
compounds 112–13, 124
gender 58–9
gender-neutral third person 
singular pronoun 42
infixes 117
lexemes 44–6
minimal word constraint 79
modals 167, 198
negative prefix 230–1
nicknames 79
noun–verb pairs 17, 51–2
Old English 85
past tense 2, 7, 8, 16, 74–6, 87, 
155n1, 163; production 
of 244–6
plural formation 6–7, 16, 74, 92, 
158, 169, 227–8
present participle 46, 163

INDEX  283
primary and secondary 
affixes 82–6, 102–3
prefixes 111, 230–1
reduplication 176
stress 40, 41
suffixes 74–6, 82–6, 113, 117, 119, 
125–7, 228, 230, 232–4, 238, 
239–42
suppletion 176–7
verbs, production of regular and 
irregular 244–6
zero-derivation 115–16, 141, 155n1
epenthesis 75, 76, 262*
ergative case 166, 189–90, 202, 206, 
210, 262*
etymology 82, 84, 116
euro, plural of 158
evaluative domain (of word) 144, 262*
exaptation 86–90, 262*
exclusive form see pronoun, first-
person plural exclusive-
inclusive
exocentric compounds 114–15, 262*
exponence 160–3, 173, 262–3*
exponent 263*; see also exponence
extension (of noun) 144, 263*
Feyerabend, Paul 12
figure–ground reversal 138
Finnish 96, 176
folk etymology 122, 135n1, 263*
fossilization 84
free form 35, 117–18, 263*
French 55, 232; see also verlan
acronyms 121
adjectives 20–21
blends 238
blocking 236
definite determiner 161–2
gender 58, 165–6
hiatus 77
lexeme, citation form of 44
Old French 107
Old Norman French 122
plurals 158
stress 36
suppletive forms 176–7
Fula 23, 58, 201
function word 41–3, 263*
fusional language 179, 263*
gender 58, 161, 165–6, 201–2; see also 
noun class, Kujamaat Jóola
animate/inanimate 59, 166, 
201–2, 259*
English 42, 58–9
French 58, 165–6
German 201
inherence 163
Latin 11, 64
Ojibwa 201–2
Russian 198–9
genitive case see case, genitive
German 29, 58, 119, 135n1, 135n4, 
141, 158–9, 164–6, 201–2
Swiss German 173–4
Germanic
languages 51, 87, 174
origin, suffixes of 82, 85–6
stems 237
Goethe, Johann Wolfgang von 1
government 164–5, 195n4, 263*
grammatical function change 203–11, 
263*
grammatical word 37–8, 263–4*
Grebo 60
Greek 1, 44, 58, 114, 176, 237, 257n1
Ancient 9, 36, 54, 75–6, 108n1, 162, 
166, 195n6
lexeme, citation form of 44
Modern 37, 158, 161, 232–4
Greenlandic Eskimo 206, 210
Gricean principles of cooperation 144
Haitian Creole 93
Hale, Kenneth 143

284  
INDEX
hapax legomena 114, 237, 242–4, 264*
Hausa 106
head (of word) 113–14, 129, 264*
head operation 129
headlines 34, 237
Hebrew 228
agreement 199
blends 120, 238
constraints on morphological 
productivity 232, 234
loanwords in Israeli Hebrew 89, 
158–9
root-and-pattern morphology 79, 
80–1, 152–3, 177, 192–3
hiatus 77–8, 264*
history of words see etymology
Hockett, Charles 49
homonymy 44, 264*
homophony 44, 137–9, 264*
host 41, 264*
Houdini, Harry 139, 143
Huave 104
Hungarian 79, 108n3, 179
Icelandic 79
Ilokano 81
imperfective 72n6, 159, 167, 172, 202, 
214, 264*
Bulgarian 178
Navajo 173
Papago 49–50
Russian 167
inanimate gender 264*; see also 
animate gender
inchoative affix -sc 87–88
inclusive form see pronoun, first-
person plural exclusive-
inclusive
Indo-European languages 58, 62, 87, 
120, 161, 183–4, 219
Indonesian 3, 6, 175–7, 195n8
infinitive 44, 172, 177–8
infixes 3, 91–2, 117, 128, 162, 264*
inflection 44, 48–9, 159–81, 248–52, 
264*
blocking 235
inherent vs. assigned 163–4, 259*, 
265*
morphological vs. syntactic 
197–8
productivity 244–6
structural constraints on 198–200
types 171–77, 227
universal grammar 201–2
vs. derivation 47–8, 168–71
inflectional category 165–7, 201–2
inflective language 179
inherent inflection see inflection, 
inherent vs. assigned
instrumental case see case, 
instrumental
integrity 38–9, 112–3, 265*
internal change see apophony
International Phonetic 
Alphabet xviii, xx
intransitive verb 166, 258, 262, 265*
IPA see International Phonetic 
Alphabet
isolating languages 179, 265*
Italian 88–90, 158, 189
item-and-arrangement 
approach 49–51, 54, 57, 265*
item-and-process approach 49–54, 
57, 265*
Jakobson, Roman ix
Japanese 6–7, 17, 120, 166, 169
Jóola 23; see also Kujamaat Jóola
Joos, Martin 12
Keyser, Samuel Jay 143
Kichaga 207–8
Kivunjo 207
Kru 60

INDEX  285
Kujamaat Jóola ix–xi, 11, 23, 32n4–6, 
247–50
abstract nouns 63–4
agreement 164, 182–7
aspect 214–6
augmentatives 61
big–thin distinction 97–101
causative 149–50, 206
circumfixes 117, 218
consonants 24–5
definite article 182–3
demonstratives 182–3, 185
derivation 111, 131, 148–51, 
170, 248–9
diminutives 62–3
dubitive-incompletive 111, 148, 
214–5, 219, 225n7
emphasis 148, 150, 217–8 see also 
noun emphasis marker
future time 215–6
gender see noun classes
infinitive 64–5, 101–2, 162, 249
loanwords 60–1, 64, 66–7
mass nouns 63
morphophonology 96–103
negative 215–18
nominal derivational suffixes 
131
nominal modifiers 183–6
noun classes 58–67, 162, 201–2
noun emphasis markers 148–9, 
217–8
numbers 185–6
object marking 212–4
passive 205
phonemic inventory 24–5
place names 60
pronouns 183
reduplication 102, 148, 150–1, 
213, 217
relativizers 184
secondary affix 101–3
semantic classes 59–60
subject marking 186–7, 212–3
subject–verb agreement 186–7, 
199, 212
subordination 148–9, 199, 213, 
217–9
syllables 26
syntax 219–21
tense–lax distinction 74, 96–7, 131, 
247–8 see also big-thin 
distinction
verb morphology 101–2, 148–50, 
186–7, 212–19, 248–9
vowel harmony 23, 95–100
vowels 24
word order 219–21
language games 88–90
language vs. Language 10
Larike 8–9
Latin 82, 84–6, 177, 228, 237, 
239, 257n2
active–passive distinction 167
declensions 11, 236*
exponence 160, 162–3
gender 11, 64
inchoative affix 87–9
leveling 90–1
lexical stems 46
nasal infix 91
nouns 11, 90–1
partial reduplication 176
plurals 257n1
rhotacism 91
stem alternations 171–2, 176–7
theme vowel 87–88
verbal inflection 160, 162
word order 38
Lees, Robert 143
letters of the alphabet, names 
of 108n1
level 1 affixes see primary affixes

286  
INDEX
level 2 affixes see secondary affixes
leveling 90–1, 265*
lexeme 43–6, 123–4, 130, 137–41, 
144–5, 155n1*
lexical category 34, 44–5, 48, 50–1, 
72n4, 86, 113–5, 117, 168, 170, 
233, 265*
lexical stem 45–6, 118, 148, 265*
lexical word see content word
lexicon 54–7, 84, 111–12, 114–16, 119, 
130, 150, 163–4, 170, 241–4, 
246–52, 265*
linguistic junk 86–8
loanwords (borrowings) 58, 61, 64, 
66, 81, 122, 174, 201, 228, 266*
locative case see case, locative
logogram 37
Lynch, Captain William 155–6n2
Maltese 89–90
Manam 9
Manjaku 58, 201
Marchand, Hans 143, 145–6
marked 41, 205, 266*
markedness 213 see also marked; 
unmarked
mass noun 63, 65, 137–8, 169
Matthews, Peter 159, 160, 162
Mayan languages 79
Meillet, Antoine ix
mental lexicon see lexicon
minimal word constraint 78–9
modal affix 148
modal auxiliary 167, 198, 263, 266*
Mohawk 79
Mongbandi 194
monomorphemic 266*
mood 160, 162, 167, 202, 266*
morph 2, 266*
morpheme 2–4, 13–17, 266*
morphological analysis 12–22
morphological productivity see 
productivity
morphology 1–2, 4–9, 266*
agglutinative 148, 179
component of languages or 
grammars 11
prosodic 78–81
as system 11
morphophonemics see 
morphophonology
morphophonology 73, 73–103, 198, 
212–13, 266*
morphosyntactic feature 159–60, 
163–4, 170, 177–8, 180, 266*
morphosyntactic word see 
grammatical word
morphosyntax 196, 267*
motivation 110–11, 114, 267*, 272*
Nahuatl 208
Navajo 173
negative prefixes in English 230–1
negator, logical and contrary 230, 
261*, 266*
neurolinguistics 246, 267*
nicknames 79, 122
Nida, Eugene 13, 19
Niger-Congo family 23, 58–9, 
151, 166
nominative case see case, nominative
nonce form 114, 116, 141, 237, 240, 
245, 267*
non-separability 38–9, 267*
Nootka (Nuuchahnulth) 180
noun 11, 23, 34, 42–4, 138, 144, 163–4, 
267* see also agent nouns, 
count noun, mass noun, noun 
class, etc.
noun class 23, 267*; see also Kujamaat 
Jóola, noun classes
noun incorporation 208–11
noun-to-verb derivation 141–4
noun–verb pairs 17, 51–2
novel word 4 –5, 115, 227, 237, 241
nucleus 74, 93–4, 261, 267*

INDEX  287
number 9, 13, 65, 159, 161, 163–4, 
165, 170*
Nuuchahnulth 180
object agreement 160–1, 199–200, 
202, 206
Ojibwa 201–2
Onondaga 208–9
onset 74, 93–5, 267*
open class 42
order of elements 35, 38, 49, 128–9
ordering of morphological 
operations 124–9
-ousness 145
overextension 139, 268*
Papago 49
paradigm 44, 260, 265, 268*, 271
partial suppletion see suppletion
passive voice 162, 167, 169, 202–5, 
210, 218, 225n1, 271, 272*
past tense 7–8, 16, 47, 87, 159, 167, 
178, 202, 244–6 see also English, 
past tense
paucal number 165, 202, 267*
perfective 49–50, 72n6, 90, 162–3, 
167, 171–3, 176–7, 202, 259*, 
264
performance 229, 268*
person 146, 160–3, 166–7, 197, 
199, 268*
personal names 60, 79, 122, 143, 232
PET see positron emission 
tomography
phonological constraints 231–2, 
234
phonological word 40–1, 268*
phonology 23, 73, 268*
phonotactic constraints 78–9, 81*
Pig Latin 93, 95
place–people alternation 138
plural 46–7, 158–9, 263–4, 267*
Arabic 174–5
English 6, 7, 10, 16–17, 49, 74, 92, 
122, 129, 169, 174, 227–8, 235
French article 77
Indonesian 6, 175
inflectional category 159–60, 163, 
165, 202
Japanese 6–7
Kujamaat Jóola 59
Latin 257n1
reduplication 81, 175–6
Polish 36
polysemy 137–9, 268*
polysynthetic languages 180, 268*
portmanteau word 268* see also 
blending
Portuguese 165
positron emission tomography 
(PET) 239, 244–5, 269*
potential word 228, 260, 269*
pragmatic factors 139–40
pragmatics 23, 269*
prefixes 84–6, 117, 269*
be- 111, 241
cray-, rasp-, boysen-, cran- 112, 
135n1
in- 84–5, 230–1
non- 230–1
re- 3–4, 48, 117–18, 233
un- 5, 85, 126–8, 230–1
with- 241
preposition 41–3, 47, 71n2, 72n4, 
76–7, 164, 203, 208, 265
prepositional prefix 241
primary affixes 82–6, 269*
proclitics 41, 269*
productivity 226–9, 269*
degrees of 231–6
salience and 236–8
testing 238–46
progressive assimilation 76, 259*
pronoun 8, 42–3, 58, 163–5, 176, 182, 
183, 208, 212–3, 217, 221, 248, 
258, 264

288  
INDEX
pronoun (cont’d)
first-person plural exclusive-
inclusive 167, 262*
gender-neutral 42
pronunciation 20, 40, 121
prosodic morphology 78–81
Proto-Indo-European 219
prototype see archetype
psycholinguistics 170, 246, 269*
reduplication 81, 128–9, 162, 172, 
175–6, 269*; see also Kujamaat 
Jóola, reduplication
regressive assimilation 76, 259*
reversative 126–8, 269*
Rhaeto-Romance 88
Romance 82, 86–9, 164–5, 214, 232, 
234, 239, 257n2
Romanian 79, 88–9, 178
root 2, 79, 269*
root-and-pattern morphology 80–1, 
89, 174–5, 177, 269*
Rumantsch 77
Russian 58, 158, 161, 167, 197–9
salience 4–5, 236–8
Sapir, Edward ix, 179
Sapir, J. David ix, 23
Saussure, Ferdinand de 109
Saussurean sign 109–10
secondary affixes 82–6, 101–2, 270*
secret languages 93
segolate noun 80
semantic constraints 233–4
semantic type 137, 270*
semantics 23, 249–50, 270*
Semitic languages 79, 80–1, 89, 
166, 174
Serer 58, 201
sign 109–10, 270*
signified 109, 270*
signifier 109, 270*
simple word 270*
single-route models (single-system 
theories) 245–6, 250–1
singular 46, 47, 165, 267*
Spanish 44, 93, 122, 176, 238
gender 58, 165–6
hiatus 77–8
leveling 91–2
plurals 158
regressive assimilation 76
suffix -ísimo 15
speakers 2, 5, 7–8, 12–13
spelling 20
stems 2, 45–7, 113, 117–18, 129, 
148–51, 171–3, 177, 270*
stress 36–7, 39–41, 51–2, 82–3, 85–6, 
89, 102, 108n3, 232, 234, 270*
structural linguistics 12, 49
subject agreement 160, 167, 178, 
186–7, 197, 198–9, 200, 212
suffixes 3, 117, 270* see also agent 
nouns, English
closing 119, 260*
English 47–8, 74–6, 82–4, 113, 117, 
119, 125–7, 140–1, 145, 163, 
169, 174, 228, 230, 232–3, 234, 
239–42
-al 48, 232, 234 
-ance 233
-ant 233
-able 83–5, 234
-ee 233–4
-(e)ry (English) 48, 141
-hood 228, 233–4
-ian 48, 82
-iana 243
-ible 83–5, 240–2
-ify 233
-ish 48, 118, 232–3
-ism 82–3, 140–1, 233
-ist 125, 233
-ity 230–1, 238–41

INDEX  289
-ive 233
-ly 3, 48, 124, 233
-ness 145, 228, 230–1, 238–41
-ory 233
-ous 145
-th 228–9, 237, 254
-y 233
German 119, 141
Greek 232, 234
Hebrew 232, 234
inchoative 87–88
Kujamaat Jóola 131, 148–51, 
170, 214–19
Spanish 15
suppletion 163, 176–7, 198, 261, 271*
Swahili, Congo 30–1
swearwords 117
Swedish 176
syllable 36–7, 51, 64, 74, 78–9, 
82–3, 93
syncretism 177–8, 271*
synonym 236
syntactic constraints 233–4
syntax 5, 23, 35–6, 196–7, 
219–21, 271*
synthetic approach 12–13
synthetic languages 179, 271*
Tagalog 3, 128–9
Tamil 58
Tarahumara 105
technical terms 238
tense 167, 202, 225n2, 271*
Thai 93
theories 10, 12–13, 244–6, 250
token 14, 271*
tone 52, 271*
tools 12
transcription xviii-xix, 19, 32n5
transitive verb 84, 166, 258, 262, 271*
tree diagram 35, 51, 125
trial number 9, 165, 202, 267*
truncation 122, 271*
Tsotsil 105
Tsova-Tush 60
Turkish 179
type 14–5
typology 178–80, 271*
Tzeltal 191
Tzutujil 232, 234
umlaut 174, 227, 271*
underextension 139, 271*
Universal Grammar 10, 201–2
unmarked 53–4, 167, 205, 214, 271*
Uto-Aztecan 49
variant 2, 97–99, 101, 272*
verb 34, 42, 43–5, 137, 163–7, 272*
verbal inflection 165–7, 202
verlan 93–5
Vietnamese 7, 11, 179–80, 197
voice 167, 202, 204–5, 225n3, 272*
vowel harmony 23, 95, 96–100, 272*
Wellington Corpus of Written New 
Zealand English 243–4
West African languages 96
West Atlantic language family see 
Atlantic language family
wh-movement 112, 272*
Wolof 23, 58, 99, 201
word 34–6, 272* see also content 
word, function word, 
grammatical word, 
phonological word
complex word 5, 13, 55–6, 261*
empirical tests for 38–40
simple word 270*
ways to define 35–8
word formation see derivation
word minima see constraints, 
minimal word
word play 4 –5

290  
INDEX
word production 247, 272*
word recognition 247, 272*
rote recognition 250, 270*
rule-based recognition 250, 
270*
whole-word recognition 250
written language 247 see also 
spelling
Yao 60
Zapotec 189
zero-derivation 115–16, 125, 155n1, 
235, 272*
semantics 141–5
zero allomorph 17, 197
Zoque 29–30, 104–5

What is Morphology?
Answers to exercises
Chapter One
 
■
1. Answers vary.
2. Students’ hypotheses will vary. However, we can make the follow-
ing observations:
a. pHisoderm, a pH-balanced cleanser: The name begins with 
“pH.” This is followed by iso-, from Greek, meaning ‘equal’, 
and derm, also from Greek, meaning ‘skin’.
b. Nescafé: According to the Nescafé website, Nescafé was first 
introduced in 1938. Its name combines the first syllable of its 
maker, Nestlé, and the French word café, which means both 
‘coffee’ and ‘café’. http://www.nescafe.com/worldwide/en/
nescafe/Pages/history.aspx, accessed August 9, 2009.
c. 
Ajax: Ajax is a hero of Greek mythology, famed for his strength.
d. Eucerin: Eu- is a Greek prefix meaning ‘good’. It is also found in 
words such as eulogy and euphemism. The second part of the 
name may have been inspired by Latin ce¯ra ‘wax’. The word 
cerin exists, denoting a type of waxy substance.
e. Friskies: Cf. frisky.
f. 
Tums: Cf. the first syllable of tummy.
g. Trident: A trident is a three-pronged spear. It contains the Latin 
root dent ‘tooth’ (cf. Latin nominative singular dens, accusative 
singular dentem).
h. Life savers: A life-saver is both a flotation device that is some-
times shaped like a donut and something that helps a person 
overcome a severe difficulty.
i. 
Spam: It rhymes with ham.

2  
ANSWERS TO EXERCISES
3. Answers vary. We have heard remote, clicker, flipper, changer. Remote 
is a clipping from remote control. Clicker, flipper, changer all bear the 
same suffix, -er, which, attached to a verb, forms an agent noun.
4. Answers vary.
5. Answers vary. Many people use only me, and not I, after than, e.g., 
You are older/wiser/taller than me; You run faster than me. Many also 
use me in coordinated subjects: Me and my friends went shopping.
6.    Word
Morphemes
Examples (answers vary)
a. monologue
monolog(ue)
mononucleosis, monorail; dia-
logue, analogue, catalogue
b. predispose
predispose
preapprove, predict, premature; 
discern, discuss, dismiss; pose, 
repose
c. receive
receive
redeem, 
resume; 
conceive, 
deceive
d. phonology
phon(o)logy
phonograph, phonetics; biol-
ogy, astrology, zoology
e. decline
decline
deduce, defend, deport; recline, 
incline
f. television
television
telebanking, telegraph, tele-
scope; visible, vision, visor; 
pollution, session, action
g. circumscribe
circumscribe
circumnavigate, 
circumvent; 
scribe, inscribe, prescribe
h. bibliophile
bibliophile
bibliography, 
bibliophagist; 
Francophile, Anglophile
7. a. Dan(n)-y
b. theor-ist-s
c. 
multi-fac-et-ed or multi-facet-ed. Facet comes from French 
facette, a diminutive of face. Most modern English speakers, 
however, probably treat facet as monomorphemic.
d. weather: monomorphemic.
e. monkey: monomorphemic.
f. 
partner-ship-s
g 
hyster-ic-al
h. child-ren (in modern English).

ANSWERS TO EXERCISES  3
 8. Two different morphemes. Wrathful (-ful1) is an adjective meaning 
‘full of wrath’. A handful (-ful2)is a noun roughly meaning the 
amount contained in a hand full of X. Examples of -ful1 include 
graceful, beautiful. Examples of –ful2 include boxful, spoonful, mouth-
ful, houseful.
 9. A.  These spellings are stressed on the penultimate syllable when 
used as nouns and on the last syllable when used as verbs. 
Introducing some technical vocabulary, they are oxytones 
(words stressed on the last syllable) when verbs and paroxy-
tones (words stressed on the penultimate syllable) when 
nouns.
 
B.  The two pronunciations of the verb protest in American 
English are prótest and protést. Protést is the expected pronun-
ciation. Prótest seems to have arisen from the noun protest 
through zero-derivation or conversion (see chapter 4), that is, 
without the addition of a morpheme or a change in its stress 
pattern.
10. Spit-Ø. Reasoning: There are other forms in the language with a 
non-zero past tense. In other words, the zero variant contrasts 
with the non-zero variant. See Principle 4 in this chapter.
11. Singular 
Plural
 
Vater 
Väter 
‘father, fathers’
 
Kind 
Kinder 
‘child, children’
 
Pferd 
Pferde 
‘horse, horses’
 
Mann 
Männer 
‘man, men’
 
Adler 
Adler 
‘eagle, eagles’
 
Kuh 
Kühe 
‘cow, cows’
 
Auge 
Augen 
‘eye, eyes’
 
Frau 
Frauen 
‘woman, women’
 
Auto 
Autos 
‘car, cars’
Ignoring changes in the stem vowel, the allomorphs of the plural 
ending are -er (as in Kinder ‘children’, Männer ‘men’), -e (as in 
Pferde ‘horses’, Kühe ‘cows’), -(e)n (as in Augen ‘eyes’, Frauen 
‘women’), -s (as in Autos ‘cars’), and -Ø (as in Väter ‘fathers’, Adler 
‘eagle’).

4  
ANSWERS TO EXERCISES
12. Answers vary. Speakers bring their acquired knowledge to lan-
guage analysis. Some students may know the prefix holo- ‘whole’ 
and the root caust ‘burn, burnt’. Most or all discussants probably 
consider parade, which came to English from French, monomor-
phemic. Etymologically, however, it has two components, par- 
(‘adorn, beautify; prepare, arrange; dress elegantly’, cf. pare) and 
the suffix –ade (as in calvacade, crusade). Presence is clearly related to 
present (adj.) and so most discussants probably recognize in it two 
morphemes.
13. Zoque
 
kahʃi 
‘hen’
 
libru 
‘book’
 
naka 
‘skin, leather’
 
nanah 
‘mother’
 
p
e
n 
‘man’
 
ʔune 
‘child’
 
wetu 
‘fox’
 
yomo 
‘woman’
 
teʔ 
‘the’
 
-taʔm 
plural
 
-hiʔŋ 
‘with’
 
-k
e
si 
‘on’
 
-kotoya 
‘for’
 
-pit 
‘by means of’
 
-ʃeh 
‘as, like’
 
-tih 
‘just’
 
 ʔune 
diminutive, ‘young of’
 
maŋ 
‘go’
 
min 
‘come’
 
-u 
past
 
-pa 
progressive
 
-tih 
completive (students may create their own term)
 
-ke ʔt 
also

ANSWERS TO EXERCISES  5
14. Congo Swahili
 
Subject prefixes
ni 
1sg 
tu 
1pl
wu 2sg 
mu 
2pl
a 
3sg 
wa 
3pl
 
Subject prefixes, negative forms
si 
1sg 
hatu 1pl
ha 3sg 
hawa 3pl
 
Object prefixes
ni 
1sg 
tu 
1pl
ku 2sg 
nu 
2pl
mu 3sg 
wa 
3pl
 
Verb roots
sem ‘speak’
pik ‘hit’
on ‘see’
 
Other morphemes
na 
found in verbs translated as present tense
li 
found in verbs translated as past tense
taka 
found in verbs translated as future tense
-iz 
causative
-a 
morpheme (not identifiable on basis of data set)
-iw-, -w- passive
-ak- 
remote time
ta 
negative
Chapter Two
 
■
1. No. In the first, [German car] can itself be treated as a compound 
that is combined with dealership. In the second, [rich-country] can 
be treated as a compound that is combined with club. This is an 
unusual formation, and for that reason, these examples jumped 
out at us.

6  
ANSWERS TO EXERCISES
 
 Another example is great white shark breeding program. [Great 
white shark] is itself a compound, which is combined with [breed-
ing program].
2. A phrase. Compare “the mayor of Pittsburgh’s master plan,” where 
the ‘s attaches to the end of the noun phrase [the mayor of Pittsburgh] 
rather than to the noun [mayor].
3. Content words: Row, down,* stream, merrily, dream
 
Function words: your, the, is, but
 
The case of down is somewhat tricky, because in some ways preposi-
tions behave as function words. For example, preposition tends to be a 
closed class, and some languages have a very limited number of them. 
We have chosen to call down a content word here because English has 
so many prepositions, and down has a very specific meaning.
4. The words in column A end in a nasal consonant (phono logical 
 generalization) and they are function words (morphological 
 generalization).
5. Third person singular they is both singular and generic. It is often 
called epicene they. (Epicene is an adjective used to describe words, 
usually nouns, that have a single form to indicate either sex.) For 
discussion of the history of epicene they, see Balhorn (2004).
6. a. 
roast (verb), roast (noun): two different lexemes
b. roaster ‘piece of equipment used for roasting’, roaster ‘chicken 
packaged and purchased for roasting’: two different lexemes
c. 
roast (verb), roasting (participle of verb with the same mean-
ing): same lexeme; roasting (adverb used to modify ‘hot’): dif-
ferent lexeme
d. roast, roasts, roasted (all verbs with the same meaning): same 
lexeme
e. book, books (both nouns with the same meaning): same lexeme
f. 
book, bookie, booklet (all nouns): different lexemes
7. In American English, in sentence (a), have is generally pronounced 
[hæv]. In sentence (b), it is generally pronounced [hæf], although 
[hæv] is also acceptable. Note that in both sentences, have is fol-
lowed by the voiceless alveolar stop [t].

ANSWERS TO EXERCISES  7
 8. Phonological words (3):
[flawrˌ] 
[flawrˌz] 
[flawrˌd]
flour (n) 
flours (n) 
floured
flour (v) 
flours (v) 
flowered
flower (n) 
flowers (n) 
flower (v) 
flowers (v) 
Grammatical words (10): Each of the words listed is a separate 
grammatical word.
Lexemes (4): FLOUR1 (noun), FLOUR2 (verb), FLOWER1 (noun), 
FLOWER2 (verb)
 9. In an item-and-arrangement model, civilization would be formed 
by the concatenation of three morphemes, civil, -ize, and ation. In 
an item-and-process model, the stem civil would be subjected to 
the functions that we could call ‘-ize suffixation’ and ‘-ation suf-
fixation’. Taking sing to sang in an item-and-process model is rela-
tively simple. For example, sing can be subjected to an ablaut 
function that changes the vowel i to a. A possible solution in an 
item-and-arrangement model would be to form sang by the con-
catenation of two morphemes, s_ng and a.
10. Answers vary.
11. Discussion of this question should address both of the following 
observations: (a) many languages have gender systems but (b) the 
gender system of Kujamaat Jóola is different in many respects 
from the gender systems of languages like English (gender in pro-
nouns but not nouns), French (masculine and feminine gender in 
pronouns and nouns), and other languages. We might hypothesize 
that “gender” is a universal category of Language but that it can be 
realized in many different ways in specific languages.
12. Chichewa
 
We can identify six noun classes in the data. There are six noun 
class morphemes, of which one is zero. Most have more than one 
allomorph.
 
Class 1. The noun class prefix has the following allomorphs:
 
mu- 
preceding monosyllabic stems
 
m- 
preceding polysyllabic, consonant-initial stems
 
mw- 
preceding polysyllabic, vowel-initial stems

8  
ANSWERS TO EXERCISES
 
Class 2. The noun class prefix has the following allomorphs:
 
βa- 
preceding monosyllabic stems
 
a- 
preceding monosyllabic stems
 
Class 3. The noun class prefix can be treated as a zero morpheme 
(Ø-), or it may simply be treated as unmarked.
 
Class 4. The noun class prefix is ma-.
 
Class 5. The noun class prefix has the following allomorphs:
 
tʃi- 
preceding consonant-initial stems
 
tʃ- 
preceding vowel-initial stems
 
Class 6. The noun class prefix has the following allomorphs:
 
vi- 
preceding consonant-initial stems
 
vj- 
preceding vowel-initial stems
 
From the data provided, we can describe the noun classes as 
 follows:
 
Class 1: human, singular. Examples: ‘man’, ‘child’, man’s sister’s 
child’
 
Class 2: plural of Class 1
 
Class 3: words for ‘wish, need’ and ‘prayer’, as well as ‘marsh’ 
and ‘friend’, singular.
 
Class 4: plural of Class 3
 
Class 5: word for at least one kind of tree (coconut), as well as 
at least two tree products (calabash, a kind of gourd that grows 
on a tree, and arrow point made of wood) and ‘piece of iron’, 
singular
 
Class 6: plural of Class 5
Chapter Three
 
■
1. Classical Greek
The basic forms of the stems are as follows:
a. aithiop-
b. phleb-
c. phulak-
d. aig-
e. thεt-

ANSWERS TO EXERCISES  9
f. 
elpid-
g. ornith-
h. gigant-
i. 
hrin-
Problems raised by the data: Determining the stem of (c) is straight-
forward: removing the -s of the nominative and the -os of the geni-
tive gives the same result. However, removing the nominative 
suffix -s in (d–i) does not yield the same form as removing the gen-
itive suffix -os. From the data, one may hypothesize that in forms 
like (d), certain stem-final voiced consonants (here /ɡ/) are 
devoiced before a voiceless consonant (here the nominative suffix 
-s). From (e–g, i), it appears that /t/, /d/, /th/ (aspirated /t/), and 
/n/ are assimilated to a following /s/ because of their shared place 
of articulation. We might make two hypotheses regarding (h), first 
that certain words, like gigas, gigantos, have two stems, one used 
for forming the nominative and the other the genitive, or second, 
that /nt/ is assimilated to the following /s/ and the vowel is 
deleted.
2. Answers vary. Positing an underlying representation /himn/ 
for hymn allows us to take hymn to hymnal [himn
e
l] simply 
by adding the suffix -al, but it forces us to explain why the 
 stem-final /n/ is not pronounced in hymn [him]. If we posit an 
underlying representation /him/, then the most streamlined 
analysis would be that both hymn and hymnal are listed in the 
lexicon, and that there is no synchronic derivation of hymnal 
from hymn. Other words ending in -mn include solemn, condemn, 
damn, and autumn; words derived from these include solemnity, 
condemnation, damnation, and autumnal. The underlying repre-
sentation proposed for these words must take into account the 
fact that the final -n of the stem is not pronounced when it is 
word final (e.g., in solemn), but it is when followed by a suffix 
(e.g., in solemnity).
3. Huave, Mexico
To solve this problem, one must first identify the morphemes:
-himb 
occurs in (a, d) ‘broom, to sweep’
-ahndot 
occurs in (b, h) ‘dust (n, v)’
-ʃei 
occurs in (c, f) ‘man, male’
-hta 
occurs in (e, g) ‘female, woman’

10  
ANSWERS TO EXERCISES
n-, na- 
occurs in (a–c, g)
a- 
occurs in (d, h)
The morpheme that has allomorphs is na-, n-, which occurs on 
nouns in this set of data. Na- occurs before consonants, and n- before 
a vowel (n-ahndot ‘dust’).
4. Zoque
‘My’ is expressed by means of  ʔ
e
s plus a nasal consonant, whose 
allomorphs are as follows:
m before p, as in (a, d)
n 
before t, c, as in (c, f)
ŋ 
before k as in (b, e)
The distribution of allomorphs can be explained as assimilation of 
the nasal consonant in place to the first consonant of the stem.
5. Tarahumara, Mexico
Morphological breakdown:
-ku 
appears after mitʃiru (a, b) and ritu (d, e)
-ki 
appears after sikwi (c) and patʃi (h, i)
-ke 
appears after reme (f, g)
-ka 
appears after opatʃa (j, k)
The distribution of allomorphs is determined by the quality of the 
vowel in the preceding syllable. This type of assimilation is called 
vowel harmony. (See discussion of Kujamaat Jóola morphophonology 
later in chapter 3.)
6. Tsotsil, Mexico
A. Identify all morphemes:
-k’uʃ 
‘wedge’
-ʃik’ 
‘prop used beneath an object’
-ʃon 
‘prop used against an object’
vov 
‘crazy’
t’uʃ 
‘wet’
sak 
‘white’
lek 
‘good’
 ʔik’ 
‘black’
tu 
‘smelly’
-i, -u 
verbalizing sufﬁ x
-ub, -ib verbalizing sufﬁ x

ANSWERS TO EXERCISES  11
B. List the morphemes that have allomorphs: Each of the two 
verbalizing suffixes has allomorphs. One is -i, -u; the other 
is –ib, -ub.
C. Describe the phonological distribution of these allomorphs:
-i 
occurs on stems containing u, o (a, c–e)
-u 
occurs on a stem containing i (b)
-ib 
occurs on a stem containing u (i)
-ub occurs on stems containing a, e, i (f–h)
Assuming that a represents a front vowel in Tsotsil, we can 
hypothesize that in each case, the allomorphs of the verbalizing 
suffix containing the high front vowel /i/ (i.e., -i, -ib) attach to 
stems containing a back vowel (o, u), whereas the allomorphs 
containing a high back vowel (i.e., -u, -ub) attach to stems con-
taining a front vowel (a, e, i). More data would allow us to test 
this hypothesis.
7. Set I (examples of full reduplication, where the reduplicant and 
stem are identical): a, j.
 
Set II (examples of partial reduplication, where the reduplicant is of 
the form C(C)a-): b, c, d.
 
Set III (examples of partial reduplication, where the reduplicant is 
of the form C1(C)V(:)C2 and C2 assimilates to the following conso-
nant): e, f, g.
 
Set IV (examples of partial reduplication, where the reduplicant has 
the form CV and is followed by an additional consonant: h, i. The 
additional consonant is /l/.
 
Here are the forms of set II:
b. sʔawrii 
‘retarded growth’ sʔàsʔawraa 
‘ one of retarded 
  growth’
c. 
mòòriyaa ‘usefulness’ 
mammooraa ‘usefulness’
d. gawcˇʔii 
‘brittleness’ 
gàggawsʔaa ‘a brittle one’
We can hypothesize that if the onset of the stem contains only a 
single consonant, this consonant is doubled, but if the onset is 
complex, containing more than one consonant already, no dou-
bling occurs.
8. a. 
Basic allomorph of stem: diplomat
  
Affixed form: diplomacy
  
 Changes to stem: stress shifts from final syllable to penultimate  
syllable; the stressed /o/ of diplomacy is not reduced; /t/ > /s/

12  
ANSWERS TO EXERCISES
b. Basic allomorph of stem: public
  
Affixed form: publicize
  
Changes to stem: /k/ > /s/
c. 
Basic allomorph of stem: different
  
Affixed form: differential
  
 Changes to stem: penultimate syllable of different is deleted in 
casual speech; the same syllable is pronounced in differential; in 
its basic form, different is stressed on the antepenultimate (first) 
syllable /dif/; in differential, the stem is stressed on the final 
syllable /εn/; /t/ > /ʃ/
d. Basic allomorph of stem: sane
  
Affixed form: sanity
  
Changes to stem: /e/ (/ej/) > /æ/
e. Basic allomorph of stem: electric
  
Affixed form: electricity
  
 Changes to stem: stress placement: in its basic form, electric is 
stressed on the penultimate syllable /lεk/; in its affixed form, 
it is stressed on the final syllable /tri/; /k/ > /s/
f. 
Basic allomorph of stem: pollute
  
Affixed form: pollution
  
Changes to stem: /t/ > /ʃ/
9. a. -ness: secondary
  
Other examples: rowdiness, tenderness, perniciousness
  
 How we know that it is secondary: It does not cause a stress 
shift; it does not trigger stem allomorphy, i.e., it attaches to the 
citation form of a lexeme (e.g., lonely, rowdy, tender, perni-
cious); it occurs outside of primary suffixes, as in primitiveness, 
gloriousness; the semantics of forms suffixed with -ness are com-
positional; -ness itself has no allomorphs; it always attaches to 
lexical stems.
b. -ive: primary
  
Other examples: permissive, reactive
  
 How we know it is primary: It triggers stem allomorphy, cf. 
permit and permissive; it occurs inside of -ness, which we have 
just seen is a secondary affix; sometimes the stem to which -ive 
attaches is not lexical (e.g., permiss-).
c. 
-ous: primary
  
Other examples: glorious, timorous, precious

ANSWERS TO EXERCISES  13
 
 
 How we know it is primary: It occurs inside another pri-
mary affix, -ity (e.g., curiosity, preciosity); it attaches to a non-
basic allomorph of the stem (compare price with precious); 
it sometimes attaches to non-lexical stems (e.g., curious, 
 heinous).
 
d. -ship: secondary
 
 
 Other examples: friendship, membership, lordship, appren-
ticeship
 
 
 How we know it is secondary: It does not cause a stress shift; 
it attaches to the basic allomorph of the stem (i.e., the citation 
form of a lexeme); the semantics of the derived form are com-
positional; it always attaches to a lexical stem.
10. Old French
 
A.  Ignoring cross-paradigmatic changes in vowels, we note 
that in early Old French, [f] and [v] alternate as the stem-
final consonant (we find [f] in the 1sg, and [v] elsewhere). 
This alternation is leveled out, with the 1sg [f] ending 
replaced by -ve.
 
B.  Comparing the second column in part A (later Old French) with 
the paradigm in part B, we note that the stem vowel in the modern 
paradigm is consistently ou [u], whereas in later Old French, eu 
occurs in the 1–3sg and 3pl forms, and ou in the 1–2pl.
11. In this secret language, called javanais by users and some-
times infixing javanais by linguists, [av] is inserted between the 
onset and rhyme of the syllable. From the data, we see that if 
the word begins with a vowel (c) or glide (yeux, in j), [av] is 
inserted before the vowel or glide. Regarding inconsistency 
in [av] infixation, as Bullock (1996: 186–7) has already discussed, 
the same diphthong is treated differently in various forms. In 
(a) fois and (k) point, [wa] acts as a nucleus, whereas in (b) poig-
net and (h) pointe, “the [w] portion of the diphthong is treated 
as part of the onset.” In (f)  derrière and (l) variable, “the [j] … syl-
labifies as part of the onset,” but in (c) atelier and (i) bien, “the 
diphthong is vocalic.” More generally (not apparent from 
the data given here), the study of the original researcher 
“reveals, among other things, a great deal of  inconsistencies 
in the  participant’s use of the language game such as the 

14  
ANSWERS TO EXERCISES
 
 occasional addition or deletion of syllables, the repetition of certain 
sounds, and simple lapses in the corpus. This is the risk of perform-
ance data.”
Chapter Four
 
■
1. The relationship between the first and second elements in the com-
pounds in (a-e) is not the same as the relationship between dog and 
house; nor does the word house itself refer to the same sort of struc-
ture.
2. Answers vary. But in our own online search, we found bughouse 
referring to a chess variant, a store that sells Volkswagen parts, and 
a facility run by the Michigan State University Department of 
Entomology where kids can learn about insects.
3. Answers vary.
4. Bound
Free
Spanish, English, 
Irish
Adjectives:
reddish, oldish, prudish, purplish, flattish
Nouns:
childish, boyish, old-maidish, selfish, 
doggish, bookish, Turkish, foolish, 
British, thievish
Verb:
ticklish
Adverb/preposition:
uppish
5. 
Adj
Adj
un
(a)
believ
able

ANSWERS TO EXERCISES  15
 
N
(b)
Adj
stick
i
ness
 
N
(c)
N
Adj
stick
y
s
bun
 
N
(d)
Adj
Adj
un
pretent
ious
ness
 
N
know
it
all
(e)
 
N
(f)
N
un
gentle
man
li
ness
Adj
Adj

16  
ANSWERS TO EXERCISES
6. 
German
car
dealership
(i)
 
German
car
dealership
(ii)
 
rich
country
club
(iii)
 
rich
country
club
(iv)
7. The second one is correct. Un- attaches to adjectives, but not adverbs. 
Therefore, un- must attach to [comfortable], and -ly is attached to 
[uncomfortable].
 
un
comfort
abl
ly
8. 
e
um
a
it
(i)
 
bu
pal
um
a
(ii)

ANSWERS TO EXERCISES  17
Chapter Five
 
■
1. Answers will vary. Among the meanings of run (verb) listed in the 
Oxford English Dictionary that exemplify polysemy, we found “To 
move the legs quickly (the one foot being lifted before the other is set 
down) so as to go at a faster pace than walking,” “To go about freely, 
without being restrained or checked in any way,” “To go or resort to a 
person, etc., esp. for help or guidance,” “To retire or retreat rapidly; to 
take to flight; to abscond or desert,” “To compete, or take part, in a 
race ( for a prize),” and “Of vehicles, etc.: To move easily or rapidly by 
reason of being set on wheels.” The related meanings listed under run 
(noun)1 can also be considered instances of polysemy, e.g., “A single 
act or spell of running,” “A distance covered, or taking a certain time 
to cover, by running.” For a clear example of homophony, contrast all 
these meanings with the archaic run (noun)2, meaning ‘brine’.
The meaning “A tear in a knitted garment or stocking,” listed in 
the Oxford English Dictionary under run (noun)1, is related to the 
basic meaning of run (verb), but it represents a fairly radical shift in 
meaning, and students may want to consider it another example of 
homophony.
2. Answers vary.
3. 
a.  Answers vary. Among the meaning of waters, we find the fol-
lowing: ‘flood’, as in flood waters; ‘flowing water or water 
moving in waves’: deep waters, great waters, etc.; different 
bodies of water, as in eastern waters.
 b. rices: different types of rice
 c. fishes: different types of fish
 d. Air, referring to atmospheric air, is almost always singular. 
We encounter airs when the meaning refers to something 
countable (e.g., the Oxford English Dictionary has “In BMX 
biking, skateboarding, snowboarding, etc.: an aerial manoeu-
vre or jump,” “a current or draught of air,” “Melody,” “Any 
of the movements performed in advanced dressage,” “An 
assumed manner, affected appearance, show”).
e–h. These are typically not found in the plural.
Analysis: For words like water, rice, fish, and air, a plural in -s is 
found when the noun refers to something which is countable.

18  
ANSWERS TO EXERCISES
4. b. CaCoC
c. 
CaC
d. CaCoC
e. CaCiC
f. 
CaCuaC
g. CaCuC
h. CaCoC
i. 
CaCoC
j. 
CeCeCeC
Yes, a semantically-based pattern emerges. Colors have the pattern 
CaCaC. Examples are kaxol ‘blue’, ʔadom ‘red’, varod ‘pink’, yarok 
‘green’. An exception is texelet. We might hypothesize that it is formed 
on a different pattern because it has a different etymological source.
5. Full of X 
An X full of …
careful 
handful
deceitful 
earful
prayerful 
mouthful
sorrowful 
bagful
playful
 
The second –ful is productive. We can create words like diskful and 
computerful.
6. a.  No. In dancer, -er is a deverbal suffix with the meaning ‘some-
one or something connected with what the base denotes’ (par-
aphrased from Marchand 1969: §4.30.1). Other examples 
include baker, potter. The suffix -er of all-nighter is one that is 
frequently attached to compounds and syntactic phrases 
(Marchand 1969: §4.30.24), yielding a variety of types of mean-
ings. Examples include three-decker, two-seater, and upper-and-
downer ‘wrestling match’.
b. No. Badger is monomorphemic.
c. 
Yes. In both cases, the suffix –y forms denominal adjectives. In 
both words, the base noun denotes a liquid and the suffixed 
form has the meaning ‘resembling that liquid’.
d. No. In He’s done it, ‘s is a clitic that is in complementary distri-
bution with has. In He’s here, it is a clitic in complementary dis-
tribution with is.
e. No. In funny, -y is a suffix that forms denominal adjectives. In 
Bobby, -y is a hypocoristic suffix (also spelled -ie).

ANSWERS TO EXERCISES  19
f. 
Yes. In both cases, the suffix attaches to a noun denoting a 
material (wood, gold), and the derived adjective has the mean-
ing ‘made of, consisting of X’ and ‘resembling, like X’.
g. No. In merriment, -ment is a nominal suffix. Cement is mono-
morphemic.
h. No. In friendly, -ly is an adjectival suffix meaning ‘appropri-
ate to, befitting’. Other examples are ghostly, kingly, manly, 
scholarly. In quickly, -ly is an adverbial suffix that attaches to 
an adjective base. Other examples are gently, nicely, produc-
tively.
i. 
Yes, the two strings (-er, -or) are instances of the same suffix 
which creates deverbal nouns with the meaning ‘someone or 
something connected with what the basis denotes’ (see discus-
sion of dancer in [a] above).
j. 
Yes. The suffix -ess forms feminine nouns that are parallel to 
masculine forms (cf. duke, sorcerer).
 7. In the chapter we noted that the meaning of zero-derived verbs is 
constrained only by the meaning of the base noun. The meaning 
‘showing films on a screen’ fulfils this requirement.
 8. Answers vary.
 9. Answers vary. With respect to (e), it is worth noting that a koala is 
not a true bear.
10. Answers vary.
11. In some cases, but certainly not all, there is similarity between the 
morphemes within a given position class. For example, both the 
resultative and resultative negative are in 2-; both the resultative 
negative and the negative imperative are in 2-; both object and pas-
sive are in -2 (in a passive construction, the direct object is elimi-
nated). But, for example, the regular negative is in -1.
12. Answers vary.
13. Answers vary. But discussion should address the fact that in some 
languages, like English, causative, reflexive, and reciprocal are 
expressed syntactically, whereas in Kujamaat Jóola they are 
expressed through morphemes.

20  
ANSWERS TO EXERCISES
14. Causative, reflexive, strong reflexive, reciprocal: all of these mor-
phemes occur close to the stem, inside inflectional morphology. In 
addition, derivation generally results in a change in lexical mean-
ing, as these do.
15. A possible analysis would be that the noun class prefix does not 
itself trigger a change in meaning, but that a change in meaning 
drives the selection of a noun class prefix.
Chapter Six
 
■
1. Italian
parl-o 
parl-av-o
parl-i 
parl-av-i
parl-a 
parl-av-a
parl-iamo 
parl-av-amo
parl-ate 
parl-av-ate
parl-ano 
parl-av-ano
parl- 
‘speak’
-av- past
 
 
sg
 
pl
1
-o
-iamo (in present paradigm)
-amo (in past paradigm)
2
-i
-ate
3
-a
-ano
In both paradigms, endings exemplify cumulative exponence, 
expressing both person and number. (We might consider present 
tense to be unmarked.) In the past tense paradigm, the suffix -av- is 
an example of simple exponence.
2. Zapotec
Identify all morphemes:
geta 
‘corncake’
bere 
‘chicken’

ANSWERS TO EXERCISES  21
doʔo 
‘rope’
yaga 
‘wood’
diʔiʤa 
‘word’
palu 
‘stick’
kuba 
‘dough’
tapa 
‘flour’
s-  
possessive
-be  
‘his’
-luʔ  
‘your’
 
List the morphemes with allomorphs:
geta, keta 
‘corncake’
bere, pere 
‘chicken’
doʔo, toʔo 
‘rope’
diʔiʤa, tiʔiʤa 
‘word’
Describe the distribution of allomorphs having phonologically 
definable positions of occurrence: Devoicing of the voiced stop con-
sonants /b/, /d/, /g/ following the voiceless fricative /s/ accounts 
for the distribution of allomorphs.
Discuss the data in terms of exponence: Based on this data, it 
appears possessive marking is accomplished through extended 
exponence, with the prefix s- and a suffix denoting person.
3. It can be seen from the data that in a nominative–accusative case 
system, the subject of the verb receives case-marking that differenti-
ates it from the object of a verb, i.e., that singular subjects of a given 
declension receive the same case-marking (domin-us, serv-us), as do 
plural subjects of a given declension (domin-ī, serv-ī ); and a different 
set of endings is found on direct objects. In an ergative language, 
“the subject of an intransitive clause is treated in the same way as 
the object of a transitive clause, and differently from transitive sub-
ject” (Dixon 1994: 1). In the data from Dyirbal, we see that the sub-
ject of an intransitive verb (a, b) and the object of a transitive verb 
(c, d) pattern together in occurring with absolutive case (which is 
unmarked) and that subjects of transitive verbs bear ergative case-
marking.
4. a. Derivation
b. Inflection

22  
ANSWERS TO EXERCISES
c. 
Inflection
d. Derivation
e. Derivation
f. 
Inflection
g. Inflection
h. Derivation
i. 
Derivation
j. 
Derivation
5. a. 
Derivation. Change in meaning.
b. Derivation. Change in meaning and grammatical category.
c. 
Derivation. Change in meaning.
d. Derivation. Change in meaning and grammatical category.
e. Inflection. The meaning of the root stays the same.
f. 
Inflection. The meaning of the root stays the same. Number is 
an abstract syntactic category realized through inflection.
g. Derivation. Change in meaning.
h. Derivation. Change in meaning and grammatical category.
i. 
Derivation. Change in meaning.
6. Sudan Colloquial Arabic
Identify morphemes:
kitab 
‘book’
axu  
‘brother’
-i, -y 
‘my’ 
-na 
‘our’
-ak  
‘your’ (m.sg.) 
-kum 
‘your’ (m.pl.)
-ik, -ki 
‘your’ (f.sg.) 
-kan 
‘your’ (f.pl.)
-u, -hu 
‘his’ 
-um, -hum 
‘their’ (m.)
-a, -ha 
‘her’ 
-in, -hin 
‘their’ (f.)
Distribution of allomorphs:
-i, -u, -a occur after consonants.
-y, -hu, -ha occur after vowels.
7. Based on the data, it appears the third person singular indicative of 
-er verbs in Spanish is formed by adding -e to the stem. Some stems 
are also subject to allomorphy. Types of allomorphy encountered 
are the following: /e/ > /i/, as in (a, b); /e/ > /ie/, as in (h, i, k); 
/o/ > /ue/ as in (j, l, m).

ANSWERS TO EXERCISES  23
8. Rewrite each form:
 
Past
a. CaCaCti, 1sg
b. CaCaCta, 2m.sg
c. 
CaCaCt, 2f.sg
d. CaCaC, 3m.sg
e. CaCCa, 3f.sg
f. 
CaCaCnu, 1pl
g. CcaCtem, 2m.pl
h. CCaCten, 2f.pl
i. 
CaCCu, 3pl
Present
a. CoCev, m.sg
b. CoCeCet, f.sg
c. 
CoCCim, m.pl
d. CoCCot, f.pl
Describe the formation of the past and present tense: 
Generalizations about the paradigms include (a) that in the past, 
forms are inflected for both person (1, 2, 3) and gender, whereas 
in the present, only number and gender are marked, and (b) that 
inflection for person and number in most of the past tense forms 
and all but the masculine singular present form involves both 
changes to the vowels between the root consonants and the addi-
tion of suffixes.
9. a. 
ʔeCCoC, 1sg
b. tiCCoC, 2m.sg
c. 
tiCCCi, 2f.sg
d. yiCCoC, 3m.sg
e. tiCCoC, 3f.sg
f. 
niCCoC, 1pl
g 
tiCCCu, 2m.pl
h. tiCCoCna, 2f.pl
i. 
yiCCCu, 3m.pl
j. 
tiCCoCna, 3f.pl
The patterns of the future differ from those of the past and 
present seen in (8). Along with the past, the future contrasts with  
the present in showing agreement for person, gender, and number, 

24  
ANSWERS TO EXERCISES
as opposed to just gender and number. The future differs from 
both past and present in having prefixes. Students can break 
down the forms even further, observing that, based on this data, 
it appears ʔe- is the exponent of 1sg, ti- of second person (both 
genders) and third person feminine, yi- of third person mascu-
line, ni- of first person plural, -u of masculine plural, and -na of 
feminine plural. This could be confirmed and revised if neces-
sary by looking at other examples of future paradigms.
10. a.  go/went: These originally belonged to two separate verbs. The 
original past tense of go was replaced by the past tense of wend.
 
b.  good/better: good has no comparative form of its own. As with 
good/went, the suppletive comparative form better comes from 
a different stem altogether.
11. a. Affixation; loaded
 
b. Ablaut; drink/drank
 
c. Suppletion; bad/worse
12. Forms with plural subjects have a characteristic tonal pattern, a 
high tone on monosyllables, and level then high on words with 
two syllables.
13. Answers vary, but students will want to observe that agreement 
marking on the verb does not merely reflect features of a subject 
noun phrase that is present. Similarly, we have seen that verbs 
bear subject markers even when there is no subject noun phrase 
expressed.
Chapter Seven
 
■
1. Answers vary. Possibilities for discussion include the following. 
(a) Inflectional categories are universal, appearing over and over 
again in the world’s languages in a limited set. But they are not stable 
cross-linguistically. (b) Gender is frequently a category in the world’s 
languages, but the genders and kinds of genders vary greatly. (c) Even 
when different languages have the same grammatical-function-
changing phenomena, they might be realized in different ways, and 

ANSWERS TO EXERCISES  25
whereas some languages have grammatical-function-changing affixes, 
other languages use words or a combination of words and affixes.
2. Answers vary.
3. Ganja Balanta: -ud, -id. Applicative affix.
4. a. 
Passive.
b. Applicative.
c. 
Causative.
5. Students’ new, more detailed diagrams will need to represent
●  both the prefix and suffix portions of the first person plural 
inclusive subject markers;
●  the ordering of indirect object pronouns before direct object pro-
nouns (position-2 suffix);
● the co-occurrence of the dubitive-incompletive marker with other 
position-1 suffixes and the observations that it may precede or 
follow -erit (habitual negative), -ut (negative), -
c
rut ‘not yet’, -
c
rul
c
:t 
‘toward speaker’ (negative), and -ul
c
 ‘toward speaker’; but that it 
always precedes the other variants of -ulo, -u, and –ul, as well as 
the habitual marker and the second portion of the first person 
plural inclusive subject circumfix (see “Aspect” in the Kujamaat 
Jóola section for discussion);
●  doubling of the dubitive-incompletive marker;
●  flexibility in the ordering of the second member of the emphatic 
-e:n;
●  the position of the second member of the past subordinate 
marker when it co-occurs with the dubitive-incompletive suffix 
and the ‘toward speaker’ marker (see “Emphasis and subordina-
tion” in the Kujamaat Jóola section).
It would also be worth discussing the convenience of a diagram like 
the one at the beginning of the Kujamaat Jóola section and the fact 
that preparing such a simplified diagram requires careful analysis 
of verb morphemes and an understanding of what different mor-
phemes have in common, both in terms of their position and in 
terms of their meaning. Preparing a summary diagram can actually 
be more time-consuming than preparing a more detailed one, but 
both have their merits.

26  
ANSWERS TO EXERCISES
6. Kujamaat Jóola bound object pronouns do not participate in verb 
stem reduplication because inflectional morphology is not consid-
ered part of the stem. The stem is made up of a root plus certain 
derivational affixes.
7. In contrastive constructions, the dubitive-incompletive suffix 
-e:n is emphasized through doubling. This exemplifies composi-
tional semantics, because, as noted in the chapter, it is as if 
each instance of the suffix contributes a degree of meaning. let- is 
a resultative prefix (related to futurity) and a negative 
marker. Combining let- with -e:n results in a construction that 
indicates that an action missed taking place or will not be accom-
plished (i.e., the action did not result, will not result). In other 
words, the resulting interpretation is both dubitive/incompletive 
and negative. Regarding the question of whether these are unam-
biguous examples of compositional semantics or problematic in 
some respect, answers may vary, but as part of class discussion, 
instructors can ask students to discuss whether the analysis of 
the compositionality of these affix combinations can be reversed. 
If we came across a familiar stem with both of these affixes, not 
knowing their combined meaning ahead of time, would we be 
able to predict the meaning of the complex form on the basis of 
its parts?
8. a. 
Simple exponence:
  
 1, 2, 3 singular pronouns (this assumes singular number is 
unmarked)
  
bound object pronouns
  
-e noun emphasis
  
-e:n dubitive-incompletive
  
noun class markers
  
-ut negative
  
-ul
c
 toward speaker
  
pan- resultative
  
pi resultative clitic
  
e- habitual
  
-m ~ -mi simple subordinate
b. Cumulative exponence:
  
 2, 3 plural subject pronouns (express person and plural 
number)

ANSWERS TO EXERCISES  27
  
-erit habitual negative
  
 -
c
rut not yet (students can discuss why classifying this as an 
example of simple exponence can also be motivated)
  
-
c
rul
c
:t toward speaker (negative)
  
le- ~ let- resultative negative
c. 
Extended exponence:
  
inclusive and exclusive 1pl subject circumfix
  
ba- … -er past subordinate
9. Answers vary, but Kujamaat Jóola clearly expresses through affixes 
many categories that in English are expressed with words. Students 
can provide specific examples.
Chapter Eight
 
■
1. Answers vary.
2. The occurrence of highth in today’s English is facilitated by the exist-
ence of width and (probably to a lesser extent) length, which have 
similar meanings. We personally have encountered highth most 
often in situations where others speak of measuring the highth and 
width of something.
3. Answers vary. Coolth is sometimes used facetiously.
4. The list of words in the problem demonstrates that -ly is able to 
attach to both vowels and consonants (e.g., (e) pretti-ly; (a) quiet-ly), 
to monosyllables and polysyllables (e.g., (d) slowly, whose stem is 
slow; (e) prettily, whose stem is pretty), to simple stems and to stems 
that already contain another suffix (from the data, we know only 
that it can attach outside -al): e.g., (d) slowly, (f) ungrammatically. 
Examples (h–k) suggest that the only phonological constraint on 
the appearance of this affix is that it cannot attach to a word 
already ending in ly, whether the ly sequence is a morpheme, as 
in (j) *kindlily (kind-ly + ly) or part of the stem, as in (i) *uglily (ugly 
+ ly). We are unable to come up with any counterexamples in 
which the adverbial suffix -ly attaches to a word that already 
ends in -ly. Student examples of other words containing this -ly 
suffix will vary.

28  
ANSWERS TO EXERCISES
5. The English suffix -en attaches to monosyllables that end in an 
obstruent. Thus it may not attach to words ending in a vowel (e.g., 
blue, as in (n) ) or sonorant consonant (e.g., green, as in (m) ), or to 
polysyllabic stems (e.g., orange, as in (k) ). (Instructors may wish to 
point out to students additionally that -en can surface outside 
another suffix, namely -th, as in lengthen. -th does not add a syllable 
to the stem.)
6. Barker (1998) found that -ee suffixation is constrained by three fac-
tors, and standee exemplifies all three. (i) The referent of the newly 
derived noun must be sentient. A standee is sentient. (ii) The referent 
of the noun is typically characterized by a lack of volitional control. 
That is true of the definition and example of standee given in the 
problem. (iii) The -ee noun and the stem must be episodically linked. 
This is also true of standee: every instance of standing qualifies some 
individual as a standee, and for every standee, there is a standing 
event that qualifies him or her as a standee.
7. We might expect blocking to prevent these words from occurring, 
because linguistic, democratic, and explain already exist. There are 
various reasons for why words like this are nonetheless created by 
speakers. Linguisticky has a different meaning than linguistic and 
would normally be used in informal situations to mean ‘sort of lin-
guistic, having to do with linguistics’. Often affixes with particular 
meanings are added to words that already have that meaning so as 
to reinforce the meaning. Thus, explanify and democratical sometimes 
have the same meaning as explain and democratic. (Here are two 
examples from inflection: children historically has two plural suf-
fixes, -er and -en, and some English-speaking children create forms 
like hiddened—‘it was hiddened’, forming the past participle with 
two suffixes instead of one). Students may give other reasons for 
why these forms occur.
8. Answers may vary, but in many cases the child’s form seems to be 
blocked by the fact that a word or phrase with the same meaning 
already exists and is readily available to adult speakers: (a) hair me 
seems to be blocked by brush my hair; (b) rocker by rock; (c) broom by 
hit with broom; (d) lawn by mow the lawn; (e) superman by pretend to be 
superman; (g) cast by put a cast on; (h) babysitter by babysit; (i) decora-
tion by decorate; (j) chocolate by put chocolate in. The remaining one, 

ANSWERS TO EXERCISES  29
(f), seems to be infelicitous because magic does not have enough to 
do with the act of disappearing.
 9. a. 
 re- is productive and can be added to new coinages, e.g., re-IM, 
re-text.
b. un- is productive, e.g., unmugglelike.
c. 
for- is not productive.
d. hyper- is productive. But it often has the meaning ‘very’ (as in 
hyper-exciting) and it could be argued that in such a context it 
is a stand-alone word and not a prefix.
10. a, e, f, g.  Not very productive, though it is possible to create 
forms containing them. Others might agree with us that 
the following forms would be acceptable to speakers of 
English: (a) donatorship, (e) houseling (someone who lives 
in a house, probably a specific type of house, perhaps in 
another dimension or other fictional world), (f) Toddster 
(the nickname of one of our cousins), (g) universitydom.
b.  Not very productive. We are hard pressed to create a 
new form in -ance.
c, d.  Quite productive. -wise can attach to lots of nouns, e.g., 
‘Exercise-wise, we hope this is a useful book’, and adver-
bial -ly is readily applied to stems by some English 
speakers as if -ly suffixation is a productive rule or proc-
ess. Note that some English speakers can use bare adjec-
tives as adverbs: ‘This engine runs smooth/quiet’.
11. Alcoholic can be broken down into two parts, alcohol and -ic. In 
the other forms listed, the suffix has been reanalyzed as -oholic ~ 
-aholic, i.e., part of the word alcohol is contained within it. -oholic ~ 
-aholic attaches to monosyllables, and so chocolate is truncated, result-
ing in what appears to be a blend of chocolate and alcoholic, chocoholic 
(although the blend cannot be said to contain the meaning of alco-
holic, only the sense ‘has trouble resisting something intended for 
human consumption’). We can create other words on the same pat-
tern, e.g., blendaholic ‘someone who is crazy about blends’.
12. a. gripper
 
b. gurgler
 
c. delouser

30  
ANSWERS TO EXERCISES
 
d. spiffer upper
 
e. cooler downer
 
f. 
rubbish inspector
 
g. squid eater
 
Verb + -er: straightforward.
 
Verb + particle + -er: -er suffixes attach to both verb and particle.
 
Verb + noun: the morphological form has the order Noun + Verb 
+ -er.
13. Answers vary.

