
Wild Profusion

Series Editor
Paul Rabinow
A list of titles in the series appears at the back of the book

Wild Profusion
BIODIVERSITY CONSERVATION IN AN
INDONESIAN ARCHIPELAGO
Celia Lowe
P R I N C E T O N
U N I V E R S I T Y
P R E S S
P R I N C E T O N
A N D
O X F O R D

Copyright © 2006 by Princeton University Press
Published by Princeton University Press, 41 William Street, Princeton, New Jersey 08540
In the United Kingdom: Princeton University Press, Oxford
All Rights Reserved
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Lowe, Celia, 1961–
Wild profusion : biodiversity conservation in an Indonesian archipelago / Celia Lowe.
p.
cm.—(In-formation series)
Includes bibliographical references (p. )
ISBN-13: 978-0-691-12461-2 (cl : alk. paper)
ISBN-10: 0-691-12461-2 (cl : alk. paper)
ISBN-13: 978-0-691-12462-9 (pbk.)
ISBN-10: 0-691-12462-0 (pbk.)
1. Biological diversity conservation—Indonesia—Togian Islands. 2. Biological diversity
conservation—Indonesia—Togian Islands—Social aspects. I. Title. II.In-formation series
(Princeton University).
QH77.I5L69
2006
333.95′1609598—dc22
2006041598
British Library Cataloging-in-Publication Data is available
This book has been composed in Sabon
Printed on acid-free paper. ∞
pup.princeton.edu
Printed in the United States of America
1 3 5 7 9 10 8 6 4 2

CONTENTS
Preface
vii
Acknowledgments
xiii
List of Abbreviations
xvii
INTRODUCTION
Between the Human and the Wild Profusion
1
PART ONE
Diversity as Milieu
27
CHAPTER ONE
Making the Monkey
33
CHAPTER TWO
The Social Turn
53
PART TWO
Togean Cosmopolitics
75
CHAPTER THREE
Extraterrestrial Others
81
CHAPTER FOUR
On the (Bio)logics of Species and Bodies
106
PART THREE
Integrating Conservation and Development
129
CHAPTER FIVE
Fishing with Cyanide
135
CHAPTER SIX
The Sleep of Reason
154
Appendix: Scientiﬁc, Military, and Commercial Explorations
in the Togean Islands and Vicinity: 1680–1999
167
Notes
171
References
181
Index
193


PREFACE
AS I DEPARTED for the last time from the Togean Islands of Central Su-
lawesi, in August of 1997, the sun was blood red and the horizon envel-
oped by a smoky haze. Indonesia was burning. It was the dry season, but
this would be like no dry season ever before. Over the ensuing months,
the dense haze would form a cloud of smoke across Southeast Asia as
wide and broad as the footprint of the United States. Fires of that El Nin˜o
year would cause planes to crash and ships to run aground, harm public
health, destroy property and livelihoods, deplete biodiversity, and force
President Suharto to issue a public apology to Indonesia’s Southeast Asian
neighbors. This dry season would prove to be an unprecedented environ-
mental disaster for Indonesia.
Many different explanations for the ﬁres emerged (Colfer 2002; Har-
well 2000). For the most part, the state pursued its conventional strategy
of blaming swidden agriculturalists and subsistence farmers for degrading
the land and igniting the ﬂames. Sometimes it was suggested that the
sparks necessary to start the ﬁres were caused by trees rubbing together
or by lightening bolts. Authorities declared that anyone who attributed a
cause to the ﬁres other than the unusual El Nin˜o was a “Communist,”
which effectively prevented the media from speculating on alternative ex-
planations. Some nationalists wanted to blame foreign corporations, de-
spite the fact that foreign investors in the Indonesian forestry sector all
had domestic allies, including President Suharto’s own family and busi-
ness partners.
But an unprecedented triumph also emerged out of the smoke and ash:
Indonesian nongovernmental organizations (NGOs) were able to counter
the state’s rhetoric that blamed the devastation on small-scale farmers,
the rubbing of tree-limbs, foreigners, and the weather. For the ﬁrst time,
activists were able to make the case that the ﬁres were coming from state-
owned forests and oil palm plantations and were a consequence of the
government’s own forest conversion policies. They made this argument
by appropriating the new scientiﬁc technology of Geographic Information
Systems (GIS), pinpointing the exact locations of the ﬁres and mapping
these locations onto state and commercial properties. Produced through
“science,” the satellite images were politically unassailable, and the Indo-
nesian Forum for the Environment (Walhi) was able to use them to bring
lawsuits against logging corporations despite the status and power of the
major actors involved in forest conversion and timber harvesting.
Wild Profusion tells the story of a time (the decade culminating in the
ﬁres of 1997–98) when the Indonesian environment had become a point

PREFACE
viii
of concern for social and environmental activists, scientists, and for many
ﬁshers and farmers across the country who were suffering from both de-
graded environments and from accusations that they were responsible for
destroying nature. My narrative approaches the status of Indonesian land
and marinescapes through one speciﬁc framing of nature: biodiversity.
Biodiversity, in 1990s Indonesia, implied a particular assemblage of na-
ture, nation, science, and identity—making Indonesians’ mapping of the
concept distinct within the transnational biodiversity practices and dis-
courses circulating widely at the time. As with the ﬁres, Indonesia’s great-
est environmental disaster, biodiversity loss entails complex struggles over
responsibility and blame, ﬁnance and proﬁt, technoscience, nationalism,
cultural and ethnic diversity—even over the nature of nature itself.
In Wild Profusion I tell of Indonesian scientists and their efforts to
document the species of the Togean Islands, to economically and socially
“develop” Togean people, and to turn the archipelago into a new na-
tional park. These elite Indonesians sought to produce a biological sci-
ence that was both internationally recognizable and politically effective
in the Indonesian context in order to incite positive social and environ-
mental outcomes.
At the same time, I describe experiences of Togean people, especially
people of Sama ethnicity. Sama and other Togean residents, as marginal
Indonesian citizens, were often blamed for destroying the environment,
despite the fact that well-connected entrepreneurs and state development
projects were responsible for the major transformations in Togean land
and marinescapes. Togean people had their own understandings of nature
and nation, however, and stories of nature-making can also be narrated
from their perspectives.
Wild Profusion is likewise a story of Togean nature. It details changes
in Togean land and marinescapes, and contests over what should count
as signiﬁcant or valuable forms of nature for Togean peoples, traders and
bureaucrats, tourists, and international and domestic biologists. It tracks
nature’s ability to shift its “nature” depending on who is doing the observ-
ing. And it takes seriously the decline in species diversity and abundance
on a global scale.
I began to study the intersection of Indonesians’ conservation biology,
Sama lives, and Togean nature in 1993. My initial approach to this con-
vergence was shaped by my background in political ecology and in the
critical perspectives of what anthropologists were calling then a “culture
and political economy” school. In the 1990s such an approach provided
a clear formula for determining winners and losers in the transnational
political economy. Such analyses of both environmentalism and economic
development prepared me well to: ﬁrst, recognize how conservation and
development regimes have tended to substitute a belief in pure nature and

PREFACE
ix
instrumental rationality for others’ natures and ideas; second, see how
these regimes can extend the power of the state through coercive practices
of cultural and economic mystiﬁcation; and third, to recognize the ways
economic development programs continually fail to improve human wel-
fare while conservation initiatives are hardly ever able to save nature.
Once I was in Indonesia, however, this theoretical background placed
me in a quandary. While at ﬁrst it was difﬁcult to see anything else in the
Togean project but political and economic injustice in many forms, I was
also developing a certain friendship with, and anthropological loyalty to,
the scientists and activists whose work I was following. These scientists
were deeply committed to their program of conservation and develop-
ment, and saw their work as a point of hope for the nation. Moreover,
one of the very ﬁrst things I discovered in Indonesia was that scientists
were quite sensitive to criticism from foreign scholars and were continu-
ally evaluating me as to what kind of person I was: was I the type of
foreign scholar who wanted to tell them how they had it all wrong, or
could I also learn from them and value their contributions? How was I
to maintain my analytic perspective on the political logics of conservation
and development, and simultaneously continue to share an empathic rela-
tionship with Indonesian scientists who believed that conservation biol-
ogy and projects of economic development would contribute to the ad-
vancement of their nation?
It was ultimately my Indonesian colleagues themselves who taught me
to see their work in a new light. In their questioning of my understanding
of conservation, and in their reading of my theories as criticism of them
(as individuals and as a national community), it became clear that the
problem of how to hold the situatedness of Indonesian’s science in simul-
taneous tension with the questions of justice raised by Togean conserva-
tion was central to my work and should be explored rather than deli-
cately avoided. I would need to ﬁnd a way to take Indonesian scientists
and their Togean work seriously, while retaining my awareness that bio-
diversity conservation was capable of further marginalizing Togean peo-
ple and their ability to live within the natures and histories they them-
selves sustained.
My desire simultaneously to understand scientists’ and Sama peoples’
perspectives on Togean natures, even when they were in conﬂict, led me
down an empirical path marked by an increased attention to the details
of biology and conservation I witnessed, and by noticing differences not
only between, but within, the categories “Sama” and “Indonesian scien-
tist.” In the realm of theory, this practice led me to new literatures in
science and technology studies and in postcolonial theory. The ethno-
methodological approach of recent science and technology studies has
helped me to track the micropractices of both scientists and Sama people

PREFACE
x
“in action,” and to understand the co-constitution of science and society,
things and people. Postcolonial perspectives, alternatively, have provided
a framework for understanding identity and subjectivity; postcolonial the-
ory develops the sense of politics missing from much scholarship in sci-
ence and technology studies. Wild Profusion is, thus, situated within the
emerging theoretical terrain of postcolonial science studies in an attempt
to hold in tension the diverse ways of seeing, knowing, and being that
belong to both Indonesian scientists and Sama people.
An additional consequence of the mid-1990s political economy ap-
proach to anthropology was that it was easy to lose sight of “nature” and
the fact of documented losses in the abundance and variety of life forms
on earth. While biologists have often been misguided in their methods for
convincing the rest of us of the value of biodiverse nature, this says noth-
ing of the existence (or disappearance) of plants and animals themselves.
As Vandana Shiva (2000) has demonstrated so clearly, to be against coer-
cive neoliberal conservation or the corporatization of life is not to be
against life itself in a plurality of forms. It is, in fact, to recognize the
widest possible diversity of life—especially those forms of agricultural
diversity that conservationists tend to overlook, and those forms of cul-
tural diversity that are so easily pushed aside by state, corporate, and
scientiﬁc natures.
Another issue for the story of Wild Profusion, then, is how to maintain
an antifoundationalist perspective on nature while simultaneously re-
maining attentive to the stories of nature biologists wish to tell. It would
make no sense, after all, to be in favor of less biological diversity. Nor
does it make sense to see biologists and conservationists as the most harm-
ful actors in scenarios of social abjection or schemes to remake nature in
one’s own image. This will not be a book written against the diversity of
life or against the biodiverse natures biologists make. It is, however, a
narrative that questions the methods we use to understand and maintain
nature’s variety, and that asks whose vision of nature the wild profusion
can and should sustain.
In retrospect, the ﬁres were only one kind of conﬂagration to sweep
across Indonesia in 1997–98. When I left the Togean Islands that Septem-
ber, making my way back to the city of Manado to depart from Indone-
sia, I discovered that the rupiah, the Indonesian currency, had fallen pre-
cipitously. This was the start of the Asian economic crisis, which began
with currency scandals in Thailand and ended with currency devaluation
and widespread economic dislocation across the region. As the value
of the rupiah continued to drop, prices for basic goods and necessities
(sembako), such as cooking oil, kerosene, rice, sugar, tea, and chili pep-
per, began to rise to untenable levels. At the same time, the International

PREFACE
xi
Monetary Fund and the world ﬁnancial community withdrew its support
from Indonesia.
As a consequence, the Indonesian people began to raise their voices in
a manner unheard of since the early 1960s under Indonesia’s ﬁrst presi-
dent, Sukarno. Protests and riots broke out in cities across the country.
Cries for “reformation” (reformasi) were met with some (temporary)
restraint by the Army, which was not in utter disagreement with the
popular perception that things were going poorly. When three students
were shot in a protest at Trisakti University in Jakarta in May of 1998,
that was the end for Suharto, Asia’s longest reigning dictator and leader
of a state best characterized by crony capitalism, coercive governance,
and its leader’s “darling status” amongst northern governments during
the Cold War. The end of the Suharto regime led to social upheaval,
including the rapes and murders of Chinese Indonesians in Jakarta, Mus-
lim-Christian violence across the Maluku Province and Dayak-Madu-
rese ﬁghting in Kalimantan, a series of shopping mall arsons in major
cities, the re-emergence of “ninja” killings in Central and East Java and,
most notably, a referendum granting independence to East Timor (occu-
pied by Indonesia since 1975).
These many sharp transitions unsettled how so many of us had been
thinking about Indonesia. Although everyone understood that Suharto
could not live forever, it seemed impossible, after thirty-three years, to
imagine an Indonesia without him. Due to the strength and duration of
his rule, the man had become a metonym for the state and all of its prob-
lems. It had been easy to place the Indonesian nation within the black
box of the “Suharto” state, and to blame everything on the man himself—
from coercive national language policies, media censorship, state rituals
domesticating cultural and ethnic difference, to unequal natural resource
policies. The effect Suharto’s fall from power had on many of us, foreign
scholar and Indonesian citizen alike, was that for the ﬁrst time we were
forced to think beyond good and evil. If Indonesians were going to invent
for themselves a new nation-state in the post-Suharto era, they could only
do so based on their experiences of life during those darker times.
In relation to Togean science, this suggests I needed to search for the
counterhegemonic forms of thought and action that might have existed
previously within neoliberal, state-supported, biodiversity conservation.
Those moments, where Indonesian scientists were thinking thorough the
possibilities of the nation-form from within the constraints of the New
Order state and transnational capital, were one location for the alterna-
tive political imaginations that might now become transformative or even
libratory in the post-Suharto era. Along the way, an analytic of thought,
or “reason,” has become useful to my project. Reason allows me to put
Sama and scientist into the same frame, each group struggling to solve

PREFACE
xii
particular problems of nature and nation within the degrees of freedom
and constraint encompassed by late–New Order Indonesian conditions.
As an analytic, reason allows us to move beyond good and evil, in
Nietzsche’s sense, to construct a genealogical understanding of biodiver-
sity conservation in Indonesia.
In Wild Profusion I describe Indonesians’ science and Togean peoples’
natures in the context of the structures of subjection and abjection within
which the Indonesian people were living in the waning years of the New
Order. Rather than a story of the horrors of the time, however, my inten-
tion is to provide here a more hopeful narrative. In reﬂecting upon the
possibilities and limits of 1990s biodiversity conservation in Indonesia
through an analytic of postcolonial science, and through genealogies of
reason, I desire to introduce new possibilities for thought and to open
new spaces in which Indonesian scientists, Togean people, and Sulawesi
natures each will be able to live, even to thrive.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
THE JOURNEY required to research and write a book such as this is al-
ways multisited, and entails a proliferation of debts of gratitude. First
and foremost I wish to acknowledge the many Indonesian people who
made this work possible. In the Togean Islands, scientists and Sama peo-
ple brought me along and taught me what they knew of everything from
watching birds to diving for sea cucumber, from counting butterﬂy ﬁsh
to cyanide ﬁshing, often at risk to themselves. The conventions of anthro-
pology and the nature of my work dictate that I am obliged to rely on
pseudonyms in this book. Except in the case of public ﬁgures and scien-
tists with extensive publishing records, the personalities in Wild Profu-
sion are composite characters, although the events and statements all
actually happened or were related to me. Disguised as they may be, this
book is written with very real gratitude to those actual persons who
stand behind the ﬁgures I write of here.
In Indonesia, I am grateful to the Indonesian Institute of Science (Lem-
baga Ilmu Pengetahuan Indonesia) for granting permission to conduct
this study. Nelly Paliama of the Jakarta Fulbright ofﬁce deserves special
mention for her dedicated friendship and tireless assistance. I especially
wish to thank the many friends and colleagues from the Indonesian con-
servation community who helped along the way: Suraya Aﬁff, Pak Amir,
Susi Darnedi, Rili Djohani, Christo Hutabarat, Reed Merrill, Mo-
chamad Indrawan, Tim Jessup, Reny Juita, Adrian Lapian, Pak Pili,
A. Hadi Pramono, Ida Purbasari, Chris Rotinsulu, Ari Supandi, Dedy
Supriady, Jatna Supriatna, Wendy Tan, Fadjar Thufail, Graham Usher,
and Arif Wicaksono. The Wewengkang-Tengker family gave me a home
I could always return to in Manado and I am forever appreciative of
their kindness. Several Indonesian and international conservation NGOs
also provided invaluable assistance. I wish to thank Conservation Inter-
national, Kelola, The Nature Conservancy, Walhi, the World Wide Fund
for Nature, Yayasan Bina Sains Hayati Indonesia, Yayasan Ibnu Chal-
dun, and Yayasan Sejati.
This work began as a dissertation project in the Department of Anthro-
pology at Yale University where Harold Conklin, Nancy Peluso, James
Scott, and Tinuk Yampolsky each contributed the selﬂess act of teaching,
and where Joseph Errington provided invaluable guidance as dissertation
advisor. I was fortunate to have an amazing cohort of fellow student col-
leagues each working on topics of nature and/or Southeast Asia at Yale:
Gene Ammarell, Amity Doolittle, Chris Duncan, Lisa Fernandez, Emily

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
xiv
Harwell, Cathryn Houghton, Jake Kosek, Hugh Rafﬂes, Curtis Renoe,
Janet Sturgeon, and Eric Tagliacozzo each contributed to my thinking.
Two intellectual communities in California changed forever how I view
my work. I was privileged to be a visiting scholar in anthropology at U.C.
Santa Cruz in 1997–98. A particularly gracious and inﬂuential learning
community, U.C. Santa Cruz transformed the way I view the possibilities
for my discipline and for scholarship in general. Tim Choy, Melanie Du-
puis, Donna Haraway, Cori Hayden, Sarah Jain, Ravi Rajan, Shiho Sa-
tsuka, and Jonathan Scheuer were supportive in this regard. There are
simply not enough words to express my gratitude to Anna Tsing, who
risked the ferry ride to the Togean Islands, and whose work on Kaliman-
tan is my model for scholarly engagement with Indonesia. In 2002–3,
as an S.V. Ciriacy-Wantrup fellow in Natural Resource Studies at U.C.
Berkeley, I had the good fortune to work again with Nancy Peluso in
the Department of Environmental Science, Policy, and Management. The
Berkeley environmental politics community, including Suraya Aﬁff,
Amita Baviskar, Lea Borkenhagen, Louise Fortmann, Gillian Hart, Don-
ald Moore, and Michael Watts, were key to my rethinking of cultures of
nature. In anthropology, Paul Rabinow was especially gracious to read
my work and to help me develop my thinking in science studies. His writ-
ings have been especially inﬂuential.
Since I arrived at the University of Washington in 1999, I have found
the Department of Anthropology to be a generous and supportive intellec-
tual community that has encouraged my disciplinary thinking and teach-
ing in a variety of ways. Ann Anagnost, Laada Bilaniuk, Rachel Chap-
man, James Green, Daniel Hoffman, Miriam Kahn, Charles Keyes, Peter
Lape, Rebecca Lemov, Kathleen O’Connor, Arzoo Osanloo, Lorna
Rhodes, Kalyanakrishnan Sivaramakrishnan, and Janelle Taylor have all
inspired my work. The Center for Southeast Asian Studies at the Univer-
sity of Washington has also continually supported me intellectually and
otherwise. Kiko Benitez, Mary Callahan, Patrick Christie, Judith Henchy,
Christoph Giebel, Daniel Lev, Marjorie Muecke, Vince Rafael, Pauli San-
djaja, Laurie Sears, and Sara VanFleet have all been excellent colleagues
and friends. Laurie Sears and Daniel Lev each generously read the entire
manuscript and provided much appreciated feedback. I am grateful to
Wolfgang Linser who assisted me in ﬁnding and interpreting Dutch lan-
guage historical documents. Tani Barlow of the Critical Asian Studies Pro-
gram, and Kathleen Woodward of the Simpson Humanities Center, have
also supported my work. My students at University of Washington—
Cheryll Alipio, Chris Brown, Hanh Bich Duong, Diane Fox, David Giles,
Yu Huang, Pat McCormick, Chingchai Methaphat, Rebeca Rivera, Leila
Sievanen, Mia Siscawati, Asep Suntana, Woonkyung Yeo—have been sig-
niﬁcant interlocutors.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
xv
Seven women, in particular, have provided an exceptional level of
friendship, conﬁdence, and critical support that have been invaluable to
my ability to thrive as a person and a scholar. I wish to express heartfelt
appreciation to Suraya Aﬁff, Lyn Criddle, Miriam Kahn, Nancy Peluso,
Lorna Rhodes, Laurie Sears, and Anna Tsing. Jane Bixby Weller, whose
lionﬁsh I ﬁrst encountered on Ahe´ Island in the Tuamotu Archipelago,
generously created the artwork, “Three Lines,” for this book. Her image
is a magical and much appreciated gift. Karl Taylor kindly granted me
permission to use his image of Susunang village. Charles Zerner, who
enjoyed my stories of the sea from the start, and Philip Yampolsky, with
whom I traveled through the Sulawesi highlands in search of song, have
also been inspiring. Thanks to Rick Mazzotta for his friendship and work
on the manuscript in 2004.
Scholarship requires the faith and promissory notes of outside funders,
and I have been fortunate in this regard. This research was supported by
National Science Foundation Grant SBR-9628940, a Fulbright IIE under
the sponsorship of the American-Indonesian Exchange Foundation, an
S.V. Ciriacy-Wantrup Postdoctoral Fellowship in Natural Resource Stud-
ies from U.C. Berkeley, the University of Washington Graduate School,
the University of Washington Center for Southeast Asian Studies, the Yale
University Department of Anthropology, and a Mellon Fellowship in Hu-
manistic Studies.
Earlier versions of three chapters of Wild Profusion have appeared in
print before. Chapter 1 is revised from the article “Making the Monkey:
How the Togean Macaque went from ‘New Form’ to ‘Endemic Species’
in Indonesians’ Conservation Biology,” in Cultural Anthropology
19(4):491–516 (© 2004 American Anthropological Association). Chap-
ter 3 has been reworked from “The Magic of Place: Sama at Sea, on Land,
in Sulawesi, Indonesia,” in Bijdragen tot de Taal, Land, en Volkenkunde
159(1):109–133 (© 2003 KITLV Press). An earlier version of chapter 5
appeared as “Global Markets, Local Injustice in Southeast Asian Seas:
The Live Fish Trade and Local Fishers in the Togean Islands of Sulawesi,
Indonesia,” in People, Plants, and Justice: The Politics of Nature Conser-
vation, edited by Charles Zerner (© 2000 Columbia University Press, re-
printed with permission of the publisher). At Princeton University Press I
wish to thank my editor, Fred Appel, and two anonymous reviewers.
Finally, I wish to thank my family for their encouragement, and for
supporting my adventures and sense of curiosity over the years. To my
mother, Jeanette, for insisting that I write for a wide audience; to my
father, Richard, for caring enough to ask if the book is done yet, and to
my brother, Steven, for inspiring me through his own courage and success.
I dedicate Wild Profusion with much admiration and love to them.


ABBREVIATIONS
CI
Conservation International
DPR
Dewan Perwakilan Rakyat (National Parliament)
FFI
Fauna and Flora International
GIS
Geographic Information System
GOI
Government of Indonesia
IFABS
Indonesian Foundation for the Advancement of
Biological Sciences
ITMEMS
International Tropical Marine Ecosystems Manage-
ment Symposium
JICA
Japan International Cooperation Agency
LIPI
Lembaga Ilmu Pengetahuan Indonesia (Indonesian
Institute of Science)
LSM
Lembaga Swadaya Masyarakat (People’s Self-
Improvement Leagues)
ODA
Overseas Development Agency
PKI
Partai Komunis Indonesia (The Communist Party
of Indonesia)
TNC
The Nature Conservancy
UI
University of Indonesia
UNDP
United Nations Development Program
USAID
United States Agency for International Development
VOC
Verenigde Oostindische Compagnie (The Dutch East
India Company)
Walhi
Wahana Lingkungan Hidup Indonesia (Indonesian
Forum for the Environment)
WCS
Wildlife Conservation Society
WPTI
Wildlife Preservation Trust International
WWF
World Wide Fund for Nature


Wild Profusion


Introduction
BETWEEN THE HUMAN AND THE WILD PROFUSION
[The naturalist] looks upon every species of animal and
plant now living as the individual letters which go to
make up one of the volumes of our earth’s history; and,
as a few lost letters may make a sentence unintelligible,
so the extinction of the numerous forms of life which the
progress of cultivation invariably entails will necessarily
obscure this invaluable record of the past. It is, therefore,
an important object, which governments and scientiﬁc
institutions should immediately take steps to secure, that
in all tropical countries colonized by Europeans the most
perfect collections possible in every branch of natural
history should be made and deposited in national
museums, where they may be available for study and
interpretation.
—Alfred Russel Wallace, “On the Physical Geography
of the Malay Archipelago”
IN APRIL OF 1996, I hiked through the upland forest that runs along the
narrow central crest of Malenge Island with two biologists from Jakarta,
Yakup and Budi, and with Pak Ahmad, a local ranger hired by the scien-
tists to work at their research station, Camp Uemata.1 We were there to
collect new forms of herpefauna: lizards, snakes, and frogs. Together we
scrambled up muddy slopes, grabbing hold of verdant branches and
shrubs to pull us up, breathing hard. We scanned the trees for pythons
and the ground for lizards. In the clearings we stopped to gaze at the
vistas of the coast, and we rested against the architecturally fabulous but-
tress roots of the forest’s huge dipterocarps. When we began to be bitten
by red ants, which never seemed to take very long, we would move again,
eyes ﬁxed on the trail and underbrush, poking through bogs with sticks,
constantly on the lookout for tiny eyes peering back at us.
Species uniqueness and endemism were the salient features of place de-
limiting a Togean nature the biologists wanted to claim as “biodiverse.”
To do this they needed to observe, record, and document species that were
only found in the Togean Islands. Yakup spotted some lizards with blue
tails that he suspected were “new to science.” We dove with our hands
out—to the left and to the right of the trail—trying to grasp the elusive
electric-blue tails. We placed the lizards in plastic bags with air holes to

Introduction
2
let them breathe, although later they would end up in a formaldehyde
bath, and Budi would send them traveling to the Smithsonian Institution
for conﬁrmation of their uniqueness. Laboratories in Washington, D.C.,
and other EuroAmerican scientiﬁc institutions were important for de-
termining the speciﬁcity of this place and for conﬁrming Yakup and Budi’s
acts of discovery and nature-making.
We passed through Budi’s plots marked off with strings, where he had
kept track of three thousand trees of various sizes for the past several
years. Through his marking, measuring, and counting, he was developing
a scientiﬁc record of the trees in the forest. He knew their species names,
when they would ﬂower, and how fast they were growing. Further on
down the trail, we descended into a cave that Yakup had found. The
ceiling was lined with hanging bats awakened by our movements, and the
ﬂoor was layered in guano. Yakup reminded me that it is not only human
agency that is capable of transforming a place—bats are important for
pollinating the trees of the Malenge forest. When we continued on Budi
noticed a striped spider, ten centimeters long, hanging in its web between
some leaves and vines. He took a photograph, a close-up still life that
would later trigger memories of the walk, coding this place as nature and
reminding us of its aesthetic perfection down to its smallest details.
In our movements through the Togean landscape, scientists’ stories of
species endemism vied with the narratives of plants and animals Togean
people wanted to tell. Whereas biologists were most cognizant of the ﬁg
trees that provide food for the Togean macaque, an unusual monkey liv-
ing on the island, Pak Ahmad was aware that the dipterocarps scientists
value as signs of a “wild” forest are excellent trees for canoe-building.
Walking along the path, Ahmad, who was born on Malenge Island, told
us of snakes. Togean pythons have been known to eat deer, pigs, and even
small children. Sliding his hand rapidly through the air, he showed us how
a snake strikes. He and several others had once rescued a boy in a garden.
A python had wrapped itself around the child and was beginning to take
his breath away when they discovered him. They unwound the snake, tail
ﬁrst, before attacking it with their machetes.
Ahmad’s ways of knowing Togean ﬂora and fauna called biodiverse
nature into question. Bees will pollinate and snakes will wind, yet what
is deemed important in a landscape depends on who is looking. Biologists
found monkeys and lizards intellectually gratifying, while Sama people
found the monthly ﬂowering of the sea grasses—an event overlooked by
Togean biologists—to be aesthetically alluring. Natures are “made” at
the intersection of humans with their particular social histories, and
plants and animals with their unique evolutionary and ecological histor-
ies. Neither “science” nor “society” will tell us all the interesting things
one might want to know about these natures. To proceed further, one

Between the Human and the Wild Profusion
3
must travel along a path between the human and the wild profusion. This
is the path we will follow here.
The Togean Islands and Biodiversity
The Togean Islands2 a small archipelago in the middle of the eastward
facing Gulf of Tomini, harbor a volcano, which erupted as recently as
1983, and six raised limestone islands.3 Small, craggy, thinly soiled islets
bordering the shores of the main islands create anchorages, mangrove-
lined boat passages, and resource collecting sites for Togean Island peo-
ples. Small settlements intermittently punctuate the shoreline; houses
built from cement, wood, and other forest materials lie at the edges of
the land, or on stilts over the fringing coral substrate. There are no tele-
phones or newspapers, and the only road is in Wakai town on Batu Daka
Island. Coconut palm and vegetable gardens spread from coasts into the
interiors. Forests in the midst of these encroaching cultivations supply
Togean people with canoe timber, sago palm, medicinal plants, and other
useful vegetation. Togean forests are also home to many insects, herpe-
fauna, and mammals of interest to biologists, who are concerned by evi-
dence of forest clearing. Upon ﬁrst glance, many signs of habitation in
the landscape are hidden, however. One tends to notice only the over-
whelming verdancy.
Surrounding Togean waters reﬂecting a violent equatorial sun contain
coral reefs, sand banks, sea grass beds, and azure depths. Togean people
collect subsistence and market-oriented marine goods in these waters, of
which ﬁsh and sea cucumber (trepang, S:bale*) are the most important.
Beyond the reef, in deeper waters, pelagic ﬁsh school, drawing local ﬁsh-
ers and commercial boats from the mainlands of North and Central Su-
lawesi. Ferry boats make irregularly scheduled rounds between the islands
and the mainland towns of Gorantalo, Poso, and Ampana. To the south
of the islands, the mountains of Central Sulawesi are visible. To the north,
only the waters of the Gulf of Tomini are in view. Biologists are concerned
with the health of Togean reefs and waters. People have ﬁshed the sur-
rounding reefs with both dynamite and cyanide, and several kinds of sea
creatures, like the Napoleon wrasse ﬁsh, are threatened with local extirpa-
tion. But when one looks out at the expanse of Togean waters, coral reefs,
ferry routes, and ﬁshing sites are obscured. One notices, at ﬁrst, only vari-
ous shades of blue.
* “S” represents a Sama language term throughout the book. The other terms
in parentheses are Bahasa Indonesia, the Indonesian national language.

Introduction
4
What do these expanses of primary colors interspersed with rare habi-
tations offer us as a site for understanding biodiversity and its conserva-
tion? The term “biodiversity” emerged as a new mode of biological and
social organization in the United States in the mid-1980s.4 Coming, as it
did, after several decades of heightened attention to environmental risk,
biodiversity, as a particular framing of nature and culture,5 began to reor-
ganize earlier notions of natural history, wilderness, taxonomy, ecology,
natural variety, species, and the like. Biodiversity was not so much a
solution to the problem of environmental risk, however, as its problema-
tization. It instigated a new form of critical inquiry into the relationship
between entities conceived of as “nature” and “the human.” Thrust into
the light was, on the one hand, nature, understood as the linkages be-
tween genetic variation, species populations, communities and ecosys-
tems, and land and marinescapes and, on the other hand, humanity, with
its ability to instigate what biologist Michael Soule´ has termed the “sixth
great extinction.”
Simultaneously, biological science itself was restructured around the
biodiversity problematic. The task of protecting and restoring biodiver-
sity was articulated with the sciences of population genetics, evolutionary
biology, systematics, landscape ecology, and the study of ecosystems to
form the new ﬁeld of conservation biology. Unlike nineteenth-century nat-
ural history, or twentieth-century wildlife biology, conservation biology
is self-consciously “mission-oriented” and sees itself as comparable to
medical research in its goal of intervening in ailing systems.6 Conservation
biology is unusual among the natural science disciplines in that its value
orientation—identiﬁed in terms of biodiversity’s utilitarian and inherent
worth—is explicit. This new science sees its object of study as threatened,
and describes the state of plants and animals in terms of crisis. As a scien-
tiﬁc practice, it is focused on intervention and is self-consciously directed
toward solving its urgencies.
Biodiversity also encompasses an important geographic dimension.
Conceptualized through the variety and uniqueness of species, diverse life
is not uniformly distributed. Rather, regions with large numbers of spe-
cies, where many unique life forms are found, tend to be concentrated in
the tropics. Conservation biologists recognize roughly twenty-ﬁve “hot-
spots” as having this hyperdiversity. Since most hotspots are located in
the rainforests and on the coral reefs of the global South, the peoples of
tropical nations—both non-EuroAmerican biologists, and those who live
in close proximity to tropical ﬂora and fauna—have taken on a particular
signiﬁcance within the biodiversity problematic.
Several elements have made this particular assemblage of nature and
culture under the sign of biodiversity possible. First, biologists observe an
exponential reduction in the diversity of species forms across the globe.

Between the Human and the Wild Profusion
5
They identify habitat loss, degradation, fragmentation, the introduction
of non-native species, and over harvesting as metacauses of a new rate of
extinction. While a conservative estimate of the current rate of species loss
is 27,000 species per year, far more species are considered endangered,
vulnerable, or rare (Wilson 1992:280). Conservation biologists use the
language of apocalypse, hemorrhaging, and holocaust to describe the de-
cline in the abundance and variety of life forms.7
The emergence of biodiversity as a new form has also coincided with
the global rise of the nongovernmental organization (NGO). NGOs are
non-state institutions that nevertheless affect policy and aim to trans-
form debates across national borders. Keck and Sikkink (1998) have de-
scribed the inﬂuence of what they call “transnational advocacy net-
works.” Activists forming these transnational networks (scientists along
with women’s, labor, and human rights advocates) are motivated primar-
ily by values rather than economic gain. Networks of scientists and oth-
ers concerned with the value of biodiversity and its loss link activists
across borders; the World Wide Fund for Nature (WWF), Conservation
International (CI), and The Nature Conservancy (TNC) are three of the
largest advocacy NGOs forming the institutional backbone of this trans-
national assemblage.
Further, biodiversity has emerged at a contingent moment in postcolo-
nial history. Under the logics of natural history and wildlife conservation
(at least until the early 1990s), EuroAmerican experts held the important
positions of authority in scientiﬁc nature-making projects across the tropi-
cal world.8 This condition is increasingly rare, however. For example,
when I ﬁrst began working in Indonesia in 1994, the Jakarta ofﬁces of
WWF, CI, and TNC all had EuroAmerican administrators, while by the
time I left in 1997 each organization had hired an Indonesian director to
oversee its domestic programs. Positions of leadership and authority in
ﬁeld biology and conservation management are now occupied by scien-
tists and other experts from the South. The conjuncture of biodiversity’s
tropical geography, the emergence of indigenous scientiﬁc expertise, and
increased assertions of domestic bureaucratic authority in the realm of
nature conservation, have shaped the particular understanding of biodi-
versity that this book will explore in detail.
Biodiversity conservation in the 1990s often proposed a particular solu-
tion to the problem of nature and the human in the form of the Integrated
Conservation and Development Program (ICDP). Noting the ubiquity of
conservation failures, the ICDP was premised on an understanding that
previous efforts at wildlife conservation had not taken into sufﬁcient con-
sideration the needs of the people who live around conservation areas.
These needs were interpreted in rational economic terms (by the biologists
and economists who environmental NGOs tend to employ) as the ability

Introduction
6
to derive income from surrounding natural areas. If alternative income
sources could be found, the theory went, then people would stop hunting,
ﬁshing, gathering, felling, burning, planting, and all the other activities
that threaten rare plants and animals in and around protected areas. In-
creased access to markets, land privatization, and ecotourism were key
components of this neoliberal solution.
As a cultural formation, biodiversity conservation can be tracked glob-
ally. In order to understand conservation in a generative way, however,
rather than as a set of established discourses, it is necessary to graph it at
its speciﬁc sites of production. Wild Profusion is an ethnographic account
of the rationalities surrounding a particular instance of mid-1990s biodi-
versity conservation. It concerns how biodiverse nature was made in the
Togean Islands of Sulawesi, Indonesia between 1988 and 1998, how the
main actors in the Togean conservation project (Indonesian biologists and
Togean people) constituted and were constituted through projects of na-
ture-making, and how the nation was critical to both the particularity of
the Togean biodiversity project itself and to the subjectivities formed
within the context of Indonesian science. Examining the ensuing conﬁgu-
ration in a speciﬁc locality allows us to understand the emergent rationali-
ties and identities, and the multiple natures, resulting from the project to
conserve Togean biodiversity.
The Togean Islands ﬁrst appeared as a potential conservation area in
the early 1980s. Following upon traces in the scientiﬁc literature written
by late-nineteenth- and early-twentieth-century natural historians who
had documented bird and coral varieties there, Indonesian and Euro-
American scientists arrived to establish the potential of the site for a na-
ture reserve.9 Then in the early 1990s, through the work of conservation
biologist Jatna Supriatna and his students, the Togean research station,
Camp Uemata, was built and an enduring project of conservation re-
search and management commenced. Two institutions, the new Indone-
sian Foundation for the Advancement of Biological Sciences (IFABS)
based in Jakarta, and Conservation International based in Washington,
D.C., then jointly set their sites on turning the islands into a national
park.10
I call this work a multisited ethnography in a single locality because of
what the Togean Islands as a singular site can reveal of the travels of
cultural meanings, objects, and identities across wider ﬁelds of engage-
ment. Although biodiversity was a transnational practice, it took on shape
and speciﬁcity through the work of Indonesian biologists to document
species and implement a program of conservation and development, and
the islands and their biophysical properties always meant different things
to different people. The project collapses easy deﬁnitions of “nature”
since Indonesian scientists, EuroAmerican biologists, commercial traders,

Between the Human and the Wild Profusion
7
bureaucrats, and diverse Togean people each engaged with Togean land
and marinescapes in discontinuous ways—producing the archipelago as
contrastive and contested “sites.” Rather than the “conventional mise-
en-sce`ne of ethnographic research” (Marcus 1995), the Togean Islands
should be understood as a locality generative of cosmopolitan imaginings
of science, nation, and biodiversity conservation.
The Togean archipelago is positioned particularly well to tell this story,
located, as it is, at the intersection of three signiﬁcant lines: Wallace’s
Line; the equator; and the tip of a strand of rattan that, legend has it,
connects the islands to the former Sultanates of Ternate and Bone. These
are the threads to which we will now turn.
Wallace’s Line
In the mid-nineteenth century, Alfred Russel Wallace, the naturalist who
devised a theory of natural selection independently from and simultane-
ously with Charles Darwin, observed a division in the morphology of
birds and mammals across a line that separates the islands of Bali and
Lombok in the south, and Borneo from Sulawesi in the north. “Wallace’s
Line,” as it became known, divided the eastern half of the Indonesian
archipelago from its western portion and demarcated a biogeographic
division between Asiatic and Australian fauna. Later marks on the map
(a second Wallace’s Line, Lydekker’s Line, Huxley’s Line, and Weber’s
Line) express the controversy that once existed over precisely where the
proper division was to be made (Daws and Fujita 1999:74). Now, the
region encompassing the island of Sulawesi is understood to be a zone of
transition and is referred to by the name “Wallacea.” In general terms, to
the Australian side of the zone the marsupial order dominates among the
mammals, while the Asiatic side is dominated by placental mammals.
In the collision between Asian and Australian land masses, the fauna
of these regions became mixed and commenced a unique pattern of bio-
logical evolution (Whitten, Mustafa, and Henderson 1987:37–52). Su-
lawesi’s separation from Borneo by a deep ocean trench, and the complex-
ity of its geologic history, have given the island a very high level of
vertebrate endemism: 62 percent of Sulawesi’s 122 mammals are endemic.
If one were to eliminate bats from the calculation, the rate is closer to 98
percent, striking compared with the 18 percent rate of endemism on the
neighboring island of Borneo. More species of macaque monkey exist on
Sulawesi than anywhere else in the world, and of more than 300 species
of birds, 30 percent are endemic, the highest ﬁgure for any island other
than New Guinea. Sulawesi is home to the Maleo, a bird that incubates
a 250 gram egg in the island’s volcanic sands, and the Babirusa, a “deer

G
u
lf 
of 
To
mi
ni
Ternate
TOGEAN ISLANDS
SULAWESI
Gulf
of
Bone
Una Una
Malenge
Walea Bahi
Walea Kodi
Talatakoh
Batu Daka
Togean
Walla
ce’s L
ine 1
863-
1880
Wa
llac
e’s li
ne 19
10
00°
00°
"Three Lines,” by Jane Bixby Weller

Between the Human and the Wild Profusion
9
pig” with four long tusks that curl back toward its head. The largest
Sulawesi mammal is the Anoa, a dwarf genus of buffalo of which there
are two species. Two kinds of cuscus, the Bear cuscus and the nocturnal
Tree cuscus, and the world’s largest snake, the Reticulated python, live in
Sulawesi trees. And the island has four high lakes, each with its own
endemic fauna, including an unusual species of blind shrimp only found
in caves.
What to make of this profusion of unusual and fascinating creatures?
On the one hand we might insist, along with many biologists, that the
meaning and value of this abundant nature is self-evident, the importance
of such unusual and natural diversity speaks for itself. This perspective is
intrinsic in the writings of biologist Edward O. Wilson, who describes
this way his passion for enumerating the “diversity of life”:
In the realm of physical measurement, evolutionary biology is far behind
the rest of the natural sciences. Certain numbers are crucial to our ordinary
understanding of the universe. What is the mean diameter of the earth? It is
12,742 kilometers (7,913 miles). How many stars are there in the Milky
Way, an ordinary galaxy? Approximately 1011, 100 billion. How many genes
are there in a small virus? There are 10 (in a fX174 phage). What is the mass
of an electron? It is 9.1 × 10-28 grams. And how many species of organisms are
there on earth? We don’t know, not even to the nearest order of magnitude.
(Wilson 1992:132)
On the other hand, anthropologists, historians, and science studies
scholars who do not claim the value of nature as singular or self-evident,
have been at the center of debates over the social constructedness of sex
and gender, kinship, race, and other formulations that might otherwise be
articulated in biological terms. In relation to the biophysical environment,
social scientists have argued that people are involved in shaping many
spaces that are overdetermined to be “natural,” that the idealist separa-
tion of “humans” from “nature” is an event historically and culturally
speciﬁc to the European Enlightenment, and that any understanding of
nature will always depend upon processes of representation and the sub-
jectivity of those claiming to represent such a nature.
Along similar lines, science studies scholars are responsible for intrigu-
ing efforts to get beyond the sense that nature must be either foundational
or found only in language. In the wake of the so-named “science wars,”
this group of thinkers has made intense efforts to “take nature seriously,”
without necessarily taking its forms as self-evident.11 For example, An-
drew Pickering, who has studied the particle physics of Donald Glaser,
writes, “Now I can clarify my sense of material agency. It is simply the
sense that Glaser’s detectors did things—boiling explosively or along the

Introduction
10
lines of tracks or whatever—and that these doings were importantly
separate from Glaser. To understand what happened when Glaser took a
passive role in the dance of [material] agency, I think one has to acknowl-
edge that some other source of activity and agency was at work, and in
this case that source was the material world” (Pickering 1995:51–52).
Yet, material agency is not the same thing as intentionality, Pickering ar-
gues: “My argument is that we need to recognize that material agency is
irreducible to human agency if we are to understand scientiﬁc practice.
Nevertheless, I need to stress that the trajectory of emergence of material
agency is bound up with that of human agency. Material agency does not
force itself upon scientists” (53).
Likewise, Bruno Latour has argued that “nature” is an ally of “truth”
only when all scientiﬁc controversies are settled. Before that moment, no
one really knows what nature will say. “When you attack a colleague’s
claim, criticize a world-view, modalize a statement you cannot just say
that Nature is with you: ‘just’ will never be enough. You are bound to use
other allies besides Nature. If you succeed, then Nature will be enough
and all other allies and resources will be made redundant” (Latour
1987:98). This is not to argue, he would say, against the existence of
substances and objects in historical time, yet we have to understand such
historicity in terms of the production of things: “History of science does
not document the travel through time of an already existing substance.
Such a move would accept too much of what the giants demand. Science
studies documents the modiﬁcations of the ingredients that compose an
articulation of entities” (Latour 1999:162).
These scholars of technoscience help us to see how an object becomes
a different “thing” or “substance” in the world over time, with each
new “articulation of entities” or set of associations encompassing it. An
attention to forms, assemblages, conjunctures, and histories will help us
to understand how “Togean nature” would have been a different object
in Wallace’s period of ninteenth-century natural history (where, for one,
specimens should be reposited in museums by colonial governments to
teach us earth’s history) than in Indonesian scientists’ biodiversity
(where, instead, nature must be preserved in situ for some combination
of “human” and “Indonesian” posterity). Emphasizing the active mate-
riality of nature helps us to keep in focus both the unusualness of faunal
forms in the region called “Wallacea,” and the moment in time when
scientists reassembled matter, institutions, experiments, and identities
around Togean Island plants and animals to produce a nature that could
be named “biodiverse.” It also lets us predict that the green and blue
hues of Togean land and marinescapes may be something altogether dif-
ferent for Togean people who assembled other material, institutional,

Between the Human and the Wild Profusion
11
experimental, and identitarian forms around an encompassing Togean
ﬂora and fauna.
Hemispheric Divides
A second line running across the Togean archipelago is the equator. The
equator marks a metageography (Lewis and Wigen 1997) dividing global
“North” from global “South.” This invisible line is a displacement of the
earlier metageography, “East” and “West,” which for many generations
has represented the specter of deep inherent divisions—divisions of sci-
ence, reason, modernity, development, and similar civilizational ruptures.
From the perspective of such a divided world, the term “Indonesians’
science” would be an oxymoron, since the global South purportedly
stands for belief and unreason. From a more critical perspective, however,
“Indonesians’ science” demonstrates the limitations, indeed the false-
hood, of this modernist parsing of North and South. By now, the question
is not whether the divide is accurate or not, but rather what the “truth-
effects” of such a proposition are. What kind of labor does the “Western
science” synecdoche perform in the process of creating identities and ex-
pectations? The truth-effects of hemispheric divides are a problem that
will thread their way continually across the narrative of this text.
How do we study these effects in relation to conservation biology in
Indonesia? In moving past the terrain of ethnoscience (disavowing its ten-
dency to bifurcate types of knowers), in rethinking the idea of the ﬁeld
(instilling a focus on elite subjectivity), and in provincializing EuroAmeri-
can science itself (one response to anthropology’s autocritique), anthro-
pologists and other science studiers now take as their problem spaces the
laboratory, the nuclear test site, cyberspace, and the hospital setting. To
the extent that we have reincarcerated science within the bounds of Eu-
rope and North America in the process, science remains a metonym for
EuroAmerican modernity and rationality, and Indonesia and the rest of
the global South remain the lands of farmers and ﬁshers living out “alter-
native” modernities. But what of science and reason produced beyond
EuroAmerica? What of the natural sciences in Indonesia that do not ﬁt
into those locally circumscribed forms of knowledge conventionally stud-
ied as “ethnoscience” or “indigenous knowledge”?
When I ﬁrst began to search for a research site in eastern Indonesia in
1994, I visited three different conservation projects: Bunaken National
Park in North Sulawesi, Taka Bonerate Park in South Sulawesi, and the
Togean Islands. Both Bunaken and Taka Bonerate were managed by Euro-
American consultants employing Indonesian ﬁeld and ofﬁce assistants,

Introduction
12
and only the Togean Island project was run entirely by Indonesian scien-
tists and staff. I believed (it turned out, correctly) that I would learn more
interesting things from these Indonesian experts than I could from expa-
triate consultants with whom I shared a quite similar educational and
social history. Although I could not predict what I would ﬁnd, I assumed
that there would be something “different” about the Togean project as a
result of its nationalization.
My research with the scientists entailed living and working at Camp
Uemata, participating in the scientists’ ICDP activities in the Togean Is-
lands, attending conservation meetings with IFABS and CI in Jakarta
and Palu (the capital of Central Sulawesi), and interviewing Indonesian
and EuroAmerican conservation practitioners in Jakarta, Manado, and
Central Sulawesi. What I discovered in the process of accompanying bi-
ologists in their species inventories, or participating in meetings and dis-
cussions about Togean conservation, was that difference and similarity
are both part of the story of biodiversity in Indonesia. Indonesians’ scien-
tiﬁc and conservation management practices were distinct from, but also
very much the same as, what could be found elsewhere in the global
travels of the mid-1990s biodiversity paradigm.12 I came to understand
that these questions of comparability were also important to Indonesian
scientists who sought recognition but also desired a sphere of autonomy
for their work.
I witnessed, for example, the frustration Indonesian scientists some-
times felt in their collaborations with foreign scientists, and heard the
comments some of these same EuroAmerican visitors made. “The only
thing disappointing about this experience at the [Togean] research sta-
tion,” one foreign scientist said, “is that there are no real scientists work-
ing here.” Processes of negation were constitutive of the Indonesian sub-
ject of 1990s conservation biology. While science studies is an invaluable
rubric through which to understand Indonesians’ conservation biology,
it is also insufﬁcient to explain the interplay of similarity and difference
that exists across the imagined hemispheric divide. The “postcolonial
condition,” as it is known, goes further in explaining the subjectivities
produced through Togean science where Indonesians struggled to attain
a voice in an international ﬁeld.
Although the autonomy of the nation has secured a space for Indone-
sians within transnational science, and these biologists are now mentors,
partners, and colleagues of EuroAmerican scientists in producing natural
scientiﬁc knowledge, they still face many challenges: the terms for what
can be considered “good” science are often set somewhere else; Indone-
sians are frequently expected to contribute only data, rather than theory;
Indonesian scholars are required to know EuroAmerican literatures while
the inverse is not usually the case; and EuroAmerican scientists continue

Between the Human and the Wild Profusion
13
Photographing biodiversity, by Celia Lowe.
to take for granted that Indonesia is only one “problem space” within an
entire world amenable to their investigations, while Indonesian scholars
tend to perceive the nation as their most pressing area of concern. For
these reasons, and more, Indonesian scientists struggle for recognition
within transnational scientiﬁc domains.
Postcolonial theorists have contributed greatly to our understanding of
this dilemma. Itty Abraham (1998), Partha Chatterjee (1993), Pheng
Cheah (2003), Deepak Kumar (1995), Jean Langford (2002), Gyan Pra-
kash (1999), and Ann Stoler (1995, 2002), among others have had much
to say on the role and function of science and technology within the colo-
nial civilizing mission, on “race,” “caste,” “ethnicity,” and “tribe” as out-
comes of colonial science, on the cultural norms and forms of reason at
particular scales and temporalities, and on relations between metropole
and colony across hemispheric divides. These writings have also ﬁrmly
established the connections between science and the nation in projects of
colonial and postcolonial rule.
Links between science and the apparatus of state (relations of knowl-
edge and power, in other words) demonstrate their effects in the realm of
identity, and science is a primary site where putative “incommensurabil-
ity” is produced. Incommensurable identities, dependent upon the experi-
ence of subjection in colonial and neocolonial contexts, should be under-
stood as the outcome of elite efforts (knowing and unwitting) to
instantiate hemispheric divides, and of subaltern struggles against such
hegemony. Stagist theories of history worked out during colonial expan-
sion continue to have relevance for the way many think of the scientiﬁc
and political legacy of the European Enlightenment in places such as Indo-

Introduction
14
nesia, that are far away from its (supposedly pure) point of origin. Yet,
I argue, those identities that depend upon their relation to reason and
modernity (either EuroAmerican or elite Indonesian identities) should be
seen as outcomes of the practice of science (among other things), not the
points from which science commences.
Struggles over the idea of generativity and newness—origin, originality,
origination—are important aspects of postcolonial difference. How do
we confront the aforementioned accusation of scientiﬁc non-reality, or
address the problem that science must replicate patterns established in
Europe or America to be recognizably “real”? From where does “new-
ness” or “reality” come, and who should decide? Accusations of repeti-
tion (or of non-reality) depend upon a simultaneous desire to instantiate
elite identities while ensuring that difference is sustained (Fanon
1991[1952]). This is a no-win situation; Indonesian scientists in the con-
text of the Togean project can be seen struggling with the structure of
(though not the fact of) the mimesis and ambivalence that Homi Bhabha
(1994) describes so well.
Although funding ﬂows primarily from organizations in the North to
the many sites of biodiversity conservation in the South, I argue that
knowledges, rationalities, and natures in Southern biodiversity conserva-
tion cannot be understood through the language of assimilation or adap-
tation in the tropics of a project that originates in a more temperate cli-
mate. Rather, nature-making in the global South has been productive of
the very form that has come to be known as biodiversity. For example,
ICDP projects should be viewed as an idea originating in Southern peo-
ples’ resistance to wildlife conservation, rather than as the brainchild of
Northern biologists for whom the ICDP is merely a formalized response.
Along with many theorists of postcoloniality, I insist in this work that
science is multidirectional in its rationales, causes, and effects; ideas ﬂow
back and forth across hemispheric, identitarian, and conceptual divides
linking metropole with postcolony, center to margin.
What emerged from Indonesians’ conservation biology and practice in
the Togean Islands was a highly speciﬁed “nature,” and a particular way
of understanding “the human,” that contributed not only to the transna-
tional problematization of environmental risk known as biodiversity, but
also to a domestic project of building the Indonesian nation-state. Many
Indonesian scientists I encountered believed that the transnational dis-
course of biodiversity, with its particular notion that people who live near
rare plants and animals threaten this nature, does not ﬁt the circumstances
of Indonesia very well. For example, at Camp Uemata, Budi stressed to
me that conservation was a “Western” idea. He said, “A country like
America is rich enough for conservation and looking at wildlife the way
Americans do is a luxury. I don’t think the Indonesian people are ready

Between the Human and the Wild Profusion
15
to look at nature in this luxurious way. Nature is still full of resources for
Indonesian people because of our level of development. We are not rich
enough in Indonesia to afford conservation of species—species is a West-
ern concept. Yet, conservation is an ‘in’ for me; my biology employs me.”
I argue that a study of science neither “ethno” nor “Euro” entails a
recuperation not only of the making of science’s matter, but of where and
by whom that matter is made. In the case of Indonesians’ conservation
biology, this requires an exploration of how Indonesian scientists were
shaped by the Indonesian state during the period of authoritarian leader-
ship of former President Suharto. It also necessitates study of the commit-
ment possessed by many of these same scientists to look beyond the state
to the affective nation. For instance, while Togean people were often
viewed through the biodiversity problematic as those humans who
threaten both nature and state order, at other times scientists recognized
them as Indonesian citizens. In order to avoid being inhabited by the sup-
position that “there are no real scientists here,” we will need to take seri-
ously and examine closely Indonesian scientists’ commitments to the na-
tion form and their efforts to think through the meaning of their own, as
well as Togean peoples’, lives as Indonesian citizens and subjects.
A Thread of Rattan
The mountain at Benteng is the “navel” of the Togean Islands and through
it the islands are connected to the wider world. Benteng is the site of an
old fort built by Bugis and Sama people at their ﬁrst site of habitation
when they came to the islands from southeast Sulawesi sometime before
the 1860s.13 Puah Umar14 related to me how in the old days the Togean
Islands were called Togoya. Togoya was the youngest of three siblings.
The eldest was Selatan (South Sulawesi), and the middle sibling was Ter-
nate (an island and former sultanate to the east of Tomini Gulf). The three
siblings were connected together by a giant rattan running through the
earth: in Selatan were the roots of the vine; in Ternate were the main
branches; and in Togoya, on Benteng mountain, you can still ﬁnd the tips
of the rattan emerging from the ground. Through this rattan vine, the
Togean Islands were bound to the Raja of Bone in South Sulawesi, and
to the Sultan of Ternate to the east.
Like any project of nature-making, the Togean Island biodiversity proj-
ect would not be imposed on terra nulis. Nearly 30,000 Togean people
of more than half a dozen ethnic groups (Sama [Bajau], Bugis, Saluan,
Togean [Ta’a], Bare’e, Gorantalo, Bobongko, and others) lived in the is-
lands in the mid-1990s (Kantor Statistik Kebupaten Poso 1995a and
1995b). All of the major Togean ethnic groups had come from the sur-

Introduction
16
Benteng Mountain, by Celia Lowe.
rounding mainland, and Sama and Bugis people had migrated there as
well from South Sulawesi via the eastern coast when Sama ﬁshers arrived
in search of turtle shell and sea cucumber and Bugis traders had followed
them to buy their sea products. The economy of the Togean Islands still
revolves to this day around exports of land and sea harvests. Most of
these exports follow traditional subsistence and very old trade patterns,
like the trade of sea cucumber to China, which has persisted for at least
a millennium in eastern Indonesia (Warren 1981). But there is also a new
Australian-Indonesian pearl farming venture in Kilat Bay, and a Japanese-
Indonesian logging conglomerate has stripped the interiors of the larger
islands of trees. Tourism is another industry that connects the Togean
Islands to far-away places, in this case mainly to Europe, in a sustained
and novel way.
The archipelago is divided into two administrative districts: Una Una
and Walea Kepulauan. Every Togean village has an elementary school,
and there is one middle school in each district. The majority of Togean
villages in the 1990s were described by the government as “left behind”
(desa tertinggal) and received government beneﬁts based on this status.
With few exceptions, the people of the islands follow Islam rather than
any of the other four state-sanctioned religions and, despite the appear-
ance of isolation, the Togean Islands have been connected to wider spiri-
tual, economic, and political worlds for as long as there have been people
living there. As the third line running across the archipelago, Puah Umar’s
thread of rattan symbolizes these connections: plants and animals have

Between the Human and the Wild Profusion
17
always linked Togean people and their islands to centers of far-away cha-
risma and inﬂuence.
Biodiversity is a new layer in this much older story. Rather than pur-
chasing all kinds of plants and animals for sale and export, however, con-
servation biologists came to the islands to enumerate, classify, and pre-
serve the creatures they found. While species inventories are imagined as
the foundation of biodiversity conservation by Indonesian and interna-
tional biologists alike, numbers and totals have proliferated in conserva-
tion projects around the globe with only a magical connection between
inventory and any ability to preserve nature’s newly visible creatures.
There is no clear identity between crisis (loss of biodiversity) and form
(enumeration). The wrench in the works, from a biodiversity perspective,
is human incalculability. Biologists have been unable to save vast species
inventories on their own; they require the help of a local populace, often
the very same peoples whom they suspect of instigating biodiversity loss.
Thus, biodiversity projects have focused their gaze on these populations
and, alongside of Togean species, Togean people have become an object
of scientiﬁc study and analysis.
My interest in Togean people shadowed the interests of the biologists,
and I was most curious about people of Sama ethnicity for two reasons.15
First, biologists from the Togean project were themselves very concerned
about Sama people, often believing Sama are the ethnic group most de-
structive of the environment, especially the marine environment. Scien-
tists frequently attribute the problems of blast and cyanide ﬁshing to Sama
people because Sama are renowned as ﬁshers and many make their liveli-
hoods from Togean waters and reefs. Since Sama people, wherever they
are found (along the coastlines of Sabah, Malaysia, the southern Philip-
pines, and throughout eastern Indonesia), have often followed sea cucum-
ber and ﬁshing harvests living aboard small boats, they have been called
Southeast Asia’s “sea nomads.” This brings me to a more personal reason
for my interest in Sama lifestyles. I myself had lived aboard a boat for
seven years in the 1980s and had circumnavigated the earth passing
through the tropical waters of Asia and the South Paciﬁc. For this reason
I felt especially intrigued to learn about the identity of an ethnic group
described as “sea nomads” and “ﬂoating people” (suku terapung).
There are several Sama villages in the Togean Islands. These villages
(desa) are usually found on outlying islets offshore from the larger of the
Togean Islands and are readily identiﬁable by their bald white mounds
stripped of trees where the soil has been used to ﬁll in the surrounding
shallows. Sama houses tend to be built on stilts, with the front edge stand-
ing over the water and the back of the house on dry or reclaimed land.
Like other Togean Island people, Sama work at small-scale resource har-
vesting, gardening, coconut palm farming, and low-level trade, and their

Introduction
18
activities are more varied than ﬁshing alone. I developed most of my re-
search relationships and friendships in Susunang, a village of around
2,000 people divided into ﬁve hamlets (dusun) and the largest Sama vil-
lage in the Islands. I had a house built for me there, bought a canoe, and
spent the better part of 1996 and 1997 traveling, talking, ﬁshing, and
farming with Puah Umar and many others.
Through these activities, I began to understand how Sama people had
engaged with the materiality of the Togean Islands through their own
historical and contemporary nature-making practices. As a counterpoint
to the discourse and practice of scientiﬁc biodiversity, I followed in detail
how Sama ﬁshers and farmers physically and discursively constructed To-
gean land and marinescapes and made the islands into a productive and
storied place of familiarity and knowledge, experience and expertise. As
a result, I tell a different story about Sama people and their relationships
with Togean ﬂora and fauna from some of the conservation biologists I
know. I do not want to claim, necessarily, that my descriptions of Sama
peoples’ lives are more “true” than those biologists tell. I do want to
demonstrate, however, that we can tell a story of Sama peoples’ nature-
making that is at least as complex and nuanced as the narrative of how
biologists have come to “discover” profuse Togean natures.
Part of this complexity entails how human mobility in the Togean Is-
lands is narrated. While scientists travel the world frequenting confer-
ences and seminars in far-away locales, attending to natures that are re-
mote from the places where they themselves reside, and consuming
natural resources from sources they can’t always identify, most of the
Sama people I met had never been outside of the Togean archipelago. Still,
Sama travel aboard canoes on resource-collecting trips called pongkat is
viewed by elite Indonesians as uncivilized, as is Sama peoples’ habitation
of stilt houses overhanging the water’s edge. Sama “mobility” is perceived
as threatening, both to biodiversity and to state control of the Togean
population, and there have been several efforts to resettle Sama people
from their offshore villages onto the land of the larger Togean Islands. At
the same time, paradoxically, Sama and other Togean peoples’ perceived
lack of cosmopolitanism and connection to a wider world is also seen as
a threat to biodiversity and governmentality. This is the case even though
they are obviously integrated into larger scales of region, nation, and cos-
mos in complex ways.
Togean people, Sama people in particular, are crucial then to the story
of conservation in Indonesia. If biodiversity is a new problematization of
the relationship between nature and the human, we will want to know
who is this “human” that appears to trouble nature so. The ﬁgure that
Indonesian scientists produced through their Togean Island work was in-
evitably a different human than that developed by EuroAmerican biolo-

Between the Human and the Wild Profusion
19
gists in thinking through the problem of tropical biodiversity. This is
because Togean Island people were necessarily more than just “threaten-
ing humanity” to Indonesian biologists. They were also Indonesian sub-
jects and citizens who ﬁt into recognizably Indonesian ideas of national
development, belonging, and alienation. The particularity of Indonesians’
biodiversity was dependent on this understanding.
For this reason, I have found it useful to follow Sama people using the
same methods I use to track scientists in their work. I ask, What does
Sama peoples’ nature-making entail in the Togean Islands? What are the
networks that connect Sama people across scales of region, nation, and
transnation? How far do Sama peoples’ inscriptions, assertions, and ob-
jects travel? And how are Sama logics similar to or different from author-
ized and “ofﬁcial” discourses of science, nature, or nation? The story of
mid-1990s Togean biodiversity cannot be comprehended without this
parallel narrative of the ways Togean people engaged with the biodiversity
project and with their own material and idealist natures.
The Reason for Reason
Indonesians’ encounters with the biophysical world have conventionally
been described and evaluated from the perspective of “indigenous knowl-
edge.” At times this has proved a hopeful and necessary strategy, and the
framework of indigenous knowledge has been crucial to expanding our
understanding of what is able to count as knowledge. Different, so-called
“indigenous,” ways of knowing the environment have often proved com-
mensurable in relation to the hegemonic knowledges of natural science,
and are frequently demonstrated to be more efﬁcacious when compared
with the nonsituated and instrumental knowledges produced and pro-
moted by governments or transnational modernization schemes. Indige-
nous knowledges have also been used to reﬂect back upon natural science.
In the process it has become clear that all knowledges are situated, practi-
cal, dispositional, ﬂexible, and social.
I have chosen to study Indonesian encounters with nature not through
the analytic of indigenous knowledge, but rather through an analytic of
“reason.” Obviously, even though Indonesian scientists are literally as
“indigenous” as Togean peoples, they do not resemble the ﬁgure who
forms either the conventional subject or object of indigenous knowledge;
Indonesian scientists have represented Togean nature through “transna-
tional,” not “traditional,” ways of knowing. I also ﬁnd it more problem-
atic than productive, at this point, to describe Sama peoples’ ways of
knowing nature through the rubric of indigenous knowledge. If all knowl-
edges are situated, practical, dispositional, ﬂexible, and social, then we

Introduction
20
need an analysis capable of placing Indonesian scientists and Sama people
in the same frame. While scientists’ knowledges are clearly not indige-
nous, Sama knowledges have cosmopolitan dimensions that also do not
ﬁt within the ambit of indigenaeity.
Likewise, there are problems with a conventional tracking of “knowl-
edge.” “Local” knowledge has often seemed an antidote to the universal-
ist claims of scientiﬁcally derived natures, or the global ambitions of bio-
diversity conservation. The assumption in this work has been, if you know
a group’s boundaries you can investigate their knowledge, coherent and
original. Natural scientists themselves are also presumed to be a group,
bounded and whole, who share a single form of knowledge and a com-
mon worldview. As such, the study of knowledge has often been about
the collection of objects—bits and pieces of information or perspective—
rather than an examination of knowledge-making projects or the travels
and transformations of thought across space and time. The science of
ethnobiology, to cite but one example, has often entailed collecting names
for things and interpreting these lexicons as coherent knowledge. Such
a collection does not capture nonlexical hybridity, change, or process,
however, or the elements of thinking as practice.
While “knowledge” proposes fully formed objects that are simply exca-
vated or revealed, “reason,” on the other hand, delineates the active prac-
tice of thinking. In Paul Rabinow’s (2003) words, thinking “is a situated
practice of active inquiry whose role and goal is to initiate a movement
from a discordant situation to a more harmonious one.” Knowledge
might change through learning or discovery—the acquisition of more ob-
jects—yet, thinking demands the assemblage of matter, language, and
technique—the creation of new objects. Since the time of Aristotle, studies
of reason have interrogated the status of objects and how claims to know-
ing are made. I engage this process here, not to determine the foundations
of truth sought by ancient Greek or Enlightenment thinkers, but rather
to understand the conditions of possibility upon which particular contem-
porary thinking and knowledge-making practices rest.
Although a study of knowledge can answer many of our questions
about nature, it does not help us to see how nature becomes a question
in the ﬁrst place. A study of reason, on the other hand, operates as a
metacommentary on knowledge. It shows us what will become valued as
knowledge, how thought is actively structured and normed, and how
these norms expand to cover a variety of situations. More than a hemi-
spherically bounded analytic, reason can help to uncover the possibilities
for, and conditions of, thought no matter where thought is located. This
is not how reason is ordinarily conceived of by those who assume for
themselves the mantle of rationality, however. Reason is conventionally
understood as a system of universal truth that reveals the natural traits,

Between the Human and the Wild Profusion
21
and the relations between the elements of nature, that allow us to appre-
hend an actually existing world “out there.” Kant (2001[1781]) famously
critiqued this concept of “pure” reason for the proposition that the truth
of an object in and of itself is discernable. Rather, he argued things can
become objects of knowledge only with recourse to the experiencing
human mind structured a priori by space and time.
An archaeological shift in the milieu of reason occurred at the start of
the nineteenth century, when the European colonial enterprise, formerly
organized exclusively around extractive trade practices (those, for exam-
ple, of the Dutch and British East India Companies), became reorganized
around the governance, education, and “advancement” of colonial popu-
lations. In the process, the capacity to recognize and acknowledge the
universally true and good came to be viewed as unequally distributed
along social lines of race, class, gender, and geography. Within both met-
ropole and colony, reason was claimed as the property of a certain class
of white European men, while women, peasants, laborers, and non-Euro-
peans embodied backward, unchanging tradition as well as enchantment,
emotion, and sentimentality. The civilizing mission (the success of which
was, of course, inﬁnitely deferrable) emerged as a technological remedy
for the lack of reasoning capacity among the white man’s Other.
Alongside these historical developments, the origin of reason in nature
and its teleological progress in human history began to be called into
question in European political philosophy. Nietzsche (1998[1887]), for
example, described how reason not only reveals things but shapes them,
and he commented on the reality-shaping effect of affect: “[T]here is only
a perspectival seeing, only a perspectival knowing; and the more affects
we allow to speak about a matter, the more eyes, different eyes, we know
how to bring to bear on one and the same matter, that much more com-
plete will our ‘concept’ of this matter, our ‘objectivity’ be” (85). Weber
(1946[1914]) wrote of bureaucratic reason and its capacity to bound up
human creativity in routinized and stultifying forms that disenchant the
world we live in. Writing as refugees from European Fascism, Horkheimer
and Adorno (1969[1944]) saw the failures of reason as part and parcel
of the failures of capitalism, and argued that as Enlightenment attempts
to secure itself against the mythic it becomes as totalitarian as any system.
And Freud (1989[1933]), while espousing the scientiﬁc Weltanschauung,
was instrumental in exposing the human mind as divided against itself,
thereby opening up new possibilities for a theory of subjectivity.
Most nineteenth- and early-twentieth-century thinkers maintained lib-
eral positions on reason and its capacities—if only reason could be rid of
one tainting imperfection or another it might still perform its liberating
function. It is also worth noting that nearly all placed reason in Europe
using Asia, especially China, as a site of originary backwardness against

Introduction
22
which European reason might be recognized. By the late twentieth cen-
tury, however, reason had come to be seen for its arbitrariness—as a repos-
itory of social norms and ancient prejudices, rather than as a guide to
universal, unsituated truth. As elaborated in the work of Canguilhem,
Foucault, Rose, or Bourdieu, for example, reason displays a self-interest-
edness that situates it within a ﬁeld of normalization and social power.
Instrumental, calculating reason, including, especially, “reason of state,”
employs the proposition of universal validity in order to reinforce the
claims of many narrower interests. Critical reason, on the other hand, is
a way forward, if not a way out.
The status of the object has also been in ﬂux. How do we know the
object if it is conceived differently from different subject positions? Fol-
lowing upon Marx’s insistence on the objective value of proletarian vision
from below, theories of situated and partial knowledges have emerged
(Hartsock 1999). Pressures on the postcolonial thinker, women, and sub-
altern subjects to conform to the God’s-eye view of universal knowledge
as seen from patriarchal centers have been elaborated (Harding 1998). At
the same time, the argument for situated knowledge has also been an
attempt to get closer to the object, not to do away with the principle of
objectivity entirely (Haraway 1991). Anna Tsing has made an especially
compelling argument for “engaged universals” observing that universals
can be found in both imperial and liberatory projects: “Universals are
effective within particular historical conjunctures that give them content
and force. We might specify this conjunctural feature of universals in prac-
tice by speaking of engagement. Engaged universals travel across differ-
ence and are charged and changed by their travels. Through friction, uni-
versals become practically effective. Yet they can never fulﬁll their promise
of universality. Even in transcending localities, they do not take over the
world” (Tsing 2004:8).
Although universal human reason has come under revision in political
theory and critical ethnography, this reason still maintains an active life
as a folk category. While anthropologists and others now tend to view
reason as a strategy of universalization, in certain places, among certain
types of institutions, among certain peoples at certain times, to deny the
universal means to deny one’s own humanity (Bourdieu 1998:89–90).
Natural science is the social ﬁeld perhaps most invested in the universality
of reason, where to disclaim a truth derived through scientiﬁc practice is
to become a lesser form of human. Nonetheless all concepts, scientiﬁc or
otherwise, have particular historical and social conditions of possibility.
Dipesh Chakrabarty (2000) has argued for “provincializing” universalist
claims in EuroAmerican thought by examining these enabling conditions.
Reason, as a folk category, entails those ideas, forms, and assemblages

Between the Human and the Wild Profusion
23
that attempt to erase their own conditions of possibility to stake universal
claims, yet histories of thought as practice, and the locations from which
claims on the universal are made, leave traces. Wild Profusion is a study
of these traces.
To understand how biodiversity was a new assemblage in Indonesia,
how it problematized relations between Togean natures and Togean peo-
ples, and how at the same time scientists themselves operated within de-
grees of freedom and constraint, it is helpful to understand biodiversity
as a form of reason that produces both subjects and objects. Thinking of
humans as subjects constituted by knowledge, rather than unconstrained
individuals who possess and control knowledge, is useful for compre-
hending the identities that emerge from projects to conserve biodiversity.
For example, at some point in the 1980s Indonesian activists (and here I
include scientists with ethical and interventionist mandates) changed the
designation of their collectivities from “nongovernmental organizations”
(organisasi non-pemerintah) to “peoples’ self-improvement leagues”
(lembaga swadaya masyarakat, LSM). We see here how elite Indonesians
were invited in the Suharto era to become a prosthesis of the state, not a
node of opposition to it. This act involved an arbitrary reorganization of
the self designed to accommodate the state’s anxiety toward anything
exterior to it. While Indonesian scientists’ mediation between the state
and Togean people was regulated and normalized, scientists themselves
were also in the business of producing normalizing and standardizing
knowledges about Togean people. These knowledges might serve state
interests, though just as easily they could become a way to challenge the
reason of state.
In the move from indigenous knowledge to an analytic of reason, I seek,
therefore, to describe the contingent conjuncture where science, nature,
and the Indonesian nation came together through a particular problemati-
zation of nature and the human assembled under the sign of biodiversity.
The three lines running across this text—Wallace’s line representing Su-
lawesi’s unique faunal forms, the equator representing hemispheric di-
vides across the fabric of human identities, and a line of Sulawesi rattan
symbolizing Togean peoples’ connections to cosmopolitan worlds
through plants and animals—intersect to create a circumstance within
which transnational biodiversity conservation gained speciﬁcity, form,
and generative capacity.
In reﬂecting upon the possibilities and limits of such forms and capaci-
ties through genealogies of reason, I hope to introduce new possibilities
for thought, moving from discord to harmony, therein opening up a space
from which to understand the lives of Indonesian scientists, Togean peo-
ple, and the profusion of Sulawesi ﬂora and fauna.

Introduction
24
The Lines of This Book
The narrative of Wild Profusion is divided into three parts. Part 1, “Diver-
sity as Milieu,” moves from the forms of transnational biodiversity to the
speciﬁcities of Togean nature/cultures to looks at how “biodiverse na-
ture” and Togean “indigenous knowledge” were outcomes of conserva-
tion biology. Part 2, “Togean Cosmopolitics,” proceeds in the opposite
direction. Beginning from Togean natures, it examines how Sama people
produced local land and marinescapes as well as cosmopolitan worlds
through their nature-making practices. Part 3, “Integrating Conservation
and Development,” studies the outcome when the world of biodiversity
science and management meets Sama people’s nature-making.
In chapter 1, “Making the Monkey,” I explore the postcolonial world
of Indonesian science by examining how the Togean macaque (Macaca
togeanus) was proposed as a new species endemic to the Togean Islands.
Through the scientiﬁc practice of conservation biology, Indonesian prima-
tologists identiﬁed the monkey ﬁrst as a “new form,” then as a “dubious
name,” and ultimately as an “endemic species.” Throughout these acts
of making, unmaking, and remaking the monkey, its unique status was
crucial for developing Indonesian science, attracting foreign donors, and
enlisting government and public interest in Togean Island nature, even as
the natures important to Togean peoples were overwritten in the process.
Chapter 2, “The Social Turn,” asks how Indonesian biologists formed
their object of reason when this object was no longer conceived of as
“nature,” but rather as “culture.” I begin with a comparative perspective
on past and present instances of nature-making in the Togean Islands and
eastern Indonesia. Adolf Bernard Meyer, who collected Togean birds in
the 1880s, and Georgius Everhardus Rumphius, who collected natural
curiosities in seventeenth-century Ambon, each developed a particular
representation of Malay people that differs from the ﬁgure of the human
produced in biodiversity conservation. Through a “social turn” in 1990s
conservation, Togean people were asked to contribute “indigenous
knowledge” to the project of conserving Togean nature. “Ethnobiology”
and “participatory spatial planning” became the mediums through which
Togean peoples’ knowledges were elicited, and through which their iden-
tity as “indigenous” emerged.
I explore how it is possible to think Sama identity and Togean nature
simultaneously without essentializing such a connection in chapter 3,
“Extra-terrestrial Others.” Sama identities and natures have taken on cos-
mopolitan attributes through their connections to, and imaginations of,
other places. I follow these connections through Sama place-making, in-
cluding a sea cucumber collecting trip, making sago in a sago palm

Between the Human and the Wild Profusion
25
swamp, through place names, and by way of canoe travel along the To-
gean shoreline. I then contrast these practices with the “tribunals of rea-
son” Togean Sama people are subject to and that frame Sama lifestyles in
negative terms.
In chapter 4, “On the (Bio)logics of Species and Bodies,” I look at how
Sama identity was produced in relation to enchantment, disenchantment,
and instrumental reason in the context of health and well-being in the
Togean Islands. Both biomedicine and biodiversity conservation have
been similarly viewed as remediation for “improper” or “ineffectual”
knowledge or belief, for pseudoscientiﬁc practices, and for social “under-
development.” Managerial interventions in the Togean Islands often took
on unexpected forms, developed unanticipated lives of their own, and
ultimately missed their mark. In this chapter, I extend my analysis of na-
ture to questions of bodies and health as they intersect with Togean land
and marinescapes for Puah Lidja, her family, and her neighbors in Susu-
nang village. Further, I describe how new forms of “unreason” reveal the
limitations of and aporia in practices of scientiﬁc calculation and instru-
mental governmentality.
In chapter 5, “Fishing with Cyanide,” I present one speciﬁc type of
environmental threat, cyanide ﬁshing practiced in the live reef food ﬁsh
industry, and interrogate it for what it can tell us about identity, science,
and legal rationality. Most biologists understood Sama ﬁshers to be the
perpetrators of cyanide ﬁshing, and Indonesian laws and conservation
philosophies rhetorically placed ﬁshers at the center of responsibility for
how ﬁsh were caught. Many others of diverse ethnic backgrounds were
also involved in the live ﬁsh trade however and, in most cases, at a more
fundamental level. Chapter 5 examines how “community” became the
arena for conservation and bureaucratic intervention despite the cosmo-
politan nature of the live ﬁsh trade.
Chapter 6, “The Sleep of Reason” documents the ultimate emergence
of the Togean Island National Park in 2004. Serving as an epilogue to
Wild Profusion, this ﬁnal chapter also describes change in the form of
1990s biodiversity conservation—which coalesced around species, the
ICDP, the emergence of Southern expertise, and late-Suharto era political
norms and cultural forms—to a new millennium milieu emphasizing eco-
regions, enforcement, and the possibilities of the post-Suharto “reforma-
tion” era. Reason, I conclude, produces monsters when it is puriﬁed from
enchantment. Reading conservation practice through Francisco Goya’s
1799 painting, El Suen˜o de la Razon Produce Monstruos, the rational
mind and its demons meet, amidst the seemingly pure logic of disap-
pearing species and the imaginations that are necessary to preserve a di-
versity of life as well as lives worth living.


P A R T
O N E
Diversity as Milieu
Akuna Pongkat Dan pergilah ma-
I Pongkat And go ahead Bajau peo-
syarakat Bajau ke laut, jauh. . . .
ple to the sea, far away. . . . The pres-
Kehadiran ikan paus merupakan ter-
ence of whales is a sign that the sea-
tanda datangnya musim ikan.
son of ﬁsh has come.
Sea Horse The exoticness of Indone-
Kuda Laut Eksotisitas Indonesia di
sia in the eyes of the world for the
mata dunia sebagian terpenting ada-
most part is related to the sea.
lah pada lautnya.
Paka Lele dan Sawi Kehidupan me-
Paka Lele and Sawi Their lifestyle is
reka masih di warnai oleh corak
still colored by a traditional pat-
tradisional. Mereka telah mengikat-
terns. They are already connected by
kan diri pada ikatan sosial yang men-
social ties conspicuous for collective
onjol pada tindakan kolektif dalam
action in the community.
satu komunitas.
Ilmu Bajau Sebuah kampung Bajau
Bajau Knowledge A Bajau village
terhambur di atas barisan karang.
scattered atop a row of coral. In the
Di tengah birunya kepulauan Kaled-
middle of the blue, the Kaledupa Is-
upa. Kampung ini adalah tempat ter-
lands. This is the last place for ﬁnd-
akhir untuk menikuti kehidupan dan
ing the lifestyle and ‘mystery’ of the
‘misteri’ orang Bajau.
Bajau people.
Koin Etnik Hasil laut sejak dulu jadi
Ethnic Coin Sea products since early
komoditas orang Bajau. Hasil laut
times have been a commodity for
itu kemudian mereka tukarkan deng-
Bajau people. They trade these prod-
an ‘nilai’ yang telah disepakati oleh
ucts with a ‘value’ that is already
kedua pihak.
agreed upon by the other party.
Rajah Bajau Ungkapkan bahasa
Bajau King Speaking their language
rupa dari reka hias Bajau. Sebuah
is one form of Bajau creativity. A
simbol rupa runggu tradisional.
symbol of their tradition.
—Sopandi, Jelajah Etnik

Part I
28
IN RETROSPECT, Indonesians were rethinking diversity in relation to both
nature and nation during the waning Suharto years. On the one hand,
national norms for nature and its uses were being called into question.
Were Indonesia’s trees and minerals to be a resource for logging and min-
ing and other forms of elite national development, or was Indonesian
nature a resource for “the people” (rakyat) to create a healthy subsis-
tence? Parameters of social inclusion and exclusion in the nation were
likewise under revision. Would acceptable cultural difference continue to
be narrowly deﬁned by the modernist state, or might new forms of iden-
tity be folded into the nation’s understanding of itself? This national con-
versation on diversity is the milieu within which scientists’ species inven-
tories and their study of indigenous knowledge in the Togean Islands can
be understood.
The working through of the problems of ethnic and natural diversity
can be seen in two different gallery exhibitions for which Sama people
(who are called “Bajau” in these works) provided the raw material. Sama
were ﬁt simultaneously into the twin conﬁgurations of ethnic teleology
and nationalist history in the 1990s. First, they were considered an “alien
ethnic group” (suku terasing) at a moment when hemispheric divides
were constructed between Indonesian margins and centers at the intersec-
tion of ethnicity and a particular New Order framing of acceptable cul-
tural difference. Second, Sama were considered a “marine ethnicity”
(suku laut) at a time when Indonesia was beginning to reconsider its mari-
time heritage. These contingencies explain the “discovery” and “display”
of Sama people as a resource for a national conversation on nature and
identity.
The ﬁrst of the exhibitions, Bajau, was scientiﬁc, ethnographic, and
educational in nature, and was an outcome of a scholarly conference on
Bajau/Sama communities held at the Indonesian Institute of Science (LIPI)
in Jakarta in November 1993. The three-day conference, “addressed the
re-introduction of Indonesia’s cultural and ecological diversity as national
assets” (Sejati 1994:34). The scientists in attendance all were scholars of
Sama peoples’ “ecological adaptation, nautical skills, resource manage-
ment, maritime wisdom, and particular sea lore.” The exhibition itself
was constructed around a replica of a Sama village set in a water reservoir
and ﬁlled with ﬂoating canoes brought from Sulawesi. Around this center-
piece were placed displays explaining the distribution of Sama communi-
ties around Southeast Asia; Sama origin stories and tales of life on the
sea; terminologies and lexicons in Sama language; a description of the
Sama environment; a story called “A Day in the Life of the Bajau”; a

Diversity as Milieu
29
description of sea cucumber collecting; and an explanation of Sama medi-
cal practice and belief.
I was not in Indonesia in 1993 for Bajau and know it only through
conversations with its curators and through its catalogue. In June of 1997
I was fortunate to witness a second exhibition however, in which Sama
ethnic identity was invoked as a national resource. This exhibition, Jela-
jah Etnik [Ethnic Explorations]: A Journey Through Wallacea, held in the
lobby of the Jakarta World Trade Center, presented a series of paintings by
the artist Sopandi on the theme of Sama life in the Wallacea region. So-
pandi’s paintings were a bricolage of hornbills, wild orchids, buffalo,
dragons, tuna, boats, sea shells, and spirits, set in ﬁelds of abstract shapes.
Each painting was overlain with intricate pen and ink line drawings and
ﬁlled in with watercolors. Bursts of mega mendung cloud patterns, in-
spired by Javanese batik, formed the backdrop for the wild activity in the
foreground. The ﬁnished canvases were framed with carved hardwoods
described by the artist as “ordinary ﬁrewood.”
The Jelajah Etnik exhibition catalogue presented the artist in baggy
khaki hiking pants, T-shirt, and canvas hat carrying a large backpack and
bedroll. Looking like a nineteenth-century explorer, his image is superim-
posed upon a reproduction of Alfred Russel Wallace’s 1868 map of the
Netherlands East Indies. Treking across the map below Sopandi are eight
nearly naked Papuan people carrying machetes and wicker backpacks,
seemingly on their way home from tending a garden. The catalogue is
ﬁlled with descriptions of the paintings and of the artist’s adventures trav-
eling in Southeast Sulawesi.
Whether as science or art, the exhibitionary imagination is always polit-
ical.1 The “native village” display, like that in Bajau, is a trope of ethnic
exhibition deriving from late-nineteenth and early-twentieth-century uni-
versal expositions and world fairs. By presenting “native villages” and
“native peoples” as tableax vivant spectacles, ethnic exhibitions educated
EuroAmericans in racial and cultural superiority (Barkan and Bush
1995:25). Designed with the best evolutionary science of the time, one
famous example, the Philippine exposition at the 1904 World’s Fair in St.
Louis, aimed to re-enforce U.S. imperialism after the Spanish-American
War. This display brought to life the notion that the Philippine people
were civilizationally inferior and incapable of governing themselves with-
out help from the more “advanced” United States.
Bajau, likewise, was a spectacle of elite Indonesian progress and superi-
ority, and the evolutionary preoccupation familiar from the universal ex-
position is reﬂected in this description from the exhibition: “Today, the
seafaring culture of the Bajau remains an example of these early maritime
communities. Indeed their present day practices are direct links to Indone-
sia’s maritime past” (Sejati 1994:3). Similarly, the museum’s “archaeolo-

Part I
30
gists,” those in charge of Indonesian prehistory, oversaw the exhibition’s
installation. Indonesian and international scholars alike pursued “ecolog-
ical adaptation” as the modality for describing Sama peoples’ lives, a con-
ceptual approach that ﬁt well with the internal colonialism of the Suharto
state.2 In Bajau, Sama people are a living anachronism.
Like the paintings of Picasso, Sopandi’s style belongs to the twentieth-
century tradition known as “primitivism,” and represents a romantic en-
counter with the exotic, unfamiliar, and anachronistic. The ﬁgures who
walk across the pages of the Jelajah Etnik catalogue are racially Papuan,
not Malay like Sama people, reﬂecting an Indonesian racial formation
that associates darker Papuan features with primitiveness. Similarly, the
Javanese batik Sopandi employs in the background of his paintings are
iconic representations of ethnic difference in Indonesia. Sopandi presents
his expedition to Wallacea as cultural time travel and his imagination is
haunted by ninetenth-century colonial exploration.
Here is the question though. Must we read both of these exhibitions
merely in the context of turn-of-the-twentieth-century European evolu-
tionary thinking, or can we also understand these Indonesian scientists
and artists as attempting to remedy problems other than those solved by
earlier native village displays and primitivist art? What if we were to read
Bajau and Jelajah Etnik against the grain, as thought that searches for
new solutions to the problem of Indonesian modernity, albeit steeped in
familiar modes of representation? In such a symptomatic reading, the
place of ethnic and natural diversity within the nation appears, not merely
as determined ideology, but as a problem to solve. While the two exhibi-
tions each propose Sama inclusion into the nation on elite terms, more
radical possibilities for the meaning of inclusion work to subvert the obvi-
ous exclusionary readings.
For example, programmatic activities during Bajau describe the fully
modern political and environmental problems experienced by Sama peo-
ple as citizens of the national polity. In a section of the exhibition cata-
logue titled “Issues Affecting the Bajau Today” the curators wrote:
In collaboration with local Bajau researchers, LIPI and Sejati research pre-
sents the ecological and social-cultural issues affecting the Bajau today. Con-
tributors such as the Asia Wetlands Bureau, UNESCO, and other institutions
also provide books and articles on marine resources. In this room, the visitor
can learn about how changes in marine ecology inﬂuence the whole of Bajau
society. The visitor could study how marine (traditional) resource manage-
ment would be applied to wider development projects. Equally, the collected
research would show the commercial potential of marine resources, and this
includes marine tourism, for Indonesia’s national development. Most im-

Diversity as Milieu
31
portantly, the main hosts of the exhibition, two Bajau representatives from
North Sulawesi, would always be present to answer questions from the pub-
lic and to recount their immediate experience. (Sejati 1994:38)
Public programming for Bajau included a discussion with Abdurrah-
man Wahid (leader of the Muslim organization Nahdlatul Ulama, who
would later become Indonesia’s fourth president) on the importance of
cultural diversity in Indonesia; a visit by ﬁshermen from Jakarta Bay to
discuss issues they shared in common with Sama representatives; and spe-
cial events for business leaders and school children. Despite its anachro-
nistic representational form, Bajau contains a sub- or parallel text that
challenges the thinking of Indonesian elites, “creating something new
within the most traditional political forms” (Rose 1999:280).
Similarly, while Sopandi’s style belongs to the early twentieth-century
tradition in painting and sculpture called “primitivism,” the context for
his work is not early twentieth-century Europe. In his paintings and cata-
logue descriptions, Sopandi presents a picture of Sama life that is very
different from the Indonesian state’s own evolutionary representations of
Indonesian life outside of Java, Sumatra, and Bali. For example, he de-
scribes his painting Bajau King with the caption, “Speaking their language
is one form of Bajau creativity. A symbol of their tradition.” Clearly en-
compassed by a German Romantic theory of language, the caption never-
theless might also be interpreted as contesting state language policy that
promotes the national language, Bahasa Indonesia, over regional ethnic
languages. The value Sopandi places on Sama language confronts the
state’s rationalist desire for Indonesians to speak formal “good and cor-
rect” Indonesian (bahasa Indonesia baik dan benar). In calling Sama lan-
guage a form of “creativity,” Sopandi cracks open the universalist logics
of governmental reason.
In order to understand how Indonesian scientists produced Togean Is-
land nature and culture, we need to understand something about the mi-
lieu of diversity they were working within at the time. In this context, I
propose we will learn more about Indonesians’ scientists and their work
by taking them seriously as honest brokers struggling with what diversity
can and will mean in the context of late-twentieth-century Indonesia. Al-
though we cannot fail to recognize the power elite Indonesians have to
represent, and while we can read both rational evolutionism and imagina-
tive Romanticism into these exhibitions, Bajau and Jelajah Etnik were
attempting to solve other problems than were turn-of-the-twentieth-cen-
tury European expositions or exhibitions. Barkan and Bush, in their ex-
ploration of primitivism as a particular form of modernism, claim: “As

Part I
32
primitivism reappeared in text after text, each new ideological mix proved
unpredictable” (1995:13).
In part 1, IFABS scientists can be seen grappling with questions of how
to represent Togean biodiversity and Sama identity. Questions about To-
gean species emerged from within transnational conversations on conser-
vation biology and national discussions on science and nation. Questions
about Sama peoples’ “indigenous knowledge” arose from within the mi-
lieu of Bajau and Jelajah Etnik where the meaning of diversity within the
nation was at stake. These active practices of thinking produced such
objects as “nature” or “culture” that should be understood outcomes,
not starting points, for Indonesians’ science in the Togean Islands. From
within this milieu we can hear scientists ask: What will count as the value
of natural diversity for the Indonesian people?; What will constitute ac-
ceptable norms of cultural difference within the nation?; and, How can
these values and norms be represented?

Chapter One
MAKING THE MONKEY
The [Togean] animal kingdom is, as cannot be expected
otherwise, poor in representatives. It is said that the only
mammals living here are bats, rats, and the babi rusa
[deer pig]. Of birds, we ﬁnd many of the species living
along the main coast [of Celebes]. On our walk through
the main village I saw Trichoglossus ornatus, Tanygna-
thus megalorhynchus, and Nectarinia lepida. There are
few snakes and few crocodiles, and turtles are only found
near Poeloe Sendiri. The sea between and around the is-
lands is also poor in ﬁsh, a phenomena certainly worth
mentioning. On the other hand, the sea surrounding the
islands is rich in holothurians [sea cucumber], the most
important article of trade and export in these islands.
Finally, we noticed on our walk the most beautiful land
snail, a Nadina, which we had not yet seen on the main
coast.
—C.B.H. von Rosenburg, Travels in the Region of
Gorontalo
TOGEAN ISLAND biodiversity was not at all self-evident in the beginning of
the 1990s. Nor was the archipelago’s appropriateness as a new national
park. In order for the Togean landscape to move from “poor in representa-
tives” (as it was in 1865) to “rich in biodiversity” (which, by the mid-
1990s, it had become), the “facts” of Togean biodiversity awaited their
empirical demonstration and social emergence (Latour and Woolgar 1986;
Shapin and Schaffer 1985). Such a representation of Togean nature was
encompassed by the work of species inventory in the emergent ﬁeld of
conservation biology. Key to the appearance of biodiverse nature in the
Togean Island was the Togean macaque, Macaca togeanus, a primate living
in the upland forest of Malenge Island. Nonhuman primates have always
held a fascination for biologists due to their role in the history of human
evolution. The reason of the moment proposed that if biologists were able
to stabilize the species status of M. togeanus—if they could prove it to be
unique and endemic—a protected-area initiative would be justiﬁed.
My familiarity with the Togean monkey and the question of its species
status developed through my friendship with Jatna Supriatna. Dr. Supri-
atna, a conservation biologist from the University of Indonesia (UI), is the
world’s leading expert on the evolutionary biology and systematics of

Chapter 1
34
Sulawesi macaques. In the mid-1990s, M. togeanus became a focal point
for both Supriatna’s research, and for the establishment of a more encom-
passing conservation program in the Togean Islands. As Dr. Supriatna
observed in his discussions with me on species diversity, the species con-
cept (rather than ideas of ecosystem, ecoregion, or environmental justice,
to name just a few other possibilities) was crucial, both in biological and
social terms, for saving nature. “Species are the key,” he argued, “But
there is a ﬂexible concept of species. For example, think of the Javan
rhino. Without species conservation, maybe Ujung Kulon [a park in Java]
would never be visited by people, there would be no donor that likes to
give money, there would be no government attention. Charismatic ani-
mals allow people to want to save the environment. People don’t just say
‘I want to save biodiversity.’ Species are attractive.”
In order to put together a Togean conservation project, Dr. Supriatna
would use species to attract an Indonesian and international public, a
foreign donor, and government agents and agencies. The existence of a
unique Togean ﬂora and fauna would entice domestic and international
tourists, would create political support for a park among regional and
national bureaucrats, and it was also necessary to secure investment
from Conservation International (CI). In the process of making the mon-
key, “M. togeanus” would evolve from “new form” to “dubious name,”
and then reverse its course to become the “endemic species” the project
required.
In cultural studies of science and technology we always insist that in-
quiries into the ways science is thoroughly imbricated with, and produc-
tive of, both nature and society is not about “good” and “bad” science.
As a science studies scholar, I argue that Indonesians’ science, like any
other science, can show us how those bio-objects we want to call “natu-
ral” are immanently social and cultural as well as biological and physical.
I am interested in the many positivities of the Togean macaque research,
including the ability of a new and endemic species to form social relations
and subjectivities within biological research and conservation. While the
making, unmaking, and remaking of M. togeanus helps us to understand
“sameness” and “difference” in Indonesians’ biological science, my analy-
sis should not be read as any kind of a commentary on the “quality” of
the science as such. The monkey is, rather, an entry point for examining
the intersection of science and nation within biodiversity conservation.
A New Form
The ﬁrst hint of a distinct Togean primate species appeared in 1949 in
an article by H.J.V. Sody, “Notes on Some Primates, Carnivora, and the

Making the Monkey
35
Babirusa from the Indo-Malayan and Indo-Australian Regions.” Sody,
a naturalist from Amsterdam who was trapped in Java by the Japanese
occupation in World War II, used his time to make studies of the Bogor
Museum’s natural history collections, including Sulawesi macaques. He
had available to him 17 skins, 15 skulls, and 1 stuffed specimen of un-
known provenance. Sody combined an analysis of these specimens with
the literature on 40 other skulls including a Malenge Island series col-
lected by J. J. Menden in the Togean Islands in 1939. In October 1949,
not long after Indonesian independence, Sody published his synthesis in
the journal of the Royal Botanic Gardens at Buitenzorg (Bogor). He found
that the skull index for macaque males was larger than for females and
was the greatest in Menden’s Malenge series. On the basis of its larger
size, Sody proposed a “new form,” which he named Cynopithecus togea-
nus (Sody 1949).
The macaque next appeared in 1969 in Taxonomy and Evolution of
the Monkeys of Celebes, an account of Sulawesi primates by Jack Fooden.
Fooden acknowledged that the Malenge monkey was morphologically
larger and paler than the Tonkean (not Togean) macaque (Macaca ton-
keana). The data did not convince him, however, that the Togean primate
was a unique species. Rather, Fooden believed that the difference between
the macaques of Malenge and the mainland population was probably
caused by “relatively recent evolution in isolation,” and he found “no
characters that warrant allocation of the insular form to a separate spe-
cies, or even sub-species” (Fooden 1969:114).
In the divergence between Fooden and Sody’s opinions the species sta-
tus of the Togean macaque became amenable to further study and empiri-
cal veriﬁcation. In 1988 Dr. Supriatna was conducting a ﬁeld study of
hybridization between the Moor macaque (M. maurus) and the Tonkean
macaque using behavioral and morphological analyses, for his doctoral
degree in biological anthropology at the University of New Mexico. Dur-
ing his research travels with the “Sulawesi Primate Project,” a name he
had given to a team of Indonesian and EuroAmerican primatologists in-
cluding several of his own biology students, he heard a rumor of a ma-
caque population living in the Togean Islands. This inspired his ﬁrst trip
to the archipelago and resulted in an encounter with the Togean monkeys.
Coincident with the opportunity to deﬁne a unique macaque species,
the emerging paradigm of biodiversity was beginning to open up new
programmatic opportunities for conservation around the species concept.
The Togean Islands had been identiﬁed as a potential conservation area
by the UNDP Food and Agricultural Organization (Salm et al. 1982), the
Asian Development Bank (1992), USAID (Soekarno 1989), and the World
Wildlife Fund (Djohani 1989), among others. At the same time, Supriatna
had developed ties to Conservation International through connections he

Chapter 1
36
had made in the world of primate studies. In order to interest CI in a
Togean Island project, his interests and his science would need to align
with those of his funder.
Dr. Supriatna ﬁrst began to sponsor his students to work in the Togean
Islands on the macaque question in 1992 and 1993. During this period,
Budi, along with several other students from the University of Indonesia,
went to Malenge Island to study the macaques’ behavioral patterns as
well as Togean forest ecology. With Supriatna’s backing, Firman, an un-
dergraduate student from As-Syaﬁ’iyah Islamic University, surveyed the
size and constitution of the Togean macaque population. Firman not only
found fourteen groups of macaques and some lone males, but he also
determined that the monkeys were eating a mixture of fruits (mostly ﬁgs),
leaves, ﬂowers, grains, and seeds (Firman 1994). This early research led
to the formation of the Indonesian Foundation for the Advancement of
Biological Sciences (IFABS), an independent biologically focused NGO.
Supriatna would be able to use the Togean project, not only for Indone-
sian nature conservation, but to develop an internationally recognized
program of biological research. IFABS built its research station, Camp
Uemata, to facilitate the primate research and to further their national
scientiﬁc agenda (Surjadi and Supriatna 1998).
International interest in the Togean macaque research developed at the
ﬁfteenth International Primatological Society meetings held in Bali in Au-
gust 1994. At the conference, the project to “clarify the taxonomic posi-
tion of the Togean Island macaque” became a “priority action” (Bynum
1994). Immediately after the conference ended, Russell Mittermeier, presi-
dent of CI and a primatologist himself, visited the Togean archipelago
with Supriatna and other IFABS staff. This visit brought Indonesian scien-
tists and their project together with a funder under the banner of preserv-
ing what CI began to refer to as the “endemic Togean macaque” (Mackie
1994).1 CI then granted preliminary funding to support the new IFABS
organization and the Uemata ﬁeld station.2
While the IFABS biologists continued to study the Togean macaque in
the ﬁeld, Supriatna worked with his former advisor, Jeffrey Froehlich, on
analyzing museum specimens. In 1996 they published their ﬁrst scientiﬁc
article on the species status of M. togeanus (Froehlich and Supriatna
1996). Employing dermatoglyphics, a technique of determining relat-
edness through ﬁngerprints pioneered by Froehlich, and by examining the
bathymetric contours of the Gulf of Tomini to determine that the condi-
tions necessary to produce a species isolate could have existed, they elabo-
rated three possibilities for the primate’s taxonomic status: (1) M. togea-
nus is a third subspecies of M. maurus, (2) the Togean monkey is not
subspeciﬁcally distinct from M. tonkeana (Fooden’s hypothesis), or (3)
the primate deserves separate species status (Sody’s hypothesis).

Making the Monkey
37
On the strength of characteristics distinguishing M. togeanus from M.
maurus—a larger cranium and diminished body size, longer tail, greater
sexual dimorphism, unique pelage (coat), and varying dermatoglyphic
patterning—the authors made an incipient case for separate species sta-
tus. They argued, “comparably diagnosable pelage patterns, distinct alter-
ations in body shape, and greater dermatoglyphic differences suggest that
M. togeanus may be a valid species” (Froehlich and Supriatna 1996:65).
Emphasizing the interpretation that supported separate species status,
they proposed further research on the primate and an urgent conservation
agenda. The “nonexistent protection and the tenuous status of the only
known population of M. togeanus on Malenge Island lends urgency to
the conﬁrmation of these predictions and the formulation of adequate
conservation initiatives” (66). As the facticity of M. togeanus was begin-
ning to “harden” (Latour 1987), the monkey was increasingly able to
support a conservation agenda.
Honor in the Eyes of the World
Science has always been articulated at a national as well as universal
scale. This is true in a particular way for postcolonial nations where the
hemispheric divide has produced an urgency in the pursuit of universal
scientiﬁc knowledge. As a political prisoner on Buru Island, Pramoedya
Anata Toer, Indonesia’s most famous author, once wrote in a letter to
his daughter Nen,
Teilhard de Chardin is the greatest scientist of this century. . . . At a given
moment in the seventeenth century, the light into the darkness of the preced-
ing era was brought by Johann Kepler, namely in the ﬁeld of astronomy; but,
at present, into the darkness of the preceding era, the light is brought by
Teilhard de Chardin, in the ﬁeld of human evolution. . . . This is not a philos-
ophy, this is almost a hundred percent science through which the truth is
being proved. (Pramoedya Ananta Toer, cited in Mrazek 2002)
To understand how “the work of reason” is a “measure of things” in
Indonesians’ conservation biology, or how “a hundred percent science”
is differentiated from a “philosophy,” we must move beyond the articula-
tion of interests (scientists, tourists, funders, and bureaucrats) brought
together in the act of making the monkey.3 How is conservation science
productive of the Indonesian nation? And how does Indonesians’ science
constitute national subjectivities? In order to formulate the speciﬁcity of
“Indonesian” as a modiﬁer for conservation biology, or to think of the
emergence of Togean nature as particular at the scale of the nation, we
need to explore relations between science and nation in Indonesia in more
general terms.

Chapter 1
38
Recent anthropological work on national difference has proposed that
something called “modernity” has alternative versions.4 While main-
taining a focus on difference within the modern world, I agree with those
postcolonial and subaltern studies scholars who successfully avoid the
sense that modernity’s variations are a matter of citizens or nations choos-
ing from among sets of “alternatives.” For example, Partha Chatterjee
(1993) has argued that the form of the postcolonial nation was never
Benedict Anderson’s Euro-“imagined community.” Rather, as a national
form, it was dependent on its status as successor to the nation imagined in
Europe and the identitarian and conceptual struggles which that entailed.
Similarly, Gyan Prakash (1999) describes India’s “different” modernity
as a “desire to institute a culturally speciﬁc community,” yet he writes,
“while successfully projecting the nation as an autonomous community,
its imagination was overwhelmed by the history of the modern state.”
In other words, while the nation’s affective attachments were formed in
opposition to Europe, the state’s own technologies of rule could not es-
cape patterns established elsewhere.
Employing this postcolonial frame, both Gyan Prakash and Itty Abra-
ham describe science in India as intimately articulated with the making
of Indian modernities. Prakash (1999) describes how colonial science
was “staged” as a sign of modernity, while Abraham (1998) reveals how
the making of the Indian atomic bomb was part of India’s struggle for
national recognition. In each case, the work of these scholars emphasizes
relations of science as forms of difference producing the postcolonial
subject. It is impossible to distinguish Indian or EuroAmerican science
from legacies of the nation-state, and this is no less true for Indonesian
science.5
In Toer’s novel, This Earth of Mankind (1996), we can see how science
was present at the nation’s birth. Pramoedya’s story is structured around
a narrator named Minke and his experiences in school. Minke’s admira-
tion for European science and technology leads him to make an unfavor-
able comparison between his tradition-bound father and his learned
teachers. Yet Pramoedya’s tale also questions the use and function of all
this learnedness for colonizer and colonized alike. The Dutch in Indonesia
are caught in a canonical colonial dilemma, namely what good is all that
learning if in the end Europeans prove themselves uncivilized? Likewise,
of what use is it for Indies natives to study the newfound science if, in the
end, they are not allowed to apply their knowledge?6 Only somewhere
late in the story does Minke discover that the nickname he was given by
his ﬁrst Dutch primary school teacher had been his own mispronunciation
of the word “monkey!”
While science and politics are inseparable, many scientists wish to see
them divided on the basis of an idealized notion that good science is de-

Making the Monkey
39
Kalimantan, 1955. Classroom poster reads: “Memperlindungi Alam Berarti Men-
dapat Penghormatan Dimata Dunia (Protecting Nature Means to Receive Honor
in the Eyes of the World).” J. Roberts/National Geographic Image Collection.
void of sentiment or opinion. Scientists in postcolonial Indonesia are
forced to separate science from political sentiment for other reasons, as
well. A biologist I knew in Indonesia once told me a story of how he
learned to avoid politics. In 1965, when he was just a boy, his father was
in the army. This was the year when the Indonesian army enﬂamed its
citizens to brutally rid the countryside of suspected members of the Com-
munist Party (Partai Komunis Indonesia, or PKI). His father was in the
West Java battalion and he witnessed his father’s compatriots round up
suspected PKI members and gun them down in the open-air movie theater
on the army base.7 This history still informs the silent subjectivities of
many Indonesians today and, as the mass killings progressed, my biologist
friend witnessed the murders of his own school teachers. Between ﬁve
hundred thousand and one million people died across Indonesia during
this episode of recent Indonesian history (Cribb 1990).
With Suharto’s rise to power in 1966 following on the heels of this
violence, the nation was asked to reject the active political life that had
existed under Sukarno; in place of “politics,” the country would now
pursue “development.” Science, during the Suharto period, would come
to carry the legitimacy of “progress” and “modernity” rather than the
stigma of politics. Under these historical conditions, the seemingly apoliti-
cal nature of scientiﬁc inquiry was not an abstract philosophical position

Chapter 1
40
on scientiﬁc objectivity. Educated Indonesian citizens were guided toward
engineering, biology, and other ﬁelds in science and technology as ways
to advance the nation through “apolitical” means. Although this does not
indicate that Indonesian scientists might not also share a passion for the
forms and mechanisms of biological nature, the appeal of biological sci-
ence and species inventory must also be understood in the context of na-
tional trauma.
In the case of India, Prakash observes, science has been asked to “an-
chor the entire ediﬁce of modern culture, identity, politics, and economy.”
The semiotic possibilities of science in Indonesia also include this “edi-
ﬁce” of modernity. While the Suharto government sought development
as a panacea for politics, science was asked to complete the project of
modernity by initiating the new Indonesian subjectivity governmental ra-
tionality proposed. We can see the way science and technology brought
together the dream of technology and nation in mid-1990s Indonesia in
the efforts of Dr. Bacharuddin Jusuf Habibie, Suharto’s Minister of Tech-
nology. Habibie, who had been director of a German aerospace company
in the 1970s, returned home at the invitation of Suharto to develop a
“high-technology” economy in Indonesia, and Suharto granted Habibie
unlimited resources to follow their mutual ambition of a scientiﬁcally
modern nation. Out of this effort developed, most famously, the Airplane
Industry of the Archipelago (P.T. Industri Pesawat Terbang Nusantara).
Habibie’s idea of a high-tech economy was intended to create not only
products for elite consumption but also new national subjects. Science
and technology were imagined as central to an idealized Indonesian sub-
jectivity that would transform the citizenry from top to bottom. Habibie
once said: “The basis of any modern economy is in their capability of
using their renewable human resources. The best renewable human re-
sources are those human resources which are in a position to contribute
to a product which uses a mixture of high-tech” (Head 1998). In the
1990s, the idea of “human resources” (sumber daya manusia) was a com-
mon, though of course indeﬁnitely deferrable, way of describing the posi-
tion of citizens within the nation.
While one might presume that this discussion of human resources
would be limited to the elite center of Indonesia, marginalized peoples on
Indonesia’s periphery comprised the “other” in this national conversa-
tion. I encountered the term in the Togean Islands, for example, when a
trader once explained to me, “the problem with these Togean people is
their low human resource quality.” While this rhetoric was surprising to
me, a discourse of “human quality” was often used to distinguish Indone-
sia’s cosmopolitan classes from its agrarian and ﬁshing peoples. Togean
Islanders were imagined, from an urban perspective, as backward, and

Making the Monkey
41
the “low-tech” technologies they used in their daily lives informed this
representation.8
Biodiversity science in the Togean Islands shared with the industrial
development of a “national airplane” and a “national car” (mobil nasi-
onal, or mobnas) the sense that its desired outcome was a technoscientiﬁc
product belonging to the nation. Conservation biology in the Togean Is-
lands was the science that would produce a “national park,” although
the sense of national patrimony always had to contend with the rhetoric
of biodiversity’s universal value. IFABS’ conservation biology sutured in-
ternational science literally onto the national landscape. It did so, how-
ever, within a set of transnational social relations still haunted by the
“spectre of comparisons” (Anderson 1998) from Indonesia’s colonial
past. As a project of modernity-in-the-making, Indonesians’ science en-
tered upon territory the terms of which were known in advance and set
somewhere else. As such, there was always the danger that Indonesians’
science would be received as “repetition rather than re-presenting”
(Bhabha 1994:88).
Beginning in the 1980s, new forms of activism in Indonesia mobilized
the political neutrality of biological science and incorporated it into
agendas of social and environmental transformation. For example, the In-
donesian Forum for the Environment (Walhi), Indonesia’s most prominent
environmental organization, was able to advocate for land reform and
worker’s rights under the rubric of “environment” through the concept’s
afﬁliation with natural science. Walhi activists also occasionally employed
the rubric of “biodiversity” during this period, although biodiversity was
as much a means to legitimate their work with marginalized peoples as it
was an expression of an abstract interest in extinction or systematics.9 Both
“environment” and “biodiversity” were deemed apolitical during the late
Suharto period conveying a scientiﬁc valence both domestically and inter-
nationally.
While Walhi represents the environmental justice side of Suharto-era
activism, IFABS, with its goal of advancing biological science, represented
a somewhat more biocentric mode of social engagement. Togean primatol-
ogy and conservation biology entangled Indonesian biologists in transna-
tional scientiﬁc practices in which biology’s distance from politics was ex-
plicit within scientiﬁc discourse itself. Rather than posit contentious
political communities within the nation, or a variety of commitments to
nature based on different and often conﬂicting sets of identities or rights
(as Walhi sometimes did during this period), Togean conservation biology
was conceived of—by Indonesian and EuroAmerican scientists alike—as
producing politically uncontroversial outcomes.10 While Togean nature
emerged as locally speciﬁc through species inventory, Indonesian scientists
gained generality as transnational and universal subjects who did not polit-

Chapter 1
42
ically threaten the state. Moreover, IFABS scientists could be recognized
for developing the nation’s modern “human resources” at an unmarked
cosmopolitan and universal scale, rather than for the localized “ethnosci-
ence” through which foreign scientists and anthropologists had heretofore
represented “Indonesian” ideas of nature.
The Social Life of Transnational Collaboration
That Indonesian conservation biology is now controlled by Indonesian
scientists has everything to do with the existence of the Indonesian state.
Unlike colonial-era natural historians, EuroAmerican scientists must re-
ceive research permits, work with scholarly counterparts, and demon-
strate collegial respect in order to ply their trade in Indonesia. Many Indo-
nesian scientists still choose to collaborate with foreign scientists in their
research. The process of collaboration, though, is always haunted by the
spectre of Indonesian scientiﬁc subalternity and the struggle for Indone-
sian scientists to “speak” (Spivak 1998) in transnational scholarly set-
tings. In my work in Indonesia as a foreign scholar, I began to sense that
tensions over EuroAmerican scientiﬁc hegemony often rested just beneath
the surface.
My research began with my entrance into Indonesia through Jakarta
and a visit to the ofﬁces of IFABS located near the campus of the Univer-
sity of Indonesia. Upon my arrival, Yakup startled me with the question:
“Will you be working under your own name or under the name of Conser-
vation International?” I answered that this was my own research project.
“But why?” He told me that CI was claiming they had been doing biologi-
cal research for several years in the Togeans, while the work was actually
done by Yakup and his colleagues. The IFABS biologists were upset at
their funder’s failure to recognize them for their work. Because I had been
initially introduced to the Togean project through a contact at CI, Yakup
was concerned that I might share CI’s outlook.
In addition to the sense that foreign scholars could easily overlook the
work of their Indonesian colleagues, foreign scientists frequently caused
difﬁculties for their Indonesian counterparts by not understanding local
politics or cultural norms. Dr. Supriatna explained to me some of the
problems he had experienced working with foreign experts. Once he was
called from Jakarta by the local Sulawesi government to straighten out a
disagreement among some of the foreign researchers he was sponsoring
in a nature reserve. “This is not appropriate,” he complained. And in a
cautionary tale, he informed me that when some scholars did not turn in
research reports to him, he had withheld their requests for visa extensions.
He also warned me not to have any romantic affairs in the ﬁeld, re-

Making the Monkey
43
counting the story of a woman anthropologist who had taken an Irianese
lover, causing a scandal for her research sponsor.
Whereas in a U.S. academic setting difference among scholars is often
understood as paradigm conﬂict, between Indonesian scientists and their
foreign collaborators theoretical disagreements often produced tensions
over the neocolonial relations of scientiﬁc collaboration itself. During one
conversation at IFABS about my research, I described my project of com-
paring conservationist and Sama “ideas of nature.” Yakup said what he
wanted to know from me, however, was more about the “social struc-
ture” of the Togean people. He said: “In Java there is a social structure,
which is strong and cannot be changed. Because Sama are used to being
nomads, they are not used to being concentrated in such a tight group.
This concentration is very dense. Therefore, there can be ﬁghting and
problems. These people will need to be dispersed.”
Behind Yakup’s invocation of “Javanese social structure” and the po-
tential for “ﬁghting and problems” among Togean people lay perspec-
tives gained from his studies of biological anthropology and sociobiol-
ogy.
Behind
my
own
interest
in
political
rights
and
cultural
representations of Togean people lay my training in political ecology and
poststructuralist anthropology. As I was not willing to put my research
to ends that this training had taught me to perceive as unjust or coercive,
I explained to Yakup that I could only work to understand the perspec-
tives of all sides. In this encounter, Yakup and I each were suspicious
that our differences might lie at the level of nationality, not theory, how-
ever. In the context of transnational collaboration within the Togean
project, North/South aspects of conﬂict were frequently emphasized over
the abstraction of intellectual difference, and many tensions among for-
eign and Indonesian scientists were readily (and often mistakenly)
viewed as “national” difference.11
Perhaps nothing caused more discomfort between Indonesian and for-
eign scholars than the question of research visas. Foreign scientists are
required to have an ofﬁcial research permit before they do any studies
in Indonesia. From the perspective of foreign scholars, the research visa
can take months or years to get, sometimes requiring an expensive spe-
cial trip to Indonesia to arrange. Since the visa can only be acquired
in Jakarta, the process embeds the researcher in an endless network of
bureaucracy from the capital to the village, and most importantly, once
one is in Indonesia on a research visa it is impossible to leave without
the written permission of the research sponsor. An American biologist I
met once spent several days strapped to a board with a broken back
waiting for permission from his sponsor before he could be airlifted to
a hospital in Singapore.12

Chapter 1
44
For their part, Indonesian scientists tend to believe that foreign scien-
tists avoid collaborating with Indonesian scholars by entering their coun-
try on tourist visas. They are aware that EuroAmericans beneﬁt profes-
sionally from their Indonesian research and believe foreign scholars will
not share in these proﬁts unless required to do so. By requiring foreign
scientists to secure permissions through the Indonesian Institute of Sci-
ences, the state attempts to ensure that foreign scientists share their
knowledge and results with domestic scholars. In the 1990s the visa pro-
cess was also a way for the national security bureaucracy to determine
that foreign researchers were not engaging in politically sensitive research,
or research understood as insulting to Indonesian sensibilities. Dr. Supri-
atna regularly confronted the issue of how to persuade foreign scientists
to train students and ﬁeld assistants, to share their research results, and
to give due credit to Indonesian scientiﬁc contributions.13
In Primate Visions, Donna Haraway (1989) explores North-South sci-
entiﬁc relations through the collaboration in 1975 of American primatol-
ogist Alison Jolly and Etienne Rakotomaria, Director of Scientiﬁc and
Technical Research in the Malagasy Republic, as evidence of the decolo-
nizing process occurring in transnational science. This process is espe-
cially salient for conservation biology, which requires the literal space of
postcolonial nations to carry out its work.14 Haraway cites Rakotomaria,
“Scientists will only be allowed to work here if they arrange reciprocal
beneﬁts for Malagasy colleagues. The people in this room know that Mal-
agasy nature is a world heritage. We are not sure that others realize it
is our heritage.” Haraway identiﬁes this as a beginning of “Malagasy-
controlled reconstruction of what nature and conservation must mean for
national, ecological, and cultural survival,” and she asks a question
equally salient for Indonesia: “What might a postcolonial reinvention of
nature be like?” (Haraway 1989:207).
Camp Uemata
At Camp Uemata, I experienced biological ﬁeld science with the IFABS
scientists ﬁrsthand. In 1996 and 1997, Uemata was a busy “center of
calculation” where data on Togean nature was not only compiled but also
made mobile, stable, and combinable (Latour 1987). During the course
of the year I met many Indonesian scientists, including several primatolo-
gists, a marine biologist, a forest ecologist, a geographer, an economist,
and an ornithologist. I also met foreign researchers, including an expert
on the coconut palm, a graduate student studying public health policy, a
political ecologist, a biological anthropologist, and the members of two
Earthwatch expeditions. Another cadre of Indonesian experts on tourism

Making the Monkey
45
and development worked to translate biological mandates into social pro-
grams. And ﬁnally, Togean Island people assisted scientists with conserva-
tion and research activities. Both experts and expertise were outcomes of
Togean ﬁeld science.
One night I went into the forest with an American primatologist who
was conducting a study of the Togean tarsier. The tarsier is one of the
world’s smallest primates and the species status of the Togean Island tar-
sier, like that of the Togean macaque, also hung in the balance. Participat-
ing in capturing the tarsiers that day were Dr. Supriatna, Pak Arif (a ﬁeld
assistant to the American scientist), and several American volunteers from
an organization named Earthwatch. We climbed up to a dead ﬁcus, which
the scientists suspected was the sleeping tree of a family of tarsiers. Arif
had previously set up mist nets surrounding the tree to catch the nocturnal
tarsiers when they came out at dusk. I sat near a volunteer who took my
photograph saying: “Anthropologist at work in the jungle!”
Suddenly, we heard a chirp. Then, immediately, a whistle. This was
the duet call of a male-female pair that the American primatologist was
recording to use in a behavioral analysis of tarsier speciation. It didn’t
take long before, zip!, I saw the dim outline of a tarsier leap from one leaf
clump to another and it was caught in our mist net. Looking into the net
with our ﬂashlights, Dr. Supriatna asked the volunteers if they had ever
seen a tarsier before. He believed this was a new species and the largest
kind of tarsier, weighing 150 grams. He explained, “There are four species
of tarsiers in Kalimantan and others in Sulawesi each having color varia-
tions. The tarsier won’t live in captivity. They don’t eat because of stress,”
he added. “Are they endangered?” the volunteer with the camera asked
him. “No, not endangered, but protected,” Supriatna replied.
Dr. Supriatna had recommended Arif to the American scientist as an
expert on Sulawesi primates and on the techniques of primatological ﬁeld
work. Pak Arif lived near Tangkoko National Park in North Sulawesi,
which has populations of both macaques and tarsiers. He had made his
career working with both Indonesian and foreign scientists, and he attrib-
uted his entry into the scientiﬁc and conservation worlds to the wide vari-
ety of primate researchers he had met there. Arif assisted them with build-
ing traps, setting nets, taking blood samples, and taking care of the
physical aspects of primate ﬁeld study that scientists generally ﬁnd difﬁ-
cult. Arif also had a detailed understanding of primate behavior. Although
he had only an elementary school education, this was not an obstacle to
demonstrating his knowledge, and he was well regarded in the world of
Indonesian primate research.
Dr. Supriatna promoted all his Indonesian staff, whether scientist or
assistant, into positions of authority at Camp Uemata. He explained to
me, “Arif is the best tarsier man in the country.” Another time he invited

Chapter 1
46
Measuring a Tarsier at Camp Uemata, by Celia Lowe.
Pak Ahmad, the Ranger, to explain to some camp visitors his experience
working with the biologists. Ahmad described how he had assisted Budi
with his study of Malenge’s trees: “In 1992, Budi ﬁrst came to build a
camp here. We built a trail through the forest and we made a ‘bell’ and
then a ‘plot.’ A plot is an area 50 meters square where we counted the
number and size of trees. We also counted the six types of fruits and the
seven types of leaves. This is what is called ‘analysis.’ ”

Making the Monkey
47
While Dr. Supriatna attempted to situate his Indonesian colleagues as
experts, sometimes his efforts would fail dramatically. On one occasion,
a EuroAmerican scientist complained loudly about his food saying, “It
seems whenever I’m eating with a group of Europeans and a bunch of
foreigners, I can’t make them understand not to use so much chili pepper.”
Budi got up and left the table abruptly: who, after all, was foreign here?
Or once, when an Indonesian biologist showed up late for a ﬁeld excur-
sion, I heard a white scientist proclaim, “that’s why they’re still beating
on drums.” Most frustrating for this group of elite Indonesians was that
foreign visitors to the camp were sometimes unable to make a distinction
between Indonesian scientists and Togean villagers. The distinction be-
tween cosmopolitan scientists and rural Togean people, however, was one
of the important social distinctions at stake for Indonesian experts in their
scientiﬁc production of nature, and the ﬁeld station was a place where
“modern” and “traditional” identities were continually reinscribed.
At Uemata, Indonesian scientists were also, at times, susceptible to rep-
resenting Togean people as “unknowing,” and Togean knowledges could
be overlooked in the scientiﬁc effort to reveal biological nature. My Sama
friend Isra once asked me if I believed we are descended from monkeys.
I was a bit noncommittal on the subject. The 35 million years that sepa-
rates me from the Togean macaque does seem rather a long time to recon
kinship and, as Franklin and McKinnon (2001:5) write, “Kinship pro-
vides a useful example of naturalization as knowledge because of the way
in which kin ties are seen to be constituted out of primordial natural
facts.”15 Isra asked me about primate kinship because he himself had been
brought to the camp by IFABS in the hopes that he would internalize
their conservation values. He learned many things about the conservation
project while he was there, including the urgency of preserving the Togean
monkey. One explanation he was given of its value was that it is our
“ancestor.” But, he told me, he did not believe humans are related to
animals at all. “God looks at humans differently than animals,” Isra said.
Biologists’ desires to revise Togean peoples’ views of nature were re-
ﬂected in the way they had reworked physical space at Camp Uemata.
Uemata was built on an uninhabited beach, but the reef in front of it had
previously been a sea cucumber collecting and ﬁshing ground for Sama
people from nearby Pulo Papan. Indeed, the hill behind the camp was
somebody’s garden plot. Uemata itself was named after the tiny spring—
not much bigger than tears—that had ﬂowed onto the sand at the end of
the beach before it was turned into the camp’s shower facility. A garbage
pit at one end of the beach now gathered trash and ﬂies. The biologists’
idealist supplanting of Togean peoples’ natures was physically replicated
in their appropriation of the land- and marine-scapes of the campsite.

Chapter 1
48
Pak Ahmad, who was positioned as a culture broker between the scien-
tists and his Malenge Island neighbors, knew that the Togean macaque
competed with Malenge people who needed the space to grow coconuts
on the island. One day, as I was speaking to some women who were coring
coconuts, Ahmad teasingly called them “monkeys.” I joined in the play
by asking if they were a “protected” species. Ahmad responded, “These
are more protected than the ones in the forest.” From his perspective, if
you own coconuts, even if you are sick or old, you have something of
value. If you want to go to the store and ask for credit, the owner will
give it to you. He will pay your taxes for you, he will do almost anything
to help. For Ahmad, the scientists and their idea of biodiverse nature
threatened this livelihood and promised to make Togean monkeys more
signiﬁcant than Togean people.
Scientists and Togean people disputed the identity and meaning of To-
gean nature and, even as the scientists hoped that Togean people would
come to appreciate their biodiversity perspective, biological and Togean
cultures of nature could not always be reconciled. Isra claimed the mon-
keys did not even come from Malenge Island. He told me how they had
arrived on a Portuguese ship that had anchored near Malenge a long time
ago. The ship’s crew put down a board to the island and the monkeys
escaped. So while the scientists were searching for the origins of the mon-
key in evolutionary time, Malenge people described equally exotic origins
of the monkey from historical memory.
M. Togeanus Becomes a Dubious Name
At the end of Supriatna and Froehlich’s 1996 article suggesting the likeli-
hood of the Togean macaque’s species status, the authors mentioned a
story similar to the one I had heard from Isra: “Recent ﬁeldwork supports
local traditions that the monkeys of Malenge Island were artiﬁcially trans-
ported there about 1920 from near Tanjung Api . . . they occur nowhere
else in the Togian archipelago.” This story of the historical origins of the
Togean macaque sits uneasily in the same article alongside the authors’
invocation of island biogeography, which was intended to indicate the
possibility of the monkey’s arrival by a prehistoric land bridge.
Nonetheless, Isra’s “local knowledge” could not overwhelm the mo-
mentum of the primate research or the conservation effort. Dr. Supriatna
and his students sent blood samples of the Togean macaque to Columbia
University in New York for analysis, and he and Froehlich conducted
ﬁeld research on the mainland to look for related monkeys. Over nine-
teen days in June 1995, and twelve days in January 1996, they sampled
ninety wild and pet “Togean-like” monkeys from around the Balantak

Making the Monkey
49
peninsula. They sedated the monkeys by injecting them with Ketamine
HCl using hand-held syringes or blow-guns and injection darts, and they
gathered ﬁngerprints on clear tape covered with graphite powder. The
macaques were examined for blood, dermatoglyphic volar prints from
both hands and feet, and morphometric and pelage data. In order to
assess the health of the Togean macaque population, they took bilateral
cheek tooth measurements from the 1939 Menden collection and as-
sessed asymmetry scores to look for signs of stress on the Togean mon-
keys (Froehlich et al. 1998).
In August of 1997 Supriatna, Froehlich, and three colleagues submitted
their reanalysis for publication in the journal Tropical Biodiversity. This
time there was no mention of prehistoric Togean biogeography, and the
story of the Togean macaque’s historical arrival on Malenge Island was
covered in speciﬁc detail:
Oral traditions on Malenge and the mainland tell of a few animals being
transported to this island in the 1920s, supposedly by a Swiss man named
Sibley in charge of German copra plantations between Tanjung Api and
Bunta starting in 1918 (Pak A.Ex: Palali [Luwuk Historian], pers. comm.).
As an amateur naturalist, Sibley sailed often around Teluk Tomini in his
orange boat. Residents of Malenge also tell of more recent, but failed at-
tempts to establish their monkeys on neighboring islands of the Togeans.
(1998:168)
In their new article, the scientists conclude that the Malenge population
from Menden’s collection includes genes from female M. tonkeana and
male Balantak monkeys. “This hypothesis is supported by the emphatic
testimony of Pak Amir, a very knowledgeable forest guide on Malenge
Island,” they wrote (177), since Amir had never seen traits indicative of
the Balantak female. At the same time, the allure of taxonomic discovery
remained alive, and they determined that the Balantak peninsula was
home to a different, previously undescribed, species of macaque that they
nicknamed “the Balan of Balantak” in the title of their article.
At this point, the scientiﬁc research ﬁndings failed to sustain the inde-
pendent species status of M. togeanus, and the macaque was concluded
to be a “bottle-necked hybrid swarm” or, as another primatologist de-
scribed it to me, “feral.” Their new work reversed the suppositions of the
1996 article with the following description, “The small Togean popula-
tion represents an unnatural hybrid swarm, bottlenecked and inbred after
its founding mostly by female Tonkean and male Balantak genes.” Fur-
thermore, “The Togean sample is . . . not representative metrically, geneti-
cally, or historically of the Balantak monkey on the Sulawesi peninsula.”
The new ﬁeld data do support the idea that the Balantak primate is a valid

Chapter 1
50
new species, while “M. togeanus is a nomen dubium for the population
on the mainland peninsula” (180).
So what would become of this monkey as a raison d’etre for Togean
biodiversity conservation?
From Dubious Name to Endemic Species
The status “dubious name” might have been the end of things for M.
togeanus, but it was not. In the Balantak article, the authors argued again
for the conservation value of the Togean primates: “It would seem advis-
able to declare the name Macaca togeanus a nomen dubium, or perhaps
to reserve the name for a unique hybrid subspecies of M. tonkeana in
order to facilitate its protection for the great potential it offers in the study
of inbreeding and of hybridization between primate species” (Froehlich
et al. 1998:180).
By 1997, although the Togean macaque had come full circle from its
recognition as a “new form” to a “dubious name,” the existence of an
“endemic” primate species still had utility for Togean Island conservation.
As Supriatna had explained, “charismatic animals allow people to want
to save the environment.” At the International Tropical Marine Ecosys-
tems Management Symposium (ITMEMS) held in Port Townsend, Aus-
tralia in 1998, well after M. togeanus had become a “bottlenecked hybrid
swarm,” Dr. Supriatna and an Indonesian colleague presented a paper in
which they argued: “Almost sixty percent of the land area of the Togeans
is covered in tropical forest that supports an impressive array of local
and Sulawesi endemic species including: the Togean macaque (Macaca
togeanus)—a primate only recently described in 1996 (Froehlich and Su-
priatna 1996); the Togean lizard (Varanus salvator togeanus); the babi-
rusa or ‘pig deer’ (Babyrousa babyrussa togeanus); and the Togean Tarsier
(Tarsius togeanus) (Surjadi and Supriatna 1998:281).”
In referring only to his co-authored 1996 article where Dr. Supriatna
had argued for the macaque’s endemic status, it is clear that the outcomes
of conservation biology and primatology alone were not a sufﬁcient basis
upon which the project might reverse its course. “Science in action” (La-
tour 1987), in this case, contained the momentum of the scientists’ invest-
ments and interests in the Togean Islands as a protected area and a biodi-
verse locale. Already they had committed too much to reverse the project’s
course based on scientiﬁc ﬁndings alone.
The status of the Togean macaque as “endemic” was a strategic essen-
tialism constituting a means to several ends. First, the science of “making
the monkey” established a way to legitimate the Togean conservation
project within the larger sphere of Indonesian state control. It also had

Making the Monkey
51
secured a place for Indonesian science within transnational ﬁeld biology
and primatology in which the presence of scientiﬁc practice was as least
as important as its outcomes.16 Third, it committed CI to funding Togean
Island conservation. And ﬁnally it had succeeded in transforming IFABS
into a new institution able to promote biological science in Indonesia.
These social facts were sufﬁcient to secure the status of M. togeanus
as unique and worth conserving more solidly than dermatoglyphics or
pelage data could, and it would not prove possible to return Malenge
Island over to Togean peoples’ coconut farming or to local meanings of
nature on the basis of any scientiﬁc results. Once a “species” has entered
into the realm of biodiversity calculation, it hardly ever emerges again
as unworthy of protection; transnational biodiversity ideologies inhibit
such reversals. This, of course, has implications for the people who live
in proximity to biodiverse nature without sharing its logics. As Ahmad
had said to me: “We can’t run to the land; we can’t run to the sea; where
can we run?”
But this is a world only partially constituted by Indonesian scientists
and their own social and scientiﬁc initiatives. In her keynote address at
ITMEMS, Nancy Foster (1998) of the United States National Oceanic
and Atmospheric Association, argued for moving away from species-
driven biodiversity conservation. Instead she proposed “an ecosystems
approach to management” as the appropriate scale for both scientiﬁc
analysis and political advocacy. This was a moment when conservation
was beginning to shift its rationale from “species” to “ecoregions.” Dr.
Supriatna’s doubly anachronistic promotion of the endemic macaque
at the same conference reﬂects postcolonial relations of knowledge and
knowledge-making in which those at the margins of scientiﬁc production
are allowed to contribute data, while those in centers provide the theo-
ries through which scientiﬁc reason will be known. We can see this in
Supriatna’s own primatology where his advisor, Jeffrey Froehlich, is rec-
ognized for his invention of the techniques for dermatoglyphic analysis,
while Supriatna’s research into speciation and hybridity constitutes a
case analysis.
In this sense, the creations of Indonesian scientists, like the Indian
scientists described by subaltern studies scholars, are recognized only
through struggle and insistence. To imagine “nonderivative” thought
within Supriatna’s scientiﬁc project, however, we need only look at his
scholarship. Speciﬁcally, his insistence on recognition of Indonesians’
contributions to the scientiﬁc project encompasses its own theory of
standpoint. Supriatna’s scholarly writings contain continual reference
to the knowledge of Sulawesi and Togean peoples, and he makes their
perspectives signiﬁcant for understanding the facticity of the Togean ma-
caque itself. From the ﬁrst he includes the story of the macaque’s arrival

Chapter 1
52
on Malenge by ship. In his later article he cites Pak A., “a Luwuk histo-
rian,” and Pak Amir, “a very knowledgeable forest guide,” for their
knowledge of the macaque. His citational practices consistently allow
for Indonesians to speak as experts—be they undergraduate students or
local oral historians—in situations where EuroAmericans might other-
wise overlook these contributions.
M. Togeanus as Keystone Species
The Togean macaque, “M. togeanus,” was a metaphorical “keystone spe-
cies” for Togean conservation biology. In its biological sense, a keystone
species holds together an ecosystem and, in the Togean Islands, the ma-
caque held together the social life of biodiverse nature. The monkey drew
together threads connecting Indonesian biologists to the ideas of biodiver-
sity extending across nations in the 1990s, while the scientists were also
positioned within domestic ideas of nature and nation. In this way, Indo-
nesian biologists became subjects of a universalizing project of scientiﬁc
inquiry while simultaneously participating in the making of an Indonesian
modernity that was historically and geographically distinct. In this double
move, Indonesian modernity is not an “alternative” to something more
central or originary. Indonesian conservation biology produces scientiﬁc
reason in a manner that should be familiar from the many projects of
knowledge production described by science studies scholars, while it is
no less entangled with those issues of origin and identity outlined by theo-
rists of postcoloniality.
Indonesians’ conservation biology gave the IFABS biologists an elite
location within the nation, and this social position, in turn, gave them a
strong voice in relation to Togean Island peoples who could assist scien-
tists in the production of biodiverse nature but could not overturn the
biodiversity paradigm. By imagining Budi, Yakup, Dr. Supriatna, and the
other Indonesian biologists as occupying that space of the middle—be-
tween, on the one hand, international conservation and science and, on
the other, Togean Island people—the postcolonial status of Indonesians’
science becomes apparent. The story of making the monkey indicates the
complexities of living in a postcolonial world where Indonesian scientists
are both elite (within the nation) and subaltern (within transnational sci-
ence) at precisely the same moments.

Chapter Two
THE SOCIAL TURN
A growing number of international organizations have
chosen to focus on Indonesia including ODA, USAID,
JICA, WWF, Birdlife International, Wetlands Interna-
tional, WCS, FFI, WPTI, CI. In their hearts glow two
effective combinations of approaches: site based (e.g.,
adopt a park), and empowerment of local communities
and development of small enterprises. . . . IFABS endeav-
ors in Togean were started in 1992 by Dr. Jatna Supri-
atna who focused on ecology and conservation of the
Togean Macaque. In 1993 a greater effort was spent to
make inventories of Togean’s marine and terrestrial bio-
diversity. Needless to say, maybe, inventory is the base
foundation on which biological management is built.
IFABS, under the leadership of all IFABS Directors, real-
ized that encouraging local community participation is
the next prerequisite for successful conservation and has
accordingly to strive to turn the local communities to
be the main beneﬁciary of conservation. The wheel has
turned and begun to run now.
—Didi M. Indrawan, Notes on Togean Conservation
AT CAMP UEMATA I met a scientist named Laksmi, an IFABS biologist who
maintained a strong interest in Togean people and who was concerned
with how regimes of conservation and development could become coer-
cive. Similar to the way many anthropologists have been attracted to their
ﬁeld, Laksmi’s interest in Indonesia’s ﬁshers and farmers developed
through an early encounter with representations of Native Americans.1
When she was young, Laksmi had read the works of German novelist
Karl May translated into Indonesian. Unlike the depictions of the valiant
cowboy and treacherous Indian of American ﬁlm and literature, May
painted a picture of a “noble” Indian under siege by the savage cowboy.
Laksmi sympathized with Winnetou, the native protagonist in May’s
books, and she began to compare him in her mind with Indonesia’s many
marginalized ethnic groups. Her desire to equate a ﬁctional representation
of Native Americans with an equally imagined understanding of Indone-
sia’s marginal peoples was facilitated by the Indonesian state’s own fram-
ing of permissible forms of ethnic difference of the “song and dance vari-
ety” (Li 1999). Many scholars of Indonesia have written about the state’s

Chapter 2
54
instrumental use of “culture,” and of its efforts to aestheticize and depolit-
icize ethnicity during the New Order period (Errington 1998; Volkman
1990; Pemberton 1994; Hefner 1990). But unlike these ofﬁcial stagings
of culture, Laksmi’s imagination was also informed by a deep dislike for
inequality.
As Laksmi entered the world of biological science, she continued to
imagine the plight of many Indonesian peoples through her sympathetic
reading of Winnetou. Her imagination took on concrete form during her
ﬁrst trip to the United States when, identiﬁed as one of Indonesia’s future
leaders, Laksmi was invited by the United States Information Agency to
tour the country. Able to travel anywhere, she requested to see a place
where Native Americans were managing their own natural resources. She
was interested to learn if there were resource conﬂicts between local peo-
ple and national parks in the United States, or if only Indonesia had this
experience. Laksmi was taken to Menomonee, Wisconsin, and to the Ad-
irondack mountains of New York where she learned that, indeed, such
conﬂicts exist.
I discovered, myself, the ability of the Native American (and the Austra-
lian Aboriginal) to stand in for the marginalized ethnicized Indonesian
(especially outside of Java, Bali, and Sumatra) when I was in Palu, the
capital of central Sulawesi. When I presented my research proposal at the
Department of Social and Political Affairs I was told, “you have your
Indians, and we have our Bajau.” Yet, among some Indonesian biologists,
the Native American experience was also a guide to what should not hap-
pen in Indonesia. They were aware of how Native Americans had been
expelled from park lands by the United States Army to create spaces of
Arcadian wilderness, and they used this as evidence Indonesia needed to
follow a different path. Scientists like Laksmi wanted to work to incorpo-
rate people into a national park concept that was more appropriate for
their country.2
Conservation biology brings biologists into intimate contact with the
question of what to make of the peoples inhabiting the “natural” places
they study. My friend Hari developed a new understanding of the problem
when, as a student at the University of Indonesia, he was invited by Dr.
Supriatna to join the Sulawesi Primate Project. In studying the macaques
of South Sulawesi for his undergraduate thesis, Hari began to appreciate
for the ﬁrst time the lives of the people of rural Sulawesi and the everyday
problems they faced. In the case of the Sulawesi macaque, the issue that
brought together Sulawesi people, monkeys, and conservation was
known as the “crop raiding problem” (Supriadi and Akbar 1997). Su-
lawesi farmers thought of the macaque as a pest, since the monkeys took
coconuts from trees and crops from ﬁelds. Farmers were trapping and

The Social Turn
55
poisoning the monkeys to protect their crops and, as farmlands expanded,
conﬂicts between farmers and monkeys had become more intense.
While some biologists viewed Sulawesi farmers primarily as a threat to
the monkey, the crop-raiding problem radicalized Hari’s thinking.
Through his scientiﬁc interest in protecting monkeys, Hari came into con-
tact with Sulawesi people as objects of scientiﬁc study and political advo-
cacy. On the one hand, he wanted to know how humans were affecting
the survival of macaque populations. On the other, he wondered if the
crop-raiding problem might be resolved in a way that was beneﬁcial to
both people and monkeys. For this, biology alone could not help him.
Conﬂicts between people and primates raise larger issues of access to re-
sources and of how Sulawesi peoples understand the landscapes around
them. Hari’s questions also interfaced with another issue important from
the perspective of Indonesian developmentalist discourse, namely, could
Sulawesi farmers’ lives be improved?
Laksmi and Hari brought these experiences to their understanding of
the relationship between Togean nature and Togean people and, thus, the
people of the Togean Islands became objects of study. In the early part of
the 1990s, Laksmi and Hari explored Togean peoples’ knowledges
through the lens of “ethnobiology,” combining the biological study of
“ecology, vegetation, ﬂora, [and] land and sea fauna,” with the anthropo-
logical study of “knowledge systems concerning the technological uses of
ﬂora and marine fauna” (Yuliati, et. al. 1994). Then, in the mid-1990s,
the form of knowledge the scientists sought changed to adapt more closely
to the needs of political advocacy, and IFABS began to develop the idea
of “spatial planning” (penataan ruang). In this, the biologists broadened
their deﬁnition of knowledge to examine Togean peoples’ ideas of space
and place.
Indigenous knowledge came to be seen by IFABS scientists as an im-
portant supplement to the biological knowledges produced in species
inventory. Framing Togean people as “indigenous,” and therefore pos-
sessing special knowledges and abilities, was characteristic of a transna-
tional social turn in biodiversity conservation. If “biodiverse” was the
form scientiﬁcally produced nature acquired through Togean species in-
ventory, the “indigenous” was the form that culturally produced society
simultaneously assumed. Through ethnobiology and participatory spa-
tial planning, the scientists began to collaborate with Togean people—
understanding that conservation could not move forward without their
participation. In multiple and sometimes contradictory ways, indigenae-
ity was the analytic through which Togean people became manageable
and knowable subjects of the Indonesian state, and through which the
cosmopolitanism of Togean peoples could be denied. Indigenaeity was

Chapter 2
56
also, however, key to Togean peoples’ discursive emergence as rights-
bearing citizens of the Indonesian nation.
How did such a seemingly solid object as “indigenous knowledge”
emerge as a solution to the controversies of Indonesians’ biodiversity
conservation, and why was “indigenaeity” the form assumed by the
human in this work? Bruno Latour suggests we track how observers of
nature (and culture) move in space and time, how their inscriptions are
enhanced, and how their networks are extended. Another method for
inquiring into the speciﬁcity of knowledge-objects in the present is to
look at how relationships between nature and the human have been
problematized in the past. Colonial era nature-making also produced
observations of how Indies and Indonesian peoples related to the world
of plants and animals, and produced inscriptions bearing representations
of Indies peoples.
The Togean Islands seem far away from cosmopolitan interests, yet the
islands have been a colonial and postcolonial entrepoˆt for discovering,
enumerating, describing, and cataloguing nature’s contents since the
mid-nineteenth century. The archipelago ﬁrst became a site for nature-
making beginning with von Rosenburg’s travels in the Gulf of Tomini in
the 1860s, Adolf Bernard Meyer’s survey of birds in the 1870s, J.H.F.
Umbgrove’s survey of corals in the 1920s, and J. J. Menden’s collection
of macaque skins in 1939. If we slightly expand our geographical pur-
view to encompass the eastern half of the Indonesian archipelago, we
can push our comparison back even further in time. In the seventeenth
century, Georgius Everhardus Rumphius devoted his life to documenting
nature’s plant, animal, and mineral contents in the nearby Maluku Is-
lands. None of these early projects framed Indies peoples as “indige-
nous” or accorded their knowledges particularity or peculiarity on that
basis. The work of these early natural historians reveals the arbitrariness
of indigenaeity as both problem and solution to the relationship between
nature and the human.
The Nautilus and the Mestika
In the history of systematic inventory of life forms in the Malay world,
Rumphius’s work is the earliest, and certainly the most monumental. Ar-
riving in the Indies from Germany in 1653 at the age of twenty-six, he
spent the next ﬁfty years until his death in the Moluccan capital Amboina
developing an account of Indies “curiosities.” Although he was ofﬁcially
an engineer, ensign, and junior merchant for the Dutch East Indies Com-
pany (VOC), his calling was economic botany and he spent his time col-
lecting, describing, and illustrating the natural wonders of what he called

The Social Turn
57
the “Water Indies.” His famous compendium, The Ambonese Curiosity
Cabinet (1999[1705]), is an enormous volume divided into three books:
Dealing With the Soft Shellﬁsh, Dealing With the Hard Shellﬁsh, and
Dealing With the Minerals, Stones, and Other Rare Things. His other
great work, The Ambonese Herbal (1981 [1741]), comprised of 1,662
folio pages divided into 876 chapters and illustrated with 695 plates, de-
scribes 1,200 species of plants (Beekman 1999:lxxx). Rather than the now
familiar “ﬂora and fauna,” Rumphius is known for his record of Moluc-
can plants, sea creatures, and stones.
In the seventeenth century, the Molucca Islands (now Maluku) were
the center of natural endemism for two botanical wonders: the clove and
the nutmeg. The VOC concentrated its entire military and administrative
strength on maintaining its monopoly over the spice trade and wanted
to ﬁnd other similarly valuable commodities. To justify his work to his
employers, Rumphius’s studies had to be “of use and service to those
who live in the East Indies” (lxxxi).3 But Rumphius also intended his
discoveries to be “diverting to Lovers of Nature,” and this is clearly where
his passion lay. At the age of forty-two, Rumphius went completely blind
from “black cataracts” (glaucoma) yet, despite this impairment, contin-
ued documenting and describing nature’s objects with the help of assis-
tants until his death in 1702.
The problem Rumphius addressed was similar to that facing conserva-
tion biologists today, namely, What forms does the natural world con-
tain? His method for determining nature’s contents, however, was an
entirely different one. For Rumphius the answer came not only through
Malay peoples’ knowledge, but through engaging Malay people’s
thought, and Rumphius often aligned himself with that thought.4 Not
only did the people of Ambon help Rumphius collect and catalogue, they
also transformed the structure of his classiﬁcations and helped to shape
his interpretations. In The Ambonese Herbal, Rumphius followed the
pattern laid down by Aristotle, that is, dividing botanical descriptions
into three main groups: trees, herbs, and shrubs. Yet in outlining the
Indies ﬂora, Rumphius equally follows Malay categories, dividing plants
into “edible, fruit-bearing, aromatic, and wild trees”; “all sorts of shrubs
which stand upright”; and “such Shrubs which cannot stand upright on
their own, but which creep along with a long and slender trunk, or wind
around other trees, the like we call in the Indies Forest-ropes, or Taly-
Outang in Malay” (lxxx).
Rumphius related what Malay people told him about a thing, how it
was used, and how the wonder came to arrive in his possession. The
Nautilus, for instance, came to him through the agency of a ﬁsherman
and a sea eagle:

Chapter 2
58
I should mention a rare event here. A Sea Eagle (Haliaetos), being a bird that
constantly hunts at sea, took such a Nautilus, while it was ﬂoating in the
Sea, and bore it aloft, but while his business was with the ﬁsh, and since he
did not care about it as a curiosity, he struck his claws mostly into the ﬁsh,
wherefore the shell came to fall out of his claws, and by rare fortune, it fell
on a small spot of sand between rocks in such a way, that nothing was broken
off, except for a small corner of the foremost edge; and a ﬁsherman who was
wandering thereabouts, quickly picked it up and brought it to me. (Rum-
phius 1999 [1705]:94)
Rumphius’s pattern was to describe the plant, creature, tree, or stone
in detail and then follow with its name in various languages. Although he
wrote in Dutch, European and antique names were not yet transcendent
in Rumphius’s taxonomy. For example, he described the Nautilus as a
biologically hybrid creature having the mixed nature of ﬁsh and shellﬁsh
and wrote, “their name in Latin is Nautilus tenuis & legitimus and its
little Boat, Carina Nautili. In Dutch Doekhuyven, because of the many
folds, In Malay, Ruma Gorita, that is Domuncula Polypi, just as the
Greeks called it Ovum Polypi. In Ambonese Kika Wawutia” (Ibid). Rum-
phius could read and write Arabic script; read, write, and speak German,
Dutch, Malay, and Latin; speak Portuguese and Ambonese; and may have
known some Chinese and Macassarese. He also had a limited knowledge
of Hebrew and Greek (Beekman 1999:lvx).
While Rumphius occasionally took European categories and searched
out their Malay equivalents (as in his title, “The Malay Names For Some
Precious Stones”), he was just as likely to allow Malay categories to illu-
minate nature’s contents. One Malay taxa that worked its way into Rum-
phius’s compendium was the mestica. The mestica was:
any little stone that one ﬁnds in a plant, in wood or in other stones, in a way
that is not nature’s wont, and that was produced by the same, not from a
corruption that would afﬂict an animal, but purely from an excess of good
food, which has attracted a stone like sap from the external food. Hence we
do not include such stones which happen to get inside animals or plants or
which produce any disease in the same, such as those that are found in the
stomach, Urine, gall bladder. . . . But a Mestica must be a hard little stone,
smooth, seldom or never transparent, produced in places where nature
would not have engendered it herself, such as in ﬂesh, brains, fat, and on the
bones of animals, in pure wood and in the fruits of certain plants. (Rumphius
1999 [1705]:327)
One type of mestica was the “tiger stone,” found in the head of the
Sumatran tiger. Rumphius wrote, “one could consider them [tiger stones]
the heads of people, horses, and other animals, which this Murderer might

The Social Turn
59
well have devoured when he was alive, and these images had been im-
pressed on his brains and that stone by his imagination” (Ibid., 329). Rum-
phius’s nature was animated through the agency of people, plants, and
animals. It was a nature where eagles delivered curious objects into ﬁshers’
hands, and where murderous tigers carried images of their victims literally
in their heads. The question for Rumphius was where those powers lay,
not whether they existed: “It is true that the common people tell of many
strange events, that they have seen people, who could not be killed with
any kind of weapon, until one or more of those little stones had been cut
out of their bodies where the same had been pushed in; our people have
confronted such cabalized people in war, and these things have been said
by our own ofﬁcers, so that I do not care to contradict the same.”
Rumphius was not a Romantic (a movement that did not yet exist)
about Malay peoples or the natures they introduced him to; many hidden
powers he considered “fancy and superstition” (327). Still, Rumphius’s
nature-making did not open up a civilizational divide between himself
and those Malay people whose company he kept. The Ambonese people
did not emerge as a special case of humanity possessing a particular kind
of knowledge. They were, instead, people who assisted Rumphius with
thought. Rumphius asked of the people around him what objects were
found there and how they operated, not what did Ambonese people “be-
lieve” to exist. As such, the “indigenous” could form neither problem nor
solution in his work.
The Madreporaria and the Lorikeets
The most important precursor in the direct lineage of Togean biodiversity
conservation was J.H.F. Umbgrove’s study of coral reef morphology and
speciation in 1928. As a scientist aboard the Eridanus, a hydrographic
vessel of the Netherlands East Indies Navy, Umbgrove inventoried the
madreporaria (a genus of hard coral) of the Togean Islands (Umbgrove
1930, 1939). He identiﬁed six new species and one new variety, collecting
seventy-six species in all. In his analysis, he compared the Togean corals
with those from Cocos-Keeling, Batavia (Jakarta), Amboina (Ambon),
Murray Island, and Samoa, thereby elevating the Togean Islands to promi-
nence in the history of natural history. His collection of Togean corals
was packed by his Javanese aide, Jusuf, and shipped to the Rijksmuseum
van Natuurlijke Historie at Leiden and the Museum of the Geological
Survey at Bandung, Java.
“Where, one asks, is everybody?,” muses Mary-Louise Pratt (1992:51)
in her discussion of colonial natural history. One may ask the same ques-
tion of Umbgrove’s Togean Island collecting adventures. All we learn

Chapter 2
60
from him is the name of his Javanese assistant, Jusuf, and of Jusuf’s menial
task. We know of no knowledge provided by this assistant and, moreover,
Umbgrove never mentions Togean people. In Umbgrove’s form of natural
science, Malay peoples could not be experts on Indies nature. Their ways
of knowing were neither necessary to his work, nor were they worth re-
marking upon. This was not precisely the case in the earliest recorded
study of Togean life forms, that of A. B. Meyer’s collection of birds in the
1870s, where both birds and Malay people took on a form more substan-
tial than mere absence.
On the one hand were the Celebes birds. Meyer describes his wander-
ings over the countryside shooting nearly every bird in sight or, if birds
ﬂocked in great numbers, his desire to bag at least several of every kind,
age, and sex. The dead birds were then delicately dried or preserved in
alcohol or sprits. “If the dead bird is pressed on the belly,” Meyer wrote
of the lorikeet, “the same cry, krok krok, can be made, as from the living.
I found this the case even in specimens preserved in spirits of wine”
(Meyer 1879: 67). Bundles and bottles of tiny corpses were then shipped
off to England to form part of the accumulating collections that would
deﬁne an ever more universal and abstracted nature.5
On the other hand were Celebes peoples. In Meyer’s depictions of na-
tive scientiﬁc incompetence, they acted as foil for Meyer’s scientiﬁc ap-
preciation of nature. “The natives do not distinguish this species from P.
platurus by a special name; generally they are not strict observers of na-
ture, at least not strict in our scientiﬁc sense,” Meyer wrote (51). Meyer
referred to all Celebes peoples as “Alfurese,” the colonial name for the
many peoples of the Celebes interior, and he found cultural and linguistic
diversity messy and untrustworthy. “Native names often change from vil-
lage to village, as the native language generally does in these parts of the
East.” Likewise he viewed their classiﬁcations as unreliable:
Neither can I agree that the natives recognize them [T. muelleri and T. orna-
tus] as two birds. Even if they did, I should not attribute much value to such
a statement, as generally the natives of Celebes know but little of their fauna,
and answer a question as they think will most please the questioner. Never-
theless, were T. muelleri a species often kept in captivity by the natives, as is
Trichoglossus ornatus, I could perhaps trust them; but this is not the case,
T. muelleri rarely being seen in captivity, on account of its unamiable charac-
ter, at least in this state. (47)
People were warlike while nature was peaceful in Meyer’s accounts.
“The village of Posso [to the South of the Togean Islands] is a fort,” he
writes, “the natives being almost constantly at war with their neighbors,
and even when I was among them; they keep the skulls of their enemies
in a hut in the middle of the village. There is a group of large trees between

The Social Turn
61
the houses; and at noon I saw some white Cacatuae sleeping in the foliage,
a striking contrast of peace in nature to war among mankind. I left those
pretty birds undisturbed in their high resting-places“ (46).
Patricia Spyer’s account of “paradise’s birds” on the eastern Indonesian
island of Aru describes the cultural economy of birds in the nineteenth-
century Indies (Spyer 2000:41–65). Bird feathers were important for hat
making in Europe, and Spyer writes of a “naturalist’s wife” who observed
the export of 2,000 orange-feathered birds of paradise, 800 kingbirds,
and various other birds from the port of Makassar in South Celebes in
the 1880s. Between 1880 and World War II, 80,000 birds were exported
from nearby Dutch New Guinea in the feather trade. Spyer suggests that
Indies birds also played a role in arguments between evolutionists and
creationists in Europe: “if it was especially in naming that the religious
and territorial projects of Europe initially tended to come together, from
the eighteenth century on it was nature itself—revealing through study
and knowledge the handiwork of God—that increasingly became the ob-
ject of attention” (46). Could something so beautiful as a bird of paradise
be merely earthly?
For better or worse, no bird as spectacular as the bird of paradise
emerged from Togean Island treetops, but such a possibility helps explain
Meyer’s travels in search of new and unusual bird forms.6 In Meyer’s
natural historical nature, there was no room for birds’ usefulness or
beauty to anyone but the scientist. The EuroAmerican collector was the
only subject of natural history, and the formal properties of individual
species its only object. Unlike their absence in Umbgrove’s writings, Ce-
lebes people, as well, emerged through a speciﬁc logic in Meyer’s work:
the character of the peaceful ﬂock could be found in its contrast to the
warlike Alfurese village. The content here (peace versus war) is less im-
portant than the divide Meyer opens up between himself and those Ce-
lebes peoples he encounters. Different from Rumphius’s curious nature,
the human ﬁgure proposed through Meyer’s natural history could not
know their fauna in a scientiﬁc way and would only give a “pleasing
answer” to the inquirer. The Celebes native emerged as incommensurable
with the European scientist in Meyer’s natural history—an unbridgeable
rift, based upon “knowledge,” had appeared.
In Umbgrove’s Wake
Although 1990s biodiversity conservation would assume a different form
than either Meyer’s natural history, in which the Celebes person was un-
knowledgeable, or Rumphius’s curiosities, in which Malay people con-
tributed to how wonders were known, these earlier periods of nature-

Chapter 2
62
making were important forerunners of the Togean conservation project.
While Rumphius’s ghostly shadow haunts later projects of species inven-
tory, the late-colonial writings of Umbgrove and Meyer played a more
material role in facilitating how the islands would be “discovered” as
a site with valuable plants and animals. First, listen to Dr. Supriatna’s
description of why the Togean Islands were a likely location for late-colo-
nial collecting: “Due to a violent history of piracy well into this century,
the legacy of which we experienced on New Year’s Day in 1996 when
money was extorted from us practically at gun point, virtually no prior
collection and study of fauna has been conducted on the central penin-
sula. . . . Early naturalists simply avoided the mainland while they col-
lected fauna in the adjacent Togean and Banggai Islands” (Froehlich et
al. 1998).
When, in the 1970s, marine conservation began to come into focus
alongside more established terrestrial conservation projects, new sites
needed to be identiﬁed. The fact that early naturalists had “simply
avoided the mainland” in favor of the safer adjacent islands overdeter-
mined these offshore sites as future locations for biodiversity conserva-
tion. It was Umbgrove’s studies in particular that marked a trail directly
to the Togean archipelago.
I learned about this history in Jakarta in 1997 when I interviewed one
of the staff of the World Wide Fund for Nature, Nigel. Nigel recounted
for me how the ﬁrst marine conservation sites were found. “Where do
you start in Indonesia?” he asked.
We looked at the British Coast Pilots. We looked at maps and chose places
based on types of habitat. Teluk Cenderawasih [in West Irian] was an exam-
ple of this. Bunaken was identiﬁed through hearsay from divers. The Togeans
were through Nick Polunin and Apriliani Sugiono. They followed Umb-
grove’s reports from the 1940s [sic]. Nick spoke Dutch and found old refer-
ences to the Togeans. New spots were found through these old references
and by looking at maps.
Traveling through Sulawesi before there were banks, roads, or phones
was a challenge Nigel described to me as little changed from the early part
of the century. With these practicalities, colonial natural history could not
assist. Natural history also provided insufﬁcient information upon which
to found a modern conservation practice or a system of marine parks. In
this sense, Nigel thought of Indonesia as a “big black hole”:
Imagine starting in Indonesia. You know absolutely zilch about the coastal
waters in the biggest archipelagic nation in the world. Indonesia stretches
over one eighth of the world and it was a big black hole. There were not
even books, ﬁsh books, at the time. In ’82 we had only one ﬁsh book and

The Social Turn
63
studies of corals were in their infancy as well. Everything was centered in
Java. There were no banks anywhere. When we would go out to do surveys,
we carried millions of Rupiah. There were no boats anywhere, no transporta-
tion. The whole thing was a big adventure.
This sense of unbounded openness would change over time, however,
since the practice of biodiversity conservation could not be created in
just any way the scientists chose. Constraints existed in the form of prior
conservation failures. Nigel problematized the early focus on biology;
from the perspective of the 1990s, the exclusive attention to natural sci-
ence in the 1970s and 1980s seemed misguided:
We knew nothing about the marine environment. We would use hearsay and
old reports. It was a case of trying to ﬁnd the characteristics like protected
species, intactness, centers of biodiversity, current threats. The whole focus
was biodiversity. Now I look back with such embarrassment. We were so
unrealistic. All we thought about were the science and environmental as-
pects. Everything was from a conservation perspective. There were no at-
tempts to analyze resource use.
Out of these early explorations in search of “protected species, in-
tactness, centers of biodiversity, current threats,” et cetera, the relation-
ship of Indonesia’s people to biodiverse nature would increasingly form
a problem for thought. By the 1990s the “wheel would turn” and at-
tempts to “analyze resource use” would become as important to biodiver-
sity conservation as searching out new species.
Ethnobiology
Hari and Laksmi began to study Togean people and their relationship
to Togean nature as early as 1993. The work of the IFABS scientists to
understand those peoples who lived in close proximity to the natures they
wanted to save was indicative of a wider “social turn” in transnational
biodiversity conservation. How they would approach Togean people was
informed as much by the particularity of mid-1990s Indonesian national
ideas of social and political difference, however, as it was by international
norms for the scientiﬁc analysis of “society.” Hari and Laksmi described
their work for me on my own ﬁrst trip to the Togean Islands in 1994, and
I later read the reports of their study. Working in three Togean villages,
including Susunang, they interviewed “mainly old ﬁshermen,” observed
the species Togean people used, watched how these species were harvested
from seas and forests, and ﬁshed and farmed with Togean people.
From the ﬁrst, IFABS ethnobiology was directed toward solving partic-
ular problems that distinguished it from other instances of ethnobiology.

Chapter 2
64
The scientists described their ethnobiology as,
a study about the people’s uses of biological resources that combines the
disciplines of biological science and cultural anthropology. Its purpose is to
discover examples of the potential of biological resources, the role of natural
resources for people by recording biotic species, the useful technology of
biological resources, along with researching the inﬂuence of government pol-
icy/wisdom in the management of conservation of biological resources.
Through the lens of biology, ethnobiology can be seen as those uses of biolog-
ical resources which are directed at the effort of improving conservation of
natural resources. While from the lens of anthropology, ethnobiology can be
seen as a system of knowledge which bridges patterns of culture and is aimed
toward developing the people without damaging the potential of natural re-
sources. (Yuliati et al. 1994:1)
Each instance of ethnobiological practice in the world must be under-
stood for its speciﬁcities. IFABS ethnobiology had none of the emphasis
on cognition usually found in American structuralist anthropology of the
1950s through the 1970s. Nor was it motivated by the search for new
pharmaceutical compounds ethnobotanists were looking for in Mexico
in the 1990s (Hayden 2003). In the Togean project, ethnobiology engaged
scientiﬁc disciplinarity (merging biology and anthropology), it was aimed
toward conservation of biological resources, it discovered things about
Togean people (such as how they harvest resources), it was concerned
with “development” of these same people, and it explored the inﬂuence
of government policy on conservation. From this came a holistic multi-
plicity of discursive objects: ethnic identities, relations of school and
work, settlement patterns and house structures, religion and belief, child-
hood, infrastructure, medicine, social organization, life rituals, knowl-
edge and technology, plants and technologies for their use, et cetera.
One of the most important of these objects was Togean peoples’ knowl-
edge of plants and sea creatures and their uses. In their study, plants were
divided into six types: vegetables, building material, ritual plants, cosmet-
ics, craft plants, and medicinal plants. The numbers of each type were
counted and listed, with the names given in several Togean Island lan-
guages: Togean, Bobonko, and Bajau (Sama). Notes were made concern-
ing the uses of each plant: “the inner part of the tip of the plant is eaten
as a vegetable”; “used for mattress ﬁlling”; “indication: liver, malaria”;
“technology: root and stalk are boiled.” Sea products were also listed and
divided into nine types: demersal ﬁsh, pelagic ﬁsh, crabs and shrimps,
turtles, shells, squids, sea cucumber, sea plants, and mammals. The study
of sea creatures began with an extensive list of Latinate family names
followed by Bajau, Togean, and “trade” names (Yuliati et al. 1994:41).

The Social Turn
65
People were linked to nature through the category “religion and belief”:
articulations between “humans and nature bring to the surface religion
and beliefs concerning the power of invisible nature” (15). Sama people
were described as close to nature, and able to read its signs: “They enjoy
viewing the blooms of beautiful sea ﬂowers (lalamei/nambo) at the full
moon. They look for currents, and raise nets, and if there are many durian
falling in the forest, then many groupers will be in the sea.” There were
special prohibitions: “If a squid is blocking the way, it means that your
earlier offerings were not received by the sea spirit. This means they have
to return home so that they don’t encounter a disaster.” They possessed
unique abilities: “Bajau people have the ability to dive to 30 meters depth
and [for] several minutes without using tanks or compressors.” And there
were special knowledges: “Healing of sick people can be done by an elder
that can see sicknesses (Mawi)” (16).
Formal and informal “social organization” was another category the
scientists described. Formal social organization was “based on instruction
from the local government.” In its ideal form it “contains and coordinates
the aspiration of the people.” But it was not effective, they explained,
because people are busy with their daily labors. Also missing was someone
in the role of “motivator” to move things ahead. There are so many chil-
dren, and very low education; there aren’t any activities for youth, and
marriage at a young age is normal. Informal organization included those
organizations initiated by the people themselves: prayer groups, money
saving groups (arisan), sports and music groups, and ﬁshing and farming
groups. Types of sports and children’s games were listed: volleyball, soc-
cer, ping pong, rock throwing, and kite ﬂying (21).
How should we understand these inscriptions that bring to life the eth-
nobiology of Togean people? One possibility would be to route our inter-
pretation through a critique of instrumental reason and the potential the
ethnobiological data has to inform projects of governmentality. Nicholas
Rose, for one, has described the practice of reﬂecting on characteristics
of populations in European history, and the links between these reﬂec-
tions and governmental reason. He writes:
In European thought from at least the eighteenth century, one can trace a
variety of reﬂections on the special characteristics of discrete “nations” and
“peoples,” the possibility of writing the history of different peoples, anato-
mizing their differences, demonstrating how each participates in a shared
tradition of customs, a shared descent, a shared language; how each has a
set of habits, beliefs, mores, systems of law, morality and politics which par-
take in this common spirit. Over the course of the nineteenth century, a muta-
tion occurred in this way of apprehending the collective existence of a people.
Nations were now seen as populations of individuals with particular charac-

Chapter 2
66
teristics, integrated through a certain moral order. But more signiﬁcantly,
this way of understanding the subjects of rule as subjects of morality was
linked to a plethora of interventions into the economy, the family, the private
ﬁrm and the conduct of the individual person which sought to shape them
in beneﬁcial ways whilst safeguarding their autonomy. (Rose 1999:101)
IFABS social science likewise linked biodiversity conservation to a
moral order, and this order rested similarly on the characteristics of a
Togean population. Hari and Laksmi and the other scientists wanted to
make biodiverse nature comprehensible and desirable for Togean people
such that they would adopt an ethical stance (preserving biodiversity) in
relation to Togean nature. To do this, Togean people themselves would
be analyzed, studied, classiﬁed, described, and ultimately formed as an
object upon which conservation and state governmentality could act. In
the process they would become “indigenous people.”
From this analytic perspective, I ﬁnd the IFABS ethnobiological project
more reminiscent of Meyer than Rumphius. Rather than opening their
nature-making project to other possible natures, the scientists’ polyglot
species lists incarcerated permissible natures within forms recognizable to
natural science. Lists of nature’s things began with Latinate terms, and
Togean people could only contribute nouns within an already established
structure of representation. Fishing and farming technologies were
opened up to moral evaluation, and these techniques adhered to speciﬁc
ethnic groups. Once the social organization of the group was deﬁned,
Togean people were diagnosable according to bourgeois norms of social
development. Sama and Bobongko people were found wanting in terms
of social, religious, and medical organization, and in need of intervention
by conservationists necessarily aligned with state norms of citizenship.
Like Meyer’s inventory of birds, these research ﬁndings forced a civiliza-
tional divide between scientists and Togean people.
Other aspects of the scientists’ descriptions of Togean people remind
me more of Rumphius than of Meyer, however. Different from the inter-
pretation of “local people” witnessed in many other international conser-
vation projects, Togean people had knowledge at all. Since local people
were often presumed to harm nature out of ignorance, to come down on
the side of the existence of Togean expertise was controversial to begin
with. As Dr. Supriatna once said, “education in these Islands is low, low,
low. Gunung Halimun [in Java] has access to education, access to televi-
sion, and access to newspapers. They have information from the outside
world. But here people can be misled. There is miscommunication many
times.” In this context, IFABS’ ethnobiological work was at the minimum
a statement in support of Togean people.

The Social Turn
67
While we might question the logic of an advocacy that depends upon
the same social distinctions that exist within the theories of reason that
indigenous knowledge advocates wish to subvert (Agrawal 1995), most
of what Togean people knew or did was not described as “destructive”
by Laksmi or Hari; blast and cyanide ﬁshing, for example, actually re-
ceive very short mention at the end of their text on ethnobiology. Addi-
tionally, Togean peoples’ engagements with nature were viewed as not
merely economic and instrumental: “they enjoy viewing the blooms of
beautiful sea ﬂowers (lalamei/nambo) at the full moon.” As in Rumphi-
us’s curious nature, the scientists described people by name and related
their stories: “The family of Mbo Janiba left to go ﬁshing at 8:00 at night
and returned at 11:00 am after they felt they had caught enough trepang
[sea cucumber]” (Yuliati et. al. 1994:19). And, when Togean people did
not respond correctly to government programs, they did so for a clear
and positive reason—they were too industrious to have time for such
spurious activity (21).
Through their ethnobiological work, the scientists’ interpretations had
begun to diverge from the logics of transnational conservation biology
with its threatening human that puts nature at risk.
Participatory Spatial Planning
In May of 1997 I joined a planning meeting at the CI ofﬁce in Jakarta,
where the Togean Island park was discussed in new spatial terms. Con-
serving biological diversity involves the reorganization of space through
such tactics as gazetting territory for parks, and creating use, non-use,
and buffer zones. Some spatial strategies that isolate ﬂora and fauna from
human use, or connect wildlife across corridors, respond to the spatial
needs of plants and animals themselves.7 As Dr. Supriatna had explained,
“big charismatic animals have a wide home range. For example, the ele-
phant has a 90-square-kilometer home range. If you’re protecting them,
you’re protecting a lot of small plants and animals.” Others, such as the
creation of special areas for people’s engagement with natural features,
attempt to ameliorate the threat humans pose to nature by limiting how
people interact with their surrounding environment.8
At the meeting that day were Hari, Laksmi, Yakup, and Budi from
IFABS, and a representative from CI, Washington, D.C. New and different
indigenous knowledges were to be sought, and the uses to which these
knowledges were to be put were transformed. Togean peoples’ ideas of
space and place were the form indigenous knowledge would now take.
The scientists described the new conﬁguration this way:

Chapter 2
68
One site of the spatial plan: The waters surrounding Susunang Village. © Karl
Taylor (www.karltaylor.co.uk).
Indigenous knowledge has gained substantial attention since [the] last de-
cade. After it was neglected for decades, a movement to revitalize the knowl-
edge is growing as a way to empower local and indigenous communities and
to improve or complement scientiﬁc knowledge including those in natural
resources management. Indigenous knowledge on natural resources or eth-
noecology has evolved for decades or centuries as part of indigenous cultures
and much of it has been proven to be sustainable. The knowledge includes
how indigenous communities use space (land and sea) with its philosophies
behind it. (IFABS 1997:1)
The question would be how to involve Togean people in the planning
process by incorporating “indigenous spatial knowledge” into the plan.
The scientists wrote,
Sustainable use and conservation of natural resources is a major issue in the
last few years. Prior to the implementation of those activities, spatial plan-
ning is a crucial stage to ensure sustainability and justice. Unfortunately, in
most cases, especially in developing countries, spatial planning is carried out
merely by [the] government with inputs from scientists. Local communities
who are the most affected part of the spatial plan, often in negative ways,
are usually excluded in the planning process. Therefore, ways should be cre-
ated to include local communities’ interests in the plan. (IFABS 1997)
This articulation of indigenous knowledge, sustainability, and social
justice brought into focus new questions about scientiﬁc management.

The Social Turn
69
Working on a whiteboard, we came up with a series of “threats,” “pro-
grams,” and “priorities” for future Togean work, and we discussed how
to involve Togean people and the Sulawesi government as “stakeholders”
in the spatial planning process. Our conversation began with the difﬁcult
problem of participation:
HARI: Traditionally the government has been planning from the top down
and neglecting hak ulayat [traditional rights]. There has been no
community involvement.
LAKSMI: But there is a tension between our role and the government be-
cause our work is trying to get the government to do something it
doesn’t normally do.
YAKUP: Yes, the government can be suspicious of us working with the
community.
HARI: We have the problem of the government thinking we are working
too closely with the people, but also of the people thinking we are
working too closely with the government.
The problem of spatial planning would be to balance the interests of
the government with the interests of the people. Many of us who studied
Indonesian politics during the Suharto period imagined there was little
room to maneuver within Indonesian state mandates. But elite Indone-
sians, like the IFABS scientists, understood the state as a ﬂexible institu-
tion, and had a better sense of the possibilities of working within its con-
ﬁnes. The solution the scientists were developing necessarily involved
assisting the state from within (rather than confronting or opposing it
directly) while hoping to change it in the process.
Several changes in the world of Indonesian conservation NGOs and in
state-society relations had come together at once to make possible the
idea of spatial planning. First, a series of emerging laws, beginning with
the Spatial Planning Act of 1992, was issued by the Government of Indo-
nesia (GOI 1992). By 1997, the national legislature (Dewan Perwakilan
Rakyat, DPR) had developed these laws to give communities an opportu-
nity to contribute to regional spatial plans. Second, CI and the other big
conservation organizations had begun to encourage mapping projects
that used Geographic Information Systems (GIS) as a tool for conserva-
tion planning (Harwell 2000). Third, a discourse of “counter-mapping,”
designed to use maps to argue on behalf of community rights, had recently
emerged within Indonesian NGO networks (Peluso 1995). Additionally,
conservationists had discovered an extensive system of property rights
and temporal and spatial resource exclusions in the Maluku Islands called
sasi, and many people were looking to ﬁnd such a thing in other places
(Zerner 1994). Finally, new possibilities for political advocacy were begin-

Chapter 2
70
ning to open in the last years of the Suharto era. These possibilities were
reﬂected in our conversation that day:
HARI: Policy in Indonesia is not like black and white. It depends on how
you present it. There is always leeway. The challenge is enrolling local
government as an ally.
YAKUP: Our consortium has a facilitating role, a role providing biological
information, and it is also a stakeholder in what happens. The infor-
mation Bappeda [Badan Perencanaan Pembangunan Daerah, the Re-
gional Development Planning Board] has is very basic, that’s why this
group has a role. The consortium will provide technical assistance to
Bappeda. The result will be a map and the introduction of GIS as
a tool.
A dream of seamless translation between indigenous knowledge and
state management plans guided our conversation. Togean communities
were imagined as homogeneous and autonomous, and “participation”
could be turned into a problem of technique: “Documentation of [the]
community’s natural resource management and spatial use knowledge
. . . will be carried out by encouraging local communities to document
their knowledge (written and orally) while project staff will only act as
facilitators” (IFABS 1997:3). This imagined community would be natu-
rally interested in the project and would grant approval for it: “With [the]
community’s approval, all maps and other information will be digitized
using GIS.” And the community would be capable of communicating its
message directly to local government: “Production of [a] community ver-
sion of [the] spatial plan based on maps and other information resulted
from previous works [that the] community can exercise to produce their
version of [a] spatial plan. They can bring results from the exercise to
[the] DPRD (local parliament) and government as a base for further dis-
cussion and negotiation” (IFABS 1997:4).
Laksmi acknowledged the problems inherent in imagining a harmoni-
ous community that could provide unitary spatial knowledge, or a com-
munity member who would willingly desire to contribute to a newly
managed and bureaucratized landscape, and who was able to argue with
the state using scientiﬁc methods.9 She explained, “the word partisipasi
changes between the government and NGOs. They aren’t meaning the
same things.”
Given the ambivalence many scientists had to Togean peoples’ occupa-
tion of the proposed conservation area, however, and considering the dif-
ﬁculty of directly confronting the government on the basis of political or
citizenship rights, there was a remarkable transformation in the move
from ethnobiology to spatial planning. The Togean Island person was

The Social Turn
71
now conﬁgured as an Indonesian citizen with the right to participate in the
political process of spatial design. Moreover, this person would exercise
discretion, judgment, and thought. Despite some bumps in the road, the
wheel was beginning to turn from “indigenous knowledge” to a sense of
justice and care for Togean others, and the Togean citizen would now
contribute to thinking through and ﬁnding solutions to the problem of
environmental change. The scientists argued,
Within the last twenty years big commercial companies have been active in
the archipelago and created conﬂicts with local communities. Those compa-
nies exploit terrestrial and marine resources often within areas that have
traditionally been extractive areas for the communities. And recently, as
tourism is growing, some companies are building tourist resorts. New ven-
tures are planning their investments and are applying for plots of lands or
sea for their activities. These are growing rapidly while a detailed spatial
plan is still not available. If such a plan cannot be produced soon, greater
conﬂicts will occur which will harm local communities as they are more vul-
nerable in such conﬂicts. (IFABS 1997:1)
In nascent form within the spatial planning project, the Togean person
had been reﬁgured from the owner of knowledge in the form of “words
for things” into a rights-bearing Indonesian citizen with the capacity for
reason and thought. This move captures the aura of Rumphius, who,
while working for the VOC, was simultaneously one of its most outspo-
ken critics.10
Friendship and the Limits of “Knowledge”
Laksmi once told me a story of how, when she was still a student at the
University of Indonesia studying for a degree in biology, she conducted
an experiment in Bali on seaweed. She was looking into the possibility of
growing seaweed in brackish water ponds called tambak. Tambak are
also used as shrimp ponds, and the existing network of ponds presented
the possibility of growing shrimp and seaweed together. Seaweed (agar
agar) is used in making deserts because it gels without refrigeration, and
it is also exported for use in cosmetics and ice cream. Laksmi’s experiment
was designed to address the problem of seaweed biology and sustainable
aquaculture. But seaweed has encountered many difﬁculties in Indonesia,
including disease and inadequate rates of growth (Sievanen et al. 2005).
Laksmi herself was having trouble getting it to take hold in her ﬁeld trial;
crabs were eating the seaweed stock before it could mature.
Laksmi tried everything to keep the crabs away, and she was worried
about not getting a result she could use in her thesis. She began to discuss

Chapter 2
72
the problem of crabs with a Balinese farmer she had befriended who lived
near the tambak. The farmer told her that the seaweed would not grow
because she hadn’t asked permission to build her tambak from the land’s
“owner” (tuan). By this he did not mean its human proprietor, he meant
the spirit that inhabited that place. He helped Laksmi to make the appro-
priate offerings of “something like a chicken and some ceremonial rice”
when, low and behold, the crabs disappeared, and Laksmi’s seaweed
began to thrive.
Laksmi enjoyed telling me the story of how a ghost helped her seaweed
research. What she did not claim in her telling was that she was helped
by Balinese “indigenous knowledge.” In describing her experiment it was
not necessary for Laksmi to produce something called “Balinese culture,”
nor did she ﬁnd it useful to turn offerings into a form of scientiﬁc data.
In fact, she could not quite recall the propitiatory recipe they had used
. . . just something about a chicken. The existence of the tambak spirit
did not threaten to open a hemispheric divide between the modern and
the primitive, the rational and the spiritual, or to incarcerate Balinese
within the realm of the local. For whatever reason, Laksmi did not feel
the need to set up an opposition within which she would stand on the
side of universal reason and intellect while her Balinese neighbor would
inhabit the space of local knowledge or mystical belief.11
In much of the literature on what has variously been termed “indige-
nous knowledge,” “indigenous technical knowledge,” “traditional eco-
logical knowledge,” “local knowledge,” et cetera, the “indigenous” and
their “knowledges” have appeared as given objects in the world amenable
to a priori deﬁnition. Indigenous knowledge has been described as local,
orally transmitted, practical, empirical, shared, and experiential (Banuri
and Apfell-Margalin 1993; Ellen et al. 2000). Such deﬁnitions assume a
fundamental opposition between plural indigenous knowledges, and a
singularity called “Western,” “modern,” or “global” scientiﬁc knowl-
edge. Those who theorize the ﬁeld frequently subsume indigenous knowl-
edge under scientiﬁc knowledge by certifying that indigenous knowledge
is scientiﬁcally valid. In the process, indigenous knowledge has become a
form of instrumental reason aiding in projects ranging from economic
development to conserving biodiversity. It is hard to refute the importance
of this liberal move in a world where technocratic solutions and govern-
mental rationality devalue forms of thought not recognized as either scien-
tiﬁc or managerial.
The proposition of a radical disjuncture between the indigenous and
the scientiﬁc can be contested, however. For example, Richard Grove has
observed how the system of botanical classiﬁcations used in Cochin in
southwest India traveled to the Leiden botanical garden (from which Lin-
neaus took much of his material) through the Hortus Botanicus of H. A.

The Social Turn
73
van Reede. Grove calls the Hortus a “profoundly indigenous text,” and
claims print technology allowed South Asian classiﬁcations to travel to
Europe along pre-existing, privileged European botanical networks to be-
come what we now think of as “Linnean” taxonomy (Grove 1995:78).
For contemporary India, Akhil Gupta describes the hybridity of scientiﬁc
and indigenous knowledge in Alipur, a village in northern India. While
Alipur farmers use chemical fertilizers, electrically driven tube wells, and
bioscientiﬁcally developed hybrid seeds, they also engage in discourses
and practices of “humoral” agronomy (Gupta 1998:155). In breaking
down the separation between the indigenous and the scientiﬁc, “indige-
nous knowledge” is revealed to be a system for classifying peoples rather
than what they know.
In Togean ethnobiology and spatial planning, we can see the shadow
of Rumphius hanging over Laksmi and Hari’s desire to heal the divide
between scientists and Togean people. The rift that ﬁrst opens in Meyer’s
descriptions of peaceful birds and warlike Alfurese could not be easily
erased in the conservation project, however, since neither Togean people
nor Indonesian scientists were readily able to disrupt the international
norms and standards of biodiverse nature with its threatening human that
puts nature at risk. The very act of creating indigenous knowledge, subject
simultaneously to evaluation by scientiﬁc knowledge, has meant that the
“scientiﬁc” will never be fully unsettled by the “indigenous.” Incommen-
surability was one consequence of the social turn in transnational conser-
vation science.
But we can also see in the scientists’ work a utopian vision linking
reason and the nation with the possibility for citizenship and inclusion. In
employing ethnobiology or spatial planning, not simply as instrumental
reason, but as an expression of loyalty to Togean others as members of
the Indonesian polity, IFABS scientists demonstrated their faith in the na-
tion-form as site of freedom (cf: Cheah 2003). It does not serve us well
to see the indigenous ﬁgure of Indonesian science as precisely identical to
that “Other” formed in dialogue with European Romanticism or north-
ern scientiﬁc rationalism. Just as Rumphius aligned himself with Malay
thought on Ambonese nature, Indonesian biologists manipulated indige-
nous knowledge to form a new political imaginary and an object of hope.
I too would like to hold at bay the space of indigenous otherness. I
want to argue from the position of an anthropologist and science studies
scholar that we should think of Laksmi’s solution to the crab problem
within the ambit of normal science. But the ordinariness of science’s abil-
ity to coexist with ghosts, or the nonobjectiﬁcation of knowledge called
“indigenous,” “local,” or “ethno,” depends on something more than sci-
ence. “Friendship” might be one solution to the problem space of the
hemispheric divide. Such friendship was often an unexpected, unintended,

Chapter 2
74
and unremarked outcome of Indonesians’ science in the Togean Islands.
Friendship creates a new geography that Paul Rabinow refers to as the
“philia site.” “I propose that a primary site of thinking is friendship (phi-
lia),” he writes. “Such a formation sounds strange, as friendship is a rela-
tionship and not a physical place. Today, we have lecture rooms and con-
ference rooms and meeting rooms and classrooms and ofﬁces and studies;
the Romans had rooms for friends” (Rabinow 1996b:13).
Perhaps Rumphius also had such a room in Ambon where he came
together with Patti Cuhu to discuss Indies ﬂora. Rumphius wrote of his
friend, “this wood was shown to me for the ﬁrst time . . . by Patti Cuhu,
a Regent or Orangkaya of the Hitu village called Ely, a Man experienced
in the knowledge of plants, who has helped me a great deal in this work,
wherefore I deem it only decent, to commemorate him here” (Beekman
1999:ciii). Similarly, Yakup reminded me of the pleasures we shared with
Abo, Musir, Suala, Narto, and others in Susunang while gliding through
warm waters in search of sea cucumber together:
Celia,
How are things? . . . Last February I had a chance to travel again to several
Togean villages including Kabalutan [Susunang] with CI. Out of the work,
it’s so so nice having even a very short time in there. Many Puah and Mbo
[parents and grandparents] asked about you. They miss you so much. I had
a very great great time (only two nights) in Kabalutan and went one night
balobe [sea cucumber collecting] with Abo, Musir, Suala, Narto, and some
others. That’s all the news from Kabalutan for now. Sukses. . . ,
Yakup
How productive would it be to think of holothurians from the “philia-
site” rather than the site of indigenous knowledge? Might this not be an
excellent location from which to begin to think about the diversity of
sea cucumber life forms, or to overcome the instrumental imperatives of
species driven biodiversity conservation? For the preservation of the di-
versity of life in all its forms, we may ﬁnd that sharing thought is superior
to collecting knowledge, or that forms of friendship have advantages over
forms of reason.

P A R T
T W O
Togean Cosmopolitics
THROUGH THE IDEA of global nature-at-risk, biodiversity entails a cosmo-
politan imagining of community beyond the nation or region in which any
given instance of species uniqueness or diversity is found. For Indonesian
scientists deeply committed to the idea of the nation, rather than subvert-
ing the idea of “Indonesia,” the practice of biodiversity conservation rein-
forced a project of Indonesia-in-the-making. And despite these transna-
tional or national ambitions, biologists developed the case for threatened
global nature through the regional microsite of the Togean Islands. In the
contingent assemblage of plants, animals, and people that came together
in the Togean project to produce a claim for universal nature, the relation-
ship between “nature” and “the human” was put into play. The general-
ized humanity for whom nature was being saved could only be developed,
however, by way of contrast with the ﬁgure of the speciﬁc human who
put nature at risk.
And what of Togean people who were the object of this attention? What
were the natures, knowledges, ideas, or problems at stake for them? In
part 2, Togean Cosmopolitics, I turn to questions of knowledge, nature,
reason, and the human for Sama people who live in the Togean Islands.
In a sense, this book begins again. Rather than starting from the universal
(biodiversity) and demonstrating its ability to produce the national (Indo-
nesian science) and the local (endemic Togean species and Togean people),
we will start from the local (Sama people and their natures) and work our
way out, via the nation, to an encompassing universe (Sama cosmopoli-
tanism). If not through transnational science, how do Sama people come
to fashion a world around them and in relation to what transregional
connections and constraints? In part 2, I (re)present the Togean Islands,
not through any claim to greater accuracy or truth, but in an attempt to
bring into focus the relations of force, meaning, and scale within which
natures emerged for one particular group of Togean people, the Sama
residents of Susunang village.
The themes of part 2 are foreshadowed in a story sung for me by Mbo
Biba one night in the Togean Island hamlet of Kilat. I ﬁrst met Mbo Biba
when I was on a pongkat (S) trip with Puah Umar in search of the rare
and valuable white sea cucumber. Mbo Biba himself was on a pongkat
catching and curing salt ﬁsh. Umar and I had anchored in a cove well

Part II
76
known as a hideout for pirates, and Mbo Biba had observed us for a long
time before he approached us in our leppa (S). When he came by, he
shared some herbal medicine (jamu) he kept in an old bottle to keep him
strong while he traveled. It was a fortuitous meeting. Mbo Biba was
known as the last Sama person in the Togean Islands to be able to recite
iko iko (S), a type of song poem about the past, and I had known of him
for a long time. The last time Umar had heard iko iko, he told me, was
before he was circumcised.
We arranged to meet at Umar’s mother’s house. As Mbo Biba started
to chant out his stories of “Si Bawang” and “The Girl in the Sea Foam,”
everyone present was affected by their beauty and many began to cry.
When later Umar decided to listen again to Si Bawang, tears came down
his face as he sat under the headphones of my tape recorder. Through his
narrative, Mbo Biba connected Sama people to plants and animals, to the
former Bugis-Makassar Sultanate of Gowa in South Sulawesi, to ineffec-
tual medics and midwives provided by the Indonesian state, to Dutch
colonialism, and to the cosmopolitan world where, he speculates, “even
in America, even in Russia, everywhere they are found by the sea, our
Sama houses.” This is Mbo Biba’s story Ningkinda ma Buburah (The
Girl in the Sea Foam):
Si tempo n∂, a ma rompong,
One time, at the ﬁshing ﬂoat,
tikk∂ma tanah Boges ka dilau.
coming from Bugis land heading
Ketummu n∂leppa rompong iru
out to the sea. Next to a ﬁshing
buburah bigi rumah ma dilau.
ﬂoat, was found some sea foam as
big as a house.
Nia ningkind∂missa dadarua
Inside the sea foam was a girl,
melssou n∂ma di alang buburah.
and there was no one more beau-
Mole iyy∂ka Datu ma Boges.
tiful than she. He [the one who
found her] went home to the
Bugis King.
Tuntu’pang n∂Datu ma Boges,
He spoke with the Bugis King,
iyyo’ n∂, “nia ki’t∂’ kami buburah
he said, “there is something we
missa darua basar n∂, melassou
saw, sea foam of which there is
n∂, nia ningkinde ma dialang.”
none larger or more beautiful,
and inside it there is a girl.”
“Dadi,” iyyo’ n∂, “lamu missa
“Well,” the Bugis King said, “if
ningkind∂
iru,
dibono
kang.”
the girl isn’t there [when I look],
Sudah!
you will all be killed.” There!
Pore iyy∂palimb∂, ma ka Datu
He returned [to the sea], the

Togean Cosmopolitics
77
ne. Naginda iyy∂tikk∂ka di laut
one who had come to see the
iru, nia masih.
King. He looked for her, he came
to the sea [again] and she was still
there.
Ah! mandiru ndah dibow∂ne
Ah! there was brought yel-
kunyi,
buas
ma
dikunyitang.
lowing and rice to be yellowed
Diamburang, nggei lagi iyy∂lai.
[To be tossed over her in welcom-
ing]. It was tossed over her and
she didn’t run away.
Dadi patuku iyy∂. Alla’ n∂tang-
Then he [the king] approached
gan n∂batiru ne, “paitu ko dutai
her. He grasped her hand and said
ka lepp∂.” “Aku,” iyyo’ n∂, “itu
“come here aboard my boat.”
Datu.”
“I,” he said, “am a king.”
Nggei babaong.
She didn’t say a word.
Tikk∂mandiru alla’ n∂, padutai
From there he took her on
n∂, dibow∂ne ka dar∂’. Dibow∂
board and carried her to land. She
ka dar∂’ dipato’ ne bander∂ula
was brought to the land and the
ula
ula ula [the Sama banner] was
raised.
Takud∂’ ne memong ne ma-
All the people from the Bugis
nusia ma dar∂’, ma Tanah Boges.
land were surprised. He said, “she
Iyyo’ n∂, “nia ne, beleh, dibow∂
was there [at sea in the foam] and
paitu.” Tikk∂mandiru dipadutai
I brought her here.” From there
ne ka rum∂, nggei babaong.
[the shore] she was brought up to
the house. She didn’t speak.
Bitt∂bitt∂ne bon∂pandan n∂
After a while she was married
ale Datu Boges. Pandan n∂ale
by the Bugis King. Married by the
Datu Boges. Sudah ne, dipanikk∂
Bugis King. Even after she was
ne itu Datu. Dipannik∂Datu itu
married by the King she didn’t say
nggei babaong.
a word.
Bittah ne. Ngidang ne. Ngi-
And
she
became
pregnant.
dang ne iyy∂. Noro ne iyy∂ka
Pregnant she became. She pointed
dilau. Noro ka dilau.
to the sea. Pointed out to sea.
Sukar memong ne, ai ko itu
She made it difﬁcult for every-
ditoro ma dilau?
one. What was it she was pointing
to at sea?
Na pore a’∂ka dilau ngala
Everyone went to the water to
kim∂, batunang, bikah n∂anu
harvest giant clams and batunang

Part II
78
idang idamang ma dilau. Na di-
[Labidodemas seperianum, like a
pu’po’ ne paitu.
sea cucumber] so she could satisfy
her cravings from the sea. The
food was gathered together.
Kim∂iru je ma diala’, nginta
Only giant clams she took and
n∂, sampei basar, sampei ngana’.
ate, until she was large, until she
Nggei babaong.
gave birth. Still she didn’t speak.
Ngana’ iyy∂mandiru. Tapalu-
She gave birth there. Out it
ang ko itu, missa daulu, missa
came right there, and [speaking
kang.
directly to his audience] there
wasn’t [yet] our old folks, there
wasn’t [yet] you all.
Noro ump∂ka bullu iyy∂. Pore
She pointed to the mountain.
ka bullu iru dialla’ bikah n∂kuli’
So they went to the mountain and
kayu. Dibow∂paitu sapala n∂
brought back some bark. They
bagu. Pugei n∂batitu tanggan n∂.
brought back here some oakum.
Terpaks∂nadiki’t∂’ itu, ponso itu.
She rolled it in her hands [Mbo
rolled his ﬁngers as though he was
rolling a cigarette]. They cut it
like that, the umbilical cord.
Dadi, kit∂bo tikk∂ma taung
Thus, then, from year to year
ka taung indah bagu itu ne j∂.
we [Sama] look for only oakum.
Bobon∂ne nggei lagi melalui
We don’t use the government
mantri. Nggei lagi iyy∂. Ah, bat-
nurses, not them. Ah, it’s like
iru.
that.
Nangis ana’ana’ itu puli. Nggei
The baby cried continuously.
babaong.
Nangis
ana’ana’
itu
She [his mother] didn’t speak. The
puli, noro ka dilau.
baby cried on and on, and she
pointed to the sea.
O’. Sukar memong manusia.
Oh, it was difﬁcult for every-
Dipaks∂dipugeiang ma sidi boe
one. They were forced to build a
rum∂Dipugeiang, kang, Datu itu.
house at the edge of the sea. So,
you all [the audience], the King
made it.
Ah! Nggei lagi nangis ana’ ana’.
Ah! The child didn’t cry any
Ah!, mandiru uy∂uy∂iyy∂.
longer. Ah! There [by the sea] she
[the mother] sang and sang.
Iyyo’
n∂,
“kau,”
iyyo’
n∂,
She [his mother] said, “you,”

Togean Cosmopolitics
79
“arung nu batuah n∂ma Bone
she said, “your name in Bone
‘Somba di Gowa’.”
means ‘Somba from Gowa.’ ”
Mau, iyyo’ n∂, kami ndah Datu
Even, she said, we are certainly
j∂du. Mau, iyyo’ n∂, aku ndah
royalty too. Even, she said, I am
Datu j∂.
certainly a queen.
Sudah basar basar ne ana’ana
Then the child was grown. His
itu. Matei ne Ua itu, basar ne
father was dead by the time the
ningkilla n∂. “Ah!” iyyo’ ana’ n∂
son was grown. “Ah!” said the
ma dar∂’, iyyo’ n∂, “aku b∂k∂na-
child on the land, he said, “later I
nangah kerajaang.”
will hold the kingship.”
Iyyo’
ore
ump∂
ma
dilau.
Those from the sea said to him.
“Nggei!” iyyo’ n∂, “bo pager
“No!,” they said, “we are all men
lill∂.”
together.”
“Nggei!” iyyo’ n∂.
“No!,” he said.
Terpaks∂bono, nabono. Ter-
They were forced to war. As
paks∂nabono, dutai boe, tikk∂
they were forced to war the water
ma dilau. Dutai boe rumangi
arose from the sea. It rose so high
bembe ai.
that all the goats were swimming.
Dipato
bander∂
panyoroh,
The
ﬂag
of
surrender
was
bandera potei dipato’. Ah! Nggei
ﬂown, the white ﬂag was ﬂown.
lagi dadi bono.
Ah! There was no longer a war.
Dadi sam∂sam∂ne marintah.
So together we govern. That
Iru ne bon∂kit∂daulu. Sama itu
was us in the time before. Sama
ne nggei mina dijajah ale Belanda.
people were never ruled by the
Dutch.
Dadi memang benar benar itu.
Thus, this story is certainly a
Mbo Mbo t∂tatumu ma dialang
true one. Your ancestors were
buburah kit∂Sama itu.
found in the sea foam, these
Sama.
Cob∂, kono, tele t∂tele t∂ma-
Try, you all [who are listening],
ningg∂la’h∂’ nia ke kit∂Sama itu
to see wherever there are villages,
bon∂simat∂ma siddi boe, ruma
isn’t it true, we Sama can ﬁnd
t∂.
each other at the edge of the
water, and your houses [too].
Missa Sama itu bon∂ore ma
There are no Sama over there in
roma,
lalangkar
tadakau
da
the forest and rarely one or two
musih ma siddi boe.
are found away from the sea’s
edge.

Part II
80
Mau ma Amerika, mau ma
Even in America, even in Rus-
Ruslang, mau madingga tetap
sia, everywhere they are still by
masih di boe, ruma n∂Sama.
the sea, Sama people’s houses.

Chapter Three
EXTRATERRESTRIAL OTHERS
Of the statement that they are afraid of death when they
come to support themselves on land, the opposite ap-
pears on Tabungku, since one ﬁnds there a whole [Sama]
village where they are thriving well on a mound by the
sea, so that I believe that if one were to investigate, one
would ﬁnd more of such villages, and that they all can
thrive as well on land as on the sea.
—Robertus Padt-Brugge, Regent of Ternate, 1676
[Sopher 1977]
SAMA PEOPLE, in 1990s Indonesia, were imagined as extraterrestrial oth-
ers: both living beyond the land and alien. They were called Indonesia’s
“ﬂoating peoples” (suku terapung) and were seen as one of many “alien
ethnicities” (suku terasing) scattered across Indonesia’s far-ﬂung hinter-
lands. Representations of Sama identity emerged within the ambit of two
ethnographic facts. First, next to the Chinese in Southeast Asia, Sama
belong to the most territorially expansive ethnic group in the region, liv-
ing as they do along the coasts and strands of much of insular Southeast
Asia. Unlike Bugis or Mandar (other Southeast Asian “seafarers”) who
have well-deﬁned homelands, Sama communities are found throughout
eastern Indonesia, Sabah, Malaysia, and the southern Philippines.1 Sec-
ond, in addition to the unusual feat of being all over the place, Sama
people are known for a particular lifestyle that seems exotic to nearly
everyone. Namely, they occasionally live aboard small canoes in which
they travel looking for sea cucumber and other marine products. From
this, many have assumed that land is unimportant to Sama lifestyles.
Togean Sama people do sometimes make periodic extended collecting
trips around the Togean Islands living aboard their canoes (leppa[S]) or
living in shelters (sabua[S]) over coral reefs for several days or weeks at
a time. During these trips, called “pongkat,” people collect marine prod-
ucts, largely sea cucumber and ﬁsh, for sale to Bugis shopkeepers and
mobile traders. Living aboard a boat is never a sign that one lacks connec-
tions to a village or to the land, however, or that one is drifting aimlessly
or endlessly in some Robinson Crusoe adventure. The pongkat is a voyage
out and back, as it were, from and to home. Moreover, not all Sama
people go on pongkat; many prefer to spend their time in the village or
in their gardens.
In writing about Indonesian scientists, I have avoided over-determining
their relationship to Togean nature by assuming we do not know the iden-

Chapter 3
82
tities of scientist or science, culture or nature, species or genus, before we
commence, and we can track relations between Sama identities and Sama
natures in a similar methodological fashion. To do so would be to think
of Sama peoples’ mobility aboard boats as productive of both identity
and marinescapes without naturalizing Sama identity as “sea nomads.”
What follows is a description of a particular pongkat that I made with
Puah Umar, my friend and ﬁshing partner in Susunang, for two weeks in
April of 1997.
My day with Umar began several hours after sunset, rowing out to the
reef in the quiet of the night. There were fourteen boats altogether on this
pongkat. The only sounds were the ﬁshers’ conversations and an orches-
tra of paddling as paddles dipped into the water and drummed against
the sides of our boats. Floating across the night sea was like slipping
across the surface of a black and white photograph; there was no tint of
color to the surrounding marinescape. The sky was ﬁlled with stars from
horizon to horizon and the moon was absent. It was bulang du∂mpulu
pitu (S), the twenty-seventh night of the lunar calendar, the phase of the
moon when certain sea cucumbers “stand up” on the sea ﬂoor.
Approaching our destination, White Point Reef (Sapa Toro ma Potei
[S]), we bumped across a shallow, hitting the bottom several times and
having to back up and go around the obstructions. Once there, Umar
stood on a coral head and pumped up the hurricane lantern that he had
hung from the bow of the boat. Billowing ﬂames rose up from the front
of each boat around us as lamp burners were primed. Suddenly there was
color: ﬁrst yellow ﬂames, and then the sea bottom lit up in a dull blue
green. Below the surface were surreal green and yellow shapes of
branching ﬁngers of coral and smooth sand patches. The stars seemed to
go out as the lanterns came on, and only the few planets were left visible
overhead.
I slid over the edge of the canoe and into the water. The water felt
warm to me, and I learned that although I would say that air temperature
changes from night to day, Umar described the sea water as changing
from warm at night to cold during the day. After an hour or so, I would
always start to get cold in the water. Umar told me that to withstand the
cold I should eat bitter things, and he mentioned the names of two wild
forest tubers, kuntang (S) and bantumi (S), that are good for building cold
tolerance.
As I looked across the water’s surface, I saw heads beginning to bob,
ﬁrst looking down at the bottom and then coming up for breath. I could
hear the sounds of voices bubbling at the water’s surface as people called
back and forth so as not to lose each other in the dark. They called out
the names of kinds of sea cucumbers as they caught them: Rege! (S), which

Extraterrestrial Others
83
The circular lume, by Celia Lowe.
means the thorny one, or Haji! (S), which means the fat one with the
white spot looking like the hat of a Muslim man bent over in prayer.
Swimming inside the circular lume of the lantern’s green glow where it
had forced back walls of dark sea water, Umar and I moved along, with
him tugging our heavy boat behind us. Looking sideways across the water
column I saw muscular bodies descending to the bottom in halos of trans-
lucent green light. When I dove, I went headﬁrst but Umar and the other
divers would push the water upward with their hands and fully submerge
before turning turtle and heading for the bottom. I kicked my legs to-
gether in unison, whereas they had learned to kick with one leg at a time
in syncopation. Periodically, Umar or I would spot a sea cucumber, and
then one of us would dive down to the perimeter of the lantern’s shallow
brightness to pick it up with our ﬁngers. We would also see other creatures
when we dove. I brushed past a lionﬁsh with its dangerous spines ex-
tended to paralyze its prey. Umar scratched his head for good luck to keep
a large squid from ﬂeeing and then he caught it with his spear gun.
All together, Sama ﬁshers harvest about twenty different kinds of sea
cucumbers from Togean waters. Some sea cucumbers, when caught,
throw out their guts in sticky streams. Gamma batu (S) has a ﬂesh that
easily deteriorates in contact with other objects. Bale potei (S) and Nanas
(S) are very valuable, while most, like Lolosong (S) or Jejeper (S), are not.
Sea cucumbers crawl out from under coral rocks and ledges at night onto
sand and seagrass beds, where they feed off the organic debris on sand
particles. Every month during the pitch black of the twenty-seventh

Chapter 3
84
moon, one particular species, Gamma batu, is especially visible and abun-
dant. It “stands up” to spawn with its sucker feet attached to a rock at
one end while the other end sways erotically in the current.
At the end of several hours of collecting, it was the middle of the night.
We boarded the boat, washed off with a liter of brackish water, and
paddled to a sheltered spot close to an isolated beach. On the way there
hundreds of tiny minnows jumped out in front of our bow in random
form. Narto, in the boat next to ours, said that the ﬁsh were attracted
to the lanterns, but it seemed to me as though we were rowing directly
into a chaos that was there before we were. Umar left his lantern on to
warm himself and smoked a cigarette. We heard a Gar (Sori[S]) skipping
across the water. Long ﬁsh with sharp beaks and teeth, Gar jump across
the surface and will pierce your body if they hit you. Narto still had teeth
working their way out of his knee from an encounter with a Gar ﬁve
years earlier.
At the anchorage I pulled off my wet shirt and bicycle shorts inside my
sarong and rolled out my sleeping mat. Luckily, our leppa was just long
enough for Puah Umar and I to sleep toe to toe without embarrassment.
There was only time for a short sleep before daylight came. At ﬁrst light,
all the boats were pulled up on shore, and the long, hot process of curing
the catch commenced. The beach was a scrappy little patch of sand cov-
ered with coral rubble, but it was a place no one claimed. Umar gathered
dead mangrove limbs for ﬁrewood and he built a platform out of sticks
to hold a big aluminum wash basin of water over the ﬁre. Then he boiled
the sea cucumber. The air was hot and unpleasant on land under the equa-
torial sun with ﬁres and smoke all around us.
I studied the different types of sea cucumber the ﬁshers had caught and
the special preparation each required. Gamma batu had their intestines
removed before cooking, and the guts came out in a white and very sticky
mass on the ground. Puah Padi held his Gamma up after slitting the end
with a knife to elongate the animal; the longer ones are more valuable,
he explained. The skin of another sea cucumber, Bale potei (S), was
scraped ﬁrst to rid it of sharp nubs. Bale potei is a rare and expensive sea
cucumber and exciting to ﬁnd. Another kind, Karidau (S), had a bracket
of sticks inserted into it to help it keep its shape. Most sea cucumbers,
however, were simply washed before and after boiling. Then the sea cu-
cumbers were put over the ﬁre to be smoked. While they were smoking
the sea cucumbers sizzled, and Umar joked, “O, the sea cucumbers are
crying” (O, nangis bale [S]).
Finally, we set the sea cucumbers in the sun to dry for the rest of the
day, and we cooked a meal. Umar told me you shouldn’t grill shellﬁsh,
like lobster or crab, on the beach when you are away from the village.
If you do, this will bring the land and mountain spirits down who are

Extraterrestrial Others
85
attracted to the smell. They will make their presence known by making
you sick. We ate sago, which is good to take on a pongkat because,
unlike rice, it doesn’t require water to cook. I had brought vegetables to
eat, but that was unusual. In the afternoon, the hottest part on the day,
we anchored again and slept in Umar’s leppa which was cool and shady
inside. That afternoon, I wrote journal notes and drew a picture of the
inside of our boat.
In the early evening, Umar told stories in a loud voice so that everyone
in the anchorage could hear. One was about tourists. Once, near Katupat,
some tourists had decided to spend the night in a cave. He asked them,
“Aren’t you afraid to sleep here? There are ghosts.” They said no, but in
the middle of the night they came back to Katupat in terror. The sides of
the cave had started moving in and out when they tried to sleep. He told
another story from before he was married, describing how he had once
hid himself under the ﬂoorboards of a boat to make a secret rendezvous
with his future wife. Another time, a girl who was ﬁve months pregnant
was trying to date him, and he was accused of being the father. “Yes,” he
said, “I was there. But her stomach is a ﬁve month stomach, and I was
only there since a month ago.”
The pongkat is more than a rational economic strategy in Umar’s life.
It is a time of work and adventure when affective histories of travel are
made, told, and re-told. Stories of pongkat travel are an important genre
forming the basis for song and narrative at home in the village, even for
those who have stayed behind. Umar explained that the more boats there
are on a pongkat, the more enjoyable (ramai) it is, and the more stories
there are to tell afterward. He said he had been out with as many as thirty
other boats at one time. They would anchor offshore from the villages
and girls would row out with coconut cookies to sell to them. Narto told
me he always trades a bit of his catch to buy their cookies. I myself once
accompanied a pongkat with seventeen boats on the north side of Togean
Island where I was sure every ﬁsher had gambled away his proﬁts playing
cards before returning home. The pongkat is a time of romantic adven-
ture, ﬂirtation, and possible riches if only the right sea cucumbers are
found. Even I had acquired my own stories of swimming in the night sea
surrounded by handsome men looking for precious treasures on the rocky
bottom.
When it was nearly dark, the boats picked up anchor and we began to
move slowly along the shoreline. As we traveled in search of a new reef
to ﬁsh, the pongkat day began anew—but this time, in a new location.
People who regularly collected sea cucumber moved between places
where they knew certain species were abundant. Umar said to me that it
wouldn’t be good to ﬁsh out all the places near the village but that the
variety of collecting places was limited by the distance one can reasonably

Chapter 3
86
row in a night. To pongkat means to have access to remote ﬁshing
grounds, both on distant off-lying reefs and on coastal shores, spreading
ones’ use thinly across the resource. Umar could articulate explicitly the
way the pongkat conserved sea cucumbers, while other ﬁshers sometimes
simply took mobility for granted. Like anywhere else, preservationist atti-
tudes and knowledges are not distributed at the community scale.
Exclusionary Boundaries
I once spoke with a biologist visiting Susunang village who explained to
me that since Sama people are “sea nomads” and are always moving from
place to place, they can’t possibly care about the particular location they
happen to ﬁnd themselves in at a given moment. His implication was
that the people of Susunang would not protect the Togean environment
because they were just going to move on. The visible world is said to
provide a window on universal human reason, yet this reliance on the
visible tells us nothing of the magical powers of representation to form
perception. My conversation with the scientist had taken place in the
house of Puah Kepala, the head of Susunang village, while we were sitting
on a bright red sofa which itself rested upon a ﬂoor made of polished
cement. We were drinking from his wife’s Maripa’s precious tea set, which
was otherwise kept behind the glass of the hand-hewn wooden cabinet
her brother Samal had made for her. The house was surrounded by village
land that had been painstakingly reclaimed and built upon by the people
of Susunang over the past eighty years. First the furniture, then the ce-
ment, and ﬁnally the house made from forest timber all seemed to magi-
cally disappear from sight as the scientist told me his story of Sama imper-
manence. The roof made from sago palm leaves and rattan from the
garden were the last to go in my imagination as I listened to him explain
marine nomadism.
Pongkat travels brought Sama peoples’ collecting practices into conﬂict
with biologists who were convinced that a circumscribed and bounded
resource control, not movement, was essential for maintaining biological
diversity and resource abundance. In the project of spatial planning,
IFABS scientists sought out knowledge of property rights and traditional
exclusionary practices and, when they didn’t ﬁnd them, worried about
“open access.” Umar’s collecting involved wide mobility in search of trad-
able sea creatures, whereas biologists’ ways of saving nature involved ter-
ritorial segmentation, and bounding of people and natural resource space.
But Sama people by and large do not exclude based on territory, nor do
they tolerate being excluded themselves.

Extraterrestrial Others
87
White Point Reef and other collecting locations and curing beaches in
the Togean Islands were incrementally being restricted by state schemes
to bureaucratically manage public and private land and marine tenure.
Responding to what was understood as a problematic openness in Togean
resource access, biologists also maneuvered to divide and delimit local
resource space into use and non-use zones. Umar explained to me how
people from other villages were entering the trade because of the relatively
high price of sea cucumbers, and had moved into waters where Sama
people ordinarily pongkat. Further, the provincial government had ga-
zetted village borders with modernist linearity and village heads had the
right to tax outsiders for harvests within these lines. Village leaders from
other ethnic groups had learned to exclude Sama ﬁshers by raising their
tax, making it unproﬁtable for anyone from outside the village to collect
there. The once-ﬂuid intervillage relationships around collecting practices
became rigid as village leaders, who were little accountable for funds, set
and collected harvest taxes. Umar and his colleagues tried to avoid the
tax and, resenting the new exclusionary borders, were forced to ﬁsh in
increasingly tight spaces. I myself had participated with Umar in night-
time raids in the waters of other villages to avoid the tax.
Exclusionary rules had also created new ethnic tensions, and served to
invent competitive harvesting practices along ethnic lines. As Sama people
became the enforcement targets of natural resource regulators, people of
other ethnicities realized that their own practices of reef bombing, cyanide
ﬁshing, and other prohibited activities would be ignored if they blamed
Sama people. For example, when Malenge Island people (who are primar-
ily of Togean and Saluan ethnicity) thought I was a biologist, they talked
about how irresponsible Sama were. But when they perceived me as a
friend of Sama people, they admitted Sama were hard-working people
and they often worked alongside them in marine product trades.
Commercial enterprises were affecting coastal and forest access for all
Togean peoples. Near the newly developed foreign-owned and operated
pearl oyster companies, or near tourist resorts, Togean peoples were un-
able to collect land or sea products. At night, pearl oyster farm areas were
swept by searchlights and patrolled by speedboats to keep out imagined
pearl thieves. As commercial sites expanded along Togean shores, sea cu-
cumber collecting sites disappeared. Mangroves that provided cooking
wood were cut, and sea cucumber curing beaches and anchorages become
unavailable as well. On Pulau Angkayo, police had forcibly destroyed
Sama peoples’ temporary collecting shelters to make way for a prospec-
tive tourist resort owned by the son of a former governor, and rumors of
property acquisition by tourism entrepreneurs were rife.
Misunderstood as lacking a connection to place, and perceived as a peo-
ple linked by primordial ties to the sea, many typically presumed that Umar

Chapter 3
88
and his friends were the primary agents—not victims—of resource scarcity
in the marine environment. It was nearly impossible for Sama ﬁshers to
communicate the idea that boundaries were harmful and that mobility was
resource conserving, given the perception that their movement was uncivi-
lized and their ongoing status in Indonesia as backward and alien mobile
citizens. However, the story of the pongkat is a provocation to the idea
that Sama mobility is harmful to the environment, that sea cucumber col-
lecting is something people do only out of poverty and economic need, or
that mobility necessarily indicates lack of attachment to place.
People Who Ride Along
The desire to control Malay peoples’ mobility in the name of projects of
state resource and population control has colonial roots, and representa-
tions of Sama people as nomadic ﬁt into both historical and present-day
ways of thinking about “mobile” peoples across Southeast Asia. For
Dutch, British, and French colonial administrations, the stability and legi-
bility of settled communities was a political, economic, and civilizational
ambition. For example, Tania Li has described efforts of the Dutch to
control the movements of upland peoples who, throughout the Indies,
practiced swidden agriculture. Beginning in the nineteenth century, the
household, the village, the land survey, the census, the map, and the school
were among the technologies of rule the Dutch administration used to
control peoples’ movements (Li 1999; Aragon 2000:55–65). Control of
coastal waters and Southeast Asian seas was also important. Eric Taglia-
cozzo (2005) has described the signiﬁcance of lighthouses, beacons, and
buoys for British and Dutch abilities to control trade, smuggling, and
maritime travel. And for nearby Malaysian Borneo, Clifford Sather
(1997:44–68) has written of how in 1901 the British North Borneo Com-
pany introduced boat licensing and registration in order to control marine
trafﬁc, collect tax revenues, and persuade coastal people to acknowledge
company sovereignty.
Togean Sama people ﬁrst came from southeast Sulawesi in the company
of Bugis traders in search of turtle shell, sea cucumber, and dried ﬁsh
sometime in the eighteenth or early nineteenth century. The earliest de-
scription we have of the Islands comes from the colonial record of Jan
van der Wal, Captain of the vessel Brandgans, on a voyage to the Gulf of
Tomini in the 1680s. Van der Wal describes encounters with a population
of Bobonko people in Kilat bay and on the south side of Great Togean,
and his account gives no indication of Sama or Bugis peoples inhabiting
the islands at that time (van der Wal 1680).2 Almost two centuries later,
Captain Edward B. Hussey of the American whaling vessel Peruvian

Extraterrestrial Others
89
wrote in his log on October 26, 1854, from a position between Batu Daka
and Una Una, that the Togean Islands appeared to be uninhabited (Hussey
1855). Searching for humpback whales, to the northwest of the archipe-
lago, he would not have observed the Bobonko settlement contacted by
van der Wal in the 1680s or the village of Benteng (meaning Fortress) that
was in existence by that time on the south side of Great Togean.
By 1865 however, C.B.H.von Rosenburg, Regent of Gorantalo, made
it to the south side of the archipelago, and his account provides the ﬁrst
description of a Togean Island Bugis/Sama community (von Rosenburg
1865). He writes of Bugis people who lived at the foot of Benteng moun-
tain and who had pushed the Bobonko people, whom he calls the “origi-
nal inhabitants,” into the interior. The interesting thing about his observa-
tion of the Benteng community is that he fails to recognize the presence
of Sama people there. He describes the community this way:
The village of Togean lies in the small, enclosed bay, Laboean Mogon, the
only anchorage for ships in the whole group of islands. The houses, built in
Bugis style, almost disappear in the shade of fruit trees, and are spread out
randomly, on land that gently slopes down to the bay. At low tide, a broad
stretch of muddy ground separates it from the sea. . . . The Bugis settled here
are in part permanent, and in part temporary (orang manoempang). The
permanent ones have their origin in Todjo, a Bugis landscape north of Bunka
on the south shore of Tomini Bay. They are ruled by a Captain and they are
traders and sea cucumber ﬁshers. (von Rosenburg 1865:120)
In the nineteenth century, as at present, Bugis and Sama people often
lived in intertwined communities, and what Rosenburg surely witnessed
at Benteng was a community of Bugis and Sama trading and ﬁshing to-
gether. This is evident from his improper translation of the Melayu phrase,
“orang manoempang.” Literally meaning “people who ride along,” the
words strongly suggests there is a Sama community conjoined with, or
“riding on,” the Bugis community, collecting sea cucumber for the Bugis
Captain, and living off the beneﬁcence of their Bugis patrons. The term
acknowledges the patron-client relationship existing between Bugis and
Sama peoples and its foremost implication is unrelated to mobility or even
impermanence. The people of Susunang today call this relationship one
of older and younger sibling (kakak-adik). There were four Bugis trading
families in Susunang in the 1990s who bought sea cucumber, shark’s ﬁn,
pearl shell, and other marine and terrestrial commodities and who ex-
tended credit to any who would procure these products for them.
This does not mean that both Bugis and Sama would not have traveled
in search of trade and fortune in the nineteenth century as at present; as
Rosenburg himself describes it, the Bugis of Benteng were from Todjo on
the south side of the Gulf of Tomini, and the Dutch administered the

Chapter 3
90
archipelago indirectly through Todjo until 1906. Likewise, the Togean
Sama community claims kinship connections to the peoples of Salabanka
in southeast Sulawesi, they share a dialect with the peoples of the Banggai
Islands to the east, and they used to pay tax to the Raja of Bone in south
Sulawesi. Both Bugis and Sama communities are widely interconnected
along the eastern coastline of Sulawesi. In Rosenburg’s description, how-
ever, the lens of nineteenth-century governmentality led him to misrecog-
nize Benteng as divided between permanent and temporary settlers, rather
than between Bugis patrons and their Sama clients.
Between mid-century and the 1880s the Togean Islands, like other parts
of eastern Sulawesi, were plagued by raiders who inhibited trade and kept
Togean people clustered around the defensive fort at Benteng. While the
Togean Islands appear to have been a haven for the community, the Dutch
administrator Revius described the situation up and down the east coast
of Sulawesi in the year 1852 this way:
According to tradition this area used to have a very busy and lively trade in
all products such as rice, iron, tobacco, turtle shell, sea cucumber, woven
fabrics, etc. Many boats cruised these seas, but different circumstances such
as several wars of kingdoms against Ternate and, as a consequence, piracy,
the tearing apart of the tribes, and destruction, scared the inhabitants and
the orang Badjo [Sama] from preparing, looking for, or planting produce for
trade. All trade gradually disappeared. . . . According to rumors by people
who know the Bay of Kendari, there used to be a very lively trade in this
general resting place for all seafaring orang Badjo and the homeward bound
Makassarese, Boeginese, and Mandorese ships. This liveliness fell into decay
because of the unsafe waters and the horrible lust for power of the Boeginese
who settled in that Bay and rule there. (Revius 1852)
By the 1880s, the Dutch Navy, using steam ships, had paciﬁed the Gulf
of Tomini. Van Hoevell described Benteng in the 1890s: “Lampa [Ben-
teng] used to be a place with big Buginese houses with a fortiﬁed stone
wall with lillas [cannons] to protect it against the pirates mainly from
Tobelo and Galela who attacked and plundered Togian on several occa-
sions. Because of ﬁrm action taken by the Dutch navy between 1870 and
1880, these pirates have disappeared from the Gulf of Tomini and have
not been spotted since” (van Hoevell 1893).
At some point after the paciﬁcation of Tomini, Sama people began to
move out from Benteng to other parts of the Togean Islands. The ﬁrst
Sama village was located just offshore from Benteng on the island of Pulo
Anau at the mouth of Mogo harbor.3 From there, Sama people settled at
the even more ideal location of Susunang, located as it was between
readily accessible gardens and water sources on the land, and the most
extensive system of coral reefs in the archipelago. By at least 1929, when

Extraterrestrial Others
91
the Dutch naval ship Eriadnus produced a hydrographic survey of the
Togean Islands, the village at Susunang was substantial enough to appear
on the chart, although Susunang people describe living there well before
then. During the next half century the people of Susunang developed new
village sites at Toani to the south of Malenge Island in the 1950s, and at
Kilat in the 1970s and 1980s when several families from Susunang moved
there to plant coconut.
In the 1990s there were six Sama communities in the central part of
the Togean Islands, all emerging from the original village communities at
Benteng and Pulo Anau. Bugis people lived in all these places and contin-
ued to facilitate ﬂows of trade and credit. Togean Sama people also have
kinship connections to other Sama communities on the north shore of the
Gulf of Tomini, and as far south as Salabanka. They do not have substan-
tial ties to the Sama communities on the north coast of Sulawesi, nor do
they share a dialect with them. These histories tell us that the Sama people
of the Togean Islands have long maintained cosmopolitan connections to
people from other places, and their history in the archipelago locates them
within wider ethnic, colonial, and, more recently as we will see, national
narratives of belonging.
Chicken Feathers
While one day watching television reports concerning the ethnic ﬁghting
then occurring between Dayaks and Madurese in Kalimantan, a friend
from Manado said to me, “On this issue, I’m for the Dayaks because
they’re the original inhabitants (penduduk asli), and the Madurese are just
transmigrants.” Looking to the idea of “origins,” many elite Indonesians
linked their sympathies and their understanding of rights to what they
conceived of as the primordial inﬂuence of place on society: an essential
quality of people is to be local or not local, and mobility decreases cultural
and political legitimacy. Although Sama have been described as Southeast
Asia’s sea nomads in the colonial record, in scholarly literature, and in
popular discourse across the Malay world, ﬂoating mobility and alien
citizenship also comprised an ethnic conﬁguration with norms and forms
speciﬁc to the Suharto-era developmentalist state. Elite discomfort with
mobility is widespread, and many middle-class Indonesians, taught that
mobility is politically destabilizing and un-modern, expressed consider-
able ambivalence toward the idea of human movement.
Just as settlement was preferred to mobility in this developmentalist
aesthetic, wet-rice agriculture was believed superior to other forms of
rural livelihoods including swidden agriculture, ﬁshing, collecting, and
hunting. Christopher Duncan writes, “In Indonesia, the government

Chapter 3
92
ranks indigenous groups on a scale based on agricultural techniques and
settlement patterns: the lowest being nomads, then shifting cultivators,
and then settled swiddeners (those who move their ﬁelds but not their
homes), all of whom rank below wet-rice agriculturalists” (Duncan
2004:5). Anna Tsing, likewise, describes how in the 1980s the Depart-
ment of Social and Political Affairs classiﬁed the lowest type of “isolated
population” as nomads: “Populations whose livelihoods and living places
continually shift and whose living conditions and means of subsistence
are still extremely simple. They still live by hunting, ﬁshing, and gathering
forest products; their communications with the outside world are almost
non-existent” (Tsing 1993:155).
Within these bureaucratic articulations identities such as “nomad,”
“farmer” or “ﬁsher” were proposed as ﬁxed and distinct social spaces.
In Susunang, Puah Kepala told me that the village had been invited to
participate in an American foreign aid project called “Agricultural-Based
Area Development.” This was “foreign aid worked out between the presi-
dents and ministers of the two countries,” he said. The project would give
$20,000 to each Togean village, but there would have to be a “regulation”
(peraturan) to it: all people would be grouped according to whether they
were “ﬁshers” or “farmers.” No one was allowed to be both a ﬁsher and
a farmer, and, after the process of classiﬁcation was established, no one
would be allowed to switch categories. Susunang people understood very
well that “farmer” was a more valued social identity than “ﬁsher,” and
they often claimed to me proudly that their children would only farm
when they grew up.
For those without intimate experience with the sea, land and water can
seem binary entities. The land is start and ﬁnish; the sea is a way to get
there. The land represents the rich world of human history and domestica-
tion; the sea is a temporary pathway. But in many places with watery
histories—the Mediterranean, the Paciﬁc Islands, the Netherlands—water
and land join together in conﬁguring senses of place. In the Togean Is-
lands, sea and land were interconnected aspects of Sama worlds. In the
case of Sama people, their identiﬁcation with marine nomadism meant
that they were often perceived as lacking in afﬁliations with Togean land-
scapes. But this assumption ignored the anthropogenic nature of Togean
upland forests and lowland swamps.
The islands surrounding Susunang are fringed by mangrove trees that
straddle the line between sea and shore. Like a metaphor for the Susunang
community itself, mangrove trees are soaked in salt water yet also put
down roots deep into the soils of the strand. Behind these groves, Sama
people had turned the land into a place productive of memory and econ-
omy. Catchments with connected bamboo pipes funneled fresh water to
the shore. Channels that were cut through and behind the mangroves

Extraterrestrial Others
93
provided routes to the land, and passages for boats to avoid wind and
waves. Vegetable gardens, fruit trees, and yam gardens intertwined with
commercial coconut and clove stands, sago swamps, and cultivated
stands of nipa and pandanus. In the forest, rattan and bamboo were en-
couraged to grow and trees were harvested for canoe and house building.
Trails reached tendril like into all parts of the forest.
The most proliﬁc use of Togean landscapes is for production of a staple
food starch called sago. Also the name of the tree itself, sago involves a
particular way of domesticating the landscape. Stands of sago palm,
called gonggang (S), grow in naturally occurring muddy areas, or are
made by damming rivulets to inundate a patch of low lying land. While
from a boat on the coast it was difﬁcult for me to pick out gonggang,
nearly every available low-lying place around Susunang had been con-
verted into these swamps. There were forty-two named and individually
owned gonggang along the coastlines within several miles of Susunang
and Pulo Anau, and many Sama men and women who worked with sago
could repeat their names and locations in an order that traced the bends
and folds of the shores of Togean and Talatakoh Islands.
One time I convinced Mbo Poteiang and her husband Mbo Panai to
take me with them to make sago. At the shore we climbed out of our
boat, picked up our tools, and made our way up the hill to the gonggang
they had named “Chicken Feathers” (Bulu Manoh [S]). Sago production
involves travel to and through the gonggang swamp, and harvesting the
palm requires many intricate movements that only locally experienced
bodies could manage. Being foreign to this way of knowing the land, I
could only observe and hope that my shoes would not be sucked off my
feet by the mud.
I watched as Mbo Panai, to begin the process, picked up his axe and
felled a ripe sago tree. Although the difference between a sago palm and
a mangrove tree is visibly obvious, Mbo Panai also knew this difference
in his arms and legs: the mangrove jolts the body’s frame when hit with
an axe blade, while the sago palm’s soft trunk sucks the axe in. Mbo
Poteiang and Mbo Panai worked the trunk for three full days, arriving at
sunrise and returning in the afternoon each day. Panai’s hands and arms
ﬂew as he ﬂaked the pith off the inside of the sago trunk. The sago ﬁbers
slowly turned from white to red as they hit the air.
While her husband chopped at the tree, Mbo Poteiang built a sluice to
strain the starch from the sago pulp. With her ﬁngers and an awl, she
sewed an old rice sack to the rounded end of a branch. Then she used the
shell of an old tree trunk to make a catch basin to contain the wet sago
mixture. Once Mbo Panai’s pile of white inner ﬁbers built up into a
mound, he carried them to the sluice. He then planted his feet, bowed his
back, lifted a bucket of water—limbs suspending the container on their

Chapter 3
94
Mbo Panai and Mbo Poteiang in the gonggang, by Celia Lowe.
A-frame—and poured the water over the sago pith. He kneaded and
squeezed the pith to force its starch through the rice sack. The starch
ﬂowed into the basin and, by the end of the process of separating starch
from pith, his clean ﬁngertips and wet muddy toes had crinkled.
Sago production contradicts the common idea that Sama are afraid of
the land and continually leave one place to colonize another. Sama mobil-
ity in relation to sago production was something quite different; it was a
circumscribed movement in and around the sago trees that created famil-
iarity and established ownership in the landscape. Carl Sauer, the Berkeley
geographer, might have called Sama people’s sago-making “the appropri-
ation of habitat by habit” (Sauer 1981:359). My experience with Mbo
Poteiang and Mbo Panai in the sago swamp allowed me to think about
mobility in a new way. Rather than focus on the wide-ranging mobility
of a putative nomadism, one might focus on the micromotilities that form
the intersection of places and bodies. While to fell a tree or maintain a
sago gonggang was a manifestation of Mbo Panai’s being on this place
he called Chicken Feathers, to know the difference between how an axe
hits a mangrove or a sago palm was also an inscription of place on Mbo
Panai’s body.
From the perspective of species inventory, the gonggang held a greater
diversity of life than just the sago palm. Mbo Poteiang noticed a gogomi
(S) beetle feeding on the sago pith. She told me how this beetle is only
found in freshly ground sago and proceeded to name for me the other

Extraterrestrial Others
95
kinds of bugs she could think of, including the sago worm. Then she
picked the beetle up and tied a string to its leg to bring it home for her
grandson to play with. Later we gathered mushrooms growing out of a
pile of spent pith. We also collected the leaf tips of a vegetable she called
gangah pako (S), a green and red plant that grows at the edge of the sago
swamp. Sago was responsible for the emergence of a diverse ecosystem.
Mbo Poteiang and Mbo Panai were reluctant at ﬁrst to take me to work
sago with them. “We do work like this because we are poor,” Poteiang
told me. Government ofﬁcials and other glamorous outsiders who viewed
sago as a sign of savagery often traveled through the Togeans, teaching
people that store-bought rice was a more civilized thing to eat. Before
they came, sago was just what people ate; now it is what “poor” people
eat. Likewise, the Togeans used to be a place for people; now they are a
place for people classiﬁed as “poor.” Sago consumption and production
imbued Sama identity with a derogated positionality within hierarchically
joined regions. Freshly made sago, still part of the tree just the night be-
fore, is much tastier than the poor quality government rice (beras bulog)
brought by traders to the Togean Islands, however, and it is rosy in color
and sugary in scent. Raw sago can be fried with coconut to make a chewy
pancake, or stirred with water, lemon, and chili to make a dish like matzo
ball soup. Eaten with grilled ﬁsh, it is a wonderful meal and, unlike rice,
it doesn’t require fresh water to cook or much wood to burn to make it.
In the IFABS ethnobiological project, the scientists overlooked the sago
palm entirely, even though it is the most important economic plant for
Togean Sama people. Despite the idea that the scientists were laying claim
to the methods of anthropological ethnoscience, the Sama word for sago,
ambuloh, and the sago palm landscape, the gonggang, went unnoticed as
linguistic clues to the different interpretation and value Sama people gave
to the plant. Rather, the “national” lens, through which rice is the only
recognizable staple starchy food, overcame the “scientiﬁc” lens through
which language is said to be a key to cognition and understandings of the
natural world. While Mbo Poteiang could not escape the sense of her
subordination to people who produced and consumed rice, her resistance
to these relations was embodied in her persistent inscriptions on the To-
gean landscape through sago production. It seemed as though she was
trying to impress me with her knowledge of ideas from other places when
she would tell me, “We poor people have to eat sago.” But I knew Mbo
Poteiang loved the taste of sago more than rice, and she saw making it as
cool, clean work—not like ﬁshing under the searing sun. Turning the table
on outsiders, she would tell me, “If you aren’t from this place, you aren’t
capable of eating sago.”

Chapter 3
96
From Heteroglossia to Polyglossia
Words, mainly nouns, have been used by American structural anthropolo-
gists in debates over social commensurability and reason.4 By taking a
particular form—taxonomy—and declaring this form to be science, sci-
ence has been found in other places. When order is found/made in systems
of naming, people are said to “think scientiﬁcally.” This liberal project
contains within it two moves: in the ﬁrst, the world is divided thereby
producing a particular category of human; in the second, it is united again
creating the universal human. Thus we have “ethnoscience,” a mode of
inscription that produces reason’s “Other,” yet an Other who ostensibly
recognizes the proposed universal structuring of the natural world.
Here is how this might work in the Togean Islands. When Charles Dar-
win ﬁrst described the growth of coral reefs in the South Paciﬁc, he classi-
ﬁed them according to three generic types: atolls, barrier reefs, and fringing
reefs (Darwin 1874). His terms derived their organizing principle from his
interest in the rise and fall of volcanic islands, and his classiﬁcations de-
scribe reefs in relation to the land they border or replace. In English, we
still use Darwin’s terms today. Terms for reefs in the Sama vernacular, on
the other hand, describe reefs in relation to the sea bottom and the water’s
surface. These include: sapa lann3, a kind of reef that rises up from great
depth and can be seen at the surface of the water; sapa timpusu, a reef
that rises up from the deep but is invisible from the surface; sapa palantoh,
a reef that is bare at low tide; sapa patindeng, a reef that is never dry and
rises up from shallow depths; sapa bungeng, a ﬂat reef that is always dry;
and sapa bapusu, a coral rock rising up into the air from a coral bottom.
If a sapa bapusu can have a cluster of trees growing on it while this
conﬁguration describes “land” in English usage, does it follow that taxo-
nomical differences are superstructural to nature’s fundamental unity, or
might it indicate the inherent instability of nature itself? If Sama are said
to “think differently” from scientists about reefs (as lexicons are supposed
to reveal) does this difference reside in people or in nature? Ecological,
environmental, and cognitive anthropologists interested in cultural differ-
ence have used such linguistic evidence in debates over correspondence
theories of nature.
Rather than look for “special cognitive abilities,” Bruno Latour recom-
mends a move from cognition to practice:
[A] priori, before the study has even started, it is toward the mind and its
cognitive abilities that one looks for an explanation of forms. Any study of
mathematics, calculations, theories and forms in general should do quite the
contrary: ﬁrst look at how the observers move in space and time, how the

Extraterrestrial Others
97
mobility, stability and combinability of inscriptions are enhanced, how the
networks are extended, how all the informations are tied together in a cas-
cade of re-representations, and if, by some extraordinary chance, there is
something still unaccounted for, then, and only then, look for special cogni-
tive abilities. (Latour 1987:246–47)
To follow the forms of Sama people’s nature-making would mean
tracking emergent rationalities and practices of thought rather than codes
found in the mind. If we want to use words as our guide, we can follow
these practices through proper names that lend speciﬁcity to an intimately
inhabited world. “Proper names,” as Mary Steedly tells us, “like the lands
of Lau Cih or Kilometer Eleven, assure us that something once went on
there, at that point or place in the landscape, such that people cared
enough to give it a name” (Steedly 1993:44).
Two miles off the south coast of Talatakoh Island lies a series of reefs
strung out to the east, leading to Tanjung Keramat on the very southern
tip of Walea Bahi. These reefs, the same ones that had attracted Sama
people to the Togean Islands centuries ago, were classiﬁed “wilderness
area” in the ﬁrst proposal for a Togean park in 1982 (Salm, et al. 1982).
I learned about these reefs from Puah Hamid, who insisted that he is one
of the people who knows them best. Unlike generic vocabularies produced
through ethnoscience, Hamid’s place-names were related to practices of
work and travel. These were not transcendental vocabularies existing
prior to action in the world, rather his names reﬂected past experiences
and mobilized future actions.5
Reefs acquire proper names through the act of building a reef house,
ﬁshing regularly, the occurrence of an unusual event, or observing a strik-
ing attribute. When he was younger, Hamid said, he would travel with
his parents on the reefs to the south of Susunang on pongkat trips catching
ﬁsh and collecting sea cucumber. He would sleep with his mother and
father and one or two siblings on the sole of their boat with their ﬁsh
catch piled on a cloth on top of them. Wherever they went to sell their
ﬁsh, he told me, people would know they were Sama because they smelled
like drying ﬁsh.
An interesting feature of coral reefs is that their limits and edges are
never obvious in the way those of a ﬁeld, swidden, or forest path might
be; reefs are mainly visible by looking directly down on them from above.
This attribute reveals how truly remarkable the detail was with which
Puah Hamid remembered a familiar submerged geography. He described
and named for me the reefs to the north, south, east, and west of Susu-
nang. I present here only a piece of it, starting with Sapa Ua Sidur in the
west and ending with Tanjung Keramat in the east—a stretch of ﬁve nauti-
cal miles.

Chapter 3
98
Sama
English
Sapa Ua Sidur
Father Sidur’s Reef
Sapa Alo
Atoll Reef
Sapa Gussoh ma Buka
Open Sea Grass Reef
Sapa Matilla’
Bright Reef
Sapa Buntar
Round Reef
Sapa Aloang
Has a Lagoon Reef
Sapa Kulapei
Has Kulapei Fish Reef
Sapa Sah∂’
Sah∂’ Setan Reef
Sapa ma Rintas
Sharp Edged Reef
Sapa Mbo Mawar
Mbo Mawar’s Reef
Sapa Basar Batu n∂
With the Big Rocks Reef
Sapa Pai Naj∂
Papa Naj∂’s Reef
Sapa Si Datei
Si Datei’s Reef
Sapa Bander∂
Flag Reef
Sapa Pai Jai
Papa Jai’s Reef
Sapa ma Taha
Long Reef
Sapa Mbo Junung
Mbo Junung’s Reef
Sapa Tarias
Tarias Reef
Sapa Ko’ko’
Ko’ko’ Reef
Sapa Matilla’
Bright Reef
Sapa Aloang
Has a Lagoon Reef
Sapa Karanganang
Coralhead Reef
Sapa Boe Disalu
Fresh Water Reef
Sapa Bajangang
Bajangang Reef
Sapa Mbo Karanjah
Mbo Basket’s Reef
Sapa Ua Jabir
Father Jabir’s Reef
Tanjung Keramat
Spirit Cape
Hamid insisted that in order to know these reefs, one must have expe-
rienced the pongkat; reefs derive their names from these travels. Sapa
Pai Naj∂, for instance, is named after Naj∂’s father who built a reef house
there. Sapa Bander∂is named after a ﬂag marker used for navigation
that can be seen while ﬁshing, and which was inscribed on the Togean
Island hydrographic chart by the Eriadnus, the vessel J.H.F. Umbgrove
traveled aboard while making his coral inventories. Sapa Tarias is named
after the tarias, a kind of ﬁsh often caught there. Ko’ko’ is the name of
a kind of Satan that will pull out your eyes. Don’t utter animal names
here, Hamid warned me, or the ko’ko’ will come. Sapa Karangang is
named for the protruding coral rocks you can dry ﬁsh on. Sapa Boe

Extraterrestrial Others
99
Disalu is near to fresh water on land. Mbo Karanjah was a foreigner,
probably Dutch, who put up a basket-shaped navigation marker on that
reef; this marker also appears as a ﬁxed permanent marker on the Eriad-
nus’ chart. And Tanjung Keramat is a Melayu name; a keramat cape is
a location of dangerous spirits.
In much of the anthropological literature on place, supposedly bounded
stable ethnic groups share putatively uniﬁed and coherent senses of place.
For example, Steven Feld (1982) describes the way “Kaluli” sound expres-
sions embody “Kaluli” sentiment, and Keith Basso (1996) describes “lan-
guage and landscape among the Western Apache.” Yet, as Gupta and
Fergusson write, “Studies of ethnographic writing have revealed the ap-
parent boundedness and coherence of ‘a culture’ as something made
rather than found; the ‘wholeness’ of a holistically understood object ap-
pears more as a narrative device than as an objectively present empirical
truth” (Gupta and Fergusson 1997:2). We can see this in the names
Hamid offered.
By using proper names for reefs, we could not answer the question,
“What do Sama call it?” Unlike names on a map imbued with perma-
nence and universality, Sama place-names were continually in process,
and different individuals used different place-names depending on where
they had traveled and what they had done there. Hamid, for example,
used the name “Father Sidur’s Reef,” while others in Susunang referred
to the same reef as “Rizal’s Reef” since Rizal had recently built a ﬁshing
house and had begun to ﬁsh there regularly. New travels and experiences
reinvested places with new meanings, and the names of places could
change quickly over time. When Hamid told me he knew the reefs best,
he was invested not in the stability of his inscriptions, but in relating to
me his experience.
Working to conserve Togean nature, scientists’ interest in Sama people
stemmed from a belief that damage to the marine environment might be
linked to Sama ethnic identity. Although blast ﬁshing, for example, had
been introduced to Southeast Asia by American and Japanese soldiers
during World War II, it became associated with Sama ethnicity in particu-
lar only in the biodiversity moment. Moreover, the logic used to link Sama
ethnicity to environmental degradation was ﬂexible and arbitrary. Rather
than believing Sama ethnicity was the cause of environmental degrada-
tion, some biologists had the inverse theory, that Sama people destroy the
environment because they have weak or insufﬁcient ethnic afﬁliations. Dr.
Supriatna once told me, “There are different tribes here and the tribes
have different perceptions about natural resources. Some have tanah adat
[traditional lands], others don’t. Or maybe tanah adat is ﬁnished. It
doesn’t exist in Kabalutan [Susunang] because there is mixed culture

Chapter 3
100
there.” The idea that Sama culture was “mixed” had ﬁrst appeared in
the IFABS ethnobiological study: “Several groups of people from Bugis,
Gorantalo, Buton, Saluan, and Banggai shared the island settlement. By
now, the Kabalutan ethnic groups have become Bajau Sama, which means
people who live a similar life style and together live over the water. The
concept of ‘sama’ (same) arose after they were integrated with the other
ethnic groups that worked together to develop the coral islands as land
that could be inhabited” (Yuliati et al. 1994:8).
This analysis is a misreading of the ﬂuidity of ethnic identities across
Indonesia, however. Certainly many people lived in Susunang who had
connections through marriage to people of other Togean and mainland
Sulawesi ethnicities. For those ethnicities that were unmarked, like Kaili
or Saluan, people tended to merge into Sama identiﬁcation within a gen-
eration. For ethnicities that were marked in some way, such as Bugis,
Arab, or Chinese, these ethnic identiﬁcations could last much longer.
Movement in and out of ethnic afﬁliation in Indonesia is not a new phe-
nomena. The historical ﬂexibility of Sama identity to absorb and dispel
members is indicated in a passage from Revius written in 1852: “There
is only one trader that still gives the Badjorese indeﬁnite, sometimes even
years of credit. This is the very well known, even in Makassar and Ter-
nate, Poa [Puah] Abang, who usually comes to Ternate to trade every
year. This man is like a patriarch to the vagabonds and used to be a
Badjorese himself. Through constant hard work and diligence he has
become a rich man but he still keeps in touch with the orang Badjos”
(Revius 1852).
Nevertheless, ethnic hybridity was sometimes understood as a strain
of weakness running through the Sama community. This was especially
evidenced in Sama language, where “heteroglossia”—the blending of lan-
guage vocabularies and styles across indistinct borders—was deemed infe-
rior to “polyglossia”—the codiﬁcation of clearly bounded languages.
Henk Maier has described how in Dutch colonial philology, “scholarship
wanted order, constructed grammars and dictionaries—and concepts like
borders and restrictions were introduced. Cultural deﬁnition and societal
segregation were the result. Heteroglossia was transformed into polyglos-
sia” (Maier 1993).6 Similarly, the ethnobiological survey of 1994 de-
scribes “original Bajau language” (bahasa Bajau asli) as pure, while con-
temporary “Sama language” includes borrowings from Kaili, Saluan, and
Bugis. Lack of linguistic purity was read here as a deﬁcit, one that hin-
dered the ability of scientists to collect “names for things” and produce
indigenous knowledge. Yet, for Puah Hamid, the act of naming is an act
of knowing.

Extraterrestrial Others
101
The Strait
Sama peoples’ nature-making projects cannot be read off of the text of
Togean land or marinescapes, and objects themselves never structure the
value, meaning, or form of the observations that allow us to perceive
the world around us. Like biologists who hunt for new species by hiking
through the forest leaving biodiverse nature in their wake, Sama natures
are similarly produced through travel and mobility. Just as I described
scientists and science, culture and nature, and species and genus as the
outcomes of scientiﬁc labors, Sama identities and Sama natures were also
the result of such productive work. I shared such a moment in the con-
struction of nature and personhood on a trip through the strait between
Talatakoh and Togean Islands with Mbo Dinda and Mbo Lilla.
Starting early in the morning one day in 1996, Mbo Dinda, Mbo Lilla,
and I paddled their wide-bottomed canoe (soppe [S]) north from the vil-
lage of Susunang toward Malenge Island. Rather than ride in the village
head’s noisy motorboat, a rattling shell he had appropriated from a vil-
lage aid project, I had asked my ﬁctive grandparents, Mbo Dinda and her
husband Mbo Lilla, if they would be willing to take me to Camp Uemata.
In the quiet of the day, I knew we would be able to tell stories. They had
agreed and, immediately upon entering the calm of the strait, Mbo Dinda
began to narrate our passage by pointing to places we passed and describ-
ing the details of particular locations. Her stories, evoked by our passage,
were spun around the intersection of plants, animals, and the physical
properties of the strait.
“When I was younger, that is where we would pull sea grapes from,
from between those roots there,” she said. If you can imagine a ﬂuorescent
green brachiated seaweed with tiny polyps on it, that is what a sea grape
is, and Mbo liked to eat them with lime and chili. “And over there,” she
said, “is especially good for mud clams.” These clams are the same Manila
clam that has been imported into the Paciﬁc Northwest of the United
States. To get at the clams, Mbo Dinda told me, she would squeeze herself
in between the sharp and thorny points of the mangrove roots at low
tide, and reach into the mud. She scrunched up her face and hunched her
shoulders together, trying to show me how little she could be, as if she
were pressing her way between the roots.
After more paddling, we came upon the entrance to one of many chan-
nels that people had cut over the years leading into and through a man-
grove forest. These passages are only accessible at high tide, and Susunang
people maintained them for easy access to the land and a place to paddle
that sheltered them from wind and waves. Mbo told me how in World
War II the entire village had hid in the mangroves when the Japanese

Chapter 3
102
soldiers arrived. They had lived there for months. All the children turned
red from the tannin in the mangroves that rubbed off onto their skin as
they played around the trees. Mbo Dinda had married Mbo Lilla during
the war. “We didn’t get to have a wedding party because no one had
anything in those days,” she said. Because there were no traders arriving
from Java or south Sulawesi, people had to wear clothes made from
pounded tree bark. It was rough and had made her itch, she told me.
We rowed a bit further, and she showed me the place where she used
to collect sea cucumber. I hadn’t realized that sea cucumber were also
found among the mangroves—I thought they only lived among sea grasses
and along coral reefs. But Mbo told me, “No, these kind are called boto
pendaga.” Boto pendaga I wrote in my notebook, and repeated it aloud
over and over so that I wouldn’t forget its name. Later I learned that I
had been paddling along chanting “trader’s penis, trader’s penis, trader’s
penis!” Because sea cucumber are a trade good, most people preferred
not to eat them and to sell them instead.
When we passed a patch on the shore called Red Earth (Tane Mire [S]),
a place where P. T. Arrow M. Gobel, an Indonesian logging company, had
opened up the hillside and rolled back the forest like the lid on a sardine
can, I asked them where the road went. Mbo Lilla rested his paddle to
talk so it didn’t slap the water or clunk hollow-sounding on the side of
our boat. In the perfect silence he answered, “It’s a place where they’ve
cut down the trees.” We could see the remnants of gargantuan trunks the
loggers had left behind. They had come with tractors with big wheels,
and with jaws that tore up the trees. Then they carried them off to waiting
barges, and the trees were exported to Japan. Now they were gone—both
the loggers and the trees. Mbo Lilla told me palapi, one of the forest’s
huge dipterocarps, is the best wood for building a soppe like his. There
are only two soppe left in Susunang. Now that the large trees for boat
making are gone, people use leppa, a much narrower canoe that has one
or two boards added to the edges to increase the freeboard.
“Did the company hire any workers from the village to help with the
logging,” I asked? “No, no, we didn’t work there,” Mbo Lilla replied.
Mbo Dinda told me the loggers had a house in the woods, but no one
stayed in it now because ghosts had entered the forest in the loggers’ wake.
People were killed in the logging process, she revealed, and the ghosts
were a residue of those deaths.
We left the strait between Togean and Talatakoh Islands and aimed for
the eastern end of Malenge Island. We would have to cross a wide stretch
of water that was open to wind and waves coming from the east. Mbo
Dinda and Mbo Lilla both were nervous that in the waves we might
swamp the boat far from land. We talked about the whales that entered
the Straits of Malenge every April. I had seen the pilot whales diving and

Extraterrestrial Others
103
breaching in the open water on a previous occasion. Mbo Dinda thought
whales were terrifying creatures, but I remembered this place for the
beauty of the whales and my excitement at seeing them.
Arriving safely at the far side, we passed some Sama ﬁshers from the
village of Pulo Papan. They were ﬁshing with a net, and Mbo Dinda in-
structed me to ask them for ﬁsh. Since Mbo Dinda and Mbo Lilla would
not be able to ﬁsh that day, they would be hungry later. They knew that
the ﬁshers would be startled by the sight of a “tourist” who spoke Sama
and so would be generous. I called out for some ﬁsh, “Melaku dayah.”
The ﬁshers swam over and dropped several large reef ﬁsh into the bottom
of our canoe.
As we traveled through the strait, Mbo Dinda and Mbo Lilla recog-
nized places for the species that were there. Places without interesting
creatures became voids in the landscape and would evoke no stories. Sea-
weed, mud clams, mangroves, a sea cucumber called “trader’s penis,” a
canoe-building tree, ghosts, whales, and a gift of ﬁsh were mnemonics for
things doubly passed—for what we had physically gone by, and for what
was history. The inverse was also true—in passing by places, the places
themselves elicited and demanded story and memory in-ﬁlled by named
plants and animals. Movement was constantly necessary for making the
strait a familiar place—both for anything to happen and for eliciting his-
torical narratives of what had gone on there before. Former travels had
made meaningful events, and present travels brought those events to light
again. With stories of whales and a gift of reef ﬁsh, a sense of Togean
place had emerged for me as well.
Without abandoning the phenomenology of our passage through the
strait, we might also ask what had rendered this experience with its situ-
ated interpretations possible.7 Notice, for example, the contrast between
the pleasure that I took in seeing whales and the fear Mbo Lilla and
Dinda felt at the possibility of encountering them in open water. The
truth of the object was not in whales themselves but in how our encoun-
ter with the creatures was modulated by propositions of danger in na-
ture, and the relatively better position I have been in throughout my life
to recover from injury. Notice also Mbo Lilla’s and Mbo Dinda’s order-
ing of nature on the basis of trade in sea cucumbers unbounded by re-
gional or national boundaries. Notice how the forest became ﬁlled with
ghosts once the important trees were removed and sent to Japan in the
global timber trade. And notice the way Mbo Dinda’s recollection of her
wedding day was framed through a disruption in the trade of cloth from
Java, and how her wedding party was interrupted by a world war. Atten-
tion to phenomena is always someone’s attention; it must always be situ-
ated historically and politically.

Chapter 3
104
Tribunals of Reason
Bruno Latour has written of an asymmetry between how we view so-
called “scientiﬁc” and so-called “irrational” beliefs. Where science is in-
volved, he argues, objects and phenomena (natures) themselves often
seem to be all that is needed for explanation. In other instances, however,
the concepts of “society” or “community” are used to explain why people
believe nonscientiﬁc or “irrational” things. Latour has turned this as-
sumption on its head to reveal both “things” and “societies” as outcomes
rather than causes. “One way to avoid asymmetry is to consider that
‘an irrational belief’ or ‘irrational behavior’ is always the result of an
accusation,” (Latour 1987:185) he argues. Unreason is the product of
accusation, where the accusers stand on the side of truth, universality,
and transparent knowledge which needs only objects to explain itself,
while the accused stand on the side of belief, myth, and illogic which can
only be made intelligible through “society.”
Togean Sama people were often subjected to accusations of unreason:
in the way they ate sago, in propositions of their ethnic dilution, in ques-
tions of whether their mobility would harm nature. It is not only Sama
people, however, who are subject to tribunals of reason, I would argue.
The moment when the IFABS scientists attempted to open up the spatial
planning project to Sama participants as thinking, reasoning citizens was
a moment when the hemispheric divide was subverted. But Southern sci-
entists themselves inhabit a space where their thinking, reasoning citizen-
ship in the world is also at stake. Under the weight of accusation them-
selves, it is not surprising that Indonesian scientists might sometimes
become caught up in a mode of understanding Sama people as extraterres-
trial others. To hold this in our minds without judgment is to understand
the concept of subjectivity.
Tribunals of reason are further illuminated by theories of postcolonial
identity. It is not only “society” (about which Latour actually tells us very
little) that results from the accusatory process, but also identity, conceived
of in a ﬁxed relationship to reason and history. As Dipesh Chakrabarty
writes, “Reason becomes elitist whenever we allow unreason and super-
stition to stand in for backwardness, that is to say, when reason colludes
with the logic of historicist thought. For then we see our ‘superstitious’
contemporaries as examples of an ‘earlier type,’ as human embodiments
of the principle of anachronism” (Chakrabarty 2000:238). In Latour’s
desire to closely track the empirical practices and networks that bring
“societies” and “things” into being, he does not sufﬁciently recognize the
positive effects of identity or theorize rhetoric itself as a practice. Yet talk,
in the form of “accusation,” has the capacity to enact “irrational people.”

Extraterrestrial Others
105
Rather than a form of unreason, mobility was crucial to nature-making
projects for Sama citizen and scientist alike. Mobility through the upland
forest was necessary for making “biodiverse” nature, just as gliding
through the night sea was crucial for knowing the world of holothurians,
or swinging the axe was required to produce the gonggang and harvest
the palm. The stories of Puah Umar and Puah Narto, Mbo Poteiang and
Mbo Panai, or Mbos Lilla and Dinda, give us alternatives for thinking
through the relationship between Sama people and Togean nature. Sama
natures are practiced, storied places where what you see is not always
what you get, and where objects themselves are not a sufﬁcient basis upon
which to know or to think.

Chapter Four
ON THE (BIO)LOGICS OF SPECIES AND BODIES
Inner Heat No. 28
Indication
Overcomes internal feverish sense, halitosis, dry throat, hoarse
voice, fever due to cold, incessant sneezing, swollen gums, sprue
and affection of the nasal passage.
Direction
Infuse one sachet in 100 ml. luke hot water, add a bit of salt.
Use twice daily, morning and evening one sachet until fully
recovered.
Prohibition
While still using this jamu avoid chili pepper, fried peanut,
blinjo kernels, or fried cashew kernels.
Composition
Nasurtii Herba 25%
Glycyrrhizae Radix 20%
Woodfordiae Fructus Et Flos 10%
Fungus Calvaticus 5% and
other ingredients to make up to 100%
—Words on a Medicine Packet
AS I WAS standing in the doorway to Puah Marsipe’s house one day, her
son Udin fell to the ground in front of me. Udin’s body began to jerk, his
arms ﬂailed, and his head rolled from side to side. His trance immediately
brought on a dense crowd of concerned relatives and onlookers, and Puah
Hamid, who was a healer (dukun), was called from next door. Hamid
began to suck the spirit out from Udin’s head and stomach. Udin’s mother
was terriﬁed, as scared as the day her two year old got dysentery. I exam-
ined Udin’s body. He was only seventeen and he looked so strong. I could
not translate his movements into any familiar etiology, like seizure, and
there had not been any suggestion that he suffered from “chicken disease”

Species and Bodies
107
(sakit ayan), or epilepsy. I put my arm around Marsipe and hugged her
trying to assure her, though what did I know of spirit possession?
I asked Marsipe what had caused this, and she explained that Udin
had killed a sea turtle. The turtle’s spirit had come up onto the land and
taken hold of him. People in Susunang often hunted turtles and many
other sea creatures; what was wrong with killing a turtle, I asked? I
expected Marsipe might have told me killing a turtle is haram indicating
an Islamic prohibition. Sea turtles are haram because they inhabit two
worlds at once, land and sea, and Sama ﬁshers usually preferred to sell
turtles they caught to the Bali Hindu transmigrants on the mainland. But
she had a different explanation: “the trouble,” she told me, “is that sea
turtles are ‘prohibited objects’ [barang dilarang].” Her description “pro-
hibited object” indicated a recent conservation prohibition. Sea turtles
were one of the forms of marine life that biologists wanted Sama people
to preserve, and Marsipe felt that their list of prohibited objects should
be taken seriously.
Not everyone felt this way, however. Marsipe’s husband Iqbal, who
had spent much time collecting at sea, found their prohibitions amusing.
He had once found a turtle with a metal band attached to its leg and the
band had some writing on it that looked like an address. Iqbal laughed
rather deﬁantly, telling me he was going to inscribe “Iqbal, Susunang Vil-
lage” on every kind of sea creature. “Then I will own everything in the
sea!,” he claimed. Some people in Susunang also framed their objections
to conservation prohibitions in terms of local rights within a subsistence
economy. As Mus said rhetorically when I asked him about a conservation
prohibition on taking giant clam, “if the option is going hungry? [dari-
pada lapar?].”
In their efforts to limit marine resource harvests in the Togean Islands
conservation biologists attempted to inculcate a list of prohibitions on the
world of Susunang ﬁshers who were stereotyped by their “wild seeking”
(mencari liar) of sea products. As with the social production of the Togean
macaque, conservation prohibitions emerge at the intersection of the idea
of biodiversity and concrete histories and practices of inventory and col-
lecting. Prohibitions, which were the intended outcome of these calcula-
tions, did not necessarily produce desired results, however. While biolo-
gists tried to ﬁt Togean people into the conservation order by instilling
moral self-censorship—“buy-in,” and “belief in” the conservation mis-
sion—repressed enchantment seemed to always return. Within the Togean
conservation project, enchantment and disenchantment existed in supple-
mentary relationship; new forms of “unreason” revealed the limitations
of, and aporia in, practices of conservation calculation and management.
Managerial interventions in the Togean Islands often took on unex-
pected form, developed unanticipated lives of their own, and missed their

Chapter 4
108
mark. Aihwa Ong (1987), in her ethnography of Malay women factory
workers, sees attacks of spirit possession among Malay factory women
as a form of womens’ unconscious resistance to the rationalizing norms of
factory life and emergent bourgeois values of middle-class Malay society.
Likewise, Iqbal’s desire to “own everything in the sea” can be read as a
refusal to succumb to the disciplinarity intrinsic in the biodiversity mis-
sion. I prefer to imagine Udin’s attack, and Marsipe’s interpretation of it,
however, as a form of supplementarity where the enchanted returns to
haunt the efforts of scientiﬁc reason. The connection between enchant-
ment and disenchantment is “turtles all the way down,” to borrow Clif-
ford Geertz’s famous phrase. Because enchanted worlds exist in inevitable
relation to projects of reason, the romantic, the incalculable, the un-visi-
ble, the emotional, and the meaningful are manifest in dialogic relation
to projects of order.
In the previous chapter I explored the phenomenological logics of land
and marinescapes through the actions of Mbo Dinda, Mbo Poteiang,
Puah Umar, and others. In this chapter I extend my analysis to questions
of bodies and health at their intersection with Togean natures. Cultural
studies, produced through rubrics of medicine and nature, have much in
common and the range of assumptions that underlie biodiversity conser-
vation would be familiar to any student of medical anthropology. Udin’s
possession by the spirit of an endangered species alerts us to the connec-
tions between nature and bodies in the Togean Islands. To both species
and bodies a naturalness is posited that dissolves upon closer examina-
tion. Speciﬁc understandings of this naturalness develop within cultures
of nature—generalized networks of power, discourse, practice, institu-
tions, and objects produced under the sign of the natural—that are equally
applicable to biomedicine and biodiversity.
Both biomedicine and conservation are similarly viewed as remediation
for “improper” or “ineffectual” knowledge or belief, for pseudoscientiﬁc
practices, and for social underdevelopment. Everyday experiences of rea-
son in the Togean Islands were determined more frequently through prac-
tices and rhetorics of health and medical knowledge, in fact, than through
species or biodiversity. Shamanism, nonbelief in germs, the distance of
the Susunang community from fresh water sources, and overall health
statistics circumscribed Sama identity as unreasoned and in need of for-
mal assistance to overcome deﬁciencies that nurse-midwives, health in-
spectors, and conservation biologists all perceived as interior to Sama
people as a particular kind of human.
While “traditional” healing reveals how Sama people are positioned in
relation to discourses and practices of scientiﬁc reason in Indonesia, medi-
cal practice in the Togean Islands indicates the situatedness of Indonesian
biomedicine itself. Just as conservation biology can be delimited through

Species and Bodies
109
its modes of speciﬁcity and generality, biomedicine in Indonesia—prac-
titioners, patients, clinics, medicines, diagnoses—can be speciﬁed and
linked to wider networks of knowledge and medical practice. Allopathy,
as an elite form of knowing that travels, is not “universal”; rather its
universality is claimed and socially articulated at particular moments in
time. Sama people made that universality particular when they identiﬁed
me, myself, as sign of biomedicine. Cosmopolitan Indonesians produced
another universalism—the universalism of the hemispheric divide—when
they identiﬁed Sama people as holding backward, ineffective, and false
medical beliefs.
The (bio)logics of nature and medicine pose similar opportunities for
constructing an anthropology of reason. The “world out there” was
known in Susunang through its effects on and relationship with both bod-
ies and species, and land and marinescapes regularly intersected with
health and well-being. Biomedicine, with its implicit links to modernity,
connected medical practitioners, conservation biologists, and others with
Sama people in debates over meanings of development and national be-
longing. Indonesian biomedical practice itself was situated, rather than
the unmarked marker of a putatively universal natural body. And ques-
tions of bodies and questions of nature, arbitrarily divided into the analyt-
ical categories “medicine” and “environment,” were not thus divided in
Sama lives.
Lidja
In a book with nature as its subject, the image on page 16 of two dugout
canoes, scudding along amongst green islands, wind ﬁlling colorful sails,
suggests a tropical idyllium of the type that attracts tourists to the “ex-
otic” Togean Islands. The sense of idyll in the picture comes from a partic-
ular cultural gaze, however, rather than from the nature of the image
itself. I took this picture on a day I sailed with several boats out to Pulo
Kubur (Graveyard Island) and our journey was actually a glimpse of mis-
fortune and suffering. For Hamid with his hand on the tiller, or Hatija in
the bow, the scene was not a moment of harmony within an aestheticized
natural world. In the bottom of the windward boat lay the body of Lidja,
daughter of Hamid and Hatija, wife of Musir, mother of Amrih and a
new baby girl.
Lidja, body wrapped head to toe in white cloth dressed for her ﬁnal
resting place on Pulo Kubur, had died eight days after giving birth to her
second daughter. The infant had emerged so prematurely that her skull
protruded like a crown around her deeply sunken fontanel. At the time I
did not hold out much hope for the daughter, but I had no idea that these

Chapter 4
110
would be her mother’s last days. One week previously Mbo Dinda had
called me to help a sick person. Other than my bottle of aspirin, my Where
There is No Doctor (Werner et al. 1992), and a generalized understanding
of germs and antibiotics, I felt I had little to offer to people in Susunang.
When I heard that the sick woman had just given birth, I had even less
conﬁdence, never having experienced childbirth myself. But I had indeed
been asked for help, and so I went.
Lidja was reclined on a mattress on the ﬂoor, her body held in place on
either side by “Dutch wife” pillows. She was surrounded by family who
fanned her and watched over her protectively. She smiled at me but was
otherwise too weak to hold a conversation. She had fallen ill soon after
giving birth. On her chest was a splotch of red betel spittle where a dukun
had cemented in place a sliver of a cock’s comb. The dukun had been
there earlier in the day attempting to suck the illness out of Lidja’s head,
stomach, and feet; then she had whispered an incantation over a small
glass of water Lidja had drunk. In Susunang, ill health was usually caused
by pongko, creatures that attack the body and consume the heart from
inside a healthy person. If the heart is completely eaten, the person will
die. The dukun had placed the cocks comb on Lidja’s chest so that the
pongko would consume the chicken part rather than Lidja’s own heart.
I had been brought in as a living sign of another medical possibility,
biomedicine, and perhaps I had some knowledge, pills, or powers that
could supplement the work of the dukun. I looked at Lidja with no idea
of what else might be wrong with her or what I might do; I did not know
much about pongko—nor could I interpret her symptoms as a sickness I
knew. I didn’t even understand, at that moment, the range of possible
biomedical illnesses that were likely to afﬂict someone who had just given
birth. I did not understand my role, or the urgency of the moment. I sat
with Lidja for a while, gave her some aspirin, and went home again in
the evening. And luckily, after six days of bed rest, Lidja seemed to be
getting better. She was up cooking and she bathed and nursed the new
infant. Hamid told me we would play gambus music in a few nights to
give thanks for her recovery.
But on the seventh day Lidja fell ill again. This time when Mbo Dinda
called me she told me Lidja was going to die. I panicked. What could I
do when I knew so little about what was ailing her. Rather than sit there
in bafﬂement as I had the ﬁrst time, I attempted to assemble objects that
would bring her disease to life for me. I began by looking seriously into
my No Doctor book. After several hours, the book helped me to piece
together the possibility that Lidja had a postpartum infection, puerperal
fever. The symptoms described in the book matched what she was experi-
encing: fever, lower back and stomach pain. According to this diagnosis,
Lidja needed massive doses of penicillin. This gave me something to try.

Species and Bodies
111
I went to Ondine’s kiosk and I bought all of the penicillin that he had
for sale. I made a decision to buy penicillin rather than use the erythromy-
cin that I had because my book provided a dosage for penicillin and I
didn’t know if other antibiotics would be effective or harmful. But the
penicillin that Ondine sold at her kiosk came in units of 50,000 and I
read that she would need 400,000 units four times a day. That meant
eight pills each time and I was afraid to give her eight pills at once. If she
was truly dying, as Mbo Dinda claimed, then wouldn’t people think that
so many pills had poisoned her? Moreover, might not the eight pills actu-
ally kill her? I decided to begin with two an hour and then work back to
one every hour. That way it would be possible for her to take thirty-two
pills in a day.
But this plan ran immediately into trouble. While I was invested in the
utility of the clock, people in Susunang were not used to taking medicines
according to clock time. The start of the Ramadan holiday was an-
nounced according to a precise hour, but little else depended on it. When
Mbo Panai showed me his watch, the hour and minute hands were egre-
giously incorrect, and the second hand spun around the dial freely. Panai
had told me the function of this second hand was to create the watch’s
“cheerfulness” (hiburan). Time in Susunang depended on the segments of
the day, such as “dawn” (subuh) prayers, or ﬁshing until “almost day-
light” (hampir siang),1 but not on the speciﬁcity of hour or minute. I went
and got my clock and put it on the wall in Lidja’s house, explained the
dosage schedule, gave her the ﬁrst two penicillin tablets, and promised to
return soon. . . .
At midnight, only twelve hours later, Lidja died. I was woken up to the
sound of screaming and wailing coming from her house. Until that mo-
ment, I hadn’t fully absorbed the fact that death was an imminent out-
come of her illness, and I must acknowledge the privilege of my naivete´;
only once before had I been present for a death. How does it happen that
a body can look so young and whole, and be ready to pass away at the
same time? How is it that I could be speaking to Lidja one minute, and
she was dead only a few hours later? “Pitah”(S), Lidja had said right
before she died, “it is dark.” No one I met in Susunang, or in Indonesia
for that matter, had the luxury of my newness with death. The word ponti-
anak (or sometimes kuntilanak) is used in Susunang and many places in
Indonesia to describe the ghost of a woman who has died in childbirth.
Lidja would become a pontianak.
At daylight, Lidja’s family asked me to take photographs of her corpse.
It felt voyeuristic to me, but they thought of it differently. How else were
they going to remember her face? Her women relatives washed her body,
inside and out, before wrapping her in the white burial shroud that Mbo
Lilla had been saving for his own passing. They left her face uncovered

Chapter 4
112
Lidja, by Celia Lowe.
for the pictures. These would be the only remembrances they would have
of Lidja. It was then, after taking the pictures, that we all got in canoes
and headed for Pulo Kubur. Lidja was buried before sunset according
to Islamic convention and her grave was covered in beautiful frangipani
ﬂowers.
Instrumental Reason and Its Positivities
Recent cultural studies of science and technology argue that we do not
want to write off a biophysical world and its effects too quickly. For exam-
ple, we do not want to deny the possibility for antibiotics, immunizations,
or public health programs to increase health and decrease suffering. We
would not want to underestimate the power of a mimetic representation
of “germs” to assist in combating Lidja’s puerperal fever, or the biochemi-
cal effectiveness of the right antibiotic to have intervened on her behalf.
Likewise, state-sponsored programs often can and do provide managerial
and bureaucratic interventions that increase well-being for their citizens.
Accounting, enumerating, organizing, surveying, monitoring, gazetting,
distributing, in short “seeing like a state” (Scott 1998), all have the capac-
ity to improve life chances for any of us.
But is instrumental reason alone what was required in Lidja’s case, and
is well-being the likely outcome of governmental intervention? Why do
interventions made in the name of reason so frequently fail to meet their

Species and Bodies
113
targets? It appears there is something lacking in instrumental reason in-
and-of-itself that makes it hard to argue that biological science, biomedi-
cine, or bureaucratic rationality alone will solve the problem of early
death in the Togean Islands. Moreover, in the teleology of “development,”
reason is expected to replace enchantment. Max Weber, Theodore
Adorno, Michel Foucault and many other thinkers have argued that con-
ditions for humanity can be substantially impaired by instrumental rea-
son. Must reason drive out enchantment in order to operate on well-
being, or are fantasies of an enchantment at peace with disenchantment
only possible from the privileged position of inexperience with death?
Jane Atkinson (1996) raises the question of the capacity of instrumental
reason to improve life chances in regard to her studies of Wana peoples’
childbearing, life, death, and suffering in the central Sulawesi uplands not
far to the south of the Togean Islands. Atkinson has explored her own
dreams of immortality as somehow linked to her cultural imagination of
the inﬁnite reach of science and technology: “I imbibed a sense of progress
and boundless possibility with my infant formula. I can recall brooding
as a child over the death of a grandparent, then comforting myself with
the thought that when I was old enough to face death as an imminent
possibility, science would have conquered the problem. Fantasies of im-
mortality are certainly common enough in the world. That I pinned my
hopes to science and technology is what intrigues me about this memory”
(Atkinson 1996:166).
Atkinson reﬂects on the unparallel life chances she has shared with her
Wana friends, especially Wana women who would die all too frequently
from puerperal fever and other outcomes of childbirth. Like the women
of Susunang, Wana women in the 1980s were acutely aware of the dan-
gers of giving birth. Similar to the requests I received from Sama women,
the women Atkinson knew asked her for birth control. While they wanted
children, they didn’t particularly relish the idea of pregnancy. In a retro-
spective look at her ethnography of Wana shamanship, Atkinson counts
all her Wana friends who have died. Of thirty-nine married adults whom
she had known while living in the mountains of Wanaland in 1977, nine
of the women and six of the men had died by the time she returned in
1990. Moreover, the number of men who were widowed and remarried
(to mostly younger women) was thirteen, while the number of women
she counted who had been widowed and then remarried was only four.
Atkinson uses these statistics to explore the question of instrumental
reason, and concludes that government intervention would help to better
health conditions and save Wana lives. It would be better for Wana people
to be relocated to the coast where government services could reach them,
she argues, although she clearly identiﬁes the choice between Wana auton-
omy and Wana health as a trade-off. “The price of government-provided

Chapter 4
114
healthcare would be a loss of political and cultural autonomy,” she writes
(182). Since Wana have refused in the past to move on their own, a certain
amount of force would be necessary: “A defender of local autonomy, I
am forced to concede that improving the standard of living for upland
Wana would likely require coercive measures to insure that young people
acquire some of the cultural capital that they can parlay into economic
prosperity outside of their homeland. Such developments are underway
in the region” (183).
In addition to her hopes for state intervention, Atkinson suggests that
methods of scientiﬁc calculation would also be useful. Speciﬁcally, she
regrets her own use of narrative analysis in her ethnography to the exclu-
sion of a biodemographic approach. She writes, “I wanted to sound a
somewhat different chord by stressing the value of precisely those re-
search tools that many feminists, poststructuralists, and cultural anthro-
pologists have derided as ‘masculinist,’ ‘impersonal,’ and ‘objectifying’
technologies of imperialist Enlightenment science” (184). While aware
that a rationalized and bureaucratic intervention would contradict what
many Wana people deem to be their own interests, she still ﬁnds hope in
technocratic solutions to the problem of health and well-being in the
Wana highlands: “Apart from castigating pharmaceutical companies for
placing a higher priority on more lucrative afﬂictions such as cancer and
coronary diseases, than on tropical diseases, it is a stretch to identify
agents to blame for the physical suffering I’ve seen in eastern Central
Sulawesi. When I do, I ﬁnd my democratic principles in conﬂict with my
desire to see the Wana conditions bettered” (181).
By coming down on the side of a Darwinian sense of survival over a
Nietzschean “will to power” (both human impulses ﬁrst described in the
nineteenth century), Atkinson is proposing not only that this is a reason-
able exchange, but that in balancing bare life chances against meaningful
autonomy the likely outcome of a benign coercion would actually be im-
proved health and well-being. But does instrumental reason necessarily
direct its energies toward “life chances,” or might Wana people ﬁnd them-
selves with neither autonomy nor life chances?
Like Wana, Sama people have resisted regional government plans to
move the village of Susunang for the sake of health and political order.
Many Sama people question whether government interventions on behalf
of health care or taken in the name of order, reason, science, or govern-
mentality would improve their life chances or are even designed with their
well-being in mind. It is certain that these plans were developed without
an understanding of the thought village founders had put into locating
Susunang close to coral reefs for ﬁshing and sea cucumber collecting.
When I was summoned to help in Lidja’s care, I was really a second
choice. It wasn’t that those responsible for her didn’t know of biomedi-

Species and Bodies
115
cine, or that Lidja’s family was unwilling to share the space of treatment
with allopathic remedies. The village of Susunang had a nurse-midwife
(bidan) stationed there in the government clinic. The bidan came from
the Balinese transmigrant community on the mainland to the south and
had been trained in the state nursing program. She had been posted in
Susunang by the local government and hated living in the Togean Islands.
She was standofﬁsh around the people, ﬁnding them “primitive” and re-
calcitrant. I had been summoned as a possible resource, in part, because
the government’s own representative had refused to come.
When, after the third hour of taking the penicillin I had given to her,
Lidja refused more, she said to us, “tomorrow you will bury me.” A cry
went up and screaming people pushed their way into the small room to
touch Lidja. At this point, completely terriﬁed, I ran to ﬁnd out why the
nurse wasn’t there. When I found her in the clinic, she told me she would
not come now, but in the late afternoon after she took her afternoon
rest. Full of conﬁdence and white privilege, I berated the nurse for her
irresponsibility. I went and got my friend Jana, who was friends with the
bidan, and told Jana that Lidja was going to die. We had to get the bidan
to come and give Lidja an injection of penicillin, since she would swallow
no more. With Jana’s help we spoke again to the nurse and she begrudg-
ingly accompanied us to Lidja’s house.
By the time we arrived back at Lidja’s house with the nurse, a new
dukun had arrived and was massaging Lidja’s side vigorously. Someone
had used magic to place a needle inside her abdomen. The dukun was
massaging Lidja through her ribs to try and remove the needle before it
could migrate to her heart. Sharp objects placed in the abdomen through
magic is an etiology found not only in rural Indonesia, it is medical knowl-
edge Togean people shared with elite Indonesians. I was told of a similar
story of sharp objects magically placed in the abdomen by a program
ofﬁcer who worked for the Ford Foundation in Jakarta. At this moment
of urgent care, Lidja’s family refused to allow her to be injected by the
bidan even though I assured them I would pay the fee. I was embarrassed
by my efforts to get the bidan to come when they refused her help, and
the nurse immediately departed in disgust. She said to me there is no point
in bringing medical attention to superstitious people.
In retrospect, the midwife, not very knowledgeable herself, or with
very many techniques or medicines at her disposal, did not inspire conﬁ-
dence in the people of Susunang. Moreover, Hatija and Hamid did not
want to leave Lidja’s acute care in the hands of a hostile practitioner who
might do her harm. Inherent in Atkinson’s excellent questions about the
relationship of instrumental reason and governmentality to well-being
is the assumption many of us share that such problems exist simply due
to lack of knowledge, expertise, or resources. But even in Lidja’s case,

Chapter 4
116
where biomedicine was available in the community, instrumental inter-
vention alone was not sufﬁcient to save her life. Rather than bettering
life chances for Susunang women, the bidan acted merely as a symbol of
governmental action. Within such a symbolic system, it is perhaps not
Sama or Wana that needed to be acted upon as much as the state itself.
There is little question in my mind that were Wana forced out of their
mountain residence, they would end up in the same circumstance as the
people of Susunang, only loosing their homelands with all that would
entail in the process.
Bacteria Not Enacted
The United Nations declared 2003 the “International Year of Freshwa-
ter,” and access to water is an increasingly dire environmental and social
problem in many places around the world. Lack of access to clean water
for drinking and sanitation is also one of the major forms that predicate
how poor communities are known. Water quality as a sign of backward-
ness and ill health drives judgment and intervention even before any prac-
tices occur that cause “bacteria” or “dirty water” to emerge, and the issue
of water in Susunang attracted a great deal of attention from outsiders.
Susunang is located on a series of islets about one mile offshore from the
larger island of Talatakoh and, built on tiny calcareous mounds devoid
of soil, the village does not have fresh water. People spend a signiﬁcant
amount of time ferrying water in jugs from the surrounding land. Sama
people are known for their ability to use efﬁciently just tiny amounts of
water for drinking and washing. This does not seem unusual to me since
I, myself, once used less than ﬁfty gallons of fresh water per month when
I lived aboard a boat. From my ﬁrst visit to the Togean Islands, however, I
perceived how outsiders were consumed by the strangeness of these water
arrangements.
One day at the Susunang market I encountered a public health worker
from Palu, the provincial capital. He acted as though he was happy to
meet another educated person in the market, and he looked knowingly at
the worm medicine I was buying. “Yes, all the people here certainly have
worms,” he said. “Not only that, but the water quality is clearly very
poor.” I had not had any problems with the water and attempted to de-
fend Susunang’s reputation. I lied and said I had never had diarrhea here.
I had begun my stay in Susunang boiling my water assiduously. It was
only once I realized that I was often drinking unboiled water already that
I decided the water supply, which came from a spring in the forest, must
be harmless. I drank the same water as everyone else for the rest of the

Species and Bodies
117
time I was in Susunang and only experienced a few small bouts of diar-
rhea, which could easily have had other causes.
The question of force in the name of health intervention came into play
in Susunang in relation to water. On several occasions, the central Su-
lawesi government had attempted to force Susunang people to move from
their offshore location to the interior of Talatakoh Island, ostensibly to
be closer to fresh water. The government had even built cement houses
on Talatakoh for the people. This turned out to be a ﬁnancing scam de-
signed to enrich the builder, however, and the people of Susunang never
moved into them. Government ofﬁcials themselves felt more comfortable
on the larger islands, and it appeared to be the government’s own aes-
thetic discomfort with the location of Susunang that was motivating the
idea of relocation. In the end the government only succeeded in moving
the clinic, which was located on stilts over the water when I ﬁrst arrived,
to some available land within the village.
The sign value of piped water was also evident in projects of economic
development. The representative from the “Program for Left Behind Vil-
lages” in Susunang made a point of telling me that at his home in Poso,
water came directly to his house in a pipe. From my ﬁrst visit to the To-
gean Islands, the IFABS biologists also expressed their concern with water
quality and availability in Susunang. While an experimental toilet was
built for tourists in Malenge village not far from the research station, the
project did not provide any water or sanitation improvements in Susu-
nang while I was there. Rather, the scientists’ discussions of water im-
provement in Susunang village reﬂected a generalized public health dis-
course linking water quality to social backwardness. No data were
collected about the water supply. No practices were performed that en-
acted waterborne bacteria.2 Yet, an object was enacted in the process:
Sama identity.
While Susunang people’s daily excursions to the water pipes onshore
reﬂected, from an elite Indonesian point of view, an aesthetic of underde-
velopment and ill health, there was no actual evidence that this way of
collecting water harmed anyone. From the perspective of Susunang peo-
ple, their water was clean and did not require the extra labor of harvesting
mangrove wood to boil it. Living slightly offshore from the freshwater
supply meant several things in terms of health and sanitation. Since there
were no people or animals living near their freshwater supplies, there was
little to contaminate them. Also, living offshore meant that there were not
any mosquitoes, and thus no malaria in the village. Further, a brisk cur-
rent swept past Susunang and so feces and dirt were carried away rapidly
from the community into the surrounding sea. Finally, it was considered
more advantageous to locate the village close to ﬁshing and sea cucumber
grounds than to move inland away from the reefs. In peoples’ calculations

Chapter 4
118
of time, labor, and aesthetics, the village was in the perfect location, and
the positive consequence of locating Susunang offshore clearly augmented
public health.
Left to Their Own Devices
It does not require managerial or state intervention to bring technoscience
to the Togean Islands, I would argue, any more than such interventions
are the path of successful biomedicine. Deep-sea diving technology is one
example of a technoscientiﬁc presence that arrived in the archipelago
without any such intervention. Even though some Susunang divers are
able to free dive to ninety feet, they also use compressors (komprensor)—
the same air compressors used around Indonesia to inﬂate car tires—to
dive for sea cucumber, live ﬁsh, and pearl shell at depths otherwise not
humanly sustainable. A hose attached to the compressor pumps air down
to the diver, who breaths through a scuba regulator on the other end of
the hose. The use of these compressors is controversial because many peo-
ple have died of the “bends” (air embolism, what Sama call “kram”)
when using them. From a conservation perspective, compressor diving is
also controversial in that it allows harvests of sea products to increase.
Puah Umar, who was one of the ﬁrst to dive in Susunang, explained to
me the devastation that compressor diving was causing in the Togean
Islands. Umar had been diving for a decade since a Javanese trader ﬁrst
brought diving equipment and gave it to Sama ﬁshers to collect pearl shell
and sea cucumber for him. Umar had recently given up diving, however,
because there were many diving accidents. One of the people who had
died was Hamid and Hatija’s son. The trader had given their son the
equipment and was going to pay two dollars for each pearl shell he re-
trieved. Their son was diving near Wakai with several friends when the
accident occurred. He came home from diving and was dead by evening.
Hamid had already paid the bride price for his son to marry a girl from
Pulau Papan. No one wanted to ask the girl’s family to return the bride
money because the wedding preparations were already underway and ev-
eryone felt sorry for her. If there had been another brother, Umar told me,
the brother could have married the girl.
On Malenge Island, Pak Ahmad also told me of a friend of his who
was diving one day when he got kram. His friend lost all feeling in his
legs an hour after he surfaced and now he walks around the village on his
hands. The man still dives, however, by using science/magic (ilmu) rather
than an air compressor. He goes over the side of the boat with a rope
and then uses rocks to pull him under. His ilmu allows him to breathe
underwater “like a baby breathes in its mother’s womb,” Ahmad said.

Species and Bodies
119
Ahmad could not do this himself, but he could explain for me how it
works. When the diver descends, he ﬁrst waits for a hiccup. He must
withstand (tahan) this hiccup and then, when another hiccup comes, he
says a short prayer and the water opens in a bubble around his head.
Encapsulated in the air bubble, he can stay below the surface looking for
pearls for as long as he wants. “How does a baby breathe when it is
in the mother’s womb? That is how you breathe, using ilmu,” Ahmad
explained. His friend had even used ilmu to rescue an outboard motor
for the Dolong police. Ahmad was afraid that his life would be shortened
if he accepted the words of the prayer from his friend, and so he was
unable to perform the ilmu himself.
Just like taking medicine according to a clock time, the diving that I do
myself requires precise measurements. “Sixty feet for sixty minutes” is
the rule of thumb recreational scuba divers use in order to avoid air embo-
lism: more depth, then less time, less depth, then more time is safe. Umar
knew about these times and tables, but he also described diving injury in
the terms of a national etiology for ill health in Indonesia, the “entering
chill,” (masuk dingin, or masuk angin). In Indonesia, cold winds, night
breezes, fans, bathwaters, drinks with ice, and other sources of cold are
universally understood to create the basic conditions for illness and injury.
This knowledge is shared across the class and education spectrum and is
the default explanation for all otherwise inexplicable sickness, imbalance,
discomfort, even death.
The deeper one dives the more likely it is that one will run into clines
of frigid water. Encountering this chill, or encountering a sea satan, will
equally cause kram. In chapter 3, I described how Umar understood air
temperature as constant while water temperature changes from warm at
night to cold during the day. With this in mind divers explained to me
that one is more likely to encounter kram during the daytime since kram
comes from cold water, not depth. Musir said in the day there is enough
sunlight to dive to twenty or thirty armspans (deppa [S]), and it is very
cold so one quickly gets kram there. Once, Musir came up to the surface
and both of his legs had lost feeling. His legs slowly came back to life that
time, but only after a dukun prayed over them and he drank some holy
water. Then he got well.
Contrary to the idea of “remoteness,” those technologies and knowl-
edges that are needed for capital accumulation and resource extraction
travel to “remote” locations quite easily. Anna Tsing (2004:40) has writ-
ten of the “water machine” that has moved deep into the Kalimantan
interior. This machine sucks water from streams and provides for the pos-
sibility of a one-man gold mining operation. It shoots water at the muddy
ground with such force that it is capable of drilling a hole four-feet-deep
and uncovering ﬂakes of gold in the process. Such technologies do not

Chapter 4
120
necessarily create well-being, however; they just as easily produce suffer-
ing. While traders brought compressors to the Togean Islands, they never
brought the dive watches or depth gauges that would have made possible
the calculations necessary for diving safely. While the water machine has
produced little but debt and a ruined landscape in Kalimantan, in Susu-
nang alone Umar could count twenty fatalities and seventeen who have
been permanently injured.
It was not a dearth of knowledge, per se, that created the conditions
for dive injury. Umar told me that there had been a “practicum” that went
along with the compressor equipment, but that the divers were macho
(jago) and didn’t pay it much heed. Divers knew of the effects of diving
on the body through a transnational theory of air embolism, through a
nationally recognizable etiology of an entering chill, and through individ-
ual ilmu that could allow divers to breathe the way a baby breathes in its
mothers womb. Technology does not simply drive away enchantment, it
also conjures new etiological and technical imaginaries.3 Togean divers
had combined ilmu with the mechanical knowledge needed to convert a
tire compressor into a diving rig and entered the deep-sea in a new way.
This ability of technology to spark invention and imagination was as
true for scientists as for Sama people. In Jakarta I attended an ICDP plan-
ning meeting at IFABS, where we discussed a forthcoming workshop that
would take place at Camp Uemata. The scientists wanted to spread
knowledge about biodiversity conservation among Togean people, and
I had been invited to contribute to the workshop agenda based on my
experience living in Susunang. Since Sama people were frequently injured
in diving accidents, I thought this would be an opportunity for the conser-
vation project to show that it cared about Sama people’s lives, not just
about plants and animals. Diving is demonstrably safer when practiced
within contexts of instrumental reason and, at the time, I believed the
problem of diving in the Togean Islands was simply one of knowing about
air embolism. My idea was to teach about water pressure and the bends
by using a bottle of clear soda. By releasing the pressure from the bottle,
bubbles would form the same way they do in the blood stream. I wanted
to use this as an illustration.
Several months later at Camp Uemata I attended the workshop we
had planned in Jakarta. Many scientists and community educators led
discussions, and participants from all the surrounding Togean communi-
ties attended. The message of the workshop was, “we live in nature that
is not really ours” (hidup di alam yang memang bukan alam kita), and
the primary emphasis was on tourism. I was happy to see that the ques-
tion of diving was on the agenda. When we came to the discussion of
diving, however, the agenda had been transformed into a conversation
about how to promote dive tourism and keep tourists safe. Like a prince

Species and Bodies
121
into a frog, the discussion of air embolism, as I had conceived of it, had
been magically transformed.
I view the fact that my own attempt at rationalized intervention on
behalf of Sama people’s well-being was unsuccessful as exemplary of a
generalized theory of reason. New enchantments arise together with ef-
forts at disenchantment, and reason is never “pure.” It always attaches
to a person or group and their intentions, conscious and otherwise. In the
case of the Uemata workshop, what seemed reasonable to the scientists
was an intervention on behalf of tourism in the Togean Islands. Tourists
do not harvest marine products. In fact, their presence is supposed to
substitute for harvesting wild sea creatures. The Togean participants were
taught to make coconut shell necklaces on green plastic strings to sell to
tourists in place of harvesting wild sea or forest products themselves.
Such phantasmic leaps of logic inhabited the very heart of the rational
scientiﬁc biodiversity enterprise, while Sama “backwardness” was said to
reside in their distance from science, technology, and medicine. This dis-
tance entered into Sama peoples’ own self-consciousness of their place in
the world. “In America, everything is done with machines,” Musir ex-
plained to me about my country. “You don’t do anything by hand the
way we do here,” he said matter-of-factly. Despite the abundance of man-
ual labor in Susunang, Sama compressor diving belies the existence of
remote places distanced from modernity through lack of science or tech-
nology; technology follows capital, even into the most capital-poor loca-
tions. In the Togean Islands, the air pump was adopted and adapted easily
by Sama ﬁshers in order to make the undersea world and its marine har-
vests more accessible. What was not possible, in this instance, was for
unmotivated well-being to follow upon these ﬂows of capital, expertise,
and equipment. For this, Sama people were left to their own devices.
The Python and the Cuscus
Like the use of compressors, the world of pharmaceuticals in the Togean
Islands was not immediately recognizable to me, nor was it utterly alien.
When Puah Iqbal decided to take the steroid dexamethosone to make
himself look chubby and handsome (to me he looked simply bloated), I
could recognize the name of the pharmaceutical company on the package
of medicine, and I knew that this steroid had another purpose in a differ-
ent context. If Iqbal’s liver became damaged from the steroid as a conse-
quence, was this a biomedical effect, or an effect of superstition? It was
certainly a result of experimentation, since Togean people had tested the
drug and noticed the effect it had on body weight. Iqbal’s use of the

Chapter 4
122
medicine he called “dexa” blurs the boundary between allopathy and
home remedy.
Similarly, when I met the bidan in Jana’s house treating Jana for “inner
heat” (panas dalam), I learned that this was more than an immediately
recognizable description of fever. Inner heat is a description for illnesses
that exhibit a sore on the outside of the body. A herpes sore or a hemor-
rhoid indicate panas dalam, and these external wounds are a sign of inter-
nal disorder. Unlike the “entering chill,” which is a universal Indonesian
etiology for illness, “inner heat” is a class-bound syndrome and only some
elite patients would describe their symptoms this way. Yet the bidan, who
was a trained biomedical practitioner, diagnosed Jana with panas dalam
and prescribed for her a dose of an appropriate pill. Through the diagno-
sis of the government-sponsored nurse midwife, panas dalam moved into
the realm of biomedically remediated illness.
Each Wednesday morning Susunang held a market where medicines
were sold. On Tuesday night, traveling traders would arrive on their
wooden cargo boats. At night the boats took onboard ﬁrewood, rattan,
salt ﬁsh, and other sea and land products Susunang people had to sell.
Before dawn the next day they would unload rice, ﬂour, sugar, and other
food staples, plastic containers and cooking pots, sarongs and children’s
outﬁts, nails and hardware, and many other enticing items. Along with
these dry goods were the many kinds of medicines (obat) brought by trav-
eling obat sellers. The obat sellers set up tables in the market with boxes
of tetracycline and ampicillin, vitamins of all letters, parasite medicines,
antimalarials, and steroids. Many were made by international pharma-
ceutical companies with names I recognized: Bayer, Pﬁzer, Bristol-Meyers
Squibb, Merck. There were other medicines produced by Indonesian com-
panies: Kimia Pharma, Bintang Toedjoe, Dexa Medica, Konimex. And
there was herbal medicine (jamu), some in packages imitating the pharma-
ceuticals, and others in bottles containing home-brewed syrups and pow-
ders in various colors and combinations.
What is it that makes any particular medicine “biomedicine,” or any
given practice allopathic? In the case of the pills produced by pharmaceu-
tical companies, it could be the practices of testing and experimentation
(Shapin and Schaeffer 1985) that have gone into developing their formu-
lae, or the chemicals they contain. Across each packet of pills was written,
“not to be dispensed without a doctor’s prescription,” so the medicines
might be made “biomedical” through the regulatory practices governing
how medicines are dispensed, although the obat sellers would sell them to
anyone with money. Jamu, likewise, could also be considered biomedicine
when it came in standardized mass-produced packets with Latinized in-
gredient names listed according to their percentages.

Species and Bodies
123
In its imbrication with pure reason, allopathy proposes a human body
that responds to universal forms of medical intervention. In this conﬁgu-
ration the idea of a “universal” biomedicine contrasts with a situated
“local” medical practice, usually referred to as “traditional.” But Indone-
sian biomedicine is also particular in the way pharmaceuticals enter into
circulation, in how and what medical practitioners diagnose, in the ways
patients understand bodily experience, and in what patients expect from
their interactions with practitioners. Biomedicine is not a ﬁxed object with
universal properties. It is merely a form that is able to claim universality.
Sometimes Indonesian people choose to enter into that universalism, and
other times they reject it.
Each week the obat sellers used animal acts to attract people to their
medicines, giving the market a circus atmosphere. One Wednesday an
obat seller appeared in the market with a cat and some mice in a cage.
Everyone knows that cats and mice cannot live together! How could this
be, if not for the strength of his medicines? Another time, one brought a
crocodile. The crocodile was as potent as his powders, the medicine man
proclaimed! One day, an obat seller arrived from North Sulawesi wearing
an embroidered gray suit (kerawang), a tie and, on his breast pocket, a
badge with his photo stamped with a seal. This “license” was meant to
persuade, as were the python and the small furry marsupial, a cuscus,
that he carried with him in cages. He uncovered the animals in their cages
and began to orate in the tradition of P. T. Barnum: “Gather round, gather
round! I have already sold my medicines in Ampana, in Wakai, in Dolong
[towns in the Togean Islands]. If you don’t want to buy them, that’s ﬁne,
others will want them. Here, just take one of these pills every day. Or
wash with this soap. If you want to just look, go ahead and look, that’s
ok. People who know the strength of my medicines will buy them.”
Narto and I were interested in what he was saying and we both were
intrigued by the creatures. He took the snake and the cuscus out of their
cages, and wound the python around his shoulders. Why didn’t it strangle
him, I wondered? The obat seller appealed to the public by invoking a
connection between health and wealth, reminding us of the stranglehold
the rich had on the poor:
How many of you here are rich? You could be rich, but if you aren’t healthy,
what does it matter? I am not here to get rich! Only to help the people. What
does it matter if you are rich, if you are sick. We know it is money that rules
the world [and he rubbed his ﬁngers together]. Just ask yourself, who is it
that is in jail now? It is the people who have stolen a chicken, or just a little
rice. Rich people commit murder and they still get out of jail. How? By pay-
ing! How about our former Governor!

Chapter 4
124
I asked Narto about the obat seller. What was special about the medi-
cines he was selling? Narto told me the seller was sent by the government.
There was his badge, we could see it hanging on his pocket. I asked Narto
again about the medicines. How were these medicines different? Narto
explained it to me, “They are like all like the medicines you have, Lia.
They come from America.”
The obat seller continued to attract onlookers. “Gather round, gather
round! This is the era of development,” he cried: “Our president is the
Father of Development, President Suharto, our second president. Some
will be wealthy and some will be poor, but what is wealth without health!
I am here for you as a bridge between the city and the village. I’m just
doing a service for the beneﬁt of others. I am here as a bridge between
the government and the people.”
The geography of progress that mapped onto “medicine” was the same
as the one that mapped onto “nature.” Sama people were positioned as
keepers of false knowledge and inadequate belief in a system where factic-
ity was determined as much by social position as by the empirical demon-
strations necessary for elaborating a system of science. Contrary to the
idea that marginalized people are resistant to biomedicine, Narto’s com-
ment hints at a complex spatiality to medical practice. Effective medicines
come from far away, from the city not the countryside, even from
America. The village will always be “left behind” in this scheme. The
government is purveyor of “development,” but development does not
mean well-being in the obat seller’s rhetoric. Development means that
“some will be rich and some will be poor.” Like the boa constrictor, “our
former Governor” could squeeze money out of the project of develop-
ment. But like the furry slow-moving cuscus, there is also a place for the
people. If the people have health, they too can be happy (senang).
That medicines, and not the metal tubs painted with bright orange
ﬂowers, glittery polyester princess dresses, or tins of hair grease, became
the material of spectacle was ﬁtting in the context of Indonesian medical
practice where biomedicine and traditional healing alike depend upon
hidden powers. Once, I accompanied a biologist friend to the doctor’s
ofﬁce in Manado, a site of urban biomedical practice, where her doctor
gave her prescriptions for her illness. At the pharmacy she received one
plastic bag with ten red pills, another with ﬁfty white pills, and a third
with three yellow pills. None of the pills had names, nor were the bags
labeled. In urban Indonesia, biomedicine also depends on the concealed
knowledges of practitioners, not on public cultures that encourage critical
knowledge of medicines, their properties, and their uses. Like the dukun’s
secret incantation over a glass of water, my friend was expected to take
her doctor and her pharmacist at face value, to be convinced by their
symbolic place within universalist biomedical reason.

Species and Bodies
125
Healing as Care
Stacy Leigh Pigg has written, “Shamans ﬁgure in the Western imagination
as objects of science, obstacles to science, and alter images of science.
Shamans, taken to represent ‘tradition’ (or some times pre-modern
worlds), have long been handy symbols in the construction of ‘moder-
nity’ ” (1996:161). Many people in Susunang were self-conscious about
discussing aspects of health and well-being, especially spirit possession or
their experience of pongko, because they were well aware of the proposed
duality of superstition and reason, and on which side of that duality their
community is said to lie. Biomedicine is proposed to be about objects—
the body, the bacteria, the disease—which determine and motivate appro-
priate actions. But, as the case of water illustrates, biomedicine was also
used to motivate action before any objects themselves were enacted. Bac-
teria were known through the same means as pongko, through language
and speech acts that brought them into existence by invoking prior con-
texts. In the Togean Islands, the proposition of a universal medicine,
founded on stable biological objects, was productive merely as a system
for classifying people. It was not an effective means for improving public
health.
Puah Samal told me how one has to have money to enter the hospital
or else the doctors will allow you to die. After saving up what he thought
were sufﬁcient funds, he entered a hospital on the mainland of Sulawesi
to repair his hernia. I heard that he died on the operating table. When I
took my friend Budi to the dentist in Dolong, the dentist accidentally
broke Budi’s tooth off at the gum and left the fragment still rooted in his
mouth. A friend in Jakarta whose family came from Maluku Province
told me the reason the population was so low in Maluku was because the
government family planning program (keluarga berencana) was steriliz-
ing women without their consent. This strategy of biopolitical control
was purportedly used on the occupied island of East Timor as well. In
Susunang village a second government nurse assigned to the village had
moved to Malenge Island to open a tourist hotel, where he could make
more money. He would come to Susunang only if a patient’s family could
rent a motorboat and pay the fuel cost needed to pick him up and drop
him back in Malenge.
Under these conditions Susunang people cannot be understood as a
different kind of human with different kinds of “knowledge” or “beliefs”
about the body. Lidja’s death raises more than the question of belief in
germs, or knowledge of allopathy or traditional medicine. Rather, biologi-
cal and other medical practices produce subjects of health and disease
through entire networks that are at once social, political, experiential,

Chapter 4
126
and material. The missing links in this network—transportation systems
to take people to doctors, laboratories to enact diagnoses, regulations
over how drugs are dispensed—really have nothing to do with belief or
knowledge. I certainly knew less about childbirth than the dukuns of Su-
sunang, and I was unable to help Lidja despite my belief in germs. Like
blue-tailed lizards, which required the laboratories of the Smithsonian
Institution to turn them into new species, germs require an extensive net-
work and a complex process of enactment to emerge as credible objects.
Rather than using “force” or “judgment,” one solution to the problem
of puerperal fever in Sulawesi might be to provide effective and compas-
sionate health care and allow women to make use of it of their own voli-
tion. This path aligns with what feminist scholars have called an “ethic
of care.” These scholars (Gilligan 1982; Hankivsky 2004; Tronto 1993)
have contrasted an ethic of care with the ethic of justice described in lib-
eral political theory. Care depends upon acceptance of human difference
and uniqueness, rather than on the ﬁgure of the “universal human,”
whose requirements for justice are determinable in advance. As such, care
attends to the speciﬁcities of context and individual experience, and ac-
knowledges human interdependencies in both the public and private
sphere. All people need care throughout the life cycle, moreover, and so
a hemispheric divide is not forced on any segment of the population. In
such a world, the methods of scientiﬁc calculation and a government’s
organizational capacities would be put to the task of health care, rather
than toward ensuring political order or creating the aesthetic forms of
modernity.4
During the course of my research, I once found myself ﬂoating in the
middle of the Gulf of Tomini after my ferryboat sank out from under me
in the middle of the night. This, I later learned, had been caused by a lack
of rationalized oversight over public transportation. The owner of the
ferryboat, Agape II, had been paying the Harbor Master in Gorantalo to
forego regular safety inspections. A rotten plank underneath the engine
was not discovered in time, and three people died in the accident. We
were ﬁnally rescued when a commercial ﬁshing boat set its nets and pulled
in three passengers. The crew of the ﬁshing boat then gathered the rest of
us out of the sea. When we reached the shore in Gorantalo, we were
greeted by a phalanx of nurses who, as a form of assistance, wanted to
give all the foreign passengers inoculations. I refused their offer, as gener-
ous as it was, not believing that an injection of an unknown substance
with who knows what needle was any kind of remedy for ﬂoating in the
ocean for ﬁve hours and losing all my luggage. And why was it that only
the foreign passengers were deemed to need injections? Biomedical and
technological reason may be oriented toward life-saving ends and en-
hance well-being, but this is not necessarily so.

Species and Bodies
127
It is possible to speculate, as Atkinson does, that Wana people are re-
mote from technoscientiﬁc and managerial capacities, rather than that
they lack faith in the options available to them closer to the coast. It is
not as clear to me, however, that the more “remote” parts of Sulawesi
really are impervious to science and technology, or that state-sponsored
technoscientiﬁc management regimes really are absent. The introduction
of allopathic medicines and of scientiﬁcally trained nurse-practitioners or
midwives has not, thus far, been the solution to the problem of puerperal
fever in the Sulawesi hinterland. Stories from Susunang are a provocation
to the idea that life chances improve merely through the presence of tech-
noscientiﬁc, biomedical, or instrumental reason. Many of us would want
to refuse an injection, or choose a caring family over a hostile or unfamil-
iar government representative, just as Lidja did.


PART THREE
Integrating Conservation
and Development
Why should we preserve nature? For three reasons: 1.
Nature is the creation of God. As Muslims, God does
not allow us to harm the environment. 2. In the Govern-
ment’s “Broad Outline of the National Direction”
[Garis Besar Haluan Negara], the people are given the
responsibility to protect the environment. 3. For the
promotion of life, the continuation of life, for the life of
all earth’s people, it is the peoples’ work to protect the
environment.
—Budi, Ecotourism Practicum, May 1997
THE INTEGRATED Conservation and Development Program (ICDP) was a
particular solution to the problem of nature and the human that operated
at a global scale within 1990s biodiversity conservation. The idea of inte-
grating conservation with programs of economic development was based
upon two premises: ﬁrst, communities that live near biodiverse nature put
that nature at risk, and second, prior efforts at nature conservation failed
because they did not take into sufﬁcient consideration the economic needs
of people living near protected areas. ICDPs propose that people who live
in or near conservation areas have a right to make a living from their
surrounding land and marinescapes, but this income should come from
nonconsumptive uses of nature. “Ecotourism” was the most common
programmatic solution imagined within this global framework.
While the IFABS project adopted the institutional form of the ICDP,
what “conservation” or “development” would mean in the Togean Is-
lands was interpreted through domestic understandings of national prog-
ress, rather than through an economic abstraction of income substitution
or through “universal” ideas of modernity. Development (pembangunan)
in 1990s Indonesia possessed a certain “structure of feeling,” a speciﬁc
discursive and interactive modality, that brought together such elements
as: Indonesian class hierarchies; the role of the Indonesian state; the place
of education in national development; the ﬁgure of the citizen; an assumed
difference between “East” and “West”; a national conversation on reli-
gion; and other speciﬁcally domestic modes of political discourse and
identiﬁcation. These sensibilities made the Togean ICDP distinct from the
transnational regulative discourse on the importance of mixing develop-
ment with conservation.

Part III
130
I experienced these particularities ﬁrsthand at an “Ecotourism Practi-
cum” conducted by IFABS at Camp Uemata in May 1997. The scientists
had invited Togean Island people from four different village communities
to attend the meeting. They also invited the local representative (Camat)
of Walea Kepulauan subdistrict, and a tourism administrator from Poso
to make presentations. In Susunang, however, the practicum ran into a
problem at the start. I was on my way to Camp Uemata to witness the
events and offered to give a ride to whomever would represent the village,
but Puah Kepala had not yet chosen anyone to attend. “Why don’t you
just represent us at the meeting?,” Puah Kepala had asked of me. I re-
sponded I could not represent them since I wasn’t from Susunang. Puah
Kepala then ordered his teenage niece to accompany me to the meeting.
In selecting this young girl, he was indicating the antipathy he felt toward
IFABS and their work.
I arrived at Camp Uemata with Puah Kepala’s niece in time for the
opening ceremony, which began with a prayer and a speech by the Camat.
Then, Budi introduced the purpose of the practicum. “This work is for
the development of all of us and for our nation,” he explained. We would
learn about tourism, about conservation, and about how to employ con-
servation as a form of economic development and self improvement.
IFABS was not entirely in control of the agenda, I observed. It was neces-
sary to invite the Camat and several other government representatives in
order to demonstrate that this workshop was not subversive of govern-
ment intentions. The practicum could not be held without the cooperation
and participation of regional government representatives.
The ﬁrst speaker was Pak Pujo, the Director of Tourism from Poso.
He began, “There are still some people who are not responsible (tidak
bertanggung jawab) and who destroy the environment.” Tourism, he sug-
gested, could provide a solution to this problem. We might be confused,
however, or have an “unclear understanding,” about what tourism actu-
ally means. “For this reason, the government has created Law 9 of 1990
Concerning Tourism.” From Law 9, we should be able to understand that
tourism is connected with governance and therefore is the responsibility
of the state. “We live in a rule of law state (negara hukum) and therefore
we should follow its laws. In the law, you will ﬁnd everything ordered
there,” he explained. He told us that, in Indonesia, law begins with the
President, then it descends to the ministers, next it comes to the national
level, then the region, and ﬁnally it arrives at the local level of government,
which includes his ofﬁce: “Ofﬁce of Tourism, Level Two.” “Our law is
based on Pancasila [the national ideology],” he said, “but I will move on
from here so that my talk does not smell of government interference (ber-
bau pemerintah).”

Conservation and Development
131
He continued to discuss the tourism law in order to erase our confusion
about the meaning of tourism. Law 9 of 1990 deﬁnes a “tourist” (turis)
as “one traveling, according to their free will [dengan suka rela], to see
visitor objects [obyek wisata].” Therefore, he told us, a turis is one who
tours. Turis come in two kinds: international turis and domestic turis.
“Tourism” means everything that is connected with turis. He went on to
describe the twelve responsibilities of his ofﬁce and what was outside
his purview. For example, the hotels with the star rating system (hotel
berbintang) are the responsibility of the central government. But if you
want to open a small hotel without a star rating, you would need a permit
from his ofﬁce.
While he continued to give us the deﬁnitions of the different kinds of
hotels, and describe for us the appropriate division of labor so that every-
one in the system would beneﬁt, I saw the women participants sneak off
to make coffee. “It is important that we all share in the tourism proﬁts,”
he went on, and then he explained to us what proﬁts should be guided to
his ofﬁce, and what proﬁts the people themselves could keep. “If the sys-
tem is adhered to, the tourists will bring out their dollars, the nation will
proﬁt, the local government will proﬁt, the people will proﬁt, and the
tourists will have a good time,” he explained.
One of tourism’s beneﬁts is that it can help to preserve culture (budaya
and adat-istiadat), Pujo argued, and he instructed the audience to prepare
for tourism by making ready an “original marriage ceremony.” The Lake
Poso Festival would chose one marriage ceremony from the Togean Is-
lands next time, “if the people were ready.” But it was important to ﬁnd
an “original ceremony,” and not one inﬂuenced by Gorontalo traditions
or the traditions of others. Tourists really appreciate seeing this culture,
he claimed, but only if the culture develops on its own (tumbuh sendiri).
He cited Toraja death ceremonies as an example of culture that has devel-
oped on its own.
Along with tourism’s positive inﬂuences, there are negative ones. Tour-
ism, we learned, presents many dangers. It can have “cultural side-effects”
and requires particular attitudes and proper conduct. Tourism can “ruin
the social contract,” Pujo warned, and we must be vigilant. “Togean peo-
ple practice and follow Islam, and Islam is a religion that instructs us in
our daily lives,” he warned. The people must follow Al Qu’ran, which
means that they should not harm nature. But, more importantly, it means
Togean people should not follow culture brought in from outside. “We
have our own culture. Indonesian culture. Pancasila culture. We have to
be careful. If we see something wrong, don’t follow that just to get closer
to our guests. We have to remember that they are from the West, and we
follow Eastern culture. For example they wear those ‘mini’ clothes,” and
he drew his hands across his thighs as though he was wearing a bikini.

Part III
132
Again he invoked the name of God, “God does not grant us permission
to harm the earth. The earth is not a gift of our ancestors, they are only
letting us borrow it.” The way to have successful tourism, Pujo told us,
is to follow the seven important principles: (1) safety (aman) (2) order
(tertib) (3) cleanliness (bersih) (4) freshness (kesejukan) (5) beauty (kein-
dahan) (6) friendliness (rama-tama), and (7) remembrance (kenangan).
He concluded with advice for the upcoming national elections:
At our election (pesta demokrasi), it should be remembered that our develop-
ment is the result of the New Order. It is the result of Golkar [abbreviation
of Sekretariat Bersama Golongan Karya, the regime party]. When I was on
the boat coming here I head the ship’s bell which reminded me of our upcom-
ing elections: One ring meant stop and three rings meant go backward [refer-
ences to the two other legal political parties]. But two meant ‘forward’
[maju]! Of course it is your choice what party you chose.
I asked Budi about Pak Pujo’s presentation. Had Pujo conveyed the
message Budi had wanted? He explained to me that in the past the govern-
ment and NGOs were “allergic” to each other. Now they try to work
together. That meant the NGOs had to make concessions to the govern-
ment position. They could try and inﬂuence the government just a little
bit by introducing the idea that conservation is important, however. For
example, he had given Pak Pujo the idea of a guide association and prom-
ised to help with planning the content of the program. He explained that
the instructions that come out of the central Jakarta ofﬁces are “70 per-
cent Pancasila and only 30 percent tourism.” “You can’t eliminate the
Pancasila content altogether,” he explained to me, “or else the local ofﬁ-
cials will just throw your work into the trash. But maybe you can shift
the balance, 60/40, and throw in something about conservation.”
On day two, Budi presented IFABS’ own ideas for integrating conserva-
tion and development in a presentation titled “Developing the Capacity
of the People.” Budi began with the questions: “What does it mean to
build our capacity?,” and “Why do the people have to be strengthened?”
The audience was slow to respond. A participant from Katupat village
said, “we are ﬁshing for the right answers ﬁrst, for the answer that you
want from us.” Then, one participant called out, “the people need to be
strengthened because they are weak.” “Good,” Budi encouraged, “and
what are the peoples’ weaknesses?” He turned to the blackboard and
wrote down the responses as people called them out to him:
1. weak in education
2. weak in economy
3. weak with laziness
4. weak in communication media

Conservation and Development
133
Budi himself added to the list without noting it on the board: “Weak
in the ability to overcome outsiders who are reef bombers and cyanide
ﬁshers.”
“Why are we ‘weak’?” Budi asked, and then something unexpected
happened. A young man stood up and asserted, “we have a problem with
government. If our government was just, we would be given access to
school without school fees. Many people here are smart enough to go to
school, to college even.” Nervous laughter ﬁlled the room. Budi under-
lined “education” several times with his marking pen. “We need more
education,” Budi replied and then moved on to number two. “What
about ‘economy’?” The same participant spoke up again, “if the govern-
ment organized more work opportunities, and organized our education,
there would be more work and we would be able to do it.”
Budi intervened, “but we aren’t like a developed country (negara maju).
The government can’t give us everything. We must learn to help our-
selves.” Budi then asked, “what about ‘laziness,’ why are we lazy?” Again
the outspoken young man raised his voice: “Try building a junior high
and high school here. If we are sent to town far away that only adds to
the costs that our parents can’t afford. We loose the chance, so we become
lazy.” By this time, the mood was uncomfortable. Another participant
jumped in: “Make the people more hardworking. If we are more hard-
working, we won’t be lazy.” “Good!,” Budi answered, and he looked
around the room to see if everyone agreed. Heads nodded in agreement.
Budi next asked us to deﬁne the word “nature” (alam). “Forests!” “The
sea!” “Stars!” “The moon!” People called out the elements of nature.
Budi expanded on these suggestions. Nature is comprised of “ecosys-
tems” (ekosistem) he explained, and an ecosystem is a group of “biotic
communities” (komunitas biotik). Indonesia has forty-seven types of eco-
systems, he told us, including sea, beach, mangrove, mountain, et cetera.
Then he asked, “Why should we protect the animals and their habitats?”
People remained silent. “Because of the food chain,” Budi answered. “The
plants are eaten by the herbivores [herbivora] and the herbivores are eaten
by the carnivores [karnivora].” “If the chain is broken, all will be bro-
ken,” he said.
He asked us to think of the trees. What will happen if we cut down
trees? He was especially concerned about the Malenge forest since it was
home to the Togean macaque, but Budi attempted to orient his response
toward the participants’ concerns: there will be erosion, ﬂoods, and the
wells on the island would dry up. “The trees are an easy example,” he
told us, “while the sea is a much harder one. The sea is more difﬁcult to
understand because the system begins with plankton which are tiny and
you can’t see them.” He explained to us that we could ruin the sea and
damage the food chain. The question is, how to use the environment with-

Part III
134
out ruining it—ruining it, for example, by using bombs and poisons? “If
we use a bomb or cyanide, we are quickly full one time, but later there
will be nothing—there is only a momentary enjoyment. You are happy
once, but the coral is broken and ruined,” he argued.
He turned to Pak Ahmad and asked, “Isn’t this true?” Ahmad agreed.
“So do we need to bomb, or not?,” Budi asked us rhetorically. “Noooo,”
we answered.
Part 3 addresses what it meant to attempt to integrate conservation and
development in the context of Indonesian law and the “reason of state”
in the 1990s. The Ecotourism Practicum at Uemata that week represented
only one type of effort to integrate conservation and development. The
IFABS scientists had also worked extensively on tourism initiatives over
several years, including starting a guide service, building a nature trail
on Malenge Island and a boardwalk through the mangroves outside of
Katupat, and teaching people to make souvenirs. In the midst of these
efforts a second “integration” was required: integrating conservation
with the state’s ideas of progress and order. In order to continue their
work in the Togean Islands and to be successful in their goal of creating
a national park, the scientists were compelled to do so in a form that
honored the authority of the state and respected its norms and aesthetics.
As a consequence the major scale at which responsibility was assumed to
be located, and therefore the scale at which intervention was imposed,
was the “community.” While the transnational rationale of the ICDP
claimed that communities are both source and solution to the problem of
nature at risk, this is the same scale the Indonesian state uses to apportion
blame and discipline. The overlap between transnational and Indonesian
state discourses overdetermined the form of the ICDP as something that
would enhance state control even as it spoke of popular prosperity.

Chapter Five
FISHING WITH CYANIDE
Making the law work as it should in Indonesia is very
difﬁcult. The legal system is stacked in favor of the
wealthy and powerful but even limited progress can have
an important symbolic impact. Law enforcement has to
be carefully targeted if it is not to create more conﬂict,
however. . . . A more effective strategy, and an easier one
to justify to the public, would be to target not the low-
paid workers of the industry but the [business leaders]
and corrupt ofﬁcials who organize and facilitate it.
—International Crisis Group, Indonesia: Natural
Resources and Law Enforcement
ON ONLY MY THIRD DAY in Susunang, in January of 1996, I witnessed a
major event in the history of Togean cyanide ﬁshing, one of the methods
of ﬁshing that most concerned conservationists. Walking through the
village that day I encountered several men arguing over some jerry cans
and stopped to see what the ruckus was about. Sitting quietly at the edge
of the action, I asked my friend Udin what was happening. He told me
that the crew of a ﬁshing boat had been “arrested” by the village. The
boat had been ﬁshing for live ﬁsh close to the village and was using
cyanide. These were their jerry cans and they contained solutions of cya-
nide poison.
The captain was a tall, lean man in T-shirt and shorts who spoke with
utter conﬁdence. The conversation took place in Indonesian, the national
language, so it was clear he was an outsider. The captain was from the
Sangir Islands in north Sulawesi, it turned out, and his crew was from the
Philippines. A crowd of men had gathered, and everyone was shouting at
once. I noticed Mahmood (a Bugis trader from the other end of the vil-
lage), Udin’s uncle, and many other important people whom I would later
come to recognize as leaders in the village cyanide ﬁshing network. The
captain bragged that he had important friends in the police in Luwuk,
Poso, and other places, and the “arrest” would not stick. When the argu-
ment ended and he ﬁnally turned to return to his boat, he stopped to ask
me in a swaggering voice where I was from. He took me for a tourist, and
his bravado symbolized his cosmopolitan connections.
I asked Udin if we could go and see the boat. At ﬁrst he said we could
go, as the boat was nearby. Then Udin’s uncle suddenly interrupted and
told us that it was too far. Who was being protected, and from what, I
wondered? Later, I heard people discussing Camp Uemata and I over-

Chapter 5
136
heard someone say that I would report what had transpired directly back
to Jakarta. Some people believed, early on, that I worked for IFABS even
though I had tried to explain my research. IFABS scientists had been dis-
couraging cyanide use by telling people to report on their neighbors. No
one would do this, of course, but not wanting trouble for family and
neighbors is different from approving of cyanide use. Udin later explained
to me, “the problem is that the people here are small ﬁshers. They have no
other livelihood but ﬁshing. They will have nothing if the reef is killed.”
I heard many different perspectives on cyanide use during the two years
I lived in the Togean Islands. For example, while the “arrest” appeared
to be motivated by village leaders’ territorial claims to ﬁsh, rather than
by a true objection to cyanide ﬁshing, many other Susunang people were
sincerely disturbed by poison use. Months after the arrest of the occu-
pants of the boat and its captain from north Sulawesi, I discussed cyanide
use with Puah Jaﬁr, a friend who had taken me ﬁshing many times. Al-
though Jaﬁr had taken up live ﬁshing himself only recently, he already
noticed a change in ﬁsh stocks. “If people were using poison and my take
dropped only a little, I would accept it,” he said. “But I feel heartsick
people have used cyanide here, and then I catch nothing at all. I have not
caught a big ﬁsh in a month, so there’s no point in ﬁshing this afternoon.
There won’t be any results.”
When I had ﬁshed with Jaﬁr, we paddled his canoe two hours in the
morning as the stars faded around us. He counted out twenty arm spans
of nylon line and dropped it over the side and then he looked deep into
the water, waiting, forearm resting on the canoe’s edge, the heavy line
wrapped three times across his scarred palm. There was always competi-
tion, however: younger men motoring along the reef’s edge also on the
lookout for live ﬁsh species. These ﬁshers were not using lines, hooks, or
bait—only chalky clouds of poison that erupted out of their plastic squirt
bottles, stupefying and taming otherwise wary ﬁsh.
Jaﬁr, who only used hand lines, told me that he was torn. He too was
caught up in the excitement of the live ﬁsh boom, and he wanted to be
able to sell ﬁsh to the live ﬁsh camps near Susunang village. Fish camps,
which exported live ﬁsh to Hong Kong and Singapore, paid Togean ﬁshers
relatively well in local terms. In our conversations, Jaﬁr maneuvered to
protect and perpetuate the industry, defending this camp or that as
“clean” (bersih) and not supporting poison. Yet he also recognized that
live ﬁshing had brought a new reality to Susunang—because of cyanide
use, there were fewer ﬁsh for people to eat.
By the mid-1990s, the live reef food ﬁsh trade was proving harmful for
the majority of Togean ﬁshers, their communities, and for local coral reef
environments. Radiant wild reef ﬁsh that had always provided ﬁshers
with extra income through centuries-old markets for salt ﬁsh, and that

Fishing with Cyanide
137
Hand line ﬁshing, by Celia Lowe.
had always been a reliable source of food, were becoming rare in Togean
waters. Many government bureaucrats and biodiversity conservationists
believed that all Sama people ﬁshed with cyanide, and that Sama were the
main ethnic group responsible for the damage cyanide inﬂicted on Togean
and other Sulawesi reefs. Once, I was with Yakup when a Sama ﬁsher
came to sell us his catch of Fusiliers (ruma ruma [S]). Yakup accused the
ﬁsher of catching them with cyanide, even though ruma ruma are a variety
of schooling ﬁsh and cyanide is only ever used to catch a few species
of demersal ﬁsh like grouper. He had already naturalized an association
between Sama people and cyanide-caught ﬁsh.
While most live ﬁsh were caught with cyanide, not all cyanide ﬁshers
were of Sama ethnicity, and the majority of Togean ﬁshers of any ethnicity
used traditional hand line techniques. These ratios were disguised within
the causes and explanations formulated by concerned international and
Indonesian biologists who condemned the live ﬁsh trade as inherently
destructive, and who blamed Sama people as poor conservators of nature.
In 1998 I was contacted by an international conservation NGO that
wanted to “reintroduce” hand line ﬁshing to the Togean Islands and en-
courage Sama people to use this ﬁshing method again. This was the strat-
egy the NGO had used to combat cyanide ﬁshing in the Philippines, and
the organization’s representative did not believe me when I told him that
85 percent of all live ﬁshing was already done with hand lines in the To-
gean Islands.

Chapter 5
138
In an interconnected scenario, traders targeted Sama people as ﬁsh sup-
pliers, while other outsiders—biologists and government ofﬁcials—asso-
ciated Sama ﬁshers in an overly simpliﬁed manner with the illegal use
of cyanide. The damage done by cyanide ﬁshing is not explained as the
independent acts of a few misguided ﬁshers, however. Togean people were
caught within the ﬁbers of markets, law, bureaucracy, and identity—all
factors determining the patterns of who would ﬁsh with cyanide, who
would proﬁt the most by it, and who would suffer the consequences.
How should we understand Togean Islands cyanide ﬁshing then, if not
as the loss of hand line techniques, or as the consequence of ethnic iden-
tity? We must look at markets for live ﬁsh, at how traders bound individ-
ual ﬁshers to destructive practices that some ﬁshers would rather have
been free of, and at the ways that legal frameworks favored business prac-
tices over ﬁsher interests, making Togean people vulnerable to police
extortion and the enforcement of inconsistent regulations. These different
aspects of the live ﬁsh trade worked together to make Sama people the
victims of degraded environments as well as the assumed perpetrators,
while local bureaucrats and outside entrepreneurs became well-off in
the process.
The Togean Live Fish Trade
Live reef food ﬁsh was one of the periodic boom and bust trades that
swept through Indonesia during the Suharto era. At ﬁrst Togean Sama
ﬁshers welcomed the new market. Proﬁts from live ﬁsh allowed them to
buy cement and wood to improve their homes, and some ﬁshers banked
their proceeds in enduring sources of value like watches and gold jewelry.
Live ﬁshing brought at least a momentary economic prosperity to the
Togean Islands, and Sama people were willing to spend their time at live
ﬁshing, with a gambler’s eye toward catching “the big one.” While live
ﬁsh were proﬁtable locally, they were even more valuable beyond the To-
gean Islands. The way Jaﬁr imagined it, one large Napoleon wrasse, a
much sought-after ﬁsh, was “as valuable as a new car” when sold in Hong
Kong. Togean ﬁsh buyers, the middle men, were also becoming wealthy
from live ﬁsh. One ﬁsh buyer told Jaﬁr that he would prefer his outboard
motor sink to the bottom of the sea rather than have even one Napoleon
wrasse escape. Jaﬁr’s stories highlighted the economic value of live ﬁsh in
the Togean economy and in ﬁsher’s lives, while pointing out the social
and economic disparities between live ﬁsh harvesters and live ﬁsh buyers,
and between suppliers and the people who eat live ﬁsh in expensive restau-
rants overseas. Fish that sold for US$7.50 per kilo in the Togean Islands,

Fishing with Cyanide
139
eventually would sell for US$180 per kilo in foreign restaurants (Johannes
and Riepen 1995:9).
Despite the initial enthusiasm for the live ﬁsh trade, the negative effects
of the trade on Togean communities, on ﬁsh species, and on Togean coral
reefs was of intense concern for many Sama people, for IFABS scientists,
and for some government ofﬁcials. The use of sodium cyanide (NaCN)
causes a high mortality rate in the ﬁsh and, more importantly, bleaches
the surrounding reef, killing coral habitat. More of the reef is ruined when
ﬁshers tear apart coral heads to get at the stunned ﬁsh hiding in rocky
crevices. While Sama people noted general declines in ﬁsh abundance, the
survival of particular endangered species, especially the Napoleon
(Humphead) wrasse (Cheilinus undulatus), was of additional concern to
biologists. This ﬁsh, the most sought-after species in restaurants, very
quickly became rare after the introduction of the live ﬁsh trade in Indone-
sia. Marine biologists predicted that live ﬁsh species would be commer-
cially extinct in Indonesia, and in some areas locally extirpated, sometime
around the year 2000.
Using cyanide does not require much ecological knowledge on the part
of ﬁshers. To catch ﬁsh with cyanide, a ﬁsher is towed in the water behind
an outboard-powered boat and looks from side to side for live grouper
and Napoleon wrasse. Once a likely ﬁsh is spotted, the ﬁsher chases it
into a coral hiding place. The ﬁsher uses a small squirt-bottle ﬁlled with
a solution of one tablet of cyanide to ﬁve liters of sea water. Then while
either holding his breath or breathing from a hookah rig attached to an
air compressor, he dives and squirts cyanide in each of the holes in the
rock. The ﬁsh, having nowhere to go, may come out “drunk” (mabuk),
or else the ﬁsher will tear apart the coral with his hands or a crowbar to
retrieve the ﬁsh. Once in the ﬁsher’s hands, the ﬁsh is guided quickly to
the surface and put in the boat’s water-ﬁlled holding compartment.
The Togean Island live ﬁsh ﬁshery was only one example of the com-
modiﬁcation of wild reef ﬁsh that had spread throughout Southeast Asia
and much of the western Paciﬁc. According to Robert Johannes and Mi-
chael Riepen (1995), the live ﬁsh market ﬁrst developed in the late 1960s
with ﬁsh stocks coming from reefs near Hong Kong. The trade proved so
lucrative that Hong Kong ﬁshers soon began to move further aﬁeld. The
Philippines became the next main ﬁshing ground in the mid-1970s, and
in the 1980s and 1990s live ﬁshing spread into Palau, Papua New Guinea,
the Solomon Islands, the Maldives, and Indonesia. By the mid-1990s In-
donesia supplied half of the international live ﬁsh market.
At ﬁrst, live ﬁsh were caught by foreign ﬁshers who ﬁshed illegally in
Indonesian waters. The captain arrested in Susunang with his Filipino
crew was most likely a remnant of this type of commercial enterprise.
Later, the pattern of small collecting companies using live ﬁsh transport

Chapter 5
140
TABLE 1
Species Bought in the Togean Island Live Fish Trade
Sama
Indonesian
English
Latin
langkoe’
maming
napoleon wrasse,
Cheilinus undulates
humphead wrasse
kiapu tikos
kerapu
polkadot grouper,
Cromileptes altivelis
tikus
panther ﬁsh,
barramundi cod
sunu
sunu/ super
coral trout,
Plectropomus leopardus
leopard grouper
sunu
sunu/ super
polkadot cod
Plectropomus areolatus
sunu
sunu/ super
bar cheeked
Plectropomus maculates
coral trout
sunurang
sunurang
—-
—
sunu macang,
sunu macam
highﬁn grouper
Plectropomus oligocanthus
kiapu macang
tembolang
kerapu
—
—
tembolang
gomez
kerapu gomez
ﬂowery cod
Epinephelus fuscoguttatus
gomez pipi’
kerapu lumpur,
queensland
Epinephelus lanceolatus
kerapu gomez
grouper
vessels and employing local ﬁshers took shape. In the Togean Islands,
centrally located ﬁsh-buying camps acted as collecting and transfer points
for live ﬁsh. Camps purchased ten different species of ﬁsh, keeping them
in pens, feeding and medicating them with antibiotics, and holding them
for up to two months awaiting shipment overseas. Live ﬁsh transporting
vessels then moved the ﬁsh to Hong Kong and Singapore. The total annual
market for live ﬁsh was roughly 25,000 tons in 1995, some of that being
cultivated ﬁsh, although precise ﬁgures were not available (Johannes and
Riepen 1995).
Live ﬁsh kept in holding pens often died very quickly in Togean ﬁsh
camps. Mortality was highest for the coral trout (Plectropomus leop-
ardus), of which 50 percent of the ﬁsh died before transport, and for
the grouper species known locally as tembolang. Fish camps eventually
stopped purchasing tembolang because of their high death rate. More-
over, the mortality rate of coral trout rose twenty percent between 1996
and 1997, and no one knew why. In 1997 the four camps in the eastern
Togean Islands were each exporting 200 tons of ﬁsh per month, down
from 300 tons in 1996. Rising ﬁsh prices are one indication of decreasing
ﬁsh stocks, and prices for all species were on the rise in 1997.Competition

Fishing with Cyanide
141
for the ﬁsh was also intense at the wholesale level, and new buyers were
still entering the Togean market despite the declining ﬁsh catch.
The Science of Cyanide
Togean ﬁshers and biologists each mustered different rhetorics to support
their empirical evidence, and they employed different aesthetics to bolster
their explanatory frameworks. For example, Silvester Pratasik, a marine
biologist at Universitas Sam Ratulangi in Manado, exposed ﬁsh to sodium
cyanide at 1.5 ppm in a laboratory experiment on two freshwater food
ﬁsh, Tilapia mossambica and Cyprinus carpio. Pratasik described the
symptoms of the poisoned ﬁsh, which died within twenty-four hours, in
the following way. “[T]he ﬁsh breathed on the surface water, jumped out
of the water, imbalancedly (sic) swam, put down on the bottom, the ﬁns
stood, the body stiffed (sic) and the mouth was widely opened then the
ﬁsh died and the skin released much mucus” (Pratasik 1983). Sodium
cyanide, he explains, works by converting to hydrocyanide (HCN) in the
body and absorbing the blood’s oxygen.
Pratasik’s experiment took place in enclosed tanks where subject ﬁsh
could not escape to uncontaminated water. In open water ﬁsh are exposed
to lower concentrations of cyanide, which stun without killing. In these
settings, ﬁshers conduct experiments too. Umar described for me the behav-
ior of a cyanide-exposed ﬁsh by using his hands to trace its dizzy path. He
said, “the ﬁsh is drunk, it spins and spins without knowing where it is
going.” Jaﬁr used metaphors of ﬂow to depict the travels of cyanide through
the water column: “Cyanide is like expensive cigarette smoke or perfume;
everyone in the room comes under its inﬂuence.” Or, “it is as though some-
one hasn’t bathed and everyone around has to smell him.” Cyanide ﬁshers
laughed at the antics of the stunned and disoriented ﬁsh and took tactile
pleasure in catching wild ﬁsh with bare hands. But they did not want to see
ﬁsh die and they knew how to clear a ﬁsh’s gills of cyanide to revive it.
They had also discovered how to deﬂate a ﬁsh’s ﬂoatation bladder, which
expands when a ﬁsh is raised up from the bottom too quickly. Through
these methods they could keep ﬁsh alive and healthy for sale.
Togean ﬁshers document the ecological effects of the live ﬁsh trade by
observing ﬁsh rarity, changes in ﬁsh behavior, coral bleaching, and the
systemic effects of cyanide. Scientists and ﬁshers agree that cyanide is not
harmful to humans who eat the ﬁsh because the poison rapidly works
itself out of the ﬁsh’s system. The availability of cyanide in the Togean
Islands has resulted in human mortality, however. Several people have
committed suicide by deliberately ingesting the poison. In contrast with

Chapter 5
142
the “experience-far” concerns of scientists, ﬁshers expressed their worries
in relation to regular interactions with the coral reef environment. Puah
Jaﬁr, for example, demonstrated the effects of cyanide for me by holding
up two triggerﬁsh he had caught; one of the ﬁsh was fat and the other
very thin. The thin one, he said, had encountered cyanide that had made
it lethargic. Cyanide causes a ﬁsh to lose its appetite, which means that it
won’t bite a ﬁshhook. Jaﬁr related that he used to catch large Napoleon
wrasses right up close to shore, in the open, near to the mangroves, in
only one meter of water, right under his boat. “The ﬁsh know.” he said,
“They hear an outboard motor now and they run, they run deep out to
sea—they hide from us.”
Paradoxically, the live ﬁsh trade was generally thought by some biolo-
gists to be a sustainable industry that could have widespread positive ef-
fects on the incomes of some of the most economically vulnerable ﬁshers.
Many Togean Sama ﬁshers knew how to, and did, use hand lines that did
not poison reefs and extracted ﬁsh at lower, arguably sustainable, rates
of harvest. It was not “science” in and of itself that divided Sama from
biologists, in this case.
Who Uses Cyanide (and Who Doesn’t)
The live ﬁsh trade was a multiethnic business made up of people from all
levels of society. The role of any given participant in the live ﬁsh trade
was more closely correlated with class difference than with ethnicity. Live
ﬁsh businesses were owned by wealthy Indonesians from Jakarta, many
of Chinese descent who operated through established connections with
foreign Chinese buyers, a pattern having historical roots in other natural
resource trades. These owners could afford the capital investments and
costs associated with operating a camp. Such costs included ﬁsh holding
pens, camp buildings, short-wave radios, salaries, and especially permits
and bribes. At the local level the owners hired managers to run the ﬁsh
camps. These managers came from Java and Kalimantan to act as “boss.”
Bosses ﬁt relatively comfortably into village life and sometimes married
local Togean women. At the tail end of this extractive commodity chain,
all Togean ethnicities were represented among people who ﬁshed. The
connection of Sama people to cyanide had come about partly because ﬁsh
camp managers placed their camps strategically near to Sama villages,
and actively recruited Sama participation. Thus, there were Sama partici-
pants in the trade at all the lowest levels. But Sama were certainly not the
only Togean people involved in either live ﬁshing or cyanide use.
The general perception of Sama people as suku terasing, a term mean-
ing an ethnic group for whom the process of national development was

Fishing with Cyanide
143
still foreign, helped to articulate Sama ethnic identity and environmental
damage. Susunang and the other Togean Sama villages were all part of
the Program for Left-behind Villages (Inpres Desa Tertinggal), a poverty
alleviation scheme for putatively backward villages. A consequence of this
typology was that Sama people were thought of as inferior to wealthier,
urban Indonesian citizens. Sama people were at once ridiculed for their
cultural and ﬁscal impoverishment, and prodded to come up with means
for their own development. When some ﬁshers found the means to “de-
velop” through the live ﬁsh trade—build new houses, wear new clothes,
own motorized transport—they were then chastised for being environ-
mentally destructive.
When it came to the issue of cyanide, many people in Susunang com-
plained about those using cyanide. For example, on the pongkat, Puah
Umar called out to a ﬁsher passing by, “don’t bother ﬁshing here, they
won’t eat your hook. Someone from my village was using cyanide here
this morning. You should get your village head to report him.” When
Puah Padi spotted a person using cyanide she said, “tie him to a rock and
dump him in a deep spot,” and she frequently insulted cyanide ﬁshers as
“rock heads” (kepala batu). Ordinary ﬁshers were angry with the ones
using cyanide, and families and friends were often divided over its use.
Cyanide ﬁshers, they said, are the people who have outboards and are
making lots of money, while everyone else’s take of reef ﬁsh—for both
trade and food—disappears.
My experience with Jaﬁr indicates that Sama people might actually
have been less likely to use cyanide than ﬁshers from other ethnic groups.
While cyanide use on coral reefs was frequently attributed to ﬁsher igno-
rance, Jaﬁr’s knowledge of the marine world, in contrast, was quite ex-
tensive and directly relevant to the capture of live ﬁsh. His hand line
ﬁshing, for example, required intricate knowledge of species, currents,
locations, equipments, and baits. He told me that Napoleon wrasse will
eat all varieties of Squirlﬁsh (babakal [S]) and he named eleven separate
subspecies of Squirlﬁsh that are appropriate as Napoleon bait. While
cyanide ﬁshers swept the seas attempting to harvest every possible ﬁsh
from every imaginable reef, Jaﬁr sat waiting for a Napoleon wrasse to
swim along its favored path.
Non-Sama could sometimes be more inclined to use cyanide if they did
not recognize the appropriate baits or spatial tactics to use for Napoleon
ﬁshing. As new entrants into the market they were less inclined to take
up these difﬁcult practices, and they were more likely to go directly to
easier and more destructive ways of ﬁshing. When I interviewed a Ja-
vanese migrant ﬁsher about the presence of cyanide-caught live ﬁsh in ﬁsh
camp holding pens, he responded that all Napoleon wrasse are caught
using cyanide. Yet, whenever I ﬁshed with Jaﬁr and others and observed

Chapter 5
144
them ﬁshing selectively for Napoleon, they employed an ecological
knowledge that enabled ﬁsh catch without poison. This point has not
been lost on some in the Indonesian conservation community where Rili
Djohani (1993), for one, has argued that Sama peoples’ sea experience
could actually make them important marine conservators in Togean and
other Indonesian coastal settings.
All Togean ethnicities were represented in cyanide use, and patterns
of cyanide practice could be explained more accurately by examining
other aspects of identity like age or gender. Since women ﬁshers never
use poison to catch live ﬁsh, for example, gender was a dividing line
separating hand line ﬁshers from cyanide users. One day, when I asked
why everyone was trying to catch a small sardine (solisi [S]), Puah Padi
answered, “we are looking for solisi because all the big ﬁsh have been
poisoned.” While to protect their families, women would cover for a
spouse or son using cyanide, it was also women—and women ﬁshers in
particular—who were the most open in their criticism of the destructive
ﬁshing practices they knew to exist. Women’s perspectives and participa-
tion as ﬁshers and as community members vested in environmental out-
comes, were often overlooked.
Nearly all cyanide ﬁshing is carried out by young men. Since it is a
physically strenuous activity, older men have difﬁculty diving and they
also complain of the cold. High live ﬁsh proﬁts brought by cyanide use
enabled young men to build houses and establish new, independent fami-
lies. Cyanide ﬁshing, as an illegal activity, also had a status that was
appealing to younger people. They could earn money to smoke expensive
cigarettes and wear fashionable new clothes. The illegality of the tech-
nique indicated their closeness to ofﬁcials, who would protect them from
prosecution. While young men caught ﬁsh with cyanide, some older men
participated by using attachments to bureaucrats they had developed as
village leaders. The Indonesian state bureaucracy, which percolated its
way down to the village level and radiated out into villages through
kinship connections, was tightly correlated with illegal trade in natural
resources.
One day a Togean village ofﬁcial, under pressure to appear to be enforc-
ing cyanide laws, ordered sea operations (operasi laut), also called sweep-
ing (sweeping), and instructed his colleagues to go out and “clean up the
ocean.” I went along with a party of ﬁve sweepers, all wearing khaki
uniforms, who set off with their boat drivers in three different directions.
Only our boat had any success: we caught ﬁve skinny boys, none of them
older than ten, using cyanide to catch anemone ﬁsh. Children like to play
with the clownﬁsh that live symbiotically with sea anemones by making
the ﬁsh ﬁght each other in small containers of sea water. The boys, all
yelling at once, begged us not to report them. The police would be angry,

Fishing with Cyanide
145
and angry police are often physically violent. A solution emerged. The
boys would deliver edible anemones to the village ofﬁcial’s house. Con-
spicuously, their poison was not conﬁscated and they were left to resume
their activity.
From there we proceeded to a less afﬂuent part of the village, far from
where any ofﬁcials lived, and it was mentioned to the parents that their
children had been caught using cyanide. In the same breath the uniformed
village ofﬁcial made a casual inquiry as to whether there were any ripe
mangoes? He was soon sitting on the porch, chin dripping with mango
juice. He asked again for fried sago, which the family procured with ingre-
dients quickly borrowed from a neighbor. “Don’t forget the coconut!,”
he ordered. Coffee with tablespoons of expensive sugar was served after
the mangoes; gifts of limes and chilies were taken before leaving. Conver-
sation between the high-status village ofﬁcials and their subordinate fel-
low villagers had been smooth, never strained, polite. The threat was al-
ways left implied, wound around in-and-out of discussions of mangoes
and chilies, sweet and hot.
Fishers involved in cyanide use, if not immediate family members of
village ofﬁcials, were at least closely related to them. Village leaders pro-
vided protection against prosecution for their relatives and workers. “He
uses a code when he directs them not to use cyanide, which indicates that
in his heart he will not really be mad if they do,” Jaﬁr explained about
one village leader. Ties to bureaucrats were further relevant for determin-
ing who paid bribes and who was prosecuted instead. The children col-
lecting anemone ﬁsh were from families without strong ties to village lead-
ers and were thus vulnerable to demands for payment. Local leaders of
cyanide operations worked intimately with ﬁsh camps and tended to
channel ﬁnancial opportunities and protection beneﬁts to family members
who they could both trust and control. Outside of this circle, ﬁshers, even
small boys, used poison at their own risk.
Subsequent to this “sea operation,” Jaﬁr, who opposed cyanide use,
complained to me that the manner of our operation was all wrong—not
really designed to catch anybody. It was conducted at the wrong time of
the day, and not where people really used cyanide to ﬁsh. More impor-
tantly, he said, the people involved in the operation were themselves all
heavily implicated in cyanide ﬁshing. Village level bureaucrats, nested
tightly inside live ﬁsh procurement networks, worked closely with ﬁsh
camps that supplied cyanide and bought cyanide-caught ﬁsh. Our boat
drivers had steady work as cyanide ﬁshers in the employ of these leaders.
In other words, we had only been out to catch ourselves.
It would be easy to be swept up by a theory that village leaders who
proﬁted from cyanide were just bad people, but these networks origi-
nated, and were patterned on, an entrepreneurial culture that starts at the

Chapter 5
146
top of the Indonesian political hierarchy. Neoliberal cultures of economy
concur with these resource extraction practices, and powerful Northern
nations have acted as guarantors of an Indonesian state that enabled inter-
national trade while subverting political opposition. The ofﬁcially choreo-
graphed subversion of opposition in favor of business interests worked
efﬁciently in Indonesia, right down to the village level. Local village lead-
ers were recruited and inducted into this culture by members of the re-
gional bureaucracy, who were in turn invited to participate by national
level bureaucrats, and so on. In fact, village leaders would not have been
permitted to keep their jobs if they were unwilling to participate in bu-
reaucratic entrepreneurship. Village ofﬁcials may have reinvented, but
surely did not invent, these ways of organizing economic life.
New, Fast, and for Sale
Commodities take on new meanings through their nomadic travels, and
live ﬁshing is a cosmopolitan enterprise that stakes claims to locality in
many different places (Appadurai 1995 [1986]; Bourdieu 1984; Kopytoff
1995 [1986]). Wild reef ﬁsh from some of Indonesia’s most inaccessible
regions, hearts stopping as they hit a wok or steam pot, are consumed by
wealthy elites in the luxury restaurants of Singapore and Hong Kong. Live
ﬁsh are eaten at celebrations and religious festivals where ﬁsh symbolize
abundance, and the traditional preference for wild caught, freshly killed
ﬁsh is based on consumers’ beliefs that taste, texture, and healthful prop-
erties fade immediately after the ﬁsh dies. Where markets for high priced
consumer goods tie global suppliers to ever expanding networks of inter-
national buyers, live groupers and wrasses caught by subsistence ﬁshers
on isolated Indonesian coral reefs ﬁt into stories of the new, the fast, and
the “for sale.” Markets for live ﬁsh, which link Southeast Asia’s least
afﬂuent people with wealthy global elites, developed hand in hand with
rising incomes in urban Asia. Johannes and Reipen have proposed the
Hang Seng Index as an indicator for live ﬁsh demand—a demand that
seems to increase with ﬁsh rarity (1995:17).
The link between scarcity and price is a rare gap in the otherwise seam-
less way the live ﬁsh commodity effaces its history. I imagine consumers
have little awareness of the genesis of the grouper that arrives at the table
in Hong Kong. On either side of the South China Sea, however, the con-
texts of live ﬁsh consumption and live ﬁsh production are mutually ob-
scured.1 Fishers have been motivated to catch live ﬁsh by their own econo-
mies of luxury through the incentives ﬁsh traders give them for their
catches. In addition to cash, camps often supplied ﬁshers with gasoline
for outboards, cigarettes, and small loans. While consumers would have

Fishing with Cyanide
147
a hard time imagining the conditions of live ﬁshing, ﬁshers can only fanta-
size the extravagant lives of those who consume live ﬁsh. Although the
sins and seductions of eating live ﬁsh are opaque for consumers whose
demand motivates live ﬁsh production, the social and ecological relations
of that production cannot be so easily ignored by ﬁshing communities.
The participation of ﬁshers was even more complicated than willful
consumerism. Togean ﬁshers, even those using hand line methods, became
tied to particular ﬁsh camps through the purchase of outboard motors on
credit. Outboard motors are practical in the Togean Islands where sail
and paddle are the most prevalent means of moving about, but they are
ﬁnancially out of reach for most people. In the early years of the Togean
live ﬁsh trade, outboard motors became available to 10 percent of house-
holds, largely through loans from ﬁsh camps. The camps gave ﬁshers ﬁve
horsepower motors (ketinting) worth US$450 when bought on credit
from the camps, US$300 when bought directly on the mainland. Fishers
paid for the motors with irregular payments (uang cicil) taken out of their
live ﬁsh sales. The camps maintained the outboards, changing oil and
spark plugs, as long as the motor was being paid off. By the time a motor
was free and clear of payments, however, the outboard usually was no
longer working.
The camps required ﬁshers to pay on their loans each time they sold a
ﬁsh, but ﬁshers could decide for themselves how much to deposit. One
day Narto showed me his accounting books. Narto, who grew chocolate
and coconuts as well as trading in live ﬁsh and sea cucumber, explained
the tie he had to one of the buyers. Every morning he would ﬁsh, and in
the afternoon he would come home to work in his garden. He was tired
of ﬁshing, he said, and would like to spend more time farming. But he
had to keep ﬁshing or the camp would take his outboard away. I saw
that he made random payments up to four times per month, of amounts
between one and six dollars. He could pay off one quarter to one third
of his debt in a year, and he was always optimistic about how much he
had already paid. Though he wanted to own the motor, he also rued the
ties he had to the ﬁsh camp.
Likewise, Suala, who liked to ﬁsh nearly full time, was using his out-
board to ﬁsh for pelagic tuna. He needed the outboard to get to the off-
shore ﬁsh concentrators where deep-water ﬁsh school. Yet, his camp told
him they would conﬁscate his outboard if he did not resume catching live
ﬁsh for them. The camp’s proﬁts were not made from loans, but from
guaranteeing their supply of ﬁsh and ensuring that ﬁshers would keep
working. So if Suala wanted to prevent the camp from repossessing his
motor, he had to continue to ﬁsh on a regular basis. As the supply of ﬁsh
became more scarce, this entailed more of his time and effort.

Chapter 5
148
The relationships ﬁshers had with ﬁsh camps were signiﬁcant for an-
other reason: live ﬁsh camps were themselves centrally implicated in the
procurement of cyanide. Puah Jaﬁr claimed that poison was not used in
the Togean Islands before the arrival of the live ﬁsh industry, when ﬁsh
traders came with cyanide and taught ﬁshers how to use it. The traders
then supplied cyanide at no cost. “You shouldn’t teach people how to use
stuff like this, then it wouldn’t be used,” he observed ironically. Traders
working with the camps also supplied the compressor rigs used to catch
live ﬁsh in deeper waters and in more difﬁcult locations. Compressors go
hand in hand with cyanide use; there is no other way for a diver using a
compressor to catch live ﬁsh. These techniques have allowed live ﬁshers
to target literally every single sizeable grouper and wrasse on a given reef.
Laws from Above, Enforcement from Below
If cyanide ﬁshing was illegal, and many Sama people opposed its use, how
did it then come into common practice? The pragmatics of legal practice
provide one answer. Along with biomedicine, law is a preeminent form
of reason, and an insistence on legal form is one method states use for
asserting a universal, unmarked place within the community of nations.
In the 1990s Indonesia continually referred to itself as a “legal state”
(Negara Hukum), and it did have a formal legal framework generous in
its protections for both ordinary people and the resources they depended
upon. Environmental laws, for example, prohibited the use of destructive
technologies, the harvest and export of endangered species, and the pene-
tration of foreign ﬁshing vessels into Indonesian waters. The law is also
enacted in practice, however, and Indonesian resource law revealed a con-
sistent support for large business interests and a structure that was suspi-
cious and punitive at the community level. Laws regulated ﬁshers, busi-
nesses, and government agencies differently, thereby determining the
calculus of gain and loss in the live ﬁsh trade.
The basic framework for environmental protection in Indonesia falls
under the “Law of Living Natural Resources and their Ecosystems” (GOI
1990).2 Embedded in a philosophy that nature is God’s creation, the law
states that the natural environment should be preserved for the common
welfare of Indonesian citizens speciﬁcally, and for humankind more gener-
ally. At a biological level the law acknowledges elements in an ecosystem
as interdependent, and ecological processes as part of life-support sys-
tems. At a social level it proclaims that ecosystems and species should be
utilized in a manner protective of the ecosystem and its ﬂora and fauna.
The “Basic Fisheries Act” (Law 9 of 1985, see Warren and Elston 1994)
is one example of a law focused on popular well-being with aims that

Fishing with Cyanide
149
include improving the lives of ﬁshers and preserving the ﬁsh resource.
Indonesian environmental legislation contains the broad argument that
conservation and development are inseparable and both necessary for
human welfare; thus, environmental protection has been considered the
shared responsibility of citizens and of the state.
Foucault has written, “the bourgeoisie was to leave to itself the illegal-
ity of rights: the possibility of getting around its own regulations and its
own laws, of ensuring for itself an immense sector of economic circulation
by a skillful manipulation of gaps in the law—gaps that were foreseen
by its silences, or opened up by de facto tolerance (Foucault 1975:87).”
Indonesian resource law, which, on the surface, advocates well-being for
both humans and nature, ensures a similar “illegality of rights” for an
elite segment of the Indonesian population. In a country where “develop-
ment” has been an ideological imperative (see George 1996; Hefner 1990;
Keane 1997; Steedly 1993; Tsing 1993), environmental legislation in In-
donesia has created a protected environment for business, while focusing
conservation responsibility, enforcement, and blame onto marginalized
communities.
Bracketing, momentarily, the argument that Indonesian legislation has
never been expected to fulﬁll populist rhetorics, we can see how ofﬁcial
structures have moved from protecting people and ecosystems to pro-
tecting the interests of bureaucrats and traders by looking at the legisla-
tion for Napoleon wrasse. The decrees, titled “Ban on the Napoleon
Wrasse Fish Haul” (GOI 1995a), and “Ban on Export of Napoleon
Wrasse Fish” (GOI 1995c),3 appear in name to insulate this species from
catch and sale, since markets were almost wholly foreign and export is
banned. The law on export states, “the hauling of the Napoleon wrasse
has been conducted using manners that may be harmful to coral reef eco-
systems and other marine biology,” and, “in the framework of develop-
ment and conservation of ﬁsh resources and coral reef ecosystems, it is
deemed necessary to establish a ban on export of Napoleon wrasse ﬁsh.”
Both laws, however, contain the kernels of exception that actually facili-
tate, rather than hinder, the catch and export of the ﬁsh.
Fish camps, exporters, and government ofﬁcials are the direct beneﬁci-
aries of these legal frameworks since ﬁshers are required by law to sell
their catch to a “collecting company.” Even though in practice these com-
panies control capture methods through the provision of equipment and
incentives, the law does not speak to this role and they are hardly regu-
lated or hampered in their ability to sell and proﬁt from the Napoleon
wrasse. For example, Article 8 of the Ban on Haul states, “ﬁsh shall weigh
not less than one kilogram and not more than three,” while Article 9 says
ﬁsh “weighing more than three kilograms or those weighing less than one
kilogram will be allowed to be sold locally to a marketing entrepreneur”

Chapter 5
150
(GOI 1995a). Thus, although the law formally disallowed their export,
ﬁsh weighing too little or too much can legally enter the hands of traders
whose only intent is to sell ﬁsh abroad. Napoleon wrasse laws also have
allowed catch for research purposes, but collecting companies—ﬁsh
camps—are not set up as research stations. There is not any reason other
than export to purchase Napoleon wrasse from ﬁshers, and it is unrealis-
tic to expect that the ﬁsh the camps buy will not be exported (or that large
ﬁsh will shrink to permissible export sizes!).
Laws that enable trade in live ﬁsh simultaneously attenuate bureaucra-
cies and enrich individual government workers. This occurs through the
government’s reporting, evaluating, and permit-granting roles as outlined
in live ﬁshing laws. Government agencies grant permits for the haul of
ﬁsh and require other permits to export live ﬁsh. Each Napoleon wrasse
also needs an ofﬁcial “letter of origin” for legal export. The provincial
ﬁsheries department is further obliged to “determine the ﬁshing ground
by evaluating the resource and its environment.” Despite this “oversight,”
the Napoleon wrasse resource was well on its way to local extirpation in
the Togean Islands in the 1990s, indicating a deﬁcit in will, funding, and
expertise—and even intent—of the state to carry out its role as resource
guarantor. This was because the fees collected for permits and services
ensured that the government’s own oversight practices created conditions
for maximum exploitation and minimal protection of live ﬁsh and other
natural resources.
Every government agency has its agents. In Indonesia, bureaucracies
need to secure their own funding for all but the most rudimentary tasks,
and the personal income of government workers is directly connected to
the “fees” generated through bureaucracy. Granting permits and facilitat-
ing trade are the ordinary proﬁt-making activities of many branches of
government. Permits for ﬁsh camps in the Togean Islands reportedly cost
US$1,000 in “ofﬁcial money,” implying that immeasurable hidden
charges surpassed this ﬁgure. It was in the self interest of bureaucrats to
grant these permits, not to restrict access to natural resources. Further,
exporters without proper permits have illegally identiﬁed Napoleon
wrasse as “grouper” on customs forms and have paid ofﬁcials not to in-
spect their shipments (Johannes and Riepen 1995:40). In Indonesia, per-
mit requirements providing personal income for ofﬁcials was the rule,
not the exception, and there was no evidence to support the idea that
enforcement limited, or was even intended to limit, cyanide use.
Unlike traders and bureaucrats, who were situated to proﬁt from the
industry without liability, risk, or blame, ﬁshers were vulnerable to prose-
cution and extortion, and they also had to live with the material conse-
quences of damaged coral reef environments. In another regulation, the
“Decree of the Director General of Fisheries Regarding Size, Location,

Fishing with Cyanide
151
and Manners of Hauling Napoleon Wrasse Fish” (GOI 1995b), we can
see the role ﬁshers are assigned in the interstices between traders and bu-
reaucrats. This law allows for catch and trade by “traditional ﬁshers,”
deﬁned as persons or groups whose means of livelihood is catching ﬁsh
using nonmotorized craft or small outboards and, “which utilize ﬁsh
catching devices and substances that shall not harm the ﬁsh resource or
its environment.” Different types of rules and responsibilities within the
decree apply to ﬁshers, businesses, and government agencies. Rules per-
taining to ﬁshers focus on techniques and equipment: ﬁshers can use lines,
traps, and nets to catch Napoleon wrasse. Emphasis on catch method
implicates ﬁshers as the party responsible for how ﬁsh are caught. Unlike
ﬁshers, collecting companies are attributed “scientiﬁc expertise.” 4 Yet,
since cyanide is distributed by ﬁsh camps to ﬁshers, the law implicates
only the most vulnerable party. Moreover, ﬁshers’ vulnerability is located
in their inability to pay the fees and ﬁnes, which facilitates extralegal eco-
nomic activities.
A story of the enforcement of a law prohibiting the use of air compres-
sors to catch ﬁsh reveals the manner in which the state and its laws func-
tioned in the Togean Islands at the time. Representatives from the police,
Navy, and ﬁsheries departments descended on Susunang village one day
to perform what they called a “secret operation” (operasi rahasia). They
were checking for the permits that are required to own a compressor. One
village leader was told to notify the owners of the compressors of their
permit violations. Indicating his own involvement in illegality, he an-
swered that he had “inﬂuenza” and couldn’t leave his house. Unlike the
sea operation run by the low-level village bureaucrats, these outsiders
were successful in ﬁnding culprits, however, and three compressors were
temporarily conﬁscated.5 The rumor that the equipment owners would
be taken to the regency capital, Poso, to face charges traveled around
Susunang. The way out of the difﬁculty involved cash, and the sooner the
problem was dealt with, the less expensive it would be.
Togean people consistently expressed the idea that only poor people
end up in trouble with the law; those with means can pay their way out
of difﬁculties. As Jaﬁr said, “I want to help [those arrested], but to help
with money—there isn’t any money. To help with advice—I don’t want
to seem like I go along with the position of the police. What do I do?”
Most Susunang people had $50 or $100 in savings at the most, and release
from jail cost the impossible sum of US$5,000, I was told. This forced
Sama and other Togean people who were caught in enforcement webs to
turn to village ofﬁcials and entrepreneurs who would trade immediate
cash and protection for future illegal resource harvests. Ironically, while
poor people were the ﬁrst to suffer penalties they also assumed the great-
est risks, yet were excluded from the highest live ﬁsh proﬁts. Laws, as

Chapter 5
152
they were written, interpreted, and enforced within the entrepreneurial
Indonesian bureaucracy, enriched bureaucrats and their organizations
and failed to protect either species or citizens.
Law as Natural Resource
Two weeks after the initial incident, the story of the arrest of the cyanide
ﬁshers from North Sulawesi continued. Susunang’s leaders were sum-
moned to speak with a policeman who arrived to investigate the incident.
A very imposing ﬁgure, the policeman wore a sidearm over his shirt and
a chain of bullets lined up across his chest. Rather than supporting Susu-
nang peoples’ defense of their local waters, the policeman chastised them
for their action. He said that the village had been wrong to detain the
boat, and the captain might have to be compensated for his lost revenues
with village funds. Susunang’s leaders protested that what they did wasn’t
really an “arrest”—it was simply a chance to have a “conversation” with
the boat captain. In the end the village leaders were warned, the police-
man was paid some money for the problem to go away, and the captain
was free to use cyanide where and when he wished. “The village has the
right to regulate its own affairs, but sometimes the police want to mix
in,” Udin grumbled.
At Uemata, Hari argued that one of the most important steps needed
to protect Indonesia’s coral reefs is for people to be able to defend their
territories from outsiders, who use harmful methods to meet short-term
interests. Hari and Laksmi attempted to educate Susunang people on their
legal rights in relation to environmental protection. Using the law as a
form of community defense was a formidable task, however, given the
lack of voice Togean people possess in relation to the Indonesian state.
Even when communities are legally right, they are wrong within the prac-
tical reason of Indonesian law enforcement. The live ﬁsh trade in Indone-
sia could have been used to beneﬁt a large number of Indonesia’s ﬁshers
over the long haul, but instead it was designed to make a small number
of well-connected ofﬁcials and entrepreneurs wealthy. This came at the
expense of Togean coral reefs and the people who depend upon them.
Pheng Cheah has asked us to consider, “What does it mean for a coun-
try in the South to practice hospitality without reserve as a host for trans-
national capital?” (Cheah 2003:393). The Togean live ﬁsh trade provides
one answer. Activists and others working for social change in Indonesia
were invited to remediate at the community level, broadcasting develop-
ment and governmentality, and supporting the state’s agenda for social
control. Some, like Hari, looked for opportunities to advocate for rights.
But had IFABS attempted to intervene in natural resource markets, the

Fishing with Cyanide
153
state would have viewed this as threatening. IFABS scientists who wanted
to assist Togean people to conserve Togean natures were, thus, interpo-
lated into the state’s plans for “people’s self-help” and forcefully discour-
aged from interfering in the state’s business ventures.
Cyanide ﬁshing is a cosmopolitan practice, however, that must be un-
derstood in a variety of ways that take us well beyond ﬁshing communi-
ties. Rather than condemn the industry and its ﬁshers, I have tried to
illustrate who participates in the destructive aspects of live ﬁshing (occa-
sionally including, but not limited to, Sama people), what structures facili-
tate their participation, and through what cultural logics these structures
have come into being. This speciﬁcity is incompatible with liberal theories
of the law, however, which are based on the premise that all members of
a nation have equal access to its universal capacities, orders, and responsi-
bilities. Laws are based on principles of the good and the fair deemed
obvious to “any rational person.” It is neither necessary, nor even desir-
able, from the perspective of liberal legal theory, to understand contin-
gency or social circumstance. Yet the exemplary “human” of a universal-
ist approach to live ﬁsh law is also a particular ﬁgure: the live ﬁsh trader
imbued with both knowledge and virtue. It is not Puah Umar or Puah
Jaﬁr for whom Indonesian law is not a natural resource.

Chapter Six
THE SLEEP OF REASON
The sleep of reason produces monsters, but the sleep of
reason does not represent the imagination’s taking over.
On the contrary, reason is asleep when the imagination
deserts it. For if, as a contemporary description of
[Goya’s] work puts it, ‘imagination forsaken by reason
begets impossible monsters; united with her, she is the
mother of the arts and the source of her wonders,’ ex-
actly the same is true of reason itself: their relation is
symmetrical. It is only when both work together that
each is fully awake.
—Alexander Nehamas, “The Sleep of Reason Produces
Monsters”
ON OCTOBER 19, 2004, after more than a decade of species inventory,
ecotourism initiatives, and social surveys, the efforts of the IFABS scien-
tists ﬁnally bore fruit and the Minister of Forestry issued a decree (GOI
2004a) establishing the Togean Islands National Park (Taman Nasional
Kepulauan Togean). Letters from the governor of Central Sulawesi and
the Bupati of Tojo Una-Una Regency supported the federal-level legisla-
tion. In justifying the creation of the park, the decree mentions the Togean
Islands’ natural diversity, including 262 species of corals, 596 species of
ﬁsh, 555 types of mollusks, pilot whales, and a profusion of land fauna
including deer, lizards, the bear cuscus, tarsiers, and the Togean monkey
Macaca togeanus. The archipelago is further praised for its great potential
as a site for ecotourism.
The emergence of the Togean National Park after more than a decade
of conservation work provides an ending to my story of the Wild Profu-
sion, but certainly it is also a new beginning, a change that will allow new
conditions of negotiation and meaning for all involved. It is unclear how
corporate pearl farms, live ﬁsh camps, or logging corporations, for in-
stance, will ﬁt into this new organization of natural resource space. Will
the existence of the park rationalize natural resource harvests in such a
way as to shelter the islands and their peoples from the next extractive
boom cycle in terrestrial or marine products? What will happen when the
live ﬁsh trade expires? Will it be replaced with a trade in ornamental live
ﬁsh as predicted, and will the park make a difference in how this trade is
organized? Some Togean people will inevitably ally themselves with the
new park, and others will certainly oppose it. New identities and new

The Sleep of Reason
155
natures will emerge, and different social forms and rationalities will be
assembled as new natural and national cultures of nature come together.
That biodiverse nature could be produced from Togean Island materials
in the 1990s depended upon a series of arbitrary and contingent events.
Colonial natural historians, avoiding the mainland due to threats of vio-
lence and piracy, established a scientiﬁc record that would lead contempo-
rary scientists to the archipelago. A Swiss man named Sibley released a
group of macaques in the Togeans in the 1930s, attracting Dr. Supriatna
to the islands, and leading him to build Camp Uemata and establish the
Indonesian Foundation for the Advancement of Biological Science. There
is little doubt that “biodiversity” would have emerged from a decade of
taxonomic study in almost any nonurban region of Indonesia, and nearly
all of the species listed in the park decree are found in other places. It is
also clear that the Togean macaque helped legitimate the park without the
support of scientiﬁc results. Yet, when the work of Togean conservation
biology was completed, other “allies and resources” were made redun-
dant (Latour 1987:98), and the Togean Island National Park now appears
to be based on the fact of nature itself.
How certain aspects of the physical world become important at particu-
lar moments in time cannot be understood entirely through rubrics of the
natural or universal, I have argued. Positing biodiverse nature as prior to
signiﬁcation or representation distorts the effects of precisely what scien-
tists choose to notice, and why and how this attention is constitutive of
nature as an object.1 The assertion of a prediscursive sphere of nature
should be understood, rather, as a type of political claim. In the case of
the Togean Island National Park, claims to a fundamental, prerepresenta-
tional space of nature were a form of instrumental reason facilitating in-
tervention on behalf of plants and animals that cannot “speak for them-
selves” (Latour 1987). Through conservation biology, Indonesian
scientists have been able to claim this transnational universalist position
for their own. But to the extent they have aligned themselves with interna-
tional norms for biodiversity conservation, they have forwarded an argu-
ment against Togean peoples’ natures.
The formalization of the park provides an opening, however, to orga-
nize conservation around Togean peoples’ natures (as the IFABS scientists
were able to do at some points) rather than scientists’ biodiversity. To
proceed in this way would mean to recognize how plants and animals
have informed cosmopolitan Togean worlds for at least several centuries.
It would also mean to problem-solve around the mutual desires scientists
and Sama people have for species abundance and diversity. Clams, for
example, or grouper, or sea cucumber would all be excellent locations
from which to begin to think through a collaborative idea of species con-
servation. Producing Sama people as a different kind of “indigenous”

Chapter 6
156
human would not be as useful to such work as recognizing them in proj-
ects of friendship, thought, or care. To organize conservation around To-
gean people’s natures would mean to refuse reason’s afﬁliation with his-
toricist thought, to disavow tribunals of reason, and to recognize that
objects are not all that is needed to know or to think. To organize conser-
vation around Sama people’s natures would mean for scientists to begin
to take nature at least as seriously as Sama people themselves do.
Biodiversity Conservation Becomes a New Form
I have described Togean conservation as an assemblage of science, nature,
and nation in 1990s Indonesia that took into account: the exponential
reduction of species forms across the globe; the rise of Southern expertise
in transnational conservation projects; the ICDP as a means of reconciling
the relationship of certain peoples to plants and animals; and the domestic
political milieu of the late-Suharto era in Indonesia. As such, the Togean
project represented a particular temporal convergence. With Suharto’s
demise in 1998 the scene would shift: the changing political ﬁeld in Indo-
nesia would come into play with the new ecoregion concept in biodiver-
sity science, loss of conﬁdence in the ICDP, and a transformed post-
9/11 international political climate. Biodiversity conservation in Indone-
sia would become a new form.
The fall of Suharto inaugurated the era known in Indonesia as “refor-
mation” (reformasi). In addition to anticorruption campaigns, reformasi
brought about efforts at administrative decentralization and attempts to
address long-standing debates over Federalism left unresolved since the
Indonesian Revolution. New “regional autonomy” laws (U.U. Otonomi
Daerah) gave increased powers to the provinces (Propinsi) and regencies
(Kabupaten) to manage their own affairs (GOI 2004b, 1999a). These
laws developed a new system of beneﬁt-sharing between the regions and
the central government, and have allowed for changes such as local con-
trol over the coastal sea within a twelve-mile limit. Law No. 31/1999
Concerning Fisheries (GOI 1999b) speciﬁcally passed authority over
coastal resources to the regencies.
At around the same time the major international environmental NGOs
began to argue that the ICDP model had failed, and that their organiza-
tions were not capable of being everything to everyone. Caring about
people by providing economic development or health care draws re-
sources away from the more fundamental mission of preserving species
and habitats.2 Through this reasoning a transformation has occurred in
how the international groups problematize the relationship between na-
ture and the human. Reversing Foucault’s well-known formulation, the

The Sleep of Reason
157
“human” who threatens nature is now no longer someone to be aided, a
ﬁgure known through the disciplinary power of governmentality, but a
threatening ﬁgure who must be controlled through law, surveillance, and
sovereign power.
An unintended consequence of the shift from centralized authority to
local autonomy in Indonesia has been that the provinces have become
more amenable to direct inﬂuence. In this context foreign conservation
NGOs have used their capacity to fund, train, and equip local constabu-
laries and judiciaries. CI, TNC, WWF, and USAID’s Natural Resources
Management Project have all become at least peripherally afﬁliated with,
and sometimes directly involved in, projects of “enforcement.” These
projects have been aimed, for the most part, at the local level rather than
at markets or traders. The new concern with enforcement is revealed in a
report by CI’s “Center for Conservation and Government,” which pro-
vides “the ﬁrst quantitative evidence of exactly how poor enforcement in
biodiversity-rich countries is”:
Using a behavioral economics framework called the “enforcement econom-
ics model,” this study quantiﬁes disincentives generated by enforcement re-
gimes and compares them to the proﬁts that motivate large-scale commercial
illegal activity in the hotspots. The enforcement disincentive is determined
not only by the value of penalties; but also by how likely lawbreakers are to
be detected, arrested, prosecuted and convicted so that penalty is incurred,
and by how long the system takes to work. The results of this analysis of
risks vs. rewards clearly demonstrate that weak enforcement regimes are gen-
erating a shockingly insufﬁcient deterrent to illegal activity. (CI 2004:1)
Through an example from the Philippines, the CI study further ex-
plains, “in the Philippines’ Calamianes Islands, ﬁshermen practicing ille-
gal dynamite and cyanide ﬁshing risk only nine cents, but stand to earn
an average of $70.57 per trip.” The ethnographic complexities of cyanide
ﬁshing that I describe in chapter 5 seep away in the hyperrationalized
calculations of the “enforcement economics model.” In the Togean Is-
lands, while a hypothesized “average” person might risk only nine cents,
real ﬁshers risk $5,000 to get out of jail, or their independence as they
become reliant on village ofﬁcials, or even their bodies and lives should
they be caught and beaten as sometimes happens. Many also comprehend
the ecological risks they are taking. While the measurement “nine cents”
serves as a rationalization for enforcement, it tells us little we do not
already know about live ﬁshing, and yet this type of calculus persuades
the international groups that they must now turn their energies to devel-
oping and enforcing natural resource laws.3
As they have shifted attention away from livelihoods and toward milita-
rized and legal interventions, the ICDP has begun to seem anachronistic

Chapter 6
158
and misguided (Lowe 2003). A former representative of USAID’s Natural
Resources Management Project describes his perception of the shift this
way: “If one examines enforcement programs around the world that are
ﬁghting other blatantly illegal (but economically enticing) activities that
are deemed harmful for the future of society (narcotics peddling, child
pornography, and even hired murder come to mind), very few indeed seem
to have ‘alternative livelihood’ programs attached to them. Psychological
counseling, perhaps, but not extensive and expensive efforts to retrain
drug sellers to become grocery story owners” (Erdmann 2002).
Within this new context the international conservation community has
begun to train and equip the police and navy, and they have also encour-
aged communities to patrol and police themselves. Additionally, they have
begun to support the Indonesian judiciary aiding in the process of gather-
ing evidence and prosecuting offenders. The international organizations
claim some success, yet there has already been one case brought before
the Indonesian Commission for Human Rights (Komnasham) when two
men accused of illegal ﬁshing in Komodo National Park were shot dead
by forces supported by The Nature Conservancy (World Rainforest
Movement 2004, Walhi 2003a and b).
An argument can be made about the international milieu within which
this turn to enforcement has occurred. George Lakoff (2004, 2002, 1995)
has analyzed the current conservative U.S. political climate as the triumph
of “strict father morality” over “nurturant morality.” In his strict father
model, “Life is seen as fundamentally difﬁcult and the world as funda-
mentally dangerous. Evil is conceptualized as a force in the world, and it
is the father’s job to support his family and protect it from evils—both
external and internal.” (1995:10) Both “strict father” and “nurturant”
political inclinations have always existed in American society, he argues,
and each of us, as individuals, employ dual paradigms. In the post-9/11
world, however, the frame through which Americans view politics has
shifted, on balance, in the direction of strict paternalism. With the “global
war on terror” this U.S. political momentum has been internationalized.
The permeability of the Indonesian provinces to conservation capital
coincides with the transnational milieu of forceful, direct intervention in
the “war on terror.” Within this milieu, U.S.-based environmental NGOs
imagine enforcement as a way to protect nature from the absolute, univer-
sally self-evident evil of biodiversity loss. What are the implications for
Indonesia of hosting this powerful paradigm promoted by wealthy inter-
national conservation groups? Enforcement efforts and projects to ratio-
nalize Indonesian resource law are not attempts to create the conditions
for “justice” in Indonesia—they do not, for example, include the means
to balance a prosecution with a defense. Nor do they represent the adver-
sarial legal system through which environmental conﬂicts are mediated

The Sleep of Reason
159
in the United States. They are interventions in the name of sovereign
power in a country where some one million people died as a consequence
of state violence under the Suharto regime. The rationality of enforcement
is incapable of taking into account the speciﬁc histories or implications
of this violent legacy.
Within this new assemblage Indonesian scientists continue to occupy a
position in the middle, between, on the one hand, transnational rhetorics
of enforcement and, on the other, their own understandings of Indonesian
history, politics, and citizenship. In recent work in Susunang village, a
“sentry house” was established with village and CI funds to guard part
of the reef (Ibid.). At the same time, through a decade of developing
friendships and loyalties to Susunang people, some of the scientists have
been able to mediate between the universalist ambitions of transnational
biodiversity conservation and the particular afﬁliations they have formed
with Susunang people. One scientist describes his view of the new situa-
tion in Susunang like this:
The majority of Kabalutan [Susunang] people are from Bajau or Sama eth-
nic groups who are economically and culturally bound to marine resources.
Unfortunately, there has been a widespread negative perception of them.
Most people in Togean Islands refer to Bajau people or Kabalutan people
as the perpetrators of ﬁsh intoxication or bombing. Whereas in fact, there
are larger numbers of Bajau people who want to put an end to those activi-
ties, as conveyed personally by the people of Kabalutan village. They have
come to realize that their catch is diminishing. Some of them even feel un-
comfortable to know that Bajau people are labeled as destroyers of coral
reefs. (Sundjaya 2005)
Across Indonesia scientists and environmental activists have responded
in a variety of ways to the new opportunities opening up in the post–
Suharto period. A more robust Indonesian NGO movement has devel-
oped, and these NGOs desire to ameliorate the inequities of the Suharto
era: they investigate land tenure claims on behalf of farmers, work on
community forestry projects, monitor foreign mining operations, facili-
tate between communities and bureaucrats, develop “indigenous peo-
ples” alliances, start political “green” parties. Some IFABS scientists have
made an investment in understanding social complexity by leaving the
ﬁeld of biology to pursue advanced study in anthropology, geography, or
rural sociology. Others have taken advantage of the political opening to
advocate on behalf of Togean Island peoples in new ways. Two new
groups, the “Alliance of Indigenous Togean Peoples,” and “Togean Wom-
en’s Solidarity,” formed in 2001 to protest logging and government land
appropriation in the archipelago (Faisal 2001).

Chapter 6
160
Within these projects, new political imaginations of possible “natures,”
ﬁgures of the “human,” and relations between the two proliferate and
inﬂuence the consciousness of Indonesian biologists who continue to
work in the Togean Islands. These imaginations are not always harmoni-
ous. Some activists accuse the Togean project of “CI-ization” (CI-isasi),
while other scientists are said to be “too romantic” (terlalu romantis) in
their support of “indigenous” or “adat” peoples (although no one is ever
said to be too romantic about science!). An emphasis on forms brings our
attention to the historically situated conditions of possibility within which
such debates occur. To track the possibilities and limitations of the new
reformasi-era form of Indonesians’ environmental and social activism in
greater detail would be exciting work.
Reason and Enchantment
As Alexander Nehamas argues in relation to Francisco Goya’s 1799 paint-
ing, El Suen˜o de la Razon Produce Monstruos, reason and imagination
are both necessary for thought to be fully “awake.” It seems that ghosts
must be banished from narratives of biodiversity, however, even though
their presence is palpable within conservation biology. Relations between
universal reason and enchanting myth in postcolonial Indonesia are re-
ﬂected in the state’s formal approval of ﬁve “world religions” (Islam,
Christianity [Protestantism], Catholicism, Hinduism, and Buddhism) and
rejection of what it calls “animism” (animisme). This ofﬁcial position on
haunting is important for understanding the value of scientiﬁc rationality
in Indonesia, although it tells us little of the active social life of religion,
of Indonesian spirits, or of any phenomenon not otherwise amenable to
scientiﬁc observation. Max Weber’s famous dictum that instrumental rea-
son disenchants the world, creating therein an “iron cage” (what Foucault
has called a “monstre froid”), is equally applicable in Indonesia where
reason’s (imagined) triumph over enchantment has meant that the spirit
world itself has become inhabited by the cold monster of governmental
rationality. Compulsory de-magiﬁcation haunts the postcolonial nation
and the stories it can tell about itself.
It is not only the postcolonial world that is inhabited by phenomena not
easily explained through scientiﬁc rationality, I have argued. The trafﬁc
between reason and enchantment is an important part of any story of
science-in-the-making. Johannes Fabian, for example, has described how
colonial science was conducted within the context of reason’s alter ego:
madness. Fabian studied the “uncontrolled, ecstatic aspects of ethno-
graphic knowledge production” in the African explorations of German
colonial scientists in the nineteenth century (2000:13): “A truly radical

The Sleep of Reason
161
critique needs to address the very concept of rationality, especially the
built-in tendency of that concept to present itself as outside and above
historical contexts.” Rather than a pure space of disenchantment, Fabian
found the ecstatic, the drug-induced, the magical, the erotic, and the emo-
tional, all relevant to the practice of making knowledge.
Likewise, I view as magical a relationship between the enumeration
of species and the ability to conserve nature’s creatures in the context
where biologists will nearly always claim that “social knowledge” is
more important to conservation than the science of biology itself. This
is not meant to take away from the rationality of Indonesian scientists
at this late date—if anything, they share the magical or mad aspects of
science in common with German colonial explorers and EuroAmerican
biologists. Rather, the enthusiasm for enumerating and classifying spe-
cies in transnational projects of biodiversity involves both a haunting by
the ghost of natural history, when such a technics of nature was ﬁrst
enlivened, and an act of conjuring where we cannot determine what goes
on out of sight when preservation gets pulled out of the hat of enumera-
tion and classiﬁcation.
While conservation biology normalizes nature as “biodiverse,” it simul-
taneously naturalizes both the human of universal posterity for whom
nature will be saved, and that particular human ﬁgure who threatens na-
ture (expanding third world populations). While the being who threatens
nature has been extensively elaborated in projects of conservation around
the world (thus, the emphasis on “development” or “enforcement”), the
human for whom nature will be saved has been left relatively unarticu-
lated. Like live ﬁsh regulations, where the ﬁsh trader stands in for the
citizen able to assume rights and responsibilities, or as in biomedicine,
where the patient with access to dense allopathic networks possesses the
universal human body, the “ecotourist” is the speciﬁc ﬁgure for whom
nature will be saved. Despite claims to the universal value of biodiverse
nature, this is a nature only some will be able to avail themselves of, while
others should be kept apart from it.
To study science in this way is not to deny the materiality of nature,
nor is it to claim that science is not “true.” It is simply to make note of
our social investments in the scientiﬁc questions we ask. Likewise, we can
bring our attention to the questions we ask as anthropologists or science
studiers. One of the most important recent approaches to the conjuncture
of people and nature has connected the environment to questions of social
justice. Through the rubrics of “political ecology” and “environmental
justice,” scholars have excavated the unequal distribution across popula-
tions of environmental beneﬁts and risks using an analytic of political
economy. It is clear from these studies that there are always winners and
losers when it comes to questions of deﬁning and distributing nature, and

Chapter 6
162
these approaches have been crucial for reorienting a generation of think-
ers from conservation biologies toward the greater emancipatory possibil-
ities of “liberation ecologies” (Peet and Watts 1996).
From the perspective of an analytic of reason, however, one intrinsically
rationalist paradigm does not necessarily free us from another, and an
engaged and rigorously articulated critique might not need to divide the
world between good and evil. Holding onto a sense of a priori fairness is
not necessarily the only, nor even the most apposite, antidote to universal-
ist perspectives on nature. We are all susceptible to the complexities of
partial understandings, to fantasies as well as facts; this is the lesson of
“studying up.” In this book I have approached the problem space of na-
ture and the human through an analytic of reason, not because we can
ignore critical questions of social justice, but rather for the possibilities
reason presents for conceiving of the issues in a new way.
Reason opens biodiversity’s “universality” to reﬂection and presents its
boundaries and possibilities as unstable. While liberal theories of justice
suggest that there are clear winners and losers (or domination and resis-
tance), reason contains a more oblique sense of the possibilities for rem-
edy: all any of us have to work with are corrupted forms. In thinking
through questions of Togean nature, Indonesian scientists and Togean
people are not self-knowing “individuals” possessed of right, nor are they
even necessarily free from coercion or physical domination (this is a differ-
ent thing, and perhaps even more important). Rather, they assemble mat-
ter, language, and technique in new ways within already existing degrees
of freedom and constraint.
To search for alternative political imaginations in the Togean biodiver-
sity project has meant, therefore, analyzing how Togean peoples’ and sci-
entists’ “lines of ﬂight rapidly get recuperated, organized, systematized,
programmatized,” just as we have witnessed these same Indonesians,
“creating something new within the most traditional political forms”
(Rose 1999:280). We should not expect to ﬁnd alternative political fu-
tures within puriﬁed spaces of enlightened or reasoned fairness. This poli-
tics is more complex, contingent, and compromised; it come in “degrees”;
we might not ﬁnd it where we expect it, or even know it when we see it.4
Likewise, I have described what it would mean to understand the deep
imbrication of Sama lives and encompassing Togean land and ma-
rinescapes without imagining this relationship as essential in either ratio-
nalist or Romantic terms. I have tried to avoid the temptation to read
nature and identity as a determining relationship, for example in the ﬁg-
ure of the “subsistence resource user,” or as a carceral relationship, for
example in the ﬁgure of the “local person.” To explore reason from To-
gean Island examples has meant to ask what materials are assembled by

The Sleep of Reason
163
Sama people to produce what order of things. To follow the forms of
Sama people’s nature-making has meant tracking emergent rationalities
and practices of thought rather than codes found in the mind.
Independence Day
In 2001 I traveled for the ﬁrst time to the Philippine city of Dumaguete
in the Visayan archipelago. On Negros Oriental and the other Visayan
Islands one can ﬁnd Sama people living along the coast there. Over the
past decades they have been driven out of the islands of the Sulu sea by
ﬁghting between the Philippine government and the Moro National Liber-
ation Front. Since the 1970s their villages have been bombed, seaweed
farmers from other Islands have taken over their ﬁshing grounds and,
with the breakdown of traditional patron-client relationships with the
Tausug, many have been forced to ﬂee north. In Dumaguete I met one of
these refugees, named Boi.
Boi did not have a village full of family and friends he had known all
his life—he had lost his community when he ﬂed Sulu. Now he moved
between patches of available beachfront and squatted in abandoned
house lots with his wife and two grandchildren. Their house was made
from blue plastic tarps tied to a platform of driftwood they had gathered.
They did not have any access to rattan, bamboo, nipa, or sago palm from
the land to construct the beautiful houses Puah Jaﬁr or Mbo Poteiang had
in Susunang. Boi’s boat, likewise, was not Mbo Dinda’s elegant soppe or
Puah Umar’s leppa made from single forest logs. He had stitched together
a canoe from scraps of plywood using old rags and glue to caulk the
seams. Nor did he have a gonggang from which to harvest sago and, with
no Graveyard Island, where would Boi be buried when he died? Sama
people in Dumaguete were known as beggars who were forced to solicit
alms in the central market. Through charity and his little bit of ﬁshing,
Boi procured the necessities of bare life.
I fantasize Boi’s prior existence through H. Arlo Nimmo’s lyrical ac-
count of Sulu in the 1960s (Nimmo 1994), and I am haunted to this day
by the apocalyptic Sama futures I witnessed in Dumaguete. Knowing
alternative Sama lives, my heart was heavy as I left the city behind. Boi’s
existence is what it means to be unable to harvest the land or sea prod-
ucts that have sustained Sama lives for millennia. It represents what it is
to truly become a “sea nomad,” to have no rights to the ﬂora or fauna
of the land, and to lack the familiar sustaining relationship people in
Susunang have with the sea. This is the nightmare scenario of a transna-
tional conservation able to fully enforce each of its species prohibitions.

Chapter 6
164
This is the endgame of a global biodiversity vision where elite people on
one side of a hemispheric divide are able to separate those on the other
side from a nature they have claimed as biodiverse. This is reason de-
serted by imagination.5
But Dumaguete is not the only possible Sama future. On August 17,
1996, I participated in Susunang’s observance of Indonesian Indepen-
dence Day, which took place on the volleyball ﬁeld in front of the elemen-
tary school. At ﬁrst I misunderstood the event. Having watched the ﬂag-
raising ceremony, and having stood in the hot sun listening to overly long
ofﬁcial speeches, I got up to go home. I had left the ceremony in frustra-
tion, regretting, as I imagined it at the time, that my friends in Susunang
were being made fools of (kasih bodoh) by a state that believed they were
alien to it. But later in the day Puah Hamid asked me why I hadn’t stayed
until the end. Hadn’t I liked the way they had performed the ritual? Didn’t
they look smart in their khaki uniforms?
I was ashamed that he noticed my absence and that I didn’t have the
patience to sit attentively. What I did not comprehend at the time was
that, not only was the state making an instrumental claim on Puah
Hamid, Puah Hamid was also making an affective claim on the nation.
While he could not reject the state’s compulsory forms, Hamid could as-
sert his membership in the cosmopolitan Indonesian community that
claimed difference at the scale of the nation. His was a claim to national
belonging for Sama people whose difference seemed to exclude that possi-
bility. He asserted this claim not as an extraterrestrial other, but in the
nationally recognizable language of Indonesian citizenship. It was an ar-
gument for recognition as subject in, not object of, the national polity.
It is no coincidence that the nation, itself haunted by the instrumentality
of the state, operates at a scale that, by deﬁnition, resists universal reason.
Distinct from the subaltern studies scholars who regard the nation as a
reactionary form for its roots in German Romantic thought, its connec-
tions to ethnic fundamentalism, and its subordination of the individual
to the collective, Pheng Cheah argues from Southeast Asian materials that
the postcolonial nation is “the most apposite ﬁgure for freedom today”
(Cheah 2003:395).6 I ﬁnd an argument for the postcolonial nation as a
libratory ﬁgure useful for taking seriously Indonesians’ evident commit-
ment to the nation-form. The “difference” of Indonesians’ science lies in
a belief in the radical potential of their nation—a nation that has success-
fully cleared a space for Indonesian scientiﬁc expertise—and in Indone-
sian biologists’ faith that they share with Sama others this hopeful imagi-
nary of libratory national futures.
When E. E. Evans-Pritchard wished to demonstrate the common hu-
manity of Europeans and Africans, he was forced by his society’s own self-
representation to demonstrate a “Nuer” or “Azande” ability to reason.

The Sleep of Reason
165
Likewise, cognitive anthropologists, since the mid-twentieth century, have
proven that to classify is human—all peoples have this reasoning capacity
even when they categorize differently. To frame reason, instead, as a politi-
cal claim to knowledge at a universal scale, as a folk category that particu-
lar groups of people invest heavily in at particular moments, and as a
metacommentary on what will be noticed in a given place or time frees us
from this structure as the only means to heal hemispheric divides. Reason,
lacking imagination, produces monsters, not humanity. To imagine, to
dream and not know that one is dreaming, to be haunted, to be amenable
to mystiﬁcation and ideology, to experience care or friendship, these are
also necessary aspects for thinking through the value and meaning of the
wild profusion, the nature of the human, and for imagining their common
future together.


Appendix
Scientiﬁc, Military, and Commercial Explorations in the
Togean Islands and Vicinity: 1680–1999
1682*
Jan Van der Wal, captain of the Dutch vessel Brandgans.
On behalf of the Governor of Ternate (Robertus Padt-Brugge), Van der
Wal produced the ﬁrst hydrographic chart of the Gulf of Tomini including
Togean Islands, and wrote extensive notes on his encounters with Togean
peoples.
1855
Edward B. Hussey Jr., captain of the American whaling vessel Peruvian.
Described the north coast of the Togean Islands and the presence of
whales in the vicinity. Did not sight either people or communities.
1864, June 21–23
Carl Benjamin Hermann Von Rosenburg, scientiﬁc ofﬁcer of the Nether-
lands Indies.
For two years, including three days in the Togean Islands, studied the
geography, geology, ﬂora, fauna, and ethnology of the Gulf of Tomini.
Spotted an unusual land snail on Togean Island, and commented on the
abundance of sea cucumber for trade, but otherwise found the archipel-
ago to be without natural historical interest.
1871, August
Adolf Bernhard Meyer (born: Aron Baruch Meyer), Director of the Royal
Museum of Zoology and Ethnology at Dresden from 1875 to 1906.
Made collections of the birds of Celebes from July–September in the
Gulf of Tomini, and in August in the Togean Islands. Made ethnological
notes and collected word lists in local Sulawesi languages. Named new
Togean bird species.
1878*
S.C.J.W. van Musschenbroek, Dutch resident of Manado from 1875–76,
hobby naturalist, and ﬁrst director of the Colonial Museum in Leiden.
Ofﬁcial responsibilities took him to the Gulf of Tomini, where he pro-
duced a hydrographic chart, and a series of explanatory notes from sec-
ondary sources on local ethnology and natural history.
*Based on date of publication mentioning scientiﬁc exploration; speciﬁc dates of travel in
Togean Islands or Gulf of Tomini unknown.

Appendix
168
1886–1891
Baron G.W.W.C. van Hoevell.
Made seventeen trips around the Gulf of Tomini between March 1,
1886, and April 1891, and described the south coast of Great Togean
island. Wrote an explanation of van Musschenbroek’s Gulf of Tomini
chart based on his own travels aboard the Royal steamships Java, Havik,
Valk, Sperwer, and Kamphuijs.
1900
Nicolaus Adriani, Dutch linguist and delegate of the Netherlands Bible
Association.
Studied and recorded the languages of Central Sulawesi. In the Togean
Islands, documented Bobonko and Bajau/Sama languages, including a leg-
end of The Monkey and The Turtle.
1928, September
J.H.F. Umbgrove, scientist aboard the Eriadnus, a hydrographic vessel of
the Dutch East Indies Navy.
Described coastal morphology and inventoried the coral genera of the
Togean Islands. Tested “glacial control” and “subsidence” theories of
coral reef formation based on his Togean observations. Coined the term
“geopoetry.”
1939, December
J. J. Menden, naturalist.
Collected macaque specimens from Malenge Island, which he later de-
posited in the Bogor (Buitenzorg) Museum. Also collected Togean and
other Sulawesi bird specimens, which were distributed to museums in
Dresden, Berlin, and Amsterdam.
1945, May 3
Lt. Etheridge, U.S. Navy Captain of B-24 ﬁghter plane.
Crash-landed with crew off the village of Pulo Annau, Togean Island,
after engine caught ﬁre. Made notes on reactions of Togean people, whom
he described as mostly afraid, although a few waved hello.
1976, October
Japan International Cooperation Agency.
Upon request of M. Gobel, Chairman of Indonesian-Japanese Joint
Ventures Association and member of Indonesian Parliament, conducted
feasibility study for logging the Togean Islands. Produced list of market-
able Togean tree species and development plan for their extraction.
1977–1978
Francois Zacot, French anthropologist.

Appendix
169
Conducted ethnographic research in Torosiadje, a Sama community on
mainland Sulawesi coast directly north of Togean Islands. Began studies
of Sama people on Nain Island off Manado in 1976.
1979–1980, December 31–March 31
Victoria Selmier, German biologist.
Conducted study of the deer pig (Babyrousa babyrussa) on Pangempan
Island near Katupat village; discovered ﬁve individuals, including one
breeding female. Surveyed deer pig population on other Togean Islands
as well.
1982, February 18–25
United Nations Food and Agriculture Organization.
Indonesian and expatriate research team examined marine conserva-
tion potential of Togean Islands on behalf of the Indonesian Directorate
for Nature Conservation. Concluded the archipelago had high conserva-
tion potential for Coconut crab conservation and tourism development.
1987, July 12–October 1
Project Bat, Oxford University Expedition to the Togian Islands (Proyek
Kelelawar).
British and Indonesian research team surveyed twenty-one cave sites
and found sixteen bat species, none new to science. Explained the role of
bats as pollinators to Togean people they encountered, and assessed
threats to Togean bat populations. Discovered new species of millipede.
1989, November 12–15
World Wildlife Fund/Indonesian Ministry of Forestry.
Indonesian scientiﬁc team identiﬁed archipelago as excellent location
for Coconut crab conservation and tourism. Developed checklist of coral
genera from secondary sources.
1991, October 11–29
Deutsche Forest Consult, Germany, and Hasfarm Dian Konsultan,
Indonesia.
Indonesian and German consultants studied traditional land rights, ma-
rine biology, community development, buffer zone potential, and medici-
nal plant processing in the Togean Islands on behalf of Government of
Indonesia and Asian Development Bank.
1992–present
IFABS/CI.
Indonesian natural and social scientists conducted extensive biological
and social surveys of the Togean archipelago. Organized by Jatna Supri-

Appendix
170
atna to facilitate primatological research in the Togean archipelago, a ﬁeld
research station named Camp Uemata was built on Malenge Island. Work
culminated in the establishment of the Togean Island National Park. A
Togean water monitor, a Hawk owl, and other new species discovered.
1993
Sejati Foundation.
Team of Indonesia ﬁlmmakers and researchers conducted ethnographic
survey of Sama/Bajau communities near Torosiadje on north coast of Gulf
of Tomini, for the exhibition Bajau held in Jakarta at the end of 1993.
1994, 1995, 1996–1997, 2000
Celia Lowe, American cultural anthropologist.
Lived in Susunang and Camp Uemata for total of twenty-four months.
Went bird watching, caught lizards, collected sea cucumber, made sago.
Discovered the batunang (Labidodemas seperianum) and the sea grape,
which were new to her but not to science.
1996, April and August
Earthwatch.
Led by Indonesian scientists, U.S. and Australian volunteers conducted
coral reef, ﬁsh, bird, and herpetological inventories.
1996
Myron Shekelle, American biological anthropologist.
Studied speciation of Sulawesi tarsiers, including Togean tarsier using
genetic and acoustic analyses. Argued for taxonomic separation at the
species level of the Togean population of tarsiers.
1998, October–November
Marine Rapid Assessment Program of the Center for Applied Biodiversity
Science, CI.
Carried out inventory of marine species, including ﬁshes and corals in
Togean and Banggai Islands. New Wrasse ﬁsh discovered.
1999, September
Tethyana Expedition.
Australian
expedition
including
Dutch
and
American
scientist.
Searched for the origins of the Togean archipelago and its biodiversity.
Discovered species not found on adjacent reefs but found in waters of
Papua New Guinea. New Acropora coral discovered.

Notes
Introduction: Between the Human and the Wild Profusion
1. I use pseudonyms for all Indonesian scientists and Togean people in this
book, with the exception of already prominent scientists who are considered pub-
lic ﬁgures and whose work I am citing. In order to further disguise the identities
of both scientists and Sama people, I have also chosen to create composite charac-
ters. All of the anecdotes and examples I use are actual things people said or did,
but I have arbitrarily combined and separated incidents among my pseudonymous
characters.
2. I have chosen to use the nationalized spelling of “Togean” rather than
the former colonial spelling of “Togian” or the Dutch name “Schildpad (Turtle)
Islands.”
3. According to volcanologist Chris Newhall, Una Una Island, or Gunung
Colo, has had two or three eruptions. The most recent eruption began on July 18,
1983 and ﬁzzled out by December. A similar eruption occurred in 1898, and a
minor event occurred sometime in the late 1930s.
4. The term “BioDiversity” was ﬁrst coined by the Board of Basic Biology for
the “National Forum on BioDiversity,” which convened September 21–25, 1986,
in Washington, D.C. The Forum was sponsored by the National Research Coun-
cil’s Commission on Life Sciences, and by the Smithsonian Institution’s Director-
ate of International Activities.
5. “Nature” in this book is an empty signiﬁer. In its most general sense, I use
it to mean plants, animals, land, and marinescapes. But I also use the word as a
placeholder for all of the culturally and situationally speciﬁc content that I then
describe particular people ﬁlling it with. For this reason, I write of “biodiverse”
nature, “curious” nature, “Sama” natures, etc.
6. Edward O. Wilson writes, “specialists in this young scientiﬁc discipline con-
duct their studies with the same sense of immediacy as doctors in an emergency
ward” (Wilson 1992:228).
7. One of biodiversity’s founders and most eloquent and proliﬁc spokesper-
sons, Edward O. Wilson summarizes what is at stake for him in the following
terms:
Biological diversity must be treated more seriously as a global resource, to be indexed,
used, and above all preserved. Three circumstances conspire to give this matter an un-
precedented urgency. First, exploding human populations are degrading the environ-
ment at an accelerating rate, especially in tropical countries. Second, science is dis-
covering new uses for biological diversity in ways that can relieve both human suffering
and environmental destruction. Third, much of the diversity is being irreversibly lost
through extinction caused by the destruction of natural habitats, again especially in the
tropics. Overall, we are locked into a race. We must hurry to acquire the knowledge
on which a wise policy of conservation and development can be based for centuries to
come. (Wilson 1986:3)

Notes to Part One
172
8. Perhaps the most famous example is the position held by Richard Leakey as
Director of the Kenya Wildlife Service from 1989 through 1994.
9. Beginning in 1982, multiple excursions by scientists to the Togean Islands
documented their potential as a nature reserve. These analyses are described in
reports by the UNDP Food and Agricultural Organization (Salm 1982), US
Agency for International Development (Soekarno 1989), World Wildlife Fund
(Djohani et al. 1989), and the Asian Development Bank and the Indonesian Minis-
try of Forestry (1992).
10. The Togean Islands have been proposed as different kinds of protected
areas with different levels of restriction at different moments in time. These have
included “Marine Multiple-Use Reserve” (Kawasan Konservasi Alam Laut),
“Strict Nature Reserve” (Cagar Alam), “Marine Sanctuary” (Suaka Margasatwa
Laut), “National Marine Park” (Taman National Laut), and “Natural Recreation
Area” (Taman Wisata Laut). For the purposes of the ultimate aims of the IFABS
organization and the narrative of Wild Profusion, I view all of these as forms of
“national park.”
11. To get a sense of this debate as it has impinged on the issue of biodiversity,
see Cronon (1996) and Soule´ (1995).
12. For an excellent ethnographic example of a similar project sponsored by
World Wide Fund for Nature in Tanzania, see Whalley (2004).
13. In 1680 the crew of the Dutch “hooker” (a kind of ship), the Brandegans,
made the ﬁrst map of the Gulf of Tomini. It showed a settlement in the Togean
Islands labeled “Negeri Togoya.”
14. “Puah” is the Sama language teknonym for a person, female or male, who
has children but not yet grandchildren. “Mbo” is the teknonym for one who has
become a grandparent.
15. “Sama” is an ethnonym that the people use to refer to themselves. Non-
Sama people more often than not use the exonym “Bajau.” My research with
Togean people was sited in several locations: two different non-Sama Togean vil-
lages (Malenge and Katupat); three Sama villages (Pulo Anau, Susunang, and
Toani); three Sama hamlets (Dano, Pulo Papan, and Penabali). The work with
scientists in the Togean Islands developed primarily at the biological research sta-
tion on Malenge Island, Camp Uemata.
Part I: Diversity as Milieu
1. As Benedict Anderson argues, it is “political at such a deep level that almost
everyone . . . [is] unconscious of the fact” (Anderson 1990:183).
2. Shelly Errington has observed that while the idea of progress has come under
suspicion in the North, the idea of cultural evolution has had a new life breathed
into it across the global South:
Governments of third-world (or “developing”) countries have tended to embrace the
idea of progress with enthusiasm. Originally called “modernization,” more recently
“development,” the idea of ceaseless forward economic and technological movement
has been given new life by an alliance composed of authoritarian third-world regimes,
transnational corporations, international monetary and development agencies, and
consultants from the industrialized state economies. Like early discourses of progress,

Notes to Chapter One
173
these late-twentieth-century avatars invent objects that appropriate and refer to the
primitive and the past, although these are more likely to take the form of gloriﬁcation
of national heritage rather than primitive art . . . or cultural theme parks celebrating
ethnicity or national history, or decorated and themed airports and hotels. (Errington
1998:5–6)
Chapter 1: Making the Monkey
1. In the Fall/Winter 1994 edition of the Sulawesi Primate Newsletter, a con-
tributor from CI wrote, “The presence of the endemic Togean macaque (Macaca
togeanus) and great signiﬁcance of the Togians for biogeography and evolutionary
biology led to the development of a long-term research conservation and commu-
nity development program there” (Mackie 1994).
2. This funding was procured through USAID’s Biodiversity Conservation
Network.
3. Cori Hayden discusses the need to move beyond the sets of instrumental
“interests” in science that practitioners of science and technology studies have
traditionally followed. Science studiers have followed “interests” to understand
how facts become facts. Hayden observes the unfortunate afﬁnity of this method
with the “rational actor” model inherent in conservation discourse itself. She
writes, “mainstream science studies and neoliberal biodiversity discourse share
a fascination, it would seem, with Homo economicus and his rational, interest-
maximizing behavior” (Hayden 2003:20–23).
4. Due to the compulsory nature of modernity’s forms, Chakrabarty has in-
sightfully objected to the term “alternative” (Chakrabarty 2002:xx).
5. See Abraham 2000, 1998, Chakrabarty 2000, Kumar 1995, and Prakash
1999, among others, for work that has explored the relationship between science
and Indian and British nationalisms. Paul Rabinow (1999) has explored French
nationalism and DNA through his work at the Centre d’Etude du Polymorphisme
Humaine, while Joan Fujimora (2000) explores nation and genomics in Japan.
These are only a few examples of emerging work on science and nation in the
ﬁeld of science and technology studies.
6. Speciﬁcally, in Pramoedya’s narrative Indies natives are unable to represent
themselves in court in the Dutch language they have mastered so painstakingly.
7. Although the army in West Java had demonstrated its capacity for harshness
in ﬁghting against the Darul Islam movement, they were also considered to be
closer to the peasantry as a legacy of the battalion’s role in the struggle for Indone-
sian independence. For this reason, it has been argued that the West Java battalion
did not instigate the same level of killing as other army groups did in 1965 and
1966 (Cribb 1990).
8. This situation is analogous to one Anagnost (2004) describes as the “corpo-
real politics of quality” in China. In China’s urban centers, migrant laborers un-
derwrite China’s expanding market-oriented economy. While migrant labor is
coded as “low quality” and is devalued as a massive obstacle to modernization,
the perceived lack of value in the migrant laborer’s body allows a surplus to be
extracted that enables capital accumulation. It is the migrant laborer’s “deroga-
tion,” Anagnost argues, that produces the value that will be surplus. The Chinese
concept of value, suzhi, is very similar to the Indonesian conception of “human

Notes to Chapter One
174
resource quality” that will be added to the national subject through scientiﬁc mod-
ernization. See also Rutherford (2002) for how similar ideas are applied in West
Papua.
9. For a description of the role of Walhi in Indonesian social and environmental
change in Suharto-era Indonesia, see Tsing (2004).
10. One controversy that can be found within this science, however, concerns
the species concept itself. A major division is between the “biologic” species con-
cept and the “phylogenetic” species concept. The former emphasizes taxonomic
relationships while the latter emphasizes evolutionary connections. The contro-
versy has been described this way:
Scientiﬁc theories direct attention to the relationships and interactions among things, or
entities, thought to have an ontological status in nature. Theories themselves sometimes
impart or predict the expectation of reality to things not known to exist. One only has
to recall the predictions of particle physics or astronomy to appreciate this. Likewise,
theories of evolution are theories about the descent and modiﬁcation of entities. Biolo-
gists have traditionally called these entities “species,” but it is essential to remember
that the term species has been used in many different ways. Moreover, it is widely
recognized that taxonomic species as such have not always been accepted as the “units
of evolution” by many biologists. Indeed, these “units” have been postulated to be
genes, gametes, individual organisms, local demes, populations, varieties, subspecies,
“biological species,” and even higher taxa. If this vast nomenclature signiﬁes anything,
perhaps it is the diversity of opinion that exists about the evolutionary process itself, for
conceptions or theories about how nature is organized and has developed do inﬂuence
opinions about the ontological status of the evolving entities. (Cracraft 1992:96)
11. Yet another of these tensions is over the contribution Northern scholars
make to Indonesia after they have gathered all their data. One discourse readily
available to Indonesian scientists that fuels a great deal of resentment is that
Northern scientists take their data and run. Even thought foreign scholars fre-
quently pursue future careers in the EuroAmerican academy, my experience is that
many of them spend the rest of their career engaging with Indonesia in a produc-
tive and caring way and contributing to a positive representation of their Indone-
sian experiences.
12. John Pemberton describes his experience of acquiring a research visa in his
ethnography of Java:
When I returned to Indonesia in February 1982 to research what I loosely perceived as
the peculiar relationship between culture and politics in Java under the New Order rule
of the Soeharto regime, something marvelous happened. The research permit that I had
tracked for months through various ofﬁces of project sponsorship, security conﬁrma-
tion, and police identiﬁcation did indeed “emerge” (as Indonesian bureaucrats invari-
ably put it, as if they themselves are pleasantly surprised by such results) on February
19, 1982. But the permit also expired on the same date. (1994:1)
13. Dipesh Chakrabarty expands upon the problem in relation to transnational
citational practices. “Third world historians feel a need to refer to works in Euro-
pean history; historians of Europe do not feel the need to reciprocate” (2000:28).

Notes to Chapter Two
175
14. Itty Abraham (2000) has written about “site” or location as a “signpost”
for science in modern India. He writes that in studies of cosmic rays, Indian scien-
tists used their location near the equator to make up for other disadvantages in
funding or equipment. He writes, “Natural features became, willy-nilly, the silent
allies of postcolonial science.” At the same time, the existence of nonscientiﬁc
cultural formations, such as temples, villages, and ﬁelds were approached as “ex-
trascientiﬁc problems” by these same scientists.
15. I thank Jonathan Marks for informing me of the length of evolutionary
time separating contemporary humans from macaques.
16. This should not be understood as an “Indonesian” phenomenon, but
rather as a “scientiﬁc” one. In another context, speaking about a scientiﬁc confer-
ence that he had attended in France, Paul Rabinow writes, “clearly, the actual
event itself was of little or no importance except that it had taken place and could
consequently form the basis of a paragraph for a funding proposal submitted to
ﬁnance the next event” (1996a:4).
Chapter 2: The Social Turn
1. For example, see Harold Conklin (1998). He writes,
My enthusiasm for things anthropological was sparked on a hot August afternoon in
a dusty arena at the 1933 Chicago World’s Fair. I was seven years old and entranced
by the performance of a large, well-outﬁtted group of Plains Indian singers, drummers,
and dancers. My father, who had brought me along on a week’s trip by train from the
East Coast, suggested I go down from our seats in the bleachers for a closer look.
Delighted, I did not hesitate. A few minutes later a Dakota woman beckoned, and I
joined my ﬁrst Native American friends and, for the next hour, followed their lead and
instructions. Their hospitality, rhythms, voices, songs, trappings, colors—even the
smell of buckskin and rawhide—I found extremely appealing.
2. Other Indonesian biologists, however, were suspicious that people could live
successfully in parks in Indonesia or elsewhere. Those scientists who were the
most skeptical of, or uninterested in, Togean people tended to be those with a
strict interest in plant and animal biology.
3. It was also necessary for him to earn a living and he sold his collections to
Cosimo di Medici III, who kept Rumphius’s curiosities in his private Rariteit-
kamer in Tuscany.
4. Not the least of whom was his Ambonese wife Susanna, who helped him to
discover plants and after whom he named a rare orchid ﬂos Susanna (Beekman
1999:lxvii).
5. In the 1870s, Meyer shipped several samples of ﬁve species of birds he had
captured in the Togean Islands to Viscount Arthur Walden, otherwise known as
Arthur Hay, the Ninth Marquess of Tweeddale, President of the Zoological Soci-
ety of London from 1868 to 1878. In Walden’s accounts (1871, 1872) narrative
natures morphed into pure morphology. In Walden’s entry on the Loriculus qua-
dricolor, he described this new species of lorikeet from the Togean Islands in the
following manner:

Notes to Chapter Two
176
Loriculus quadricolor, n.sp.
Adult male. Bright green; crown and edge of shoulder scarlet; rump, upper tail-co-
verts, chin and throat deep blood-red; interscapulars back bright golden; quills black,
half the inner web of each quill verditer blue; entire undersurface of rectrices verditer
blue; bill black, feet yellow.
Male, immature. Faint indications of a few scarlet feathers on the forehead; a small
red spot on the throat; edge of the shoulder scarlet mixed with yellow; upper tail-
coverts and rump and remainder of plumage as in the adult. This stage closely resem-
bles the adult plumage of L. Wallacei, G. R. Grey.
Female. The only example sent and thus marked by Dr. Meyer is not quite adult. The
head is entirely green, the chin and throat scarlet, the shoulder-edge yellow, interscapu-
lars golden, remainder of plumage as in adult male.
Rostr. a nar.
Alae.
Caudae.
Tarsi.
Adult m.
0.37
3.69
1.88
0.37
Adult f.
0.31
3.50
1.63
0.37
This species is intermediate between L. stigmatus (Muller and Schlegel) and L. Walla-
cei, G. R. Grey. In dimensions the three are about equal. From L. Wallacei it differs by
having a scarlet cap, by the golden of the back reaching to the nape, by the darker red
of the uropygium and upper tail-coverts, and by the sexes differing; from L. stigmata
by the golden back, by the chin and throat-spot being much smaller, and the red of the
uropygium not being quite so dark. All the examples sent are from the Togian Islands.
(Walden 1872)
6. The Resident of Manado in 1878, S.C.J.W. Van Musschenbroek (1880), de-
scribes Meyer’s travels in Minahassa and Tomini, and Meyer’s work with the
parrots with great praise. He writes that everyone knew of the importance of these
parrots, but they had been treated in the wrong way, unsystematically. Meyer’s
good result was only possible due to his large sample size. All the museums of
Europe could not have given him such samples.
7. For example, to the question, “How large should a park be?” John Terborgh
answers, “As a rough guide, the area should be the size needed to sustain geneti-
cally viable populations of top predators” (Terborgh 1999:62).
8. The earliest survey to propose a spatial conservation strategy for the Togean
Islands was performed by the Asian Development Bank in 1982 (1982 Salm et al.).
This survey identiﬁed the Togean Islands for a variety of “interests and values,”
including reefs and endangered species, and the presence of “interesting Sea Gypsy
(Bajo) stilted villages.” Three maps in the report proposed territorial boundaries
demarcating a reserve boundary around the islands, and a zonation system within
the proposed protected area. This zonation system would have closed off the most
frequented ﬁshing grounds in the archipelago.
9. From an environmental justice perspective, there are many potential politi-
cal dilemmas in projects of counter-mapping. Hodgson and Schroeder describe
some of them:

Notes to Chapter Three
177
Conﬂicts inherent in conservation efforts involve territorialization, privatization, inte-
gration and indigenization; problems associated with the theory and practice of “com-
munity-level” political engagement; the limited scope of two-dimensional mapping
tools; the need to combine mapping efforts with broader legal and political strategies;
and critical questions involving the agency of “external” actors such as conservation
and development donors, the state, and private business interests. (Hodgson and
Schroeder 2002:82)
10. In his report on nutmeg, for example, Rumphius wrote of the number of
slaves that died under the forced labor of the nutmeg harvest, and he revealed
how native planters were required to burn their surplus crop.
11. The only real moment of danger came when she related the story to her
colleagues or to me. If we were to insist upon these divides, either between Laksmi
and the farmer, or between ourselves and Laksmi, then Laksmi, perhaps, would
herself have been forced to take a more realist position.
Chapter 3: Extraterrrestrial Others
1. Beginning in the eleventh century, Samalan speakers began to migrate out
of the southern Philippines in search of marine products, mainly sea cucumber
and sharks ﬁn, which they sold to land-based rulers for trade with China. They
worked their way down the Sulu archipelago from Mindanao and through
Borneo, reaching the Makassar Strait and spreading out into eastern Indonesia
before the colonial period. See James Fox (1993).
2. Van der Wal described his ﬁrst encounter with Togean people in Kilat Bay:
We learned from these people it was Negri Togoya, located on the south side of the
Island. It was ruled by a Queen. But from this side, one could only get there with a
small canoe, like theirs. And they said if we wanted to trade, they had turtle shell and
mouse foods. We would have to sail to the south side where they would then meet us
with large vessels. . . . Toward evening some of the inhabitants came to ask us what we
wanted and why we were here. We answered we came for trade if they had any turtle
shell. They said they didn’t have any now but if we wanted to stay the King would
speak with us. In the morning, the King came with the Gugugu and the Sea Captain
and 60 armed men. They came down the mountain bringing us coconuts, betelnut, and
chickens, gifts which I accepted. The Sea Captain who spoke for the King asked what
kind of people we were and from where. (van der Wal 1680)
3. The approximate date and location of early Sama settlements are conﬁrmed
by Rili Djohani (1993) who writes that Sama people told her they came to the
Togeans in the 1860s from the Salabanka Islands and ﬁrst settled at Pulo Anau.
4. Two streams of cognitive anthropology have entered into these debates from
opposite ends of the spectrum. One stream, sometimes referred to as “ethnologi-
cal” ethnoscience, has used folk categories to speak of universals in nature and
language. This work examines the similarities in categorizations across cultures.
Brent Berlin (1992), for example, bases his work on what he sees as similarities
between systematic biology and folk biology, which both reﬂect, in his mind, the

Notes to Chapter Four
178
“natural system” of nature. He ﬁnds it conclusive that if a bunch of Amazonian
bird skins are dumped on a table, students, ornithologists, and native peoples
will all group the birds in the same way. The second stream, the “ethnographic”
ethnoscience, uses folk taxonomies to argue for cultural speciﬁcity. If one dumped
a basket of the 1,500 or so plant species found by Harold Conklin (1957) in
Hanuno´o onto the same table, it would be impossible to uncover the same univer-
sal natural system and categorizations would depend on who you are. From this
perspective, nature is known through standpoints.
5. Many have written of the storied and experiential nature of Southeast Asian
landscapes. Here I am in dialogue with Doolittle (2005), Dove (1986), George
(1996), Harwell (2000), Li (1999), Peluso (1996), Sturgeon (2005), Rosaldo
(1980), Roseman (2003), Tsing (1993, 2004), and Zerner (2003). While not spe-
ciﬁcally about Southeast Asia, I have also found Kathleen Stewart’s (1996) de-
scription of West Virginia especially inspiring here. James Fox (1977) should be
consulted for the complete story of the sago palm in eastern Indonesia.
6. Henk Maier (1993) asks the provocative question, “How did the inhabi-
tants of the Indies know that they were speaking more than one language? Were
they aware of it, at all, and even more: were they aware of differences between
the two languages, or three languages they were using, and of their concurrent
affectivity?”
7. For the argument against “experience” as the foundation of identity see
Scott (1992). For a recuperation of the idea of experience see Moya and Hames-
Garcia (2000).
Chapter 4: On the (Bio)logics of Species and Bodies
1. While “siang” is Indonesian for midday, Togean Sama people use the Indo-
nesian word “siang” to refer to the time immediately before daylight. Thus,
“hampir siang” means almost daylight.
2. Through her work on atherosclerosis, Annemarie Mol (2002:32–36) tackles
the thorny problem of subject-object relations by introducing the concept of “en-
actment.” Describing objects as “enacted,” she argues, allows us to see that
“things” don’t have a life of their own independent of the practices that enliven
them. As such, objects require techniques to make them tangible, visible, audible,
and ultimately knowable. The implication of this is that objects, once produced,
do not then take on a stable existence now independent of practices. New
practices beget new objects, and objects continually require techniques for their
instantiation.
3. Despite the contention of some science studies scholars that we must aban-
don the “imagination” in favor of empirical practices, I prefer to track both simul-
taneously. Robert Romanyshyn (1989) makes an argument for the role of “tech-
nology as cultural-historical dream” informing our sense of self. He writes: “We
may, perhaps, state the point this way: technology is a crisis of the imagination.
As such, technology is both a danger and an opportunity with respect to the imagi-
nation. It is a danger in so far as it can be the death of imagination through its
literalization. It is an opportunity in so far as it can be an awakening to how the
events of the world have an imaginal depth, and how the life of the imagination
inscribes itself within the events of the world.”

Notes to Chapter Six
179
4. James Scott (1998) has developed an important argument concerning “how
certain schemes to improve the human conditions have failed.” Scott argues that
“certain forms of knowledge and control require a narrowing of vision.” What
he terms “state simpliﬁcations” deﬁne the narrowing of vision and purpose used
to achieve political order and managerial control, and he notes the similarity be-
tween these state endeavors and the goals of large corporations. His analysis is
not antithetical to an analysis of care. Through an analytic of care, however, it
would not be the “forms of knowledge” that demand a narrowing of vision, but
the ends the knowledge serves. A narrowing of vision through systems of classiﬁ-
cation applied to regulating the safety standards of public transportation, for ex-
ample, would have the capacity to “improve the human condition.”
Chapter 5: Fishing with Cyanide
1. Following Appadurai (1995 [1986]), I have divided commodity knowledge
into categories of production and consumption. Using the example of bird nests
collected by people who live in forests in Borneo, he notes the gap producers
have in their knowledge of market destinations. He claims this allows traders high
proﬁts and depends on the subordinance of the producing region relative to the
consuming one. Kopytoff (1995) argues that the knowledge gap also prevents
producing and consuming cultures from having their understanding of commodi-
ties challenged.
2. For a further elaboration of environmental laws in Indonesia see Koesnadi
Hardjasoemantri (1991), and Carol Warren and Kylie Elston (1994). Warren and
Elston argue that Indonesian legal regulation is “studded with ‘special dispensa-
tions’ and selective application according to ‘vulnerability and political value’ ”
(1994:8).
3. This decree falls under the legislative aegis of the Director General of Fisher-
ies within the Ministry of Agriculture.
4. Article 6 of the Decree of the Director General of Fisheries No SK.330/
DJ.8259/95 (GOI 1995b) states “the collecting company shall provide means for
cultivation at the stated collecting location and possess a staff experienced in ﬁsh
cultivation.” The Napoleon wrasse cannot be spawned successfully in captivity,
however.
5. With the right permit, compressors are not illegal, even though they still
would be most productively employed, from an owner’s perspective, in catching
live ﬁsh with cyanide.
Chapter 6: The Sleep of Reason
1. To understand the non-prediscursive nature of nature informing the differ-
ence of Indonesians’ biodiversity science, it is useful to reﬂect on Judith Butler’s
disruption of the “matter” of bodies, especially woman’s bodies.
The body posited as a sign, is always posited, or signiﬁed, as prior. This signiﬁcation
produces as an effect of its own procedure the very body that it nevertheless and simul-
taneously claims to discover as that which precedes its own action. If the body signiﬁed

Notes to Chapter Six
180
as prior to signiﬁcation is an effect of signiﬁcation, then the mimetic or representational
status of language, which claims that signs follow bodies as their necessary mirrors, is
not mimetic at all. On the contrary it is productive, constitutive, one might even argue
performative, inasmuch as this signifying act delimits and contours the body that it
then claims to ﬁnd prior to any and all signiﬁcation. (Butler 1993:30)
2. This sentiment is now expressed quite widely in conservation circles. For
example, it was a major theme of a talk on ecoregions by Gordon Orians, emeritus
board member of World Wildlife Fund, given at University of Washington in
2001. It was also an argument made by several biologists from CI and TNC at
the conference “Conservation for/by Whom? Social Controversies & Cultural
Contestations Regarding National Parks and Reserves in the ‘Malay Archipel-
ago’ ” at Singapore National University, May 2005.
3. The CI report frames the need this way: “Effective enforcement in hotspots
will require much broader action on multiple fronts, including augmenting inter-
agency cooperation; increasing enforcement agency budgets; building technical
capacity of detection agents, prosecutors, and judges; implementing enforcement
performance monitoring systems; and strengthening natural resource laws and
internal policies of enforcement agencies” (CI 2004:2).
4. Nicholas Rose describes these politics as “minor engagements”: “[O]ne
would examine the ways in which creativity arises out of the situation of human
beings engaged in particular relations of force and meaning, and what is made
out of the possibilities of that location. These minor engagements do not have
the arrogance of programmatic politics—perhaps even refuse their designation
as politics at all. They are cautious, modest, pragmatic, experimental, stuttering,
tentative“ (Rose 1999:279–80).
5. Some might want to argue this is their nightmare, too, of the world of
species extinction. The sea cucumbers, the giant clams, the macaques all have
gone missing in this apocalyptic image. Boi is left with nothing because an over-
populous “humanity” has exceeded its carrying capacity. This is the future of
humanity once we have used up all its nature and extinction is the order of the
day. I would counter that since the list of species biologists want to protect over-
laps with nearly every plant or animal important to Sama people, as it did in the
Togean Islands, then the interests of transnational biodiversity conservation have
never included a true vision of Sama well-being. A program designed with Sama
futures in mind might try and boost the numbers of sea cucumber or giant clams,
or protect them from rapacious industrial resource extraction. The apocalyptic
vision of transnational biodiversity conservation is one where a scientist has
nothing left to study, or an ecotourist has nowhere left to travel, not the vision
of Boi scavenging on the Dumaguete beach, which is naturalized as external to
the task of saving biodiversity.
6. Pheng Cheah makes this argument by ﬁrst disentangling instrumental from
critical reason in the work of Pramoedya Ananta Toer on Indonesia’s colonial
awakening. Toer believes, “instrumentality is merely an accident that befalls rea-
son, a removable stain external to reason in the ﬁnal instance, because it is a
consequence of how reason is used” (Cheah 2003:302). I believe Cheah envisions
these two forms of reason as signiﬁcantly entangled.

References
Abraham, Itty. 2000. “Postcolonial Science, Big Science, and Landscape.” In
Doing Science + Culture. Roddey Reid and Sharon Traweek, eds. Pp. 49–70.
London: Routledge.
———. 1998. The Making of the Indian Atomic Bomb: Science, Secrecy, and the
Postcolonial State. London: Zed Books.
Adriani, N. 1900. “De Talen der Togian-eilenden,” Tijdschrift voor Indische Taal-,
Land-, en Volkenkunde, 42:46, 490, 539–66.
Agrawal, Arun. 1995. “Dismantling the Divide Between Indigenous and Western
Knowledges.” Development and Change. 26(3): 413–39.
Anagnost, Ann. 2004. “The Corporeal Politics of Quality (Suzhi).” Public Culture
16(2):189–208.
Anderson, Benedict. 1998. The Spectre of Comparisons: Nationalism, Southeast
Asia, and the World. London: Verso.
———. 1990. “Cartoons and Monuments: The Evolution of Political Communi-
cation Under the New Order.” In Language and Power: Exploring Political
Cultures in Indonesia. Ithaca: Cornell University Press.
Appadurai, Arjun. 1995. (1986) “Introduction: Commodities and the Politics of
Value.” In The Social Life of Thing: Commodities in Cultural Perspective.
Arjun Appadurai ed. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Aragon, Lorraine. 2000. Fields of the Lord: Animism, Christian Missionaries, and
State Development in Indonesia. Honolulu: University of Hawaii Press.
Asian Development Bank and Indonesian Ministry of Forestry. 1992. Manage-
ment and Conservation of Tropical Forest Ecosystems and Biodiversity. Project
T.A. 1430-INO. Deutch Forst Consult, Germany, and PT Hasfarm Dian Kon-
sultan, Jakarta.
Atkinson, Jane. 1996. “Quizzing the Sphinx: Reﬂections on Mortality in Central
Sulawesi.” In Fantasizing the Feminine in Indonesia. Laurie Sears, ed. Durham:
Duke University Press.
Banuri, T. and F. Apffel-Marglin, eds. 1993. Who Will Save the Forests?: Knowl-
edge, Power, and Environmental Destruction. London: Zed Books.
Barkan, Elazar, and Ronald Bush. 1995. Prehistories of the Future: The Primitivist
Project and the Culture of Modernism. Stanford: Stanford University Press.
Basso, Keith. 1996. Wisdom Sits in Places: Landscape and Language Among the
Western Apache. Albuquerque: University of New Mexico Press.
Beekman, E. M. 1999. “Introduction: Rumphius’ Life and Work.” In The Ambo-
nese Curiosity Cabinet. Georgius Everhardus Rumphius. New Haven: Yale Uni-
versity Press.
———. 1981. The Poison Tree: Selected Writings of Rumphius on the Natural
History of the Indies. Amherst: University of Massachusetts Press.
Berlin, Brent. 1992. Ethnobiological Classiﬁcation. Princeton: Princeton Univer-
sity Press.
Bhabha, Homi K. 1994. The Location of Culture. London: Routledge.
Bourdieu, Pierre. 1998. Practical Reason. Stanford: Stanford University Press.

References
182
Bourdieu, Pierre. 1984. Distinction: A Social Critique of the Judgment of Taste.
Cambridge: Harvard University Press.
Burchell, Graham, Colin Gordon, and Peter Miller. 1991. The Foucault Effect:
Studies in Governmentality. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Bush, Ronald, and Elazar Barakan. 1995. Prehistories of the Future: The Primitiv-
ist Project and the Culture of Modernism. Stanford: Stanford University Press.
Butler, Judith. 1993. Bodies that Matter: On the Discursive Limits of “Sex.” Lon-
don: Routledge.
Bynum, Eva L. 1994. “Conservation Status of Sulawesi Macaques.” Sulawesi Pri-
mate Newsletter. 2(2):7.
Chakrabarty, Dipesh. 2002. Habitations of Modernity: Essays in the Wake of
Subaltern Studies. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
———. 2000. Provincializing Europe: Postcolonial Thought and Historical Dif-
ference. Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Chatterjee, Partha. 1993. The Nation and its Fragments: Colonial and Postcolo-
nial Histories. Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Cheah, Pheng. 2003. Spectral Nationality: Passages of Freedom from Kant to
Postcolonial Literatures of Liberation. New York: Columbia University Press.
Colfer, Carol. 2002. “Ten Propositions to Explain Kalimantan’s Fires.” In Which
Way Forward?: People, Forests, and Policymaking in Indonesia. Washington:
Resources For the Future Press.
Conklin, Harold. 1998. “Language, Culture, and Environment: My Early Years.”
Annual Review of Anthropology 27:xiii–xxx.
———. 1957. “Hanuno´o Agriculture: A Report on an Integral System of Shifting
Cultivation in the Philippines.” FAO Forestry Development Paper No. 12.
Rome: FAO.
Conservation International. 2004. New Study Shows That When it Comes to the
Environment, Crime Still Pays. Hotspots E-News. http://www.maildogmanager
.com/page.html?p=000001XDDtjF4u9sQYkwYguzLx4+kB1mFXrQ (accessed
8/8/05).
Cracraft, Joel. 1992. “Species Concepts and Speciation Analysis.” In The Units
of Evolution: Essays on the Nature of Species. Marc Ereshefky, ed. Pp. 28–59.
Cambridge: MIT Press.
Cribb, Robert. 1990. The Indonesian Killings of 1965–66: Studies from Java and
Bali. Clayton, Victoria: Centre of Southeast Asian Studies, Monash University.
Cronon, William, ed. 1996. Uncommon Ground: Rethinking the Human Place
in Nature. New York: W.W. Norton.
Darwin, Charles. 1874. The Structure and Distribution of Coral Reefs. London:
Smith, Elder.
Daws, Gavan, and Marty Fujita. 1999. Archipelago: The Islands of Indonesia.
Berkeley: University of California Press.
Djohani, Rili Hawari. 1989. Marine Conservation Development of Indonesia:
Coral Reef Policy. Jakarta: WWF.
Djohani, Rili, Ramli Malik and Muslimin. 1993. “Marine Parks and the Socio-
economic Implications for the Bajau People, Particularly from the Togian Is-
lands.” Prepared for the International Seminar on Bajau Communities, Jakarta.

References
183
Doolittle, Amity. 2005. Property and Politics in Sabah Malaysia: Native Struggles
Over Land Rights. Seattle: University of Washington Press.
Dove, Michael. 1986. “The Practical Reason for Weeds: Peasant vs. State Views
of Imperata and Chromoleana.” Human Ecology 14(2):163–90.
Duncan, Christopher, ed. 2004. Civilizing the Margins: Southeast Asian Govern-
ment Policies for the Development of Minorities. Ithaca: Cornell University
Press.
Ellen, Roy, Peter Parkes, and Alan Bicker. 2000. Indigenous Environmental
Knowledge
and
its
Transformations.
Amsterdam:
Harwood
Academic
Publishers.
Erdmann, Mark. 2002. “Perspective: The WAR on Destructive Fishing Practices.”
SPC Live Reef Fish Information Bulletin #10. Noumea: Secretariat of the Paciﬁc
Community.
———. 2001. “Who’s minding the reef? Corruption and Enforcement in Indone-
sia.” SPC Live Reef Fish Information Bulletin #8. Noumea: Secretariat of the
Paciﬁc Community.
Errington, Joseph. 1998. Shifting Languages: Interaction and Identity in Javanese
Indonesia. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Errington, Shelly. 1998. The Death of Authentic Primitive Art and Other Tales
of Progress. Berkeley: University of California Press.
Fabian, Johannes. 2000. Out of Our Minds: Reason and Madness in the Explora-
tion of Africa. Berkeley: University of California Press.
Faisal, Agus. 2001. “Togean People Kick Out Imperialists.” World Rainforest
Movement Bulletin. No. 52., November 2001.
Fanon, Frantz. 1991(1952). Black Skin, White Masks. New York: Grove Books.
Feld, Steven. 1982. Sound and Sentiment: Birds, Weeping, Poetics, and Song in
Kaluli Expression. Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press.
Firman. 1994. “Studies on Population and Diet of the Togean Macaque (Macaca
Togeanus).” Sulawesi Primate Newsletter 2(2):7.
Fooden, Jack. 1969. Taxonomy and Evolution of the Monkeys of Celebes. Basel:
S. Karger.
Foster, Nancy. 1998. Keynote Address: “Marine Protected Areas in the New Mil-
lennium.” Proceedings of the International Tropical Marine Ecosystems Man-
agement Symposium, November 22–26. Port Townsend: Great Barrier Reef
Marine Park Authority.
Foucault, Michel. 1991. “Governmentality.” In The Foucault Effect: Studies in
Governmentality. Graham Burchell, Colin Gordon, and Peter Miller, eds. Chi-
cago: University of Chicago Press.
———. 1975. Discipline and Punish: The Birth of the Prison. Alan Sheridan,
trans. New York: Vintage Books.
———. 1972. The Order of Things: An Archaeology of the Human Sciences. New
York: Vintage Books.
Fox, James. 1993. “Bajau Voyages to the Timor Area, the Ashmore Reef, and
Australia.” Indonesian Institute of Sciences, Jakarta, November 22–25.
———. 1977. Harvest of the Palm: Ecological Change in Eastern Indonesia.
Cambridge: Harvard University Press.

References
184
Franklin, Sarah, and Susan McKinnon. 2001. Relative Values: Reconﬁguring Kin-
ship Studies. Durham: Duke University Press.
Freud, Sigmund. 1989 [1933]. New Introductory Lectures on Psycho-Analysis.
New York: Norton.
Froehlich, Jeffrey W., Jatna Supriatna, V. Hart, S. Akbar, and R. Babo. 1998. “The
Balan of Balantak: A Possible New Species of Macaque in Central Sulawesi.”
Tropical Biodiversity 5(3):167–94.
Froehlich, Jeffrey W., Jatna Supriatna. 1996. “Secondary Intergradation Between
Macaca maurus and M. tonkeana in South Sulawesi, and the species status of
M. togeanus.” In Evolution and Ecology of Macaque Societies. John Fa and
Donald Lindburg, eds. Pp. 43–70. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Fujimora, Joan. 2000. “Transnational Genomics: Transgressing the Boundary Be-
tween the “Modern/West” and the “Premodern/East.” In Doing Science + Cul-
ture. Roddey Reid and Sharon Traweek, eds. Pp. 71–92. London: Routledge.
George, Kenneth. 1996. Showing Signs of Violence: The Cultural Politics of a
Twentieth-Century Headhunting Ritual. Berkeley: University of California
Press.
Gilligan, Carol. 1982. In a Different Voice: Psychological Theory and Women’s
Development. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Government of Indonesia. 2004a. Decree of the Minister of Forestry Number:
SK.418/Menhut-II/2004.
———. 2004b. Law No. 32/2004 Concerning Regional Governance.
———. 1999a. Law No. 22/1999 Concerning Regional Governance.
———. 1999b. Law No. 31/1999 Concerning Fisheries.
———. 1995a. Decree of the Agrarian Minister of the Republic of Indonesia. No.
375/Kpts/JK.250/5/95 Regarding the Ban on Napoleon Wrasse Fish Haul.
———. 1995b. Decree of the Director General of Fisheries. No. SK330/DJ.8259/
95 Regarding Size, Location, and Manners of Hauling Napoleon Wrasse.
———. 1995c. Decree of the Trade Minister of the Republic of Indonesia. No.
94/Kp/V/95 Regarding the Ban on Export of Napoleon Wrasse Fish.
———. 1992. Law 24/1992: Spatial Planning.
———. 1990. Law No. 5 1990 About the Conservation of Natural Resources
and Ecosystems.
Grove, Richard. 1995. Green Imperialism: Colonial Expansion, Tropical Island
Edens, and the Origins of Environmentalism. Cambridge: Cambridge Univer-
sity Press.
Gupta, Akhil. 1998. Postcolonial Developments: Agriculture in the Making of
Modern India. Durham: Duke University Press.
Gupta, Akhil, and James Fergusson. 1997. Culture, Power, Place: Explorations
in Critical Anthropology. Durham: Duke University Press.
Hankivsky, Olena. 2004. Social Policy and the Ethic of Care. Vancouver: Univer-
sity of British Columbia Press.
Haraway, Donna. 1991. Simians, Cyborgs, and Women: The Reinvention of Na-
ture. New York: Routledge.
———. 1989. Primate Visions: Gender, Race, and Nature in the World of Modern
Science. New York: Routledge.

References
185
Harding, Sandra. 1998. Is Science Multicultural: Postcolonialisms, Feminisms,
and Epistemologies. Bloomington: University of Indiana Press.
Hardjasoemantri, Koesnadi. 1991. Hukum Perlindungan Lingkungan: Konser-
vasi Sumber Daya Alam Hayati dan Ekosystemnya (Law for Environmental
Preservation: Conservation of Biological Resources and Their Ecosystems). Yo-
gyakarta: Gajah Mada University Press.
Hartsock, Nancy. 1999. The Feminist Standpoint Revisited and Other Essays.
Boulder: Westview Press.
Harwell, Emily. 2000. “Remote Sensibilities: Discourses of Technology and the
Making
of
Indonesias
Natural
Disaster.”
Development
and
Change.
31(1):307–340.
Hayden, Cori. 2003. When Nature Goes Public: The Making and Unmaking of
Bioprospecting in Mexico. Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Head, Jonathan. 1998. Proﬁle: President B. J. Habibie. BBC Online News. May
21, 1998.
Hefner, Robert. 1990. The Political Economy of Mountain Java: An Interpretive
History. Berkeley: University of California Press.
Hodgson, Dorothy, and Richard A. Schroeder. 2002. “Dilemmas of Counter-
Mapping Community Resources in Tanzania.” Development and Change.
33(2002):79–100.
van Hoevell, G.W.W.C. Baron. 1893. Bijschrift bij de Kaart der Tomini-Bocht
(Explanation of the Tomini Gulf Map). Leiden: E.J.Brill.
Horkheimer, Max, and Theodor Adorno. 2001 [1944]. Dialectic of Enlighten-
ment. New York: Continuum.
Hussey, Edward B. Jr. 1855. Log of the Ship Peruvian, unpublished ship’s log
(Log #53). Mystic Seaport, Connecticut.
Hutabarat, C., Pramono, A.H., Yuliati, S. 1996. “Preliminary Study on Marine
Resources Used in Togian Islands, Sulawesi (Indonesia): With Special Reference
to Bajau People.” Ethnobiology in Human Welfare. New Delhi: Deep Publica-
tions. Pp. 447–50.
Indonesian Foundation for the Advancement of Biological Sciences. 1997. Con-
cept Paper: “Participatory Spatial Planning in Togean Islands.” Jakarta: IFABS.
Indrawan, Didi M. 1997. “Notes on Togean Conservation.” Unpublished notes.
International Crisis Group. 2001. “Indonesia: Natural Resources and Law En-
forcement.” ICG Asia Report #29, Jakarta/Brussels.
Johannes, Robert E. and Michael Riepen. 1995. “Environmental, Economic, and
Social Implications of the Live Fish Trade in Asia and the Western Paciﬁc.”
Consultant’s Report to The Nature Conservancy and The South Paciﬁc Forum
Fisheries Agency.
Kant, Immanuel. 2001.[1781]. Basic Writings of Kant. Allen Wood, ed. New
York: The Modern Library.
Kantor Statistik Kebupaten Poso. 1995a. Kecamatan Una Una Dalam Angka.
Poso: Kantor Statistik Kebupaten Poso.
———. 1995b. Kecamatan Walea Kepulauan Dalam Angka. Poso: Kantor Sta-
tistik Kebupaten Poso.
Keane, Webb. 1997. Signs of Recognition: Powers and Hazards of Representation
in an Indonesian Society. Berkeley: University of California Press.

References
186
Keck, Margaret, and Kathryn Sikkink. 1998. Activists Across Boarders. Ithaca:
Cornell University Press.
Kopytoff, Igor. 1995 (1986). “The Cultural Biography of Things: Commoditiza-
tion as Process.” In The Social Life of Thing: Commodities in Cultural Perspec-
tive. Arjun Appadurai ed. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Kumar, Deepak. 1995. Science and the Raj, 1857–1905. Delhi: Oxford University
Press.
Lakoff, George. 2004. Don’t Think of an Elephant: Know Your Values and Frame
the Debate. White River Junction: Chelsea Green Press.
———. 2002. Moral Politics: How Liberals and Conservatives Think. Chicago:
University of Chicago Press.
———. 1995. “Metaphor, Morality, and Politics: Or, Why Conservatives Have
Left Liberals in the Dust.” Social Research 62:2 (summer 1995).
Langford, Jean. 2002. Fluent Bodies: Ayurvedic Remedies for Postcolonial Imbal-
ance. Durham: Duke University Press.
Latour, Bruno. 1999. Pandora’s Hope: Essays on the Reality of Science Studies.
Cambridge: Harvard University Press.
———. 1987. Science in Action: How to Follow Scientists and Engineers through
Society. Cambridge: Harvard University Press.
Latour, Bruno, and Stephen Woolgar. 1986. Laboratory Life: The Social Con-
struction of Facts. Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Lev, Daniel. 1998. “Religion and Politics in Indonesia and Malaysia,” Presenta-
tion to the Council on Southeast Asian Studies, Berkeley, California. February
13, 1998.
Lewis, Martin, and Karen Wiggen. 1997. The Myth of Continents: A Critique of
Metageography. Berkeley: University of California Press.
Li, Tania. 1999. “Marginality, Power, and Production: Analyzing Upland Trans-
formations.” In Transforming the Indonesian Uplands. Tania Li, ed. Amster-
dam: Harwood Academic Publishers.
Lowe, Celia. 2004. “Making the Monkey: How the Togean Macaque went from
‘New Form’ to ‘Endemic Species’ in Indonesians’ Conservation Biology,” Cul-
tural Anthropology 19(4):491–516.
———. 2003. “Sustainability and the Question of ‘Enforcement’ in Integrated
Coastal Management: The Case of Nain Island, Bunaken National Park, Jurnal
Pesisir dan Kelautan (Indonesian Journal of Ocean and Coastal Management)
special theme issue 1:49–63.
———. 2003. “The Magic of Place: Sama at Sea, on Land, in Sulawesi, Indone-
sia,” Bijdragen tot de Taal, Land, en Volkenkunde 159(1):109–33.
———. 2000. “Global Markets, Local Injustice in Southeast Asian Seas: The Live
Fish Trade and Local Fishers in the Togean Islands of Sulawesi, Indonesia.” In
People, Plants, and Justice: The Politics of Nature Conservation. Charles
Zerner, ed. New York: Columbia University Press.
Mackie, Cynthia. 1994. “Ecosystem Conservation in the Togean Islands.” Su-
lawesi Primate Newsletter 2(2):7.
MacKinnon, J. 1982. “Management and Conservation of Tropical Forest Ecosys-
tems.” Asian Development Bank Report T.A. No. 1430–1NO.

References
187
Maier, Henk. 1993. “From Heteroglossia to Polyglossia: The Creation of Malay
and Dutch in the Indies.” Indonesia 5:37–66.
Marcus, George. 1995. “Ethnography in/of the World System: The Emergence of
Multi-Sited Ethnography.” Annual Review of Anthropology 24:95–117.
Meyer, Adolf Bernard. 1879. “Field-notes on the Birds of Celebes.” Ibis (4)3:43–
70, 125–47.
Mol, Annemarie. 2002. The Body Multiple: Ontology in Medical Practice. Dur-
ham: Duke University Press.
Moya, Paula and Michael Hames-Garcia. 2000. Reclaiming Identity: Realist The-
ory and the Predicament of Postmodernism. Berkeley: University of California
Press.
Mrazek, Rudolf. 2002. Engineers of Happy Land: Technology and Nationalism
in a Colony. Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Nehamas, Alexander. 2001. “The Sleep of Reason Produces Monsters.” Represen-
tations 74:37–54.
Nietzsche, Friedrich. 1998[1887]. On the Genealogy of Morality. Indianapolis:
Hacket.
Nimmo, Harry. 1994. Songs of Salanda and Other Stories of Sulu. Manila: Ateneo
de Manila Press.
Ong, Aihwa. 1987. Sprirts of Resistance and Capitalist Discipline: Factory
Women in Malaysia. New York: State University of New York Press.
Peet, Richard, and Michael Watts, eds. 1996. Liberation Ecology: Environment,
Development, Social Movements. London: Routledge.
Peluso, Nancy. 1996. “Fruit Trees and Family Trees in an Anthropogenic Forest:
Ethics of Access, Property Zones, and Environmental Change in Indonesia,”
Comparative Studies in Society and History 38: 510–48.
———. 1995. “Whose Woods Are These?: Counter-mapping Forest Territories in
Kalimantan, Indonesia.” Antipode 27(4):383–406.
———. 1992. Rich Forests, Poor People: Resource Control and Resistance in
Java. Berkeley: University of California Press.
Pemberton, John. 1994. On the Subject of “Java.” Ithaca: Cornell University
Press.
Pickering, Andrew. 1995. The Mangle of Practice: Time, Agency, and Science.
Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Pigg, Stacy Leigh. 1996. “The Credible and the Credulous: The Question of ‘Vil-
lager’s Beliefs’ in Nepal.” Cultural Anthropology 11(2):160–201.
Prakash, Gyan. 1999. Another Reason: Science and the Imagination of Modern
India. Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Pratasik, Silvester Benny. 1983. Pengaruh NaCN Terhadap Kehidupan dan Kuali-
tas Daging Ikan Mas dan Ikan Mujair (The Inﬂuence of NaCN on the Life and
Tissue Quality of Carp Fish and Mujair Fish). Manado, Indonesia: Universitas
Sam Ratulangi, Faculty of Fisheries.
Pratt, Mary Louise. 1992. Imperial Eyes: Travel Writing and Transculturation.
London: Routledge.
Rabinow, Paul. 2003. Anthropos Today: Reﬂections on Modern Equipment.
Princeton: Princeton University Press.

References
188
———. 1999. French DNA: Trouble in Purgatory. Chicago: Chicago University
Press.
———. 1996a. Making PCR: A Story of Biotechnology. Chicago: University of
Chicago Press.
———. 1996b. Essays on the Anthropology of Reason. Princeton: Princeton Uni-
versity Press.
Revius. 1852. Report of Trade In and Between the Islands on the East Coast
of Celebes, Bangaaij, and Soella Archipelago. Republic of Indonesia: Arsip
Nasional.
Romanyshyn, Robert. 1989. Technology as Symptom and Dream. London:
Routledge.
Rosaldo, Renato. 1980. Ilongot Headhunting: 1883–1974. Stanford: Stanford
University Press.
Rose, Nicholas. 1999. Powers of Freedom: Reframing Political Thought. Cam-
bridge: Cambridge University Press.
Roseman, Marina. 2003. “Singers of the Landscape: Song, History, and Property
Rights in the Malaysian Rainforest.” In Culture and the Question of Rights:
Forests, and Coasts, and Seas in Southeast Asia. Charles Zemer, ed. Durham:
Duke University Press.
von Rosenburg, Carl Benjamin Hermann. 1865. Reistogten in de Afdeeling Go-
rontalo, Gedaan op Last der Nederlandsch Indische Regering. Amsterdam:
F. Muller.
Rumphius, Georgius Everhardus. 1999 (1705). The Ambonese Curiosity Cabinet.
E. M. Beekman, trans. New Haven: Yale University Press.
———. 1981 (1741). Selections from “The Ambonese Herbal.” In The Poison
Tree: Selected Writings of Rumphius on the Natural History of the Indies. Am-
herst: University of Massachusetts Press.
Rutherford, Danilyn. 2002. Raiding the Land of the Foreigners: The Limits of the
Nation on an Indonesian Frontier. Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Salm, Rodney, Yulheri Abas, and Rolex Lameanda. 1982. Marine Conservation
Potential: Togean Islands, Central Sulawesi. Bogor: Food and Agriculture Or-
ganization of the United Nations.
Sather, Clifford. 1997. The Bajau Laut: Adaptation, History, and Fate in a Mari-
time Fishing Society of South-Eastern Sabah. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Sauer, Carl O. 1981. “The Agency of Man on the Earth.” In Selected Essays:
1963–1975. Carl Sauer, ed. Berkeley: Turtle Island Foundation.
Scott, James. 1998. Seeing Like a State: How Certain Schemes to Improve the
Human Condition Have Failed. New Haven and London: Yale University Press.
Scott, Joan. 1992. “Experience.” In Feminists Theorize the Political. Judith Butler
and Joan Scott, eds. London: Routledge.
Sears, Laurie J. 1996. “Fragile Identities: Deconstructing Women and Indonesia.”
In Fantasizing the Feminine in Indonesia. Laurie J. Sears, ed. Durham: Duke
University Press.
Sejati Foundation. 1994. Bajau. Jakarta: Sejati Foundation
Shapin, Steven, and Simon Schaffer. 1985. Leviathan and the Air-Pump: Hobbes,
Boyle, and the Experimental Life. Princeton: Princeton University Press.

References
189
Shiva, Vandana. 2000. Tomorrow’s Biodiversity. New York: Thames and
Hudson.
Sievanen, Leila, Brian Crawford, Richard Pollnac, and Celia Lowe. 2005. “Weed-
ing Through Assumptions of Livelihood Approaches in ICM: Eucheuma Farm-
ing in the Philippines and Indonesia.” Ocean and Coastal Management 48:
297–313.
Sody, H.J.V. 1949. “Notes on Some Primates, Carnivora, and the Babirusa from
the Indo-Malayan and Indo-Australian Regions.” Treubia: Journal of Zoology,
Hydrobiology, and Oceanography of the Indo-Australian Archipelago. Bui-
tenzorg (Bogor): Koninklijke Plantentuin Van Indnonesie. 20 (Part 2):121–43.
Soekarno. 1989. Coral Reef and Associated Habitats in the Vicinity of Bunaken,
Togian Islands, and Takabone Atoll: Their Conservation Value and Needs. Pre-
pared for USAID Natural Resources Management Project. Jakarta: Center for
Oceanological Research and Development.
Sopandi. 1997. Jelajah Etnik: A Journey Through Wallacea. Privately published
museum catalogue.
Sopher, David E. 1977 (1965). The Sea Nomads: A Study of the Maritime Boat
People of Southeast Asia. Singapore: National Museum of Singapore.
Soule´ Michael. 1995. Reinventing Nature: Responses to Postmodern Deconstruc-
tion. Washington: Island Press.
Spyer, Patricia. 2000. The Memory of Trade: Modernity’s Entanglements on an
Eastern Indonesian Island. Durham: Duke University Press.
Spivak, Gayatri Chakravorty. 1998. A Critique of Postcolonial Reason: Toward
a History of the Vanishing Present. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Steedly, Mary. 1993. Hanging Without a Rope: Narrative Experience in Colonial
and Post-colonial Karoland. Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Stewart, Kathleen. 1996. A Space on the Side of the Road: Cultural Poetics in an
“Other” America. Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Stoler, Ann. 1995. Race and the Education of Desire: Foucault’s History of Sexu-
ality and the Colonial Order of Things. Durham: Duke University Press.
———. 2002. Canal Knowledge and Imperial Power: Race and the Intimate in
Colonial Rule. Berkeley: University of California Press.
Sturgeon, Janet C. 2005. Border Landscapes: The Politics of Akha Land Use in
China and Thailand. Seattle: University of Washington Press.
Sundjaya. 2005. The Community Base Marine Conservation Togean Islands.
http://www.conservation.or.id/site/modules/detail.daily.php?textid=
4387633321928321 (accessed 7/29/05).
Supriadi, Dedy, and S. Akbar. 1997. “Togean Macaques: The New Species of
Sulawesi Macaques is Threatened.” Tangkasi 3(1&2):10–11.
Supriatna, Jatna. 1991. “Hybridization Between Macaca maurus and M. ton-
keana: A Test of Species Status Using Behavioral and Morphogenetic Analyses.”
Ph.D. Dissertation. Department of Anthropology. Albuquerque: University of
New Mexico.
Surjadi, Purbasari, and Jatna Supriatna. 1998. “Bridging Community Needs and
Government Planning in the Togean Islands, Central Sulawesi, Indonesia.” Pro-
ceedings of the International Tropical Marine Ecosystems Management Sympo-
sium. Port Townsend: Great Barrier Reef Marine Park Authority.

References
190
Tagliacozzo, Eric. 2005. “The Lit Archipelago: Coast Lighting and the Imperial
Optic in Insular Southeast Asia (1860–1910).” Technology and Culture
46(2):306–28.
Tempo. 1999. Orang Bajau, Dalam Untung dan Malang. March 15, 1999.
Terborgh, John. 1999. Requiem for Nature. Washington D.C.: Island Press.
Toer, Pramoedya Ananta. 1997. The Mutes Soliliquy [Nyanyi Sunyi Seorang
Bisu]. Jakarta: Lentera.
———. 1996. This Earth of Mankind [Bumi Manusia]. Max Lane, trans. New
York: Penguin Books.
Tronto, Joan. 1993. Moral Boundaries: A Political Argument for an Ethic of Care.
New York: Routledge.
Tsing, Anna. 2004. Friction: An Ethnography of Global Connection. Princeton:
Princeton University Press.
———. 1993. In the Realm of the Diamond Queen: Marginality in an Out-of-
the-Way Place. Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Umbgrove, J.H.F. 1930. “Madreporaria from the Togian Reefs” (Gulf of Tomini,
North-Celebes).
———. 1939. “De Atollen en Barriere-Riffen der Togian-Eilanden.” Leidsche
Geologische Mededeelingen. 11:132–87.
Volkman, Toby Alice. 1990. “Visions and Revisions: Toraja Culture and the Tour-
ist Gaze.” American Ethnologist 17(1):91–108.
van der Wal. 1680. “Extract uit het Journaal van den Hoeker de Brandgans . . .”
In Reistogten in de Afdeeling Gorontalo, Gedaan op Last der Nederlandsch
Indische Regering. Amsterdam: F. Muller. C.B.H von Rosenburg, 1865.
van Musschenbroek, S.C.J.W. 1880. “Toelichtingen Behoorende Bij de Kaart van
de Bocht van Tomini of Gorontalo en Aangrenzende Landen, de Reeden, Af-
voerplaatsen, Binnenlandsche Wegen en Andere Middelen Van Gemeenschap”
(Explanation Accompanying the Map of the Bay of Tomini or Gorontalo and
Adjacent Lands, Anchorages, Ports, Local Roads, and Other Means of Commu-
nication). Tijdschrift van het Aardrijkskundig Genootschap, Vierde Deel. Am-
sterdam: C. L. Brinkman.
Walden, Arthur. 1871. “On the Birds of the Isles of Celebes.” Proceedings of the
Zoological Society of London. 22: 329–37.
———. 1872. “On Some New Species of Birds from Celebes and the Togian Is-
lands.” Annals of the Magazine of Natural History 4(9):398–401.
Walhi. 2003a. Bebaskan Nelayan Dari Penindasan TNC (The Nature Conser-
vancy) di Perairan Komodo (Free Fishers from the Oppression of TNC in Ko-
modo Waters). Jakarta: Walhi.
———. 2003b. Tim Advocacy Masyarakat Komodo (Komodo Peoples Advocacy
Team). Jakarta: Walhi.
Wallace, Alfred Russel. 1863. “On the Physical Geography of the Malay Archipel-
ago.” Journal of the Royal Geographical Society. 33:217–34.
Warren, Carol, and Kylie Elston. 1994. Environmental Regulations in Indonesia.
Nedlands: University of Western Australia Press.
Warren, James. 1981. The Sulu Zone: 1768–1898. Singapore: Singapore Univer-
sity Press.

References
191
Weber, Max. 1946[1914]. From Max Weber. Gerth and Mills, eds. New York:
Oxford University Press.
Werner, Carol Thuman, and Jane Maxwell. 1992. Where There is no Doctor.
Hesperian Foundation.
Whalley, Christine. 2004. Rough Waters: Nature and Development in an East
African Marine Park. Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Whitten, Anthony, Muslimin Mustafa, Gregory Henderson. 1987. The Ecology
of Sulawesi. Yogyakarta: Gadjah Mada University Press.
Wilson, Edward O. 1992. The Diversity of Life. New York: Norton.
———. 1986. Biodiversity. Washington: National Academy Press.
World Rainforest Movement. 2004. “The Nature Conservancy’s Plans in Ko-
modo National Park.” WRM Bulletin No. 80. Montevideo: World Rainforest
Movement.
Yuliati, Susi, Shaifuddin Akbar, Yakup Hutabarat, Chalid Mohammad, Salahud-
din. 1994. Laporan Studi Sistem Pengetahuan dan Teknologi Pemanfaatan
Tumbuhan dan Hasil Laut: Penelitian Etnobiologi Kepulauan Togian (Report
on the Study of Knowledge Systems and the Useful Technology for Using Plants
and Sea Resources: Togean Island Ethnobiology). Depok: Yayasan Bina Sains
Hayati Indonesia.
Zerner, Charles. 2003. “Sounding the Makassar Strait: The Poetics and Politics
of an Indonesian Marine Environment.” In Culture and the Question of Rights:
Forests, Coasts, and Seas in Southeast Asia, Charles Zerner, ed. Durham: Duke
University Press.
———. 1994. “Through a Green Lens: The Construction of Customary Environ-
mental Law and Community in Indonesia’s Maluku Islands.” Law and Society
Review 28(5): 1079–1121.


Index
Abraham, Itty, 38, 173n5, 175n14
community, 53, 68, 69–70, 75, 134, 152,
Adorno, Theodore, 113; and Max Hork-
163
heimer, 21
comparability. See commensurability
allopathy. See biomedicine
Conklin, Harold, 175n1, 178n4
alternative modernities. See modernity, al-
Conservation International, 5, 12, 34–36,
ternative
42, 50, 53, 67, 69, 74, 157, 159–
arbitrariness, 21, 23, 56, 99, 155
160, 169–170, 173n1, 180nn2 and 3
Aristotle, 20, 57
cosmopolitanism, 18, 20, 23, 40–41, 45,
Asian economic crisis, x
55–56, 75–76; 91, 109, 135, 146,
assemblage, 20, 75, 155–156, 162; biodiv-
153, 155, 164
ersity as, viii
crop raiding problem, 54–55
Atkinson, Jane, 113–114, 127
cyanide, 136, 139, 141–145, 148, 151–
152, 159; and ﬁshing, 67, 133, 135,
137–138, 153, 157
Bahasa Indonesia, 31, 135
Bajau, 159, 172n15; exhibition, 28–32,
170
Darwin, Charles, 96, 114
belief, 72, 104, 108, 125–126
dermatoglyphics, 36–37, 48, 50–51
biomedicine, 108–110, 116, 118, 122,
desa tertinggal, 16
125, 127, 148, 161
development, 39–40, 53, 64, 113, 149,
Bourdieu, Pierre, 22
152, 161; as discourse, 55; economic,
Bugis people, 15, 81, 88–91, 135
viii, ix, 129; national, 19, 28, 124, 129
bureaucracy, 43, 70, 87, 92, 112, 138,
Dutch East India Company. See Verenigde
144, 150, 152
Oostindische Compagnie (VOC)
Camp Uemata, 1, 12, 14, 36, 44–48, 53,
ecoregion, 51, 156
120–121, 130, 135, 152, 155, 172n15
ecotourism. See tourism
Canguilhem, Georges, 22
El Nin˜o ﬁres, vii, viii, x
care, 71, 125, 156, 165, 179n4; ethic of,
enchantment, 21, 72, 107–108, 113, 120–
126
121, 160; dis-, 161
Chakrabarty, Dipesh, 22, 104, 173nn4 and
endemism. See species, endemic
5, 175n13
enforcement, 157–159, 161; economics
Chatterjee, Partha, 38
model of, 157
Cheah, Pheng, 73, 152, 164, 180n6
Enlightenment, 9, 114
childbirth, 110–111, 113, 126
ethnic conﬂict, 87, 91
Chinese Indonesians, xi, 81, 142
ethnicity, 104, 138; and difference, 53–54;
citizenship, 56, 105, 112, 148, 159, 161,
and live ﬁsh trade, 142; and marginality,
164
54; and place, 99; Sama, 143–144; To-
classiﬁcation, 57, 125
gean, 15, 100, 137
cognitive anthropology, 96, 165, 177n4
ethnobiology, 55, 63–67, 70, 73, 95, 100
colonialism, 21, 40, 56, 91, 161; Dutch,
ethnoscience, 11, 42, 96–97, 177n4
38, 76, 88–89, 91, 100; and natural
Evans-Pritchard, E. E., 164
history, 56–63, 155
expertise, 115, 151, 156
colonial science, 160
experts, 51; EuroAmerican, 5, 45; Togean
commensurability, 12; in–, 13, 61, 73
Communists, vii; party of (PKI), 39
people as, 66

194
•
Index
Fabian, Johannes, 160–161
knowledge, 75, 86, 104, 108, 110, 115,
Fooden, Jack, 35–36
119–120, 124–126; ecological, 139; in-
Foucault, Michel, 22, 113, 149, 156, 160
digenous, 11, 19, 23, 28, 32, 55–56, 67–
freedom, 23, 73, 162
68, 70–74, 100; local, 20, 48, 72; postco-
fresh water, 93, 108, 116, 125
lonial, 51; scientiﬁc, 20, 37, 68, 72; spa-
Freud, Sigmund, 21
tial, 70; and the state, 23
friendship, 71, 73, 155, 165
Froehlich, Jeffrey, 36, 51
Lakoff, George, 158
language, 125, 162; Sama, 29, 31, 100,
geographic information systems (GIS), vii,
172n14; Togean Island, 64
69–70
Latour, Bruno, 10, 50, 56, 96, 104, 155;
germs, 108, 110, 112, 125–126
and Steven Woolgar, 33
ghosts, 72–73, 85, 111, 160–161
law, 69, 130–131, 134–135, 138, 148–
Girl in the Sea Foam, The, 76–80
153, 156–158, 161, 179n2; rule of, 130
global south, 4, 11, 14, 104, 152
live ﬁsh, 136–148, 152, 154, 157, 161
Gobel, P. T. Arrow M., 102
lorikeets, 59–60, 175n5–176n5
gonggang, 93, 105, 163
governmentality, 66, 114–115, 152, 157
Macaca togeanus. See Togean macaque
Goya, Francisco, 25, 154, 160
Madreporaria, 59
Grove, Richard, 72–73
magic, 115, 118–121
Gupta, Akhil, 73; and James Fergusson, 99
Maier, Henk, 100, 178n6
Malenge Island, 2, 36, 47–51, 87, 101–
Habibie, Dr. Bacharuddin Jusuf, 40
102, 117–118, 125, 134, 172n15
hand line ﬁshing, 136–137, 142, 147
Menden, J. J., 35, 48–49, 168
Haraway, Donna, 22, 44
mestika, 56, 58–59
Hoevell, G.W.W.C. Barron van, 90, 167
Meyer, Adolf Bernard, 56, 60–62, 66, 73,
human, the, 56, 71, 73, 75, 96, 108, 129,
167, 175n5, 176n6
153, 162, 165; ﬁgure of, 18, 61, 157,
mobility, 18, 88–89, 91, 94, 101, 104–105;
160–161; as subject, 23; understanding
Sama, 82, 85–86
of, 14; universal, 126
modernity, 32, 38–39, 40, 46, 51, 72, 91,
Hussey, Captain Edward B., 88, 167
109, 121, 125–126, 129; alternative,
11, 38, 52; Indian, 38
iko iko, 76
multisited ethnography, 6–7
ilmu. See magic
indigenous, the, 59, 155, 160; knowledge
of (see knowledge, indigenous); people,
Nahdlatul Ulama, 31
56, 66
Napoleon wrasse, 3, 139, 143, 149–151,
integrated conservation and development
179n4
programs (ICDP), 5, 12, 14, 129, 134,
nation, the, 23, 28, 37, 52, 56; autonomy
156–157
of, 12; inclusion in, 30; postcolonial,
Islam, 16, 131, 160
37–38, 44; science, technology, and,
37, 40
jamu, 76, 122
nationalism, viii
Jelajah Etnic exhibition, 29–32
Native Americans, 53–54
Johannes, Robert, and Michael Riepen,
Nature Conservancy, The, 5, 157–158,
139, 146, 150
180n2
justice, ix, 68, 71, 158, 161–162; environ-
nautilus, 56–58
mental, 41, 161, 176n9; ethic of, 126
New Order, xi, xii, 28, 54, 132
Nietzsche, Friedrich, xii, 21, 114
nongovernmental organization (NGO), vii,
Kant, Immanuel, 20–21
kinship, 47
5, 23, 36, 69, 132, 137, 156–159

Index
•
195
objects, 23, 32, 56, 59, 64, 66, 72, 104–
science and technology studies, ix, 9, 34,
105, 117, 123, 125, 155–156; bio-, 34;
52, 112, 173n3
collection of, 20; prohibited, 107; and
sea cucumber, 3, 16–17, 29, 74, 75, 81–90,
truth, 103
97, 102, 117–118, 147, 155, 167, 170,
origin, 14, 91
177n1, 180n5
sea nomads, 17, 91–92, 163
sea weed, 71–72, 163
Pancasila, 130–132
Shiva, Vandana, x
Pickering, Andrew, 9
Sody, H.J.V., 34–36
Pigg, Stacy Leigh, 125
spatial planning, 55, 67–71, 73, 86, 104
political ecology, viii, 42, 161
species, 50–51, 75, 101, 108, 154–156;
pongkat, 18, 75, 81–86, 88, 97–98, 143
classiﬁcation of, 17, 161; concept of, 15,
pongko, 110, 125
34, 174n10; endemic, 1,7, 34, 36, 49–
postcolonialism, 160; differences in, 14;
50, 57; inventory of, 17, 28, 53, 55–56,
and identity, 104; and nations, 160, 164;
94, 107, 161; keystone, 51; of live ﬁsh,
and science studies, x, 38, 52; theory of,
140; loss of, 4–5; names of, 2; new, 45;
ix, 13
and place, 103; Sulawesi, 7, 9; validity
Prakash, Gyan, 38–39, 173n5
of, 37, 49
primates, 33
spirit possession, 106–108, 125
primatology, 35, 41, 49–51, 170
state, the, 41, 69–70, 86, 116, 134, 153,
primitivism, 30–32, 72, 115
164; apparatus of, 13; Indonesian, 23,
Program for Left Behind Villages, 117,
31, 53, 152; and intervention, 114, 118;
124, 143
legal, 148
proper names, 97
subaltern studies, 38, 164
puerperal fever, 110, 112–113, 126–127
subjectivity, 34, 41, 104, 125; national, 37,
40, 164
Rabinow, Paul, 20, 74, 173n5, 175n16
Suharto, vii, xi, 15, 23, 28, 40–41, 69–70,
rationality, 6, 97, 155, 158–159, 163; bu-
124, 138, 156, 159, 174n9; and post-Su-
reaucratic, 113; EuroAmerican, 11; gov-
harto era, xi, 159; rise to power of, 39
ernmental, 40, 72; scientiﬁc, 160
Sukarno, xi, 39
reason, 19–23, 67, 71, 85, 96, 112, 121,
suku terasing, 28, 81
126, 160, 162, 164; analytic of, xi, 23,
Sulawesi Primate Project, 35, 54
162; anthropology of, 109; critical, 22;
Supriatna, Jatna, 33–34, 42–43, 45, 48–
as folk category, 22, 165; genealogies of,
54, 62, 66–67, 155, 168
23; instrumental, ix, 65, 72–73, 112–
115, 120, 127, 155, 160, 173n3, 190n6;
legal, 148, 153; pure, 21, 121, 123; scien-
tarsiers, 44–46, 50, 170
tiﬁc, 52, 108; of state, 22, 134; tribunals
taxonomy, 96
of, 104, 156; universal, 22, 72, 86, 124,
technoscience, viii, 10, 118, 127
160
Toer, Pramoedya Ananta, 37–38, 173n6,
recognition, 13
180n6
reformasi, xi, 156, 160
Togean macaque, 33–37, 47–51, 53, 107,
Revius, 90
133, 154–155, 173n1
Romanticism, 31, 59, 73, 162, 164
tourism, 16, 120–121, 129–132, 134, 154
Rose, Nicholas, 22, 31, 65, 162, 180n4
tourist, 85, 87, 103, 117, 135, 161
Rosenburg, C.B.H. von, 33, 56, 89–90,
Tsing, Anna, 22, 92, 119, 174n9, 178n5
167
Rumphius, Georgius Everhardus, 56–59,
Umbgrove, J.H.F., 56, 59, 61–62, 98, 168
66–67, 71, 73–74, 175n3, 177n10
Verenigde Oostindische Compagnie
sago, 85–86, 93–94, 104–105, 163, 170
sasi, 69
(VOC), 56, 71

196
•
Index
Wahid, Abdurrahman, 31
Wallace’s line, 7–8
Weber, Max, 21, 113, 160
Wal, Jan van der, 88, 167, 177n2
Walhi (Indonesian Forum for the Environ-
Wilson, Edward O., 9, 171n6
World War II, 101, 103
ment), vii, 41, 174n9
Wallace, Alfred Russel, 1, 10, 29
World Wide Fund for Nature, 5, 35, 53,
62, 157, 172nn9 and 12, 180n2
Wallacea, 7, 10, 29–30

The Shadows and Lights of Waco: Millennialism Today
by James D. Faubion
Life Exposed: Biological Citizens after Chernobyl by Adriana Petryna
Anthropos Today: Reﬂections on Modern Equipment by Paul Rabinow
When Nature Goes Public: The Making and Unmaking of Bioprospecting
in Mexico by Cori Hayden
Picturing Personhood: Brain Scans and Biomedical Identity
by Joseph Dumit
Fiscal Disobedience: An Anthropology of Economic Regulation
in Central Africa by Janet Roitman
Race to the Finish: Identity and Governance in an Age of Genomics
by Jenny Reardon
Everything Was Forever, Until It Was No More: The Last Soviet
Generation by Alexei Yurchak
Wild Profusion: Biodiversity Conservation in an Indonesian Archipelago
by Celia Lowe

