Mind World
Essays in Phenomenology and Ontology
This collection explores the structure of consciousness and its place
in the world, or inversely the structure of the world and the place of
consciousness in it. Among the topics covered are the phenomenological aspects of experience (inner awareness, self-awareness), dependencies between experience and the world (the role of the body in
experience, the role of culturally formed background ideas), and the
basic ontological categories found in the world at large (unity, stateof-affairs, connectedness, dependence, and intentionality). Developing ideas drawn from historical figures such as Descartes, Husserl,
Aristotle, and Whitehead, the essays together demonstrate the interdependence of ontology and phenomenology and its significance for
the philosophy of mind.
David Woodruff Smith is Professor of Philosophy at the University of
California, Irvine.
Mind World
Essays in Phenomenology and Ontology
DAVID WOODRUFF SMITH
University of California, Irvine
  
Information on this title: www.cambridge.org/9780521832038
David Woodruff Smith 2004
For Mary and Wyndham,
whose creative minds complete my world
Contents
Prolegomena: The Terroir of Consciousness and the World page ix
Origins of the Essays xvii
Overview: A Story Line 1
The Picture 8
1 Three Facets of Consciousness 10
2 The Cogito circa a.d. 2000 42
3 Return to Consciousness 76
4 Consciousness in Action 122
5 Background Ideas 147
6 Intentionality Naturalized? 176
7 Consciousness and Actuality 211
8 Basic Categories 242
Coda: The Beetle in the Box 283
Appendix: Background Conceptions of Ontology, Phenomenology,
Philosophy of Mind, and Historical Philosophy 289
Index 305
Prolegomena: The Terroir of Consciousness
and the World
This book explores the structure of consciousness and its place in the
world or, inversely, the structure of the world and the place of consciousness in it. Some essays focus on phenomenological aspects of conscious
experience; others on the world at large, especially the importance of
basic ontological categories. Some develop ideas drawn from historical
figures (e.g., Descartes, Husserl, Aristotle, Whitehead), while looking to
structures of consciousness and the world. I want to put these essays
between the covers of one book because, as I see them, their views work
together like photos of a common field taken from different perspectives.
The ideas gathered here have evolved mostly in the terroir of California,
where ideas and cultures mix uncommonly. California phenomenology.
California ontology. California syncretism. Not without a sense of history
(even in California).
The essays cut across the fields of phenomenology and ontology. The
interdependence of ontology and phenomenology, as well as its signifi-
cance for philosophy of mind, is a running theme of the collection as a
whole. This interdependence I see as part of the systematic character of
philosophy as a whole, a systematic unity rejected by much of twentiethcentury philosophy, not least in separating phenomenology from
wider metaphysics (in the wake of Kantianism, positivism, pragmatism,
existentialism).
Frequently the essays address issues in philosophy of mind, the most
vigorous area of recent philosophy in the analytic tradition. Yet my perspective does not begin with current issues of the relation between mind
and body – issues of physicalism, functionalism, supervenience, and
the like (as in Fodor, Dennett, Searle, Dretske, Kim, the Churchlands).
ix
x Prolegomena
Rather, my perspective begins with more purely phenomenological and
ontological issues: issues of consciousness, intentionality, and ontological
categories.
The essay in Chapter 1 distinguishes three fundamentally different
ontological aspects of consciousness, which separate areas of terrain explored variously in other essays. Subsequent chapters analyze consciousness in its basic phenomenological structure (intentionality, inner awareness, volition, action), in its environmental conditions (brain activity,
physical surroundings, cultural background), and ultimately in its“deep”
ontological structure (basic categorial forms or modes of being, such as
being intentional, being dependent on brain, culture, etc.). The later
chapters explore ontological categories in their own right, while keeping
an eye on consciousness.
The collection affords, I hope, a unified though by no means complete
view of mind-and-world (the unity implied in the book’s title). However,
I do not wish to axiomatize here; I let the essays speak for themselves
after previewing them with a broad story line. I find the essays mutually
reinforcing, although each was written to stand alone, as far as possible.
There are points of overlap, interlocking the essays, yet common themes
may be approached from different directions.
The essays are broadly analytic in style and approach (Austro-AngloAmerican philosophy). They are often phenomenological in content and
method and background (continental European philosophy). They are
recurrently ontological or metaphysical in content (joining a long history
of Western philosophy). And they are sometimes historical in content and
method (reflecting a long and global tradition of philosophy). In this way
the book combines elements of philosophy that are often kept separate.
There is a vision that I hope develops over the course of the present
book: that the structure of consciousness, with all the properties we find
in it through phenomenology, finds its home in the complex structure of
the world, with all the forms we find recounted in a systematic ontology.
Only by working our way into both phenomenology and ontology, in an
integrative way, can we develop this vision.
The term terroir is used by French vintners to incorporate all the elements of the vineyard, including the roles of geology, climate, and culture in the making of wine. The term has caught on in the California
wine country. Now, the philosophical terroir of California has produced
local varietals of phenomenology and ontology, and these essays partake
of those varietals in seeking the terroir of consciousness in the world.
Prolegomena xi
Consciousness: its distinctive experiential characters, its place in the
ground of things, its being in the air in philosophy, its cultural inheritance – these are the things we must attend to in consciousness. The
