world: its basic categories, its diverse formal structures, its niche for consciousness – these are the things we must attend to in the world at large.
How shall we study structures of consciousness and the world?
We understand consciousness in the first place by simply experiencing
it. Phenomenology is the philosophical discipline that seeks to describe,
interpret, and analyze our own conscious experience, just as we experience it from our own first-person perspective. But phenomenology alone
does not tell us the place of consciousness in the world.
We understand the world at large by way of everyday experience and
increasingly by what empirical science discovers and hypothesizes. Ontology, or metaphysics, is the philosophical discipline that seeks to analyze
the basic shape of the world. But today ontology is accountable to the remarkable empirical-theoretical results of modern science. Accordingly,
the task of ontology is to frame what we know about the world, including structures of our own conscious experience, structures of the things
we encounter in everyday life, and structures of what we know through
empirical science.
Interestingly, the approach of modern science has left consciousness
itself as one of the most pressing problems of cognitive neuroscience
(the science of mind) and the hottest topic in recent philosophy of mind
cum cognitive science. We philosophers and scientists together have not
found a way to fit the properties of consciousness as we experience it
(featuring intentionality, inner awareness, sensory qualia, volition, etc.)
into the world as we know it in contemporary science (featuring quarks,
quantum fields, evolution of organisms, black holes, etc.). In order to
understand the nature of consciousness and how it fits into the world,
what we need from the side of philosophy is a more careful synthesis of
more careful phenomenology and more careful ontology. Yet the disciplines of phenomenology and (formal) ontology are too little evident in
the exhilarating discipline today called philosophy of mind or, in its more
scientific reaches, cognitive science. Indeed, the thought of bringing together all these fractious disciplines (and their disciples!) calls to mind
an old Bette Davis line: “Fasten your seat belts, ... it’s going to be a bumpy
night!” Nonetheless, that is what lies ahead of us.1
In the following chapters I pursue a particular synthesis of phenomenology and ontology. However, I leave for the Appendix a more
explicit account of how I conceive of phenomenology and ontology and
xii Prolegomena
their integration. These are matters of controversy, reaching into broad
metaphilosophical positions; I try to stake out my territory in these matters in the Appendix.
My conception of phenomenology and ontology and their interdependence, as practiced here, has evolved through several overlapping “eras”
in my philosophical experience. A sense of this background may help to
indicate where I am going as well as where I am coming from, and this
sense calls to mind my gratitude to a number of teachers (including my
students and collaborators).
When I moved from mathematics into philosophy as a graduate student at Stanford in the late 1960s, what crossed my path, after Donald
Davidson’s philosophy of language, was Jaakko Hintikka’s possible-worlds
logic of perception followed by Dagfinn Føllesdal’s development of
Husserlian phenomenology. By 1982 Ronald McIntyre and I had put
together our collaborative interpretation of these things in a book that
took us ten years to write. Here was California phenomenology at work.2
At Stanford I also acquired an appreciation of the history of philosophy
and its contemporary relevance, absorbed from the teaching of John
D. Goheen and two European logicans (Dagfinn and Jaakko) who read
historical texts as seriously as today’s. When I took my first philosophy
courses, at Northwestern while an engineering and mathematics student,
I wanted to know the truth about things, not who said it and when. Slowly,
but surely, I have learned that the genealogy of philosophical concepts, in
texts of bygone years, carries a great deal of their content. Indeed, there
is something phenomenological in understanding an idea by tracking its
historical evolution. With ideas as with organisms, ontogeny recapitulates
phylogeny. In William Faulkner’s words, “The past is not forgotten, it is
not even past.”
In 1982 I got a telephone call inviting me to talk about phenomenology’s relevance to software design. Thus began my twenty-year philosophical discussion with Charles W. Dement. We started by assessing Sartre’s
ontology, and we have been talking ever since about issues in formal ontology cum phenomenology, ranging from Anaximander and Aristotle
to Husserl, Ingarden, Whitehead, and Ernst Mayr (yes, the biologist).
This work was part of a formal research program at Ontek Corporation
(incorporated in 1985): designing systems of computational ontology
cum phenomenology. (Ontek’s work was the first of this kind.) Here was
California ontology in the making. In the late 1980s and throughout the
1990s, our philosophical research – and the iterations of systems built by
Prolegomena xiii
the Ontek team that were based on that research – moved from categories,
states of affairs, and modalities (ontic and epistemic) to basic “modes”
(including manyness, composition, dependence, intentionality) and on
to what we have called “systematics” or “metasystematics” (marking ontological distinctions and their role in the formal genesis of entities, in
a kind of analogy with biological systematics). Our work over the years
also involved close collaboration with logician Peter Woodruff and ontologist Peter Simons (thinkers from the world of academic philosophy)
and with Ontek systems designer Steve DeWitt and master programmer
John Stanley (philosophical thinkers from the real world).
On a parallel track through the 1990s I was drawn back into Husserl’s
Logical Investigations, this time with my eyes focused more closely on formal ontology. Although my results and stance in these essays are often
far from Husserlian, I found in Husserl an important case study in how
phenomenology, ontology, and logic (think of formal semantics) work together. In my current view, Husserl joins Aristotle, Kant, and Whitehead
as the most systematic of philosophers. A series of conferences, with occasions to present papers on these things, has helped me to develop this
new perspective on Husserl and on the synthesis of ontology and phenomenology (and logic). There were conferences in Bordeaux in 1995,
Leeds in 1996, Bolzano in 1997, Copenhagen in 2000, Montreal in 2001,
Memphis in 2001.
For many years I have worked with small groups who gathered in southern and northern California for informal discussions of aspects of intentionality. In these forums I have talked with Ron McIntyre, Dagfinn
Føllesdal, Izchak Miller (until his untimely passing), Bert Dreyfus, John
Searle, Allan Casebier, Martin Schwab, Dallas Willard, Rick Tieszen,
Wayne Martin, Amie Thomasson, Jeff Yoshimi, and others. I have also
enjoyed conversations over the years, often in Europe, with Barry Smith,
Peter Simons, and Kevin Mulligan, Ltd., the threesome British champions
of formal ontology (and its history in Brentano, Husserl, et al.).
Meanwhile, I have been fortunate to work with a string of gifted graduate students at Irvine, expanding my horizons as their dissertations unfolded. In nearly weekly discussions with each, many of the ideas below have circulated in various garbs. Jeff Yoshimi, Paul Livingston, Tim
Schoettle, Linda Palmer, Jason Ford, Kay Mathiesen, Joe Tougas, Dan
Zelinski, Amie Thomasson, John Bickle, Jim Zaiss, Kent Baldner – these
perceptive younger minds have taken very different directions. It has
been fascinating to see, from my office chair, how things are related, from
neuroscience to mysticism, from the ontology of art to the ontology of
xiv Prolegomena
politics, from phenomenology to philosophy of language to philosophy
of mind, and from one historical figure to another.
My kindest thanks to all these good people, without whom ...
The mixing of ideas, ideals, cultures, and peoples is a natural pattern
of human evolution. California in particular presents a form of cultural
confluence demonstrating this fact of life on earth. Today’s “California”
