looks toward Asia and Latin America as much as Europe, as well as Africa
and the Middle East. The mix and flux of this California is a daily experience for all who have been fortunate to inhabit the richness of the
University of California in recent decades, not least on the Irvine campus
where I teach.
Yet the modern ethos – from science to human rights – is felt as deeply
threatening to many people across the globe. Science and rationality have
overridden traditions of spirituality and of ethnicity. In this century many
peoples and their values will mix more than ever before. The challenge
is how to honor difference amid sameness – not least in light of the fact
that we are all hurtling through space on a planet that we may obliterate
simply because we cannot sustain our own species along with other life
forms. The events of 11 September 2001 shook the world, in ways we have
yet to understand.
And yet, constant flux is not without history, not without continuity,
and not without form, as Whitehead’s ontology declares. (The essay in
Chapter 7 draws on that ontology of flux.)
Something of the Zeitgeist – the constant flux of different ideas from
different cultural and philosophical origins – is at work in the essays gathered here. Not usually by design, of course, as the spirit moves us mostly
in ways we do not see. California’s openness to new things has encouraged my looking to “other” philosophical traditions. Indeed, the mixing
of ideas in a multicultural way is an important part of the background of
the essays in this book. (Including the one titled “Background Ideas” in
Chapter 5, first published in Italian in Rome.)
My thanks thus to the intellectual terroir of “California.”
Notes
1. The relevance of Husserlian phenomenology for cognitive science has
been explored in two anthologies: Hubert L. Dreyfus (with Harrison Hall),
ed., Husserl, Intentionality and Cognitive Science (Cambridge, Mass.: MIT
Press, 1982); and Jean Petitot, Francisco J. Varela, Bernard Pachoud, and
Prolegomena xv
Jean-Michel Roy, eds., Naturalizing Phenomenology: Issues in Contemporary Phenomenology and Cognitive Science (Stanford, Calif.: Stanford University Press
in collaboration with Cambridge University Press, 1999). From a different
perspective, the analytic tradition in philosophy of mind, in the parts most
relevant to my concerns, has been highlighted in Ned Block, Owen Flanagan,
and Guven G ¨ uzeldere, eds., ¨ The Nature of Consciousness (Cambridge, Mass.:
MIT Press, 1997); however, the phenomenological tradition, with its rich
panoply of results, is not drawn into the latter volume. Meanwhile, a new collection is imminent, joining results from both classical phenomenology (as
a discipline) and contemporary philosophy of mind: David Woodruff Smith
and Amie L. Thomasson, eds., Phenomenology and Philosophy of Mind (forthcoming). Of course, many analytic philosophers remain uncomfortable with
the first-person, phenomenological approach to consciousness, and a few
reject the existence of phenomena of consciousness. On the other hand,
many phenomenologists remain uncomfortable with the naturalism of scientifically oriented philosophy of mind, often setting “transcendental” phenomenology in opposition to any naturalistic explanation of consciousness,
intentional content, or meaning in general. Stay tuned for my take on such
issues.
2. The school of so-called California phenomenology began with Dagfinn
Føllesdal’s teaching at Harvard and Stanford in the 1960s, joined by
Hubert Dreyfus’s teaching at Berkeley. This conception of phenomenology,
and its Husserlian foundations, is laid out in two volumes: Hubert L. Dreyfus,
ed., Husserl, Intentionality and Cognitive Science (1982, cited in note 1); and
David Woodruff Smith and Ronald McIntyre, Husserl and Intentionality: A Study
of Mind, Meaning, and Language (Dordrecht: D. Reidel, 1982). The latter work
remains the only book-length development of the neo-Husserlian theory of
intentionality that evolved in the “California” tradition (in fact, a particular
variant on the theory emphasizing horizon as well as noema, and detailing
connections with Fregean and possible-world semantic theory as well).
xvi
Origins of the Essays
The essays in Chapters 1, 2, and 4–7 were originally published as indicated
and have been edited here for uniformity of style:
“Three Facets of Consciousness,” Axiomathes 12 (2001): 55–85.
“The Cogito circa ad 2000,” Inquiry 36 (3) (September 1993): 225–54.
“Consciousness in Action,” Synthese 90 (1992): 119–43.
“Background Ideas” appeared in Italian translation as “Idee di sfondo,”
Paradigmi (Estratto da PARADIGMI, Rivista di critica filosofica)
(Rome), Anno XVII, no. 49 (January–April 1999): 7–37.
“Intentionality Naturalized?” in Jean Petitot, Francisco J. Varela, Bernard
Pachoud, and Jean-Michel Roy, eds., Naturalizing Phenomenology: Issues
in Contemporary Phenomenology and Cognitive Science (Stanford, Calif.:
Stanford University Press in collaboration with Cambridge University
Press, 1999), pp. 83–110. The essay has been translated as“L’intentionnalite naturalis ´ ee? ´ ” in Jean Petitot, Francisco J. Varela, Bernard
Pachoud, and Jean-Michel Roy, eds., Naturaliser la phenom ´ enologie: Essais ´
sur la phenom ´ enologie contemporaine et les sciences cognitives ´ (Paris: CNRS
Editions, 2002), pp. 105–42.
“Consciousness and Actuality” appeared as “Consciousness and Actuality
in Whiteheadian Ontology,” in Liliana Albertazzi, ed., The Dawn of the
Cognitive Science: Early European Contributors (Dordrecht: Kluwer Academic Publishers, 2001), pp. 269–97 – only the title is changed, for
aesthetic parallel.
I am most grateful to the original publishers for permission to reprint
these essays in the present book: to Taylor and Francis, Ltd., publisher of
the journal Inquiry, in which Chapter 2 appeared; to Stanford University
xvii
xviii Origins of the Essays
Press, publisher of the volume Naturalizing Phenomenology, in which
Chapter 6 appeared; and to Kluwer Academic Publishers, publisher of the
journal Axiomathes, in which Chapter 1 appeared; publisher of the journal Synthese, in which Chapter 4 appeared; and publisher of the volume
The Dawn of Cognitive Science, in which Chapter 7 appeared.
The essays in Chapters 3 and 8 are published here for the first time:
“Return to Consciousness”: this essay aims to update, revise, and amplify my analysis of “inner awareness” in The Circle of Acquaintance
(Dordrecht: Kluwer Academic Publishers, 1989) and “The Structure
of (Self-)Consciousness,” Topoi 5(2) (1986): 149–56.
“Basic Categories”: this essay includes material from a series of four lectures I gave in the 1997 Bolzano International Schools in Cognitive
Analysis at the conference “Categories: Ontological Perspectives in
Knowledge Representation” in Bolzano, Italy, 15–19 September 1997;
the essay reflects my work on ontology in collaboration with colleagues
at Ontek Corporation since 1982 and a series of courses and seminars
I taught at the University of California, Irvine, during the 1990s.
Overview: A Story Line
The Background
In a moment I will sketch a line of argument, or rather narrative, that
weaves through the essays gathered here. But first let me recall some
background notions broadly assumed in that story line.
