Consciousness is a consciousness “of” something, and this of-ness –
called intentionality – is the tie that binds consciousness and world
together.
Intentionality is itself the structure in which we know about the world.
This structure begins with mental and practical acts on the one hand
and objects of various types on the other. Phenomenology works from
intentionality into structures of experience, or conscious mental activity, whereas ontology works inter alia from intentionality into structures
of the world in general (including mental activity). We do not normally think of ontology as beginning with intentionality. As Quine has
stressed, however, our ontology consists of what we posit in our preferred theories – what we posit, I note, in our intentional activities of
theorizing.
So we may think of working from intentionality into phenomenology
on the one hand and into ontology on the other hand. In one direction
lies “subjective” structure; in the other lies “objective” structure. Both
directions are pursued in the essays gathered in this book, but the subjective and objective, I urge, are part of one world with a unified structure.
(By contrast, Descartes posited two realms of mind and body, and Kant
separated two spheres called phenomena and noumena, or things-asthey-appear and things-as-they-are-in-themselves.)
1
2 Mind World
Since Husserl’s work in the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries, philosophers have come to define intentionality as the property
of a mental state’s being “of” or “about” something – in the sense that
(following Husserl) consciousness is (almost always) a consciousness “of”
something. The concept of intentionality has been developing since at
least Aristotle, but it came into its own in Husserl. In the background
of the essays in this volume lies a reconstruction of Husserl’s basic theory of intentionality.1 What I rely on is mostly an appreciation of the
phenomenon of intentionality, including intentional content and the intentional relation of mental act to object. This much is broadly Husserlian
but shared by other philosophers who take seriously “first-person” consciousness and content.2
Very briefly, the content theory of intentionality, in the form I prefer,
holds that intentionality consists in a complex structure of context, subject, act, content, and object – that is, within a certain context a person
or subject performs or experiences an act of consciousness (thinking,
seeing, willing, etc.) with a certain content (thought, image, etc.) that
represents or “intends” a certain object (individual, state of affairs, event,
etc.). In that way consciousness is intentionally directed toward an object.
Schematically:
context |—— subject — act — content ——> object.
The context includes the background conditions on which the intentionality depends. The subject is the person who is conscious. The act
is the state or event or process of thinking, perceiving, imagining, desiring, willing, or whatever. The content is the ideal or abstract “meaning”
entertained in the act. That content represents something, which is the
object of the intentional act, that which the subject is conscious “of” – in
a certain way defined by the content and conditioned by the context.
A special range of cases that have interested me are those in which
the subject is directly acquainted with the object, as in visual perception.
Here the content is naturally expressed by indexical words such as “this,”
“here,” “I,” “her,” etc. The intentional or semantic force of the intrinsically
“indexical” content of an act of acquaintance depends on the context of
the act: my perception of “this” tree depends on which tree is in my visual
environment as I see “this.” The structure of acquaintance figures in some
studies in this volume, so I point toward it here in preview. What may be
less familiar is how the case of acquaintance is handled in a content theory
of intentionality.3 In this form of intentionality mind and world are most
intimately connected.
Overview: A Story Line 3
The Story Line
The essays to follow tell their stories individually. But these shorter stories
fit into a larger story, a broad philosophical account of mind and world.
I have arranged the essays in a pedagogical order: moving mostly from
more phenomenological to more ontological issues. An alternative pedagogy would move in the reverse order, and one might well read the essays
in reverse, depending on one’s interests. Here, in an overview, I attempt
to weave the larger story line around salient themes in the individual
essays.
Three Facets of Consciousness
In the information age computer scientists have found it useful to distinguish a computing system’s hardware, software, and users: the physical
implementation of the formal computing algorithms manipulated by humans as the computation appears to them on their computer screens. But
this three-schema approach to computation reflects a highly abstract ontological framework. Indeed, the nature of any entity divides into three
fundamental facets that we may call form, appearance, and substrate. An
entity’s form consists in its kinds, properties, relations; its appearance
consists in the way it is known or experienced by a knowing agent; its substrate consists in that on which it depends for its existence (such as deep
physical process in quarks or strings or whatever). Now, the nature of an
act of consciousness divides thus into form, appearance, and substrate. Its
form is intentionality; its appearance is its qualitative phenomenological
character as experienced; its substrate is its neural basis, its cultural background, and more. Keeping this division of essence in mind will change
the way we practice philosophy of mind and indeed ontology in general,
while sharply defining the place of phenomenology in both.
The Cogito circa a.d. 2000
Philosophers have studied intentionality, the basic form of consciousness,
in various guises at least since Aristotle. But it was Husserl’s work circa
1900 that finally produced a sharp model of intentionality. On this model,
an act of consciousness is directed via a conceptual structure of meaning (intentional content) toward an object appropriately represented or
“intended” through that meaning. But how do we come to know the
form of consciousness? The phenomenological turn to consciousness
and its intentional structure began with Descartes’s cogito ergo sum. The
best way to appreciate the “first-person” approach to mind – which has
4 Mind World
returned to center stage in contemporary philosophical-scientific theory
of mind – is to reexamine the cogito from today’s perspective. Consciousness includes, in its very structure, an inner awareness of the transpiring act.
The logic of the cogito follows this form of inner awareness. This inner
awareness grounds our knowledge of our own conscious experience from
our own first-person perspective. That knowledge is not incorrigible (as
Ryle averred of Descartes’s claim). Rather, it is the experientially certain
starting point of our understanding of consciousness. And third-person
studies of mind must accommodate this first-person structure.
The Return to Consciousness
What makes a mental act or state conscious, on the classical view
(Descartes, Locke, Brentano, Husserl, et al.), is a certain inner awareness of the act as it transpires: I am not consciously thinking, perceiving,
and the like unless I am aware of so thinking or perceiving. What is the
form of that inner awareness? It cannot be that of a distinct mental act
of observing or reflecting on the given mental act, because then we have
two acts instead of one and tend toward an infinite regress (of observing observing ... ). Instead, inner awareness must be an integral component of a conscious experience. Roughly speaking, we may articulate the
structure of inner awareness in the following form of phenomenological
description: “Phenomenally in this very experience I see this frog.” The
inner awareness is not, then, an additional and second-order awareness
