Husserl distinguished phenomenology from both everyday knowledge
and scientific knowledge, and he distinguished “formal” ontology from
“material” ontologies of Body, Culture, and Consciousness (as the distinction is reconstructed in D. W. Smith 1995). The point to stress here
is that the world is characterized in different parts and levels in these different ranges of theory, and the philosophy of mind must respect these
differences of theory.
Only by understanding more clearly both phenomenology and ontology, along with the natural sciences (as well as the humanities), can we
understand the place of consciousness in the world. That is the loftier
moral of this essay. The specifics to follow concern the ontology of the
three aspects or“facets” of consciousness, and the role of phenomenology
in such an ontology.
Phenomenology and Ontology
Ontology (or metaphysics) is the science of being: as Aristotle put it,
being as being. Where the special sciences – physics, chemistry, biology,
psychology, and the like – are sciences of particular kinds of beings, ontology is the general science of what it is to be a being (and perhaps of
what it is to be).
Phenomenology is the science of consciousness: as Husserl put it, of
consciousness as we experience it. Phenomenology begins in the description of conscious experience from our own point of view as subjects or
agents: “I feel angry,” “I see that volcano,” “I think that Plato was ironic,”
“I will [to act so that I] stroke this tennis ball cross-court,” and so on. The
intentionality of consciousness is evident in our own experience: I am
conscious “of” or “about” such and such.
Now, ontology and phenomenology interact in our overall theory of
consciousness and its place in the world. For our experience – in emotion,
perception, thought, and action – is informed by our understanding of
the world around us, by our ontology, implicit or explicit. And as we
practice phenomenology, we use our ontology, implicitly or explicitly, in
order to describe our experience, its intentional relation to objects in the
Three Facets of Consciousness 17
world, and the things we are conscious of in perception, thought, and
action. In this way, phenomenology is ontological. But ontology itself
is phenomenological insofar as it recognizes the existence of our own
consciousness, as we must in saying what exists.
It may be surprising to speak of ontology within the practice of phenomenology. For did not Husserl, in Ideas (books I and II, 1969/1913
and 1991/1912ff.), enjoin us to bracket the existence of the surrounding world of nature (and culture) in order to describe the structure of
our consciousness? Here lies confusion. Husserl assumed a good deal of
“formal” ontology – concerning individual and essence, part and whole,
dependence, and so on – precisely as he sought to describe the essence of
intentionality in phenomenology; and bracketing the region of nature
(and the region of culture) leaves the region of consciousness, with the
“material” ontology of consciousness as part of phenomenology (see D. W.
Smith 1995). Heidegger followed suit, in The Basic Problems of Phenomenology (1988/1975/1927), assuming his own formal categories in describing
structures of our existence and comportment; indeed, Heidegger insisted
that phenomenology is “fundamental ontology,” and so fundamental ontology is essentially phenomenological. Philosophy today has lost sight of
the intimate connection between our saying what there is and our saying
how we experience what is.
Let us approach the nature of consciousness and its place in the world
by laying out a very basic ontological distinction, a distinction we rarely
make explicit but assume deep in the background of a good deal of our
theorizing about the world.
Three-Facet Ontology
Everything in the world – every entity whatsoever – has a nature that
divides fundamentally into three aspects we shall call facets: its form, its
appearance, and its substrate. Thus:
1. The form of an entity is how or what it is: its whatness or quiddity –
the kinds, properties, relations that make it what it is.
2. The appearance of an entity is how it is known or apprehended: how
it looks if perceptible (its appearance in the everyday sense), but
also how it is conceived if conceivable, how it is used if utilizable –
how it is experienced or “intended” as thus and so.
3. The substrate of a thing is how it is founded or originated: how it
comes to be, where it comes from, its history or genetic origin if
18 Mind World
temporal, its composition or material origin if material, its phylogenetic origin if biological, its cultural origin if a cultural artifact –
in short, its ecological origin in a wide sense, and ultimately its
ontological origin in basic categories or modes of being.
The three facets of an entity (in this technical sense) are categorially
distinct aspects of the entity, with important relations among them, as we
shall be exploring. This distinction of aspects we may call the three-facet
distinction (Figure 1.1).
Distinctions among form, appearance, and foundation or origin have
been drawn in philosophy since its inception. Plato distinguished concrete things from their forms, and appearance from reality, and posited
forms as the foundation of being. Before Plato, Anaximander assessed
the material composition of things and envisioned their origin or foundation in something more basic (an archaic quantum field?); he even
foresaw biological evolution, 2,500 years before Darwin. In more recent
centuries, epistemologists from Descartes to Kant distinguished things
from the ways they are known, while idealists like Berkeley put mind at
the foundation of reality and materialists reduced mind to matter. What I
am proposing, however, is to unify the distinctions among form, appearance, and substrate, and then to elevate the three-facet distinction itself
to an axiom of fundamental ontology – and so to structure ontology itself
(in one way) along these lines.
The structure < Form, Appearance, Substrate > thus defines a special
system of ontological categories. For the world is structured importantly,
at fundamental joints, by this three-facet distinction. The distinction presupposes that the world includes attributes (of entities), minds (to which
entities may appear), and contexts of foundation or origin (from or within
which entities may come to be). There may be possible worlds that lack
such things, but our world has this much structure, and our ontology and
phenomenology are accountable to this three-facet structure of the world.
These three categories do not form a sequence of mutually exclusive and
collectively exhaustive summa genera of entities, as do the Aristotelian categories (roughly, Substance or Individual, Species, Quality, Quantity, etc).
FORM
|
ENTITY
/ \
SUBSTRATE APPEARANCE
figure 1.1. The three facets of an entity.
Three Facets of Consciousness 19
Rather, the categories of Form, Appearance, and Substrate order or rank
three fundamental ways an entity in our world is defined: by relation to
its form, to its being known or “intended,” and to its ground or origin.
If you think about it, these categories define three fundamentally important and importantly different areas within the nature of any entity (in a
