of “transcendental.” As Sokolowski shrewdly observes, “Transcendental
phenomenology is the mind’s self-discovery in the presence of intelligible objects.” Whence: “to think about intentionality in all its forms... is
transcendental phenomenology.”
I concur that transcendental phenomenology is the study of intentionality. But I propose to rethink the traditional conceptions of “transcendental.” We may say the three-facet distinction in ontology is itself
“transcendental,” radically updating the medieval notion, insofar as this
distinction defines a fundamental formal ontological structure that applies to
any entity in our kind of world (from a biological species to a computer
system). Indeed, in terms of the three-facet architecture we can redefine
the role of phenomenology in studying the nature of mind.
The appearance of an act of consciousness is studied in what Husserl
called “phenomenological description,” description of experience as
lived. The form of an act of consciousness – the details of its intentional
structure – is studied in what Husserl called “eidetic analysis” of the act,
abstracting or factoring out its form or eidos, namely, its being directed
from subject to object via content. These are the two stages of method
Husserl (1913) used in the practice of “transcendental phenomenology.”
Now, the substrate of an act of consciousness is studied not by phenomenology, but by the natural sciences (in neuroscience, evolutionary
biology, physics) and the cultural sciences (in criticism and history). It
is precisely these aspects of substrate that are bracketed in practicing
phenomenology.
What is “transcendental” in phenomenology, then, is its focus on
the form and appearance of consciousness, as distinguished from its
Three Facets of Consciousness 29
substrate. But what makes this focus “transcendental” is its marking the
formal-ontological distinction among form, appearance, and substrate.
For what is “transcendental” in philosophy, in the present scheme, is
“formal” ontology: seeking very basic forms of being. We need not cling
to the term “transcendental”; what is important in the study of consciousness is observing the differences among form, appearance, and substrate.
If we observe these differences, we should not rule out the relevance
of neuroscience and biology for the phenomenological and ontological
study of consciousness: empirical studies of brain activity may reinforce
or even help to clarify phenomenological observations by showing where
in the brain a particular process or quality of consciousness is produced.
Still, the analysis of form and appearance in consciousness is the business
of phenomenology, informed by ontology. (Compare D. W. Smith 2000b
and 2000c.)
“Naturalistic” Philosophy of Mind and the Study of Consciousness
The lessons of classical phenomenology are being rediscovered in recent
philosophy of mind cum cognitive science, which begins with the metaphysics of naturalism, holding roughly that everything, including mind,
is a part of nature and so – turning to epistemology – is to be studied
following the methods of the natural sciences. Within this context we
need to draw out the implications of the three-facet distinction in formal
ontology.
As noted, it is the discipline of neuroscience, not phenomenology, that
must teach us about the inner workings of the brain, how it produces
consciousness, how it implements the structure of intentionality – the
form of consciousness – in human beings and other terrestrials. When
neuroscience-minded philosophers like Patricia Churchland (1986) and
Paul Churchland (1995) eliminate the propositional attitudes of belief
and the like in favor of neuronal activity, or collapse consciousness into
neural flashes, they have limited their view of consciousness to its neural
substrate. But there is more in view: there is form and appearance, where
intentionality and its subjectivity reside.
Casting a wider net, we have a growing scientific story of the network
of causal interactions within which mental activity occurs, interactions
not only within the brain but among brain events and physical events external to the body. This wider causal ecology defines the causal substrate
of consciousness. When philosophers like Fred Dretske (1981, 1995) collapse intentionality into the causal flow of physical“information”through
30 Mind World
environment and organism, they have limited their view of consciousness
to its causal-ecological substrate.
A kindred view of mind is the widespread view that mind is a function, especially a computational function, of the brain. Causal or computational function is a higher-order property of brain activity, of the
brain’s mediation of inputs and outputs of the organism or system. These
functional properties of brain belong to the physical, causal substrate of
consciousness. Philosophers like Jerry Fodor (1975, 1994) and Daniel
Dennett (1991) follow variations on the functionalist theme: Fodor identifies mental activity with a “language of thought” consisting in physical
symbols processed in the brain, whereas Dennett identifies mind with
computational brain function viewed from the “intentional stance” and
consciousness with a particular function (producing “multiple drafts”
of the brain’s “story” about the world and itself). But functionalism is
restricted to a specific view of the causal substrate of consciousness, overlooking the proper analysis of intentionality in the form and appearance
of consciousness. (See D. W. Smith 1999a, calling for a wider ontology.)
The neural and causal grounding of consciousness is not the only sort
of condition on which our conscious experience depends. As we have
come to recognize, our cultural background also constrains or makes
possible, in importantly different ways, the forms of intentionality we
may enjoy. We cannot think about “naturalism” or “racism” or laissez
faire economics except in a historical context in which other persons,
other intentional subjects, have put forth and debated relevant issues.
More basically, we cannot think as we do “in language” unless we have
acquired a language, such as English. (See D. W. Smith 1999b on “background ideas.”) Cultural preconditions, then, define a distinct region of
the substrate of an act of consciousness. When philosophers like Richard
Rorty (1979) reduce consciousness to philosophical “conversations” following Descartes, they restrict their view to the cultural substrate of our
philosophical self-consciousness. But there is more to consciousness than
what we say about it, even if our discourse shapes our awareness of our
own experience. The form and appearance of our experience is distinct
from its cultural background.
Still another kind of precondition of our human forms of intentionality
is our biological heritage. Here is where the evolutionary biologist’s point
takes hold. I quoted Edward O. Wilson (1998) earlier, where I intimated
that in the study of consciousness, physical and biological theory need to
be developed in relation to phenomenology and ontology. Consider the
role of biological evolution. The human organism – its nervous system,
Three Facets of Consciousness 31
indeed its genome or overall genetic footprint – evolved in the natural
environment of the planet Earth, in the planetary system of the star we
call the sun, in this universe which has developed over some 12 billion
years since the Big Bang. These natural conditions are preconditions for
our forms of consciousness: for intentionality in the form of visual perception (by two eyes two inches apart on the front of a head), emotion
(desire, fear, anger), cognition or thought (about water or fire or Plato),
or volition (to run, using two primate legs rather than two differently advantaged lizardly aviary “legs”). Wilson is right that, in some sense, natural
