into the structure of the world defined by quantum physics, evolutionary
biology, cultural history, and even cosmology. But our understanding of
consciousness must begin with our own experience, as Descartes began
to see. Our understanding will begin with the structure of consciousness
analyzed in phenomenology, and will go on to integrate the results of
phenomenology with those of natural science and cultural analysis in a
unified world picture framed by basic ontology.
Phenomenology will elaborate (part of) the form of consciousness in
the structure of intentionality and will detail the appearance of consciousness in different forms of experience, including our inner awareness of
experience. These analyses of form and appearance will interweave with
logic, mathematics, computer science, and formal ontology, in analyses of
forms of various things including consciousness. This complex of analyses
will ultimately tie into analyses of the substrate of consciousness, comprising conditions under which the extant forms of experience are realized,
conditions mapped out by the empirical natural sciences and the social or
cultural sciences. And the structure of the world in which consciousness
38 Mind World
and its empirical background conditions obtain will be framed by basic
formal ontology.
What is hard about understanding consciousness is getting our mind
around all these different kinds of structure while keeping straight their
differences. We do this as we delimit phenomenology and its kindred
ontology.5
Notes
1. An extensive collection of work on consciousness in the literature of recent
cognitive science is Block, Flanagan, and Guzeldere ¨ 1997. In these essays phenomenological issues arise quite often, including issues about consciousness,
perception, qualia, content, intentionality, temporal awareness, and higherorder thought. Yet there are virtually no references, in this lengthy collection,
to the literature of phenomenology itself, beginning with Husserl, where these
issues have been analyzed with great illumination for a century. (William
James appears, appropriately, the classical psychologist with a phenomenological nose.) Evidently, there is a cultural barrier at work. I shall not here
specifically critique the recent literature in philosophy of mind cum cognitive
science (Fodor, Dennett, et al.). My aim in this chapter is rather to assess
issues of consciousness within the theoretical framework of phenomenology
in the context of a wider ontology. In my “Mind and Body” (1995), I placed
Husserlian theory within the space of ideas framed by recent philosophy
of mind and cognitive science, including issues of reduction, functionalism,
and the like. Meanwhile, issues of cognitive science are addressed in relation
to phenomenology in Dreyfus 1982; Varela, Thompson, and Roesch 1993;
and Petitot et al. 1999. My own essay in the latter volume, “Intentionality
Naturalized?” (1999a), critiques two influential lines of analysis, articulated
by Fodor and Dretske, from a phenomenological-ontological point of view.
2. Husserl’s notion of founding (Fundierung), or dependence, was used in many
later works after being developed in the third of his Logical Investigations
(1900–1), elaborating a conception originating in Aristotle and used by
Brentano. The Husserlian analysis is assayed in B. Smith 1982. A wider discussion of ontological dependence, amplifying Husserl’s conception, is found
in Simons 1987: chap. 8, pp. 290ff. Kit Fine explores an essence-based conception of dependence in Fine 1995. Thomasson (1999) develops a succinct
model of a basically Husserlian conception of dependence, refining distinctions formulated by Roman Ingarden and applying the model to fictional
objects as dependent on authors’ and readers’ intentional acts. D. W. Smith,
(1989: chapter 6) sketches a ramified notion of dependence or ground, specifying different kinds of dependence (physical, psychological, etc.) and distinguishing kinds of dependence involved in direct awareness, or acquaintance, notably dependence on intentional content and different kinds of
dependence on the context of one’s experience. Simons (1987) similarly
distinguished different kinds of ontological dependence, including logical
presupposition.
Three Facets of Consciousness 39
3. See, as noted earlier, Kim 1994, especially the essay “Supervenience as a
Philosophical Concept,” and 1998.
4. See Armstrong 1989: 100, speaking there of internal relations as supervenient
on their relata while being nothing over and above the relata.
5. The roots of the present essay are various. (1) I have assumed, broadly, a
theory of intentionality as mediated by a meaning-content, the theory developed from Husserl in Smith and McIntyre 1982. (2) In D. W. Smith 1989,
I developed a conception of the “ground” of intentionality, including physical, psychological, and cultural conditions on which intentionality depends;
these grounds of intentionality are part of the substrate of consciousness,
according to the three-facet ontology of consciousness discussed here. (3) A
shorter ancestor of this essay is my “Ontological Phenomenology” (2000c).
(4) The three-facet distinction in ontology, featured here, is used systematically in the formal phenomenological ontology of the PACIS project at
Ontek Corporation: what I here call “facets” have been called “complements” in PACIS terminology. The distinction appears also in Simons and
Smith 1993.
References
Armstrong, David M. 1989. Universals: An Opinionated Introduction. Boulder:
Westview Press.
1997. A World of States of Affairs. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Block, Ned, Owen Flanagan, and Guven G ¨ uzeldere, eds. ¨ 1997. The Nature of
Consciousness. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press.
Chalmers, David. 1996. The Conscious Mind. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Churchland, Patricia Smith. 1986. Neurophilosophy. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT
Press.
Churchland, Paul M. 1995. The Engine of Reason, the Seat of the Soul. Cambridge,
Mass.: MIT Press.
Davidson, Donald. 1970. “Mental Events.” Reprinted in Davidson, Essays on Actions, Causes, and Events. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1980.
Dennett, Daniel C. 1991. Consciousness Explained. Boston: Little, Brown.
Dretske, Fred. 1981. Knowledge and the Flow of Information. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT
Press.
1995. Naturalizing the Mind. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press.
Dreyfus, Hubert L. (with Harrison Hall), ed. 1982. Husserl, Intentionality and Cognitive Science. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press.
1991. Being-in-the-World: A Commentary on Heidegger’s Being and Time, Division I .
Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press.
Fine, Kit. 1995. “Ontological Dependence.” Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society
95: 269–90.
Fodor, Jerry A. 1975. The Language of Thought. New York: Cromwell.
1994. The Elm and the Expert: Mentalese and Its Semantics. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT
Press.
Føllesdal, Dagfinn. 1982. “Husserl’s Notion of Noema.” In Dreyfus 1982. First
published in Journal of Philosophy, 1969.
40 Mind World
Heidegger, Martin. 1988. The Basic Problems of Phenomenology. Translated by
Albert Hofstadter. Revised ed. Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 1988.
German original, 1975, from a lecture course in 1927.
Husserl, Edmund. 1969. Ideas [Pertaining to a Pure Phenomenology and a Phenomenological Philosophy, First Book]: General Introduction to Pure Phenomenology. Translated by W. R. Boyce Gibson. London: George Allen and Unwin;
New York: Humanities Press. First English edition, 1931; German original,
1913.
1970a. Logical Investigations. Vols. 1 and 2. Translated by J. N. Findlay from
the revised, second German edition. London: Routledge and Kegan Paul.
