certainty gained in inner awareness. What kind of certainty does one have
of one’s own thinking and existence in virtue of one’s inner awareness of
one’s experience? Descartes sought absolute indubitability. And through
the indubitability of the cogito he sought the defeat of skepticism (the
skepticism he had formulated in the First Meditation, culminating in the
demon hypothesis) and ultimately a rationalist foundation for all knowledge. Here I want to follow a road less traveled, seeking the “certainty”
of the cogito in the phenomenology of evidence.
Husserl understood evidence (Evidenz, self-evidence) as a phenomenological quality in various types of experience, and he distinguished different types of evidence, including the evidence of phenomenological re-
flection (Husserl’s mode of introspection, guided by his methodological
strictures).14 Similarly, we might recognize in inner awareness its own
kind of evidence. Sensory perception is an evident presentation of one’s
physical surroundings. The quality of sensory evidence is epistemically
primitive: our judgments about our surroundings are based on sensory
perceptions in virtue of their characteristic evidence, and such judgments
are revisable in light of further sensory evidence and even further beliefs.
But there is nothing to say about sensory evidence itself beyond a phenomenological description of perception as carrying evidence in varying
degrees, depending, say, on how well one sees something. (What we normally call sensory evidence, then, comprises the propositions that are contents of judgments based immediately on sensory perceptions.) Similarly,
inner awareness is an evident awareness of one’s current mental activity.
This kind of evidence too is epistemically primitive: our judgments about
our own mental activities are based on the evidence in inner awareness,
yet about this kind of evidence itself we can only offer phenomenological
description, including strength or degree. The analogy with perception
is not new. As noted earlier, Descartes himself used a generic notion of
perception, which explicitly included not only sensory perception but
perception of one’s thinking. The outstanding question is about revisability. Are introspective judgments – judgments about our experience
based on the evidence of inner awareness – revisable in light of further
The Cogito circa a.d. 2000 53
inner awareness, or further evidence in sensory perception, or in light
of auxiliary beliefs? Is the evidence in inner awareness so strong that the
deliverances of inner awareness are always and forever unrevisable?
It is commonly said that Descartes assumed the “incorrigibility” of the
mental, this interpretation of Descartes deriving from Gilbert Ryle’s The
Concept of Mind (1949).15 As Ryle put it, Cartesian doctrine holds: “The
states and operations of a mind are states and operations of which it is
necessarily aware, in some sense of‘aware,’ and this awareness is incapable
of being delusive. ...It is part of the definition of their being mental that
their occurrence entails that they are self-intimating” (p. 158). Because
not all mental states are conscious (as Ryle observed contra Descartes),
this claim should be restricted to the conscious ones. Then the claim
is that (1) every conscious mental state includes an awareness of itself
and (2) that awareness is infallible, or “incapable of being delusive.” This
claim is the conjunction of two principles, the first being essentially the
principle of awareness formulated previously (for the case of thinking):
When I am consciously thinking “p,” I am aware of my thinking “p.”
The second, which we may call the principle of infallibility (of inner awareness),
would say (for the case of thinking):
When I am aware of my thinking “p,” I am in fact consciously thinking “p.”
This principle is just the converse of the principle of awareness, and it is
equally plausible: consciousness and awareness go hand in hand (in normal adult human consciousness). But this is an ontological claim. And
“incorrigibility” (uncorrectability, unrevisability) ought to be an epistemological feature of introspective, phenomenological judgments about
conscious thoughts and experiences. So our question is, What kind of
evidence does inner awareness give to introspective judgments? Are they
so secure in their evidence that they could not reasonably be revised?
Descartes’s answer we know: it is his Second Meditation. When I am
consciously thinking “p,” the evidence in my awareness of my so thinking
is so strong that I cannot reasonably doubt that I am so thinking – even
under the hypothesis of an evil demon who places the thought in my
mind. Thus, when so thinking I could not reasonably revise my judgment
that I am so thinking (insofar as I could form this judgment at the same
time, in the presence of that thinking).
What did Husserl say when he addressed the cogito in his Cartesian Meditations? Husserl said that the evidence in our reflection on our
54 Mind World
experiences has the three characters of certainty (we do not doubt these
judgments), adequacy (there are no hidden aspects of pure consciousness), and even apodicticity (it is “unimaginable” that we could doubt
these judgments).16 For Husserl, then, the apodicticity of judgments
made in phenomenological reflection – based, let us add, on the evidence
in inner awareness – would seem to rule out any reasonable revision of
these judgments. And yet, the phenomenological character of apodicticity does not entail the ontological character of infallibility: although it
may seem unimaginable to me – in light of my awareness of thinking “p” –
that there could be reason for me to doubt that I am now thinking “p,”
in fact I may not be so thinking.
Indeed, there is much to know about our experiences that is not accessible to phenomenological reflection but is the business of empirical
psychology, from psychoanalysis to experimental cognitive psychology to
neuroscience and psychobiology. The epistemology of inner awareness
and introspection should thus allow that judgments of introspection are,
like all things human, fallible and, in principle, open to revision in light
of appropriate evidence from further introspection and from appropriate empirical investigation, say, about one’s current brain state. By the
same token, empirical theories of mind – in psychobiology and cognitive science – must accommodate the evidence of inner awareness and
introspection.
A proper epistemology of inner awareness and introspection would
assay the types and grades of evidence therein. Such a project is well
beyond the scope of this chapter and probably beyond the state of current knowledge. But note how very strong is Descartes’s criterion of certainty in the cogito. Not only is indubitability the measure of certainty
(whereas Husserl allows a weaker form of certainty than apodicticity
or indubitability). But this indubitability, for Descartes, is measured by
performing a thought experiment in which one imagines a wildly possible circumstance: an evil demon orchestrating one’s experience. This
thought experiment defines something like a logical possibility, raising
the question of what precisely is the logic of the cogito and what kind of
logical possibility the demon scenario exemplifies in regard to the proposition “I am thinking.”
The Logic of the Cogito
Any appraisal today of the logic of the cogito should begin with
Jaakko Hintikka’s perceptive study, “Cogito, Ergo Sum: Inference or
The Cogito circa a.d. 2000 55
Performance?” (1962).17 While Hintikka’s exact proposal – the so-called
performative version of the cogito – is neither the most plausible reading
of Descartes’s texts nor the most compelling form of the cogito, his subtly
crafted essay separates many of the key issues concerning the logic of the
cogito. Here we shall pursue those and related issues in light of more
recent results in the phenomenology of inner awareness and the logic of
indexicals such as “I.”
Hintikka rightly observed that if cogito ergo sum expresses a logical inference, it cannot be an inference of the form “a is thus and so, therefore
