the self-verification of the speech act is grounded in the self-evidence of
the thought act.
Hintikka’s analysis addresses the statement “I exist.” But what of the
inference “I am thinking, therefore I exist”? The cogito, after all, was
supposed to prove something (as my colleague Ermanno Bencivenga remarked to me). Logic would demonstrate the validity of the inference,
on any occasion of performance, by showing somehow that the premise
could not be true and the conclusion false on that same occasion. Its
validity, however, is not grounded simply in syntactically defined rules
of inference (e.g., Fa/ ∴ ∃x(Fx)). The “self-validating” character of the
inference – whence its validity – is not a matter of proof theory, but
a matter of semantics or pragmatics grounded in phenomenology, as
we shall see later. Further, the truth of the premise “I am thinking” –
hence the soundness of the inference – would be a matter of logic only
if this premise were somehow a logical truth, and its truth, as we will
find shortly, is warranted by phenomenology rather than logic as usually
conceived.
There is, moreover, an unusual epistemic feature of Descartes’s use
of the cogito inference (general or special). Descartes used the cogito
inference in his quest for certainty. Thus, in the inference “I am thinking, therefore I exist,” what Descartes sought to preserve – in the move
from “I am thinking” to “I exist” – was not merely truth but certainty,
or indubitability: the indubitability of my thinking (for me in thinking)
is transferred to the indubitability of my existence (for me in so thinking). In this respect (as Calvin Normore wisely observed in conversation),
Descartes’s conception of inference in the cogito was different from our
twentieth-century notion of a truth-preserving movement of thought.
Or, rather, Descartes asked more of this particular inference than truth
preservation, and the indubitability he sought to preserve derives from
the character of evidence in inner awareness of thinking.
Many of Descartes’s readers have thought that introspection – or better,
as argued earlier, inner awareness – is the source of certainty in Descartes’s
cogito. Hintikka played down the role of introspection in the cogito
(pp. 63ff.), stressing the logic. But that was before he had discovered
The Cogito circa a.d. 2000 59
phenomenology. In another context he has since quipped, “There is often more logic than phenomenon in phenomenology.” Turning to the
cogito and his appraisal of its logic, however, we might better say, “There
is more phenomenon than logic in the cogito.” The phenomenon of
thinking – the act of thinking as it is experienced – is the ground of the
logic of the cogito. Better still: there is logic in the phenomenology and
phenomenology in the logic of the cogito! And there is linguistics, too,
in the range of speech act theory and language game theory.
Thus, to appraise the logical force of the cogito (principle and inference, special and general), we have to appraise the several lines of
force – phenomenological, semantic, and pragmatic – in the relevant
mental acts, speech acts, sentences, and propositions (thought contents). These
include:
The sentences “I exist” and “I am thinking, therefore I exist.”
The speech acts of asserting, “I exist,” and inferring, “I am thinking,
therefore I exist.”
The propositions “I exist” and “I am thinking, therefore I exist.”
The mental acts of thinking “p,” thinking “I exist,” and thinking “I am
thinking, therefore I exist.”
The Semantics (or Formal Pragmatics) of the Cogito
A lot of water has flowed under the bridge of philosophical logic since
Hintikka’s essay on the cogito. Along came possible-worlds semantics, including Hintikka’s formulations of the logic and semantics of sentences
ascribing intentional attitudes; then came Richard Montague’s extension of possible-worlds semantics to pragmatics, giving formal models of
context-dependent aspects of meaning and reference; and then, along
with the neo-Russellian theory of“direct”reference, came David Kaplan’s
logic – formal semantics or pragmatics – of demonstrative pronouns like
“that” and indexical words like “I,” terms whose reference depends on
the context of utterance.21 Noting the indexical elements in “I exist” and
“I am thinking,” we might now try to explicate the logic of the cogito in
terms of a formal semantics (or pragmatics) of indexicals – enlightened
by the phenomenology of thought and inner awareness. Specifically, in
terms of such a semantics we can explicate the self-verifying character of
a speech act of asserting, “I exist” – or indeed “I am thinking, therefore I
exist.” And in terms of a parallel “semantics” of thought, we can explicate
the self-verifying character of a mental act of thinking “I exist” – or “I am
thinking, therefore I exist.”
60 Mind World
Kaplan’s semantics for indexicals ramifies Frege’s scheme of sense
and reference and reintroduces a neo-Russellian notion of “singular
propositions.”22 In place of Fregean “sense,” Kaplan introduces two levels of meaning called “character” and “content.” Take, for instance, the
sentence “I am tall.” The character of the sentence – something like its
role or rule of use – specifies for each context (or occasion) of utterance
the content of the sentence in that context, and the content of the sentence
in a given context is, for Kaplan, the “singular proposition” consisting
of the individual whom “I” refers to in that context and the property of
being tall – in effect, the putative state of affairs that said referent is tall.
Of course, the character of the sentence “I am tall” depends on the character of the indexical “I,” which specifies for each context of utterance
the content of “I” in that context, which is simply the individual who utters “I” in that context. Indeed, in any context “I” refers to the individual
who utters “I” in that context; for Kaplan, “I” refers “directly,” in that the
referent is fixed by context without the mediation of a Fregean “sense,”
and so the “content” of “I” in a given context is simply its referent in
that context. (Originally, Kaplan modeled character as a function from
contexts to contents, and content as a function from possible worlds to
extensions. Nota bene: I have used the terms “content” and “proposition”
differently, meaning intentional contents of thoughts or experiences, and
I shall resume that usage later.)
What about the cogito? In Kaplan’s semantics, the sentence “I exist”
is true whenever it is asserted, that is, in any context of utterance. If you
will, it is “analytically” true, true by virtue of the level of meaning called
“character,” and in that sense its utterance is “self-verifying.” That is: the
character of “I exist” specifies for any context of utterance the “singular
proposition” consisting of the individual uttering the sentence in that
context and the property of existence;23 and, whatever the context, that
“proposition” is true – since, by hypothesis, the context of utterance includes the speaker, who must exist in that context in order to perform
the utterance of the sentence “I exist.” Thus, Kaplan’s semantics underwrites a linguistic version of Descartes’s special cogito principle: “The sentence ‘I exist’ is necessarily [i.e., analytically] true whenever I pronounce
it.” However, the inference “I am thinking, therefore I exist” is not, in
Kaplan’s semantics, “necessarily true” in every context of utterance (semantically valid and sound) – unless it is assumed, say, that in every context the speaker is thinking and thinking entails existence, which begs the
question of the cogito. Nor does the semantics address that the speaker
is thinking and thinking entails existence, which begs the question of
The Cogito circa a.d. 2000 61
