the cogito. Nor does the semantics address the speaker’s certainty of
his or her existence in uttering “I exist” or “I am thinking, therefore
I exist”; indeed, Kaplan’s semantics per se sheds no light on the epistemological or phenomenological features of the cogito (nor was it
intended to).
Thus, we need a semantics formulated with an eye to phenomenology, to intentionality theory, to the “semantics” of thought. We need a
semantics that posits levels of meaning coordinate with the intentional
structures of thought, namely, the content and object of thought. Accordingly, let us sketch an intentional semantics (or pragmatics) distinguishing
four levels of meaning called character, sense, intension (or intention),
and extension.24 Take, again, the sentence “I am tall.” The (semantic or
pragmatic) character of the sentence – its rule of use – specifies for any
context of utterance its sense and its intension in that context. Its sense
in a given context is the proposition expressed in that context, namely
the thought content “I am tall.” Its intension (or intention) in the given
context is the state of affairs asserted (or “intended”) in that context,
namely the singular state of affairs consisting of the referent of “I” in that
context and the property of being tall. Its extension in that context is its
truth value in that context. And it is true in a given context of utterance
if and only if the state of affairs asserted by uttering it in that context is
actual: so its character determines its truth conditions. Thus, the proposition expressed by saying “I am tall” (the sense) would be the content
of the speaker’s thinking “I am tall” on that occasion, while the state of
affairs asserted (the intension) would be the object of the speaker’s so
thinking.
Of course, the meaning of “I am tall” depends on the meaning of
“I,” that is, its character, sense, intension, and extension. The character
of “I” specifies for each context of utterance the sense and intension of
“I” in that context: in any context of utterance, “I” expresses the sense
“I,” which embodies the mode of presentation “I” (more on that shortly),
and “I” refers to (or “intends”) the person uttering “I” in that context,
who is thus the intension of “I” in that context. And the extension of
“I” in that context is (also) the referent in that context. Contra Kaplan,
in this intentional semantics, “I” refers “directly” not because it has no
“sense” and is fixed by context, but because its reference is geared to
the speaker’s “direct” awareness of him- or herself in speaking – that is,
because in any context of utterance, “I” expresses the sense “I,” which
embodies the “direct” awareness one has of oneself in thinking or in
acting volitionally, namely in speaking, and accordingly “I” refers to the
62 Mind World
speaker, who is the object of this“direct” awareness of herself in speaking.
It might be proposed, with Frege, that “I” expresses different senses or
modes of presentation on different occasions. That proposal becomes
implausible, however, when we look closely at the mode of awareness one
normally has of oneself in thinking or, indeed, speaking.25 Or it might be
proposed, with inspiration from Wittgenstein perhaps, that“I”is not used
to express any mode of self-presentation, or even to refer to oneself. This
implausible idea loses its clout as we look not only at the phenomenology
of self-awareness but at the remarks of Wittgenstein that prompted it.26
What of the cogito?
On this intentional semantics, the sentence “I exist”is analytically true –
that is, true in any context of utterance by virtue of its semantic character. (The details are the same as in Kaplan’s semantics, except there is
an additional level of meaning involved, namely the propositional sense,
or thought content, “I exist.” This sense is not idle, but its role emerges
properly in the cognate semantics of thinking “I exist,” as opposed to saying “I exist.”) However, this semantics does not in itself properly ground
the inference “I am thinking, therefore I exist.” To be sure, the semantics
might presuppose that in speaking one is thinking and therefore exists.
Specifically, it might be assumed in setting up the semantics that: (a) for
any sentence “p” and any context of utterance, the speaker uttering “p” is
also in that context thinking “p,” where the content of his so thinking –
the proposition “p” – is the sense expressed by his uttering “p” in that
context (in the way language expresses thought); and (b) that act of
thinking requires the existence of its subject, who is the speaker and thus
the referent of “I” in that context. Whence, for any context of uttering
“I am thinking, therefore I exist,” “I am thinking” is true in that context
because the speaker is thinking “I am thinking,” and “I exist” is true in
that context because the referent of “I” is the speaker, who is assumed
to exist in that context. But what is the relation between the speaker’s so
thinking and his existence? That is the question of the cogito, and that
relation is not properly articulated among the system of semantical relations codified in the semantics itself. Rather, that relation is articulated
in the phenomenology, or “semantics,” of thought itself – to which we
now turn.
Hintikka suggested that the logic of speech acts should carry over to
the logic of thought acts. How might this go? Let us sketch a semantics (or
formal pragmatics) for acts of thought (as opposed to speech), formalizing
features of the intentionality of thought. We distinguish for each thought
The Cogito circa a.d. 2000 63
type four levels of intentional structure (or meaning) for thought acts
of that type: their intentional character, content, object, and extension.
Take the thought type, thinking “I am tall.” The intentional character of this
thought type – if you will, its role or rule of use – specifies for each context
(or occasion) of so thinking the content and object (and hence extension) of the act of so thinking in that context. The content of this thought
act (its “sense”) is the proposition “I am tall”: we assume that thought
types are individuated by thought contents (they are one-to-one). The object of this thought act (its “intentional object” – if you will, its “intention”
or “intension”) is the state of affairs that consists in the subject of this
thought act having the property of being tall. And the extension of this
thought act is its truth value, where it is true if and only if its “intended”
state of affairs is actual.
Now, an act of thinking “I am tall” includes as a constituent a presentation of “I,” and correlatively the mode of presentation “I” is a constituent
of the thought type “I am tall.” The intentional character of the mode of
presentation “I” specifies for any context of presentation the content and
object (and extension) of the presentation of “I” in that context. The content of the presentation is the first-person mode of presentation “I,” the
object of the presentation is the subject who is having it, and the extension
of the presentation is (also) that subject. Importantly, we assume there
is an essentially indexical content “I,” whose intentional force – as specified by the cognate intentional character – is, where entertained in a
particular presentation in a given context, to prescribe the subject of the
presentation so entertaining it. This mode of presentation is precisely the
phenomenological character of the inner awareness one has of one’s own
experience, as appraised earlier. And in this mode of presentation one
is “directly” aware of oneself insofar as the content “I” directly indicates
the subject who is being presented: the content “I” in a presentation of
this type prescribes the subject of that presentation solely in virtue of the
subject’s “performing” that presentation.27
