And the cogito?
According to this semantics of thought, the proposition “I exist” is
analytically (semantically or pragmatically) true: it is true whenever anyone
thinks it, by virtue of the intentional character of that thought type. For in
any context in which someone thinks “I exist,” the content “I” prescribes
the person who is so thinking and that person exists in that context, and
hence in that context “I exist” is true. Now, this pragmatic analyticity
is not the same thing as the indubitability Descartes sought (namely,
64 Mind World
the self-evidence of thinking itself, which comes with inner awareness).
But if in the act of consciously thinking “I exist” the subject intuitively
grasps the intentional (or logical) force of the content “I exist,” then in
that way the proposition “I exist” is indubitable for him in so thinking.
And that is what the special cogito principle proclaims. On this semantic
account, however, the indubitability of one’s existence in thinking “I exist”
comes not from one’s inner awareness of one’s so thinking but from one’s
semantic intuition of the intentional force of the proposition “I exist” in
one’s thinking it. The act of thinking “I exist” illustrates that force for the
subject, by performing it (pace Hintikka).
Furthermore, in any context in which someone thinks “p” (for any
proposition “p”), that person exists in that context, and hence the proposition “I exist” is true of her in that context; or, rather, it would be true
if she were thinking it in that context. In that sense the proposition “I
exist” is analytically true: in any context of thinking, it would be true if
thought in that context. Again, this pragmatic analyticity is not the indubitability Descartes sought for “I exist” (in the subject’s inner awareness
of her thinking “p”). However, insofar as the subject intuitively grasps the
intentional force of the content “I exist” while being aware of thinking
“p,” the proposition “I exist” is indubitable for her in thinking “p.” And
that is the claim of the general cogito principle. Again, on the present
semantic account, this certainty of one’s existence in thinking comes not
from one’s inner awareness of one’s thinking, but from one’s semantic intuition of the intentional force of the proposition “I exist” in the
context of one’s thinking. Similarly, the inferential proposition “I am
thinking, therefore I exist” is true in any context in which someone is
thinking (no matter what she is thinking), or would be true if the subject were thinking it (or performing the inference) in that context (as
opposed to, or in addition to, thinking what she is thinking in that context). And insofar as the subject intuitively grasps its intentional force,
it is indubitable – which is the claim of the general cogito inference
principle.
It should now be clear that we need to distinguish two sources of
evidence that might ground the cogito, and they are appropriate for
different cogito claims. On the one hand, there is the evidence in inner
awareness of thought; on the other hand, there is the evidence in one’s
semantic intuition of the intentional force of the proposition “I exist” or“I
am thinking, therefore I exist.” These two types of evidence give different
grounds for being unable to doubt one’s existence when thinking. Thus,
The Cogito circa a.d. 2000 65
the evidence of inner awareness most relevantly grounds the following
form of the general cogito principle.
Whenever I am thinking, I am certain that I am so thinking and that
I exist.
The evidence of semantic intuition most relevantly grounds the following
form of the special cogito principle.
Whenever I am thinking “I exist,” the proposition “I exist” is indubitable (for me in so thinking).
By contrast, the general cogito inference principle holds:
The inference “I am thinking, therefore I exist” is indubitable (for me
in so performing it).
And this claim is most relevantly grounded in semantic intuition, although that semantic intuition is itself grounded in reflection on inner
awareness.
Thus, the semantics (or logic) of the cogito is grounded ultimately
in the phenomenology and epistemology of inner awareness: the verifi-
cation, hence certainty, of the proposition “I exist” – or “I am thinking,
therefore I exist” – occurs in the act of thinking the proposition and in
virtue of the evidence in one’s inner awareness of so thinking. However,
a different kind of evidence, hence certainty, comes with an act of reflection on thought and content, wherein one comes to “intuitively grasp”
the semantics of the propositions “I exist” and “I am thinking, therefore
I exist” – namely, their intentional character and thus their pragmatic
analyticity, or self-verifying character. Notice that we are dealing with a
second-order thought in the reflective, semantic judgment that the proposition “I exist” – or “I am thinking, therefore I exist” – is self-verifying (in
thinking the proposition).28 Not only is the evidence in the second-order
judgment (thought) different from that in the first-order thought, but the
content is different. Accordingly, the special cogito principle is properly
a principle about the proposition “I exist” (in Descartes’s slightly edited
words: the proposition “I exist” is necessarily true whenever I think it).
Whereas the general cogito principle is properly a principle about one’s
certainty of one’s thought and existence in thinking.
66 Mind World
The Ontology of the Cogito
What is the nature of the subject – the “I” or ego – that is revealed in
my inner awareness of my thinking? Am I a purely mental substance (as
Descartes argued in the second and sixth of the Meditations), or am I
a psycho-socio-physical human being (as we assume in everyday life)?
And what is the nature of my thinking itself which is revealed in inner
awareness? Is thinking a purely mental process, a mode of the attribute
of thought in a mental substance (as Descartes assumed in the second
of the Meditations)? Or is it a brain process, or a functional, perhaps
computational process executed in a brain? These are the traditional
issues of the mind-body problem, central to the ontology of the cogito.
We shall not resolve them here (surprise!); I would only point out that
these issues are undecided by the phenomenology, epistemology, and
logic or semantics of the cogito.
Inner awareness does not reveal the nature of thought or subject beyond what is specified in the form of inner awareness (as explicated earlier, “phenomenally in this experience I am thinking ‘p’”). In my awareness of my thinking “Descartes was smart,” it clearly seems to me (with
a certain type of evidence) that I am so thinking and that I exist in so
thinking. And it seems to me that my experience of thinking is just that,
an experience of so thinking, and that I am a being that so thinks. However,
it does not seem to me, in inner awareness, that my thinking is a brain
process. Nor does it seem to me in inner awareness that I am a neural
system in a human body – or, for that matter, a self defined by interaction
of the psychic structures called ego, superego, and id. Yet all this and
more may well be true of me and my thinking, so far as the evidence of
inner awareness attests. Indeed, it does not seem to me in inner awareness
that I am a purely mental substance. Only if Descartes was right in his
doctrine of “clear and distinct ideas” and its application to the ideas “I”
