Burge, Tyler. 1979.“Individualism and the Mental.”In Peter A. French, Theodore
E. Uehling, and Howard Wettstein, eds., Midwest Studies in Philosophy, IV:
Studies in Metaphysics, pp. 73–121. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota
Press.
1988.“Cartesian Error and the Objectivity of Knowledge.”In Robert H. Grimm
and Daniel E. Merrill, eds., Contents of Thought, pp. 62–76. Tucson: University
of Arizona Press.
Castaneda, Hector-Neri. ˜ 1966.“‘He’: A Study in the Logic of Self-Consciousness.”
Ratio 8: 130–57.
Curley, E. M. 1978. Descartes against the Skeptics. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press.
Descartes, Rene.´ 1984–85. The Philosophical Writings of Descartes. Vols. I and II.
Translated by John Cottingham, Robert Stoothoff, and Dugald Murdoch.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
1988. Descartes: Selected Philosophical Writings. Translated by John Cottingham,
Robert Stoothoff, and Dugald Murdoch. Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press.
Frege, Gottlob. 1967. “The Thought: A Logical Inquiry.” In P. F. Strawson, ed.,
Philosophical Logic. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Hintikka, Jaakko. 1962a.“Cogito, Ergo Sum: Inference or Performance?” Philosophical Review 71: 3–32. Reprinted in Alexander Sesonske and Noel Fleming, eds.,
Meta-Meditations: Studies in Descartes, pp. 50–76. Belmont, Calif.: Wadsworth,
1965.
1962b. Knowledge and Belief. Ithaca: Cornell University Press.
1975. The Intentions of Intentionality. Dordrecht: D. Reidel.
Hintikka, Merrill B., and Jaakko Hintikka. 1986. Investigating Wittgenstein. Oxford:
Basil Blackwell.
Husserl, Edmund. 1960. Cartesian Meditations. Translated by Dorion Cairns. The
Hague: Martinus Nijhoff. German original, 1931.
The Cogito circa a.d. 2000 75
1966. The Phenomenology of Internal Time-Consciousness. Translated by James S.
Churchill. Bloomington: Indiana University Press. German original, from
lectures of 1905–10.
Kaplan, David. 1977. Demonstratives. University of California, Los Angeles. Typescript. Revised and updated version appeared as “The Logic of Demonstratives,” in Joseph Almog, John Perry, and Howard Wettstein, eds., Themes from
Kaplan. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1989.
1979. “On the Logic of Demonstratives.” Journal of Philosophical Logic 8:
81–98.
Katz, Jerrold J. 1987. Cogitations. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Miller, Izchak. 1984. Husserl, Perception and Temporal Awareness. Cambridge, Mass.:
MIT Press.
Montague, Richard. 1972. “Pragmatics and Intensional Logic.” In Donald
Davidson and Gilbert Harman, eds., Semantics of Natural Language.
Dordrecht: D. Reidel.
Nagel, Thomas. 1987. The View from Nowhere. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Perry, John. 1979. “The Problem of the Essential Indexical.” Nous 103: 3–21.
Ryle, Gilbert. 1965. The Concept of Mind. New York: Barnes and Noble.
Sartre, Jean-Paul. 1966. Being and Nothingness. Translated by Hazel Barnes. New
York: Washington Square Press.
Smith, David Woodruff. 1981. “Indexical Sense and Reference.” Synthese 49:
101–27.
1986. “The Structure of (Self-)Consciousness.” Topoi 5(2): 149–56.
1989. The Circle of Acquaintance. Dordrecht: Kluwer Academic Publishers.
1990. “Thoughts.” Philosophical Papers 19 (3): 163–89.
Smith, David Woodruff, and Ronald McIntyre. 1982. Husserl and Intentionality.
Dordrecht: D. Reidel.
Wilson, Margaret Dauler. 1978. Descartes. London: Routledge and Kegan Paul.
Wittgenstein, Ludwig. 1958. Philosophical Investigations. Translated by G. E. M.
Anscombe. New York: Macmillan.
1965. The Blue and Brown Books. New York: Harper Torchbooks.
3
Return to Consciousness
Abstract. What makes a mental state conscious, according to the classical
view (in Locke et al.), is a certain self-consciousness, or (as I prefer to put
it) an inner awareness of the state. What is the form of that inner awareness?
This is a difficult question, as we see by studying neoclassical models in
Brentano, Husserl, and others. In recent philosophy of mind it has been
proposed that this awareness of our experience consists in a higher-order
monitoring. Yet there are problems with all higher-order theories of consciousness, as Brentano well observed. Here I pursue and partly revise my
own earlier analysis of inner awareness as a “modal” character of mental
acts. On that analysis, inner awareness is an integral part of an act of consciousness; it is not a higher-order act of any type (such as observing one’s
current thought or perception). On a particular account, this inner awareness may itself be grounded in the temporal flow of consciousness (extending Husserl’s analysis of time consciousness). Yet, in the end, we should
allow that lower forms of consciousness do not include the form of inner
awareness typical of everyday human experience. Consciousness does not,
then, reduce to inner awareness; instead we need a systematic classification
of types and levels of consciousness, and we sketch the beginning of such a
classification.
Segue. In “The Cogito circa a.d. 2000” we appraised the core elements of
the Cartesian account of how consciousness is eo ipso a consciousness of its
object and an awareness of itself. Here we pursue the form of that inner
awareness, and we consider limitations on the classical view of consciousness as self-consciousness. This exploration is purely phenomenological
and focused indeed on the most “inner” aspect of conscious experience.
Later chapters, however, lead from phenomenology into ontology, expanding the horizons of our own consciousness.
I thank Amie Thomasson and Jason Ford for comments on the penultimate version of this
chapter.
76
Return to Consciousness 77
Some years ago (in The Circle of Acquaintance [1989] and, tersely, in “The
Structure of (Self-)Consciousness” [1986]), I proposed a model of the
phenomenological structure that makes a mental act or state conscious:
what I called an inner awareness of the act taken as a modal structure distinguished from any higher-order reflection or judgment or recollection or
perception of the original act. Since that time, consciousness has come
center stage in philosophy of mind cum cognitive science. Philosophy
has returned to consciousness, after the dark ages of behavioristic theory (from Skinner to Ryle to Dennett). And now I return to the story of
consciousness, seeking to refine a neoclassical analysis of consciousness.
Here I hope to deepen and widen – and, in some ways, revise – my
earlier modal analysis of inner awareness by contrasting it with alternative
views drawn from both phenomenology and cognitive science. The discussion addresses observations of blindsight and theories of higher-order
monitoring, in contemporary philosophy of mind allied with cognitive
science; the analysis of inner consciousness and time consciousness, in
Brentano’s psychology and Husserl’s phenomenology; and my own earlier account of modality in intentionality. Finally, we consider certain
limits on inner awareness.
In this way I hope to bring out the uniquely modal form of inner
