much recent work in philosophy of mind and cognitive science.
But what makes consciousness the really hard problem for the theory of
mind is the problem of inner awareness. Without our own inner awareness of our passing experiences, we might plausibly identify mental states
with neural activities whose essence lies in physical properties of neurons
and their causal interactions with their physical environs. The character of inner awareness, however, calls out for analysis in its own terms.
We need to understand the form of inner awareness, which is not the
same as the form of its neural implementation, or its causal interactions,
or other functional properties of a mental state. And the formal analysis of inner awareness, amid other forms of consciousness, is a task of
phenomenology.
From Blindsight to Consciousness
The problem of consciousness has been brought to the fore dramatically
by the empirical observation of what is called “blindsight.” Indeed, the
phenomenon of blindsight puts the character of consciousness itself in
sharp relief, and we begin the present discussion there.6
Studied in cognitive science in recent years, blindsight is commonly
characterized as follows.7 Some people, having suffered damage to the
Return to Consciousness 81
visual cortex, say they see nothing but are able to answer questions about
objects placed before them. They often resist the questions, saying, “I
can’t see anything” but then go on to say correctly that the object before
them is, say, a vertical rather than horizontal line, or perhaps a book
rather than a frog. The subject in such experiments, we naturally observe,
sees the book before him or her but is not aware of seeing it. Her visual
state is one of blindsight: she sees, but her seeing is not conscious.
In the reported cases, blindsight is not very good at articulating what
is before the subject.8 Still, there is an important aspect of mental structure in the subject’s seeing (taking in information visually) without being
aware of seeing anything. Ideally, by extrapolation, we should note the
possibility in principle that for any conscious visual experience there is a
corresponding type of vision that lacks the character of consciousness but
is otherwise the same in structure. To be sure, we should be cautious in
basing theory on thought experiments that far outrun “real” possibilities.
And yet the ideal structure that distinguishes conscious from unconscious
vision is just what phenomenological analysis is after. At least on the classical Husserlian approach (in Logical Investigations), phenomenological
analysis is a kind of “logical” analysis of ideal mental types or “meaning”
structures in familiar forms of experience.9 So let us recognize a particular aspect of mental structure, the character of consciousness, which we
naturally ascribe with the adverb “consciously.”
In blindsight, then, one sees but does not consciously see. Accordingly,
we distinguish two forms of visual perception, whose intentional structure
(in a simple example) is ascribed as follows:
Consciously I see this frog.
Unconsciously I see this frog.
The first form of perception is conscious; it is conscious sight. The second
is not conscious; it is blindsight, or unconscious sight. The difference is
that the first has and the second lacks the character of consciousness:
the character “consciously” – to give it a name and a basic category to be
further examined.
What is this character of consciousness, this quality that makes a visual
state conscious? More generally, what is the character of consciously seeing
or thinking or wishing or willing: the character that makes a conscious
mental act (of whatever type) conscious?
First and foremost, the character of consciousness is a phenomenological form of a mental act: something we each experience in our own firstperson conscious experiences – and to which we give voice in first-person
82 Mind World
phenomenological descriptions like “Consciously I see this frog.” In fact,
it is only by experiencing conscious sight myself that I can project the
character of consciousness into your vision, namely, by empathy.10 And I
so gather that you and others also experience consciousness in conscious
vision. Now, in the blindsight experiment we make third-person claims
about another’s mental state, taking the other’s experience in conversing
with us to have consciousness but taking her perception to lack the character of consciousness. Here we practice “heterophenomenology,” analyzing another’s experience. By contrast, in classical phenomenology –
“autophenomenology” – we each analyze our own experience, from
the first-person perspective, and we assume others have similar forms
of experience.11 Here we see an interaction of method between phenomenology and cognitive science.
Because blindsight is so uncommon, the sentence “I see this frog” in
everyday English normally carries a presupposition of consciousness. Distinguishing conscious and unconscious sight, however, allows us to parse
off that presupposition for the purpose of our present analysis. We then
add the modifier “consciously” to ascribe the character of consciousness,
and we use “unconsciously” to mark the lack of that character.
So the phenomenological character“consciously”is, to begin with, the
property that distinguishes conscious sight from blindsight. Generally, it
is what makes a conscious mental state conscious.
According to the classical analysis, from Descartes and Locke to
Brentano and Husserl, consciousness essentially involves an “inner” cognition of one’s mental state. Classically, that form ofinner awareness defines
the character of consciousness and makes the state conscious. Indeed, on
that analysis, the difference between conscious vision and blindsight is
precisely the fact that in conscious vision one is aware that one is seeing,
whereas in blindsight one is not aware that one is seeing. The experimental observation of blindsight places in sharp relief this property of inner
awareness, which is otherwise so familiar that we lose sight of it. Having
brought it to salience, we go to work in further analysis.
I choose the term of art “inner awareness,” rather than “inner cognition” or “inner perception” or “introspection,” for reasons that will
unfold. Later we shall ask whether all states of consciousness essentially involve inner awareness, allowing that lower levels of consciousness do not.
But in the meantime we focus on the form of inner awareness where it is
present in familiar forms of consciousness.
Generally, we should allow that there are different types and degrees of consciousness. Freudian psychoanalysis distinguished among
Return to Consciousness 83
the dynamic unconscious (forced by repression), the merely static unconscious (not so forced, arguably with a different character), the preconscious (ideas or emotions awaiting prompting), the strictly conscious,
and even the verbalizable conscious.12 Leaving psychoanalysis to the side,
however, there seem to be degrees of consciousness even in human vision.
Our everyday experiences of clear and attentive vision include a standard
character of“full” consciousness, which arguably includes a form of inner
awareness. By contrast, the reported cases of blindsight lack this character.
In principle there are gradations of consciousness between these ideals
of fully conscious and quite unconscious vision. However, by focusing on
ideal cases of conscious and unconscious sight, those which have and lack
inner awareness, we turn our attention to the question of the proper analysis of such inner awareness – in paradigm cases where it characterizes
conscious visual experience.
The Form of Inner Awareness
What is the form of this inner awareness? That is the central question
before us. It is a phenomenological question.
Although we shall use the logical or grammatical form of phenomenological descriptions as a tool to express or articulate forms of experience,
it is the phenomenological – and ultimately ontological – form of the
