something [= intentional]. Adapting our terminology, we can call these intransitive and transitive states of consciousness, respectively. For a mental state to be
conscious is for it to be a state one is conscious of being in. So a HOT [higherorder thought] can be a source of consciousness for the mental state it is about
because the HOT is a transitive state of consciousness; it does not also need to be
an intransitive state of consciousness. (Block et al. 1997: 743)
Rosenthal is right to distinguish a state’s being conscious from its being
conscious-of-something, or intentional. And, in the model at hand, he
is right to say it is the HOT’s being about the state that makes the state
conscious. And he is right in noting (pp. 743–44), for example, that one
may not be aware of hearing a conversation nearby until one’s name is
heard. But still my question remains, if I may recast it a bit differently:
how can an unconscious intentionality directed toward a second intentionality make the second one conscious? The HOT is not a consciousness,
96 Mind World
or conscious “intention,” of the given state, although it is an intention
of the state. But if it is the HOT that makes that mental state conscious,
then it ought to be somehow integrated into that consciousness. It ought
to be a proper part of the given conscious state and so itself somehow
conscious, something experienced in that mental state. Thus, we still have
not captured something Brentano was onto in his own account of “inner
consciousness.”
Fred Dretske approaches the problem at hand from a different direction. While working very much in the tradition of cognitive science,
Dretske rejects inner awareness as posited by higher-order monitoring
theories of consciousness:
What makes an internal state or process conscious is the role it plays in making one
(intransitively) conscious – normally, the role it plays in making one (transitively)
conscious of some thing or fact. An experience of x is conscious, not because one
is aware of the experience, or aware that one is having it, but because, being a
certain sort of representation, it makes one aware of the properties (of x) and
objects (x itself) of which it is a (sensory) representation. My visual experience of
a barn is conscious, not because I am introspectively aware of it (or introspectively
aware that I am having it), but because it (when brought about in the right way) makes
me aware of the barn. It enables me to perceive the barn. (Block et al. 1997: 785,
emphasis added)
We return later to the possibility that consciousness does not always require inner awareness of the experience. For now, however, I want to
extract from Dretske’s discussion a different claim, a quasi-Brentanian
claim about inner awareness. (Again, a state is “intransitively” conscious
if it is simply conscious, and “transitively” conscious if it is conscious of
something, or intentional.)
Dretske’s theory of mind, here in the background, draws on information theory, holding that a mental state of an organism is a state relating it to its causal history and specifically to its transmission of physical
“information.”18 In this vein, what makes a state mental is the form of
information-transmission it realizes, and then what makes a mental state
conscious is “the role it plays in making one (intransitively) conscious,”
namely, a role involving its causal reception of information from its environment. Overlaying this information-theoretic conception of mind,
however, is a claim about the phenomenology of consciousness. Dretske
holds (with Rosenthal) that consciousness comes in two forms: transitive
and intransitive consciousness. I may be conscious – and this may involve
my mental state’s role in relation to my environment – or I may be conscious of something, say, in perception or thought or anger. The former is
intransitive, the latter transitive. If you will: to be conscious is to be in a
Return to Consciousness 97
state of mind, often with a certain alertness, in which I am ready (say)
to perceive consciously this frog or to judge consciously that this frog is
about to jump.
On Dretske’s non-Brentanian view, then, I may be conscious without
performing any higher-order thought or perception about my mental
state, and I may be conscious of something, as in consciously seeing this
frog or consciously thinking it will jump, without any higher-order introspective awareness of my mental state. What makes my mental state
conscious, on this view, is something else. Dretske recurs to itsrole (vis-`a-vis
environment) in making the state, well, conscious (and so ready for
appropriate causal interactions with its environment). But we must distinguish causal role from phenomenological form. Then Dretske’s contention boils down to the claim that what makes a mental state conscious
is a feature more basic than that of inner awareness of the state. Whatever
the causal role of consciousness, and given that role, its form qua conscious is different from that of transitivity, or intentionality: different, in
particular, from any awareness of the conscious state. At least some conscious states, arguably, are conscious by virtue of this more basic feature.
Fair enough. Still, we should make room in our phenomenological inventory for forms of consciousness that do involve inner awareness, even
if other (perhaps lower-level) forms of consciousness do not. (We return
to this point later.)
Our task, remember, is to analyze the form of inner awareness, the
phenomenological form of the awareness that, by hypothesis, makes a mental
state conscious, a form we experience in living through a conscious mental
state.
Returning to our updated Brentanian model, we can now pose
a question about the phenomenological form ascribed in Brentano’s
analysis – the form (in our idiom):
Consciously I now see this frog and judge that I am now in this very
mental state.
Why isn’t the basic form of consciousness simply the form “consciously”?
Why is an awareness of the state in a judgment that “I am in this very
state” required to make the state conscious? Whether the second-order
judgment merely accompanies the state (as in Rosenthal’s analysis) or
is bound into it structurally (as in Brentano’s analysis), why is an act of
judgment required to make the state conscious?19
Do we experience simply a character of consciousness, or do we experience consciousness embracing inner awareness within it? Brentano
bound inner consciousness into consciousness of an object, as indicated
98 Mind World
in the neo-Brentanian analysis earlier. Brentano’s intuition seems right,
but the form of judgment seems wrong, even when bound into the complex form given previously.
Jean-Paul Sartre described consciousness as“translucent”: I see through
my consciousness, which is a consciousness of its object. Consciousness
is at once a conscious experience of some object: it is “for itself,” a prereflective “consciousness (of) itself,” while being a consciousness of its
object. This “consciousness (of) consciousness of something,” Sartre
says, is constitutive of consciousness, but it is not an additional consciousness. (See Sartre’s doctrine of the prereflective cogito in the introduction to Being and Nothingness, 1943.) Sartre’s description is suggestive
and echoes Brentano’s doctrine without adding an element of judgment. Still, his device of parentheses around “of” marks a distinction
but does not adequately articulate the form of this “consciousness (of)
consciousness.”
As an alternative metaphor, instead of saying consciousness is “seeing”
its object “through” itself, we might say consciousness is “hearing” its object “in” itself: in a medium that includes act and object in one movement.
Hearing places me within the object of consciousness and within the experience, as the sound surrounds me, envelops me, flows through me – I
am not looking at it from a distance. Nodding toward physics, we might
say consciousness occurs in a “field” that ties act and object together so
that the act feels itself in feeling its object.
Such metaphors seem to me on the right track, and they have their
place in phenomenological description, rather like impressionist painting. What we need, accordingly, is an articulate model that places inner
