awareness within the consciousness of the object, without making it a
separately focused higher-order cognition of that consciousness.
Inner Awareness as a Modal Character
We can now better interpret the modal analysis of inner awareness (which
may seem rather cryptic in my 1986 and 1989 accounts). On that model,
the form of a conscious experience is (staying with the old example):
Consciously I now see this frog.
It is important to factor the phenomenological structure of an experience
so that “consciously” is articulated as a character distinct in form from
the intentional character of presenting (say) “this frog.” In order to mark
Return to Consciousness 99
out the formal role of this character “consciously,” we need to develop a
phenomenological distinction drawn sharply by Husserl.
Husserl distinguished two basic components in the “content” or phenomenological structure of act of consciousness.20 In our simple case of
seeing a frog, the “content” of the experience divides into the “thetic”
or “positing” character of seeing (as opposed to judging, wishing, etc.)
and the “sense” (Sinn) of the object, embodied in its presentation as “this
frog.” Similarly, Searle distinguishes the “psychological mode” from the
“propositional content,”21 say, in seeing that this frog is jumping. In the
terminology I settled on (1989), the mode of presentation in a mental act
carries the sense of the object (“this frog” or whatever), whereas the modality of presentation in the act carries the mental act type (“see” or “judge”
or whatever). However, there are further qualifications in an act’s thetic
character or modality. I can see clearly or dimly; I can listen attentively or
inattentively; I can desire passionately or casually; I can think quickly or
slowly; and so on. On the modal analysis of consciousness, accordingly,
a specific thetic or modal character “consciously” further qualifies the
character of vision (or judgment or desire, etc.). The point I am pressing
right now is that, within the formal structure of a mental act, the character “consciously” should be placed in the modality of presentation and
not in the mode of presentation. The character of consciousness per se is
then distinguished from the object-directedness of a consciousness. (By
the way, observing this distinction in phenomenological structure helps
us avoid any tendency to collapse the character “consciously” into another form of “consciousness-of-x”22 in some higher-order cognition: the
“of”-ness in the act lies elsewhere.)
In my modal model of inner awareness (as recounted earlier), the
form “consciously” was factored into two components indicated in the
phenomenological description:
Phenomenally in this very experience I now see this frog.
Here we find a way of articulating the form of consciousness that embraces inner awareness without pressing it into the mold of a separate
judgment or inner perception, the mold of higher-order monitoring.
Let me explain.
The form “phenomenally” covers what philosophers call the “raw feel”
of an experience, its subjective quality, “what it is like” to have the experience, the way it is experienced or lived through. Here lie the sensory
qualia in a perceptual experience. However, emotions also have their
own peculiar qualia or subjective character: note the difference between
100 Mind World
feeling joyful and feeling sad. But qualia do not end with sensation and
emotion. Conscious thinking “feels” a certain way. And so does conscious
intention or volition. So every conscious mental act or state, we should
recognize, has its phenomenal character. (Of course, this use of “feels” is
not tied to emotional “feeling.”)
Now, there is nothing in the phenomenal character of an experience that articulates an inner awareness of the act as such. My proposal
is that there is a further reflexive character, the character “in this very
experience” – or“herein” – that articulates awareness of the experience itself. But there is nothing in this reflexivity that articulates phenomenality;
a mental act could intimate itself reflexively without yet being phenomenal. These two characters are interwoven in consciousness, in inner
awareness, on the model at hand. Here lies inner awareness, in the form
“phenomenally in this very experience.”
The character “phenomenally” modifies the form of the whole mental
act. And within the scope of that character, the form “in this very experience” – or “herein” – reflexively indicates or intimates the act itself. But
nowhere in this structure is there the form of separately observing or
judging that the act is occurring, or that I am in that mental state. Thus,
within the overall form of the conscious experience there is a form of
inner awareness of the act, in this reflexive character. Shall we call this
a “secondary intentionality,” with Brentano? That would be misleading,
because it is not a part of the act’s directedness toward its object; nor is
the object of consciousness itself a complex including (here) the frog
and the act. “In this very experience” is not a separate mental act, nor a
component act. Rather, it is a character of the act, of the way the act is
executed.23
The reflexive character “in this very experience” is modified by (falls
within the scope of) the phenomenal character “phenomenally.” In that
way the inner awareness of the act is itself conscious and experienced or
“felt”in living through the act. So inner awareness is neither unconscious
nor a further act accompanying the given act.
On this modal analysis, then, the form “this frog” is part of the mode
of presentation of the act’s object, prescribing the object intended, while
the form “see” is part of the modality of presentation or intentionality in
the act. The character “consciously” is a further part of the modality of
presentation or intentionality. And so the inner awareness articulated by
the form “in this very experience”is part of the modality of intentionality:
part of what makes the act conscious, within the character “consciously.”
Yet“this very experience” does not occur in any form of judgment holding
Return to Consciousness 101
that I am having “this very experience,” whether a separate judgment
(Rosenthal) or an internal judgment (Brentano). Nor does it occur in
any other form of higher-order monitoring.
In short, we have here an analysis of phenomenological form that resonates with Brentano’s view of inner consciousness but avoids the problematic features of higher-order monitoring, including Brentano’s own
version of an internal higher-order judgment.
Temporal Inner Awareness
In lectures published as On the Phenomenology of the Consciousness of Internal Time [inneren Zeitbewusstsein] (1991/1893–1917), 24 Husserl developed a quasi-mathematical analysis of our consciousness of the “inner”
passage of time. According to Husserl, our “inner consciousness” of our
passing experience – what I am calling inner awareness – automatically
falls out of the structure of our consciousness of time: our temporally
flowing consciousness of temporally flowing events both external and
internal to our consciousness. Husserl’s analysis of time consciousness
seems to imply, then, that inner awareness in our sense can be analyzed
more closely in terms of the temporal structure of consciousness. Let us
explore this temporal model of inner awareness in light of our preceding
considerations.
So long as we are conscious, we experience a temporal flow of sensation, a continuous flow of sensory awarenesses in visual, auditory, tactile,
and kinesthetic perception, along with taste and smell. Consider a simple experience of hearing a melody, say, “Yankee Doodle.” Each phase of
