experience, and then, in Brentanian fashion, the pattern of secondary
retentions and anticipations makes up my inner awareness of the whole
experience. Thus, in Husserl’s hands inner awareness resolves or decomposes into this pattern of retentions and protentions. Inner awareness
itself is thus reduced to temporal awareness of flowing consciousness.
This analysis is elegant. But is this temporal structure the proper form
of inner awareness as such? I think not, although inner awareness may
rightly be said to supervene on temporal awareness.
Inner Awareness Supervening on Temporal Awareness
When I see a frog, my experience includes a visual presentation of a froglike pattern of colors and shapes and textures. But the salient content in
my experience – the salient structure in the mode of presentation of the
object – is “this frog,” or “this red tree frog.” That content, we may say,
supervenes on the visual registration of details of color, shape, texture –
of the frog as presented. But the content “this red tree frog” does not
decompose semantically into a content specifying the pattern of colors,
shapes, and so on: that is the lesson of the failure of sense-datum theories
Return to Consciousness 105
of perception, and of careful phenomenological analysis. Similarly: when
I hear the melody “Yankee Doodle,” my inner awareness of my perception carries the content – part of the modality of presentation – “in this
very experience.” My inner awareness, bearing that content, supervenes
on my temporal awareness consisting in a pattern of retentions and protentions, but the content “in this very experience” does not decompose
semantically into a content specifying the pattern of retentions and protentions (like temporal sense data). Accordingly, the contents that define
respectively inner awareness and temporal awareness are distinct contents
with different phenomenological tasks.
The phenomenology of my experience of hearing “Yankee Doodle”
should then articulate separately both inner awareness and temporal
awareness. Along the lines we have been pursuing, I propose the following (rather cumbersome) phenomenological description:
Phenomenally in this very experience
(I now hear this present tone E in “Yankee Doodle”
and [interdependently] retain (i) past tones... and (ii) my past hearings thereof and [interdependently] anticipate (i) future tones... and
(ii) my future hearings thereof).
My inner awareness of my experience, in virtue of the modal character
“in this very experience,” spreads holistically over my temporally flowing
experience of hearing “Yankee Doodle” including the present tone E.
But the reflexive content “this very experience” indicates my experience
directly, without articulating the complexity of temporal awareness that
Husserl appraised. Accordingly, the form of inner awareness,“in this very
experience,” is distinguished from the form of temporal awareness in the
pattern of retentions and protentions. Yet the character “in this very experience” itself depends on the temporal awareness comprising retentions
and protentions. For, without that integral temporal awareness of the
ongoing experience, I could not (as Husserl says) “sense” the ongoing
experience, albeit simply as “this very experience.”
Whatever else we experience, we experience a temporally structured
flow of sensory perception along with thinking, imagining, wishing, willing, and the like. This flow of sensory experience (including kinesthesis
and bodily control) is a deep and basic current in our stream of consciousness, above which flow our various other intentional activities. And
that basic sensory flow, let us grant, has a structure very much like that
Husserl analyzed as temporal awareness. Supervening on that temporal
awareness, however, is a distinct formal feature of consciousness, which is
106 Mind World
inner awareness proper. There is the form of “inner consciousness” that
Brentano and Husserl sought to explicate.
That said, the whole experience – bearing the whole content articulated by our complex phenomenological description – is itself flowing
temporally, and its aspect of inner awareness is an integral part of the
temporally flowing experience. Thus, inner awareness is itself temporally
manifest, as the pattern of secondary retentions and protentions points
toward the temporal extent of the whole experience, of which inner
awareness is an integral part. To recognize inner awareness as part of
the modality of presentation, I would suggest, helps to dispel the sense
of mystery about the “self-constitution” of consciousness through “inner
time-consciousness.”26
Consciousness as Modality
When I spoke of the modality of presentation in an intentional act (1986,
1989), I alluded to a conception of intentionality as a form of modality.
In the 1960s Jaakko Hintikka analyzed the logic of sentences like “I believe that p” and “I see that p” as similar to the logic of “necessarily p”
or “it is necessary that p.” Where the traditional metaphysical notion of
modality covers necessity and possibility, Hintikka’s logic brought intentionality into a similar mold. The logical analogy frames the following
truth conditions:
“Necessarily p” is true in a world W if and only if “p” is true in all logically possible worlds logically alternative to W.
“a believes/sees that p” is true in a world W if and only if “p” is true in
all intentionally possible worlds intentionally alternative for a to W.
In Smith and McIntyre, Husserl and Intentionality (1982), this modal semantics was transformed into a modal model of intentionality per se (as
opposed to the interpretation of sentences ascribing intentional propositional attitudes). On that modal model, an act of thought or perception
is intentionally directed not simply toward an object in the actual world
but toward a variety of objects in appropriate situations or worlds defined
by the content (and “horizon”) of the act. That is, the act’s intentionality
consists in this pattern of directedness reaching into a variety of conceptually or intentionally possible situations (while based in a home world
W, normally the actual world).
Return to Consciousness 107
The modal analysis of consciousness begins with the logical form of
the phenomenological description “Consciously I see this frog” or, pace
Hintikka,
“(Consciously I see that) (this is a frog).”
Here the modifier “consciously” is parsed as an adverb within the modal
operator “I see that” and then factored further in
“((Phenomenally in this very experience) I see that) (this is a frog).”
So we use the logical form of the modal operator to articulate inner
awareness, along the lines explained previously. The assumption is that
this form of language articulates the form of experience we are after.
Accordingly, we call the phenomenological form “consciously” a modal
structure of intentionality.27
Looking at the possible-worlds explication of intentionality as modality, we can see a striking difference between the modal model of consciousness and higher-order monitoring models. On the latter, the act A
is itself the object toward which a certain higher-order act H is directed:
that is the relevant fact that makes A conscious. However, on the modal
model, there is only one act A – with no accompanying act H – and A is
directed only (in the case at hand) toward a situation involving a frog.
Thus, the content“this is a frog”in A directs my experience A in W toward
a situation S in a world W (intentionally possible and alternative for me
in A to W), where S consists in a certain object’s being a frog, namely, the
object visually before me in W.28 A’s intentionality consists in this pattern
of directedness toward frog situations in the alternative worlds. Now, the
content “consciously” in A plays a completely different role. It does not
