The snail is engaged in sentient-motor activity, and so am I when I stub
my toe on a rock and instinctively pull it back. Sensory awareness and
purposeful bodily movement at this most basic level are conscious but
lack inner awareness. No doubt my sentient-motor activity at this level is
interlinked with far more complex mental activities than the snail’s, yet
both occur at this formal level of consciousness.
Indexical awareness begins with awareness of the distinctness between
“this” and “that”: between a state or entity “itself,” “this here entity” (“self”
without a sense of person), and an entity over against it,“that there entity.”
This second level of consciousness bears the protoform of intentionality,
the distinction between act and object. Here we find the most basic form
of inner awareness, carried in the consciousness of “that” object over
against and distinct from “this” act.
Return to Consciousness 111
Conceptual intentionality presents an object under a predicative concept, such as “frog” or “rock” or indeed “person.” My simple visual
consciousness of “this frog” involves elements of consciousness from the
first three levels: my experience is a visual sentient activity, it is an awareness of“this/that [entity]” (as distinct from “this very experience”), and it
is a conceptual intention or presentation of“[this] frog.”Indeed, the conceptual presentation depends on the indexical awareness, which depends
on the sentient activity. This level of consciousness assumes a conceptual
apprehension of space-time and the place of experiences and objects
in it.
Symbolic intentionality occurs when a consciousness involves symbolic
concepts (some of them indexical) that have a grammar or syntax in a
logical-linguistic symbol system, notably, a natural language like English
or Chinese. When I consciously think “Brentano launched the phenomenology of inner awareness,” my experience is laden with concepts
that belong to and are expressed only within a proper language, namely,
English – indeed, an ideolect of English philosophical discourse (following translation from German philosophical discourse). Again, when I consciously see “this Macintosh PowerBook G4 computer,” my consciousness
includes concepts that I could not have unless I were familiar with jargon
of today’s computer technology. The fourth-level symbolic consciousness
in my experience depends on third-level conceptual presentations of
shapes and colors and tools familiar in everyday human culture, and both
depend on second-level indexical awarenesses of “this silver box ... ,”
which in turn depends on first-level sentient visual consciousness.
Again, while we choose commonplace examples of these levels of consciousness, we are noting formal structures of consciousness, and the theory of these forms of consciousness is a formal theory that awaits empirical
application. All that we need claim here is that a simple case of human
visual consciousness, for example, can be factored along these lines into
different elements. Where exactly does inner awareness occur in these
levels of consciousness?
Where a mental activity is conscious, it has the character “consciously”
or “phenomenally.” This remains a primitive form of experience, and it
covers the mental structures in the four levels of consciousness distinguished here. Inner awareness enters the form of consciousness most
basically with indexical awareness of “this/that entity” as distinct from
“this act.” If we have a conception of “experiences,” as we do in everyday life, then the form “in this very experience” is indexical and
conceptual; this is the form we assumed in the analysis of our everyday
112 Mind World
awareness of our passing experience. And if one day we are able to discern
our own neural activity, somewhat as an expert winemaker discerns the
“cherry” and “chocolate” and “cassis” overtones in a Stags Leap appellation of California cabernet sauvignon, then inner awareness may include
a symbolic-conceptual content:“Phenomenally in this very neural activity
I see that poisonous red tree frog,” where the form of inner awareness
“in this very experience” is informed with the theoretical concepts of
neuroscience.
The four-level scheme of categories of consciousness helps to explain
some prominent criticisms of classical, broadly Cartesian philosophy of
mind – and to explain where they go wrong. (i) As noted earlier, Fred
Dretske has urged that consciousness is defined not by inner awareness
but by a certain (causal) role. This view finds its natural (and naturalistic)
place at low levels of consciousness, especially in sentient-motor activity.
Indeed, at that level we want to address the causal interaction of a conscious organism with its environment.32 Yet recognizing this level does
not in itself cut inner awareness out of other forms of consciousness, especially at higher levels. (ii) Following Kant, Wilfrid Sellars has argued
that perception cannot present “this” sensuous object without some sortal concept such as (in our example) “frog.” Third-level perceptual consciousness would indeed take such a form, as in seeing “this frog.” Yet
it does not follow that there cannot be a lower level of perceptual consciousness of “this,” where sortal concepts fail. When it is foggy, I may
see “that” ahead (whatever it be), with no sortal concept informing my
experience.33 (iii) Drawing on Heidegger and Merleau-Ponty, Hubert
Dreyfus has championed habitual human actions, describing states of
what I would call “minimalist consciousness,” as when I see a nail and
hammer it in the familiar course of carpentering. I am consciously hammering the nail (I am not a zombie) but without any prominent consciousness – even minimal indexical awareness – of my action, myself,
my hand, my hammer, my will, and without any conscious conceptual or
symbolic judgment or volition about hammer, nail, cabinets, and so forth.
Higher-level consciousness is lacking in this action, and inner awareness
may be largely or even wholly lacking in such actions. Still, it does not
follow that consciousness and inner awareness are lacking in other forms
of human activity, at different levels of consciousness.
(iv) Ludwig Wittgenstein described “fundamental empirical propositions,” contained in basic beliefs that are inaccessible to consciousness –
not because they are repressed `a la Freud, but because they are so basic
to our human existence that we ordinarily have no need for them. Such
Return to Consciousness 113
beliefs would be symbolic or language-bound intentional states, but they
do not involve consciousness, much less inner awareness (see in Chapter 5
the essay “Background Ideas,” extrapolating from Wittgenstein’s concerns in On Certainty). Such “beliefs” do indeed ground our epistemology.
Yet it does not follow that consciousness with inner awareness does not
inform other human thoughts, at the levels of conceptual and symbolic
consciousness. (v) Donald Davidson has argued, on grounds of interpretation of others’ beliefs and desires, that language is a prerequisite
for intentional propositional attitudes. Only at the symbolic level of consciousness, however, do such intuitions and arguments have bite. In any
event, it does not follow that lower levels of consciousness and intentionality require language.
Such observations, against the omnipresence of acute consciousness in
human affairs, should not impel philosophy to abandon consciousness in
an effort to get beyond Cartesianism and into high postmodernism, as a
Richard Rorty might urge. Instead, such observations should lead us into
careful discriminations of forms and levels of consciousness. In that spirit
we proposed a four-level scheme of categories of forms of consciousness.
These four categories do not, however, complete the systematic categorization of forms of consciousness. They define certain forms of awareness, in four levels, but across these levels other categorial differences
apply. A separate dimension of variation is that between three basic forms
of mental act or state, which we might call forms of mental direction or
bias:
34
A. Perception B. Thought C. Volition/Action
In perception a being or organism receives information from its environment and so is affected by its environs. In volition a being or organism
initiates action and so affects its environs. (Or, we may say, in action
a being executes or carries out a volition.) In thought, in either judgment or imagination, a being represents or conceives things, but does
