pp. 323–93.
1997. “Being and Basis.” Unpublished manuscript, extending my presentation
under the same title at the Second European Congress of Analytic Philosophy, Leeds, England, 5–7 August 1996.
1999.“Intentionality Naturalized?”In Jean Petitot, Francisco J. Varela, Bernard
Pachoud, and Jean-Michel Roy, eds., Naturalizing Phenomenology: Contemporary Phenomenology and Cognitive Science, pp. 83–110. Stanford, Calif.: Stanford
University Press in collaboration with Cambridge University Press.
2002a. “What Is ‘Logical’ in Husserl’s Logical Investigations? The Copenhagen
Interpretation.” In Dan Zahavi and Frederik Stjernfelt, eds., 100 Years of
Phenomenology: Husserl’s Logical Investigations Revisited, pp. 51–65. Boston:
Kluwer Academic Publishers.
2002b. “Intentionality and Picturing: Early Husserl vis-a-vis ` Early Wittgenstein.” Southern Journal of Philosophy 40 suppl.: 153–80.
Smith, David Woodruff, and Ronald McIntyre. 1982. Husserl and Intentionality.
Boston: D. Reidel.
Thomasson, Amie L. 2000. “After Brentano: A One-Level Theory of Consciousness.” European Journal of Philosophy 8 (2): 190–209.
Zahavi, Dan. 1999. Self-Awareness and Alterity: A Phenomenological Investigation.
Evanston, Ill.: Northwestern University Press.
4
Consciousness in Action
Abstract. A phenomenology of action is outlined, analyzing the structure
of volition, kinesthesis, and perception in the experience of action. These
three forms of intentionality are integrated in a typical case of conscious
volitional action. In their integration we find the structure of our everyday
experience of embodiment in action. The intentionality of action is contrasted with that of thought and perception in regard to the role of the
body, and the relations between an action, the experience of acting, and
the context of the action are specified.
Segue. In “The Cogito circa a.d. 2000” we argued that the experience of
consciousness includes an inner awareness of the act of consciousness
(sans dualism and sans incorrigibility). In “Return to Consciousness” we
analyzed the form of inner awareness in detail. Phenomenological analysis begins with our awareness of our own experience as lived. Often
this phenomenological perspective, grounded in inner awareness, is assumed to lead to an isolation of mind from body. However, a careful
phenomenology of action shows that this structure of consciousness already places consciousness in intimate relations to the “lived” body, so the
“inner” is already tied to the “outer,” the “subjective” to the “objective.”
Thus, consciousness is already embodied as we experience it in everyday
action. Inversely, the body is itself experienced in conscious action. That is,
consciousness is itself experienced as part of nature, beginning with one’s
own body.
An early version of this essay was read at the XVIIIth World Congress of Philosophy in
Brighton, England, on 25 August 1988. I thank discussants on that occasion, including
cosymposiasts Robert Gordon, Helen Lauer, and Jonathon Suzman; I thank Steve DeWitt,
Ronald McIntyre, Martin Schwab, Peter Simons, and Peter Woodruff for discussions since;
and I thank an anonymous referee for many detailed comments on the penultimate draft.
The present edition is much longer than, and quite different from, what was read at
Brighton.
122
Consciousness in Action 123
The Phenomenological Problem of Action
As phenomenology describes human experience, the phenomenology of
action describes the experience of acting, or doing something, especially
doing something consciously and intentionally, or volitionally. Acting typically involves moving or using one’s body by the volition to do such-andsuch. But what is the structure of an experience of acting? That is the
phenomenological problem of action.
Here I should like to present a blueprint for a phenomenology of
action, sketching a theory of the intentionality of action – as opposed to
thought and perception, which (at least on the face of it) do not involve
using one’s body. I shall assume the broad outlines of a “content”theory of
intentionality, according to which an intentional state or “act” is directed
toward an object via a content, where the content of the act prescribes,
or is satisfied by, the object of the act (if the act is successful). In the
case of thinking the content will be a proposition (e.g., “that 1970 was a
good year for Bordeaux”), whereas in visual perception the content will
be a visual image or percept (usually informed by conceptualization, as
in seeing “this green frog here in the grass”). But in the case of action,
we shall find quite different phenomenological structures, or contents,
as we sort through the issue raised by human action for a general theory
of intentionality.1
I do not propose to offer, as would some theories of action, an account
of necessary and sufficient conditions for being an action. I am not sure
there are any (given the plasticity of our concept of action). But in any
event I want here to focus on a certain paradigm of conscious, intentional
action. And, as we shall see, there are variations in what we experience
in different actions even of this kind.
One does something consciously when one does it with awareness of
what one is doing, and one does something intentionally when one does
it with intention, or volition. (A distinction between intention and volition, to be drawn later, need not concern us at this time.) One may
do something consciously but unintentionally (nonvolitionally). For instance, when I drive over the curb, I am driving the car consciously, and
intentionally, but it is not part of my intention, or volition, to drive over
the curb. Again, one may do something unconsciously yet intentionally
(volitionally). For example, when I say something offensive to my friend,
I may do so intentionally but unconsciously, motivated by envy. Our concern, however, will be those actions in which one does something both
intentionally and consciously.
124 Mind World
It is important to distinguish phenomenological problems from metaphysical problems. Because action involves bodily movement caused by
volition, the traditional mind-body problem is just around the corner:
in action, how is the mental state of willing related to (and how can
it cause) the bodily state of moving and thereby doing such and such?
That is a metaphysical problem. But another sort of mind-body problem
arises in the phenomenological description of action. Conscious action
involves awareness of one’s volition and one’s bodily movement. What
is the relation between volition and bodily movement as experienced
in conscious action? That is a phenomenological problem, formulated
at the level of phenomenological description. By contrast, the traditional mind-body problem is that of relating mental events as described
in phenomenology or psychology with physical events as described in
neurophysiology.2
In classical phenomenology, action is addressed more centrally by
Merleau-Ponty than by Husserl or Heidegger. Merleau-Ponty is said to
have undercut Cartesian dualism and averted the mind-body problem
by describing the body in a way that does not admit of mind-body distinctions. It would be better to see his account of “the body” as a phenomenological description of certain forms of intentionality, including
bodily awareness in action and perception.3 Similarly, in psychology,
J. J. Gibson describes visual experience at a level of human rather than
physical interaction, so that perceived objects are presented with properties like “a stone to be stepped on.”4 At that level of description, objects in
the “external” world are described in terms that overlap with descriptions
