of our “internal” world of experience. And that level of description – of
one’s experience and the world around one – is the level at which human
actions are described in the phenomenology of action.
Intentionality in Action, Thought, and Perception
The phenomenological problem of action, I have assumed, is a problem
of intentionality in the Brentano-Husserl sense: what is one conscious or
aware of in performing an action?
But there are very different kinds of intentional activity. Some, such as
thinking, are purely mental activities (realized in brain function), whereas
others, such as action (and arguably perception), involve use of the body.
These different kinds of “acts” have very different kinds of intentionality.
Thus, I have a thought “about” Russell, a perception “of” the dog, and an
intention or volition “to” hit the bull’s eye. These different phenomena
Consciousness in Action 125
are all said to be intentional or “directed” toward something: thinking,
because it is“about” something; perception, because it is“of” something;
intention or volition, because it is “to” do something. Bodily actions, too,
are said to be “intentional.”But is the intentionality of action a special case
of intentionality in the Brentano-Husserl sense? Not quite. An action is
intentional in the everyday sense if and only if it is done with and through
the volition or intention to act in a certain way, and a volition or intention
is intentional in the Brentano-Husserl sense, as it is a willing or intending
“of” the action, or “to” act thus and so. In this way, the everyday sense
of “intentional” may be defined in terms of the Brentano-Husserl sense.
Alternatively, the Brentano-Husserl sense may be extended (from purely
mental acts) to actions, by saying an action is intentional insofar as the
constituent volition (through which it is performed) is intentional.5
The classical phenomenologists took differing views of intentionality
in part because of their diverging attitudes toward action and the body.
Husserl focused on the intentionality of thought and perception as cognitive apprehension of objects in the world, whereas Merleau-Ponty focused
on the intentionality of perception as essentially involving meaningful
embodied behavior, or action. It is said that Husserl privileged cognitive
representation in thought and perception divorced from action in the
world, whereas Heidegger held that meaningful behavior (informed by
culturally – or historically – defined practices) is more fundamental than
thought or perception, and Merleau-Ponty (with less emphasis on praxis)
urged that perception and bodily movement go hand in hand (“the theory of the body is already a theory of perception”). But these familiar
oppositions blur what is at issue in the intentionality of action.
All intentional human activities – actions, thoughts, perceptions – take
place in the world (where else?) and are performed by an embodied human subject. The issues should be: what are these different kinds of intentionality, in action, thought, and perception? And in what ways do they
depend on each other – is one kind most fundamental, or does each depend in different ways on certain of the others? Once these questions
are posed clearly, the familiar postures attributed to Husserl, Heidegger,
and Merleau-Ponty appear wrongheaded: there are different kinds of
dependence among these different kinds of intentionality.
Different Forms of Awareness in Action
What is one aware of in performing an action? Awareness comes in several things in different ways, in different forms of intentional activity.
126 Mind World
Consider a relatively simple action: my picking up a shovel to dig in
the garden. We should distinguish the following forms of awareness,
or structures of experience, involved in my performing this conscious
action. First, within action itself, there is my volitional awareness of my
action, that is, my volition to so act: I am consciously willing to pick up
this shovel, that is, willing that I now pick it up (in a certain manner,
grasping the handle with my hands and lifting it with my arms). Second, accompanying my action is my kinesthetic awareness of my bodily
movement as I pick up the shovel. Third, there is my concurrent perception of certain things in my environment, especially my seeing and
touching the shovel I am picking up, and also my seeing the shovel
rising in my hands (the intended effect of my action). Thus, my experience of acting consists in my conscious volition, which occurs against the
background of my relevant kinesthetic and perceptual experiences. And
these three forms of awareness make up my overall experience in acting.
Importantly, although kinesthesis and perception accompany and guide
my volition, I am attending to what I am willing and thereby doing –
picking up the shovel – rather than to what I see or what I feel of my bodily
movement.6
Some philosophers balk at the claim that action involves a distinguishable element of willing and that we are aware of our willing in acting.
However, a striking experiment dissolves that skepticism. Neurologist
Wilder Penfield inserted an electrode into the motor cortex of the patient’s brain, which caused the patient’s hand to move. The patient, fully
conscious, declared, “I didn’t do that. You did.”7 The point being that we
normally do experience our effectively willing our hands to move. The
phenomenology of action should explicitly recognize this element in the
experience of acting. To experience willing, however, is not to have something like a “feeling” of willing, a sensation of willing, like a churning in
one’s stomach or, indeed, a kinesthetic sensation of moving. Consciously
willing is not sensation of any kind; it is willing.
The three forms of awareness noted in a typical action – volition, kinesthesis, and perception – are interdependent in that they presuppose one
another in certain ways. Thus, I normally cannot perform the conscious
action of picking up the shovel, by my volition to pick it up, without having
a kinesthetic awareness of my movement and a perceptual awareness of
the shovel and its movement in my hands. Nor can I see the shovel without turning my eyes toward it, or feel it without reaching my hands out
to touch it. These different forms of experience are thus interwoven as
I perform the conscious action. The action itself, as it unfolds, is guided
Consciousness in Action 127
by the integration of these three forms of awareness of what I am doing.
(Of course, there are many variations on this simple form of action, some
of which we note later, but let us focus on the structures of experience
involved in this simple paradigm.)
By hypothesis, these three forms of awareness involved in my action are
all mental events. Now, what makes a mental event conscious is an “inner
awareness” of it as it transpires. In particular, as I will that I now pick up
this shovel, I am aware of my so willing. And, as I feel my body moving,
I am aware of this kinesthetic sensation of my body. Again, as I see this
shovel rise in my hands, I am aware of my visual experience of the shovel.
However, this awareness of my intentional activity – my willing, sensing,
or seeing – is not an attentive awareness, as my attention lies in what I
am doing (raising the shovel) rather than in my awareness of my doing
it. Furthermore, this awareness is not a distinct, second-order judgment
or observation about the activity. It is rather a prereflective awareness of
the activity, a reflexive awareness that is internal to the activity itself and
makes it a conscious mental activity. The structure of my awareness in my
volition, then, may be expressed in a phenomenological description of
the form:
In this volition I am now willing (myself) to pick up that shovel, that
