“In this volition I am now willing that I am digging this hole.”
By contrast, my thinking of my digging has a cogitative content:
“In this thought I am now thinking that I am digging this hole.”
Moreover, if Castaneda is right, the volitional content expressed here ˜
by “I am digging this hole” is of a different logical or phenomenological
form than the cogitative or propositional content expressed by “I am digging this hole.”16 The content formulating what is willed, as opposed to
thought, he calls a practition, as opposed to a proposition, the difference
lying in the copula: while the relevant proposition has the form “I am
Consciousness in Action 137
digging” (“In this thought I think that I am digging”), the practicion has
the form “I to dig” (“In this volition I will I [myself] to dig”), and the
copula “to” signals a “causal openness” in the volition. Whether or not
these core contents of thought and volition are different in form (we
need not settle that matter here), the overall contents certainly differ in
form.
Moreover, the activities that bear these contents differ in effect. A volitional content is, if you will, an executive content, in that “performing”
a volition executes an action – if all goes according to form, that is, according to content. And this is what most fundamentally distinguishes
the intentionality of volition from that of thought or perception; this is
what makes it a practical intentionality.
Indeed, what most strikingly distinguishes volition from thought or
perception is the causal efficacy of volition. Whereas I represent the world
in thinking, I seek to affect the world in acting, by causing my bodily
movement through my own volition. Thus, willing my digging causes
my movement in digging and thereby executes my action: that is what
makes the volition a practical intentional activity. By contrast, thinking
that I am digging does not in itself cause my movement in digging; nor
does kinesthetically sensing my movement cause my movement – quite
the reverse. And not only does my volition cause my movement, but
in willing I experience the causal relation between my willing and my
movement (my awareness of causation being confirmed by my kinesthetic
and perceptual awareness of my movement). In this way the ontology and
phenomenology of action come together in causation.
Still, as different as practical and cognitive intentionality are, they share
a familiar ontological structure: the “act-content-object” structure articulated by Husserl and others of the Brentano tradition. For the case of
thought, this structure is outlined in the following principles:
1. An act of thinking has a certain content (a thought or proposition)
that represents – semantically prescribes, or is satisfied by – a certain
object (a state of affairs).
2. The same object can be represented in different ways, that is, in acts
of thinking with different contents.
3. An act of thinking may have a content but no object (a false thought
represents no actual state of affairs); or it may have an object that
does not exactly fit the content.
4. The object of an act of thinking always transcends the content of
the act, in that there are more aspects of the object than can be
138 Mind World
represented in the content. (This applies not only to the state of
affairs represented, or thought to obtain, but to the constituent
objects thought “about.”)
5. An act of thinking is intentionally related to an object if and only if
the act has a certain content and that content prescribes, or is satisfied
by, the object – that is, the intentional relation is the composition
of the relations of entertaining and (successfully) prescribing.17
Similarly, for the case of action:
1. An action includes a bodily movement and a volition that has a
certain content that prescribes a certain object, namely, the action
itself.
2. The same action can be willed in different ways, that is, in volitions with different volitional contents (including contents that vary in
complexity).
3. A volition may have a content but no object (where the volitional
content is not satisfied, when the attempted action fails, as in missing the nail with the hammer, or when no movement ensues, as
in paralysis); or a volition may produce a movement or effect that
does not exactly fit the volitional content (say, in executing a ballet
step).
4. The action willed (including the bodily movement) always transcends the content of the volition, in that there are more aspects of
the action (e.g., bodily nuances, causal effects, and cultural significances) than can be represented in the content.
5. The intentional relation between a volition and an action consists in
the volition’s having a certain content and the action’s satisfying
the content.
Notice (again) that this intentional relation is distinct from the causal
relation between the volition and the movement in the action (although
the causal relationship is part of the conditions of satisfaction of the
volition’s content). That is why action is an “intentional,” not merely a
causal, phenomenon.
The principle of transcendence (4) is a point of special importance.
The beauty of action in practice is that the content of my volition may
be most minimal (“dig this hole,” “hit a spin serve there”), yet my bodily movement may be exceedingly complex, the result of years of practice, and my actions may be informed with deep cultural significance
(reflecting the role of gardens or games in our culture) – with little or
Consciousness in Action 139
none of these complexities being explicitly represented in the content
of my volition itself. The writings of Heidegger and Merleau-Ponty, and
Wittgenstein too, are rich in suggestions of this transcendence. However,
we should not infer (as some of their interpreters are wont to infer) that
there is no such thing as intentional content – or, indeed, consciousness –
in action. In the (post)modern metaphor: the form of bodily movement
in an action may be “compiled” from vast complexities of neural-network
activities, and the form-of-action itself from a vast cultural network of
interlocking forms of action, although the volition that consciously executes the action carries only the most minimal content. The job of phenomenology of action is to characterize such contents carefully, defining
their intentional force and, in a larger context, their limits as well. (The
larger context is the domain of “connectionisms,” tracing neural, conceptual, and cultural networks.)
The Bodily “I” in Action
The body plays a central role in practical intentionality (as long as we are
not gods or angels). Not only does action itself involve bodily movement,
but the experience of acting involves an awareness of oneself as an acting,
bodily “I.”
In my action of digging, my body in fact plays three distinct roles: as
part, means, and end of action. First, the movement of my body is part of
the action. Second, this movement (caused by my volition) causes the
intended effect of the shovel’s dislodging earth in the garden. Third, the
content of my volition prescribes a certain movement of my body (caused
