by the volition).
By contrast, the body plays no such essential roles in most cognitive
intentional activities. Thoughts about one’s body make intentional reference to one’s body, but thinking does not make use of the body in the way
that digging or running does. (I“use” my brain in thinking, but that is another matter.) To be sure, there are indirect ways in which thinking may
involve bodily action, for instance, the ways in which thinking depends
on the use of language, especially while thinking “out loud.” But the role
of the body in such thinking is very different from its role in action. Perception is the one cognitive intentional activity in which the body plays a
role like that in action. For not only does vision involve a causal relation
(barring hallucination) between one’s environment, one’s body (eyes),
and one’s visual experience; the content of the visual experience also
prescribes the causal relation, and so makes intentional reference to the
140 Mind World
perceiver’s body.18 Moreover, one must (normally) turn one’s head and
eyes in the direction of an object in order to see it, whence the perception
itself presupposes this simple action, which involves bodily awareness.
Now, in my action of digging, I both move and experience my bodily
movement. Or, better, I experience myself moving. But I do not experience myself as a disembodied, or even disembodiable, “I” that wills the
movement of “this body” and receives kinesthetic and visual images of
the movement. Perhaps I experience myself as a purely mental “I” when
I think: cogito, ergo sum. (Or do I? It was only through a strenuous course
of argument that Descartes’s Meditations led to the conclusion that “I” am
a purely thinking being.) But when I dig and experience my digging, I
experience myself as a moving, acting, bodily being, and this is essential
to the structure of my experience of digging.
Thus, in the experience of acting, in the structure of volition, we find a
certain element of self-awareness. In our phenomenological description
of my experience of digging, this mode of self-awareness is indicated by
the word “I”:
In this volition I am now willing that I am digging this hole with this
shovel.
The volition itself occurs against the background of, and presupposes,
kinesthetic and perceptual experiences whose structure we describe so:
In this kinesthesis I am now sensing my hands closed as if around
a shovel handle and my arms moving forward and upward as if in
digging.
In this visual experience I am now seeing this shovel in my hands
moving this earth.
What is the force of this content “I” in the experience of acting – in the
volition and in the accompanying kinesthesis and perception?
The word “I” occurs twice in our description of the volition.19 Thus,
the content “I am digging...” prescribes the action willed. Clearly, this
content presupposes that “I,” the agent, am an embodied being capable
of moving in a digging way, and moving volitionally. Now, the reflexive
content “In this volition I am now willing . . .” characterizes my inner
awareness of my willing. But while willing does not itself include bodily movement, this content nonetheless presupposes that “I,” the willing
subject, am capable of action and thus embodied, because what “I” will
is that “I” (the same being) am digging. Thus, the intentional force of
Consciousness in Action 141
the content “I,” in both occurrences, is that of prescribing an embodied
agent. This prescription is further supported by the content “I” in the accompanying kinesthesis and perception. For the kinesthetic experience
presents “my” bodily movement, movement of this same bodily “I.” And
the visual experience also presents “my” bodily movement, “me” moving,
from a different perspective. So, again, the “I” so experienced is a bodily
“I.” I also experience myself as a subject of kinesthesis and perception,
through the reflexive contents “in this kinesthesis I sense...” and “in
this visual experience I see . . .” In my overall experience in action, then,
I experience myself as a being that sees things, feels bodily movement,
and wills and performs actions.
In acting, we might say, I experience myself as body, I experience “I”
as “my body,” “me-body.” Indeed, in the idiom of an older English, we are
“bodies” as much as “persons” or “selves.” We still say, “Is anybody home?”
And, the old lyric says, “When a body meets a body, comin’ through the
rye.” In today’s English, however, we tend to associate more physiology
and physics with the word “body.”
Indeed, the object of this complex experience of oneself in acting
transcends what the content “I” prescribes of it. (This accords with the
principle of transcendence noted earlier, for practical as for cognitive
intentionality.) In particular, what natural science has to say about this
living-moving-willing “body” that “I” am is quite different from what
my experience in action tells me about it. The phenomenology of action, body, and self is one story, their physics and physiology quite
another.20
In the context of action theory, then, we need to address not the
familiar, Cartesian mind-body problem (how can a mental event of
volition cause a physical event of body movement?) but, instead, the
body-body problem: what is the relation between the consciously-willing
“body” and the physiological “body,” between the body-as-it-appears-inthe-experience-of-acting and the body-in-itself-in-physical-nature?21
Notes
1. This kind of theory of intentionality is characterized in Smith 1989. Its locus
classicus is in Husserl’s work, according to the interpretation in Smith and
McIntyre 1982; its history, beginning in Aristotle, is traced in Sajama and
Kamppinen 1987. Where I speak of the “structure” of an experience of acting,
I understand structure as “content” in that traditional sense. However, I wish
to remain neutral here on the ontology of contents, as the results presented
here can accommodate different conceptions of content.
142 Mind World
2. In his modern classic “Mental Events” Davidson (1980) argued that these
two levels of theory cannot be crossed by bridge laws relating the mental and
physical (especially as cause and effect), although the two levels are ultimately
about the same events albeit differently described: thus, Davidson’s “anomalous monism.” My point here is that the problem of action’s being caused
by volition already arises at the level of phenomenological or mentalistic
psychology.
3. See Merleau-Ponty 1962: “Part One: The Body.” Also, on “incarnate meaning” in Merleau-Ponty, see Dreyfus 1982. An elaboration of a partly MerleauPontian theory of action is found in Dreyfus and Wakefield 1988.
4. See Gibson 1979. A Merleau-Pontian reading of Gibson is developed in
Blinder 1986.
5. Among recent action theorists, Hector-Neri Castaneda and John Searle as- ˜
sume the intentionality of action is a species of intentionality in the sense
characterized by Brentano and Husserl. See Castaneda ˜ 1975 and Searle 1983.
However, the issue of intentionality in the Brentano-Husserl sense is not
explicit – so as to point toward a bona fide theory of intentionality for intention and action – in the earlier classics of action theory, for example, in
Wittgenstein 1953, Anscombe 1959, Melden 1961, and Davidson’s “Actions,
