Reasons, and Causes,” in Davidson 1980.
6. The sense of body in action was elaborated by Husserl and Merleau-Ponty.
See Husserl 1989 and Merleau-Ponty 1962. Cf. Russow 1988. What is at issue in “bodily intentionality,” in the Merleau-Pontian claim that the body has
a unique form of intentionality that is not reducible to the intentionality of
thought? Does“bodily intentionality” mean embodied intentionality, say, in perception and action? Or, does it mean awareness of one’s body, in perception
and action? Or, does it mean the body itself as experienced in perception and
action, the body at a certain level of intentional description?
7. Cf. Penfield 1975: 76. Searle (1983, pp. 89ff.) stresses the point made here,
but he calls the volition “intention-in-action.”
8. This reflexive form of “inner awareness” of an experience is explicated in
Smith 1989: chap. 2; a shorter version is presented in Smith 1986. There
I draw upon, and critique, Sartre’s doctrine of “prereflective cogito” and
Brentano’s doctrine of secondary intentionality (that every mental act includes a consciousness of itself as well as a consciousness of its object). See
Brentano 1973: 153ff. and Sartre 1966: introd. Importantly, I concur with
Castaneda ˜ ’s analysis of the first-person form of the content of an intention,
carrying the same form over into volition; thus, Castaneda would use the ˜
“quasi indicator” “he himself” to form a third-person attribution of the form
of volition, as in “Smith intends/wills [himself] to pick up that* shovel,” that
is,“Smith intends/wills that he himself pick up that* shovel” (where “that*”is
the quasi indicator that invokes Smith’s own visual perspective on the shovel
before him). See Castaneda ˜ 1975: chap. 6. One terminological difference:
Castaneda says what is intended is not an action, and I say it is; but by ˜ “action”
he means a type of event, or action-type, whereas I mean a particular event,
or action-token.
Consciousness in Action 143
9. Searle describes this “experience of causation” in Searle 1983: chap. 3. I
essentially concur, observing similar details of content, except that I replace
intention in action with volition. Cf. Castaneda ˜ ’s explication of what he calls
the “internal causality of practical thinking” (1975: chap. 10).
10. The volition is intentionally related to, or successfully “of,” an event – an
action – if and only if the content of the volition (successfully) prescribes,
or (inversely) is satisfied by, that event. In Searle’s idiom, which I take to
be equivalent, the action is the “condition(s) of satisfaction” of the volition’s
content (see Searle 1983: 80). The action, on the present analysis, comprises
the occurrence of a bodily movement together with the volition’s causing the
movement and (as the case goes) the bodily movement’s causing the shovel
to move appropriately. For further elaboration of this notion of intentional
relation and the role of content in intentional relations, see Smith 1989:
introd. and chap. 4.
11. Searle distinguishes prior intention from intention in action (see Searle
1983: chap. 3) because he assumes the intention-in-action causes the action.
I take it that by “intention in action” he means what I have called the volition
in the action. However, Searle tends to use the word “volition” differently
than I. First he talks of the “traditional category” of volition (p. 31), including desire as opposed to intention. Then, introducing “the experience of
acting” as a term of art for the intention in action, he disparages “what some
philosophers have called volitions or acts of willing” because our experiences
of acting “are not acts at all” (pp. 88–89). I agree with his point, but I prefer
the term “volition” or “willing” where he uses “intention in action” because
“intending”sounds like a passive state rather than a causally efficacious event.
12. On Davidson’s broadly Aristotelian model, the desire to achieve a certain
end (or “pro-attitude” toward it) together with the belief that-doing-A-willachieve-that-end normally tends to cause the action of doing A – on pain of
weakness of will. See “Actions, Reasons and Causes” and “Weakness of Will,”
both in Davidson 1980. On the present model, the desire and belief may
give rise to the intention to do A, but there is still slack (as philosophers
from Plato to Davidson have felt): the intention is not sure to produce the
action, as volition may not kick in. Thus, “weakness of will” is here weakness
of intention. That is why volition must be distinguished from intention: it is
volition, and not yet intention of desire-plus-belief, that is causally effective
and issues in action. Michael Bratman has stressed the role of planning in
action: see Bratman 1987. On the present model, planning would be part
of the process of framing an intention in response to desire plus belief (although Bratman distinguishes planning theories from belief-desire theories
of action). I would resist the assumption that all actions involve something
like a deliberate and deliberative plan; if plans are to be an essential part
of action, then the notion of plan must be watered down to something like
the content of an intention (which is not necessarily the result of deliberate
planning).
13. Skills belong to what Searle calls the “Background” of an intentional state, as
distinct from the “Network” of beliefs associated with the content of the
144 Mind World
intentional state. See Searle 1983: chap. 5. Heidegger stresses the background cultural practices on which everyday activities depend, their historical formation, and our implicit understanding of their significance. See
Heidegger 1962: secs. III and V. Sartre sets every action within a larger, guiding “project”; see Sartre 1966: part 4. Developing his interpretation of
Merleau-Ponty and Heidegger, Dreyfus stresses skills, formed by cultural
practices, as virtually definitive of action; see Dreyfus and Wakefield 1988
and Dreyfus 1991: 55ff.
14. An intentional relation is the “semantic” relation that holds between an
intentional experience, or its content, and its object. I have argued elsewhere
against collapsing intentional relations with causal relations, in particular, in
the analysis of perception. See Smith 1989: especially chap. 4. Similarly, I
here oppose collapsing them in the case of action or, rather, volition. I read
Searle as of like mind in his discussion of the experience of causation (see
again Searle 1983: chaps. 3 and 4).
15. See Haugeland’s (1982) quasi-behaviorist or pragmatist interpretation of
Heidegger. Hubert Dreyfus, drawing alternately on Heidegger and MerleauPonty, has long argued against Husserl and cognitive science on grounds that
they impute too much cognitive structure in situations where human beings
simply act, drawing on nonintentional skills and extant human practices.
See the flow of argument in Dreyfus 1991. The most detailed explication
of his views relevant to my issues here is in Drefyus and Wakefield 1988.
I believe the present account of action is consistent with their insights in
that essay, although Dreyfus would disagree. The outstanding problem is to
articulate – in still greater detail – the interdependence in action among
conscious intentional events (volition, kinesthesis, perception, etc.), nonintentional states (skills, habits, etc.), bodily states (including neural network
states), and social states (invoking cultural practices, etc.). It is essential, in
any event, to detail carefully the limits of the contents of volition in various
types of actions. But all this must await another occasion.
16. See Castaneda ˜ 1975: 280ff.
17. These basic principles about intentionality are expounded in Smith and
McIntyre 1982: chap. 1, and further explicated in following chapters.
18. Details of this intentional relationship are explored in Searle 1983: chap. 4
and Smith 1989: chap. 1.
19. The structure of self-awareness here described follows the pattern in Smith
