1989: chap. 2. In the idiom of that work, the content “In this volition I am
now willing...” is the modality of presentation in the volition, including the
mode of inner awareness of oneself, and the content “I am digging...” is
the mode of presentation of the action in the volition.
20. Accordingly, Husserl distinguished two conceptions of body, that of the
“lived” or “living body” (Leib, from the verb leben, meaning “to live”) and the
“physical body” (Korper ¨ , from the Latin corpus, for “body”). See Husserl 1989:
sec. 38 on Leib as “organ of will,” and Husserl 1954: sec. 28ff. Merleau-Ponty
(1962) followed Husserl’s lead, distinguishing “phenomenal” and “physical”
body.
Consciousness in Action 145
21. Addressing eliminative materialism, Arthur Danto (1985) used the felicitous
phrase “the body-body problem,” independently.
References
Anscombe, G. E. M. 1959. Intention. Oxford: Basil Blackwell.
Blinder, David. 1986. “A New Look at Vision.” Topoi 5: 137–48.
Bratman, Michael. 1987. Intention, Plans, and Practical Reason. Cambridge, Mass.:
Harvard University Press.
Brentano, Franz. 1973. Psychology from an Empirical Standpoint. Translated by A. C.
Rancurello, D. B. Terrell, and L. L. McAlister. London: Routledge and Kegan
Paul. German original, 1874.
Castaneda, Hector-Neri. ˜ 1975. Thinking and Doing. Dordrecht: D. Reidel.
Danto, Arthur. 1985. “The Body-Body Problem.” Paper presented as a University
Lecture at Columbia University, 13 November.
Davidson, Donald. 1980. Essays on Actions and Events. Oxford: Oxford University
Press.
Dreyfus, Hubert. 1982. “Husserl’s Perceptual Noema.” In Dreyfus, ed., Husserl,
Intentionality and Cognitive Science, pp. 97–123. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT
Press.
1991. Being-in-the-World. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press.
Dreyfus, Hubert, and Jerome Wakefield. 1988. “Action and the First Person.”
Unpublished manuscript, 25 February.
Gibson, James J. 1979. The Ecological Approach to Visual Perception. Boston:
Houghton Mifflin.
Haugeland, John. 1982. “Heidegger on Being a Person.” Nousˆ 16(1): 15–26.
Heidegger, Martin. 1962. Being and Time. Translated by John Macquarrie and
Edward Robinson. New York: Harper and Row. German original, 1927.
Husserl, Edmund. 1954. The Crisis of European Sciences and Transcendental Phenomenology. Translated by David Carr. Evanston, Ill.: Northwestern University
Press. German original, ed. Walter Biemel, 1954 (posthumous).
1989. Ideas Pertaining to a Pure Phenomenology and Phenomenological Philosophy,
Second Book: Studies in the Phenomenology of Constitution. Translated by Richard
Rojcewicz and Andre Schuwer. Dordrecht: Kluwer Academic Publishers. ´
German original, 1952, from 1915 manuscript.
Melden, A. I. 1961. Free Action. London: Routledge and Kegan Paul.
Merleau-Ponty, Maurice. 1962. Phenomenology of Perception. Translated by Colin
Smith. London: Routledge and Kegan Paul. French original, 1943.
Penfield, Wilder. 1975. The Mystery of the Mind. Princeton: Princeton University
Press.
Russow, Lily-Marlene. 1988. “Merleau-Ponty and the Myth of Bodily Intentionality.” Nousˆ 22(1): 35–47.
Sajama, Seppo, and Matti Kamppinen. 1987. A Historical Introduction to Phenomenology. New York: Croom Helm.
146 Mind World
Sartre, Jean-Paul. 1966. Being and Nothingness. Translated by Hazel Barnes. New
York: Washington Square Press. French original, 1943.
Searle, John. 1983. Intentionality. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Smith, David Woodruff. 1986. “The Structure of (Self-)Consciousness.” Topoi
5(2): 149–56.
1989. The Circle of Acquaintance. Dordrecht: Kluwer Academic Publishers.
Smith, David Woodruff, and Ronald McIntyre. 1982. Husserl and Intentionality.
Dordrecht: D. Reidel.
Wittgenstein, Ludwig. 1953. Philosophical Investigations. Translated by G. E. M.
Anscombe. New York: Macmillan.
5
Background Ideas
Abstract. Here we study the background of intentionality and what I call background ideas. This chapter shows how everyday experiences depend for their
intentional force on ideas extant in one’s background culture. These ideas
are abstract meaning entities (as in the classical Husserlian model of intentionality), but they arise only in particular historical cultures (they do not
exist in a Fregean or Platonic heaven of ideas). And they could not mean
what they do without that cultural background. Accordingly, the content
of one’s thinking, perceiving, willing, and so forth depends ontologically
on one’s background culture.
Segue. In “Consciousness in Action” we showed that our experience is not
isolated within a solitary subject or disembodied mind: our conscious bodily
actions are carried out in a physical and indeed social context, and that is
part of their intentional content, their volitional meaning. But there is
a further, logical reason why consciousness itself normally implicates the
social world in which we live. For, as we see in the present chapter, the
contents of our intentional experiences are themselves typically composed
of concepts and rules of practice that are drawn from and depend on a
rich background of ideas that form part of the cultural context in which we
live. Normally, then, consciousness is not only embodied but en-cultured.
This aspect of consciousness requires a sensitive basic ontology, as we shall
explore in later chapters.
The world is so you have something to stand on.
Krauss and Sendak, A Hole Is to Dig
For various discussions and/or comments on an early draft of this essay, I thank Christian
Beyer, Chuck Dement, Dagfinn Føllesdal, Peter Simons, Barry Smith, Amie Thomasson,
and Richard Tieszen. For their contributions to the argument for the background, I am
indebted to discussions with Hubert Dreyfus and John Searle. For the opportunity to discuss
relevant texts at length, I thank the students in my seminar at the University of California,
Irvine, winter quarter, 1994.
147
148 Mind World
Here I want to develop a conception of the background of intentionality
and explore the status of what I call background ideas. I draw on writings of
Searle and Wittgenstein as well as Husserl, but the framework to unfold –
part phenomenology, part ontology – differs from theirs.
Background
The theory of ideas – contents of mental acts or states – weaves through
nearly all of philosophy since its inception. Different strands of theory
come together finally in Husserl’s analysis of intentionality, where we find
