But if background ideas are abstract, cultural artifacts, ultimately so are
all intentional contents or ideas. This crucial point about the ontology of
ideas flows naturally, but surprisingly, from the emerging theory of the
background.
The Content Theory plus the Background
Let us recount the classical content theory of intentionality and see how
it is extended with the notion of background.
The content theory has its locus classicus in Husserl; it has been
reconstructed in California phenomenology, and reincarnated in,
who?, Searle.8 According to this theory, an intentional state or actof-consciousness is experienced by a subject (“I”), has a content, and
through its content “intends” or is intentionally related to an object
(if such exists). So the structure of an intentional relation between actsubject and object is this:
I — act — content ——> object.
The content is a percept, concept, thought-proposition, volition: an idea.
The content prescribes the object as having certain properties. (The short
arrow depicts this part of the intentional relation; the long arrow depicts
the whole intentional relation of act by subject to object through content.) In Husserl’s version of the story, content mediates the intentional
relation much as sense mediates reference in language. In Searle’s variation, the content determines the “conditions of satisfaction” of the actstate, the conditions under which the intentional state would be satisfied.
(Let us bracket worries about the self and keep a role for ego or “I” in
intentionality.)
But the theory of the background says the story is not finished. For
an intentional state or act does not occur in isolation but is connected,
as Husserl and Searle argue, with a system of beliefs the subject holds
about the object or kind of object intended. These beliefs Searle calls
the “network,” and they are part of what Husserl called the “horizon”
152 Mind World
of the act.9 Now, the act presupposes, and so its intentionality depends on,
a network of background beliefs whose contents are associated with the
content of the act. In a picture:
network of belief |—— < I — act — content ——> object >.
10
(Here the T-bar depicts the relation of ontological dependence.) The
intentional relationship itself depends on a network of beliefs. For instance, when I see yonder bird, my visual experience, whose content is
“that gliding turkey vulture,” presupposes my background beliefs about
birds, for instance, that birds have wings.
But still the story is not finished, says the background theorist. The
intentionality of an act depends on a background of further conditions
that are not tacit beliefs or any other kind of intentional state, but
rather... what? Searle proposes a background of skills: bodily habits, or
dispositions of the nervous system, glossed as “capacities.” When I see
a turkey vulture overhead (not Searle’s example), my visual experience
rests on my capacity or ability to turn my head and focus my eyes, my
ability to recognize a turkey vulture in flight, my bird-watching knowhow. These mind-brain states are not themselves intentional states, but
they are an indispensable background of intentionality – in ways to be
specified.
And still the story is unfinished. As I watch the turkey vulture overhead,
my visual experience presupposes not only various of my personal beliefs
and bodily skills, but also a broad complex of communal assumptions
about the world in which we live. Wittgenstein called this complex our
“background” “world picture.” Our world picture, he said, includes our
“fundamental empirical propositions,” for instance, that here is a hand,
that I have two feet, that the earth has existed for a long time.11 These
are “ground propositions” about the world in which we live, propositions
that describe the world as we deal with it in basic ways in everyday life.
Such propositions, Wittgenstein observed, shade off into rules of practice,
governing not only linguistic activity (language games) but also bodily
activity (walking across the room, with my two feet, or sitting in the chair,
without checking to see that it has legs). For Wittgenstein, then, the background would consist of fundamental propositions shading into rules of
practice. What Searle has done, in effect, is to bring the background rules
indoors, from the surrounding community into the individual’s nervous
system: not as rules followed in unconscious mental execution but as neural states that produce behavior in accord with the rules in the community
(rule-governed, not rule-following behavior, as Searle rightly stresses).12
Background Ideas 153
Precisely what goes into the background – beliefs, skills, propositions,
or norms? When we appreciate the ontology of the background, we
should see that this is not an either-or question. Intentional activities
may depend, ontologically, on all these types of entities.
When the background is brought in, I propose, the structure of intentionality looks like this:
background |—— < I — act — content ——> object >.
On this content-background theory, the intentionality of an act – the relationship binding subject, act, content, and object – depends on a
background that includes a network of associated beliefs and a system
of practical capacities realized in neural pathways13and a framework of
background ideas that form our basic image of the world. In this way the
background is part of the operative context of the act, but it is not part
of the act’s content.
The Argument for the Background
To begin to motivate the notion of background, Searle uses an observation of Wittgenstein.14 Consider a drawing of a man walking on a hillside.
Nothing in the drawing itself determines that it is a picture of a man walking forward uphill rather than a man sliding backward downhill. Only
relative to an interpretation, an assumption about what the man is doing,
can we see the picture one way rather than the other. Now, the background is like that, Searle suggests: an intentional state can represent
one state of affairs rather than another – it can have one set of conditions
of satisfaction rather than another – only against a background of “assumptions” or capacities that enable it to represent as it does. The scare
quotes warn that, for Searle and Wittgenstein, what seem to be assumptions are often not belief states at all, even deeply unconscious ones, but
something akin to “know-how.” These issues emerge more clearly as we
proceed.
The most compelling argument for the background goes by example.15 Searle aptly draws this form of argument out of Wittgenstein’s
On Certainty, even though Wittgenstein was arguing in a different direction and had no explicit conception of intentionality. Searle also adapts
Wittgenstein’s argument about rule following: one cannot follow a rule to
follow a rule, on pain of infinite regress. The rule argument, however, applies only to intentional action (which might be mistaken to consist always
in following a rule), surely not to perception, emotion, contemplation, or
154 Mind World
other kinds of intentional state. So we shall develop here the argument
by example. This style of argument incorporates a phenomenological
minimalism, which argues against overpopulating our phenomenology
with too many representations – a stance Hubert Dreyfus derives from
Heideggerian phenomenology.16 To feel the force of this argumentation,
we need to describe, patiently, a number of different types of intentional
activity.
Consider a simple intentional action like walking:17
I am walking, with the conscious experience of so walking.
