My action depends on my fundamental knowledge about walking, for
instance:
I “know” that the earth does not move as I walk on it.
Is that item of “knowledge” a belief I hold? Is the proposition “the earth
does not move as I walk on it” any part of the content of my conscious experience of walking?18 No. But is it a belief I hold, not a conscious thought
or judgment but a tacit and unconscious belief, a “silent” background belief presupposed by my experience of walking, including my intention or
volition in walking? Perhaps, but consider what happens next:
As I am walking, an earthquake strikes the area and I feel the earth
rolling, like a wave beneath me, as I try to walk on.
Before the earthquake, before my rock-and-roll experience, I did not
have an active belief to the effect that the earth does not move. Of course,
I knew about earthquakes and I had an intellectual belief something like
that. But that belief played no role in my experience of walking. It was not
even a background belief presupposed by my experience of walking. This is
debatable, but as we expand the range of ostensible background beliefs,
it grows gradually implausible that all this cognitive structure is really
used somehow, genuinely presupposed, by my simply walking along: on
the ground, on the surface of the earth – where else?
Maybe this sort of fundamental knowledge or“belief”is a skill, an item
of know-how rather than knowing-that. That is the line taken by Searle and
by Dreyfus (Searle drawing on Wittgenstein and Dreyfus on Heidegger
and Merleau-Ponty). Still, I think it is not right. To see why not, we have
to dig into Wittgenstein’s original intuitions about the background. This
sort of “belief,” we shall find, is somehow deeper than the beliefs carried
“in my head”: it is part of our communal world picture, on which my
belief states themselves rest.
Background Ideas 155
Take another example, not an action but a simple visual experience:
I see that turkey vulture gliding over the meadow.
Now:
I believe that birds fly through the air.
I believe that wings enable birds to fly above the surface of the earth.
I believe that the earth has an atmosphere of nitrogen, oxygen, and
so on.
I believe that the earth is a globe floating in space.
I believe that the earth is very old.
Are these beliefs part of the network of background beliefs presupposed
by the content of my visual perception? Perhaps the first two, but not the
last ones. Although I do believe these things, they play no role in my visual
experience. As the content of my experience fans out to associated content, to background presuppositions, the horizon of my perception soon
reaches a boundary beyond which the “propositions” that seem required
in order to make sense of “what I see” are either abstract or scientifically
informed beliefs or, well, not really beliefs at all. My wider knowledge
of the world takes over, some merely practical and some pointing to the
knowledge of experts. I know that I cannot fly, that birds can. But this
“knowledge” is as much know-how as know-that, as much practical skill as
theoretical belief. The problem of the background (in Searle’s sense, with
an eye to Wittgenstein) begins with the problem of where to draw this
boundary, where bona fide intentional content leaves off and practical
know-how or skill takes over.
Consider now a purely intellectual, conscious activity of thought. Re-
flecting on a recent earthquake,
I think that the earth does not normally roll beneath me as I walk.
There are a great many collateral beliefs I would seem to hold:
The earth is a mass of dirt I may walk on.
The earth has hills and valleys I may walk on.
The earth is molten iron covered by a crust of dirt.
The earth is a roughly spherical body.
The earth is one of nine planets that orbit the sun.
The dirt in California is a dry powder in summer.
The earth has existed for a long, long time.
There has been no rain hereabouts (in California) for some time.
156 Mind World
There is no mud underfoot as I walk across this hill.
I weigh 175 pounds.
I weigh the same as my brother.
I move my feet in this way [an image] when I walk uphill.
I have two feet.
I use both my feet when I walk.
I believe all of these things. Yet which of these propositions are contents
of bona fide beliefs in the background of my consciously thinking “the
earth does not normally roll beneath me as I walk”? Is it that I actually
believe all of these things, or only that I would reach such conclusions
quickly if I thought about such things? If these really are actual beliefs
I hold, albeit far from my consciousness in thinking “the earth does not
normally roll ... ,” do they play any role in my so thinking? Are these
beliefs engaged as background beliefs of my so thinking? Are they presupposed by my act of thinking, so that my thought actually depends on
them?
It is implausible that my thought actually engages – presupposes and so
depends on – all these beliefs. Potentially perhaps, but not actually. The
point is that sooner or later, as we list propositions to which I would assent
or propositions to which I could be expected to reason rather naturally
were I to think on and on about the earth and my walking – sooner or
later, it becomes implausible that all these beliefs are a proper part of
the system of background beliefs on which my thought actually depends.
And yet, we want to say, they are there, implicitly at least.
The preceding line of argument for the background has a form we
may summarize as follows. First, assume that an intentional act has a
content (which prescribes the object of consciousness). Second, from
examples observe that an act presupposes a variety of collateral beliefs
or knowledge as well as cognate practices and know-how. Third, from
plausibility considerations observe that these items are too much or too
inappropriate to be in the content itself. Finally, conclude that they form
a background presupposed by the act but not explicitly included in its
content.
The background of intentionality, then, includes our fundamental
“knowledge” or “assumptions” or “attitudes” about the world with which
we are dealing. But what sort of things are these “assumptions”? It remains to specify more carefully the ontology of the background, the type
of entities on which intentionality depends in the ways described: the
background ideas we regularly presuppose.
