content mediates the intentional relation (by semantically prescribing the
object), whereas the background founds the relationship (by making it
possible).
This dependence on background is not the dependence of a mental
state on a brain state, as in recent theories of the “supervenience” of
mind on brain.32 Rather, the dependence at issue is that of a mental act’s
intentionality on its background: the act could not be directed as it is unless
the relevant background phenomena existed. Moreover, the ontological
experiences invokes prescribes
background |— < subject ———— act ——— content ———— > object >
founds intentional relation
figure 5.1. The ontology of intentionality.
166 Mind World
foundation of intentionality includes not only the neural activity in the
subject’s brain but also his background ideas about the world, ideas extant
in his culture, not in his brain.
Where the background entities are ideas or propositions in our world
picture, we cannot follow Searle’s characterization of the background as
“causal” conditions. It is useful to recall Searle’s characterization, though,
to see how it fits into our wider, more robust conception of background.
In Intentionality Searle characterized the role of background, restricted
to practical skills, as that of “enabling conditions” (1983: 158):
[T]he Background [is not some further Intentional content that latches on to
the primary Intentional content, but] is rather the set of practices, skills, habits,
and stances that enable Intentional contents to work in the various ways that they
do, and it is in that sense that the Background functions causally by providing a
set of enabling conditions for the operation of Intentional states.
In The Rediscovery of the Mind Searle said, more simply, that “Background
capacities that are not themselves intentional” (1992: 175) but “enable
our [intentional] mental states to function,”that is, to represent (p. 175):
they are, in a Kantian idiom, “conditions of the possibility” of intentionality (p. 195). In The Construction of Social Reality Searle says these
Background capacities are “a certain category of neurophysiological causation” (1995: 129). Accordingly, “Enabling is meant . . . to be a causal
notion. We are not talking about logical conditions of possibility but about
neurophysiological structures that function causally in the production of
certain sorts of intentional phenomena” (p. 130). So Searle conceives
background capacities as neural, not logical, conditions of possibility,
and he takes these as a kind of causal enabling condition. We, however,
must define “enabling” in a way that does not reduce to causation but allows causal conditions as a special case of enabling conditions. So what is
meant by an “enabling condition” or “condition of possibility”? The only
clear accounting I know of uses the notion of ontological dependence,
as explained earlier.
The ontology of background clarifies issues of externalism in recent
philosophy of mind. Internalism holds that the intentionality of a mental
state is determined by content “in the head” (= mind); Husserl’s theory
of intentionality is internalist and so is Searle’s, but both are ramified by
notions of background. Externalism holds that intentional content is determined not by what is “in the head” but by external conditions of causal or
social context – by what we have called background conditions; on Tyler
Burge’s view intentional content is “individuated” by social context,33
Background Ideas 167
whereas on Fred Dretske’s view perceptual content resides in the physical “information” in the causal route from object to perception.34 The
ontology of externalism would thus fuse the content and context or background of an intentional act and so conflate the importantly different
roles of background and content. Internalism, on the other hand, tends
to either omit the background or fill our heads with too many ideas aping
the background. Now, the theory of background we have sketched avoids
these errors. We put context where it belongs: in the background! – and
content where it belongs: in the head!35
The Ontology of Background Ideas
What is the ontological category of intentional contents, or ideas: concepts,
thoughts or propositions, images, volitions, and the like? According to
a long tradition noted earlier, ideas are not mental events or subjective
“appearances,” but objective entities extant in the world. They are shareable as contents of different acts by different people, and they are communicable in language, art, and other media. Yet they are not physical objects, and they are not themselves located in time or space. From the Stoics
to Bolzano, Husserl, and Frege, ideas have been conceived in this way as
objective abstract entities. We need not put them in a Platonic or Fregean
heaven outside the “real” world, however. In fact, the whole thrust of
Wittgenstein’s examples of “fundamental empirical propositions” is that
these propositions are contingent upon our earthly human existence.
Their presence in the background of our experience in this world requires that they not be confined in an ideal heaven. They are abstract –
Husserl said “ideal” – entities, yet they are in this world, available to our
intentionalities.
It is vital that our intentional activities share much of the same background ideas or “assumptions,” both practical and cognitive. Without
such shared background, communication is impossible. Science fiction,
describing encounters with extraterrestrials, illustrates what we all well
know about the background of intentionality; but the lesson is familiar
much closer to home. The point to notice here is that the background
must include shareable objective intentional contents, roughly of the sort
posited by Bolzano and Husserl. And these background contents cannot,
then, be identified with token states of one’s nervous system (as Searle
proposed), though they are surely implemented thereby. Nor are these
contents one’s own personal skills or capacities (as both Dreyfus and
Searle might suggest). In the case of practical background, the contents
168 Mind World
are shareable items of know-how, which we may learn from one another,
and which our personal skills instantiate as we acquire the same skill our
fellows have. These principles of know-how are rules of practice extant in
our culture. They may be operative even if no one ever articulated them
explicitly, as in rules of body language such as how to move in walking
down the street (say, quick-paced, bouncily, with a swagger, or carefully,
soft-footedly, with restraint). Or they may be operative precisely because
people articulated them in a law, as in rules of driving such as “Turn right
on a red light if no one is coming through the intersection” (a law instituted in California but not in some other states). The important point is
that such rules are “out there,” extant in our culture.
Now, our background world picture has just this status as an objective
artifact of intentional, cultural activity. It consists of ideas – images, concepts, propositions, feelings, values, and items of know-how – that are
extant in our culture, realized in our form of life, shared background in
our diverse activities. It is a product of human experience, thought, action, and practice, formed over hundreds of thousands of years, refined
over a couple of thousand years of “history.”
Our scientific theories are increasingly a special part of that picture.
But our everyday image of our kind and our world is a still more fundamental part, our life-world image, presupposed yet modified by our
scientific image. Indeed, our most basic ideas of things have a status like
that of what Carl Jung called “archetypes,” primordial images written
