according to such an ontology, describe intervolved formal and material
entities or features. For example, “f = ma” describes a relation among
quantities correlated with a certain force, the mass of a certain body, and
the rate of change of its location in space-time. Certain of the entities
involved are “formal” and others are “material.”
The categories of physics are subject to raging controversies, specifically, in the interpretation of quantum mechanics. Under material
186 Mind World
categories, are there waves only, particles being illusions brought on by
interference of observation? Or are there particles only, determinate elements in eigenstates following collapse of the wave function? Or are
there only superpositions forming wavicles, neither particles nor waves
in themselves but only relative to observation or the absence thereof?
It remains unclear exactly which ontological categories are best suited
to current physical theory. The point here, however, is not to settle such
issues, but to indicate the relevance of the distinction between formal
and material categories – and, more generally, the importance of “systematics” in ontology. However these controversies in the foundations of
physics turn out, would the formal distinction between Individual, Quality, and Relation be abandoned? Is this much not presupposed by the
most basic structures of mathematics, recognizing things and functions
(with or without a strongly realist interpretation of mathematics)? It is
hard to see how the different versions of quantum mechanics, or other
parts of physics, could do without this formal distinction.12
In this category scheme, Intentionality is posited as a formal category
because it may be required by the material categories presupposed by
quantum physics. For on the Copenhagen interpretation of quantum
mechanics, observation causes the collapse of the wave function in a
quantum system. But if observation is an intentional event (as it is), and
intentionality has a distinctive formal structure (as it does), then quantum mechanics (on that interpretation) presupposes the formal category
Intentionality. Thus, the ontology of the physical world may require the
category Intentionality even before we look at the categorial structure of
mind per se.
The Ontology of Mind in Nature
Now let us turn to the ontology of mind. An adequate ontology must
be phenomenological, in the sense that it recognizes structures of experience, notably consciousness and intentionality, as well as structures of
stones, gravity, quantum states, and so on. On the present approach,
a phenomenological ontology would be articulated within a scheme of
formal and material categories.
For the sake of argument, assume the formal categories given previously. What material categories should an ontology of mind assume?
They might be the same as those given for physical entities: this would
be a form of physicalism, but the characters of consciousness and intentionality would have to take their place somehow in the category scheme.
Or in a plural-aspect scheme like Husserl’s, the formal categories would
Intentionality Naturalized? 187
apply to, say, the material categories of Biomatter, Culture, and Consciousness. Each of these material categories would be characterized by
diverse properties, but each would be governed by the formal categories
of Individual, Species, and the like.
Rather than begin with the material categories of physics, however,
our theory of mind and cognition must begin with categories of things
in the everyday world of common sense – what Husserl called the “life
world,” the midworld range of things we live among between quarks
and the cosmos.13 We do not begin our ontology of the world around
us by dealing with bosons and black holes, or neurons and neural nets,
abstracting so far from our familiar concerns that we no longer know
where we fit into the world. Rather, we encounter and categorize mental
or cognitive activities in everyday life – prior to our theorizing in physics
or neuroscience, which is constrained by our everyday experience and
answers to it in our scientific practice of observing and theorizing. Indeed,
our quantum physics and neurophysics must ultimately jibe with everyday
experience so as to recognize and account for everyday affairs, including
our conscious activities of theorizing.
Consider then the following categorial ontology of the everyday world,
structuring the world as we know it in everyday life:
Formal Categories: Individual, Species, Quality, Relation, Location,
Quantity, Dependence, Intentionality, State of Affairs.
Everyday Material Categories: Object, Event, Place, Time, Plant, Animal,
Human Being, Mind, Action, Practice, Artifact, Institution.
Here, an object is an individual that persists relatively unchanged, an
event is an individual that transpires relatively quickly in time, and so
forth. The formal and material categories interweave so that there is
ontological complexity in the world. But there are no separate domains
of mental and physical substances or simple division of properties into
mental and physical.
In this ontology there is one world that includes mind and culture
amid “natural” objects or events. Mind takes its place in the order of the
world, along with stones, trees, and owls, as well as cities, schools, and
stories. A mental activity such as a thought, perception, or action is an
intentional event: it is categorized materially under Event and formally
under Intentionality. In closer detail, a mental activity is experienced by
a subject (human or animal), carries an intentional content (a concept,
proposition, etc.), and, if veridical, is directed to an object (the object
188 Mind World
of thought). There may be collective as well as individual intentional activities, such as collective beliefs or group intentions. The salient mental
events are conscious: we experience these, and build our ontology around
them among other familiar things. Now, cultural entities also take their
place in the world. A hammer is an artifact: categorized formally under
Individual and materially under Artifact. A political party is an institution, classified under Individual and Institution; a song is something we
write and perform, an artifact, and so forth. Cognition, then, consists in
a mental activity of perceiving or thinking being intentionally directed
to an appropriate entity, which may be an object, an event, a plant, or
a hammer. Notice that some features of mind or cognition are formal
and some are material, instances of formal or material categories respectively. And notice, roughly, how the formal and material categories work
together in these formulations.
These categories structure the things we deal with in everyday life, in
our niche in the human world within the natural world. There are vital
differences among the objects of everyday human life in the stone age,
the agricultural age, the industrial age, and now the age of air travel,
telecommunication, and computers. Yet the formal categories such as
Individual or Species seem to apply to things under everyday material
categories in any of these ages. And the everyday material categories given
previously seem appropriate to different cultures of humans ancient and
modern. Our categories are not written in stone (or iron or silicon), but
we must revise them cautiously.
Unionism – the formal ontological backbone of an appropriate naturalism – requires that the world of nature is one world including
