quarks, quantum wave collapses, and black holes along with human beings and conscious intentional experiences and political scandals. Thus,
the present ontology is unionist. As Husserl stressed, there must be dependencies of consciousness and human affairs on the basic physical states
of things (and perhaps vice versa): dependencies among “moments” that
instantiate the relevant categories, formal and material. From quantum
mechanics to neuroscience there is much yet to learn about these dependencies. From categorial ontology, however, we draw an approach that
systematizes the contributions to “formal” and “material”structures of the
world. A unionist ontology would ultimately detail how the ontological
structures of things physical, mental, and cultural are all extruded from a
unified system of fundamental ontological categories, formal and material. The “correspondence problem” (borrowing the term from physics)
is then how precisely to characterize relations among the physical,
Intentionality Naturalized? 189
phenomenological, and cultural aspects of things – which are diverse
aspects of things in this one world.14
Subcategories for Consciousness and Intentionality
Within the preceding ontology, under certain categories we may carve
out subcategories that structure consciousness and intentionality more
specifically, thus refining the formal and material categories that define
mind.
Under the formal category Intentionality we specify formal subcategories that structure the intentionality of an experience. These are Subject, Experience, Content, Intention. Thus, the formal structure of intentionality is that of an intention, or “directedness,” among subject, experience or “act of consciousness,” content, and object. Content is a distinct
formal category, since contents – images, concepts, propositions – are
distinguished from species, relations, numbers, or quantities: they are
formally their own kind of thing. And Content is a formal rather than
material category because it is plausible, so far as we know, that the same
content may be realized or invoked in different material categories, for
example, if extraterrestrials have experiences that are realized differently
than experiences in humans or animals. Our brains produce experiences
through neural processes, but the extraterrestrial’s system produces experiences, say, through gaseous propagation (in a life world like Jupiter’s).
This is not the functionalist claim that computation may be executed in
different hardware or wetware or gasware. Rather, the claim is that thinking and other kinds of experience may be ontologically dependent on
variable kinds of processes – processes that do not reduce to computation.
Cognition – in perception, thought or contemplation, and judgment –
is formally classified as a kind of intention, or intentionality, not a structure of dependence. Yet our cognitive activities are materially analyzed
as dependent on a causal flow involving the neural activity in our brains
and its causal interaction with things in our environment. If this ontology is correct, then the reduction of intentionality or cognition to causalcomputational process – as proposed in recent cognitive science – rests
on a formal category mistake. It is not just that we happen to talk about
intentionality and causality in different ways, even in different grammatical categories, or that we experience them in very different ways. Rather,
the point is that we categorize them differently.
From our conscious mental activities, we may abstract material
categories of their psychology and phenomenology. These are phenomenological material categories governed by the formal category
190 Mind World
Intentionality. Thus, under the material category Mental Activity are
subcategories specifying phenomenological types, namely: Perception,
Thought, Emotion, Volition. These types of mental activity carry materially distinct types of content: perceptions, images and thoughts (propositions), feelings (and desires), and volitions (or intentions).
Conscious intentional experiences are thus categorized formally under Intentionality and materially under Mental Activity, with the foregoing subcategories. The category scheme in which they take their place
then looks like this (ignoring further subcategories):
Formal Categories: Individual, Species, Quality, Relation, Location,
Quantity, Dependence, Intentionality, State of Affairs.
Subcategories (under “Intentionality”): Subject, Experience, Content, Intention.
Everyday Material Categories: Object, Event, Place, Time, Plant, Animal,
Human Being, Mental Activity, Artifact, Institution.
Subcategories (under “Mental Activity”): Perception, Thought, Emotion, Volition.
Mental life grades off from the conscious into lower levels of awareness
and on into the unconscious – and into paranormal phenomena of split
brains, split personalities, hallucinogenic experiences, and highly disciplined states of meditation. We begin our categorization, however, with
conscious mental activities familiar in everyday life. Empirical investigation into the less familiar will extend our categories, perhaps modifying
them as well.
Naturalism, Dualism, Supervenience, Functionalism
How does the categorial phenomenological ontology I have sketched
differ from extant positions in philosophy of mind and cognitive science?
This ontology posits a diversity of categories in our one world. There
are many kinds of things in the world and many basic categories, even
different levels of categories (formal and material). Yet all things are tied
into one world:“nature,”if you will. This unionist view differs from extant
forms of naturalism precisely in its account of categorial diversity.
Like all forms of naturalism, this ontology rejects substance dualism. It
does not divide the world of concrete things into two domains, the mental things (minds, souls, spirits) and the physical things (bodies, from
quarks to quasars). Rather, mind is part of nature, and so is culture: physical objects and events, mental activities, persons, societies, and cultural
Intentionality Naturalized? 191
institutions all occur in this one world of nature. However, this categorial
ontology rejects the simple identification of mind (and culture) with the
workings of quarks, neurons, and so on. For it posits a more complex
system of ontological categories.
Property dualism takes a step toward categorial diversity in positing two
types of properties (as opposed to substances): physical properties (such
as mass) and mental properties (such as intentionality). The categorial
ontology presented here does not, however, divide properties into just
these two categories. Instead, it posits a structured system of categories
that divide the world into various groups of things, properties, and the
like.
Supervenience theories hold that the mental“supervenes” on the physical – if we assume property dualism but deny substance dualism.15 One
form of supervenience is defined basically as the dependence of a mental
event on physical events in a brain. Because dependence is one of the formal categories in the preceding ontology, supervenience can be placed
in that ontology. However, dependence alone does not place mind in the
world, as shown by the variety of categories we have adduced.
Functionalism takes a different step toward categorial diversity, distinguishing functional and physical properties of a system, and identifying
mind with computational function of a neural system (at least in humans
and other thinking animals on Earth). The functional-physical distinction can be seen as a formal distinction among types of properties. In the
preceding categorial ontology, this distinction would be reconstructed in
terms of a temporal sequence of events: a functional property is defined
solely by a type of result in a sequence of events. However, this categorial
ontology would reject the simple identification of mental event types with
functional types. For there is more complexity in the categorial structure
of mind (and culture) than function alone. To deny functionalism is not
to deny function but to put it in its place.
The ontology above differs from these prominent approaches to philosophy of mind, then, in seeking a systematic account of the categorial
complexity of the world, and mind’s place therein. Recent forms of naturalism are explored from this perspective later, especially the causal and
computational models of mind espoused by Fodor and Dretske.
Internalism and Externalism
Within the preceding categorial ontology, what are we to make of the
debate between internalism and externalism in philosophy of mind?
