192 Mind World
On the internalist view of intentionality, what makes a mental activity
intentional, or directed toward its object, is the intentional content held
in mind, where that content is internal to the mental act. By contrast, on
the externalist view, what makes a mental act intentional is context, either
its physical causal history or its cultural circumstance, whence intentional
content must be defined in terms of the act’s contextual relations. The
classical view is internalist, as found in Husserl and defended recently
by John Searle and (with a contextualist reformation) myself.16 But the
predominant attitude in recent cognitive science has been externalist, as
expressed by Fodor and Dretske.17
As we work with the foregoing unionist ontology, however, it becomes
clear that the opposition between internalism and externalism is false. A
mental act has both a causal genesis and a phenomenological character.
And these two aspects of the act belong to different ontological kinds: the
former is an instance of the category Dependence, whereas the latter is an
instance of the category Intentionality (and relevant subcategories). Our
ontology must recognize both the genetic tree and the phenomenological
character of a mental act, its “clade” and its “phenotype” (to borrow
biological idiom) – and neither reduces to the other.
In the ontology, Intentionality and Dependence are distinct formal
categories. They must be distinct because they have radically different
ontological structures. Thus, the structure of intentionality is that of an
experience (by a subject) intending an object via a content (a concept,
proposition, image, etc.). By stark contrast, the structure of dependence
is that of one thing’s needing another in order to exist. The ontology of
these structures is so obviously and fundamentally different that reducing
the intentionality of an experience – or its content – to its causal dependence on other things, as externalists sometimes propose, is simply out
of the question.
Intentionality as a Formal Category
Our Cartesian heritage shapes philosophy of mind as a choice among
material categories of substance, so that we think we must say either “All is
Body” or “All is Mind” or “All is divided between Body and Mind” – thus
the lure of physicalism in the age of physics. Furthermore, the emphasis on empirical (“material”) results of recent science – from quantum
mechanics to cognitive neuroscience – leads us to overlook distinctions
about mind that belong properly to formal rather than material ontology.
Thus causal and externalist theories of mind in Fodor, Dretske, and others cathect on material patterns of causation, whereas functionalist and
Intentionality Naturalized? 193
computationalist models of mind obsess over the marvels of computer
engineering (the most “material” of results).
But systematic ontology – ontological systematics – leads us to think
about mind in different ways, avoiding the usual suspects of substance
dualism, idealism, physicalism, functionalism, and the like.
In an ontology that distinguishes formal and material categories, Intentionality belongs among the formal categories. To justify this assumption
in detail would be a long story, arguing that the intentionality of an experience is a unique form differing from that of a quality, a relation, a
dependence. To begin the story, the ontological structure of intentionality is reflected in the distinctive “intensional” logic of idioms such as
“A thinks that . . .” – but we are talking about ontological structures of
experiences in the world, not logical structures of our language about
experiences.18 Accordingly, we must distinguish the object of thought
from the content, the idea or concept of the object, through which one
thinks about it, through which it is “intended” by one’s thinking. This
structure of intention-via-content is formally unique. Thus, the ontological structure of an intention or intentionality is just plain different from
that of a quality, a relation, a dependence, and so on. Hence, Intentionality, Quality, Dependence, and others are distinct formal categories.
It is natural to speak of the “intentional relation” between an experience and its object, yet this “relation” is so unusual that Intentionality
and Relation deserve the status of distinct formal categories. The formal
structure of an intention, or “intentional relation,” is that of subject-actcontent-object. Thus, a subject has an experience or act that has a certain
content, which prescribes a certain object (if such object exists); intentionality is this directedness of act by subject through content toward
object. Is this the structure of a relation among subject, act, content, and
object? Either “yes” or “no” carries problems. If it is a relation, its number of relata varies: sometimes there is no object and it is a three-place
relation; otherwise there is an object and it is a four-place relation. This
is not normal for relations. As Brentano and Husserl observed, intention
is “relation-like” if not a proper relation. If it is not a relation, then what?
Then it has its own form, as described, and a distinct category.
The category Intentionality is formal because it may apply to materially
different domains. The same form of intentionality, such as perceiving a
window, may apply to very different experiences in a fish, a lizard, a parrot,
or a cat, not to mention an extraterrestrial. The functionalist, with Fodor,
would explain this by identifying mentation with computation, realizable
in different physical systems and even through different algorithms. That
194 Mind World
is not my point. Without reducing mind to computation or function or
causal role, we should see that Intentionality is a form that applies to
different domains of mental activity just as Relation applies to different
domains of individuals – whence intentionality is a formal, not material
property of thoughts, perceptions, and the like.
What I want to stress is the role of intentionality in an ontology of mind
among other things. If we recognize Intentionality as a formal category,
we shall not be tempted to find the difference between consciousness
and, say, electricity in two types of substance called “mind” and “matter.” We shall instead articulate a unified world in which such different
phenomena take their places.
Problematic Features of Consciousness and Intentionality
Three features of mental activity have been problematic in recent discussions in philosophy of mind cum cognitive science. These are intentionality, qualia, and consciousness. Within the ontology outlined earlier,
where lie these crucial features of mind?
Consciousness is the great mystery of the day in cognitive science,
yet the familiar turf of phenomenology. Now, part of the problem of
consciousness is its formal structure and part is its material character.
Three crucial aspects of consciousness are intentionality, reflexivity, and
qualia.19
The intentionality of a mental activity, on the above ontology, is a formal feature instancing the formal category Intentionality. The structure
of intention (subject-act-content-object) applies to both conscious and
unconscious mental activities.
Now, part of the formal intentional structure of a conscious mental activity is its reflexivity. When I have a conscious experience, I am reflexively
aware of my having the experience. This form may be specified in phenomenological description, articulating content, by saying: “In this very
experience I now see that wriggling snake on the path before me.”(See
Chapter 3 for details.)
The prefix “in this very experience” specifies the reflexive structure
or content that in part makes the experience conscious. That reflexivity
makes it, as Sartre stressed, a “consciousness (of) itself”: not a separate
act of introspection or reflection on the experience, but a prereflective awareness of the experience as it transpires. For Sartre, indeed, this
character is definitive or constitutive of consciousness – an insight that
