cognitive science has yet to appreciate fully or to rediscover.
Quite a different feature of consciousness is the subjective character
of an experience: its “phenomenal” or “qualitative” character, or qualia
Intentionality Naturalized? 195
(especially its sensory characters) – in Thomas Nagel’s idiom, “what it
is like” to have that experience. What makes an experience conscious,
I would urge, is the combination of qualitative character and reflexivity,
which takes its place within the intentionality of the conscious experience.
To what category do qualia belong? Qualia are properties of an experience or act of consciousness. Their formal category is Quality. Their
distinction from other qualities is a material distinction within the domain
of conscious mental activities – falling under the material categories Perception, Thought, Emotion, Volition – to which the forms Quality and
Intentionality apply. Specifically, they are distinct in type from qualities
such as the spiking frequency of a neuron or its receptivity to certain neurotransmitters. The intentional form of an experience must make room
for these qualities we call subjective.
Now, if Intentionality is a formal ontological category, and Mental Activity a material ontological category, then an event of cognition has the
form of an intentional mental activity with a specific intentional content
such as “I now see that snake on the path before me.” The event may
have the material essence of being implemented by a neural process in
a human brain. Or if the event is a thought performed by a being on
a distant planet, its material essence may be very different. Whatever
its material essence, it may also have a form not of Intentionality but
of Dependence – its causal role, which is a form of dependence on past
and future events. But because Intentionality and Dependence are different formal categories, there is no temptation to reduce intentionality to
causal-computational role. However, the formal category Intentionality
does not apply to every material domain: rocks do not have intentionality, and neither do silicon chips. (This is not to beg the question of
whether Intentionality reduces to Causation or Dependence. Remember, the formal properties of intentionality are not preserved by causal
reduction.)
Finally, note that consciousness does not reduce to computation. Not
all conscious activity is computation; feeling dizzy is not computing. Perhaps, as neuroscience suggests, a certain form of computation is part of
the neural activity that implements every state of consciousness. But that
is a different matter, a gray matter.
Critique of Naturalism
Fodor for Naturalism
Where classical phenomenology, in Husserl and his progeny, opposed something called “naturalism,” today’s cognitive science assumes
196 Mind World
naturalism as a given – the only option of good science – and seeks to
“naturalize” mind and specifically intentionality.
Current attitudes toward naturalizing intentionality run the gamut,
however. W. V. Quine once rejected the “science of intention” because it
does not reduce to physical science and indeed requires a different logic
than the rest of natural science. But he now gives our talk of intentional
attitudes a place of honor alongside the language of natural science, and
he says consciousness is something that must be explained.20 Jerry Fodor
assumes psychology must be intentionalistic – embracing intentionality in
belief, desire, and so on – and also naturalistic; rejecting behaviorism and
eliminativism along with idealism, he proposes to “naturalize”intentional
content in the language of thought. Daniel Dennett endorses talk of intentionality, if only as a convenient“stance”toward what is really going on
as the brain crunches data; his “explanation” of consciousness explains
it (away) as multiple drafts of code in the brain. Paul Churchland and
Patricia Smith Churchland have sometimes denounced intentionality as
a remnant of folk psychology, viewed as superstition rather than empirical wisdom; but they do not now dismiss consciousness itself, the crowning achievement of neural activity. David Armstrong identifies mental
activity, including intentionality, with brain activity, and he analyzes consciousness as the brain’s monitoring itself. Fred Dretske takes consciousness and intentionality seriously and analyzes their structure as a flow of
causal “information” outside the head. Donald Davidson and Jaegwon
Kim, meanwhile, have held that the mental and intentional “supervenes”
on the physical activity of the brain – a ramified form of physicalism. And
Francis Crick (Nobel Laureate biochemist) gives scientific credulity to
consciousness and even the “soul” while declaring, “You’re nothing but
a pack of neurons.”21
Fodor holds that “naturalizability” is required for any serious science,
not just psychology or cognitive science. He defines naturalism in effect as
the assumption that “everything that the sciences talk about is physical”
(Fodor 1994: 5). This assumption boils down to physicalism, or materialism, the ontological view that everything is physical. When Quine proposed “naturalizing” psychology and epistemology, he urged following
the methods of natural science (and expressing its results in first-order
logic) – thereby securing a physicalist ontology, unless science leads elsewhere. He thus opposed beginning with a “first philosophy,” whether a
metaphysics (as in Aristotle) or an epistemology (as in Descartes) – or,
we might add, a phenomenology (as in Husserl).22 The naturalism in
cognitive science today assumes both ontological and methodological
positions, but I want to focus on the ontological.
Intentionality Naturalized? 197
Fodor thinks a naturalistic intentional psychology requires two
doctrines:
1. Causalism, the view that intentional content (and also linguistic
meaning) is “information,” in the technical sense of a physical
structure transmitted by a causal flow.
2. Computationalism, the view that thinking is computation, in the technical sense of computer science, that is, an algorithmically defined
process in either a digital computing machine or a neural network
in a brain.
(The labels “causalism” and “computationalism” I introduce here for
convenience.) Causalism – championed by Dretske with Fodor following
suit – is a variety of:
3. Externalism, the view that content or meaning is defined by its
external relations to physical (or on some views social) relations
with what lies “outside the head” and indeed outside the given
intentional state.
And computationalism, of course, is a variety of:
4. Functionalism, the view that thinking is wholly defined by its function
in a physical system as it interacts causally with other processes of
thinking and ultimately with processes in the physical environment.
Classical computationalism also assumes:
5. Syntactic formalism, the view that the properties of thinking that
count are formal, syntactic properties of physical symbols processed
in brains or computing machines.
An alternative to classical computationalism is:
6. Connectionism, the view that the properties of thinking that count
are vector distributions of relevant properties in dynamic networks
of neurons in brains, which can be modeled or perhaps shared by
computer systems with parallel distributed processing.
Some connectionists consider this view a paradigm shift away from classical computationalism (assuming syntactic formalism) and thus from
the computer model of thought. Fodor, however, counters that the form
of the computation, whether logicosyntactic or connectionist, is merely
