a matter of implementation.23 And the implementation of computation, whether classical or connectionist, lies in causal processes. Hence
198 Mind World
causalism remains in force. Dretske, however, downplays computation
inside the brain and stresses the causal flow of “information” outside
the organism. So the project of naturalizing the mind, for Fodor and
Dretske, is to show how intentionality and other features of mind can be
accounted for in a way consistent with causalism, hence externalism – all
in the service of naturalism, and ultimately physicalism.24
Unfortunately, neither causalism nor computationalism (nor connectionism) preserves the properties of consciousness and intentionality. The phenomenological character of consciousness (beginning with
qualia) is not preserved, and intentionality is not simply identical with
the structure of a causal process – whether realizing a connectionist or a
classical computational architecture. Within philosophy of mind, in the
cognitive science tradition, John Searle has argued clearly and effectively
the inadequacy of the computationalist view: syntactic form alone does
not yield intentional content or meaning; neither, we might add, does
connectionist form. Consciousness and intentionality, Searle holds, are
irreducibly subjective properties of mental states, realized, however, in
our brains.25 Earlier, within the phenomenological tradition, Husserl,
Sartre, Merleau-Ponty, and others charted the properties of consciousness and intentionality in great detail, always distinguishing them from
various natural, physical properties of human bodies.
The properties of intentionality do not fit into the causal-computational view Fodor prefers. Fodor’s task in The Elm and the Expert is to
bite the bullet and try to make his preferred view amenable to the basic
features of intentionality. But Fodor recognizes that his favored naturalizing gets wrong the basic properties of intentionality. How does he justify
going on with his approach? He says the problem cases – Frege cases
and Twin cases – do not happen very often. That means his theory is
wrong: they happen and his theory does not handle them. On consciousness he is silent, beyond saying it is not tractable, in his kind of research
program.
Dretske in Naturalizing the Mind bites the bullet in closer detail, recasting the features of conscious experience as external, causal features. He
treats intentionality as natural“indication”: a perceptual state indicates its
object as a speedometer indicates the speed of the automobile (all these
things being physical entities). In effect Dretske builds in causal terms a
replica of the structure of intentionality, and likewise for qualia and introspection. That gets the structure right but applies it to the wrong phenomena. By tracing the causal flow of physical “information” that gives
rise to the important features of consciousness, intentionality, qualia, and
Intentionality Naturalized? 199
introspection, Dretske shrewdly tracks the causal preconditions of such
phenomena.(See Chapter 1 on substrate and Chapter 3 on levels of consciousness.) But he identifies the physical structures called “information”
in information theory with the intentional contents called “information”
in everyday talk about contents of thought or speech. Now, intentional
“information” in one’s thought may well depend on physical-causal “information” in one’s environment and indeed in one’s brain. But the two
things have very different properties.
Although it may seem that causalism cum externalism, and/or computationalism cum functionalism, serve the needs of naturalism and current
cognitive science, they do not fit with prior results of phenomenology and
indeed ontology. Phenomenology, in concert with ontology, has detailed
structures of conciousness and intentionality in well-defined arguments
from well-defined observations. These are sound results achieved by basic
principles of rational inquiry in good philosophy or good science (as detailed, notably, by Quine in his general epistemology).26 Yet externalism –
the broad assumption behind causalism, computationalism, and functionalism – does not jibe with a phenomenologically sensitive account of
intentionality in perception and other indexical forms of intentionality,
as I have argued in a detailed study of acquaintance.27
Fodor says, “I’m not going to fuss about ontology except where it
matters” (1994: 3). Unfortunately, a full theory of intentionality and consciousness requires more ontology than is countenanced by Fodor and
most philosophers of mind in cognitive science.
Nor do Fodor et alii fuss about phenomenology, even where it matters. Consciousness has become a hot topic in cognitive science ever since
neuroscientists declared it worthy of hard science.28 Yet the writings of
Fodor et alii show little awareness of the extant results of phenomenology.
Owen Flanagan’s Consciousness Reconsidered is advertised with the proclamation that its author “examines more problems and topics associated
with consciousness than any other philosopher since William James”; yet
the book makes no mention of Husserl, Sartre, or any other phenomenologist, even though Flanagan wants to make room for phenomenology
in cognitive science.29 In a recent issue of Scientific American philosopher
David Chalmers, writing in the new wave of consciousness-raising, says
that conscious experience might yet be explained not by neuroscience
but by “a new kind of theory” that gives new fundamental laws about subjective conscious experience.30 Aptly he broaches the need to distinguish
between subjective and objective aspects of“information.” Of course, that
“new” kind of theory is called phenomenology, following Husserl. Many
200 Mind World
of its laws are already in place about intentionality, content, sensation,
temporal awareness, and consciousness of one’s experience, one’s body,
oneself, and others.
If psychology is to be set within the bounds of naturalism, naturalism must be set within the bounds of an adequate phenomenology and
ontology. To this end there is much to be learned from Husserl.
Husserl against Naturalism
Husserl opposed naturalism as an ontology that would reduce the essence
of consciousness and intentionality to physical-biological properties. Today he would have opposed, with Searle, their reduction to causal or
computational properties, as opposed to intrinsically subjective characters of experience. But Husserl’s antinaturalism was part of a systematic
phenomenological ontology whose details developed in Ideas I and especially Ideas II. Husserl opposed naturalism on methodological as well
as ontological grounds, as he sought foundations for natural science in
a “first philosophy” that began with reason and ultimately grounded all
knowledge in phenomenology. Here I focus only on the ontological issues. (Other phenomenologists, from Heidegger to Sartre, have also rejected naturalism. Here I draw on my own reconstruction of Husserl’s
account of mind and body sans idealism.)31
Husserl posited three “regions” of being, which he called Nature,
Spirit or Culture, and (Pure) Consciousness. These regions are not domains of individuals or events; they are species or “essences.” They are
the highest “material” essences or genera to which individuals or events
may belong. Nature is characterized by physical properties including spatiotemporality, mass, causality, and life. (Under Nature Husserl distinguished the living from the merely physical and my “living body,” or Leib,
from my “physical body,” or Korper ¨ .) Culture is characterized by persons
in communities holding values and making history. And Consciousness
is characterized by the subjectivity of experience and the central feature
of intentionality. Importantly, one and the same individual or event may
be characterized by all three essences. For instance, I am a biological
organism of the species Homo sapiens sapiens, and thus under Nature; I
am also a person teaching philosophy, and thus under Culture; and I
am as well an ego experiencing this event of thinking, and thus under
Consciousness.
More precisely, bringing in Husserl’s ontology of dependent parts or
“moments” (what some philosophers today call “tropes”): the same individual, I, has distinct moments that are particularized instances of the
Intentionality Naturalized? 201
essences Consciousness, Culture, and Nature – say, my moments of thinking, being a teacher, and being over six feet tall. Moreover, there are relations of ontological dependence among such moments or tropes. Thus,
my thinking depends upon – cannot occur without – certain activities in
my brain and other activities in my culture. (There lies a specific doctrine
of the “supervenience” of the mental on the physical and cultural. But
that is another story.)
