Fodor, Jerry A. 1975. The Language of Thought. New York: Thomas Y. Crowell.
1994. The Elm and the Expert: Mentalese and Its Semantics. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT
Press.
Horgan, Terence, and John Tienson, eds. 1991. Connectionism and the Philosophy
of Mind. Dordrecht: Kluwer Academic Publishers.
Husserl, Edmund. 1963. Ideas. Translated by W. R. Boyce Gibson. New York:
Collier Books. German original, 1913. Originally titled Ideas Pertaining to
a Pure Phenomenology and to a Phenomenological Philosophy, First Book.
1970. Logical Investigations. Vols. 1 and 2. Translated by J. N. Findlay from the
revised, second German edition. London: Routledge and Kegan Paul. New
edition, edited with an introduction by Dermot Moran, and with a preface
by Michael Dummett. London: Routledge, 2001. German original, 1900–1,
revised 1913 (Prolegomena and Investigations I–V), 1920 (Investigation VI).
1989. Ideas pertaining to a Pure Phenomenology and to a Phenomenological Philosophy, Second Book. Translated by Richard Rojcewicz and Andre Schuwer. ´
Dordrecht: Kluwer Academic Publishers. From the German original unpublished manuscript of 1912, revised 1915, 1928.
Kim, Jaegwon. 1993. Supervenience and Mind. Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press.
Linsky, Bernard, and Edward Zalta. 1995. “Naturalized Platonism and Platonized
Naturalism.” Journal of Philosophy 0022–362X: 525–55.
McIntyre, Ronald. 1986. “Husserl and the Representational Theory of Mind.”
Topoi 5: 101–13.
Quine, W. V. 1960. Word and Object. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press.
1969. Ontological Relativity and Other Essays. New York: Columbia University
Press.
1992. Pursuit of Truth. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press.
Quine, W. V., and Joseph S. Ullian. 1978. The Web of Belief. New York: Random
House.
Rey, Georges. 1988. “A Question about Consciousness.” In Herbert R. Otto
and James A. Tuedio, eds., Perspectives on Mind, pp. 5–24. Dordrecht: D.
Reidel.
Searle, John R. 1983. Intentionality. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
1992. The Rediscovery of the Mind. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press.
Simons, Peter. 1987. Parts. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
210 Mind World
1994–95. “New Categories for Formal Ontology.” Grazer Philosophische Studien
49: 77–99.
Simons, Peter, and David Woodruff Smith, with Charles W. Dement. 1993. “The
Philosophical Foundations of PACIS.” Paper presented at the International
Ludwig Wittgenstein Symposium, Kirchberg am Wechsel, Austria, 19 August.
Smith, Barry, ed. 1982. Parts and Moments. Munich: Philosophia Verlag.
1995. “Common Sense.” In Barry Smith and David Woodruff Smith, eds., The
Cambridge Companion to Husserl, pp. 394–437. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Smith, Barry, and David Woodruff Smith, eds. 1995. The Cambridge Companion to
Husserl. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Smith, David Woodruff. 1989. The Circle of Acquaintance. Dordrecht: Kluwer Academic Publishers.
1994. “How to Husserl a Quine – and a Heidegger Too.” Synthese 98 (1): 153–
73.
1995. “Mind and Body.” In Barry Smith and David Woodruff Smith, eds., The
Cambridge Companion to Husserl, pp. 323–73. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Smith, David Woodruff, and Ronald McIntyre. 1982. Husserl and Intentionality.
Dordrecht: D. Reidel.
Thomasson, Amie L. 1995. “The Ontology of Fiction: A Study of Dependent
Objects.” Ph.D. dissertation, University of California, Irvine.
Whitehead, Alfred North. 1978. Process and Reality. Edited by David Ray Griffin
and Donald W. Sherburne. New York: Free Press, Macmillan. First edition,
1929.
7
Consciousness and Actuality
Abstract. Alfred North Whitehead elaborated an ontology of process that
we can use to frame a novel ontology of consciousness and cognition.
Whitehead amplified the familiar notion of temporal process (“all is flux,”
echoing Heraclitus) in an ontology that presages today’s dynamical systems theory, with obvious application to both events in nature and events
of consciousness. But Whitehead also developed a different and deeper
notion of process: what I call “ontological becoming,” as opposed to temporal becoming. Ontological becoming, I propose, is the formal structure
realized in the material structure of temporal becoming. Both apply to
processes in general and to processes of consciousness in particular. From
Whitehead’s ontology we can thereby begin to learn how we might develop
an ontological “systematics,” a broad and fundamental framework that gives
consciousness its due along with the rest of the world.
Segue. In “Intentionality Naturalized?” we argued that the theory of mind
needs a broad and sensitive ontology that places consciousness in the structure of the natural world while preserving the phenomenological character of conscious experience. As we saw in that essay, one approach to a
sufficiently rich ontology borrows from Husserl, developing not only his
analysis of the structure of intentionality, but also his distinction between
formal and material ontology (see “Basic Categories” in Chapter 8). A
still more radical approach is found in Whitehead’s process ontology, to
which we turn here, looking for a model of how to analyze consciousness
I wish to acknowledge my debt to the late John D. Goheen of Stanford University. I first
studied Whitehead’s metaphysics in a course taught by Professor Goheen, and the image of
“prehension” has stayed with me for three decades. In recent years the image has emerged,
with a life of its own, in the very practical needs of the PACIS database project of Ontek
Corporation. I thank Charles W. Dement of Ontek for many discussions of Whitehead’s
ontology and its role in prefiguring the ontology of PACIS. My thanks finally to Liliana
Albertazzi for inviting me to write this essay, in a sense for seeing its need.
211
212 Mind World
in a wider structure of the world. In the long run the aim is to borrow
from Whitehead’s “depth” ontology (as I shall call it) to build a framework for an ontology that respects both physical and phenomenological
structure.
Cognition in the Structure of Existence
If cognitive science is the science of cognition, what is cognition?
Whitehead’s answer is drawn directly from his fundamental ontology:
cognition is a special form of what he calls“prehension,”taking more particular forms in conscious perception, thought, imagination and other
psychological processes.
From Whitehead’s sweeping metaphysics I propose to appropriate key
elements and reconstruct from these a fundamental ontology that applies to consciousness in cognitive processes. This Whiteheadian ontology has shaped a novel approach to fundamental ontological categories
used in database design or knowledge-based computer systems.1 And the
Whiteheadian approach to conscious processes is instructive for the dynamical systems approach in cognitive science, which has been proposed
as an alternative to both the neural-network approach and the languageof-thought approach to modeling cognitive processes.2
Whitehead’s main concern was not cognitive process, but process in
general. Within a fundamental ontology of process, he turned to processes of consciousness, perception, belief, and emotion – almost in passing as he sought to limn the truly ultimate structure of reality. For those
