raised in empirical science, or in philosophy oriented to science and modern logic, Whitehead’s ontology will seem the most extreme of a priori
speculative metaphysics, written moreover in a philosophical prose that
is as complex as Russell’s is simple. Still, the mathematical wizardry in
Principia Mathematica was more Whitehead than Russell, and the purity
of Whitehead’s ontological vision (shaped by his mathematician’s brain)
is kindred in soul with the physical vision of an Einstein or a Hawking.
It is this pure ontology that I want to frame, in order to construct from
it, along lines Whitehead prescribed, an ontology of consciousness in
various forms of cognition.
The resulting Whiteheadian ontology does not naturalize consciousness by reducing it to physical process. Rather, it places all of nature cum
consciousness in a world formed by one ontological process of “becoming” through “prehension.”
Consciousness and Actuality 213
Whitehead’s Background and Context
Alfred North Whitehead (1861–1947) is known as a principal founder
of mathematical logic, through the monumental Principia Mathematica
(1910–13), which he coauthored with the younger Bertrand Russell.
Whitehead and Russell exerted an indirect influence through logic on
computer science and thus on the computer model of mind that informs cognitive science today. Whitehead’s later years, however, saw him
engaged in abstract metaphysics, in work that is usually treated quite separately from his early work in mathematics and then mathematical logic.
Here I address Whitehead’s ontology as developed in Process and Reality
(1929; delivered as a lecture series in 1927–28).
Whitehead posited a basic structure of “process” applied to all reality.
As a mathematician he was keenly attuned to the physics of relativity and
quantum mechanics emerging in his day. As a British-born philosopher
he had his eye also on the early modern philosophers, from Descartes
to Locke and Hume, for whom mental activity was salient. Yet as a philosophical cosmologist he looked to the ancient Greeks, to Plato and the
pre-Socratics, especially Heraclitus, who famously proclaimed that everything is flux. Reflecting a further sensibility of the nineteenth century, Whitehead called his metaphysical-cosmological system “the philosophy of organism,” and he did indeed think of the cosmos itself as
alive in a fundamental sense. Today his system is often called “process
philosophy” and is influential in theology, because Whitehead defined a
place for God in the cosmos, as the first being formed by the process of
“becoming.”
With an eye to cognitive science, as opposed to metaphysical system,
consider from Whitehead’s era three very different approaches to the exploration of the mind. Wundt’s experimental psychology used introspection to study sensations. Freud’s psychoanalysis used hypotheses about
drives and infantile experience to explain adult neuroses. And Husserl’s
phenomenology used the technique of reflection on one’s own experience to analyze the structure of consciousness, including the dynamics
of time consciousness. Here were three starkly different “sciences” of the
mind, differing in both aim and method. Yet each had to address the
dynamics of changing and interacting states of mind, and today’s cognitive science carries the analysis of mind into mathematical-computational
models of the dynamics of cognitive process. Whitehead’s ontology of process ought to shed light on the most basic structure of mental process as
a flow of cognitive occasions.
214 Mind World
Whitehead drew where possible on classical ideas: in Plato, Aristotle,
Heraclitus, Descartes, Leibniz, Locke, Hume. Yet the proximate influence
on his conception of process was the French philosopher Henri Bergson.
In Matter and Memory (1896), Bergson painted a metaphysics featuring
“durations” rather than classical enduring natural objects, what Aristotle
called “substances” (ousia). The world is a vortex of passing events in
interaction with one another, each bearing within it “images” of others. Bergson envisioned a monism whereby this metaphysical picture applies equally to physical events and to mental events. Physical events were
soon to be described in relativity theory and then in quantum physics,
while mental events were soon to be described in phenomenology, in
psychoanalysis, and ultimately in what has recently emerged as cognitive
science. Bergson would have wished his metaphysics to apply to the dynamics of quantum and relativistic physical phenomena and equally to
the dynamics of perception, imagination, thought, and desire. Bergson
expressed his vision in vivid impressionistic prose, mirroring in metaphysical language the flow of painting in French impressionism and fauvism.
I find Whitehead’s metaphysical prose impressionistic yet mathematical.
Whitehead’s technical terms are often vividly, disconcertingly, mentalistic. Yet his terminology reflects a Bergsonian style of monism rather than
the varieties of absolute idealism that ran from Hegel to F. H. Bradley
and J. M. E. McTaggart in England. Like absolute idealism, Whitehead’s
philosophy of “organism” preached the radical interaction of all things;
however, for Whitehead, the ultimately actual entities are neither mental
nor physical, but constitute what we know as the mental and the physical
alike.
McTaggart taught philosophy at Cambridge when Whitehead taught
mathematics at Cambridge. Like McTaggart, as well as Bergson,
Whitehead focused on the process of coming to pass in time, where the
truly “actual” – what deserves the name – is in process, becoming rather
than already become. McTaggart (1927) argued that only the present
is actual, that past and future are unreal, indeed that time itself is
unreal because a time or occurrence cannot be first future, then present,
then past, as these temporal attributions are mutually contradictory.
Whitehead (1927–28) held, by contrast, that past and future are perfectly real but not “actual,” or actualizing, that is, in process of becoming.
Still, Whitehead had his eye on bigger fish when he framed actuality as
becoming: his concern was not only coming to pass in time, but coming to
be an entity at all, of which coming to be an entity in temporal flux is a
special case.
Consciousness and Actuality 215
Whitehead’s fundamental ontology of process, I want to suggest, provides formal tools that can be used to analyze the substantive claims about
process, including processes of consciousness, put forth in empirical or
experiential studies. By “formal,” however, I mean pertaining to formal
ontology, as opposed to formal languages of logic, mathematics, or computer science. Here I draw on Husserl’s distinction between formal and
material ontology. “Formal” ontology seeks invariant structures that are
realized in various domains of entities, whereas “material” ontologies analyze ontological structures within a given domain (such as mind, body,
culture, or what have you).3 Whitehead’s account of the process of becoming an entity is, I shall try to show, a formal ontology of “process,”
and consciousness inherits this structure of process.
The Outlines of Whitehead’s Ontology
Whitehead’s ontology in Process and Reality is framed by an elaborate
system of categories (1978: 18–30). I can address only that part of the
system which I appropriate for present purposes.
The most fundamental category, dubbed “the Category of the Ultimate,”is that of Creativity or Becoming. Becoming is the process by which
many entities become – come together to form – one actual entity. Becoming is also called concrescence (p. 21). Importantly, the category of
becoming “replaces Aristotle’s category of ‘primary substance’” (p. 21).
Aristotle’s paradigm of a primary substance (ousia, or being) is a concrete being such as an individual human organism; such a being is a
member of a species, in this case humanity, and species themselves belong to the category Aristotle called secondary substance. For Aristotle,
a primary substance is something that endures through time and may
change its qualities or “accidents” such as its relations to other things
or its location; and it is a fusion of matter and form, the matter undergoing change in form. Now, Whitehead’s leading claim is that such
beings are not the most fundamental type of thing in the world. More
fundamental are the processes of becoming that form all actual entities.
Becomings, not “substances,” are the ultimate constituents of the world,
the cosmos. Aristotelian substances are, for Whitehead, the product of
