many processes of becoming, and this view is an abstract version of modern physical theory, for which everyday objects are products of relativistic,
quantum phenomena of a more fundamental and very different kind.
Presupposing the category of Becoming are the Categories of Existence (p. 22). There are eight such categories, of which I shall focus on
216 Mind World
three: Actual Entity, Eternal Object, and Prehension (p. 1). An actual
entity, or actual occasion, is a concrete entity rather like a “point” event
(p. 2). An eternal object, or form, is what Plato called a form (eidos),
but Whitehead conceives a form, or “form of definiteness,” as a “pure
potentiality” for being “determined” in a specific way. For Plato, a form
is an actual but eternal entity (residing in a Platonic heaven, as Plato is
often parodied, a parody Whitehead rejects). For Whitehead, however, a
form is not an actual albeit eternal entity, but rather a pure potential for
actual entities: the way an actual entity could be – which is “eternal” insofar as it is not realized in an actual entity (p. 3). Now, prehension is the
tie that binds everything together; it is the way in which things are, most
fundamentally, related. If you will, prehension is simply the fundamental
form of relatedness, and particular prehensions are the basic “concrete
facts of relatedness.” Thus, actual entities prehend other (prior) actual
entities, and they prehend forms as well. (More on all this shortly.)
Presupposing both the Category of Becoming and the Categories of
Existence are two further types of categories. The Categories of Explanation are twenty-seven axiomatic conditions, or types of interaction, among
actual entities, eternal forms, prehensions, and the like – basic conditions
laid down by axioms in the ontology. And the Categoreal Obligations are
nine preconditions laid down, as it were, by further axioms. These categories together weave the story of reality as told in Whitehead’s ontology.
Importantly, Whitehead ranks different types of categories: most basic is
the Category of Becoming, next are the Categories of Existence, then the
Categories of Condition and then those of Precondition (as I am calling
them).
With this ranking of categories, Whitehead moves well beyond
Aristotle, who launched the idea of ontological categories with his famous list:
Primary Substance (Individual), Secondary Substance (Species),
Quantity, Quality, Relative, Where, When, Position, Having, Acting,
Being-Acted-Upon.
Aristotle’s term kategoriai originally meant simply “predicates,” or types
of entities. By contrast, what are called categories in biology today –
Species, Genus, Family, Order – are ranks of taxa (groups of living things),
defining their place in the classification scheme. Indeed, Whitehead’s
categorial scheme shows something of the complexity that has since
arisen in modern biological systematics, or higher classification. The
great biologist Ernst Mayr even refers to Whitehead while distinguishing the evolutionary roles of species as opposed to higher taxa.4 Where
Consciousness and Actuality 217
systematics in biology is the science of diversity of living beings, we may
conceive ontological systematics as the science of diversity of all beings, classifying things of all types and categories. A ranking of categories is then
part of the task of ontological systematics, and of “formal” ontology in
the sense that Husserl had in mind.
Assuming Whitehead’s scheme of categories, let us turn to his account
of actual entities. To be “actual” is to be active, to be in process, to be part
of the flux that constitutes all actuality. As Heraclitus insisted, all is flux,
“all things flow” (p. 208). Thus, in Whitehead’s vision, the atoms of the
universe are not particles but points in the flux, points of flow: processes
of becoming, or actual entities or occasions in the process of becoming, coming into actuality. Points along the flow are bound together by
prehension: later occasions or actual(izing) entities prehend or “feel” earlier ones. We think of a physical“feeling”in gravitation or electromagnetic
attraction, but prehension is – I should like to say in interpretation – the
formal connection that is realized as gravitational or electromagnetic connection, or physical causation, in the relevant scenario of physics. Again,
we think of an emotional “feeling” in personal attraction, where prehension is the formal connection that is realized as a bond of friendship, in
the relevant scenario of psychology. And we may think of a cognitive “feeling”in conscious perception of an object, where prehension is the formal
connection that is realized as a bond of intentionality – to use Husserl’s
term, which has now gained currency in phenomenology, philosophy of
mind, and cognitive science, but was unknown to Whitehead. The root
meaning of “intention” is to aim or reach toward something; this is exactly the metaphor behind Whitehead’s term “prehension,” as he initially
defines a prehension as having “a vector character” (p. 19). Whitehead
looks to Leibniz’s Monadology (p. 19) as a model: indeed, his ontology
is like Leibniz’s but with the monads’ windows open. However, whereas
Leibniz looks to mental operations for a model of the physical, producing
his unique brand of idealism, Whitehead sees the notion of prehension
as striking a “balance” between mental and physical operations (p. 19). A
better way of putting the point, I propose, is to say that prehension is the
common formal structure that is realized in operations of both mental
and physical “feeling.”
Now, Whitehead recognizes different types of prehension (p. 1). There
are positive prehensions, called “feelings” (illustrated provisionally here).
But there are also negative prehensions, which block or“eliminate”things
from feeling. We address only positive prehensions, or feelings (p. 2). An
actual entity E prehends not only other actual entities but also eternal objects or forms. Prehending an actual entity is called “physical” prehension,
218 Mind World
whereas prehending a form is called “conceptual” prehension (as discussed later). E’s prehending a form F is Whitehead’s variation on what
we call, since Plato, E’s exemplifying F. In Whitehead’s idiom, E “feels”
the form F; alternatively, F “ingresses” into E.
For Plato, forms exist eternally and thus in a different realm than
particulars; for Aristotle,contra Plato, forms (species, accidents, locations)
exist in the concrete world but only insofar as instantiated by particular
substances. But Whitehead places both concrete actual entities and abstract forms precisely in the flux that is reality. The difference is that a
form is a potential for definiteness in an actual entity, whereas an actual entity is a definite realized entity, that is, in process of becoming and thereby
being fully “determined.” Later we address, in Whitehead’s fine-grained
analysis, a hybrid entity that combines the actual and the potential. (I
leave the details as a surprise to the reader.)
The prior actual entities prehended by a given actual entity E form
the “datum” of E, or the “actual world” of E. The constitution of E – its
“real internal constitution” (p. 25) – includes the pattern of prehensions
in which E feels the actual entities in its actual world and also feels the
forms that are realized in it. Importantly, there is an ontological relativity in Whitehead’s scheme: the actual world of E is not the actual world
tout court, for every actual entity has its own “actual world.” The point to
remember is that Whitehead’s ontology is “tensed,” or rather indexicalized. Recall McTaggart’s distinction between two structures of time, or
two types of temporality: times are ordered in what he called the A-series,
where times are past, present, or future; and times are ordered in the
B-series, where one time is before another time. It is customary to say
that B-series time is time viewed from outside the space-time framework,
as it were eternally, whereas A-series time is time viewed from within the
space-time framework, and thus indexically. Now, actual entities are ordered by becoming. To add a dose of McTaggart to Whitehead, actual
entities are “present,” or presently actualizing. This currency defines “actuality” for Whitehead. (That is in fact one of the meanings of “actual” –
in French and German, current events.) Think, then, of flux as a transition from past (formerly) actual entities into present (currently) actual
