physical and conceptual feelings is “intellectual sight.” This integrative
higher-phase feeling Whitehead calls “propositional feeling” (p. 214).
Specifically, a form or eternal object is a capacity for “determination,”
that is, being propertied or related in a specific way. When a form is realized in an actual entity, that entity is determinate in respect of that form.
And a propositional feeling is a higher-phase prehension of the propositional integration of a form in a determinate actual entity: “An eternal
object realised in respect to its pure potentiality as related to determinate
logical subjects is termed a ‘propositional feeling’ in the mentality of the
actual occasion in question” (p. 214).
In the web Whitehead weaves, we discern the picture in Figure 7.2.
Thus, propositional feeling is a higher-phase prehension that consists in
feeling, with intellectual sight, the integration of the received actual entities and forms. That integration is called a “proposition” (p. 256) and the
prehension of a proposition is a propositional feeling. Figure 7.3 depicts
this form of prehension, whose fine structure is depicted in Figure 7.2.
(We return to Whitehead’s ontology of propositions later.)
In this scheme for propositional feeling we hear the echo of Kant’s
famous dictum, “Intuition without concepts is blind; concepts without
intuition are empty.” Kant’s concern was the structure of cognition that
Consciousness and Actuality 225
physical reception
aesthetic supplementation
intellectual sight
conceptual reception
aesthetic supplementation
+
+
=
=
propositional feeling
feeling the proposition that those forms are realised in those
entities
actual entities
eternal forms
figure 7.2. Propositional feeling.
(form + actual entity) = proposition (propositional feeling)
figure 7.3. A proposition and its prehension.
synthesizes sensations and concepts, or sensibility and understanding.
This structure applies to objects in nature precisely because, according to
Kant’s transcendental idealism, natural objects are phenomenal projections of cognition. But Whitehead inverts this order of priority: cognitions
carry this structure precisely because all actual occasions have the structure of concrescence, which with intellectual sight begins to constitute an
occasion of cognition or consciousness. (See his note on p. 215.) According to Whitehead, it is in this niche of concrescence, formally defined,
that the structure characteristic of consciousness begins to emerge.
If Whitehead’s scheme seems to force a mentalistic structure onto concresence itself (conceptual feeling is “mental,” propositional feeling is
part “intellectual”), consider a recent program in the philosophy of cognitive science. The Shannon-Weaver notion of “information” (roughly a
conditional probability of this given that) is the basis of Fred Dretske’s
analysis of knowledge as a “flow of information.”6 In Dretske’s ontological vision, cognition is a complex transfer of “information” from the
environment to the knower, but this information-processing is conceived
as a “natural” process, like causation, and the “information” transferred
is not what we usually think of as a “proposition” in a mind. Well, in
Whitehead’s system, prehension itself is a kind of flow of information, as
the datum of actual entities (and forms) that are prehended by an actual
entity is the “reason” or foundation of the entity (the condition of this
entity given those). Thus, we could see the formal structure of the process
226 Mind World
of information flow in either a monistic ontology `a la Whitehead or a
naturalistic ontology `a la Dretske (which is not to reduce Whitehead to
Shannon-Weaver-Dretske).
Propositions
The “objective datum” of a propositional feeling – if you will, the object
of a propositional feeling – is what Whitehead calls a proposition (1978:
256). Specifically:
An “impure” prehension arises from the integration of a “pure” conceptual prehension with a physical prehension originating in the physical pole. The datum
of a pure conceptual prehension is an eternal object; the datum of an impure
prehension is a proposition, otherwise termed a “theory.” (p. 184)
A proposition is a new kind of entity. It is a hybrid between pure potentialities
[or forms] and actualities. The definite set of actual entities involved are called
the “logical subjects of the proposition”; and the definite set of eternal objects
involved are called the “predicates of the proposition.” The predicates define
a potentiality of relatedness for the subjects. The predicates form one complex
eternal object: this is “the complex predicate.” The “singular” proposition is the
potentiality of this complex predicate finding realisation in the nexus of reactions
between the logical subjects, with assigned stations in the pattern for the various
logical subjects. (pp. 185–86)
Here are echoes of the voice(s) of Principia Mathematica.
But Whitehead’s later ontology gives “propositions” an utterly different role than does traditional logic: “Indeed Bradley does not mention
‘propositions’ in his Logic. He writes only of ‘judgements.’ Other authors
define propositions as a component in judgement. The doctrine here
laid down is that, in the realisation of propositions, ‘judgement’ is a very
rare component, and so is ‘consciousness’” (p. 184). Thus, Frege posited
a realm of “thoughts” that serve as “sense” (Sinn) expressed by language
but are entities distinct from both the physical and the mental. Again,
Husserl posited a realm of “noemata” that serve as “sense” (Sinn) or content of mental acts including judgments and are expressible in language
but are distinct in ontological kind from mental acts, physical objects, and
cultural institutions (including words). But Whitehead’s conception of
propositions is strikingly different, and genuinely novel, because a proposition per se is neither component nor content nor object of a mental act
of judgment or consciousness or of a speech act or linguistic expression.
Even in causal “feeling,” a proposition is “what is proposed” for feeling.
Consciousness and Actuality 227
Whitehead insists:
The term “proposition”suits these hybrid entities, provided that we substitute the
broad notion of“feeling”for the narrower notions of“judgement” and “belief.” A
proposition is an element in the objective lure proposed for feeling, and when admitted into feeling it constitutes what is felt. ... Judgement is the decision admitting
a proposition into intellectual belief. (p. 187)
We might call this hybrid entity a state of affairs, following a wellestablished tradition in Austrian philosophy, including Husserl and the
early Wittgenstein, for whom a state of affairs (Sachverhalt: literally “things
related”) is a complex entity formed by a number of objects instantiating a
determinate relation (or one object instantiating a determinate property
or species). However, Whitehead joins Russell in importing this notion
into philosophical English under the term “proposition.” Unfortunately,
we say in English that a proposition is“true” but a state of affairs“obtains”
or is “actual.” Nonetheless, Whitehead presses his terminology into the
