virgin territory of prehension loosed from thought or consciousness:
The interest in logic, dominating overintellectualised philosophers, has obscured
the main function of propositions in the nature of things. They are not primarily
for belief, but for feeling at the physical level of unconsciousness. They constitute
a source for the origination of feeling which is not tied down to mere datum. A
proposition is“realised” by a member of its locus, when it is admitted into feeling.
There are two types of relationship between a proposition and the actual world
[or datum] of a member of its locus. The proposition may be conformal or nonconformal to the actual world, true or false. (p. 186)
Thus, Whitehead finds for “truth” a distinct role from that of “actuality”
(becoming, concrescence), even while defining a proposition as rather
like a state of affairs. Remember, the “actual world” of an actual entity is
the nexus of (other) actual entities prehended by the entity. So a proposition felt by one actual entity is true just in case it is conformal to the
relevant actual world of the entities that are logical subjects of the proposition felt.
Here Whitehead divines a subtle line between truth and actuality. It
is natural to think, in a classical vein, that a proposition is a content of
thought or language that represents a state of affairs beyond thought or language. Then a proposition is true if and only if it conforms to the actual
state of affairs it represents. If there is no actual state of affairs to which a
proposition corresponds, then the proposition is false. On a modal variation, a false proposition may yet represent a possible but nonactual state
of affairs. However, on Whitehead’s approach, a proposition is a hybrid of
228 Mind World
actual entities and potentialities, that is, forms as potentialities for determination as thus and so in actuality. And this hybrid stands ontologically,
modally, between achieved actuality and mere potentiality. A proposition,
on this view, is neither a possible state of affairs nor a “proposed” state of
affairs. A possible state of affairs lacks the modal character of potentiality,
or tending toward actuality; and a proposed state of affairs has still a different modal character, if understood as an object intentionally contained in
a mental act of judgment or supposition or imagination, or intentionally
projected from and so dependent on a propositional act of consciousness. No, for Whitehead, a proposition is “proposed for feeling” in the
sense that it is a not an actual state of affairs but is poised in readiness
for being realized or formed through the process of conscrescence into
a nexus of actual entities in determinate relation. And this status is ontologically prior to any conscious act of judgment, imagination, or the
like.
No stranger to logic, Whitehead recognizes quantified as well as singular propositions: “A ‘general’ proposition only differs from a ‘singular’
proposition by the generalisation of ‘one definite set of actual entities’
into ‘any set belonging to a certain sort of sets.’ If the sort of sets includes
all sets with potentiality for that nexus of reactions, the proposition is
called ‘universal’” (p. 186). So Whitehead recognizes not only singular
propositions (involving definite actual entities as “subjects”) but also universally quantified propositions (involving “any” definite actual entities)
and also existentially quantified propositions (involving “some set of actual entities” but not a definite set) (see pp. 257–58). Also, Whitehead
recognizes“negative” as well as“positive” prehensions (p. 23) and thence
affirmative and negative perceptions and judgments in feeling affirmative
and negative propositions (pp. 161, 243, 270–74). So, with truth and the
familiar logical forms of propositions, Whitehead articulates the structures of modern logic: all within the realm of propositions defined as
ontological structures prior to judgment or thought content or indeed
linguistic expression!
If states of affairs are just “out there,” determinate matters of fact with
no intrinsic connection to consciousness and its logical operations in
judgment or language, then it seems gratuitous to posit logically complex states of affairs. Indeed, so it has seemed since Wittgenstein’s Tractatus. Wittgenstein recognized elementary states of affairs (Sachverhalten)
of form [aRb] (and arguably situations [Sachlagen] of form [aRb and not
cQd]). But he did not recognize quantified states of affairs of form [All
Fs are Gs] or [Some Fs are Gs]. Wittgenstein restricted quantification to
Consciousness and Actuality 229
propositions (Satze ¨ ) or thoughts (Gedanken), as in propositions of form
“All As are B” and “Some As are B.” Now, Whitehead gives propositions
a modal status between that of purely “objective” actual entities (faits
accompli) and that of purely “subjective” prehending entities: as hybrid
entities opening toward prehension, or proposed for feeling. But potentialities may be toward “some” or “all” of a set of actual entities, not only
particular concrete actual entities, being determined in a certain way.
Then it is plausible, surprisingly, that there are in the world “proposed”
states of affairs such as the proposition of form “Some Fs are caused by
a.” This hybrid entity integrates the actual entity a with the potentiality
of “some Fs” to be related by causation to a. This “proposition” is just
as much a part of the world as is the proposed state of affairs of form
“a causes b,” which integrates two actual entities with the eternal object
causation.
Here is a more robust variety of “logical atomism” than Russell’s or
Wittgenstein’s. For Whitehead’s ontology of “propositions” allows all the
familiar forms of propositions, not only the singular ones, while placing
them all in the world alongside concrete states of affairs and not merely in
language or thought or its contents. And thereby Alfred North Whitehead
puts logic in its place: in the cosmos!
Consciousness
For Whitehead, consciousness emerges, in the order of the cosmos, only
with higher phases of prehension: an actual entity is “conscious” just
in case it prehends a proposition in a certain way (to be specified later).
Fundamentally, then, consciousness is a propositional attitude, to use
Russell’s idiom. A more systematic phenomenology, I believe, shows that
not all acts of consciousness are propositional in form: judging or seeing
“that this is a lizard” is propositional, but seeing “this lizard” is not.7 For
the moment, though, for the sake of argument, let us grant Whitehead
propositionality. What is striking in Whitehead’s account of consciousness
is the role of his ontology. For consciousness inherits its structure – I
would say its phenomenological structure – from the ontological form of
prehension involved. There lies Whitehead’s novel idea.
Consciousness is not Whitehead’s central concern, and he would seem
to leave the specifics to others – may we say, to phenomenologists in
the lineage of Brentano, Husserl, et alii, whom Whitehead seems not
to have read, and in other respects to neuroscientists in today’s “consciousness studies.” Yet Whitehead explicitly addresses consciousness
230 Mind World
after he analyzes propositional feeling, and he remarks on consciousness all along the way in Process and Reality. In his own idiom Whitehead
writes:
[C]onsciousness presupposes experience, and not experience consciousness. It
is a special element in the subjective forms of some feelings. Thus an actual entity
may, or may not, be conscious of some part of its experience. Its experience is its
complete formal constitution, including its consciousness, if any. Thus, in Locke’s
phraseology, its“ideas of particular things” are those other things exercising their
function as felt components of its constitution. Locke would only term them
“ideas” when these objectifications belong to that region of experience lit up by
consciousness. (1978: 53)
By “experience” and “feeling,” we know, Whitehead means prehension,
and the “subjective form” of a feeling is the way an actual entity receives
