What else distinguishes consciousness from propositional feeling in
general? I have not found an answer in Whitehead, and I suspect there
is a reason why I have not.
Whitehead’s further analysis of consciousness fans out into analyses of
particular types of “higher phases” of prehension: in perception, imagination, belief, judgment (pp. 266ff.). Here, I believe, we should proceed
instead into the rich analyses of these phenomena that populate the literature of phenomenology, starting with Husserl’s results on such things,
which hark back to Hume, Leibniz, and others in ways that Whitehead
would approve. In fact, there is a methodological point to be pressed
here.
My point assumes the distinction between formal and material ontology, along lines charted by Husserl. I believe Whitehead uses such a
distinction in practice, without the terminology. Both were mathematicians who turned to a broader canvas, and in this distinction we see the
intellectual habits of the pure mathematician. Roughly, formal ontology
analyzes structure that is invariant, applying to very different domains,
ideally to all domains, whereas material ontology analyzes structure within
a specific domain.
Whitehead approaches the ontology of consciousness through the
analysis of prehension, propositional feeling, and feeling the affirmationnegation contrast in a proposition. It is in this latter feeling of contrast,
Whitehead holds, that consciousness begins to emerge, that is, as a distinct type of prehension, leading into higher phases of prehension. But
here, I believe, the formal ontology ends and the material ontology begins. For the structure of prehension – even of feeling a proposition and
feeling the contrast it involves – is purely formal, applying invariantly to
all prehension up to that level. But the structure of our own characteristically human forms of consciousness is partly “material,” in that the forms
of feeling in our sensory perceptions, our everyday judgments, our desires and volitions are partly conditioned by the special structures of our
234 Mind World
peculiarly human world. Here are forms of prehension that are special to
beings like us, in our earthly environment, in this “epoch” as Whitehead
allows. Perception, judgment, imagination, and emotion have their formal constitution in what Husserl called intentionality and intentional
content, but they also have their specific “material” constitution.
For instance, I see objects around me from the perspective of two eyes
looking binocularly toward things I may touch with my two symmetrically
placed hands, and some of these things are fellow human beings who
share my values and ways of walking and talking and thinking and seeing.
There is much to be said about how these “material” ways of prehending
(or intending) realize the formal ways of prehending that Whitehead has
analyzed. Whitehead the cosmologist has his eyes on the formal structure
of prehension, with much less to say about the material structures of
perception, imagination, and other processes.
Reading Whitehead in this way, the formal structure of consciousness
is that of feeling a proposition and the contrast it involves, whereas the
material structure of, say, perception or imagination is that of feeling a
nexus of actual entities in a region of space-time.
Reflexive Awareness?
The formal structure of consciousness seems to require one further feature. For an act of consciousness is not only a consciousness of X – a
Whiteheadian proposition (we assume for present purposes). It is also
eo ipso a consciousness of itself, of its being a consciousness of X. Without
this reflexive awareness of itself, the act would not be conscious. Along
these lines Brentano and Husserl held that every act includes a primary
intention directed toward its object and a secondary intention directed
toward itself – but in such a way that no infinite regress ensues (with a
third directness toward the second, etc.). Alternatively, I have argued, the
reflexive character is a modification of the intention of X, rather than a
supplementary intention of the intention-of-X.9 (See Chapter 3.)
Whitehead does not explicitly address this reflexive structure in consciousness, but he comes close to ruling it out on formal ontological grounds. An actual entity is in process of becoming, and the final
phase of its concrescence Whitehead calls “satisfaction.” But the structure of concrescence, Whitehead argues, imposes a certain limitation on
consciousness: “No actual entity can be conscious of its own satisfaction;
for such knowledge would be a component in the process, and would
thereby alter the satisfaction” (1978: 85). Whitehead’s argument here
Consciousness and Actuality 235
is elliptic. Becoming cannot be continuous, resolvable into smaller and
smaller becomings, Whitehead has argued with reference to Zeno (p. 35).
Similarly, the satisfaction of an entity – the final phase of its becoming –
cannot be resolved into smaller and smaller component satisfactions.
Here the argument may be that satisfaction cannot be resolved into successively nested satisfactions. That is, if an actual entity were to prehend
its own satisfaction, then its satisfaction would require the satisfaction
(through prehension) of its own satisfaction. With Zeno in mind, this
begins to look like a vicious regress.
Whitehead seems to be propounding a formal ontological principle of
complete generality: an actual entity cannot prehend its own satisfaction.
If we look to the special case of consciousness, however, we find ourselves
in more familiar territory: an act of consciousness cannot be conscious of
its own becoming. And then Whitehead’s principle rules out the reflexive
structure that our consciousness seems intuitively to have.
But perhaps we are looking for consciousness in the wrong places.
Given Whitehead’s “atomism,” the things we know in everyday life are
not simple “actual entities,” but highly complex groupings or “nexuses”
of simple actual entities. Perhaps our everyday conscious experiences are
such nexuses. Thus, when I see a dog, my conscious perceptual judgment
that-this-is-a-dog is a nexus that combines two prehensions: my perceptual
prehension of the proposition that-this-is-a-dog and my reflexive prehension of that perception. These are distinct prehensions, neither of which
includes a prehension of itself, of its own becoming. And my conscious
perception consists of this nexus. Moreover, the dog and I are ourselves
a complex nexus of actual entities. Indeed, Whitehead had his eye on
basic physics, and the philosophy of physics must explain the correspondence between basic physical states and everyday affairs.
Husserl’s phenomenology of time consciousness, in fact, elaborated
such a complex form of awareness. On Husserl’s analysis, my current
phase of perceptual consciousness includes not only a perception of X but
also a spread of “retentions” of successively prior phases of the ongoing
perceptual consciousness, and indeed a spread of “protentions” of anticipated upcoming phases of perceptual consciousness. My current ongoing
experience thus consists of this complex. And my reflexive awareness of
the ongoing experience, we might say, consists in the complex of retentions and protentions. But, as Whitehead requires, no “point” awareness
is an awareness of itself.10
There remains one further wrinkle by which Whitehead’s ontology
might capture what we experience as reflexive awareness of experience.
236 Mind World
proposition X act B reflexion
figure 7.5. Reflexive awareness.
Whitehead allows for the “mediation” of feeling through an actual entity
(p. 226): if A feels B (in A’s actual world), and B feels C (in B’s actual
world), then A feels C not directly but mediately. Thus, if B is conscious
of a proposition X and A prehends B, then A has a mediate prehension
of X. Perhaps then A’s prehension of B together with its indirect prehension of X constitutes a “reflexive” awareness of B’s consciousness of
