X. See Figure 7.5. Then the act B does not include a component prehending itself, but is rather accompanied (immediately afterward) by a
further “reflexion” that prehends it. [Consider the levels and biases of
consciousness distinguished in Chapter 3.]
The remaining problem is how well the phenomenology fits with the
ontology.
Critical Reflections
We have sketched on Whiteheadian lines a fundamental ontology and its
application to consciousness. I should like to close with a brief appraisal
of the chief virtues and problems I see in this Whiteheadian system.
The Structure of Consciousness
As Husserl observed, in the wake of Brentano, conscious experience is
paradigmatically intentional: as cognitive science puts it today, mind is
representational. Some states of consciousness (like feeling dizzy) are not
intentional, but most are. Whitehead captures the structure of intentionality in “prehension.” So far, so good. He then analyzes consciousness
as prehension of a proposition. But while it is often assumed that intentional states are essentially propositional in form (like believing that such
and such is the case), some intentional states (like seeing this dog) are
not propositional, and so cannot consist in prehending a proposition.
Whitehead touches on specific forms of consciousness including perception, judgment, and imagination, but the details do not really further
his basic analysis, and we must look elsewhere for the cognitive or phenomenological structures of perception, thought, desire, and the like.
What we should learn from Whitehead about cognition is that we need a
truly fundamental ontology – in some sense a formal ontology – in order
to articulate the structure of cognition and specifically consciousness.
Consciousness and Actuality 237
The Ontology of Propositions
On Whitehead’s analysis, consciousness begins to emerge in “feeling” a
proposition: a hybrid of actual entities and form (say, that a R b), where
the form (the relation R) is a “potential” for definiteness in the actual
entities (a and b). Whitehead may have had in mind a sort of superposition of phenomena as envisioned in quantum mechanics. Alternatively,
what is potential is the possible state of affairs combining these things (that
a R b), which consciousness may prehend indirectly through a propositional meaning entity (the thought that “aRb”), which itself comes into
being with the act of consciousness. Whitehead’s intriguing conception
of propositions, somewhere in between actuality and potentiality and
thereby opening into consciousness, should be parsed, I suspect, into
different ontological structures: actual entities, forms, potentiality, and
meanings.11 In any event, all these things will be subject to the “process”
of becoming in Whitehead’s overall ontology.
The Ontology of Consciousness
The “hard” problem of consciousness, it is said in philosophy of cognitive science today, is how to account for subjectivity: the felt quality of
experience, what it is like to have a certain form of experience. What is
hard is precisely fitting consciousness, in all its phenomenological glory,
into a world of particles in the void. Whitehead took modern physics
to heart, embracing relativity and quantum phenomena, and he developed a metaphysical vision in which everything consists in interactions
of prehension whereby actual entities come into being bearing forms.
Consciousness and causality are then two types of prehension, and mind
and body find their place as different types of nexuses of actual entities,
forms, and hybrids thereof. The details of this way of distinguishing consciousness and causality require, shall we say, further work. In particular,
are propositions as hybrids a good idea? In any event, the architecture
of Whitehead’s ontology is admirable: we must look to fundamental ontology to solve the mind-body problem, so that the distinctive structures of
mind and body emerge respectively from more fundamental ontological
structures something like ontological becoming.
The Principle of Becoming
In broadest strokes, Whitehead’s ontology is a radical revision of the
most basic assumption of classical Western metaphysics: that the world is
fundamentally structured into forms and substantial particulars related
238 Mind World
by exemplification. Plato and Aristotle, and nearly all since, began with
this assumption, while differing on the status of the forms. The traditional
languages of logic – including quantified predicate logic in Principia Mathematica and more recent modal logics – reflect this metaphysics of substances and attributes (including relations). According to Whitehead’s
ontology, however, all this structure emerges from a more fundamental
structure of becoming, or concrescence, through prehension. The principle of ontological becoming, or coming to be an entity, I submit, carries Anaximander’s assumption that the order of “determinate” beings –
what Aristotle would later call substances (ousia: beings) and their species
and attributes – emerges from a different order of the “nondeterminate”
(apeiron). Whitehead begins with such an assumption in the category of
the “ultimate,” becoming. However, he does not treat substances and
attributes in the same way, as “determinates” formed by concrescence.
For although he treats Aristotelian substances as products of concrescence, he leaves Platonic forms as “eternal” objects (albeit potentials).
This disparity between everyday objects and their forms calls for further
evaluation.
The overarching lesson from Whitehead, then, is to see how this principle of becoming might ground all ontological structure. The structure
of consciousness is then to be a special case.
Notes
1. Here I refer to the PACIS system developed in different phases, by
Ontek Corporation in Laguna Hills, California. PACIS is a high-level database
system, designed to represent all kinds of entities in a unified way. I think
of PACIS, philosophically, as a computational phenomenological ontology,
a system of fundamental categories of ontology (what there is) and phenomenology (how we experience or represent what there is) expressed in its
own computer language (how we codify our representations of what there
is). The ontology has been developed by a team consisting of the present
author, Charles W. Dement (Ontek Corporation), and Peter Simons (University of Leeds), with help from Stephen DeWitt and John Stanley (Ontek
Corporation).
2. The dynamicist approach to mind is presented in Port and Gelder 1995.
As the editors write, “Dynamicists from diverse areas of cognitive science
share more than a mathematical language; they have a common worldview”
(p. vii). Their world view, I suggest, is Whiteheadian. That is to say, the greatest classical metaphysical statement of the dynamicist world view is found
in Whitehead, with precursors tracing to Hume and all the way back to
Heraclitus.
Consciousness and Actuality 239
3. The distinction between formal and material ontologies is explicated, in my
own terms, in D. W. Smith 1995. I do not here restrict myself to the details of
Husserl’s particular conception of the distinction, as used in Husserl’s categorial ontology. Rather, I want to unfold a version of the distinction framed
within Whitehead’s very different categorial ontology. Whitehead did not
draw the distinction himself, nor had he read Husserl (to my knowledge).
However, as a mathematician, like Husserl, he would have implicitly understood the distinction. For it is common to think of pure mathematics as
developing formal theories that can be applied to very different domains.
For instance, the theory of differential equations may be applied to the motion of waves of water in fluid mechanics or equally well to the flow of waves
of radiation in electromagnetism theory. Formal ontology, however, is not
concerned with formal structures of mathematical language that describe different domains. Rather, formal ontology is concerned with formal structures
of reality that are realized in different domains.
4. Mayr and Ashlock 1991: 256. The PACIS ontology has been influenced by
the search for categorial complexity in biological systematics, although the
