1. substance
a. primary substance [individual] this man [Socrates], this horse
b. secondary substance [species] man [kind], horse [kind]
2. quantity
a. discrete four cubits
b. continuous [much (water)]
3. quality
a. state/condition grammatical (in the soul)
b. capacity [rational]
c. affective quality white
d. shape [square]
4. relative [relation?] double, half, larger [than]
5. where [place] in the Lyceum, in the marketplace
6. when [time] yesterday, last year
7. position [arrangement] lying, sitting
8. having has shoes on, has armor on
9. doing [action] cutting, burning
10. being affected [acted upon, passion] being cut, being burned
figure 8.1. Aristotle’s category scheme.
things that can be said to be. The categories he proposed reflect everyday grammar (in ancient Greek) and define answers to familiar forms
of question. Each category answers the general question, What is it?
and a more specific question, Which is it? What kind? How many? How
qualified? Where? When? Aristotle’s categories are sometimes misread as
grammatical categories, or“predicate”types. However, they are ontological
categories: Aristotle is focused not on forms of language but on forms of
“being.”6
Aristotle listed ten categories, and several subcategories, with examples
of each. His category scheme may be summarized as shown in Figure 8.1
(the organization and examples are his).“Of things not in combination,”
Aristotle said, there are these ten categories. We address “things in combination” later, including states of affairs. Aristotle said nothing explicit
about them in the Categories, but his phrase implies a place for them in a
complete ontology.
For Aristotle, these ten categories are the most general types of things in
the world. Every entity falls under one and only one of the categories. Yet
primary substances occupy a distinguished niche. For species, quantities,
qualities, and the like are each “predicated” of primary substances: that
is, a primary substance is such and such, for each remaining type of thing.
Thus, Socrates is a human, is one in number, is rational, is smaller, is in
250 Mind World
the marketplace, is at noonday, is standing, is sandaled, is criticizing, is
criticized. There are accordingly ten types of predication, or being suchand-such, for species, quantities, qualities, etc.
The Aristotelian scheme differs from the Quinean by adding to “primary substances” (ultimately, for the Quinean, particles) some ten types
of “predicate” or “attribute” (categories 1b and 2–10), all of which the
Quinean must explicate in terms of sets or else eliminate. In retrospect,
an Aristotelian approach distinguishes different categories expressed by
various forms of predicate in everyday language, whereas a Quinean approach follows today’s predicate logic in assimilating all predicates to one
form (“Rxy”) with which is correlated a set or ordered tuple of entities.
The most vexing term in Aristotle’s discourse is“substance.”The Greek
word is ousia, which strictly means that which is, a being or entity. The traditional translation as “substance” is completely misleading in English,
but Aristotle’s examples make it plain that “primary beings” are simply
particular, concrete entities – what we may call concrete individuals. In
Aristotle’s scheme, concrete individuals form the first and most basic
category (or subcategory), that of “primary beings/substances,” because
they are the kind of entity that most properly has being, or is most fundamental in being. Species are the second most fundamental kind of
entity, and so form the (sub)category of “secondary beings/substances.”
An individual’s species is essential to it and constitutes its“real definition”;
individuals and species are together the most proper“beings” and so form
the category of“being/substance.” Aristotle’s paradigm here is that of living organisms. In light of evolutionary biology today, it was prescient of
Aristotle, the founder of the science of biology, to give such pride of place
to species – notwithstanding today’s rejection of his essentialist theory of
the real definition of species.7
If Aristotle’s ten basic kinds of entity are propercategories, then not only
are these ten kinds distinct, but these ten kinds of entity have unique ontological roles and stand in unique ontological relations to one another.
Accordingly, Aristotle says that a quality is “in” a primary substance (this
whiteness is in this piece of paper), whereas a species is not“in” a primary
substance but rather is “said of” it (Man is said of Socrates). In more congenial idiom, we may say that a quality inheres in an individual while an
individual belongs to a species. Then inherence and belonging are distinct
types of “predication,” which are modes of connection between entities
in different categories. To complete the ontology, we would specify the
various types of connection between entities in the various categories,
especially the types of predication that tie concrete individuals to their
Basic Categories 251
species, quantities, qualities, relatives, places, times, and so on. Ontological dependence is an important feature of the connection between certain
entities of different categories (though Aristotle did not use a term for
dependence). Specifically, Aristotle holds, a quality cannot exist apart
from a substance in which it inheres, while the substance could exist
apart from that quality (as when the substance changes). Thus, a quality
is a particular entity, not something shared like a species (or, for that matter, a Platonic form). Husserl would later call such entities “moments,”
or “dependent parts”; today these particularized properties are called
“tropes.” By contrast, a species is shared by its members and can exist
apart from any one of its members, though an individual cannot exist
without its species. It is tempting to think that Aristotle believed that entities of the second through tenth categories could not exist apart from
primary substances (and the species to which they belong).
Some of Aristotle’s categories look odd or half-baked today (we may
lose something in the translation). Why “relative” instead of relation?
(Philosophers had trouble with relations until the twentieth century,
partly because Aristotelian logic recognized only monadic predicates,
whereas modern logic recognizes n-place predicates modeled on mathematical functions with n arguments.) Why add “position” – isn’t this a
complex relation of elements? What is “having” in the relevant sense,
other than a type of relation? Why “passion” in addition to “action” –
isn’t passion just the inverse of action? Is “action” intentional action or
merely causal action? And where is mind in all this? And is intentionality
all packed into “action” or is it a special form of relation, or “relative”?
Rather than dig further into these details, we shall outline next a more
modern version of broadly Aristotelian categories, based on the distinction between substance and attribute, or individuals and their properties,
but recognizing further features like dependence and intentionality.
Aristotle ramified his ontology in the Metaphysics, with well-known
doctrines: the “hylomorphic” principle that a concrete being is matter
shaped by form; the account of change wherein a being’s qualities (but
not species) vary over time; and the theory of cause, divided into four
