types, namely, formal, material, efficient, and final causes. Also, in De
Anima (Of Spirit, anima in Latin, psyche in Greek) Aristotle posited the
mind (psyche) as part of the form of the body, and there he observed what
Husserl (after Brentano) theorized as the intentionality of perception
and knowledge. (In perception, for Aristotle, the mind takes in the form
but not the matter of the object known.) To complete an Aristotelian
ontology, then, we would have to explicate these structures of the world
252 Mind World
and show exactly how they all play in the category scheme. Specifically,
we would have to decide where mind figures in the scheme. Presumably,
a mental act is a quality (a condition) in a primary substance such as
Socrates, and this quality is shared by the act’s object.
Starting from natural language, as Aristotle did implicitly (sometimes
explicitly), is not a bad way to begin sifting through our knowledge base
in search of what we take to be the most basic kinds of entity in the world.
For our language, be it Greek or English or Chinese, is the residue of
thousands of years of dealing with the world in very practical terms. But
let us remember that we are seeking basic categories of beings in the
world around us, not logical or grammatical categories of expressions
in our language. That said, we articulate and represent ontological categories, either explicitly or implicitly, only within a system of thought and,
realistically, within a language that expresses a theory about entities in
the world.
Plus Intentionality and Modality (Aristotle Modernized)
Suppose we wanted to preserve as much of Aristotle’s ontology as possible today, while recognizing more modern conceptions of relation, set,
part-whole, causation, dependence, modality, and intentionality (all of
which Aristotle addressed in some form in works after the Categories). I
have in mind approaching Aristotle’s metaphysics in a spirit like that in a
rich study by Montgomery Furth,8 and then folding in intentionality and
modality. The categories we would recognize include forms of complexity
beyond “things not in combination.”
In this spirit, we might modernize Aristotle’s category scheme along
the lines shown in Figure 8.2 (deleting some of Aristotle’s categories and
adding other categories).
In this category scheme, we begin with a variation on the distinction between substance and attribute. “Primary beings,” or “substances,” are replaced by individuals, including concrete particulars, but perhaps also abstract particulars such as numbers and sets. Individuals are the “substrate”
of all “attributes,” or “properties” (to choose a slightly more modern
term). Properties of individuals are divided (in an Aristotelian spirit)
into some four distinct types: kinds or species (sortal properties including natural kinds such as biological species and chemical substances,
but also including man-made kinds or artifacts), qualities (nonsortal,
monadic properties), and relations (polyadic properties, with plural subjects). Quantities are a different type, aligned with numbers but arguably
Basic Categories 253
CATEGORIES
1. individual
2. species
3. quantity
4. quality
5. relation
6. location
7. intentionality
8. combination
9. dependence
10. modality
— where:
6. location covers extension in space-time
7. intentionality includes
perception
thought
imagination
desire
volition
8. combination includes
set
whole
state of affairs
9. dependence includes
causation
(ontological) foundation
10. modality includes
possibility
necessity
actuality
— and where:
Intentionality is a mental act’s being directed toward an appropriate entity.
A state of affairs is a combination formed by an individual’s belonging to a
species or bearing a quality or standing in a relation to one or more
individuals (or thinking about something or . . .).
A state of affairs is possible or necessary or actual.
figure 8.2. A Modernized Aristotelian category scheme.
grouped under properties of individuals en masse, or properties of sets
(which are abstract individuals). (Various kinds of mathematical entities
would need to be appraised, deciding inter alia whether all mathematical
entities can be built up from sets; we do not delve into these issues here.)
Entities in the remaining categories – such as locations, intentionalities, combinations – might be thought of as properties with special
254 Mind World
importance. But here they are instead grouped as something other than
properties of individuals. Let us call them “modes,” borrowing a late medieval term for properties. Here we are beginning to group these “special” properties in an ontological niche of their own, and we make more
of this categorial maneuver in other category schemes considered later.
Thus, locations place individuals (and their properties) in space-time.
Intentionalities direct mental acts (a kind of individual) toward various
entities. Combinations unite entities in heaps, sets, wholes, and the like.
Dependencies tie entities together in their existence, either as one event
causes another or as a quality depends on a particular in which it inheres.
Modalities modify the existence status of entities, with the so-called alethic
(truth-related) modalities of actuality, possibility, and necessity. Finally, intentionality is ontologically unique (it is neither a quality nor a relation
nor anything else), warranting its own category. Thus, individuals form a
substrate for properties of different types, and different types of modes
modify entities formed from individuals and various types of properties.
Our purpose in sketching (so tersely) this neo-Aristotelian scheme is
to bring out some of the complexity that unfolds in an updated broadly
Aristotelian ontology. Thus, we distinguish three types of categories in this
scheme, reorganizing the scheme as shown in Figure 8.3.
