William of Ockham famously rewrote Aristotle’s category scheme
(ca. 1300) by reducing the original ten categories to one, if you will,
the category Individual, “nominalizing” or conceptualizing the rest. The
Quinean follows suit but finds need for sets. By contrast, our neoAristotelian refines Aristotle by eliminating some categories, adding
others, and then grouping importantly different categories – a far cry
from Ockham’s list-of-one. This neo-Aristotelian holds that we are not
A. Substrate
1. individual
B. Property
1. species
2. quantity
3. quality
4. relation
C. Mode
1. location
2. intentionality
3. combination
4. dependence
5. modality
figure 8.3. An ordered neo-Aristotelian category scheme.
Basic Categories 255
multiplying entities beyond necessity. We are instead articulating ontological distinctions that we need in order to account for the complexity we find in the world. Ockham’s razor is wielded with different
results.
In this latter scheme we begin to recognize categories of a higher order.
Aristotle assumed a flat list of categories, with subcategories, although
Primary Substance has a privileged status. Here we group the categories
with a sense of ontological priority (still in the spirit of Aristotle). And
we go well beyond a Quinean ontology by positing a variety of nonextensional categories including both properties and “modes” of various
types.
We note that mind and consciousness appear in this scheme with intentionality, which does not reduce to physical composition or causal
dependence or functional relations or anything else.
Substance-Attribute Applied to Mind-Body (Descartes)
A familiar touchstone in metaphysics is the dualism developed in Rene´
Descartes’s Meditations on First Philosophy (1641). Descartes (1596–1650)
assumed a neo-Aristotelian distinction between substance and attribute
(or “mode” in Descartes’s preferred idiom,9 a different use of the term
than mine just presented). Then Descartes argued for the “real distinction” between mind and body. But the first distinction cuts across the
second. This dual dualism leads into an instructive system of ontological
categories. For here we find two types of category: one including Substance and Attribute, the other including Mental and Corporeal or (as
we say today) Physical. Moreover, the first applies to the second, so the
two types cross to form a “Cartesian product” of the two types (to play
on a term from mathematics). Thus, we may find in Descartes’s ontology
a two-dimensional category scheme (entering in the boxes in Figure 8.4
the kinds of entity that fall under the crossed categories). As noted,
Aristotle’s category scheme was a flat sequence of ten categories, with
subcategories. And the structured neo-Aristotelian scheme followed the
same architecture, albeit with specially grouped subcategories. But with
CATEGORIES
A. mental B. physical
1. substance minds bodies
2. attribute thought extension
figure 8.4. Descartes’s category scheme.
256 Mind World
Descartes’s scheme, as organized here, we find a new kind of architecture
in category schemes, where two types of category cut across each other.
(Here let us assume the Aristotelian and neo-Aristotelian categories are
simplified to Substance and Attribute, as our concern is how these categories cut across Mental and Physical.)
Of course, mind is at the root of the architectural innovation. Where
Aristotle at best treated mind as a quality in certain bodies (consonant
with today’s physicalism), Descartes gave the mental its own category as
distinct from the physical. However, the point of the reconstruction here
is not that the mental and physical form distinct categories. Rather, the
point is that there are two types of category cutting across each other. If
Cartesian substance-dualism is untenable, attribute dualism is nonetheless a step in the direction of diversity among properties, and the moral
of the story is categorial complexity.
Most philosophers today reject Cartesian dualism for substances and
worry about it for attributes (compare Chalmers 1996). But if I am right,
there is something quite different at stake in Descartes’s ontology. In retrospect, we may see in the Cartesian category scheme the abstraction
of ontological form from ontological content. Thus we may see the
Substance-Attribute distinction as “formal” and the Mental-Physical distinction as “material.” In this view, the Substance-Attribute distinction
applies to any substantive or material (= physical) domain of entities,
and it happens that Descartes posits two such substantive domains harboring minds and bodies respectively.10 However, we are getting ahead
of our story, applying lessons learned from more recent philosophical
movements. The gist of this view is that ontology mirrors logic in discerning formal ontological categories, and that is the tack followed explicitly
by the early Husserl (nodding to Leibniz and Bolzano).
Fact and Essence and Sense (Husserl)
In Edmund Husserl’s Logical Investigations (1900–1) and Ideas I (1913)
we find, along with the new discipline of phenomenology, a sprawling
ontology. This ontology can be drawn together, I propose, as a basic ontology that accommodates many of the lessons of the previous category
schemes. In fact, Husserl (1859–1938) can be read as integrating several prominent lines of thought from Plato and Aristotle onward: the
ontology of universals, the logic of sense and reference (modifying Frege
et al.), the epistemology of sensory-conceptual knowledge formation
(modifying Hume, Leibniz, Kant, et al.), and the theory of intentionality
Basic Categories 257
(going beyond Brentano), which is foundational for phenomenology. In
Husserl’s system, the ontology plays a central role but is interdependent
with the logic, phenomenology, and epistemology. I laid out a Husserlian
category scheme in “Mind and Body” (1995) and explored parts of it
more closely in subsequent essays including “Mathematical Form in the
World” (2002b). Here I should like to construct (or construe) the architecture of the scheme, its implicit ontological systematics. We have to do
the work of systematizing Husserl’s diverse categories, because Husserl
did not explicitly organize his results.
We begin with Husserl’s distinction among “fact,” “essence,” and
“sense” (laid out in opening Ideas I). We shall ramify Husserl’s category
scheme in later sections.
Roughly, the type Fact includes concrete individuals and, presumably,
events: these entities take the place of Aristotelian “substances.” The type
Essence (Wesen, from was-sein, “what” a thing “is”) covers Aristotelian “attributes.” And the type Sense (Sinn) is drawn from logical theory but used
in Husserl’s own theory of intentionality: sense includes ideal intentional
contents (many of which are expressible in language as “meanings”).
