2.6. proposition [= state of affairs]
2.7. multiplicity (disjunction-of-diverse-entities)
2.8. contrast (patterned-entity)
– * Where “actual entities and eternal objects stand out with a certain extreme
finality.”
3. Categories of Explanation
27 axiomatic principles about how actual entities, etc., may become.
4. Categoreal Obligations
9 axiomatic principles about preconditions for existence and explanation.
figure 8.8. Whitehead’s category scheme.
among types of essence in Husserlian ontology move in this direction,
when we separate unity, part, dependence, and intentionality from properties that are predicated of objects, properties such as being a human,
being wise, or being a teacher. Whiteheadian becoming is something of
a different order altogether. It is a kind of “deep” structure determining
what it is to be an entity at all, according to Whitehead’s ontology. I am
inclined to call ontological forms at this level “modes of being,” suggesting ways in which an entity comes to be the entity it is. Accordingly, in
Whitehead’s system the category of Becoming is more fundamental than
the categories of Existence, where we find categories closer to others
we have considered. The architecture of the Whiteheadian scheme thus
places Becoming at a distinctive and basic level.
Systematics in Category Schemes
A basic ontology, we said, is a theory about the most basic structures
of the world, beginning with an ontological systematics that posits the
most basic divisions or “diversity” among entities in the world, divisions
defining the basic categories of the world. Logically, a basic ontology
270 Mind World
includes a scheme of categories and a system of principles about entities
in those categories. But there is more to ontological systematics than a
list of categories. As our comparative explorations have been shown, the
organization of categories is crucial. Thus, a category scheme organizes
the basic divisions among things into categories, so that there is a structure in the basic division of entities. In the series of category schemes
explored here, we see an increase in complexity of structure as we
move through the schemes. What is the ontological significance of such
complexity?
The Quinean scheme posits only individuals (ultimately particles) and
sets: no nonextensional entities, and no bona fide categories or types as
opposed to sets. The structure of this scheme is thus very simple. In set
theory, to be sure, Russell’s theory of types adds complexity: a hierarchy of
types of sets. But Russell’s theory concerns only types of sets; at most it can
serve as a partial model of how some ontological types – groups – might
be ordered. Also, in the spirit of the Quinean scheme, particle physics
may lead into complications of quantum and field structure. But still,
in this category scheme, the ontological simplicity of individuals-and-sets
remains, even as set theory and particle physics grow more complicated
as theories.
The Aristotelian scheme posits a flat list or sequence of ten categories,
with branching subcategories for some. The structure of this scheme is
still very simple: a list of mutually exclusive types and subtypes. However, Aristotelian categories are bona fide types (not sets). They are
the most general types of entities that make up the world, the highest
general types, summa genera. If Species is granted its own place, as deserved, then the Aristotelian scheme is a list of eleven categories, which
are the highest genera of entities in the world, prior to combinations
thereof. It is assumed that every noncomposite entity falls under exactly one of the categories: the categories are mutually exclusive and
collectively exhaustive. Beyond that, the only principle of order is that
the category Primary Substance is most basic, because all the remaining categories cover entities that are “predicated” of primary substances,
or concrete individuals. If you will, concrete individuals are first-order
entities, and all other entities are second-order entities predicable of
individuals.
The neo-Aristotelian scheme varies the categories but retains the basic Aristotelian structure of substance and attribute. Thus, different types
of “properties” and “modes” are predicable of concrete individuals, the
Basic Categories 271
ontological “substrates” of the world. We also find composite entities,
notably states of affairs, that are formed by combinations of individuals with properties (featuring the mode of combination), and which
themselves carry modes like possibility. Yet the structure of the category
scheme is still a list of categories with subcategories. And every noncomposite entity in the world falls under one and only one category (or
subcategory).
The interesting question for Aristotelian category schemes is whether
there are different connections of “predication” for the different types
of attribute, the different categories after Substance. The simplest view
posits one kind of link that ties all types of attributes to individuals. Then
we would assume that Socrates is (univocally) a human, one, rational, a
teacher. A more complex view requires different types of link. Then we
would assume there are different basic ontological ties for different categories. The ubiquitous “is” then covers a multitude of sins, so that it is
one type of thing that Socrates is a human in kind, quite another type of
thing that Socrates is one in quantity, quite another that Socrates is rational in quality, and so on. In other words, different types of attribute “do”
different things to an individual, so these types of predication are ontologically distinct and should be kept apart. Despite the increase in complexity, I am sympathetic to this second approach. After all, what makes
Socrates “be” a human is a matter of belonging to an evolving biological
species, whereas what makes Socrates be one is a matter of arithmetic
structure or countability, whereas what makes Socrates be rational is a
matter of how well his mind (or brain?) works, and so on. What could
be more different than species membership, countability, qualifiability?
When we get serious about ontology, these are the kinds of difference that
matter.
Now, the Cartesian scheme presented here introduces a new principle
of organization among ontological categories. The scheme is no longer
simply a sequence of categories, with branching subcategories. Rather,
there are two types of categories, one cutting across the other. To impose
the later terminology, the formal categories of Substance and Attribute
cut across and apply to the material categories of Mental and Physical.
Thus, there are two basic types of type: formal and material. What is
remarkable, in our view here, is not the familiar material division into
mental and physical, for which Descartes is so famous. Instead, whatever
one may think of Cartesian dualism of substance and attribute (substancedualism plus property-dualism), I want to bring out Descartes’s implicit
272 Mind World
distinction between formal and material types or categories. These are
second-order types. What we find then in the Cartesian category scheme,
cast into our idiom, is a new structure of categories: not a sequence, but
a table of rows and columns, a matrix of two dimensions.
Because modern mathematics began with Descartes, we might expect
that subsequent mathematical visions would reshape the organization
of basic categories in ontology, not least when logic itself was tied into
