Number, Set, Structure,...
Part/Whole
278 Mind World
Location [Form of Space-Time]
Possibility, Necessity, (Actuality)
Dependence
Intentionality
The three-facet distinction can be seen, then, in this ontology as the
beginning of a systematic categorial ontology, an ontological systematics.
But we do not stop at three basic facets; we parse as many as our ontology
recognizes.
To generalize, or rather to formalize, the contemporary category
scheme outlined here entails that any entity has distinctive ontological
facets of:
attribute
mathematical structure
composition
location (if concrete)
modality
existential dependence
intention (intentional representation)
These categorially distinct ontological facets of an entity are instances
of precisely the several categories posited in that scheme. Importantly,
not every entity admits of facets of all these types. Properties or essences
do not have location, nor do mathematical structures, nor do senses.
Only minds achieve intentional representation. (Language is infused with
mind, and vice versa, and so achieves intention.) Some things depend
for their existence on others, whereas others do not. Of course, these
differences are precisely what lead us to basic categories, basic ontological
forms.
Observing such categorial differences is the lifeblood of ontology, no
matter the domain of application.
Complexity
Quine declared a famous preference in ontology for “desert landscapes”
rather than jungles, meaning he sought simplicity.
However, to vary the metaphor, the Amazon rainforest has spawned
more life forms than any other place on Earth, and we had better acknowledge their diversity. For that matter, the desert biosphere is far from
simple; get down on your knees and you see all kinds of life forms that you
Basic Categories 279
could not observe from a human’s eye level. In any event, I want to close
the present chapter with a plea – against the Zeitgeist – for complexity
in ontology. Much as biology must mark divisions among kinds and order the divisions, so must ontology mark basic divisions and order the
resulting basic kinds or categories. The closer we look at things around
us, from physical to biological to cultural phenomena to – perhaps the
hardest to observe – our own consciousness, the more distinctions we
must draw. Moreover, many of the basic distinctions we draw are formal
rather than material.
But why does the Quinean posit only individuals, and sets of them?
Because modern predicate logic reflects a simple ontology: here lies the
driving background idea. (Compare the influence of such conceptions
according to my “Background Ideas,” in Chapter 5.) As language is structured into terms and predicates only, combined by sentence connectives
and quantifiers, so it seemed to Quine the world is structured into individuals and sets only. To add Husserl’s distinction, a Quinean recognizes
only these two formal categories: all further distinctions in ontology are
left to material ontologies, which in turn are established by the special
sciences, which take over where formal ontology leaves off.
What we learn from these reflections on increasingly complex category
schemes, I believe, is that basic ontology needs to mark out a rather
complicated order of basic types of entities, both formal and material
types. Like biological systematics, ontological systematics finds genuine
complexity in the basic structure of the world around us.
Notes
1. On conceptions of biological systematics, see Mayr and Ashlock 1991 and
Lincoln, Boxshall, and Clark 1998. The definition is from Mayr and Ashlock,
p. 2. The conception of ontology as a formal scheme of“systematics” covering
all possible types of entities – what I am calling “ontological systematics” as opposed to biological systematics – derives from discussions with Chuck Dement
in the Ontek research program. This conception of systematics in ontology
is also informed by a close study of Whitehead’s ontology, as discussed in this
chapter and in Smith 2001a, reprinted in Chapter 7 as “Consciousness and
Actuality.”
2. See Mayr and Ashlock 1991: 430.
3. Quine argued initially against the distinction between analytic and synthetic
truths, those determined by meaning and those determined by empirical fact.
Subsequently, he characterized the “web of belief” as a network tied to empirical observation at the periphery, with mathematical and logical beliefs at
the center. Observations are largely a posteriori, while logical-mathematical
280 Mind World
claims are largely a priori. It is this distinction of role in the formation
of beliefs that I have in mind. Categorial ontology lies at the center of our
web of belief, yet is responsible to the periphery of perceptual observation.
4. See Quine 1992/1990, 1995; Smith 1994.
5. A crisp summation of received naturalist wisdom is found in Kim 1998. Kim
finds room for mind as supervenient on basic physical processes that are ultimately functional states of a physical system composed ultimately of physical
particles.
6. We follow the text in the Irwin and Fine (1995) translation of Aristotle’s
Categories. Fine and Irwin firmly read Aristotle as concerned with ontological,
not grammatical, categories. On Aristotle’s term kategoriai, or“predications,”
and thus the derived term “categories,” see Irwin and Fine’s comments in
Aristotle 1995: notes, pp. 1, 606–7.
7. A perceptive contemporary philosophical study of Aristotle’s full metaphysics, very congenial to our concerns, is Furth 1988.
8. See Furth 1988.
9. Descartes uses the term “mode” to mean a property in a substance, and
“attribute” in a more special sense. Here I substitute attribute for mode in
summarizing Descartes’s ontology, to indicate variation on the Aristotelian
system and to make room here for my own use of mode.
10. My colleague Alan Nelson reads Descartes in a way that I would place squarely
between Aristotelian and Husserlian doctrines of attribute. For Descartes,
on Nelson’s reading, every “mode,” or instance of one of the attributes of
thought and extension, is itself abstracted from a substance only by a specific
mental act of “distinction,” so that, as I understand the view, each mode of
thinking-such-and-such or being-extended-thus-and-so is inseparable from
its substance except by this rational act of distinguishing it in a certain way.
