from Kant to the positivists – were aimed at speculative metaphysical
systems. Yet we need a sense of system that outruns any direct experimentation. Theoretical physics follows this pattern while explaining results
of empirical investigation. As W. V. Quine has well observed, our belief
system – from everyday common sense to current physics – crafts the best
overall theory we can muster in the face of our overall empirical observations. What we have lost in recent philosophy is the really big picture, writ
large but written carefully. First there was Rudolf Carnap’s logical empiricism of the 1930s and 1940s, where the new logic was to formulate our
scientific theories based on reports of sensory perception (formulated
in “protocol” sentences): a Kantian world view written in a language of
symbolic logic (the noumena outrun that language, so we don’t really
talk about them). Then there came ordinary language philosophy in the
1950s, which eschewed metaphysics. P. F. Strawson’s Individuals (1960)
then allowed “descriptive” metaphysics, which would analyze the world
but only as described in ordinary language. Then, since the 1970s, came
the computer revolution: computer languages tell all, from the nature
of mind (artificial intelligence) to DNA reproduction to molecular combination and even molecular computers, as if all reality is constituted by
algorithms in some appropriate language of computation. Meanwhile, in
the continental tradition Jacques Derrida transformed phenomenology
into subtle interpretations of linguistic practices or texts, seeming to jettison not only consciousness but all reality beyond the text. Other French
poststructuralists followed similar lines. The most extreme antimetaphysical rhetoric may lie in Jean Baudrillard’s recent notion of “hyperreality,”
where reality is lost in virtual reality, in the commodity of computer information that increasingly defines social and ultimately political force,
displacing natural languages and the consciousness that phenomenology
said underlies language. The computer model has thus displaced not only
classical theories of mind but social theories as well.
Appendix 291
To deal with consciousness once again, philosophy must return to the
discipline of phenomenology. A century ago consciousness was richly
studied: from Franz Brentano’s Psychology from an Empirical Standpoint
(1874) to William James’s The Principles of Psychology (1891) to Edmund
Husserl’s Logical Investigations (1900–1) and Ideas (1912–13) to the literary practice of interpreting one’s own experience in Marcel Proust’s
In Search of Lost Time (A la recherche du temps perdu ` , beginning in 1913).
Phenomenology then flourished in the continental tradition following
Husserl: in Martin Heidegger, Jean-Paul Sartre, Maurice Merleau-Ponty,
Simone de Beauvoir (even as Heidegger had resisted talk of “consciousness”). But analytic philosophy of mind took an apparently antiphenomenological turn with Gilbert Ryle’s The Concept of Mind (1949), declaring that mind is but a disposition to overt behavior (ascribed in ordinary
language). (In fact, Ryle viewed his own work as a variant practice of phenomenology, as did Wittgenstein his.) There followed the seminal essays
of today’s materialism by U. T. Place, J. J. Smart, and D. M. Armstrong
in the 1950s and 1960s, positing that mind is identical with states of the
central nervous system. By 1970 functionalism set in as a refinement:
mental states are functional states of a physical system – mind is what
the brain does in its physical environment of body in nature, and what
computers can in principle do. Gradually we witnessed the return of consciousness. From Thomas Nagel’s “What Is It Like to Be a Bat?” (1973)
to John Searle’s The Rediscovery of the Mind (1993), philosophers began
to insist that consciousness is real even though realized in the brain in a
physical universe. Specifically, consciousness has essential properties, including intentionality and sensory qualia, that do not reduce to physical
properties of physical particles or even functional properties of systems of
physical particles. Thus was born, or reborn, the “hard” problem of consciousness, as David Chalmers dubbed it in The Conscious Mind (1996).
Gradually the words “intentionality” and “phenomenological” have entered the vocabulary of cognitive science – as scientific philosophy of
mind has been called since the 1970s. And so, merging the rich continental and analytic traditions in philosophy of mind, we do philosophy in
the new millennium with our eyes on consciousness. To develop a proper
theory of consciousness, I submit, we must think through the basic results
of classical phenomenology, starting with Husserl’s monumental work.
These classical results (in the mathematician’s sense of achieved results)
are not yet fully articulate in the analytic tradition (in the writings of
Jerry Fodor, Daniel Dennett, Paul and Patricia Churchland, etc.), where
the important details of phenomenological analysis are largely glossed
292 Appendix
over. Yet we must proceed in phenomenology today with our eyes on the
issues of mind-in-brain that are so sharply focused in recent cognitive
science.
A philosopher well versed in both continental and analytic philosophy
observed to me recently, “It will take two hundred years for philosophy
of mind to catch up with phenomenology.” Indeed, the distinctions and
conceptualizations of phenomenology are well ahead of the literature of
analytic philosophy of mind. On the other hand, these results must today
be worked into the best results of contemporary science. And one day
soon results of neuroscience will help to refine results of phenomenology,
as we learn where and how key structures of consciousness are produced
or realized in particular patterns of neural activity in various parts of the
brain.
To deal with this bewildering complexity, from quarks to consciousness
to human language to computational systems to biological processes,
philosophy needs a proper synthesis of phenomenology and ontology,
a framework able to combine the results of phenomenology on consciousness and the results of ontology on forms of things in the world.
Although doctrines of functionalism and supervenience have stimulated
a great deal of thought about the precise ontological form of mind, there
is more to ontology than meets our eyes in this piecemeal approach to
the mind-body problem – as exciting and fruitful as the recent debates
in philosophy of mind have been. It was Wilfrid Sellars who described
philosophy’s task as seeing together, stereoscopically, the scientific and
manifest images of man. We may say instead: seeing in unity the ontological and phenomenological aspects of the world.
A Shifting Paradigm
We awake and see and hear and smell the things of morning, and the
rest of waking life, and we experience variations on these things when
dreaming. We perceive, think, feel emotion, value, will, move intentionally, act in meaningful ways, and interact socially, with varying degrees
of consciousness. We live among other sentient beings, other subjects,
notably other humans in a highly evolved social context of family and
friends, houses and carpenters, banks and economists, governments and
politicians. And all this occurs in a world we increasingly understand as
founded on elementary particles like quarks and electrons in fields of
gravity, electromagnetism, and quantum superpositions in the cosmos.
We humans, blessed and afflicted with the brain of Homo sapiens sapiens,
Appendix 293
have developed ways of studying these phenomena: the physical, the experiential, the cultural. But our disciplines think in significantly different
ways, and we are as yet unable to unify our divergent views of matter, mind,
and culture.
In the 1930s, as contemporary physics came together, Husserl diagnosed a “crisis” in intellectual history.1 With the development of
mathematical physics since Galileo, he observed, we have increasingly
“mathematized” nature, reducing its essence to mathematical forms that
distance the world of nature so described from the world of everyday life,
the “life world” as Husserl called it. We no longer understand how to
put these two “worlds” (world concepts) together. In particular, we have
