of meaning in language acquisition, seemed to bypass consciousness –
though Quine himself says consciousness is not to be denied but rather is
a mystery to be explained.5 Ordinary language philosophy of the 1950s
and 1960s followed later Wittgenstein’s seeming suggestion that mind is
in effect language and talk of“consciousness”is a muddle – although P. F.
Strawson distinguished mental and physical predicates and dug into Kant.
Modal logic led Hintikka into the logic of belief and perception, and intentionality in phenomenology. Føllesdal wrote evenly about Husserlian
intentionality, modal logic, and Quinean linguistic meaning (and indeterminacy). Then cognitive science took the computer as model of mind,
whence consciousness and even intentionality seemed to escape the theory of mind. Neuroscience spawned a different, connectionist computer
300 Appendix
model, but still consciousness remains today the chief stumbling block
for a scientific, physicalistic theory of mind.
Here is our entry. We need to study consciousness itself from the firstperson point of view, from the perspective of each of us who experience
it. And that is precisely the business of phenomenology.
My approach to phenomenology is a syncretic approach that integrates classical phenomenology (building especially on Husserl’s work)
with logical-semantic theory (in the tradition of Frege, Tarski, Carnap,
Hintikka, and Kaplan) – and, I would add, with recent cognitive neuroscience (in the spirit of Searle and others who take consciousness seriously), and indeed with the wider sweep of Western philosophy (from
Plato and Aristotle through Ockham and Aquinas to Descartes, Hume,
and Kant into Bolzano, Brentano, Husserl, and beyond). This integrative
approach is sometimes called “California phenomenology.”6 There is a
wink in this appellation, not least because the relevant philosophers are
not confined by the shores and mountains of the Golden State.
From an Ontological Point of View
A particular type of ontology is part of what I am urging in this book.
It appears in the guise of “formal ontology” and “basic ontology.” I do
not mean ontology written in a formal language such as the predicate
calculus or set theory or the computer language of the day. Rather, formal ontology concerns “formal” structures of reality, such as the formal
categories Individual, Property, State of Affairs, Number, Group, Part,
Dependence, and so on, which govern very different domains such as
the material categories Mind, Body, Culture. By “basic” ontology I mean
the study of particularly fundamental categories, including what I like to
call basic “modes of being,” such as being an individual, being a part,
being dependent, and being intentional.
As our perspective widens from issues of phenomenology to issues of
basic ontology, our conception of consciousness and its place in the world
widens. We come to see the importance of the synthesis of phenomenology and ontology. Only thereby, I believe, can we truly understand the
phenomenon of mind. And contemporary theory of mind needs to approach mind systematically in this way, or so I argue in different ways in
the present chapters.
In fact, we experience certain basic ontological structures. In perception,
for instance, I experience the distinctness and relation between “that
object before me” and myself, or“I.” The articulation of such structures in
Appendix 301
a developed ontology lies beyond the deliverance of our inner awareness
of our experience. Yet we still have a phenomenological hold on part of
the structure of the world.
It is timely now to reassert the importance of ontology in phenomenology and in contemporary philosophy of mind. I say reassert, because
ontology was explicitly used in the classical texts of phenomenology,
in Husserl and indeed Heidegger; and because in philosophy of mind
since the 1950s the mind-body problem has been attacked from positions that identify a mental state with a brain state or a functional state
of the body or a social condition of the person, or from other stances
that are specifically ontological. What is needed now is a more systematic
approach to both the phenomenological and ontological structures of
mind, especially consciousness. This metaphilosophical thesis is a corollary of the present collection of essays, which study a variety of these
aspects of phenomenology and ontology, aspects that are less than systematically appraised in the rich literature on philosophy of mind in the past
decades.
From a Historical Point of View
My aim in this book is a philosophical account of aspects of consciousness
and world. My technique is partly what may be called historical philosophy.
By this I mean that I draw philosophical analysis partly from historically
significant works, relying on interpretation of key texts along the way,
although my aim is neither exclusively nor primarily “historical.”
Many philosophers today seem to think that philosophy is done in the
absence of the voices of Plato, Aristotle, Descartes, Hume, Kant, Husserl,
Russell, Quine. “To the arguments themselves, to the concepts and theories themselves, to the phenomena themselves,” we cry. Indeed. But the
best philosophical ideas we have nearly always begin their lives clothed
in texts of the great thinkers of the past, and often we must go back and
work at understanding classical texts in order to move on with the theories and arguments themselves. Our philosophical theories are historical
products, and much of their real content lies in their evolution, in debates
along the way. Most important, in the ontology and phenomenology of
consciousness, the best groundwork is laid not in the current works of
Fodor, Dennett, and others (as exciting as these are), but in penetrating
investigations by Descartes, Kant, Brentano, Husserl, Sartre. To make real
progress, we must develop new conceptual tools sharpened by issues of
neuroscience, computer science, evolutionary theory, social theory, and
302 Appendix
other disciplines. No one I know has a full mastery of all these things, so
the work will be collective.
To understand a philosophical idea, such as the concept of intentionality or indeed of consciousness, we need to address it in texts that speak
to us (in our style and cultural context), in precise formulations (in exact
theories and arguments), and in historical genesis (in dialectic that develops or reveals motivations). These three facets of an idea are instances
of what I have called its appearance, form, and substrate (in the essay in
Chapter 1). For reasons of ontology, then, the content of a philosophical
idea lies partly in its history!
At various points along the way I have drawn on historical philosophical works, by Aristotle, Descartes, Husserl, Heidegger, Wittgenstein,
Whitehead, Quine, and others. I do not see the history of philosophy as
a dustbin of old and dead ideas. Rather, I see our current ideas as evolutionary heirs of the ideas and debates of years past, whether last year or
50 years ago or 300 years ago – or even 2,600 years ago (as I like to nod
to Anaximander at the dawn of philosophy as we know it).
To the Things Themselves
With these metaphilosophical and methodological remarks in the background, drawing on “background ideas” of our philosophical culture, the
present chapters go about their business, looking to consciousness and
its place in the world.
Notes
1. See Edmund Husserl, The Crisis of European Sciences and Transcendental Phenomenology, trans. David Carr (Evanston, Ill.: Northwestern University Press,
1970; from the posthumous German edition, 1954; original German texts
from 1935–38). See especially §§53–54 on “the paradox of subjectivity.”
2. This conception of intentionality was detailed in David Woodruff Smith and
Ronald McIntyre, Husserl and Intentionality (Dordrecht: D. Reidel, 1982), and
ramified in David Woodruff Smith, The Circle of Acquaintance (Dordrecht:
Kluwer Academic Publishers, 1989). A wider ontology for the basic theory
