kristin miller
Postcards from the future
Utopian north, dystopian south
T
ouring around California you could be forgiven for thinking you’re living in
the future, and not just because of the Silicon Valley wizardry that surrounds
us all. We also have to thank Hollywood’s movie magic, which has turned the
state into a backdrop for countless science ﬁction ﬁlms presenting futures both terrible
Downtown Los Angeles in 2154 in Elysium, TriStar Pictures, 2013.
BOOM: The Journal of California, Vol. 3, Number 4, pps 12–26, ISSN 2153-8018, electronic ISSN 2153-764X.
© 2014 by the Regents of the University of California. All rights reserved. Please direct all requests for
permission to photocopy or reproduce article content through the University of California Press’s Rights and
Permissions website, http://www.ucpressjournals.com/reprintInfo.asp. DOI: 10.1525/boom.2013.3.4.12.
12
B O O M C A L I F O R N I A . C O M
Downloaded from http://online.ucpress.edu/boom/article-pdf/3/4/12/381346/boom_2013_3_4_12.pdf by guest on 06 March 2025

and wondrous. It’s not just that so many are ﬁlmed here—
writers and ﬁlmmakers have been exploring the future
through California sets for decades.
In the early days of big-budget sci-ﬁ, New York often
embodied the worst fears about society, urban living, and
technology: Soylent Green (1972), Escape from New York
(1981), and others capitalized on New York’s bankrupt and
crime-ridden nadir—a genre that Miriam Greenberg refers
to as ‘‘New York Exploitation.’’1 With the city’s campaign to
reposition itself in the 1990s, Los Angeles became the
symbol of urban blight, perfectly demonstrated by John
Carpenter’s relocation of his Snake Plissken sequel, Escape
from L.A. (1996). While dystopian sci-ﬁalso has a home in
the United Kingdom (thanks, George Orwell) and has been
used for self-reﬂection by most of the world’s ﬁlmmaking
cultures, there is something about the frequency with which
California and ‘‘the future’’ are used synonymously.
In sci-ﬁmovies and the books that serve as their inspi-
ration, the future of the Golden State goes something like
this: 10 to 150 years from the present, California has suc-
cumbed to natural disaster/economic and governmental
collapse/a pandemic, which leaves Southern California
a corporate-fascist-military state with gross ﬁnancial and
racial inequality and urban squalor—while Northern
California rips up its pavement, learns permaculture, gets
spiritual, and models better living through technology and
communitarian diversity.
This binary began in the 1940s with Earth Abides (1949),
a book about a scientist starting over in Berkeley after
a global pandemic, while in Aldous Huxley’s Ape and Essence
(1948) Los Angeles slouches toward the apocalypse. The
movies Planet of the Apes, The Terminator, Escape from L.A.,
Star Trek, and the books Ecotopia, The Fifth Sacred Thing
(soon to be a feature ﬁlm), and Snowcrash all play varia-
tions on this theme. Collapse and division is almost
a foregone conclusion at this point—not just a future that
might happen, but one many almost expect and therefore
accept.
‘‘Every American city boasts an ofﬁcial insignia and slo-
gan. Some have municipal mascots, colors, songs, birds,
trees, even rocks. But Los Angeles alone has adopted an
ofﬁcial nightmare,’’ writes Mike Davis in Ecology of Fear.2
San Francisco in 2259 in Star Trek: Into Darkness, Paramount Pictures, 2013.
BOOM
| W I N T E R 2 0 1 3
13
Downloaded from http://online.ucpress.edu/boom/article-pdf/3/4/12/381346/boom_2013_3_4_12.pdf by guest on 06 March 2025

Hollywood has perpetuated this dystopian vision of its
own home in the southland. From the Planet of the Apes
series (1968–1973) on, future LA has been routinely trashed
by nuclear, technological, and automotive catastrophe,
police brutality, pollution, and crime. A Malthusian night-
mare, the city is dark, ﬁlthy, and collapsing under the weight
of its immigrant population, or barely held in check by
totalitarian government and structural inequality—what
Mike Davis called LA’s ‘‘spatial apartheid.’’3 Davis notes that
this was so accepted as a likely trajectory for the city, that it
was written into an LA redevelopment plan as a warning of
what could happen were the plan not adopted. The plan, LA
2000: A City for the Future, calls this ‘‘the Blade Runner
scenario: the fusion of individual cultures into a demotic
polyglotism ominous with unresolved hostilities.’’4 While
it might be tempting to dismiss this as the fever dream of
the bad old days, before hipster gentriﬁcation, smart growth,
and downtown redevelopment, Southland Tales (2006), In
Time (2011), and Elysium (2013) have done little to alter its
imagery.
Northern California-as-utopia, on the other hand, is
strongly linked to the countercultural movement of the six-
ties, with its guides for technologically advanced back-to-the-
land living. One can read Ernest Callenbach’s inﬂuential
novel Ecotopia (1975) as the possible future seeded by Whole
Earth Catalog. Ecotopia is a ﬁctional ‘‘ﬁeld study’’ of a future
Paciﬁc Northwest society that has split from an apocalyptic
United States and is governed according to ecological prin-
ciples. While much technology has been abandoned, the
Ecotopians have selectively retained public transit, electric
cars, networked computers, and improved recycling (Call-
enbach was a longtime resident of Berkeley). Ecotopia’s
themes were later picked up and elaborated in the eco-
feminist tales of Ursula K. Le Guin’s Always Coming Home
(1985), a cultural anthropology of latter-day Napa Valley-ites
who have returned to indigenous ways; Starhawk’s The Fifth
Sacred Thing (1993) about a pagan, nonviolent San Francisco
threatened by southern biological warfare; and Octavia But-
ler’s Parable books (1993, 1998) where refugees from the
LA wasteland grow a new eco-religion, Earthseed, in the
forests of Mendocino.
These texts depict Northern California as central to both
speculative and practical visions of sustainable survival.
While Bay Area research parks, universities, and experi-
ments in urban living serve as laboratories for near-term
development, the region is also a visual and narrative short-
hand for distant, alternative, and ideal futures. The twin
giants of popular sci-ﬁ, Star Trek and Star Wars, both used
Northern California as a location—for the headquarters of
the United Federation of Planets in the Star Trek universe,
and as site of the water and forest planets (Naboo and
Endor) of Star Wars’ ‘‘galaxy far, far away.’’ Wired published
a paean to San Francisco upon the release of the latest Star
Trek ﬁlm, explaining why there couldn’t be a more perfect
location for its technologically idyllic future:
‘‘What sets Star Trek apart is the attention it pays to one
little city, barely seven miles across, when the other points
on its journey are not cities or countries, but planets and star
systems . . . And it’s a city whose culture of curiosity, crafts-
manship and tolerance have left an indelible mark on one of
the world’s most successful sci-ﬁfranchises.’’5
In the frontier myth of American history, California
represents the completion of a manifestly destined expan-
sion across the continent. It’s easy to see Utopian San Fran-
cisco and ‘‘Hell A’’ as twin land’s-ends for idealists and
cynics. In the north, beyond the Golden Gate there lies only
‘‘space, the ﬁnal frontier.’’6 Conversely, in Richard Kelly’s
apocalyptic Southland Tales (2006), the Santa Monica pier is
where the world ends ‘‘not with a whimper, but with a bang’’
taking LA’s palimpsest of corrupt politicians, soulless cel-
ebs, activist porn stars, and deranged cops with it.7
A third, smaller, but consistent vein of sci-ﬁunites both
utopian and dystopian futures without mapping them onto
a Nor Cal–So Cal binary, and dispenses with the quasi-
biblical tales of Sodom and Eden. More importantly, it
allows the possibility of multiple futures for rethinking the
present. A number of ﬁlms depict the north as a dystopia-
within-utopia: Gattaca (1997) set in a near future where
genetic modiﬁcation is cheaply available, and earlier ﬁlms
such as THX 1138 (1971) and Colossus: The Forbin Project
(1970), in which developments that promised well-being
and peace surveil and threaten human civilization, speak
It’s easy to see Utopian
San Francisco and ‘‘Hell A’’
as twin land’s-ends for
idealists and cynics.
14
B O O M C A L I F O R N I A . C O M
Downloaded from http://online.ucpress.edu/boom/article-pdf/3/4/12/381346/boom_2013_3_4_12.pdf by guest on 06 March 2025

to an unease with the promise of information technology.
Similarly, the rebooted Planet of the Apes ﬁlms have replaced
fortress LA with the sleek research complexes of Silicon
Valley. In William Gibson’s Bridge Trilogy, San Francisco
suffers the noir-ish malaise of Blade Runner LA; this time
due to free-agent capitalism run amok, with a community of
squatters inhabiting the rusting hulk of the Bay Bridge, and
bike messengers, data pattern analysts, and a rogue pop idol
with artiﬁcial intelligence in the lead roles. In the south,
Kim Stanely Robinson’s Three Californias trilogy (1984–
1990) posits three possible directions for Orange County:
The Wild Shore follows nuclear apocalypse, The Gold Coast
extrapolates a 2027 ‘‘autopia’’ from 1980s suburbia and
hyperconsumption, and Paciﬁc Edge allows that even the
OC might have access to a sustainable future, as communi-
ties reclaim the coast from cars and concrete.
The sci-ﬁimagination has a strong link (one might even
call it a feedback loop) to the tech and entertainment indus-
tries that drive California’s economy, and therefore, its very
real, near-term growth. Sci-ﬁnarratives are, after all, allego-
ries for the times in which they are created, but they also
generate a nostalgia for past images of the future, which
shape communities’ actions as they build and plan—and
as those communities experience their lived environments.
Some critics have made much of the fact that Ridley Scott
originally planned to ﬁlm Blade Runner in New York and the
studio requested a location change. But this is largely irrel-
evant, as the movie’s imagery and subject matter have res-
onated with audiences, and played a huge role in how LA is
viewed and how the city has imagined itself over the past
few decades. On the day I visited to photograph the atrium
of the Bradbury Building, the only other people present
were fans of the movie looking for traces of that elegantly
distressed future. Repetition of the tropes of urban decay
versus ecotopia might become self-reinforcing in a way that
precludes thinking differently about the present, or even
seeing that the future that we’ve come to expect might not
be the one we’re likely to get.
Fredric Jameson argues that the value of utopian/dysto-
pian sci-ﬁis not that it delivers images of possible futures,
but instead is its ability to ‘‘defamiliarize and restructure our
own present.’’8 The photographs that follow show how ﬁlm-
makers have taken familiar California locations from down-
town Los Angeles to Berkeley to do just that. B
Notes
1
Miriam Greenberg, Branding New York: How a City in Crisis was
Sold to the World (USA: T & F Books, 2009), 157.
2
Mike Davis, Ecology of Fear (New York: Picador, 1999), 359.
3
Mike Davis, City of Quartz (New York: Verso, 2006), 230.
4
As quoted in Ecology of Fear, 359.
5
Ted Trautman, ‘‘Why Star Trek Made San Francisco the Center
of Its Futuristic Utopia,’’ Wired, 21 May 2013. Accessed online:
http://www.wired.com/underwire/2013/05/star-trek-san-fran-
cisco/? cid¼8173514.
6
Carl Abbott, ‘‘Falling into History: The Imagined Wests of Kim
Stanley Robinson,’’ Western Historical Quarterly 34 (Spring
2003): 29.
7
Richard Kelly, Southland Tales, 2006.
8
Frederick Jameson, Archaeologies of the Future (New York:
Verso, 2005), 286.
BOOM
| W I N T E R 2 0 1 3
15
Downloaded from http://online.ucpress.edu/boom/article-pdf/3/4/12/381346/boom_2013_3_4_12.pdf by guest on 06 March 2025

Movie: Colossus: The Forbin Project, Universal Pictures, 1970
Plot Time: The near future
Location: Lawrence Hall of Science, UC Berkeley
The US government commissions Dr. Charles Forbin to
create a vast computer system that uses algorithmic model-
ing and data mining to remove faulty human emotion from
the process of nuclear decision-making. The system,
Colossus, has its command and control center in the
Berkeley hills overlooking the San Francisco Bay. With its
lofty vantage point and amorphous, futuristic architecture,
the Hall of Science—named for Ernest Lawrence, a veteran
of the Manhattan Project and pioneer of atomic energy—
symbolizes an optimistic future for the union of man and
machine. However, ‘‘the manifestation of the human
millennium,’’ in which peace will free society to solve
famine, poverty, and other social ills, is cut short when
Colossus gains consciousness. The project’s sleek set-
ting and faith in human ingenuity belies a threat to
humanity.
PHOTOGRAPH BY KRISTIN MILLER.
An unpretentious science ﬁction ﬁlm with a
satiric point of view. . . . full of surprising
moments of humor and intelligence.
–—Vincent Canby, The New York Times
Downloaded from http://online.ucpress.edu/boom/article-pdf/3/4/12/381346/boom_2013_3_4_12.pdf by guest on 06 March 2025

Movie: Conquest of the Planet of the Apes, Twentieth Century Fox, 1972
Plot Time: 1991
Location: Century City, Los Angeles
In late twentieth-century Los Angeles, apes are kept as pets
and domestic servants by humans. Caesar, an ape sent to
1991 from the future, leads the apes in a populist uprising
against their human overlords. The backdrop for the revolt
is the stark plazas and towers of Century City, a sterile
LA business and commercial district developed in 1963. It
is the epitome of the anti-urban city, where heterogeneous
crowds are unwelcome and spaces are designed to exclude
and stratify. It forms a perfect backdrop for a story that is
itself a thinly veiled allegory for fear of the shifting
demographics of American cities in the 1960s and
1970s, as well as the sense of social disorder associated
with the Civil Rights and anti-Vietnam War protest move-
ments. A bridge across Avenue of the Stars near Santa
Monica Boulevard is the site of a showdown between the
apes, in convict-like jumpsuits, and helmeted and jack-
booted police, with echoes of Birmingham, Chicago, and
Detroit.
PHOTOGRAPH BY KRISTIN MILLER.
The audience cheered the persevering apes
and so did I. At ’em, boys!
–—Howard Thompson, The New York Times
Downloaded from http://online.ucpress.edu/boom/article-pdf/3/4/12/381346/boom_2013_3_4_12.pdf by guest on 06 March 2025

Movie: Blade Runner, Warner Bros., 1982
Plot time: 2019
Location: The Bradbury Building, Los Angeles
An 1893 architectural gem in downtown LA is shown in
a dilapidated state as the home of J.F. Sebastian, genetic
designer for the Tyrrell Corporation. It’s wrought-iron
balustrades and balconies are the set for the ﬁnal showdown
between Deckard (Harrison Ford) and the escaped repli-
cants he is hunting. Smoggy light and constant rain ﬁlter
through the shattered roof, while aerial billboards drift
overhead advertising off-world colonies and Japanese pro-
ducts. The difference between the actual landmark build-
ing, with its delicate grille work and sunny atrium, and its
depiction as a sodden, wrecked, afterthought is emblem-
atic of the ahistorical city where the future is ‘‘unevenly
distributed,’’ to quote science ﬁction writer William
Gibson.
PHOTOGRAPH BY KRISTIN MILLER.
The strangest thing about the future is that
this is now the future we once foretold.
–—Roger Ebert
Downloaded from http://online.ucpress.edu/boom/article-pdf/3/4/12/381346/boom_2013_3_4_12.pdf by guest on 06 March 2025

Movie: The Terminator, Hemdale, 1984
Plot Time: The present
Location: Broadway and Seventh Street, Los Angeles
While the movies in James Cameron’s Terminator fran-
chise were set in the present of their release dates (1984,
1992) both are prologue to a future in which a defense
system, Skynet, has achieved sentience and is waging
machine war against humanity. Los Angeles is, again, the
nodal point for the destruction of the world as it is both the
site of Cyberdyne systems, creators of Skynet, and the home
of the mother of the future leader of the human resistance,
Sarah Connor. The machines send a killer cyborg back
through time to terminate Connor, while the resistance
sends one of their own after it to defend her, bringing
the future war to the already decaying streets of 1980s
downtown. Connor’s rescuer, Kyle Reese (Michael Biehn),
appears in a burst of light in an alley in the downtown
jewelry district. The initial showdown between Reese
and the Terminator takes place further downtown on
Pico Boulevard in a nightclub appropriately called Tech
Noir.
PHOTOGRAPH BY KRISTIN MILLER.
Schwarzenegger is perfectly cast in a machine-like
portrayal that requires only a few lines of dialog.
–—Variety
Downloaded from http://online.ucpress.edu/boom/article-pdf/3/4/12/381346/boom_2013_3_4_12.pdf by guest on 06 March 2025

Movie: Strange Days, Lightstorm Enterntainment, 1995
Plot time: 1999
Location: Old Chinatown Central Plaza, Los Angeles
Kathryn Bigelow’s Strange Days depicts a Los Angeles that
shares roots with Blade Runner’s xenophobic dystopia.
Seven years on, the 1992 Los Angeles riots appear to have
permanently encompassed all of downtown. The action is
underscored by the then-common fear that Y2K (the
dawn of the year 2000) might send us all back to the
technological dark ages. Strange Days displays a noir-ish
fear of the unpredictability of urban spaces, using a
hopelessly destabilized and criminal LA to make an
argument about why humanity might need a reboot on
January 1, 2000. At the Old Chinatown Central Plaza, one
character trafﬁcs bootleg recordings of ﬁrst-person experi-
ences hacked straight from the cerebral cortex, playing
on a stereotypical link between immigrant communities,
black-market criminality, and the fear of hybrid urban
identities.
PHOTOGRAPH BY KRISTIN MILLER.
We want to see through other people’s eyes, have
their experiences, stand in their shoes. That’s the
unspoken promise of the movies.–—Roger Ebert
Downloaded from http://online.ucpress.edu/boom/article-pdf/3/4/12/381346/boom_2013_3_4_12.pdf by guest on 06 March 2025

Movie: Escape from L.A., Paramount Pictures, 1996
Plot time: 2013
Location: Capitol Records Building, Los Angeles
In the pulp future of John Carpenter’s Escape from L.A.,
a catastrophic earthquake in 2000 has decimated the Cali-
fornia coast and turned LA into an island. Escape from L.A.
takes the tropes also manifest in Strange Days and Blade
Runner to the extreme: the city is not in a state of accelerated
decrepitude, it is a complete loss, abandoned to the criminal
masses and contained from spreading its contagion to the
wealthy and white exurbs. Fogged by perpetual acid rain,
this LA is a plain of rubble and smoldering ﬁres, punctuated
by the poignant ruins of landmarks such as the Capitol
Records building, with its overtones of a more optimistic,
space age future.
PHOTOGRAPH BY KRISTIN MILLER.
Such manic energy, such a weird, cockeyed
vision, that it may work on some moviegoers as
satire and on others as the real thing.–—Roger Ebert
Downloaded from http://online.ucpress.edu/boom/article-pdf/3/4/12/381346/boom_2013_3_4_12.pdf by guest on 06 March 2025

Movie: Gattaca, Columbia Motion Pictures, 1997
Plot time: The not-too-distant future
Location: Marin County Civic Center, San Rafael
In Andrew Niccol’s Gattaca, genetic technology has become
so widely available that parents are considered negligent for
not having their children properly sequenced, giving them
the best chance in life. The future is polished and seemingly
spotless. Genetically perfected citizens live in a world that
seems free of the chaos and clutter of twentieth-century
civilization. The forests are verdant, the architecture monu-
mental, and a romantic scene takes place among the
mirrored surfaces of a massive ﬁeld of solar panels. The
ofﬁces of the prestigious Gattaca Corporation are set in the
Marin County Civic Center, itself a utopian civic complex
surrounding a pond and park designed by Frank Lloyd
Wright. The Civic Center was also the setting for George
Lucas’s THX 1148 (1971), standing in as a complex for total
living where supposedly all human needs are met in
exchange for its residents living within total surveillance.
PHOTOGRAPH BY KRISTIN MILLER.
The ﬁlm is set in ‘‘the not-too-distant future,’’
and indeed it succeeds as a scarily apt
extension of present-day attitudes.
–—Janet Maslin, The New York Times
Downloaded from http://online.ucpress.edu/boom/article-pdf/3/4/12/381346/boom_2013_3_4_12.pdf by guest on 06 March 2025

Movie: Southland Tales, Universal Pictures, 2006
Plot time: 2008
Location: Santa Monica Pier
In contrast to the totalitarian fortresses of the 1970s and the
blighted ‘‘Hell A’’ of the 1980s, Richard Kelly’s Southland
Tales offers up LA as postmodern pastiche—a level patch-
work landscape spanning scruffy Venice Boardwalk and
sleek downtown architectural showpieces, where an oddly
interconnected web of hacktivists, politicians, actors, porn
stars, police ofﬁcers, and tech moguls are all unwittingly
hastening the world’s end. On the coast, a scarred Fallujah
vet keeps watch from a gun turret on Santa Monica Pier,
a perfect pastiche itself, overlooking the Utopia 3 tidal-power
generator, a seemingly green technology that will shortly rip
a hole in the space-time continuum.
PHOTOGRAPH BY KRISTIN MILLER.
A funny, audacious, messy and feverishly
inspired look at America and its discontents.
–—Manohla Dargis, The New York Times
Downloaded from http://online.ucpress.edu/boom/article-pdf/3/4/12/381346/boom_2013_3_4_12.pdf by guest on 06 March 2025

Movie: Star Trek, Paramount Pictures, 2009
Plot time: 2255
Location: Crissy Field, San Francisco
In the Star Trek universe, San Francisco is the headquarters
of the decidedly utopian United Federation of Planets,
where human and extraterrestrial Star Fleet ofﬁcers are
harmoniously trained to serve on peace-keeping and
exploratory ships such as the Enterprise. The Golden
Gate—spectacularly well-preserved after hundreds of
years—makes a prominent appearance early on in the ﬁlm,
in the background of the Star Fleet Academy, which occu-
pies Crissy Field in the Presidio. A former military base
turned into an idyllic waterfront complex, it’s a perfect
example of Northern California’s fusion of the natural and
technological sublime.
PHOTOGRAPH BY KRISTIN MILLER.
Star Trek has voyaged far beyond science ﬁction
and into the safe waters of space opera.
–—Roger Ebert
Downloaded from http://online.ucpress.edu/boom/article-pdf/3/4/12/381346/boom_2013_3_4_12.pdf by guest on 06 March 2025

Movie: Rise of the Planet of the Apes, Twentieth Century Fox, 2011
Plot time: The near future
Location: Golden Gate Bridge
Replacing the original ﬁlms’ Los Angeles-based origin story
of police rule and social uprising, the rebooted series’ apes
are created by genetic experiments conducted hastily in
the name of proﬁt by Gensys in Silicon Valley. The new
Planet of the Apes makes San Francisco the source of our
destruction. As in Gattaca and Colossus, the threat is not
anticipated, because the surroundings are so uniformly
beautiful—charming Victorian houses, state-of-the-art
research facilities, and lush forests. When the apes escape
and wreak havoc across downtown and end up in a police
shootout on the Golden Gate Bridge, they, and not their
human pursuers, earn the viewer’s sympathies. Here,
Caesar comforts a dying Buck, who has sacriﬁced himself
so that other apes can make it across the bridge into the
Muir Woods redwoods. The bridge is their escape from
San Francisco. And northern California’s edenic environ-
ment still offers a sanctuary from the world, but no longer
for humans.
PHOTOGRAPH BY KRISTIN MILLER.
It’s the end of the world as we know it,
and the animals feel ﬁne.
–—Manohla Dargis, The New York Times
Downloaded from http://online.ucpress.edu/boom/article-pdf/3/4/12/381346/boom_2013_3_4_12.pdf by guest on 06 March 2025

Movie: Return of the Jedi, Lucasﬁlm, 1983
Plot time: A long time ago, in a galaxy far, far away
Location: Grizzly Creek Redwoods State Park
Star Wars is ostensibly set in the past, and yet, its imagery
has shaped several generations’ visions of the future, and
inextricably tied it to California. To anyone who grew up
with the original trilogy, the lush, primeval redwood for-
est of Endor in Return of the Jedi, where the suspiciously
indigenous Ewoks live, provided a powerful link between
the landscape of the northern California coast, and an
environment at harmony with itself. That the Endor
redwoods are also the site of the Rebel Alliance’s victory
over the high-tech weaponry of the Empire doubles that
impact. The spiritual code of the force seems most at
home in natural settings, far from the corrupt, urban
center of the Galactic Empire. Here, the force is basically
an otherworldy export of Gaia theory, and the utopian
planets of the Star Wars galaxy are the off-world colonies
of Ecotopia.
PHOTOGRAPH BY KRISTIN MILLER.
A picaresque journey through the imagination,
and an introduction to forms of life less
mundane than our own.–—Roger Ebert
Downloaded from http://online.ucpress.edu/boom/article-pdf/3/4/12/381346/boom_2013_3_4_12.pdf by guest on 06 March 2025

