Azeez Jasim Mohammed
Arabic into English   

Literary Translation in Practice
“This meticulously thorough, multi-faceted model of Arabic-English translation brings an invalua­
ble, illuminating, problem-solving, practical methodology to the field, clearly and richly illustrated 
by resonant case studies.”
—Kamilla Elliott, Professor of Literature and Media, English Literature 
and Creative Writing, Lancaster University, UK
“Literary Translation in Practice is a contribution that reflects the author's own experience of teach­
ing university level students in the Middle East universities. Based on this background, the author 
has brought out a treasure trove of study material where the students will be exposed not only to the 
short stories translated in English, but also the original source material in Arabic. They can experi­
ence at firsthand the difficulties of translating ideas across cultures. (‘Lost in Translation’ is a real 
pitfall.) This book will lead to more critical thinking among readers and enrich their experience.”
—Kajal Chakravarti, Associate Professor, Retired Head of Department 
of English, Ferguson College, Pune, India

Azeez  Jasim Mohammed
Editor
Literary Translation 
in Practice
Arabic into English

Editor
Azeez Jasim Mohammed
Department of English Language 
College of Education 
Imam Ja’afar Al-Sadiq University (IJSU)
Baghdad, Iraq
ISBN 978-3-031-59332-1 	
ISBN 978-3-031-59333-8  (eBook)
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-59333-8
© The Editor(s) (if applicable) and The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Nature 
Switzerland AG 2024
This work is subject to copyright. All rights are solely and exclusively licensed by the Publisher, whether 
the whole or part of the material is concerned, specifically the rights of translation, reprinting, reuse 
of illustrations, recitation, broadcasting, reproduction on microfilms or in any other physical way, and 
transmission or information storage and retrieval, electronic adaptation, computer software, or by similar 
or dissimilar methodology now known or hereafter developed.
The use of general descriptive names, registered names, trademarks, service marks, etc. in this publication 
does not imply, even in the absence of a specific statement, that such names are exempt from the relevant 
protective laws and regulations and therefore free for general use.
The publisher, the authors and the editors are safe to assume that the advice and information in this book 
are believed to be true and accurate at the date of publication. Neither the publisher nor the authors or 
the editors give a warranty, expressed or implied, with respect to the material contained herein or for any 
errors or omissions that may have been made. The publisher remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional 
claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.
Cover design by eStudioCalamar
This Palgrave Macmillan imprint is published by the registered company Springer Nature Switzerland 
AG
The registered company address is: Gewerbestrasse 11, 6330 Cham, Switzerland
If disposing of this product, please recycle the paper.

v
Acknowledgments
I would like first to thank all contributors for their kind patience and cooperation 
in responding to my repeated and insistent questions. Grateful thanks to the trans­
lators in this collection for making their experience in translation available to the 
public. My sincere thanks go to Dr Musallam Al-Ma’ani, Dean of ZCW, for intro­
ducing my idea to academics in the field of translation for relevant suggestions.
I cannot forget Klaus Stierstorfer’s gentle support during my visit to Muenster 
and my meeting with his staff at Muenster University to call for contributions to 
the proposed book. Thanks to Florian Klaeger, D.R. Pattanaik, Yogesh Sinha, and 
all contributors and translators for agreeing to participate in this work and sub­
mitting their contributions. Heartful thanks go to Ms Indu Narayanan for her kind 
support with publishing the collection.
My gratitude to Palgrave Macmillan for their patience and advice during the 
preparation of this collection, with special thanks to my editorial assistants Cathy 
Scott and Bhavya Rattan.
My heartful thanks to my family members, my wife and my little daughter 
whose character is the heroine of some of the stories in this collection, and my eld­
est sister who has continued to remind me of the deadlines for submission of the 
final draft. To be honest, without them, final submission of this book would have 
taken much longer.
Finally, my thanks to all those whose names have slipped my mind.

vii
Contents
1	
Introduction. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 	
1
Azeez Jasim Mohammed
Part I  Non-Arabic Speaking Reader’s Comments on Written 
Works in English by Arabic Native Speaker
2.
Commentary on ‘The Monkey’s Profession’ (الغابة في القرد مهنة) 
and ‘One Way’: (عودة بال ذهاب): Practical observations 
on form knowledge in translation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 	
9
Florian Klaeger
Part II  Translation of Arabic Texts into English and Comments 
by Arabic Native Speakers
3	
Translating Arabic Text into English: Theory and Practice. .  .  .  . . . 	
29
Ali R. Al-Hassnawi
4	
Issues in Translation: Three Different Target Texts. .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . 	
45
Harith Ismael Turki
5	
Translating Arabic Text into English: Concepts and Practices . .  . . 	
71
Abdulkhaliq Alazzawie
6	
Translating Arabic Text into English: Form and Meaning. .  .  .  . . . . 	
97
Rafid Ghaeb
7	
Arabic Translation into English: Between “sense for sense” 
and “word for word” . .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 	
109
Azeez Jasim Mohammed
8	
Translating Arabic Text into English: Reading 
and Understanding. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 	
133
Eyhab Abdulrazak Bader Eddin

Contents
viii
9	
Non-Arabic Speaking Readers’ Perspective. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . 	
149
Yogesh Sinha and Dipti Ranjan Pattanaik
Part III  Non-Arabic Speaking Reader’s Comments on Translated 
Texts into English by Arabic Native Speaker
10	 Literary Translation in Practice . .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 	
173
Azeez Jasim Mohammed
Index. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 	
185

ix
Notes on Contributors
Ali R. Al-Hassnawi  is an associate professor of linguistics and translation. He re­
ceived his Ph.D. in linguistics and translation in 2000, developing a widely recog­
nized model for the analysis of shifts in translation between English and Arabic. He 
completed a post-doctoral degree in humanities at the Onassis Foundation, where 
he became a Fellow in 2002. He also holds a Master’s degree in linguistics (1994), a 
Bachelor’s degree in English language and arts (1988) and a Diploma in Education 
(1984). Al-Hassnawi has authored more than 20 research papers and articles, many 
of which are published in international journals with high citation impact.
Abdulkhaliq Alazzawie  holds an M.A. and Ph.D. in linguistics from Canadian 
universities. With teaching experience spanning universities in Canada, the UAE, 
and Oman, he's adept in English language, linguistics, and translation at various lev­
els. His research, published in international Scopus-indexed journals, covers syntax, 
discourse analysis, pragmatics, and translation.
Eyhab Abdulrazak Bader Eddin  is an assistant professor of Translation at Nizwa 
University, Oman. In recent years he has mainly taught on the M.A. programme. 
With a Ph.D. on A. J. Arberry’s translation of Al-Muallaqat and an M.A. on Gi­
bran Khali’s The Prophet, he is passionately interested in classical Arabic, and has 
published extensively in the fields of linguistics and translation in such refereed 
journals as Translation Journal, British Journal of Middle Eastern Studies, AWEJ, 
JSAI, and ZDMG.
Rafid Ghaeb  is an associate professor and head of the Department of English Lan­
guage and Translation, Al-Mansour University College, Baghdad, Iraq.
Florian Klaeger  is Professor of English Literature at the University of Bayreuth, 
Germany. He holds a Ph.D. from the University of Düsseldorf and is the author of 
two monographs, Forgone Nations (2006) and Reading into the Stars (2018), as 
well as numerous articles and book chapters on early modern and contemporary lit­
erature. His research interests include questions of literary form, diasporic writing, 
and the relationship between literature and science.

Notes on Contributors
x
D. R. Pattanaik  teaches in the Department of English, Banaras Hindu Universi­
ty, Varanasi, India. He is the recipient of a Fulbright Fellowship, Charles Wallace 
Fellowship, and Shastri Indo-Canadian Institute Fellowship, and holds the Erikson 
Scholar in Residence position for his scholarly enterprise and creative writing. His 
novel The Life and Times of Banka Harichandan has just been published by Simon 
and Schuster.
Yogesh Sinha  is an assistant professor in the Department of English at Ohio Uni­
versity, Athens, USA. Since 2019, he has collaborated with participants of the Elon 
Research Seminar to explore writing beyond the university. With over 30 years’ 
experience as a professor and associate professor of English spanning five countries 
(Oman, Yemen, Ethiopia, India, and the USA) on three continents (Asia, Africa, and 
America), he has made significant contributions to publications covering various 
topics including writing studies, cultural studies, applied linguistics, and rhetoric 
and communication. His recent research has been published in a number of reput­
ed journals, including Composition Forum and The WAC Journal. Additionally, Dr 
Sinha serves as secretary of the Writing Through the Lifespan Standing Group at 
the Conference on College Composition and Communication (CCCC). He has also 
held leadership roles in the Standards Professional Council and the Higher Educa­
tion Interest Section at the TESOL International Association, USA.
Harith Ismael Turki  is an associate professor in Modern British and American 
Drama who has been teaching for over 17 years. He obtained his Ph.D. in Iraq in 
2009. He has taught at different universities in Iraq and Turkey. Currently he is 
teaching in the Faculty of Letters, Department of Western Languages and Literature 
at Karabuk University.

xi
List of Translators
Ahmed Hamad Kareem  Department of English Language, University of Kirkuk, 
Iraq.
Aseel Hamad Al-Azzawi  Department of English Language, University of Tikrit, 
Iraq.
Renad Said Nabeel  Postgraduate student, Faculty of Arts, Port Said University.
Dina Ali  Teaching assistant, Faculty of Arts, Port Said University.
Walaa Sultan  Postgraduate student, Faculty of Arts, Port Said University.
Husamulddin Al-Faisali  Ph.D. Scholar, Karabuk University, Turkey.
Mohammed Talalwa  Ph.D. Scholar, Karabuk University, Turkey.
Noaf Abdallah Rashid Al Badi  Freelance translator, B.A. in English Language 
and Translation, Sohar University, 2023.
Thaer Al-Abdullah  is an ELT lecturer at College of Banking and Financial Studies 
(CBFS). He holds an MSc in translation from Sultan Qaboos University, Oman. 
Previously, he worked at Oman Dental College, Muscat University and Al Zahra 
College for Women in the General Foundation Program and the Department of Eng­
lish Language and Literature. With nearly a decade of experience in higher educa­
tion (foundation and post-foundation), he is a proud advocate of lifelong learning 
and professional growth.
Suaad Kadhim Zayer  is a lecturer in the Department of English, Faculty of Edu­
cation, Imam Ja’afar Al-Sadiq University, where she has taught language and trans­
lation courses for B.A. students since 2014. She holds an M.A. in translation studies 
from Baghdad University, College of Languages, Iraq. She has been translating 
from Arabic into English and vice versa since 2004.
Mohammed Abdulrahman  is a faculty member in the Department of English, 
Faculty of Education, Imam Ja’afar Al-Sadiq University, Baghdad, Iraq. He holds 
an M.A. in English literature. He is a member of the Iraqi Translators Association.

List of Translators
xii
Asma Yahya Jaffal  is a poet and writer in imagination. Her first poetry collection 
was translated and published by Dar Jeem, Baghdad, in 2024. She currently works 
as a faculty member and co-ordinator at Department of English, Faculty of Educa­
tion, Imam Ja’afar Al-Sadiq University, Baghdad, Iraq. She holds an M.A. in Eng­
lish literature and she is a member of the Iraqi Translators Association.
Hayder Ban Reekab  is a faculty member in the Department of English, Faculty 
of Education at Imam Ja’afar Al-Sadiq University, Baghdad, Iraq. He is also a play­
wright and stage director and has staged plays including The Balance, A Trial of All 
Times, Blood Red Rose and Pupa. He holds an M.A. in English Literature with a 
specialization in Renaissance drama.

1
Chapter 1
Introduction
Azeez Jasim Mohammed
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2024
A. Jasim Mohammed (ed.), Literary Translation in Practice, 
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-59333-8_1
Arabic-speaking translators fluent in their comprehension of their native lan­
guage need to know how the non-Arabic speaking (NAS) reader thinks about their 
English translation of the source text. They also need to know to what extent their 
translation is capable of transferring the idea conveyed in their native language 
and making it readily understandable for the NAS reader. If students can read and 
translate the source text written in their native language, the question, on one hand, 
is: will they be able to render the idea that they comprehend in the source text 
suitably for comprehension by the NAS reader in the target text? This book, on the 
other hand, aims to clarify for both the non-Arabic speaking and Arabic-speaking 
reader how each thinks about the thesis rendered in the translated text. It answers 
the questions: Can both the Arabic-speaking reader of the source text and the 
non-Arabic speaking reader of the target text comprehend the idea written by the 
author in the source text exactly as it is? To what extent does the translator succeed 
in achieving this end?
The pedagogical process in this book simulates the work of non-English speak­
ing students. It starts by providing the source text to a range of Arabic-speaking 
translators who did their undergraduate degree in translation studies or English 
language studies at different universities. Commentaries and feedback on the 
translations are provided by experienced Arabic native-speaker academics who 
teach English language and/or translation studies at university level, who then give 
their own translation of the text. When posing their comments they keep the fol­
lowing in mind:
a.	 What statements, sentences, phrases and/or words did you find it difficult to 
translate into English?
b.	 How could you solve the problem?
c.	 Did you consult any external source to solve the problems you encountered, 
such as dictionaries, websites, translation software, senior colleagues?
A. J. Mohammed (*) 
Department of English, College of Education, Imam Ja’afar Al-Sadiq University (IJSU), 
Baghdad, Al-Qahira District, Iraq

2
A. J. Mohammed
d.	 What translation system do you follow? Do you, for example, rely on any 
theory of translation  or use a textbook as a guide? Or do you have your own 
method?
e.	 Give examples of any statement, sentence, phrase and/or word that needed time 
to translate.
Once the final draft has been received from the academic contributor, all the files 
are forwarded to non-Arabic speaking readers for further commentaries on the 
final drafts. The role of the NAS readers is to provide a commentary on the target 
text and suggest solutions where necessary. They consider the following questions:
a.	 What statement, sentence, phrase and/or word did you find it difficult to grasp?
b.	 What do you consider a suitable substitute for each difficult or confusable sen­
tence, phrase, word, etc.?
c.	 Did you have any difficulty understanding the context of the story? If yes, how 
can you suggest an improvement for understanding the text?
d.	 Is the main idea of the story clear? Did you have any difficulty understanding 
the text as a whole? Specify.
e.	 Did you come across any statement, sentence, phrase and/or word which you 
feel reflect(s) the effect of the Arabic native language on the translated text? 
Can you suggest a substitute?
The book is in three parts. The first part consists of a single chapter about bilingual 
literature writing (Arabic and English). It contains two stories authored by the edi­
tor of this book in both English and Arabic. The stories demonstrate how the same 
idea can be retained in a text written in both Arabic and English. It shows how the 
author thinks, enabling the translator to think in the same way while translating 
from Arabic into English. Thinking of the death of the author as a literary theory, 
this chapter is intended to show the author as a translator. The texts are followed 
by comments and criticism by Florian Klaeger as a non-Arabic speaking reader. 
He comments on the comprehensibility of the text and the difficulties or ambigu­
ities third parties from non-Arabic speaking communities may face when reading 
the English texts. He clarifies the extent to which a text written or translated by 
an Arabic-speaking author can be understood by a non-Arabic speaking reader. 
Klaeger comments on the texts followed by examples of statements that he feels 
are vague and unclear to him as a non-Arabic speaking reader. To make things 
clear to students, he answers these questions: what possible idioms can be substi­
tuted for statements and/or sentences that are difficult to understand? How can the 
translator avoid using such statements, phrases, and/or sentences from a non-Ara­
bic native speaker viewpoint?
At the end of the chapter, students will be able to understand how the NAS 
reader thinks about the following:
a.	 Ambiguous and confusing words or terms used by the translator.
b.	 The Arabic language, Arabic literature, and Arabic culture.
c.	 The difference between Western and Eastern short stories.

3
1  Introduction
d.	 The questions raised in the minds of native Arabic speakers while reading the 
translations of stories.
Part II consists of seven chapters. Six are specifically for Arabic-speaking transla­
tors and academics, and one is for the two NAS readers who look at the text from 
a non-Arabic speaking perspective. Each story in the first six chapters of this part 
is authored by the editor himself and translated by a professional translator. The 
content of the stories, the plot, is derived from daily life. The students are pre­
sented with a situation or an event that they will have experienced in real life. This 
can make it easier for beginners to translate a text from Arabic into English. The 
students are also asked to translate a part of the text before reading the translation 
and to compare their own translation with that of the professional, then to review 
comments from an Arabic-speaking academic and a non-Arabic speaking reader, 
both teachers of English. The commentaries and critiques by translation and lit­
erature professionals act as a bridge between their translation and the translators 
themselves. The techniques of translating the literary text from the Arabic source 
language into the English target language, and the difficulties the learner may face 
when translating the text, are explained. This part also sheds light on the theories 
that help professional translators. The editor reviews the translated texts and com­
ments on each translation in the introduction. Each chapter provides both Arabic 
and English texts, preceded by a critical study of translation theories.
The draft translation is forwarded to a contributor of a chapter who provides 
commentaries on the student’s translation by checking the difficulties the trans­
lator faces while translating the text. The exception is Chapter 6, in which the 
contributor gives general comments after translating the source text himself. In 
Chapter 8 the draft translations are not shown and the students remain anonymous 
at their own request. The contributor gives examples of the statements and/or sen­
tences that were difficult to translate, making the context easier for the non-Ar­
abic speaking reader to understand. The contributor suggests solutions to these 
problems.
Part II ends with a chapter by two NAS readers who are English Language 
teachers at university level and give critical comments on the final translation of 
the six stories. Yogesh Sinha reads the translated text and suggests the extent to 
which the text can be understood. Yogesh starts by showing the difficulties that the 
non-Arabic speaking reader may face reading such translations. He gives exam­
ples of appropriate substitutes for each statement, phrase and/or sentence in the 
text and comments on each difficult point, statement, phrase, word and/or sentence 
he encountered while reading the translated texts. The chapter focuses on the fol­
lowing notes on the target texts given by NAS readers:
–	 Difficulties and substitutes
–	 Careful understanding of the context
–	 Understanding the main idea
–	 Influence of the Arabic native language
–	 Overall understanding of the story 

4
A. J. Mohammed
In his review, Dipti Ranjan Pattanaik pays great attention to the plot and to under­
standing the main idea of the story. The students can check whether the NAS 
reader is correct in his understanding and analyses of the text. If not, the students 
will be asked to spot the main confusing points in the story that misled the NAS 
reader. An academic teacher experienced in translation, Pattanaik comments on 
the translation of each story and suggests how suitable the translation is for the 
reader from a theoretical viewpoint. His comments are supported with examples 
and questions for discussion.
Part III consists of a single chapter that discusses a story translated by two 
translators from different communities and backgrounds. Both are Arabic native 
speakers and academics with MAs in translation studies. There are no third-party 
commentaries or feedback, but the editor raises some questions for students to 
consider.
The book is designed as a link between the Arabic and English languages in 
the classroom from a literary viewpoint. It is aimed at students in departments of 
English language and translation in Arab countries, since they are studying trans­
lation from Arabic into English which is widely needed. While as Arabic native 
speakers they may be good at translating into Arabic, they may not be so good into 
English. There is a severe shortage of teaching resources for Arabic-to-English 
translation. The aim of this book is for students to learn how to translate a literary 
text into English easily.
Students will need to navigate between chapters to sequence the main ideas 
of how to translate the text; notes guide students to the chapter concerned. The 
intended learning outcomes are given at the end of each chapter. The following 
outcomes should be achieved by students by the end of the book:
a.	 To be aware of the difficulties of rendering English translations for Arabic-
speaking translators.
b.	 To be able to differentiate between a text written in the original language and 
the translated one.
c.	 To be introduced to different types of translation by different translators from a 
diverse range of backgrounds.
The following terms are used in the book:
Contributor
1.	 An academic who teaches at university level. S/he is asked to give the Arabic 
source text to any of her/his students for translation then provide commentary 
and feedback followed by her/his own final translation of the text.
2.	 Translator: an Arabic-speaking student or PhD scholar who has done an 
advanced course in English language and/or translation studies at university 
level. They are asked to translate the source text and forward it to their instruc­
tor for further comments on the translation.

5
1  Introduction
3.	 Non-Arabic speaking (NAS) reader: a non-Arabic speaking academic with long 
experience of teaching English language and literature and/or translation stud­
ies at university level. Three NAS readers have contributed to this book.
4.	 Arabic-speaking reader: the translators and contributors mentioned above.
5.	 Author: the author of the story. NB: The book only includes short stories writ­
ten by Azeez Jasim Mohammed in Arabic and/or English.
6.	 Editor: the author of the stories is the editor of this book.

Part I
Non-Arabic Speaking Reader’s Comments 
on Written Works in English 
by Arabic Native Speaker

9
Chapter 2
Commentary on ‘The Monkey’s Profession’ 
(مهنة القرد في الغابة) and ‘One Way’: 
( :)ذهاب بال عودةPractical observations 
on form knowledge in translation
Florian Klaeger
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2024
A. Jasim Mohammed (ed.), Literary Translation in Practice, 
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-59333-8_2
Introduction
­
­
­
­
F. Klaeger (*) 
Department of English and American Studies (GW I, 1.26), University of Bayreuth, 
Universitaetsstr. 30, 95447 Bayreuth, Germany

10
F. Klaeger
1
The subject at hand—the translation of literary works from one cultural sphere 
to another, entangled as they may be—demands at least some reflection on what is 
at issue. It is not merely a question of ‘correctly’ Englishing Arabic-language sto­
ries; the translator who takes their task seriously will attempt (per the etymology 
of ‘translate’) to ‘carry across’ linguistic as well as cultural differences some cen­
tral aspects of the textual artefact: “a good translation,” Paul Ricœur writes, “can 
aim only at a supposed equivalence that is not founded on a demonstrable identity 
of meaning. An equivalence without identity” (2006, 22; emphasis in the original). 
To achieve such equivalence, translators need to be highly sensitive to the range 
of meanings of the original text, as well as to the formal means of, and constraints 
on, rendering them in the target language and culture. Ricœur thus emphasises the 
task of cultural translators as “cultural bilingualists” facilitating the “process of 
transference to the mental universe of the other culture, having taken account of 
its customs, fundamental beliefs and deepest convictions; in short, of the totality 
of its significant features” (1996, 5). This seems to me an ideal – albeit surely an 
ultimately unachievable one—that this book encourages its readers to strive for. 
Following Ricœur (and, broadly, George Steiner [1998]), Sarah Maitland deems 
the translator’s activity as representative of our hermeneutic mode of being: “the 
social practice of everyday life in a globalized, multicultural, world means that on 
a daily basis every one of us is faced with interpreting that which we do not under­
stand” (2017, 27). To realize this ubiquity and indeed, inescapability of translation 
in overcoming difference is to understand its contingency and necessity:
As thinking, feeling, beings in the world, embedded socially, culturally, politically and 
historically, the subjectivity of translators means that the process of translation is above all 
one of cognitive outreach. It is a thoughtful journey outwards, across the terrain of other­
ness and back again. (Maitland 2017, 159)
As such, the act of translation—conducted by a translator always aware of the 
limitations of their knowledge—is a leap of faith and an attempt at transcultural 
communion.
Ricœur rightly observes that “equivalence” between the original text and its 
translation “can only be sought, worked at, supposed. The only way of criticiz­
ing a translation—something we can always do—is to suggest another supposed, 
alleged, better or different one” (2006, 22). In what follows, I do not generally aim 
at a criticism of the translations in this sense. Instead, and more modestly, I aim 
to indicate formal (not only linguistic) challenges to achieving equivalence from 
the perspective of one particular reader. Where linguistic, formal, stylistic choices 
1 In the following, all references to Azeez Jasim’s explanations are to personal correspondence 
between the summer of 2022 and December 2023.

11
2  Commentary on ‘The Monkey’s Profession’ …
precipitate certain effects, such as expectations, assumptions, and connotations, I 
inquire whether these have an equivalent in the Arabic original. I hope that this 
may serve, purely by means of example, to guide budding translators into examin­
ing their task with an eye for form.
‘The Monkey’s Profession’ and ‘One Way’ are linked, it seems to me, by a 
number of common threads. Reading the translations, this obviously raises the 
question to what extent those common threads are present in the Arabic originals, 
and whether they have a similar function in their original context as in the transla­
tions. Students of literature are familiar with configurations of multiple individual 
parts making up a larger whole, such as sonnet sequences, short story collections, 
or composite novels, to name but a few. Some of the features that make for coher­
ence in those configurations also appear in the present pair of stories: for all their 
individual variations, there are thematic links between them; they seem to share 
certain conceptions of time and space (or what might be called their chronotope); 
and both appeal to a certain degree of universality. Foremost, however, they are 
stories, and they are short: shorter, one might add, than would usually be expected 
from a Western short story. This raises the very obvious question of genre: do 
these stories include certain Arabic conventions in storytelling, ones that follow 
different rules from the Western short story with its emphasis on economy in sto­
rytelling, characterization, and theme, among other things? If so, might a transla­
tor of a single story, or of a pair such as this, add an explanatory note to situate the 
text in its generic context? Depending on the context in which the translation is to 
appear, it might make sense to include reflections on generic traditions, conven­
tions, and implications.
For instance, the question of generic form is raised urgently by the story, ‘The 
Monkey’s Profession’: for a Western reader, it quite clearly recalls the ancient 
genre of the fable. A non-Arabic speaking (NAS) reader might wonder whether 
there is a similar tradition in Arabic writing (this will be explored below in more 
detail). However, there are narrative practices that are far less specific than genre: 
for instance, mimetic conventions. To what extent, NAS readers might wonder, are 
assumptions about what constitutes ‘realistic’ narration shared between the Arabic 
tradition and others? What is the work of narrative detail (or, conversely, ‘gaps’), 
of causality (or implausibility), or of ambiguity? Wherever the NAS reader 
encounters variations to traditions and conventions they are familiar with, trans­
lators should be alert to them. This is not to say they must necessarily interfere 
with the text to accommodate the difference—far from it. They must, however, be 
aware that a sense of estrangement may be introduced in the translation that is 
wholly absent from the original. To render these general observations more con­
crete, I now turn to the individual stories.

12
F. Klaeger
‘The Monkey’s Profession’ by Azeez Jasim Mohammed
TT
ST
The Monkey's Profession
There is a small town in the jungle inhabited by tame animals. The town is ruled by a 
wolf, a monkey and a dog. Day by day, they become a league and start ruling the town. 
The wolf manipulates the monkey and the dog into managing and controlling the town 
completely. The dog is riotous and disliked by all animals while the monkey is artful 
and dodger. These two charming features help to make them the right hand of the wolf
الغابة في القرد مهنة
في والكلب القرد من بكل الذئب إستعان .وكلب وقرد ذئب من كل صغيرة غابة على سيطر 
القرد أما الذئب ألوامر ًمطيعا ولكنه ًمشاغبا الكلب كان .عليها السيطرة وإحكام إدارتها 
والتخطيط التفكير في داهية فكان
One day, the monkey is seen gathering the animals and publicizing for obeying the wolf 
and his assistants. He starts his missionary work with assistance of a fox that considers 
them ideal and obeys them blindly. The monkey also considers the fox as the best ani­
mal in the town since whatever he announces the fox replies: “I totally agree with you.”
بثعلب دعوته في إستعان .سعيدة حياة أجل من الذئب نهج إتباع إلى يدعو القرد ًيوما خرج 
.الخطابات إلقاء في يوم كل القرد إستمر .األعلى المثل القرد في يرى الثعلب ألن صغير 
بين وسأكون يقول ما أقول القرد مع إتفاق على أنا“ :ًمبتسما الثعلب أكد القرد تحدث كلما 
ًحيا مازلت للذئب الساهرة والعين يديه.”
Day by day the majority of the animals believe in what the monkey announces except 
the elephant that doesn't pay him homage. The elephant is highly respected by the 
animals of the town for his honesty. They also used to share with him any problem they 
face in the town. The elephant decides to go to the monkey to talk to him about the bad 
effect of their conduct on the animals of the town. After hearing the elephant's talk, the 
monkey smiled and left
فيها عاش مَن بين مِن .الغابة أعيان لقوانين خاضع والجميع والسنين واألشهر األيام مرت 
في ليحاوره القرد إلى ًيوما الفيل خرج .له معاناتهم شكوى إعتادوا حيث الجميع يحبه ٌفيل 
ومن الغابة لسالمة معاملتهم تغيير منه طلب بالقرد الفيل التقى عندما .وسكانها الغابة أمر 
ًخيرا ووعده ساخرة ضحكة القرد ضحك .فيها
:continued)

13
2  Commentary on ‘The Monkey’s Profession’ …
TT
ST
Day after day the Monkey starts getting up early in the morning and going to the 
borders of the town until mid-night. He claims to prepare a very useful project for the 
benefit of the animals. The fox helps him in the project. After two months the monkey 
and the fox worked hard to complete this project. They did not tell the dog about the 
project so that it could be a big surprise for all
حتى يعود وال الغابة أطراف إلى ًمتجها يوم كل من ًفجرا القرد رؤية بعدها الجميع إعتاد 
أن أبى ولكنه الذئب مع باالتفاق أقترحه مشروع انجاز في بالثعلب إستعان .الليل منتصف 
المشروع هذا تنفيذ يتم لكي وعناء بكد والقرد الثعلب من كل عمل .عليه الكلب يّطلع
One evening, the monkey was seen in a hurry heading along with the fox to the place of 
the elephant. “It's our honor to let you start the project with us.” The monkey invites the 
elephant with a smile. The elephant welcomes the idea and accompanies them. When 
they reach the place, it becomes so dark. It is a moonless night. The wolf is waiting for 
them there with the frenzied dogs. The project is a very big well which can help the 
town for a century ahead. The wolf gives the orders. Though it is so dark but the mon­
key recognizes the signal easily. “Do your work.” The monkey orders the fox. The fox 
jumps as a child with a smile. “With pleasure sir.” Replies happily and goes down into 
the deep well as usual to check it while the monkey is seizing the rope strongly. After 
five to six miles distance inside the well, the monkey looses the rope. “ahhhhhhh…..” 
The fox is heard screaming
عند .الثعلب ًمصطحبا الفيل إلى ًمسرعا القرد خرج المرة هذه الغروب وعند األيام أحد في 
المشروع مكان إلى معهما يذهب أن بلطف الفيل من القرد طلب مكانه إلى وصولهما 
وصال إن وما معهما إصطحباه .الرائع االفتتاح هذا يشاركهم أن منه يريدون ألنهم لتدشينه 
كبير مشروعهم لعل .بانتظارهما الذئب كان حيث ًمحاقا القمر وكان المكان على الليل خيّم 
ترجل .الغابة في عاش من جميع يخدم أن يمكن ًجدا وعميق كبير ماء بئر عن عبارة فهو 
إبتسم .كالعادة ليتفحصه البئر إلى النزول الثعلب من وطلب رأسه الذئب هز أن بعد القرد 
وصل إن ما .يوم كل يفعل كان كما بقوة بيده الحبل ًماسكا والقرد ًمسرعا ونزل الثعلب 
ثم مدوية صرخة الثعلب صرخ حيث الحبل القرد ترك حتى البئر منتصف إلى الثعلب 
بعدها ًصوتا للثعلب يُسمع لم .سكت
:continued)

14
F. Klaeger
TT
ST
There is a pause. “Wicked.” The monkey shouts and rushes to catch the elephant assisted 
by the frenzied dogs. “What do you think yourself?” The monkey cries violently standing 
face to face with the Elephant. “A crime… a crime… a crime.” The monkey starts 
shouting. After that they lead the elephant to the downtown. “Wake up Nobles, wake up 
animals, wake up everyone. Come and see the person whom you used to respect, love 
and consider as an ideal. Come and see what a serious crime your ideal has committed!” 
The monkey cries seizing the elephant strongly and walking in the streets accompanied 
by the wolf and the supporters. “We managed to capture this criminal and reveal his 
wicked plans as we are awake the whole nights for your safety.” The monkey pretends. 
The animals gather in groups they want to know what the crime is. The monkey and the 
wolf start telling them stories. “This disloyal friend doesn't like this town and its ani­
mals.” The monkey screams furiously. “The poor fox is the victim of this crime since he 
works hard with us.” The monkey adds while shedding tears. After hearing this story the 
groups decide to go to the well in the same night so that they can examine the crime. The 
animals are too simple that they believe in what the monkey and the wolf claim easily. 
The groups walk to the well along with the elephant. When they reach the well, orders 
have been given to get the fox's dead body out. At the time the monkey sees it, he rushes 
suddenly to hug it with tears. “I have lost the best friend in this town.” He cries. “I prom­
ise you dear that the criminal won't be alive.” The monkey addresses the dead body then 
he rushes to attack the elephant with the help of the frenzied dogs. The Dog is standing 
astonishingly and silently. He can't do anything! After a short trial, the three responsible 
animals of the town decide to punish the elephant, in the presence of the animals, for his 
crime severely. “Like fault, like punishment.” The monkey announces the judgment. The 
wolf immediately gives order to seize the elephant. When the monkey hears the wolf's 
order, he reacts immediately jump on the back of the elephant, close to his ear. They 
lead the elephant to the well. “It's too late to understand life well.” The monkey whispers 
in the elephant's ear before sharing pushing him powerfully to the depth of the well. 
“Justice is achieved now.” The monkey cries triumphantly after turning his face back to 
the gathered groups
حيث الغابة مركز إلى وأقتادوه حراسهم بمساعدة الفيل على والذئب القرد من كل إنقض 
كشفها إستطعنا ألتي البشعة الجريمة أعينكم بأُم لتشاهدوا أخرجو“ :بقوة يصرخ القرد سُمع 
إننا“ :ٍعال ٍبصوت وتابع ”.االحترام له وتكنون تحبونه الذي الفيل هذا إرتكبها وألتي 
بدأ الجميع تجمهر أن بعد ”.وسكانها الغابة سالمة أجل من عين لنا تُغمض ال ساهرون 
ليلة في به ليغدر البئر إلى وأخذه الثعلب على الفيل إحتال كيف عليهم يقصان والقرد الذئب 
القرد صرخ .للجميع ًخيرا فيه سيكون الذي عملهم في لهم مساعدته على منه ًمنتقما ظلماء 
الثعلب ضحيتها وراح لنا عزة فيه شيء يرى أن يريد ال الخائن الفيل هذا إن“ :بحرقة 
إلى الذهاب بعدها الحاضرون قرر ”!مشروعنا إنجاح أجل من بجد عمل الذي المسكين 
إلى والذئب القرد من كل إقتادهم .بأنفسهم القول صحة من ليتأكدوا الليلة بنفس البئر مكان 
جثة اُخرجت وصلوا وعندما .باألمر علم أي له يكن لم الذي الكلب يرافقهم الحادث مكان 
وأطهر أغلى فقدت لقد“ :القول ًومرددا ًباكيا عليها إرتمى للجثة القرد رؤية وحال .الثعلب 
اعوانه بمساعدة الفيل على انقض ”.ًابدا ًحيا به غدر الذي الخائن أترك ولن صديق وأوفى 
ترجل .الفيل بمعاقبة ًقرارا وأتخذوا لوهلة والقرد الذئب من كل تشاور .ًضربا وأبرحوه 
عند وإندهش ًمذهوال الكلب وقف ”.العمل جنس من العقاب“ :بالُحكم ونطق بعدها القرد 
الحرس أحاط بعدها .بالصمت وإكتفى يفعل ماذا يعرف ولم القرار وسماع المشهد رؤية 
الفيل ماسكين معهم والقرد الذئب من كل بادر .بالقوة البئر الى واقتادوه جانب كل من بالفيل 
البئر إلى بقوة دفعوه ”.تتعلم لكي األوان فات“ :ليهمسا االنتصار بنشوة أُذنيه من ومقتربين 
مرتاحة القرية ستنام اليوم“ :ًصارخا الجميع إلى بوجهه القرد والتفت…!!!!”

15
2  Commentary on ‘The Monkey’s Profession’ …
Before even taking in the story, ‘The Monkey’s Profession’ as a whole, I was 
struck by its title. There is a phrase in English that it is curiously close to, but also 
different enough from it, to make the NAS reader wonder: what is the difference 
between ‘the monkey’s profession’ and the familiar ‘monkey business’? The lat-
ter, a phrase used to describe “mischief, trickery, fooling around” (OED), has a 
clear relevance to the story. The translation chosen here recalls the phrase but, per-
haps playfully, references a higher register: ‘profession’ is a more technical term, 
suggesting learning, erudition, and seriousness. The contrast between the familiar 
phrase and the title, then, is ironic, suggesting that the story, too, might subvert 
certain expectations—perhaps by presenting something in a comically inappropri-
ate fashion.
On the face of it, this story seems to me to be about social relations and about 
the question of whom we should trust to govern us. The animal community, which 
quite clearly allegorizes human types (on which more presently), is ruled by a 
gang of self-serving, manipulative villains. Their treatment of the ‘dissenting’ ele­
phant shows their true colours: they cannot abide that he should be respected by 
the community and refuse to accept their sovereignty, so they ruin his reputation 
and his life. The elephant’s execution seems to tighten the gang’s grip on the town. 
The monkey’s final words—perhaps, his ‘profession’ in the sense of a declara­
tion—drastically highlight the extent to which this animal society has been turned 
upside down, when murder is equated with justice.
As indicated above, a key question I asked myself as I was reading ‘The 
Monkey’s Profession; for the first time was: is this a fable? Or, to be more pre­
cise: is there a tradition similar to the fable, or the animal tale, in Arabic liter­
ature? What assumptions, expectations, and knowledge would an Arabic reader 
bring to this story? In the Western tradition, for instance, readers would expect a 
certain type of ‘message’ to be imparted by a fable: “All fables are didactic in pur­
pose” (Rubin/Sells 2012, 476). In the traditional genre, we often encounter explicit 
statements of a moral or thesis, whereas in ‘The Monkey’s Profession’, that does 
not seem to be the case. Instead, the story resembles the form of the “problem­
atic fable”, characterized by “moral dilemmas or enigmatic presentation” (ibid.). 
However, the enigma of the story may indeed arise from issues of translation, 
rather than from the original story itself: specifically, I wondered about the con­
ventional connotations attached to the animals included in the story.
To the Western reader, the monkey or ape connotates largely negative things: 
the animal so closely resembles humans as to mock (or ‘ape’) them, and it is often 
said to delight in such mimicry. As a mockery of mankind, the monkey can also 
represent evil, and specifically, the sexual instinct, as well as playful irresponsi­
bility. The wolf is ambivalent in its symbolic meanings: it represents the forces of 
nature and of freedom, of cruelty and lechery, as well as maternal love. The dog 
connotates mainly positive things: dogs are guardians and good learners, faith­
ful, perceptive, and strong; the elephant, likewise, symbolizes strength, as well as 
greatness, prudence, virtue, kindness, piety, and continence. The fox, a prominent 
animal in Western fables and animal tales, is usually seen as deceitful and greedy, 

16
F. Klaeger
representing false prophets and heretics (for all these, see the relevant lemmas in 
Butzer/Jacob 2021). Strikingly, the connotations for an Arabic reader are quite dif­
ferent, as the author of the stories informs me: the monkey, as also indicated in the 
story, represents someone who says one thing but will do another, motivated by 
self-interest and with little concern for others. So, the connotations are similarly 
negative, but in terms of their specific meanings, they differ markedly. The wolf, I 
am told, is an animal one cannot trust, even if one offers help and friendship. The 
dog raises associations with “frenzied people”, “always angry, unpredictable and 
they can harm you at any time”, “easily manipulated” by self-seeking people. The 
elephant, for the Arab as for the Western reader, connotates greatness and kind­
ness; the fox is not only double-tongued and untrustworthy, but also sycophantic.
This poses a challenge for the NAS reader, and consequently, for the translator. 
Given the poignancy of the narrative, it is probably difficult to provide the conno­
tations raised by the animals in Arabic culture through additions to the text. It is 
true that the story’s opening paragraph provides descriptions of the animal-protag­
onists. However, the NAS reader will still wonder to what extent these descriptions 
offer variations an existing type, and to what extent other assumptions about the 
animals remain unstated. I could imagine that a translator might make small addi­
tions to assist the NAS reader, such as the following:
The dog, like all dogs, is riotous and disliked by all animals while the monkey, like all its 
kind, is artful and dodger.
This would reassure the NAS reader that they are not missing anything about these 
characters, while also registering the differences between the symbolic meanings 
of these animals in Arabic and Western culture. The above sentence, incidentally, 
also contains a phrase that struck me in my first reading: the monkey is described 
as “artful and dodger”. I raised this point to the author-translator, inquiring about 
the apparent allusion to Dickens, given that the monkey’s character in the story 
seemed rather different from that of the Artful Dodger in Oliver Twist. Dr Jasim 
informs me that both artfulness and dodging are involved in the monkey’s char­
acter, and in its machinations for retaining its social position. He adds that the 
monkey’s character as described here is intended as a contrast to the elephant’s 
honesty: “The end of the story proves ironically that those who behaves like the 
dog and the monkey will be right and promoted while those like the elephant will 
be accused of crimes.” The Dickens allusion, in this light, seems to me slightly 
misleading in a way that a different (also more grammatical and idiomatic) phras­
ing might avoid—perhaps, ‘cunning and unpredictable’?
To return to the broader generic issue of the fable, the most obvious question 
concerns its moral or thesis. Is this a story, I wonder, about those who seize power 
by deceit and retain it only through injustice, populism, and ultimately, murder? Is 
it a warning for those who, like the elephant, try to lead a virtuous life in an unjust 
society? Is it also a warning to those who, like the fox, make themselves complicit 
with a corrupt regime that will not hesitate to sacrifice them for its own ends? 
These concerns seem universal and transhistorical, and—as the Western fable 

17
2  Commentary on ‘The Monkey’s Profession’ …
would demand—there is very little indication of a specific temporal setting to this 
story. Likewise, its spatial settings—a jungle, a village, a dark place, the streets, 
as well—are unspecific to the point of universality. The ‘jungle’ is an overdeter­
mined place and concept: to the colonial mindset, it represents wild and obstinate 
nature; to the postcolonial critic, it can constitute a site for subverting hegemonic 
colonial narratives and the binary of nature and civilization (cf. Popal, 2021, 476). 
Perhaps more in keeping with the latter, critical mindset, the story’s animals are 
initially—and surprisingly—described as “tame”, and they have settled in a “small 
town in the jungle”. However, the story soon shows the community’s ostensible 
civilization and cohabitation deteriorating, as those in power abide by the prover­
bial ‘law of the jungle’. Does the story recall a specific historical moment, and a 
specific social configuration? If it does, I cannot unpack it, but it seems to me that 
the framing of the story as a fable does not require the reader to do so—in fact, 
it seems rather to seek to avoid such specificity. There is an appeal to universal 
values that clearly transcend any immediate temporal, spatial, or indeed cultural 
context.
Concerning the manner in which this universal appeal is presented, the narra­
tive in the present tense certainly makes for immediacy. There is, in fact, a devel­
opment discernible in the story’s temporal deictics: in the first paragraphs, general 
indexes dominate, such as “there is”, “day by day”, “day after day”. The paragraph 
beginning with “One evening” introduces a shift towards a specific point within 
the story’s time frame, and it turns out to be its terminal point. That moment is 
specified like no other before: “it is a moonless night”. This single night occupies 
twice as much narrative space as the narrative leading up to it. The author tells me 
that in Arabic, the phrase “one evening” is sometimes used “to give some solutions 
to some questions and to make things clear about the previous ambiguity. This can 
also pave the way to the falling action and to make the Arabic reader be ready for 
the events and the end of the story”. Similar connotations might be raised by the 
phrase in certain Western generic contexts, although I am not sure it is quite as 
loaded.
As an NAS reader, one aspect of the translation offered here confused me. The 
depth of the well is given as “five to six miles”, which seems both excessive and 
excessively specific and thus, unexpected in the generic context, which is marked 
rather by universality than by specificity. As someone unfamiliar with the con­
struction of wells, I am struggling with this detail, and I wonder whether there is 
a simple conversion mistake at issue here: might the translation be off by an order 
of magnitude, or likely even two? Certainly, a translator would need to account for 
the sense of incongruity that might result for a Western reader from what seems 
like a spurious detail.
In terms of the narrative economy of sympathy, I was surprised to find that by 
the end of the story, the dog is characterized as an impotent bystander to the mon­
key’s deceit: “The Dog is standing astonishingly and silently. He can’t do any­
thing!” This second sentence seems like an invitation to the reader—who likely 
shares the sense of impotence at witnessing such injustice—to identify with the 

18
F. Klaeger
dog. However, the initial negative characterization of this animal would appear to 
preclude this effect. There seems to be a degree of character development here, as 
the dog acquires some insight into the consequences of its actions—a small anag­
norisis, perhaps. As the author tells me, the dog is intended to represent those who 
are intimidated into following orders and come to regret their complicity.
Given the story’s shifting stance between ambivalence and almost heavy-
handed moralism, the monkey’s final statement, “It’s too late to understand 
life well”, is unclear. Is this a cruel pun on the ‘well’ into which the elephant is 
pushed? If so, what does it signify? Is the monkey’s joke merely an indicator of its 
depravity? Likewise, the irony of the monkey’s final words, “Justice is achieved 
now”, is obviously heavy, but here, its source is different: in the former statement, 
the monkey might be intentionally joking, whereas in the latter, he seems to be 
dead serious. Incidentally, such obscurities only heighten the effect of this story’s 
bleak vision—the reader is left aghast and disorientated in a world where the good 
are expelled and brute force holds sway.
‘One Way’ by Azeez Jasim Mohammed
TT
ST
One Way
While coming back home from my mill, I 
saw him walking in the street absent-minded. 
“Hello,” I said with a smile as he seemed 
to look at me. He passed by me with no 
response. After returning back home, I gave 
him a call to see whether he was in a trouble. 
He apologized for the situation as he claimed 
that he was in a trouble indeed. He lost his 
job and that was why he walked absent-
minded. He was busy thinking of another way 
of earning his living
عودة بال ذهاب
رأيته الصغير محلي من البيت الى عائدا طريقي في انا بينما 
يخرج لعله السالم عليه اطلقت ”مرحبا“ .الذهن شارد ماشيا 
انه من الرغم على يجبني لم ولكن فيها هو التي الغيبوبة من 
ان بعد حتى ماشيا استمر لكنه .ّالي النظر وجهه على بدى 
على اطمأن ولكي اليه ألتحدث به اتصلت .جواري من مر 
.مساعدته مقدوري في ولعل ما لشيء حاجة في لعله حالته 
فعال ورطة في كان بانه وقال القصة سماع حال اعتذاره قدم 
تبين وعندها الوظيفة من طرده قصة لي شرح .ّالي ينتبه ولم 
كان انه منه فهمت كما حيث ذهنه شرود وراء السبب لي 
العيش لكسب أخرى طريقة في التفكير في مشغوال
Two weeks later, I had received an email 
from an abroad company offering me a good 
contractual job opportunity for three years. 
I was so happy to receive such news and 
decided to get rid of my mill in the town. My 
mother suggested that I give it to someone to 
earn his living for some benefits in return. “It 
is a good idea.” I said and started thinking of 
him to use the mill. He was extremely happy 
to hear the idea and welcomed it. He offered 
me a fifty-fifty profit rate. “No matter how 
much he pays, let him just use it and earn his 
living better than keep it closed.” My mother 
said happily
عمل عرض استلمت الحادثة تلك على أسبوعين مرور بعد 
في البلد خارج للعمل اإللكتروني البريد طريق عن مغري 
كبيرة سعادة غمرتني .سنوات ثالث لمدة الشركات احدى 
محلي في العمل اترك ان وقررت العرض استالم حال 
ابدا استغني ال التي والدتي مع األمر في تشاورت .الصغير 
الشيء مقابل لإليجار اعرضه أن واقترحت مشورتها عن 
فكرة انها“ .المستأجر ويعين يعينني ان يمكن الذي البسيط 
أن مخيلتي في وقررت بسعادة اجبتها ”أمي يا جميلة 
الرزق كسب في المحل من يستفد لعله عليه األمر اعرض 
كثيرا فرح .عمل بال البيت في جالس وهو فاته عما ويعوض 
نصف سيعطيني بانه بالقول وبادر بالعرض سماعه عند 
يمكن ال لربما بمبلغ مقيدا يكون ال لكي األرباح من الوارد 
انه المهم ،يعطيها التي القيمة او المبلغ كم يهم ال“ .توفيره له 
العمل في الصغير المحل ويستمر الرزق لكسب يستخدمه 
ان بعد مسرورة وهي أمي أجابت ”.مغلقا تركه من بدال 
بالخبر سمعت

19
2  Commentary on ‘The Monkey’s Profession’ …
TT
ST
My new work was interesting. My Boss such 
an objective and accurate man that I have 
never seen like him before. He was so gentle 
that I saw loyalty, objectivity, honesty and 
love to others in his conduct. “God always 
bless those whom people are satisfied with 
them.” He repeatedly told us. My experiences 
with working abroad widened my abilities 
to deal with others. I spent the three years in 
that company as if they were three months 
indeed
كان بالعمل الجديد الرئيس .الجديد بعملي ًجدا ًسعيدا كنت 
اشاهد لم بشكل عمله في ودقيق ًومهنيا ًوموضوعيا ًلطيفا 
بالحقيقة اذهلني الذي وتعامله اللطيف اسلوبه .قبل من مثله 
كالم يردد دائما كان .خالله من العمل بحب شعرت ألنني 
الذين اؤالئك كل عمل في دائما هللا يبارك“ :سماعه يعجبني 
الكثير تعلمت ”.ورضاؤهم اآلخرين حب كسب في يسعون 
ذو صبحت بحيث الخارج في العمل في تجربتي خالل من 
ثالث قضيت .محترف بشكل اآلخرين مع التعامل في خبرة 
البصر بلمح مرت وكأنها الشركة تلك في عملي في سنوات
“Sir, I'm leaving to my country next week. I 
hope you can provide me with a recommen­
dation letter.” I asked my Boss after meeting 
him before the end of the working day. “How 
time flies!” He replied astonishingly and 
promised to make it ready by evening of the 
next day. I collected it and my colleagues 
arranged a small farewell party to bid me 
goodbye. After six days, I was on the flight 
coming back home after three year span of 
living abroad
“باالمكان هل .سيدي يا القادم االسبوع في بلدي الى عائد أنا 
”المستقبل؟ في منها استفيد لكي وتوصية خبرة شهادة منحي 
ان قبل قابلته ان بعد ادب بكل بالعمل الرئيس من طلبت 
مرت !ياللعجب“ .الشركة في بالعمل لي االخير اليوم ينتهي 
ألنتهاء اندهاش بكل المسؤول اجابني ”.البصر بلمح االيام 
الرسالة انجاز في ًخيرا ووعدني الشركة في عملي مدة 
من الرسالة اخذت .التالي اليوم مساء في لي وتسليمها 
حفلة لي رتبوا حيث الشركة في الزمالء وودعت المسؤول 
الطائرة متن على منت بالضبط أيام ستة بعد .صغيرة توديع 
في عمل سنوات ثالث مرور بعد بلدي الى ستقلني التي 
الغربة
I took some rest at home for a week and went 
to my mill to start the work again with my 
friend as I didn't hear from him during the 
past three years
لما السفر عناء من البيت في الراحة من ًقسطا أخذت أن بعد 
الصغير محلي الى الذهاب قررت ًتقريبا االسبوع يقارب 
لكي وكذلك غيابي اثناء صديقي اليه توصل مالذي لمعرفة 
بلدي في وظيفة اجد أن الى معه العمل اباشر
“Good Morning.” I said after meeting him the 
next day
“التالي اليوم في قابلته ان بعد بحرارة حييته ”الخير صباح
“Good Morning. Who are you?” He replied
“بسرعة اجابني ”انت؟ من .النور صباح
“Did you forget me?” I said in a gentle way 
to remind him
“نسيني قد كان ان بنفسي ألذكره بلطف سألته ”نسيتني؟ هل 
ًفعال
“I've never met you before.” He insisted
“اجابني ”.ًابدا قبل من رأيتك او بك التقيت ان لي يسبق لم 
موقفه على باصرار
“No one on earth has died for three years!” 
I stated
“ثالث غضون في تموت ان الفتية للذاكرة يمكن ال 
نسياني له يمكن ال بأنه افهمه لكي ذلك ذكرت ”!سنوات
“But they are enough time to change our 
life.” He said. “This is my land. Go back to 
the place where you spent your time.” He 
added. He turned his face pretending to be 
busy and continued working. I returned back 
home absent-minded thinking of another way 
of earning my living!
“ثقة بكل اجابني ”كذلك؟ اليس …حياتنا لتغيير كافية ولكنها 
”.يسكنها لمن فاالرض اتيت حيث من ارجع“ :قال وبعدها 
.بالعمل واستمر مشغول بأنه ًمتظاهرا عني وجهه ادار 
البيت الى طريقي في ًراجعا وقفلت كذلك أنا وجهي ادرت 
الرزق كسب بها استطيع طريقة في افكر الذهن شارد!

20
F. Klaeger
For this story, too, the title is ambiguous. Encountering the story for the first time, 
we wonder about the frames it aims to activate in the reader: is it the one-way 
street as a metaphor for an inevitable course and outcome? Or, does it indicate 
that there is (only) one (correct) way of life one should choose? Or, that the sto­
ry’s characters share the same path? However, as the author kindly informs me, 
this ambiguity is not actually present in Arabic: the original title “gives the idea of 
something that you can do but you must be very careful when you decide to do it 
as there will not be any return for your decision”. It seems to me that ‘One Way’ is 
a very apt translation, then, despite the ambiguity it introduces (and which might 
be reduced by rendering it, ‘One-Way’?). An alternative phrase to capture the irre­
versibility of the decision might be ‘a line in the sand’, but while it might be less 
ambiguous, it would introduce a sense of antagonism in the decision-making that 
is absent from the story and the meaning of the Arabic phrase: the proverbial line 
needs to be drawn by someone and crossed by another, which is not what is hap­
pening in the story. Another alternative might be ‘point of no return’, which seems 
less ambiguous than ‘one way’, but draws attention more to the decision itself than 
to the consequences it entails (a ‘point’, rather than a ‘way’ that must be walked; a 
moment more than a process). Perhaps it has the virtue of highlighting the impos­
sibility of return, and it introduces a certain dramatic irony in the discrepancy of 
information between narrator and reader, but it might strike readers as more heavy-
handed than ‘One Way’. What is more, ‘one way’ poignantly contrasts with the 
phrase in the first and last paragraphs, ‘another way’, which I will return to below.
The importance of such connotations is also revealed in the opening of the 
story. It introduces a sense of circularity that I take to be central to the story’s sub­
ject, the contrast between intersubjective generosity and a sense of injustice that 
pervades human experience: with “While coming back home from my mill”, the 
narrative space is defined as the space between work and home, and “I saw him” 
also establishes the social space between individuals. Further, there is mental 
space, in which ‘the other’ is beside himself and out of sorts, whereas the narra­
tor is at one with themselves. As in ‘The Monkey’s Profession’, the story estab­
lishes a frame of reference characterized by universals, with an appeal that goes 
far beyond specific temporal, spatial, or cultural settings. In conversation with the 
author, I learned that in Arabic, the term ‘while’ can be used as an indicator of an 
in medias res opening, and that it can suggest an unreliable narrator, who might 
be expressing something obliquely that is too painful for them to address directly. 
What is more, the author informs me that the reference to the end of a working 
day acts as a quite specific temporal deictic, indicating a setting in the afternoon 
between 3 and 4 pm. That is a lot to accomplish in a little phrase, but perhaps a 
translation does not need to convey all of it to achieve equivalence. For instance, 
the timing of the encounter in the street seems relatively irrelevant to me (although 
I may be missing a symbolic significance here). The narrator’s implicit memo­
rial work, however, should certainly be registered, since it not only foreshadows 
the ending but also establishes a more complex relationship between the story’s 
temporal levels: the events are not only recounted, but they have a direct bearing 
on the narrator’s present. Perhaps, a rephrasing such as ‘I remember when, while 

21
2  Commentary on ‘The Monkey’s Profession’ …
coming back home from my mill, I saw him…’ might at least introduce this idea 
of a continued presence of the past (of the narrator working through something 
by way of memory), as well as the possibility of unreliability. Given the circular 
nature of the story’s plot (reflected in the final sentence’s verbal echoes of the first 
paragraph, “returned back home”, “absent-minded”, “another way of earning my 
living”), it seems like this is an additional, stronger link between opening and end­
ing that a translation might do well to incorporate.
The issue of time is central to other passages of this story, as well. Before enter­
ing into the “one-way street”, “two weeks” pass before the offer of work abroad 
arrives, and then “three years” of working abroad follow. Next, “six days” are 
mentioned as the temporal gap between the farewell party and the return home. 
Then, the dialogue between the past and present mill-owner returns to the three 
years’ interval. A reader might wonder whether these explicitly designated inter­
vals have a symbolic function. The numbers add up to nine, which in Christian 
symbolism is sometimes taken as an intensified representation of the Trinity 
(3 × 3). What is more, 1, 2, and 3 add up to 6, the number of the days of creation, 
but the subsequent return to 3 seems to indicate a circling back and ‘un-making’, 
a reversal of the temporal pattern which brings the narrator into the same posi­
tion as their counterpart at the beginning. (This reversal is reflected also at the sto­
ry’s turning point, when the three years abroad are said to have seemed like three 
months, with the previous “fifty-fifty” profit splitting offering a numeric suspen­
sion or balancing.) As the author informs me, however, this symbolic dimension 
is not at all intended! This strikes me as an instance in which the translation can 
achieve equivalence by adding a dimension absent from the original: a Western 
reader’s associations with numeric symbolism lend the story a pattern and sense of 
universality that is quite in line with the plot development.
In terms of characterization, too, there is an appeal to universality. The narra­
tor is unnamed and of unspecified sex; the person they help is male, but similarly 
unnamed. Next to them, the story adds the narrator’s mother and their foreign 
boss, who is coded as a benevolent paternal figure. The role of these parental 
figures is interesting in that the mother seems initially a force for kindness and 
good, advocating that the narrator share their good fortune. However, she is proven 
wrong by how things turn out, and her kindness is exploited. Similarly, the foreign 
boss’s creed that God will bless those who please others seems to be discredited 
by the story’s plot. Instead of receiving a blessing, the narrator loses their live­
lihood. And yet, the story might be framed more positively considering that it is 
presented as an account: in this sense, it is addressed to the reader, whose charity 
is challenged to put things right. Someone in need of help, such as the univer­
salized narrator (who, in offering this account, reflects the situation of their part­
ner manqué at the beginning of the story), might find themselves in that position 
through no fault of their own. The story’s appeal to the moral authority of parents 
suggests that to counteract selfishness and greed, we must extend our charity even 
if it seems naïve. Thus, although the narrator is left, at the story’s ending, with an 
uncertain economic future and a disappointed sense of justice, the reader is called 
upon to help those in need, like the narrator, wherever they encounter them. In 

22
F. Klaeger
spite of human failings, we must continue to believe in kindness—this may be 
what the phrase “another way” refers to, which is placed prominently in the first 
and last paragraphs, and which contrasts strikingly with the story’s title.
A final word on the idea of ‘justice’, which links this story to ‘The Monkey’s 
Profession’: the narrator speaks of “my mill” upon their return, naturalizing their 
expectations for the reader. Clearly, the mill is theirs by right, and the immedi­
ate relationship between narrator and reader serves to corroborate this. In narrative 
terms, the switch to dialogue for the encounter with the beneficiary of the narra­
tor’s generosity likewise makes for a temporal immediacy that recalls the story’s 
opening with a (failed) dialogue: after the compressed time-frames of days, weeks, 
and years, narrative time slows down again to match narrated time, indicating the 
importance of the dialogue. The new mill-owner’s hard-nosed rejection of the nar­
rator is rebuked with the enigmatic sentence, “No one on earth has died for three 
years”. As the author kindly tells me, this is not a proverbial idiom in Arabic (as 
it might seem), but intended to reflect the injustice of property seized from absen­
tees. In theory, the law may protect property rights, but de facto, property may be 
taken away from those unable to protect it. I understand this phrase, then, on one 
level to refer to the narrator: they have not died, and therefore, they continue to be 
the rightful owner of the mill. At the same time, the statement is clearly wrong, 
showing the narrator’s hyperbolic idealism, wishing only the best for all. This atti­
tude, like the elephant’s in ‘The Monkey’s Profession’, is disappointed. However, 
I believe that instead of a nihilistic affirmation of a dog-eat-dog world, such as 
we find in the former story, ‘One Way’ offers encouragement to the reader to act 
like the narrator and extend their charity in order to provide justice. In this sense, 
the pair of stories constitutes a fruitfully complementary exploration of similar 
themes.
There would be much more to say about these stories, but this is not intended 
as an exhaustive analysis. Instead, I hope my brief observations have helped to 
indicate some of the issues that translators might attend to as they approach liter­
ary texts for transcultural translation. Next to linguistic aptness, the form knowl­
edge attaching to aspects such as temporality, spatiality (both encompassed in the 
chronotope), characterization, certain narrative genres and plots, symbolism, and 
many other means of non-literal signification requires reflection as we aim for 
‘equivalence’. Translators, then, in seeking to aid textual movement, must strive to 
be at home both at the text’s point of origin and its destination. If this makes for a 
cosmopolitan mindset championing the ties that unite all of humanity, translation 
is not only a profession, but a moral endeavour.
Editor’s questions to the students:
Read both Arabic and English versions of the stories then answer the following 
questions:

23
2  Commentary on ‘The Monkey’s Profession’ …
	 1.	 What is the NAS reader’s reaction to the title of the two stories? Check the 
substitutes given by NAS reader.
	 2.	 In his comments on the two stories, Florian raised such questions as:
	 a.	 Do these stories reflect certain Arabic storytelling conventions, ones that fol­
low different rules than the Western short story (with its emphasis on econ­
omy in storytelling, characterization, and theme, among other things)?
	 b.	 If so, might a translator of a single story, or of a pair such as this, add an 
explanatory note to situate the text in its generic context?
	 c.	 To what extent, NAS readers might wonder, are assumptions about what con­
stitutes ‘realistic’ narration shared between the Arabic tradition and others? 
What is the work of narrative detail (or, conversely, ‘gaps’), of causality (or 
implausibility), or of ambiguity?
	 -	 Can you answer them to make it clear to NAS reader?
	 3.	 How do you respond to the explanation furnished by Florian about the titles 
of the two stories?
	 4.	 Discuss the difference between “Monkey’s profession” and “Monkey 
business”.
	 5.	 Try to elaborate on the representation of animals in Western culture and their 
representation in Arabic culture.
	 6.	 In his comments on the end of ‘The Monkey’s Profession’, Florian points out:
As an NAS reader, one aspect of the translation offered here confused me. The depth of 
the well is given as “five to six miles”, which seems both excessive and excessively spe­
cific and thus, unexpected in the generic context, which is marked rather by universality 
than by specificity.
What is your analysis of this understanding?
7.	 Florian mentions that “…the monkey’s final statement, ‘It’s too late to under­
stand life well’, is unclear.” How can you translate it in a way that it makes it 
clear to the NAS reader?
8.	 In his reading of ‘The Monkey’s Profession’, Florian enquires about the exist­
ence of fable in Arabic stories when he says:
As indicated above, a key question I asked myself as I was reading “The Monkey’s 
Profession” for the first time was: is this a fable? Or, to be more precise: is there a tradi­
tion similar to the fable, or the animal tale, in Arabic literature? What assumptions, expec­
tations, and knowledge would an Arabic reader bring to this story?
Do you find any answer to his questions in the Arabic texts?
9.	 Florian’s overall understanding of ‘The Monkey’s Profession’ is stated in his 
paragraph:
On the face of it, this story seems to me to be about social relations and about the ques­
tion of whom we should trust to govern us. The animal community, which quite clearly 
allegorizes human types (on which more presently), is ruled by a gang of self-serving, 
manipulative villains. Their treatment of the ‘dissenting’ elephant shows their true col­
ours: they cannot abide that he should be respected by the community and refuse to accept 

24
F. Klaeger
their sovereignty, so they ruin his reputation and his life. The elephant’s execution seems 
to tighten the gang’s grip on the town. The monkey’s final words – perhaps, his ‘profes­
sion’ in the sense of a declaration – drastically highlight the extent to which this animal 
society has been turned upside down, when murder is justice.To what extent you think 
that he covers the story’s meanings as they appear in Arabic? Do you think this is the 
main idea of the story? Why?
10.	In his conclusion about ‘The Monkey’s Profession’ Florian delineates the les­
son behind the story in these questions:
To return to the broader generic issue of the fable, the most obvious question concerns 
its moral or thesis. Is this a story, I wonder, about those who seize power by deceit and 
retain it only through injustice, populism, and ultimately, murder? Is it a warning for those 
who, like the elephant, try to lead a virtuous life in an unjust society? Is it also a warning 
to those who, like the fox, make themselves complicit with a corrupt regime that will not 
hesitate to sacrifice them for its own ends?
Has this NAS reader reached the lesson behind the story? Elaborate with 
examples.
11.	Compare the alternatives to the title ‘One Way’ which are suggested by the 
NAS reader and the content of the text in Arabic.
12.	In his reading of ‘One Way’, Florian finds time issues. As an Arabic-speaking 
reader do you, like him, find any time issues in the source text? Why?
13.	Florian’s comment on the numbers mentioned in “One Way” is:
The numbers add up to nine, which in Christian symbolism is sometimes taken as an 
intensified representation of the Trinity (3x3). What is more, 1, 2, and 3 add up to 6, the 
number of the days of creation, but the subsequent return to 3 seems to indicate a cir­
cling-back and ‘un-making’, a reversal of the temporal pattern which brings the narra­
tor into the same position as their counterpart at the beginning. (This reversal is reflected 
also at the story’s turning point, when the three years abroad are said to have seemed like 
three months, with the previous “fifty-fifty” profit splitting offering a numeric suspension 
or balancing.)
What does number 3 refer to in Arabic culture?
Compare the representation of numbers in Christian symbolism and Arabic 
culture.
14.	In his understanding of the main idea behind ‘One Way’ Florian concludes:
The story’s appeal to the moral authority of parents suggests that to counteract selfishness 
and greed, we must extend our charity even if it seems naïve. Thus, although the narrator 
is left, at the story’s ending, with an uncertain economic future and a disappointed sense 
of justice, the reader is called upon to help those in need, like the narrator, wherever they 
encounter them. In spite of human failings, we must continue to believe in kindness—this 
may be what the phrase “another way” refers to, which is placed prominently in the first 
and last paragraphs, and which contrasts strikingly with the story’s title.
Is this the lesson behind the story?
Is this the exact meaning of “another way” given by the author in ‘One Way’? Explain in 
detail.

25
2  Commentary on ‘The Monkey’s Profession’ …
15.	 In his confusion about the meaning of a specific statement, Florian says:
The new mill-owner’s hard-nosed rejection of the narrator is rebuked with the enigmatic 
sentence, “No one on earth has died for three years”. As the author kindly tells me, this 
is not a proverbial idiom in Arabic (as it might seem), but intended to reflect the injus­
tice of property seized from absentees. In theory, the law may protect property rights, but 
de facto, property may be taken away from those unable to protect it. I understand this 
phrase, then, on one level to refer to the narrator: they have not died, and therefore, they 
continue to be the rightful owner of the mill.
Compare the ‘enigmatic sentence’ with the Arabic text and try to translate it in 
a way that is clearer for the NAS reader.
16.	 The NAS reader finds similarity in the themes of the two stories. How and 
why?
References
Butzer, Günter, and Joachim Jacob. Metzler Lexikon Literarischer Symbole. 3rd ed. Stuttgart: J. 
B. Metzler‘sche Verlagsbuchhandlung & Carl Ernst Poeschel GmbH, 2021.
Maitland, Sarah. What Is Cultural Translation? Bloomsbury advances in translation. London: 
Bloomsbury Academic; Bloomsbury Publishing, 2017.
Oxford English Dictionary, “Monkey Business”, July 2023.
Popal, Mariam. “Objektivität / Desiring Subjects.” In Wie Rassismus aus Wörtern 
spricht: (K)Erben des Kolonialismus im Wissensarchiv deutsche Sprache; ein kritisches 
Nachschlagewerk. Edited by Susan Arndt and Nadja Ofuatey-Alazard. 4th ed., Münster: 
Unrast-Verlag, 2021. 463–83.
Ricœur, Paul. On Translation. Thinking in action. Abingdon, England, New York: Routledge, 
2006.
Ricœur, Paul. “Reflections on a New Ethos for Europe.” In Paul Ricoeur: The Hermeneutics of 
Action. Edited by Richard Kearney. London, Thousand Oaks, CA: SAGE Publications, 1996. 
3–13.
Rubin, David Lee, and A. Lytton Sells. “Fable.” In The Princeton Encyclopedia of Poetry and 
Poetics. Edited by Roland Greene et al. 4th ed., Princeton: Princeton University Press, 2012. 
476–77.
Steiner, George. After Babel: Aspects of Language and Translation. 3rd ed. Oxford: Oxford 
University Press, 1998.

Part II
Translation of Arabic Texts into English 
and Comments by Arabic Native Speakers

29
Chapter 3
Translating Arabic Text into English: 
Theory and Practice
Ali R. Al-Hassnawi
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2024
A. Jasim Mohammed (ed.), Literary Translation in Practice, 
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-59333-8_3
This chapter is in three parts. The first shows the student’s translation of the text. 
The second consists of commentary and proposed amendments to the translation 
by an academic with experience of teaching translation. The third part shows 
the academic’s final translation after making all notes about the translation. The 
students’ task is to compare the two translations, create their own translation, 
and comment on why they have used a different translation. In this way students 
demonstrate their ability to comment on any type of translation and improve their 
ability to translate text in a way that makes its meaning clear to a non-Arabic 
speaking reader.
The source text is broken up into sections and the target text compared accord­
ingly. Following the Russian Formalism leads to implement theories of translation 
on the selected pieces. The final translation of the text, presented after all clarifi­
cations and comments, aims to reduce any additional issues the NAS reader may 
encounter in comprehending the main idea.
By the end of this chapter, students will be able to:
1.	 Look at the text from a theoretical viewpoint and read between the lines
2.	 Break the text up into important sections to make a better translation
3.	 Analyze the source text and add their own comments to each piece of 
translation.
A. R. Al-Hassnawi (*) 
Pearl Muscat Complex, Airport Heights, Muscat, Sultanate of Oman

30
A. R. Al-Hassnawi
Translated by Noaf Abdallah Rashid Al Badi
TT
ST
VIRTUE AND LAW
The doves came rushing toward us, waiting 
for the food we used to scatter for them every 
day. My little girl of two-and-a-half years 
old went down to feed them as usual after 
all the pigeons had gathered around her and 
safely and cheerfully ate the grain she spread 
for them. I sat near her contemplating what 
was going on around me; Pigeons colored in 
the colors of the spectrum, my child happily 
and innocently scattering grains of wheat 
for them, people walking on the sides of 
the road, fresh air breezes and its beautiful 
moderate coolness. While she was immersed 
in her pleasure and joy with the baths, she 
remembered the scene of the little calf and its 
mother in one of the most wonderful scenes 
shown by the (National Geographic) channel
المروءة والقانون
 إتجهت الحَمامات نحونا مُسرعة تنتظر الطعام الذي إعتدنا
 أن ننثره لهنّ كل يوم. نزلت طفلتي الصغيرة البالغة من
 العمر سنتان ونيف إلطعامهن كالعادة بعد أن تجمعت كل
 الحمامات حولها وبكل أمان تأكل من الحبوب التي تنثرها
 لهن وهي مبتهجة. جلست أنا بالقرب منها أتأمل ما يدور من
 حولي؛ الحَمامات الملونة بألوان الطيف، طفلتي بكل سعادة
جوانب  وبراءة تنثر حبوب القمح لهن، أناس يمشون على
 الطريق، نسمات الهواء النقي وبرودته المعتدلة الجميلة.
 بينما هي غارقة في سرورها وبهجتها مع الحَمامات تذكرت
 مشهد العجل الصغير وأمه في واحد من أروع المشاهد الذي
الناشنال جيوغرافي( :)عرضته قناة
The herd heads towards the other bank of the 
river, and among them is a young calf and its 
mother. As soon as they entered the river, its 
fast waves pushed the young calf away after 
its mother failed to protect it and maintain 
its flow in the right rhythm in the river to 
reach the second bank. The mother stood up, 
not having the strength, as much as an inch, 
to chase him or even help him, but she kept 
looking with her eyes, not knowing what to 
do. The little calf spent a whole night on the 
river cliff after the river waves pushed it on 
the coast away from the herd
 يتجه القطيع نحو الضفة األخرى من النهر وبينهم عجل
 صغير وأمه، وحال دخولهم النهر دفعت أمواجه السريعة
 العجل الصغير بعيداً بعد أن أخفقت أمه في حمايته والحفاظ
 على سريانه بالنسق الصحيح في النهر للوصول الى الضفة
 الثانية. وقفت األم ال تملك من القوة بقدر إنملة لمالحقته أو
 حتى إسعافه بل وبقيت تنظر بعينيها ال تعرف ماذا تفعل.
 مضت على العجل الصغير ليلة كاملة وهو على جرف النهر
بعد أن دفعته امواج النهر على الساحل بعيداً عن القطيع

31
3  Translating Arabic Text into English: Theory and Practice
TT
ST
The dawn broke, the morning came with its 
light, and the sun shone on him again, as it 
was written for him to survive and live, but 
this time alone without care. While he turns 
left and right looking for a living away from 
his mother after the waves hit him to this 
place, he is noticed from the other side by 
a hungry wolf who suddenly turned around 
after he smelled the little calf. The wolf ran 
towards the little calf while the geese stand­
ing on the other side started screaming with 
a voice that caught the attention of the little 
calf. As if she sensed the danger hovering 
around him. While the geese were screaming, 
the wolf accelerated and increased his steps 
to reach the prey as soon as possible. The 
little calf fled when he saw the wolf and death 
in his eyes, but there was no way he could, 
neither time nor place could help him, not 
even the geese had the ability to intervene. 
The wolf grabbed the little calf from its neck, 
trying to knock it to the ground to get hold 
of it, but the little calf resisted the wolf for a 
few seconds, and while the wolf's attempts 
to knock its prey to the ground increased, 
the geese continue to scream, looking for 
help, while the little calf is still defending its 
presence with whatever power it possesses, 
even if it was simple. Suddenly, the wolf's 
attempts to complete his mission accelerated 
with movements that allow the viewer to 
conclude that the wolf wants to kill him in 
order to make him a lifeless corpse that is 
only suitable as a meal
من عليه الشمس واشرقت بضوءه الصبح وأطل الفجر بزغ 
من ًوحيدا المرة هذه ولكن والعيش النجاة له كُتبت فقد جديد 
لقمة عن ًباحثا ًوشماال ًيمينا يتلفت هو بينما .رعاية دون 
،المكان هذا إلى الموج به عصف أن بعد أمه عن ًبعيدا عيش 
أن بعد فجأة استدار جائع ذئب اآلخر الجانب من إليه ينتبه 
العجل نحو ًمسرعا الذئب إتجه .الصغير العجل رائحة شم 
اآلخر الجانب على واقفة كانت إوزات بدأت بينما الصغير 
استشعرت كأنها .الصغير العجل انتباه أثار ٍبصوت تصرخ 
الذئب عجّل اإلوزات تصرخ بينما .حوله يحوم الذي بالخطر 
.وقت باقرب الفريسة إلى ليصل خطواته في وزاد ًمسرعا 
عينيه في والموت الذئب شاهد عندما الصغير العجل هرب 
وال إسعافه بإمكانهما المكان وال الوقت ال حيلة باليد ما ولكن 
بالعجل الذئب مسك .التدخل على القدرة لها اإلوزات حتى 
ولكن منه ليتمكن ًأرضا طرحه ًمحاوال رقبته من الصغير 
إزدادت وبينما ٍثوان لبضع الذئب الصغير العجل قاوم 
في اإلوزات تستمر ًأرضا فريسته طرح في الذئب محاوالت 
يدافع الصغير العجل يزال ال بينما نجدة عن باحثة الصراخ 
ًوفجأة .بسيطة كانت ولو قوة من يملك بما وجوده عن 
تتيح بحركات مهمته ألكمال الذئب محاوالت تسارعت 
أن أجل من قتله يريد الذئب أن يستنتج ان للمشاهد الفرصة 
طعام كوجبة إال تصلح ال هامدة جثة منه يجعل
Suddenly, after all these quick attempts to 
overthrow the little calf, the wolf left the calf 
and moved away from it by half a meter or 
less. The mother of the little calf ran quickly 
towards her calf, where she finally found him 
after wandering the place all night in search 
of him. The little calf gathered its strength 
and felt the safety and strength that it derived 
from the presence of its mother around it 
and started attacking the wolf. The mother 
took her little one and walked after he ate his 
meal from his mother's milk, which cannot be 
replaced by all the meals in the world
بالعجل لألطاحة السريعة المحاوالت هذه كل وبعد فجأة 
المتر نصف بحاولي عنه وأبتعد العجل الذئب ترك الصغير 
صغيرها نحو مسرعة الصغير العجل أم ركضت .أقل أو 
في الليل طوال المكان جالت أن بعد ًأخيرا وجدته حيث 
باألمان وشعر قواه الصغير العجل استجمع .عنه البحث 
يهاجم وبدأ حوله من أمه وجود من استمدها التي والقوة 
أصوات من كل بين ما االرتباك الذئب على بدا حيث الذئب 
من تسارعت التي الصغير العجل أم أقدام ووقع اإلوزات 
أخذت .األوان فوات قبل وانقاذه صغيرها الى الوصول أجل 
الذي أمه حليب من وجبته تناول أن بعد ومشت صغيرها األم 
العالم وجبات بكل يستبدله ال

32
A. R. Al-Hassnawi
TT
ST
I suddenly got out of the scene after I heard 
the sound of a modern luxury car coming 
towards me. The car stopped, and while 
my child was immersed in her joy with the 
pigeons, the pigeons left her and flew four 
to five meters away, as two young men, aged 
between thirty and forty years, got out of the 
car and put food for the pigeons. With confi­
dence and pleasure
سيارة صوت سمعت أن بعد المشهد جو من فجأة خرجت 
طفلتي وبينما السيارة توقفت .باتجاهي قادمة حديثة فخمة 
وطارت الحمامات تركتها الحمامات مع فرحتها في غارقة 
من ترجل حيث أمتار خمسة إلى أربعة مسافة مسرعة 
َعاما واألربعين الثالثين بين العمر من يبلغان شابان السيارة 
أثار بشكل السرب اذهل الذي الطعام للحَمامات ووضعا 
كانت التي الحَمامات فقدت ألنها بكت التي صغيرتي إنتباه 
وسرور ثقة بكل حولها من تدور
“What's wrong with you, little girl? They 
want to feed her like you want.“ I tried to 
calm my little girl after she felt sad for them. 
While we were watching the pigeons eating 
from the food of the two young men, one 
of them pulled out a long and thin piece of 
metal that he had apparently inserted for them 
in the food while he was spreading it, and I 
saw a group of pigeons dancing on top of the 
piece of metal. What’s going on I thought to 
myself, but soon I saw the doves increasing 
the speed of flapping their colorful wings, 
asking for help, but there was no help because 
I did not have the strength to help me defend 
them. I didn't understand what was going on 
but the two young men quickly put the doves 
in the car and sped off
“.”ِأنت تريدين مثلما إطعامها يريدون صغيرتي يا ِعليك ما 
هي شعرت أن بعد صغيرتي روع من أهديء أن حاولت 
طعام من تأكل وهي الحَمامات نتابع كنا بينما .عليهن بالحزن 
كان ورفيعة طويلة معدنية قطعة أحدهما سحب ،الشابين 
ورأيت نثره أثناء الطعام في لهن دسها قد مايبدو على 
مالذي .المعدنية القطعة فوق ترقص الحَمامات من مجموعة 
الحَمامات رأيت ما سرعان ولكن نفسي في فكرت يحصل؟ 
ما ولكن النجدة طالبة الملونة أجنحتها رفرفة سرعة من تزيد 
.عنهن الدفاع على تعينني التي القوة أملك ال ألنني معين مِن 
الحَمامات الشابان وضع ما سرعان ولكن يدور ما أفهم لم 
مسرعين وولوا السيارة في
The pigeons turned away from me and my 
child, as they turned away from the food we 
were giving them, and we kept looking at 
each other from afar. The rest of the pigeons 
were afraid of us and our food for a while… 
Then: I took my child and walked quickly 
because I still have the power to protect her…
الطعام عن ابتعدت مثلما طفلتي وعن عني الحمامات إبتعدت 
من البعض بعضنا إلى ننظر وبقينا إياه نعطيهن كنا الذي 
ومن منا الحمامات من تبقى ما خوف موقف استمر .بعيد 
فأنا ًمسرعا ومشيت طفلتي أخذت :بعدها…لوهلة طعامنا 
حمايتها على القدرة أملك الزلت…

33
3  Translating Arabic Text into English: Theory and Practice
Commentaries and Analysis by Ali R. Al-Hassnawi
Virtue and Lawوالقانون المروءة
The doves came rushing toward us, waiting for the food 
we used to scatter for them every day. My little girl of 
two-and-a-half years old went down to feed them as usual 
after all the pigeons had gathered around her and safely 
and cheerfully ate the grain she spread for them. I sat 
near her contemplating what was going on around me; 
Pigeons colored in the colors of the spectrum, my child 
happily and innocently scattering grains of wheat for 
them, people walking on the sides of the road, fresh air 
breezes and its beautiful moderate coolness. While she 
was immersed in her pleasure and joy with the baths, she 
remembered the scene of the little calf and its mother in 
one of the most wonderful scenes shown by the (National 
Geographic) channel
تنتظر مُسرعة نحونا الحَمامات اتجهت 
.يوم كل ّلهن ننثره أن اعتدنا الذي الطعام 
العمر من البالغة الصغيرة طفلتي نزلت 
أن بعد كالعادة إلطعامهن ونيف سنتان 
تأكل أمان وبكل حولها الحمامات كل تجمعت 
.مبتهجة وهي لهن تنثرها التي الحبوب من 
من يدور ما أتأمل منها بالقرب أنا جلست 
،الطيف بألوان الملونة الحَمامات حولي؛ 
القمح حبوب تنثر وبراءة سعادة بكل طفلتي 
،الطريق جوانب على يمشون أناس ،لهن 
المعتدلة وبرودته النقي الهواء نسمات 
سرورها في غارقة هي بينما .الجميلة 
العجل مشهد تذكرت الحَمامات مع وبهجتها 
المشاهد أروع من واحد في وأمه الصغير 
جيوغرافي الناشونال( قناة عرضته الذي):
“The doves came rushing toward us” مُسرعة نحونا الحَمامات اتجهت
• Commentary: According to House”s theory, this translation demonstrates a reasonable level 
of textual fit, as it maintains the general action conveyed in the original Arabic text. However, 
to further align with House's theory, a more dynamic phrase like “The doves hurried towards 
us” could better capture the urgency and align with the concept of textual fit
• Proposed translation: The doves hurried towards us
“all the pigeons had gathered around her” حولها الحمامات كل تجمعت
• Commentary: This translation meets House's criterion of informational and functional 
equivalence by accurately conveying the gathering of the pigeons around the girl. The key 
event from the source text is faithfully represented, aligning with House's theory of maintain­
ing the intended meaning and effect
“safely and cheerfully ate the grain” الحبوب من تأكل أمان وبكل
• Commentary: This translation aligns with House's theory in terms of descriptive adequacy. 
It effectively conveys the safe consumption of the grain by the doves, while also capturing 
their joyful behavior. The translation maintains the descriptive quality of the original text, 
meeting the criterion set out by House
“Pigeons colored in the colors of the spectrum” الطيف بألوان الملونة الحَمامات
• Commentary: In line with House's theory, this translation upholds descriptive adequacy by 
conveying the visual aspect of the pigeons’ colorful appearance. However, to further adhere 
to House's principles, the translation could be enhanced with a more vivid and engaging 
description, such as “Pigeons adorned with a spectrum of vibrant hues”. This would enhance 
the descriptive power and fulfill House's criterion of providing a compelling and evocative 
description
“fresh air breezes and its beautiful moderate coolness” الجميلة المعتدلة وبرودته النقي الهواء نسمات
• Commentary: The translation satisfies House's criterion of descriptive adequacy by effec­
tively conveying the pleasant weather and moderate coolness. It successfully captures the 
essence of the original text in terms of atmospheric conditions, aligning with House's empha­
sis on accurately conveying the descriptive aspects of the source text
Overall, the translation adheres reasonably well to J. House's theory of translation qual­
ity assessment. However, to further align with the theory, improvements could be made to 
enhance the textual fit, enrich the descriptive details, and ensure a stronger connection to the 
target language and cultural norms

34
A. R. Al-Hassnawi
Virtue and Lawوالقانون المروءة
The herd heads towards the other bank of the river, and 
among them is a young calf and its mother. As soon as 
they entered the river, its fast waves pushed the young 
calf away after its mother failed to protect it and maintain 
its flow in the right rhythm in the river to reach the second 
bank. The mother stood up, not having the strength, as 
much as an inch, to chase him or even help him, but she 
kept looking with her eyes, not knowing what to do. The 
little calf spent a whole night on the river cliff after the 
river waves pushed it on the coast away from the herd
النهر من األخرى الضفة نحو القطيع يتجه 
دخولهم وحال ،وأمه صغير عجل وبينهم 
الصغير العجل السريعة أمواجه دفعت النهر 
والحفاظ حمايته في أمه أخفقت أن بعد ًبعيدا 
النهر في الصحيح بالنسق سريانه على 
ال األم وقفت .الثانية الضفة الى للوصول 
حتى أو لمالحقته أنملة بقدر القوة من تملك 
تعرف ال بعينيها تنظر وبقيت بل ،إسعافه 
ليلة الصغير العجل على مضت .تفعل ماذا 
دفعته أن بعد النهر جرف على وهو كاملة 
القطيع عن ًبعيدا الساحل على النهر امواج
• Commentary: The translator has effectively translated the general plot and sequence of 
events. The reader can understand that there is a herd moving towards the other bank of the 
river, accompanied by a young calf and its mother. The theme of the river and the depiction 
of the calf being separated from its mother due to the swift waves are also well conveyed. The 
translation maintains the focus on the calf's struggle and its mother's helplessness, creating a 
sense of tension and empathy for the characters involved
However, there are several areas where the translation falls short. See below:
تفعل ماذا تعرف ال بعينيها تنظر وبقيت بل ،إسعافه حتى أو لمالحقته أنملة بقدر القوة من تملك ال األم وقفت
‘The mother stood up, not having the strength, […], to chase him or even help him, but 
she kept looking with her eyes, not knowing what to do.’
• Commentary: Obviously this approach of literal translation, though it maintains the deno­
tative meaning of the text, sacrifices the emotive meaning of expressing the calf’s mother’s 
bewilderment and helplessness
“as much as an inch,” “أنملة بقدر”
• Commentary: One more instance of loss in this translation lies in the lack of linguistic 
nuance and cultural context. For example, the phrase “أنملة بقدر” is translated as “as much as an 
inch,” which loses the poetic impact of the original Arabic expression. Figuratively, the Arabic 
expression “أنملة بقدر” means ‘to have an extremely little amount of something’, here 
‘strength’, emphasizing the mother's extreme weakness. The translator’s choice of “an inch” 
fails to convey the same intensity and reduces the impact of the scene

35
3  Translating Arabic Text into English: Theory and Practice
Virtue and Lawوالقانون المروءة
The dawn broke, the morning came with its light, and 
the sun shone on him again, as it was written for him to 
survive and live, but this time alone without care. While 
he turns left and right looking for a living away from his 
mother after the waves hit him to this place, he is noticed 
from the other side by a hungry wolf who suddenly 
turned around after he smelled the little calf. The wolf 
ran towards the little calf while the geese standing on 
the other side started screaming with a voice that caught 
the attention of the little calf. As if she sensed the danger 
hovering around him. While the geese were screaming, 
the wolf accelerated and increased his steps to reach the 
prey as soon as possible. The little calf fled when he saw 
the wolf and death in his eyes, but there was no way he 
could, neither time nor place could help him, not even the 
geese had the ability to intervene. The wolf grabbed the 
little calf from its neck, trying to knock it to the ground to 
get hold of it, but the little calf resisted the wolf for a few 
seconds, and while the wolf's attempts to knock its prey 
to the ground increased, the geese continue to scream, 
looking for help, while the little calf is still defending its 
presence with whatever power it possesses, even if it was 
simple. Suddenly, the wolf's attempts to complete his mis­
sion accelerated with movements that allow the viewer to 
conclude that the wolf wants to kill him in order to make 
him a lifeless corpse that is only suitable as a meal
واشرقت بضوءه الصبح وأطل الفجر بزغ 
النجاة له كُتبت فقد جديد من عليه الشمس 
دون من ًوحيدا المرة هذه ولكن ،والعيش 
ًباحثا ًوشماال ًيمينا يتلفت هو بينما .رعاية 
عصف أن بعد أمه عن ًبعيدا عيش لقمة عن 
من إليه ينتبه ،المكان هذا إلى الموج به 
أن بعد فجأة استدار جائع ذئب اآلخر الجانب 
الذئب اتجه .الصغير العجل رائحة شم 
بدأت بينما الصغير العجل نحو ًمسرعا 
اآلخر الجانب على واقفة كانت إوزات 
.الصغير العجل انتباه أثار ٍبصوت تصرخ 
.حوله يحوم الذي بالخطر استشعرت كأنها 
ًمسرعا الذئب عجّل اإلوزات تصرخ بينما 
بأقرب الفريسة إلى ليصل خطواته في وزاد 
شاهد عندما الصغير العجل هرب .وقت 
حيلة باليد ما ولكن ،عينيه في والموت الذئب 
وال إسعافه بإمكانهما المكان وال الوقت ال 
مسك .التدخل على القدرة لها اإلوزات حتى 
ًمحاوال رقبته من الصغير بالعجل الذئب 
العجل قاوم ولكن منه ليتمكن ًأرضا طرحه 
ازدادت وبينما ٍثوان لبضع الذئب الصغير 
ًأرضا فريسته طرح في الذئب محاوالت 
نجدة عن باحثة الصراخ في اإلوزات تستمر 
عن يدافع الصغير العجل يزال ال بينما 
.بسيطة كانت ولو قوة من يملك بما وجوده 
إلكمال الذئب محاوالت تسارعت ًوفجأة 
ان للمشاهد الفرصة تتيح بحركات مهمته 
يجعل أن أجل من قتله يريد الذئب أن يستنتج 
طعام كوجبة إال تصلح ال هامدة جثة منه

36
A. R. Al-Hassnawi
Virtue and Lawوالقانون المروءة
من ًوحيدا المرة هذه ولكن ،والعيش النجاة له كُتبت فقد جديد من عليه الشمس واشرقت بضوءه الصبح وأطل الفجر بزغ 
رعاية دون
“The dawn broke, the morning came with its light, and the sun shone on him again, as it 
was written for him to survive and live, but this time alone without care.”
• Commentary: The translation accurately captures the meaning of the original Arabic 
sentence. It conveys the idea that the sun rises again, symbolizing a new day, and the person is 
destined to survive and live, but this time without anyone to take care of them. The translation 
effectively conveys the intended message
من إليه ينتبه ،المكان هذا إلى الموج به عصف أن بعد أمه عن ًبعيدا عيش لقمة عن ًباحثا ًوشماال ًيمينا يتلفت هو بينما 
الصغير العجل رائحة شم أن بعد فجأة استدار جائع ذئب اآلخر الجانب
“While he turns left and right looking for a living away from his mother after the waves 
hit him to this place, he is noticed from the other side by a hungry wolf who suddenly 
turned around after he smelled the little calf.”
• Commentary: The translation accurately conveys the actions and events described in the 
original Arabic sentence. It depicts the person searching for a livelihood away from their 
mother after being swept away by waves, and then being noticed by a hungry wolf. The trans­
lation effectively captures the sequence of events and maintains the intended meaning
العجل انتباه أثار ٍبصوت تصرخ اآلخر الجانب على واقفة كانت إوزات بدأت بينما الصغير العجل نحو ًمسرعا الذئب اتجه 
حوله يحوم الذي بالخطر استشعرت كأنها .الصغير
“The wolf ran towards the little calf while the geese standing on the other side started 
screaming with a voice that caught the attention of the little calf. As if she sensed the 
danger hovering around him.”
• Commentary: The translation accurately portrays the actions and reactions described in 
the original Arabic sentence. It effectively conveys the wolf running towards the calf and the 
geese screaming, which catches the calf's attention. The translation also conveys the idea 
that the geese sensed the danger surrounding the calf. It maintains the intended meaning and 
sequence of events
وقت بأقرب الفريسة إلى ليصل خطواته في وزاد ًمسرعا الذئب عجّل اإلوزات تصرخ بينما
“While the geese were screaming, the wolf accelerated and increased his steps to reach 
the prey as soon as possible.”
• Commentary: The translation accurately describes the simultaneous actions of the geese 
screaming and the wolf accelerating towards its prey. It effectively conveys the urgency and 
speed with which the wolf is approaching. The translation maintains the intended meaning 
and effectively captures the events described
وال إسعافه بإمكانهما المكان وال الوقت ال حيلة باليد ما ولكن ،عينيه في والموت الذئب شاهد عندما الصغير العجل هرب 
التدخل على القدرة لها اإلوزات حتى
“The little calf fled when he saw the wolf and death in his eyes, but there was no way 
he could, neither time nor place could help him, not even the geese had the ability to 
intervene.”
• Commentary: The translation accurately conveys the actions of the little calf, its realization 
of the danger, and the inability of anyone or anything to come to its aid. The translation effec­
tively captures the sense of helplessness and the absence of options for the calf. It maintains 
the intended meaning and effectively conveys the message of the original Arabic sentence
وبينما ٍثوان لبضع الذئب الصغير العجل قاوم ولكن منه ليتمكن ًأرضا طرحه ًمحاوال رقبته من الصغير بالعجل الذئب مسك 
الصغير العجل يزال ال بينما نجدة عن باحثة الصراخ في اإلوزات تستمر ًأرضا فريسته طرح في الذئب محاوالت ازدادت 
بسيطة كانت ولو قوة من يملك بما وجوده عن يدافع

37
3  Translating Arabic Text into English: Theory and Practice
Virtue and Lawوالقانون المروءة
“The wolf grabbed the little calf from its neck, trying to knock it to the ground to get 
hold of it, but the little calf resisted the wolf for a few seconds, and while the wolf’s 
attempts to knock its prey to the ground increased, the geese continue to scream, looking 
for help, while the little calf is still defending its presence with whatever power it pos­
sesses, even if it was simple.”
• Commentary: The translation accurately depicts the intense struggle between the wolf and 
the little calf, as well as the ongoing screams of the geese seeking help. It effectively conveys 
the determination and resistance of the calf in defending itself despite the odds. The transla­
tion maintains the sequence of events and effectively captures the intended meaning of the 
original Arabic sentence
أن أجل من قتله يريد الذئب أن يستنتج ان للمشاهد الفرصة تتيح بحركات مهمته إلكمال الذئب محاوالت تسارعت ًوفجأة 
طعام كوجبة إال تصلح ال هامدة جثة منه يجعل
“Suddenly, the wolf’s attempts to complete his mission accelerated with movements 
that allow the viewer to conclude that the wolf wants to kill him in order to make him a 
lifeless corpse that is only suitable as a meal.”
• Commentary: The translation effectively conveys the sudden acceleration of the wolf’s 
efforts and its clear intention to kill the calf. It also captures the implication that the wolf aims 
to turn the calf into a lifeless corpse for consumption. The translation maintains the intended 
meaning and effectively conveys the sense of urgency and danger in the situation
Overall, the translation provides a faithful rendering of the original Arabic text, effectively 
conveying the events, actions, and emotions described. While there may be minor improve­
ments in terms of wording or flow, the translation accurately captures the intended meaning 
and successfully conveys the narrative
Suddenly, after all these quick attempts to overthrow the 
little calf, the wolf left the calf and moved away from it 
by half a meter or less. The mother of the little calf ran 
quickly towards her calf, where she finally found him 
after wandering the place all night in search of him. The 
little calf gathered its strength and felt the safety and 
strength that it derived from the presence of its mother 
around it and started attacking the wolf. The mother took 
her little one and walked after he ate his meal from his 
mother's milk, which cannot be replaced by all the meals 
in the world
السريعة المحاوالت هذه كل وبعد فجأة 
العجل الذئب ترك الصغير بالعجل لإلطاحة 
.أقل أو المتر نصف بحوالي عنه وأبتعد 
نحو مسرعة الصغير العجل أم ركضت 
جالت أن بعد ًأخيرا وجدته حيث صغيرها 
استجمع .عنه البحث في الليل طوال المكان 
والقوة باألمان وشعر قواه الصغير العجل 
وبدأ حوله من أمه وجود من استمدها التي 
االرتباك الذئب على بدا حيث الذئب يهاجم 
أقدام ووقع األوزات أصوات من كل بين ما 
أجل من تسارعت التي الصغير العجل أم 
فوات قبل وانقاذه صغيرها الى الوصول 
أن بعد ومشت صغيرها األم أخذت .األوان 
يستبدله ال الذي أمه حليب من وجبته تناول 
العالم وجبات بكل

38
A. R. Al-Hassnawi
Virtue and Lawوالقانون المروءة
• Commentary: The translation of is generally accurate and conveys the main ideas and 
events depicted in the original text. However, there are a few areas where alternative trans­
lations or slight modifications can enhance the clarity and coherence of the translation. See 
below:
أقل أو المتر نصف بحوالي عنه وأبتعد العجل الذئب ترك الصغير بالعجل لإلطاحة السريعة المحاوالت هذه كل وبعد فجأة
“Suddenly, after all these quick attempts to overthrow the little calf, the wolf left the calf 
and moved away from it by half a meter or less.”
• Proposed Translation: Suddenly, after all these rapid attempts to seize the young calf, 
the wolf abandoned it and retreated about half a meter or less
• Commentary: The suggested alternative uses the term ‘seize’ instead of “overthrow” to 
better capture the intended meaning of the wolf's actions. Additionally, ‘abandoned’ is used 
instead of “left” to emphasize the abandonment aspect. The phrase ‘retreated about half a 
meter or less’ provides a more precise description of the distance between the wolf and the 
calf
عنه البحث في الليل طوال المكان جالت أن بعد ًأخيرا وجدته حيث صغيرها نحو مسرعة الصغير العجل أم ركضت
“The mother of the little calf ran quickly towards her calf, where she finally found him 
after wandering the place all night in search of him.”
• Proposed Translation: The mother cow sprinted hastily towards her young calf, finally 
finding him after tirelessly roaming the area all night in search of him
• Commentary: The suggested alternative replaces “little calf” with ‘young calf’ to provide a 
more specific description. Using ‘cow’ instead of “mother” adds clarity and avoids repetition. 
The adverb ‘tirelessly’ emphasizes the mother's persistent search, and ‘roaming the area’ 
conveys a sense of exploration
الذئب يهاجم وبدأ حوله من أمه وجود من استمدها التي والقوة باألمان وشعر قواه الصغير العجل استجمع
“The little calf gathered its strength and felt the safety and strength that it derived from 
the presence of its mother around it and started attacking the wolf.”
• Proposed Translation: The young calf summoned its strength, feeling the security and 
power it drew from the presence of its mother nearby, and began to assail the wolf
• Commentary: The alternative translation maintains the meaning of the original text but uses 
‘summoned’ instead of “gathered” to convey a sense of determination. Replacing “derived” 
with ‘drew’ maintains the meaning while offering a more commonly used term. The verb 
‘assail’ adds a stronger sense of aggression than “attack”
العالم وجبات بكل يستبدله ال الذي أمه حليب من وجبته تناول أن بعد ومشت صغيرها األم أخذت
“The mother took her little one and walked after he ate his meal from his mother's milk, 
which cannot be replaced by all the meals in the world.”
• Proposed Translation: The mother took her calf and walked after he had consumed his 
meal of his mother's milk, which cannot be substituted by any meal in the world
• Commentary: The suggested alternative clarifies that the mother took her ‘calf’ rather than 
“little one”. The phrase ‘after he had consumed’ ensures proper sequence of events. Using 
‘substituted’ instead of “replaced” emphasizes the unique value of the mother's milk. The 
phrase ‘any meal in the world’ is more idiomatic than “all the meals in the world.“
I suddenly got out of the scene after I heard the sound 
of a modern luxury car coming towards me. The car 
stopped, and while my child was immersed in her joy 
with the pigeons, the pigeons left her and flew four to 
five meters away, as two young men, aged between thirty 
and forty years, got out of the car and put food for the 
pigeons. With confidence and pleasure
سمعت أن بعد المشهد جو من فجأة خرجت 
.باتجاهي قادمة حديثة فخمة سيارة صوت 
في غارقة طفلتي وبينما السيارة توقفت 
الحمامات تركتها الحمامات مع فرحتها 
خمسة إلى أربعة مسافة مسرعة وطارت 
يبلغان شابان السيارة من ترجل حيث أمتار 
َعاما واألربعين الثالثين بين العمر من 
السرب أذهل الذي الطعام للحَمامات ووضعا 
ألنها بكت التي صغيرتي انتباه أثار بشكل 
حولها من تدور كانت التي الحَمامات فقدت 
وسرور ثقة بكل

39
3  Translating Arabic Text into English: Theory and Practice
Virtue and Lawوالقانون المروءة
باتجاهي قادمة حديثة فخمة سيارة صوت سمعت أن بعد المشهد جو من فجأة خرجت
“I suddenly got out of the scene after I heard the sound of a modern luxury car coming 
towards me.”
Commentary: By using “atmosphere” instead of “scene,” the translation captures the 
intended meaning of the original text more accurately. “جو” refers to the overall atmosphere or 
ambience rather than just the physical scene
خمسة إلى أربعة مسافة مسرعة وطارت الحمامات تركتها الحمامات مع فرحتها في غارقة طفلتي وبينما السيارة توقفت 
أمتار
“The car stopped, and while my child was immersed in her joy with the pigeons, the 
pigeons left her and flew four to five meters away.”
Commentary: Adding “swiftly” clarifies the speed at which the pigeons flew away, providing 
a better understanding of the sudden movement and capturing the sense of urgency
السرب أذهل الذي الطعام للحَمامات ووضعا ًعاما واألربعين الثالثين بين العمر من يبلغان شابان السيارة من ترجل حيث 
صغيرتي انتباه أثار بشكل
“Two young men, aged between thirty and forty, got out of the car and placed food for 
the pigeons, which astounded the flock in a way that caught my little one's attention.”
Commentary: No changes made to this sentence as the translation is accurate and effec­
tively conveys the actions and reactions of the young men and the flock of pigeons
وسرور ثقة بكل حولها من تدور كانت التي الحَمامات فقدت ألنها بكت التي
“She cried because she lost the pigeons, which were spinning around her with confidence 
and joy.”
Commentary: No changes made to this sentence as the translation is accurate and effectively 
describes the emotional state of the child and the joyful interaction she had with the pigeons
“What's wrong with you, little girl? They want to feed her 
like you want.“ I tried to calm my little girl after she felt 
sad for them. While we were watching the pigeons eating 
from the food of the two young men, one of them pulled 
out a long and thin piece of metal that he had apparently 
inserted for them in the food while he was spreading it, 
and I saw a group of pigeons dancing on top of the piece 
of metal. What’s going on I thought to myself, but soon I 
saw the doves increasing the speed of flapping their color­
ful wings, asking for help, but there was no help because 
I did not have the strength to help me defend them. I 
didn't understand what was going on but the two young 
men quickly put the doves in the car and sped off
“مثلما إطعامها يريدون صغيرتي يا ِعليك ما 
روع من أهدئ أن حاولت .”ِأنت تريدين 
.عليهن بالحزن هي شعرت أن بعد صغيرتي 
طعام من تأكل وهي الحَمامات نتابع كنا بينما 
طويلة معدنية قطعة أحدهما سحب ،الشابين 
في لهن دسها قد يبدو ما على كان ورفيعة 
من مجموعة ورأيت نثره أثناء الطعام 
ما .المعدنية القطعة فوق ترقص الحَمامات 
سرعان ولكن نفسي في فكرت يحصل؟ الذي 
رفرفة سرعة من تزيد الحَمامات رأيت ما 
مِن ما ولكن النجدة طالبة الملونة أجنحتها 
على تعينني التي القوة أملك ال ألنني معين 
سرعان ولكن يدور ما أفهم لم .عنهن الدفاع 
السيارة في الحَمامات الشابان وضع ما 
مسرعين وولوا

40
A. R. Al-Hassnawi
Virtue and Lawوالقانون المروءة
Critical Analysis of the Translation:
“صغيرتي يا ِعليك ما” is translated as “What's wrong with you, little girl?” This translation 
captures the general meaning but misses the nuance of the original Arabic. A more accurate 
translation would be “What's bothering you, my little one?” or “What's the matter, my dear?” 
This alternative translation maintains the sense of concern and addresses the girl in a more 
tender manner
ِأنت تريدين مثلما إطعامها يريدون
“They want to feed her like you want,”
An alternative translation could be “They want to feed her just like you want” or “They want 
to feed her as you do.“ This conveys the idea that the two young men have the same desire as 
the little girl regarding the feeding of the pigeons
صغيرتي روع من
“after she felt sad for them.”
Commentary: Although the translation captures the overall sentiment, the word “روع” 
denotes fear rather than sadness. A more precise translation would be “after my little girl got 
scared for them” or “after my little girl felt frightened for them.“ This better reflects the girl's 
emotional response
ورفيعة طويلة معدنية قطعة أحدهما سحب
“One of them pulled out a long and thin piece of metal.”
Commentary: The translation is accurate, but for improved specificity, an alternative transla­
tion could be “one of them withdrew a long, slender piece of metal” or “one of them took out 
a lengthy, thin metal object.“ These alternatives provide a clearer description of the object
“يحصل؟ الذي ما”
is translated as “what's going on?” This translation is acceptable, but a more precise transla­
tion would be “what is happening?” or “what is taking place?” to better convey the sense of 
confusion and curiosity
The pigeons turned away from me and my child, as they 
turned away from the food we were giving them, and 
we kept looking at each other from afar. The rest of the 
pigeons were afraid of us and our food for a while… 
Then: I took my child and walked quickly because I still 
have the power to protect her…
مثلما طفلتي وعن عني الحمامات ابتعدت 
إياه نعطيهن كنا الذي الطعام عن ابتعدت 
.بعيد من البعض بعضنا إلى ننظر وبقينا 
الحمامات من تبقى ما خوف موقف استمر 
أخذت :بعدها …لوهلة طعامنا ومن منا 
أملك الزلت فأنا ًمسرعا ومشيت طفلتي 
حمايتها على القدرة…

41
3  Translating Arabic Text into English: Theory and Practice
Virtue and Lawوالقانون المروءة
Overall, the translation captures the main ideas and general meaning of the Arabic text. 
However, there are a few areas where alternative translations or improvements could be sug­
gested for a more accurate representation of the original text
طفلتي وعن عني الحمامات ابتعدت
“The pigeons turned away from me and my child.”
Commentary: The translation accurately conveys the idea that the pigeons turned away. 
However, the phrase “طفلتي وعن عني” could be better translated as ‘from me and my daughter’ 
to emphasize the relationship and connection between the narrator and the child
إياه نعطيهن كنا الذي الطعام عن ابتعدت مثلما
“as they turned away from the food we were giving them”
Commentary: The translation captures the general meaning, but it uses the word “we” 
instead of specifying that it was the narrator who was giving the food. Additionally, “إياه” is a 
pronoun referring to the food, so it should be translated accordingly
بعيد من البعض بعضنا إلى ننظر وبقينا
“and we kept looking at each other from afar”
Commentary: The translation effectively conveys the meaning of looking at each other from 
a distance. However, the repetition of “البعض بعضنا” is not necessary in the English translation
لوهلة طعامنا ومن منا الحمامات من تبقى ما خوف موقف استمر
“The rest of the pigeons were afraid of us and our food for a while.”
Commentary: The translation accurately reflects the fear of the pigeons, but it doesn't capture 
the sense of the fear being temporary or momentary. The word “لوهلة” indicates a brief period 
of time
حمايتها على القدرة أملك الزلت فأنا ًمسرعا ومشيت طفلتي أخذت
“I took my child and walked quickly because I still have the power to protect her.”
Commentary: The translation accurately conveys the main idea, but it doesn't specify the 
gender of the child. Adding the appropriate pronoun would provide clarity
Final Translation by Ali R. Al-Hassnawi
TT
ST
VIRTUE AND LAW
The doves came rushing toward us, waiting 
for the food we used to scatter for them every 
day. My little girl of two-and-a-half years 
old went down to feed them as usual after 
all the pigeons had gathered around her and 
safely and cheerfully ate the grains she spread 
for them. I sat near her contemplating what 
was going on around me. The doves were 
colored in like a spectrum. My child happily 
and innocently scattering grains of wheat for 
them. There were some people walking on 
the sides of the road with fresh air breezing. 
While seeing her immersed in her pleasure 
and joy with the baths, I remembered the 
scene of the little calf and his mother in one 
of the most wonderful scenes shown by the 
National Geographic channel
والقانون المروءة
إعتدنا الذي الطعام تنتظر مُسرعة نحونا الحَمامات إتجهت 
من البالغة الصغيرة طفلتي نزلت .يوم كل ّلهن ننثره أن 
كل تجمعت أن بعد كالعادة إلطعامهن ونيف سنتان العمر 
تنثرها التي الحبوب من تأكل أمان وبكل حولها الحمامات 
من يدور ما أتأمل منها بالقرب أنا جلست .مبتهجة وهي لهن 
سعادة بكل طفلتي ،الطيف بألوان الملونة الحَمامات حولي؛ 
جوانب على يمشون أناس ،لهن القمح حبوب تنثر وبراءة 
.الجميلة المعتدلة وبرودته النقي الهواء نسمات ،الطريق 
تذكرت الحَمامات مع وبهجتها سرورها في غارقة هي بينما 
الذي المشاهد أروع من واحد في وأمه الصغير العجل مشهد 
جيوغرافي الناشنال( قناة عرضته):

42
A. R. Al-Hassnawi
TT
ST
The herd headed towards the other bank of 
the river, and among them was a young calf 
with his mother. As soon as they entered 
the river, its fast waves pushed the young 
calf away after its mother failed to keep him 
floating with the right rhythm of the river till 
it reached the other bank. The mother stood 
up, helpless and strengthless to chase him or 
even help him, but she kept gazing at him, 
not knowing what to do. The little calf spent 
a whole night on the river cliff as the river 
waves pushed him away from the herd
عجل وبينهم النهر من األخرى الضفة نحو القطيع يتجه 
السريعة أمواجه دفعت النهر دخولهم وحال ،وأمه صغير 
والحفاظ حمايته في أمه أخفقت أن بعد ًبعيدا الصغير العجل 
الضفة الى للوصول النهر في الصحيح بالنسق سريانه على 
أو لمالحقته إنملة بقدر القوة من تملك ال األم وقفت .الثانية 
.تفعل ماذا تعرف ال بعينيها تنظر وبقيت بل إسعافه حتى 
النهر جرف على وهو كاملة ليلة الصغير العجل على مضت 
القطيع عن ًبعيدا الساحل على النهر امواج دفعته أن بعد
The dawn broke, the morning came with its 
light, and the sun shone on him again, as he 
was destined to survive and live, but this time 
alone without care. While he was turning 
left and right looking for a living away from 
his mother, he was spotted by a hungry wolf 
who suddenly turned around after it smelled 
the little calf. The wolf ran towards the little 
calf while the geese standing on the other 
side started screaming with a voice that 
caught the attention of the little calf, as if 
they sensed the danger hovering around the 
calf. While the geese were screaming, the 
wolf hurried his steps to reach the prey as 
soon as possible. The little calf fled when 
he saw the wolf with death in his eyes, but 
there was no way he could, neither time nor 
place could help him, not even the geese had 
the ability to intervene. The wolf grabbed 
the little calf from its neck, trying to knock 
it to the ground to get hold of it, but the little 
calf resisted the wolf for a few seconds, and 
while the wolf's attempts to knock its prey to 
the ground increased, the geese continue to 
scream, looking for help, while the little calf 
is still defending its presence with whatever 
power it possesses, even if it was simple. 
Suddenly, the wolf's attempts to complete his 
mission with movements that leave no doubt 
of impression that the wolf wants to kill him 
that is the best meal to eat
من عليه الشمس واشرقت بضوءه الصبح وأطل الفجر بزغ 
من ًوحيدا المرة هذه ولكن والعيش النجاة له كُتبت فقد جديد 
لقمة عن ًباحثا ًوشماال ًيمينا يتلفت هو بينما .رعاية دون 
،المكان هذا إلى الموج به عصف أن بعد أمه عن ًبعيدا عيش 
أن بعد فجأة استدار جائع ذئب اآلخر الجانب من إليه ينتبه 
العجل نحو ًمسرعا الذئب إتجه .الصغير العجل رائحة شم 
اآلخر الجانب على واقفة كانت إوزات بدأت بينما الصغير 
استشعرت كأنها .الصغير العجل انتباه أثار ٍبصوت تصرخ 
الذئب عجّل اإلوزات تصرخ بينما .حوله يحوم الذي بالخطر 
.وقت باقرب الفريسة إلى ليصل خطواته في وزاد ًمسرعا 
عينيه في والموت الذئب شاهد عندما الصغير العجل هرب 
وال إسعافه بإمكانهما المكان وال الوقت ال حيلة باليد ما ولكن 
بالعجل الذئب مسك .التدخل على القدرة لها اإلوزات حتى 
ولكن منه ليتمكن ًأرضا طرحه ًمحاوال رقبته من الصغير 
إزدادت وبينما ٍثوان لبضع الذئب الصغير العجل قاوم 
في اإلوزات تستمر ًأرضا فريسته طرح في الذئب محاوالت 
يدافع الصغير العجل يزال ال بينما نجدة عن باحثة الصراخ 
ًوفجأة .بسيطة كانت ولو قوة من يملك بما وجوده عن 
تتيح بحركات مهمته ألكمال الذئب محاوالت تسارعت 
أن أجل من قتله يريد الذئب أن يستنتج ان للمشاهد الفرصة 
طعام كوجبة إال تصلح ال هامدة جثة منه يجعل

43
3  Translating Arabic Text into English: Theory and Practice
TT
ST
Suddenly, after all these quick attempts to 
overthrow the little calf, the wolf left him and 
moved away from half a meter or less. The 
mother of the little calf ran quickly towards 
her calf, where she finally found him after 
wandering the place all night in search of 
him. The little calf gathered his strength and 
felt the safety and strength brought by the 
presence of its mother around him and started 
attacking the wolf. The mother took her little 
one and walked after he had his meal of his 
mother's milk, which cannot be replaced by 
all the meals in the world
بالعجل لألطاحة السريعة المحاوالت هذه كل وبعد فجأة 
المتر نصف بحاولي عنه وأبتعد العجل الذئب ترك الصغير 
صغيرها نحو مسرعة الصغير العجل أم ركضت .أقل أو 
في الليل طوال المكان جالت أن بعد ًأخيرا وجدته حيث 
باألمان وشعر قواه الصغير العجل استجمع .عنه البحث 
يهاجم وبدأ حوله من أمه وجود من استمدها التي والقوة 
أصوات من كل بين ما االرتباك الذئب على بدا حيث الذئب 
من تسارعت التي الصغير العجل أم أقدام ووقع اإلوزات 
أخذت .األوان فوات قبل وانقاذه صغيرها الى الوصول أجل 
الذي أمه حليب من وجبته تناول أن بعد ومشت صغيرها األم 
العالم وجبات بكل يستبدله ال
I suddenly got out of the scene after I heard 
a modern luxury car coming towards me. 
The car stopped, and while my daughter was 
immersed in her joy with the doves, they left 
her and flew several meters away. Two young 
men, aged between thirty and forty years, got 
out of the car and put food for the doves. The 
herd was so startled that even my daughter 
started crying when she lost the doves that 
were going around here with confidence and 
pleasure
سيارة صوت سمعت أن بعد المشهد جو من فجأة خرجت 
طفلتي وبينما السيارة توقفت .باتجاهي قادمة حديثة فخمة 
وطارت الحمامات تركتها الحمامات مع فرحتها في غارقة 
من ترجل حيث أمتار خمسة إلى أربعة مسافة مسرعة 
َعاما واألربعين الثالثين بين العمر من يبلغان شابان السيارة 
أثار بشكل السرب اذهل الذي الطعام للحَمامات ووضعا 
كانت التي الحَمامات فقدت ألنها بكت التي صغيرتي إنتباه 
وسرور ثقة بكل حولها من تدور
“What's wrong with you, my little girl? They 
want to feed her like you want.“ I tried to 
calm my little girl after she felt sad for doves. 
While we were watching the doves eating 
from the food of the two young men, one of 
them pulled out a long and thin piece of metal 
stick that he had apparently inserted for them 
in the food while he was spreading it. Then I 
saw a group of doves dancing onto the stick. 
‘What's going on?’ I thought to myself, but 
soon I saw the doves flapping their colorful 
wings, asking for help, but there was no hope 
because I myself did not have the strength to 
help me help them. I did not figure out what 
was going on but the two young men hastily 
put the doves in the car and drove fled off
“.”ِأنت تريدين مثلما إطعامها يريدون صغيرتي يا ِعليك ما 
هي شعرت أن بعد صغيرتي روع من أهديء أن حاولت 
طعام من تأكل وهي الحَمامات نتابع كنا بينما .عليهن بالحزن 
كان ورفيعة طويلة معدنية قطعة أحدهما سحب ،الشابين 
ورأيت نثره أثناء الطعام في لهن دسها قد مايبدو على 
مالذي .المعدنية القطعة فوق ترقص الحَمامات من مجموعة 
الحَمامات رأيت ما سرعان ولكن نفسي في فكرت يحصل؟ 
ما ولكن النجدة طالبة الملونة أجنحتها رفرفة سرعة من تزيد 
.عنهن الدفاع على تعينني التي القوة أملك ال ألنني معين مِن 
الحَمامات الشابان وضع ما سرعان ولكن يدور ما أفهم لم 
مسرعين وولوا السيارة في
The doves turned away from me and my little 
daughter, as they turned away from the food 
we were giving them, while we kept looking 
at each other from a distance. The rest of the 
doves were afraid of us and our food for a 
while… Then: I took my child and walked 
quickly away as I still have the strength to 
protect her
الطعام عن ابتعدت مثلما طفلتي وعن عني الحمامات إبتعدت 
من البعض بعضنا إلى ننظر وبقينا إياه نعطيهن كنا الذي 
ومن منا الحمامات من تبقى ما خوف موقف استمر .بعيد 
فأنا ًمسرعا ومشيت طفلتي أخذت :بعدها…لوهلة طعامنا 
حمايتها على القدرة أملك الزلت…

45
Chapter 4
Issues in Translation: Three Different 
Target Texts
Harith Ismael Turki
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2024
A. Jasim Mohammed (ed.), Literary Translation in Practice, 
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-59333-8_4
This chapter presents a comparative analysis of three different translations of 
Azeez Jasim Mohammed’s short story “Corona Series”. The third translation is 
given by the contributor of this chapter, an academic teaching English language at 
university level. The comments, which include various grammatical, semantic and 
other issues, are given by the third translator of the source text.
The story is about the life of a family during the coronavirus pandemic. It is 
divided into six episodes that describe the spread and culmination of the virus. 
Similarities and differences between the translations are identified, and reasons for 
these differences are explored to illustrate some of the difficulties the translators 
may have faced. The source text is divided into sections and presented in three col­
umns with marginal comments. Students should read the source text and all three 
translations, identifying the differences between them. They can also refer to the 
comments by NAS readers of this translation in Chapter 9. Practical exercises for 
students can be found at the end of this chapter. By the end of this chapter, stu­
dents will be able to state:
1.	 The problems in translation and/or issues of translation they faced
2.	 Grammatical issues while rendering the statements and using the correct form
3.	 Linguistic or semantic issues arising during the translation of the source text.
H. I. Turki (*) 
Faculty of Letters, Department of Western Languages and Literature, Karabuk Univesity, Daire 
12, Safranbolu, Karabuk 78600, Turkey

46
H. I. Turki
Translation # 1
Mohammed Talalwa.
TT
ST
The Corona Series—Siham Al-Waswas
Episode 1—Introduction
Hearing the newscaster delivering the news: 
“Two people have been infected with a new 
virus called Corona, and it is deadly.” He con­
tinues to broadcast the news in a frightened 
tone: “There is no cure for this virus. We are 
waiting for experts to develop antivirals to 
treat it…”
Widad: “Are we truly living in the twen­
ty-first century?”
Murad: “I can’t believe it!” He reassures his 
wife, “Forget about it, Widad.”
Widad: “You’re right, Murad… why are we 
preoccupied with such news?”
مسلسل الكورونا—سِهام الوسواس
الحلقة االولى—التعريف
إصابة أثنين بفيروس“ : نسمع المذيع يُلقي نشرة األخبار
يستمر ”. جديد يدعى كورونا وهو خطير الى حد الموت
ال يوجد عالج لهذا الفيروس“ :َ باذاعة الخبر مرعوبا
”…وبأنتظار الخبراء أليجاذ مضادات لعالجه
هل نحن في القرن الحادي والعشرين؟“ :”وداد
انسي الموضوع“ :يُطمئن زوجته ”!ال اصدق“ : مراد
”.ياوداد
معك حق يا مراد… لماذا ننشغل في مثل هذه“ : وداد
”…األخبار
Episode 2—Outbreak
A week later, Murad asked Widad upon his 
return from work, “What’s the news, Widad?”
“They’re indicating that the virus is spreading 
rapidly,” she replied, looking visibly worried. 
“The news is not reassuring, Murad.”
“Don’t worry, Widad… It’s still far away, and 
we’re safe for now,” Murad reassured her. 
“What will you be cooking for us today?”
الحلقة الثانية—األنتشار
بعد مرور اسبوع
يبادر بالسؤال حال عودته من ”ما األخبار ياوداد؟“ : مراد
العمل
تواصل ”…يشيرون الى انه بدأ باألنتشار السريع“ : وداد
األخبار ال تُطمئن يا مراد“ :”.الحديث ويبدو عليها االرتباك
ال عليك يا وداد … مازال بعيداً فنحن بخير… ماذا“ : مراد
”ستطعميننا اليوم؟
Episode 3—Closure
Six days later
“Murad, did you know that the mosques 
and places of worship have been closed, and 
everybody is banned from entering or leav­
ing?” Widad said
“My goodness! How are we supposed to 
attend your sister’s wedding now?” Murad 
replied anxiously
“The wedding has been cancelled because 
everyone is scared to attend,” Widad said with 
a heavy heart
الحلقة الثالثة—إغالق األبواب
بعد ستة أيام
هل تعلم يامراد؟ أُغلقت المساجد ودور العبادة ومُنع“ : وداد
”.الجميع من الدخول والخروج
ياللهول…! كيف لنا أن نحضر حفل زفاف اختك“ : مراد
إذاً؟
أُلغيّ الحفل ألن الجميع يخشى الحضور“ :”.وداد
Episode 4—Distance Education
Five days later
Murad: “What are the kids doing in the 
streets outside today?”
Widad: “They got an open holiday and they 
have been informed to study from home.”
Murad: “I thought I was the only one who 
would be sitting at home!”
Widad: “We will spend some beautiful time 
together at home, Murad.”
الحلقة الرابعة—التحكم عن بُعد
بعد خمسة ايام
ماذا يفعل األوالد في الشارع اليوم؟“ :”مراد
منحوهم إجازة مفتوحة وأبلغوهم بالدراسة عن بعد“ :”.وداد
ظننت نفسي الوحيد من سيجلس في الدار“ :”!مراد
سنقضي أوقات جميلة في البيت سوية يا مراد“ :”.وداد

47
4  Issues in Translation: Three Different Target Texts
TT
ST
Episode 5—Zombie Apocalypse
Four days later, sitting at home watching TV
Widad: “Bring us some vegetables, Murad.”
Murad sighed and replied, “It’ll be my turn 
to go shopping with nine other people in two 
hours!”
Widad knew that time was of the essence and 
urged him to make the most of it. “Make use 
of the time to buy all the important things,” 
she said
However, Murad reassured her that he was 
prepared for the task ahead. “Don’t worry,” 
he said, “everyone’s share is ready.”
العصر زومبي—الخامسة الحلقة
ايام اربعة بعد
التلفاز يشاهدان الدار في جالسان ومراد وداد
مراد يا الخضار لنا اجلب“ :وداد.”
أخرين اشخاص تسعة مع التسوق في دوري سيحين“ :مراد 
ساعتين بعد!”
المهمة األشياء كل تسوق في الوقت استغل“ :وداد.”
جاهزة منا واحد كل حصة تقلقي ال“ :مراد.”
Episode 6– Symptoms
Episode 6—Symptoms
Three days later, Widad and Murad are still in 
their home. Now, they are both feeling unwell
“I feel feverish and tired,” Widad tells Murad
“I do too, Widad,” Murad replies
Widad begins to worry that they may have 
contracted the virus. “Did you touch or inhale 
anything? Did you shake hands, kiss, or talk 
to anyone?” she asks Murad
“No, I didn’t do any of those things. What 
about you, Widad?” Murad responds
“Neither did I. So why do we feel sick, 
Murad?” Widad asks
Murad begins to panic. “Did we get infected 
for no reason, Widad?” he exclaims
األعراض—السادسة الحلقة
أيام ثالثة بعد
والتعب بالحمى أشعر“ :وداد.”
وداد يا كذلك وأنا“ :مراد.”
أم قبلت ،صافحت هل شيء؟ استنشقت أو لمست هل“ :وداد 
؟… هل أحد؟ الى تحدثت
وداد؟ يا ِوأنت …أفعل لم كال“ :مراد”
مراد؟ يا ًإذا لماذا …أنا وال“ :وداد”
وداد؟ يا شيء كل بدون العدوى اصابتنا هل“ :مراد!!”
Final Episode—Prevention is Better than 
Cure
Silence pervades the house as the sound of 
the news announcer’s voice is heard on the 
television. “The virus has been contained,” 
he says
Widad and Murad have been sound asleep in 
their bed for two nights in a row
العالج من خير الوقاية—األخيرة الحلقة
نشرة في المذيع صوت يُسمع … المنزل يعم هدوء 
األخبار…
“الفيروس على السيطرة تمت.”
ليلتين منذ الفراش في نائمان ومراد وداد!!!

48
H. I. Turki
Translation # 2
Husamulddin Alfaisali.
TT
ST
THE COVID SERIES
EPISODE ONE: The Identification
The news broadcaster’s voice crackles 
through the TV, “Two individuals have been 
confirmed to have contracted the newly 
discovered Corona virus, which is considered 
to be deadly dangerous.” He continues in a 
panicked tone, “The vaccine for the virus 
remains elusive, and we are eagerly awaiting 
the discovery of an effective antidote by the 
experts.”
Wedad utters, “Are we really in the twen­
ty-first century?”
“I don’t buy this.” Murad reassures his wife. 
“Forget about it, Wedad.”
“You’re right, Murad. Why would we busy 
ourselves with such news?” Wedad replies
الوسواس سِهام—الكورونا مسلسل
التعريف—االولى الحلقة
بفيروس أثنين إصابة“ :األخبار نشرة يُلقي المذيع نسمع 
يستمر “.الموت حد الى خطير وهو كورونا يدعى جديد 
الفيروس لهذا عالج يوجد ال“ :َمرعوبا الخبر باذاعة 
لعالجه مضادات أليجاذ الخبراء وبأنتظار…”
والعشرين؟ الحادي القرن في نحن هل“ :وداد”
الموضوع انسي“ :زوجته يُطمئن ”!اصدق ال“ :مراد 
ياوداد.”
هذه مثل في ننشغل لماذا …مراد يا حق معك“ :وداد 
األخبار…”
EPISODE TWO: The Breakout
A week goes by
“What’s on the news, Wedad?” Murad asks as 
he arrives home from work
“They say it’s spreading rapidly,” Wedad 
replies, seeming puzzled. “It’s all bad news, 
Murad.”
“Don’t you worry, Wedad. As long as it’s far 
away from here, we’ll be fine. Anyway, what 
did you cook for today?”
األنتشار—الثانية الحلقة
اسبوع مرور بعد
من عودته حال بالسؤال يبادر ”ياوداد؟ األخبار ما“ :مراد 
العمل
تواصل ”…السريع باألنتشار بدأ انه الى يشيرون“ :وداد 
مراد يا تُطمئن ال األخبار“ :االرتباك عليها ويبدو الحديث.”
ماذا …بخير فنحن ًبعيدا مازال … وداد يا عليك ال“ :مراد 
اليوم؟ ستطعميننا”
EPISODE THREE: Shutting Doors
Six days pass
“Murad, did you hear that mosques and 
other places of worship have been closed. 
Everyone’s banned from going in or out,” 
Wedad informs her husband
“Oh, my Gosh! How are we supposed to 
attend your sister’s wedding then?” Murad 
exclaims
“It’s canceled. Everybody’s afraid to come,” 
Wedad replies with disappointment
األبواب إغالق—الثالثة الحلقة
أيام ستة بعد
ومُنع العبادة ودور المساجد أُغلقت يامراد؟ تعلم هل“ :وداد 
والخروج الدخول من الجميع.”
اختك زفاف حفل نحضر أن لنا كيف !…ياللهول“ :مراد 
إذاً؟
الحضور يخشى الجميع ألن الحفل ّأُلغي“ :وداد.”

49
4  Issues in Translation: Three Different Target Texts
TT
ST
EPISODE FOUR: Remote Control
Five more days go by
“What are the kids doing on the street 
today?” Murad asks
“They were given an open leave and were 
told to study online,” Wedad replies
“And I thought I was the only one who’d be 
stuck indoors,” Murad says
“We’ll have fun together inside the house, 
Murad,” Wedad says back
بُعد عن التحكم—الرابعة الحلقة
ايام خمسة بعد
اليوم؟ الشارع في األوالد يفعل ماذا“ :مراد”
بعد عن بالدراسة وأبلغوهم مفتوحة إجازة منحوهم“ :وداد.”
الدار في سيجلس من الوحيد نفسي ظننت“ :مراد!”
مراد يا سوية البيت في جميلة أوقات سنقضي“ :وداد.”
EPISODE FIVE: Zombie of the 
Century
Four more days pass, and Wedad and Murad 
are watching TV at home
“Go get us some vegetables, Murad,” Wedad 
requests
“My turn, along with nine other people, 
comes in two hours,” Murad replies
“Buy ALL the necessities and don’t waste 
any time,” Wedad reminds her spouse
“Don’t worry. Our share is ready,” Murad 
assures her
العصر زومبي—الخامسة الحلقة
ايام اربعة بعد
التلفاز يشاهدان الدار في جالسان ومراد وداد
مراد يا الخضار لنا اجلب“ :وداد.”
أخرين اشخاص تسعة مع التسوق في دوري سيحين“ :مراد 
ساعتين بعد!”
المهمة األشياء كل تسوق في الوقت استغل“ :وداد.”
جاهزة منا واحد كل حصة تقلقي ال“ :مراد.”
EPISODE SIX: The Symptoms
“I’m feeling feverish and worn-out,” Wedad 
says, shivering
“Same here, Wedad,” Murad responds
“Did you touch or inhale something? Did 
you shake hands, kiss, or talk to someone?” 
Wedad inquires
“Nah, I didn’t. What about you, Wedad?” 
Murad replies
“Me neither. Why is this happening then, 
Murad?” Wedad questions
“Did we just catch the virus outta nowhere, 
Wedad?” Murad wonders aloud
األعراض—السادسة الحلقة
أيام ثالثة بعد
والتعب بالحمى أشعر“ :وداد.”
وداد يا كذلك وأنا“ :مراد.”
أم قبلت ،صافحت هل شيء؟ استنشقت أو لمست هل“ :وداد 
؟… هل أحد؟ الى تحدثت
وداد؟ يا ِوأنت …أفعل لم كال“ :مراد”
مراد؟ يا ًإذا لماذا …أنا وال“ :وداد”
وداد؟ يا شيء كل بدون العدوى اصابتنا هل“ :مراد!!”
FINALE: Better Safe Than Sorry
While the house is lapsed into an expectant 
silence, a broadcaster’s voice echoes from the 
speakers of the TV, “The virus is now under 
control.”
Wedad and Murad have been asleep in their 
bed for two nights now
العالج من خير الوقاية—األخيرة الحلقة
نشرة في المذيع صوت يُسمع … المنزل يعم هدوء 
األخبار…
“الفيروس على السيطرة تمت.”
ليلتين منذ الفراش في نائمان ومراد وداد!!!

50
H. I. Turki
Translation # 3
Harith Ismael Turki.
TT
ST
Corona Series
The First Episode: The definition
We listen to the anchor reading the newscast 
“Two people were infected with a new deadly 
virus called Corona”. Terrified, the anchor 
continues: “There is no cure for this virus, we 
are waiting for the scientists to find one”
Widad: Are we in the twenty-first century?
Murad: I don’t believe”, trying to comfort his 
wife, “Forget about it”
Widad: You are right, why should we be 
concerned with such news?
الوسواس سِهام—الكورونا مسلسل
التعريف—االولى الحلقة
بفيروس أثنين إصابة“ :األخبار نشرة يُلقي المذيع نسمع 
يستمر ”.الموت حد الى خطير وهو كورونا يدعى جديد 
الفيروس لهذا عالج يوجد ال“ :َمرعوبا الخبر باذاعة 
لعالجه مضادات أليجاذ الخبراء وبأنتظار…”
والعشرين؟ الحادي القرن في نحن هل“ :وداد”
الموضوع انسي“ :زوجته يُطمئن ”!اصدق ال“ :مراد 
ياوداد.”
هذه مثل في ننشغل لماذا …مراد يا حق معك“ :وداد 
األخبار…”
Episode 2: Outbreak
A week later
Murad: What’s up, he asked as soon as he 
arrived home
Widad: They said that it is spreading fast, she 
seemed to be confused but she continued “It 
doesn’t seem to be reassuring”
Murad: Don’t worry, it is still far, we are fine. 
What is for lunch?
األنتشار—الثانية الحلقة
اسبوع مرور بعد
من عودته حال بالسؤال يبادر ”ياوداد؟ األخبار ما“ :مراد 
العمل
تواصل ”…السريع باألنتشار بدأ انه الى يشيرون“ :وداد 
مراد يا تُطمئن ال األخبار“ :االرتباك عليها ويبدو الحديث.”
ماذا …بخير فنحن ًبعيدا مازال … وداد يا عليك ال“ :مراد 
اليوم؟ ستطعميننا”
Episode 3: Closure
Six days later
Widad: Do you know that all mosques and 
other worshiping places are closed, and peo­
ple are not allowed to come in or leave?
Murat: Oh God, how can we attend your 
sister’s wedding?
Widad: It is called off, because everyone is 
afraid of attending
األبواب إغالق—الثالثة الحلقة
أيام ستة بعد
ومُنع العبادة ودور المساجد أُغلقت يامراد؟ تعلم هل“ :وداد 
والخروج الدخول من الجميع.”
اختك زفاف حفل نحضر أن لنا كيف !…ياللهول“ :مراد 
إذاً؟
الحضور يخشى الجميع ألن الحفل ّأُلغي“ :وداد.”
Episode 4: Distance Learning
Five days later
Murad: What are the kids doing out?
Widad: They gave them an open leave and 
told them that classes will be online
Murad: I thought I am the only one staying 
home
Widad: We will spend good times home 
together
بُعد عن التحكم—الرابعة الحلقة
ايام خمسة بعد
اليوم؟ الشارع في األوالد يفعل ماذا“ :مراد”
بعد عن بالدراسة وأبلغوهم مفتوحة إجازة منحوهم“ :وداد.”
الدار في سيجلس من الوحيد نفسي ظننت“ :مراد!”
مراد يا سوية البيت في جميلة أوقات سنقضي“ :وداد.”

51
4  Issues in Translation: Three Different Target Texts
TT
ST
Episode 5: Zombie of the Time
Four days Later
Widad and Murad are home watching the TV
Widad: You should do some grocery
Murad: My turn with nine other people’s will 
be two hours later
Widad: Make use of time to buy the impor­
tant things
Murat: Don’t worry. Everybody’s share is 
ready
العصر زومبي—الخامسة الحلقة
ايام اربعة بعد
التلفاز يشاهدان الدار في جالسان ومراد وداد
مراد يا الخضار لنا اجلب“ :وداد.”
أخرين اشخاص تسعة مع التسوق في دوري سيحين“ :مراد 
ساعتين بعد!”
المهمة األشياء كل تسوق في الوقت استغل“ :وداد.”
جاهزة منا واحد كل حصة تقلقي ال“ :مراد.”
Episode 6: Symptoms
Three days later
Widad: I feel feverish and fatigued
Murad: Me too
Widad: Did you touch or inhale anything? 
Did you shake hands, kissed anyone? Did 
you…
Murad: No, I did not, did you?
Widad: No, I did not, then why is it so?
األعراض—السادسة الحلقة
أيام ثالثة بعد
والتعب بالحمى أشعر“ :وداد.”
وداد يا كذلك وأنا“ :مراد.”
أم قبلت ،صافحت هل شيء؟ استنشقت أو لمست هل“ :وداد 
؟… هل أحد؟ الى تحدثت
وداد؟ يا ِوأنت …أفعل لم كال“ :مراد”
مراد؟ يا ًإذا لماذا …أنا وال“ :وداد”
وداد؟ يا شيء كل بدون العدوى اصابتنا هل“ :مراد!!”
Finale: Precaution is better than cure
The house is deadly silent, the voice of the 
anchor was heard
The virus has been contained
Widad and Murad have been sleeping for two 
nights!!
العالج من خير الوقاية—األخيرة الحلقة
نشرة في المذيع صوت يُسمع … المنزل يعم هدوء 
األخبار…
“الفيروس على السيطرة تمت.”
ليلتين منذ الفراش في نائمان ومراد وداد!!!
Comments by Harith Ismael Turki
Sub-title:
Source Text
التعريف
Translator #1
Translator #2
Translator #3
Introduction
Identification
Definition
Comments
In the first episode, the three translators translated the word “التعريف” differently. T1 translated 
it as “Introduction”, T2 as “Identification”, and T3 as “Definition”. The word “التعريف” means 
to define or identify something or someone. The story’s author uses the word to identify or 
introduce the disease. All three translations seem to suit the purpose of rendering the word 
into English

52
H. I. Turki
Using Different Tenses in Translation:
I noticed that each of the translators used a different tense in translating the first 
sentence, “األخبار نشرة يُلقي المذيع نسمع”.
Source Text
األخبار نشرة يُلقي المذيع نسمع
Translator #1
Translator #2
Translator #3
Hearing the newscaster deliv­
ering the news
The news broadcaster’s voice 
crackles through the TV
We listen to the anchor read­
ing the newscast
Comments
T1 used a nonfinite clause, and T2 and T3 used the simple present tense. The different tenses 
used correspond with the translators’ understanding of the sentence. T2 and T3 stick to the 
literal sentence-verb pattern that the story provides. T1 deviates from the original sentence 
pattern in their translation
The word “المذيع” was translated as “newscaster” by T1, “broadcaster” by T2, 
and “anchor” by T3 as shown below:
Source Text
المذيع
Translator #1
Translator #2
Translator #3
newscaster
broadcaster
anchor
Comments
T1 and T3 seem to be more accurate because a broadcaster is more related to an organizer in 
a broadcasting organization. Besides, a newscaster fits the context here because an anchor, 
which is used by T2, is more than an ordinary newscaster
Using Types of Determiners:
The sentence “الموت حد الى خطير وهو كورونا يدعى جديد بفيروس أثنين إصابة” was translated 
in different ways by the three translators:
Source Text
الموت حد الى خطير وهو كورونا يدعى جديد بفيروس أثنين إصابة
Translator #1
Translator #2
Translator #3
Two people have been 
infected with a new virus 
called Corona, and it is 
deadly
Two individuals have been 
confirmed to have contracted 
the newly discovered Corona 
virus, which is considered to 
be deadly dangerous
Two people were infected 
with a new deadly virus 
called Corona

53
4  Issues in Translation: Three Different Target Texts
Source Text
Comments
What attracts my attention in the translation of this sentence is the long explanation by T2, 
compared with T3 which explains the idea in fewer words. The word “إصابة” in the sentence 
was translated as “infection” by T1 and T3, while T2 used the word “contract”. T1 and T3 are 
more accurate because infection draws more attention to the source than the recipient, while 
contract does the opposite. The original language focuses on the new virus; for this reason, 
infection is closer to the meaning. The tense used by T1 and T2 is present perfect. T3 used the 
past tense. T1 and T2 relied on the fact that the time of infection is not known, and the effect 
of the disease is recent. T3 used the past tense because they may have thought the act of 
infection was over
The phrase “كورونا يدعى جديد فيروس” was translated using the indefinite article by T1 and T3, 
following the original text. T2 used the definite article to introduce the newly discovered virus. 
In addition, “الموت حد الى خطير وهو” was rendered as “deadly” by T1 and T3, and it was used as 
a pre-modifying adjective, whereas T2 added the word “dangerous” and made it a post-modi­
fying adjectival phrase to give it more emphasis. The adverb “َمرعوبا” was translated as 
“frightened” by T1, “panicked” by T2, and “terrified” by T3. T3 is more accurate because 
“frightened” refers to a sudden kind of fear and “panicked” more to a permanent state of fear. 
“Terrified” suggests that the newscaster was terrified by the news of the virus
Focusing on the Headwords in Translating Sentences:
In translating this sentence, “مضادات أليجاذ الخبراء وبأنتظار الفيروس لهذا عالج يوجد ال 
لعالجه…” the focus of each of the translators was different.
Source Text
لعالجه مضادات أليجاذ الخبراء وبأنتظار الفيروس لهذا عالج يوجد ال…
Translator #1
Translator #2
Translator #3
There is no cure for this 
virus. We are waiting for 
experts to develop antivirals 
to treat it
The vaccine for the virus 
remains elusive, and we are 
eagerly awaiting the discov­
ery of an effective antidote 
by the experts
There is no cure for this 
virus, we are waiting for the 
scientists to find one
Comments
T1 and T3 used the active mode to draw attention to the fact that everyone was waiting for the 
experts or scientists to find a cure. T2 used the passive mode to focus on the cure more than 
the scientists who would develop it. As for the word “عالج”, T1 and T3 translate it as “cure”, 
while T2 used the word “vaccine”. T1 and T3 could use a more suitable equivalent than T2. A 
vaccine is an antidote we use to boost our immune system and prepare it to fight a virus. It is a 
precautionary measure we take before the body gets infected. A cure, on the other hand, is 
something that we use after the body has been infected. The same difference applies to 
antivirals and antidotes. T1 uses “antivirals” as an equivalent to “مضادات” and T2 uses 
“antidotes”. T3 used an anaphoric reference instead of looking for a match

54
H. I. Turki
Negating the Sentence in Translation:
Source Text
اصدق ال
Translator #1
Translator #2
Translator #3
I can’t believe
I don’t buy it
I don’t believe
Comments
T3 is closer to the meaning than the other two. “I don’t believe” means a complete rejection 
of believing in something. “I can’t believe” is a less absolute rejection. “I don’t buy it” is used 
when someone tries to convince you to accept an opinion or an idea you do not want. The 
husband in the story attempts to dispel the worries of his wife. This is why he wants her to 
believe that such a virus does not exist
Certainty in Translation:
Source Text
زوجته يُطمئن
Translator #1
Translator #2
Translator #3
reassures his wife
reassures his wife
comforts his wife
Comments
As for translating “زوجته يُطمئن”, “reassure” is used when we try to restore confidence and 
peace for someone who loses them, on one hand. On the other hand, the term “comfort” is 
used to console or relieve someone of their worries and apprehension, which is what the 
husband tries to do
Source Text
ننشغل
Translator #1
Translator #2
Translator #3
preoccupied with
busy ourselves with
be concerned with
Comments
To be preoccupied, in this context, means to be distracted from the main course of your life 
because you are deeply engrossed in thought. Being busy with means being engaged in an 
activity or an idea. Being concerned with is to pay special attention or show more concern for 
something. T2 and T3 are more accurate in their choice of words

55
4  Issues in Translation: Three Different Target Texts
Sub-title:
Source Text
األنتشار
Translator #1
Translator #2
Translator #3
Outbreak
Breakout
Outbreak
Comments
The second episode is entitled “األنتشار”. T1 and T3 used the word “Outbreak” as a translation 
of the title. T2 used “Breakout”. The two words seem synonymous. However, “breakout” 
requires more physical effort or sometimes even violence and is associated, for example, with 
forced escape from a prison. With an epidemic or pandemic, “outbreak” is commonly used
Tenses:
Source Text
السريع باألنتشار بدأ انه الى يشيرون
Translator #1
Translator #2
Translator #3
They’re indicating that the 
virus is spreading rapidly
They say it’s spreading 
rapidly
They said that it is spreading 
fast
Comments
As the husband arrives home, he asks his wife about what is new with the virus. His wife 
replies “السريع باألنتشار بدأ انه الى يشيرون”. Each of the translators used a different tense. T1 used 
present continuous, T2 simple present, and T3 past tense. The author of the story uses the verb 
“يشيرون” in its present tense. Since there is no present continuous tense in Arabic, translators 
may use present simple or present continuous tense depending on the context. There is no 
implied past tense in the context, so for this reason, T3 is not accurate. Additionally, T1 and 
T2 used “rapidly” for “السريع”. T3 used “fast”. There is a slight difference between “rapidly” 
and “fast”. The first is more formal and more used in academic writing
Semantic Rendering
Source Text
االرتباك
Translator #1
Translator #2
Translator #3
worried
puzzled
confused
Comments

56
H. I. Turki
Source Text
The wife feels confused because she feels overwhelmed by the news, more than puzzled, 
which means thinking harder to understand something that occupies one’s mind
Source Text
تُطمئن ال األخبار
Translator #1
Translator #2
Translator #3
News is not reassuring
It’s all bad news
News is not reassuring
Comments
The wife wants to show her worries about the news. She tells her husband “تُطمئن ال األخبار”. T1 
and T3 rendered it as “News is not reassuring” and T2 “It’s all bad news”. “Bad news” means 
that the wife is definitely sure of the news. For this reason, she will not only be confused, she 
will be terrified. For this reason, “not reassuring” is closer to the context of the original text
Grammatical Issues
Source Text
بخير فنحن ًبعيدا مازال
Translator #1
Translator #2
Translator #3
It’s still far away
As long as it’s far away from here, 
we’ll be fine
It’s still far away
Comments
The husband tries to comfort his wife by suggesting that they are far from the infected areas. 
He states: “بخير فنحن ًبعيدا مازال … وداد يا عليك ال”. The problem the three translators faced is in 
translating the phrase “بخير فنحن ًبعيدا مازال”. The subordinate conjunction, “بخير فنحن ًبعيدا مازال” 
was interpreted as an ordinary sentence by T1 and T3. In comparison, T2 used the subordinate 
conjunction “as long as”, which is closer to the original text
Translation Issues:
Source Text
اليوم؟ ستطعميننا ماذا
Translator #1
Translator #2
Translator #3
What will you be cooking for us 
today?
Anyway, what did you cook for 
today?
What is for lunch?
Comments

57
4  Issues in Translation: Three Different Target Texts
Source Text
Additionally, seeking to distract his wife, the husband asks her about what she will cook 
without identifying whether it is lunch or dinner. He asks using the future tense: “ستطعميننا ماذا 
اليوم؟”. There are two problems the three translators faced: dealing with the tense, and dealing 
with the time of the meal. T1 used the future tense, T2 used the past tense, and T3 used the 
simple present tense. In a context like this, contextualizing the tense is somewhat problematic. 
T1 rendered the tense as it is. T2’s way of dealing with the tense reflects the fact that the meal 
had already been prepared, but the act of eating will happen in the future, and T3 dealt with 
the situation as though it was a kind of habit that husbands ask their wives frequently about 
what they are preparing for the meal. As for the second problem, T3 used the word “lunch”, 
which was not used literally in the original text. In Arabic culture, husbands normally have 
lunch at home with their families
Subtitle:
Source Text
األبواب إغالق
Translator #1
Translator #2
Translator #3
Closure
Shutting Doors
Closure
Comments
It literally means “shutting or closing the doors”. Of the two, “shutting” is more informal and 
less used in academic texts
Tenses:
Source Text
يامراد تعلم هل
Translator #1
Translator #2
Translator #3
Did you know …
Did you hear …
Do you know …
Comments
When the wife asks “يامراد تعلم هل”, which is in the simple present tense, T1 and T2 used the 
past tense in their translations. They may have counted on the fact that the wife wanted to 
know whether her husband already knew or not. Still, the use of the past tense is elusive

58
H. I. Turki
Semantic Issues:
Source Text
والخروج الدخول من الجميع ومُنع
Translator #1
Translator #2
Translator #3
… everybody is banned from 
entering or leaving…
Everyone’s banned from 
going in or out,…
…people are not allowed to 
come in or leave…
Comments
The wife mentions “والخروج الدخول من الجميع ومُنع”, which literally means that everyone was 
banned from going in or out. Here T1 and T2 used the word “banned” to stand for “مُنع”. T3 
used “not allowed”, which technically means banned. But “ban” is more legal, and it is used 
when there is a law or a decree that prohibits people from doing something, which is the case 
in the original text
Translation Issues:
Source Text
الحضور يخشى الجميع ألن الحفل ّأُلغي
Translator #1
Translator #2
Translator #3
The wedding has been can­
celled because everyone is 
scared to attend,
It’s cancelled. Everybody’s 
afraid to come,
It is called off, because every­
one is afraid of attending
Comments
Two more problematic cases are seen in the final part of the third episode. The wife indicates 
that there will be no marriage ceremony because of the pandemic; she says: “الجميع ألن الحفل ّأُلغي 
الحضور يخشى”. T1 and T2 used the word “cancel” for “ّأُلغي”. T3 used “call off”. Both seem 
correct, but some dictionaries state that “call off” is used more in everyday speech. The second 
issue is the word “يخشى”, which was translated by T2 and T3 as “afraid”, whereas T1 used 
“scared”. “Afraid” is more associated with a constant state of fear, while “scared” refers to a 
temporary state of fear. Both translations seem correct. It is true that the fear of coming in or 
out seems to be temporary. People are, in general, afraid of entering or leaving a place that is 
infected with viruses

59
4  Issues in Translation: Three Different Target Texts
Semantic Issues:
Source Text
اليوم؟ الشارع في األوالد يفعل ماذا
Translator #1
Translator #2
Translator #3
What are the kids doing in the 
streets outside today?
What are the kids doing on 
the street today?
What are the kids doing out?
Comments
In the fourth episode, the husband asks about what his kids are doing: “الشارع في األوالد يفعل ماذا 
اليوم”. The three translators dealt with this sentence in different ways, especially when they 
came to the phrase “الشارع في”. T1 translated this part as “in the street”, T2 “on the street”, and 
T3 “out”. One of the problems that Arabic learners of English face is the use of prepositions. 
What I have realized, too, is that the same problem is also present with native speakers of 
English. Many native speakers do not see any difference between “on the street” and “in the 
street”. In fact, there are two main differences: first, “in the street” seems to be more generic, 
while “on the street” is more specific, because we have to mention the name of the street, like 
“on Ozark Street”; and second, “on the street” could mean on the pavement, not on the road 
itself, while “in the street” means inside the street, and vulnerable to being hit by cars
Grammatical, Semantic Issues:
Source Text
بعد عن بالدراسة وأبلغوهم مفتوحة إجازة منحوهم
Translator #1
Translator #2
Translator #3
They got an open holiday and 
they have been informed to 
study from home
They were given an open 
leave and were told to study 
online
They gave them an open 
leave and told them that 
classes will be online
Comments
T1 and T2 used the passive mode to put the object “the kids” in the spotlight, which is high­
lighted by the original text because the subject of the parents’ talk was the kids. T3 used the 
active mode, which is somehow a literal rendering of the original text. As for “holiday” used 
by T1, and “leave” by T2 and T3, “holiday” is an official break from study or work, and is 
determined by law, like the summer or winter holiday. “Leave”, on the other hand, refers to a 
sudden suspension of work, duty, or study due to something urgent or important, which may 
be more relevant to the context. Moreover, T2 and T3 used “online” for the way the children 
would proceed with their education. T1 used “from home”. T2 and T3 highlighted the incor­
poration of contemporary technology. T1 focused more on the fact that the kids would learn 
from home, not from school, without drawing on how they would learn

60
H. I. Turki
Semantic Issues:
Source Text
جميلة أوقات سنقضي
Translator #1
Translator #2
Translator #3
We will have a beautiful time
we will have fun
we will have good times
Comments
“Having a beautiful time” connotes a specific period of time, like a holiday or a special 
occasion. “Having good times”, on the other hand, implies an extended period of time, like 
university time or school time. “To have fun” and “to have a good time” seem synonymous, 
yet, “having fun” emphasizes the fun part of the time people spend together
Subtitle:
Source Text
العصر زومبي
Translator #1
Translator #2
Translator #3
Zombie Apocalypse
Zombie of the Century
Zombie of the Time
Comments
They all seem to be suitable equivalents for the original title. However, some differences 
between the three translations are noticeable. T1 used “apocalypse”, which gives the sense 
that this corona disease will be the reason for the end of the world. T2 used “century”, think­
ing that corona is the deadliest virus in the century, neglecting the fact that maybe a stronger 
virus will appear before the end of the century. T3 used the word “time” to show that corona 
is the deadliest virus of the present day. So, the effect and the time span used by the three 
translators are different
Semantic Issues:
Source Text
الدار في جالسان
Translator #1
Translator #2
Translator #3
sitting at home
sitting at home
sitting home
Comments
The stage directions show that the husband and the wife are watching TV: “الدار في جالسان”. T1 
and T2 translated this as “sitting at home” and T3 as “sitting home”. Both translations give the 
same meaning, but dictionaries of common usages show that there is a slight difference 
between the two. “At home” means that someone is already there and located there, and not in 
another place, whereas “home” means that someone has just got home, coming from 
somewhere

61
4  Issues in Translation: Three Different Target Texts
Grammatical Issues:
Source Text
مراد يا الخضار لنا اجلب
Translator #1
Translator #2
Translator #3
Bring us some vegetables, 
Murad
Go get us some vegetables, 
Murad
You should get us some 
vegetables, Murat
Comments
In the same episode, the wife asks her husband to get some vegetables. She uses the impera­
tive verb “لنا اجلب” with her husband’s name at the end of the sentence, “مراد يا”. T1 and T2 
used an imperative, and T3 used a model auxiliary of obligation: “should”. T1 used a manner 
that implies a request more than a command. T2 used a verb that implies order, like a 
command coming from a higher authority to a lower subject. T3 used “should” to make it 
more like a request. The original text in Arabic does not show this sense of strong command 
or order. It is more like a request than a command
Source Text
اآلن من ساعتين بعد أخرين اشخاص تسعة مع التسوق في دوري سيحين
Translator #1
Translator #2
Translator #3
It’ll be my turn to go shop­
ping with nine other people 
in two hours!
My turn, along with nine 
other people, comes in two 
hours,
My turn with nine other peo­
ple’s will be two hours later
Comments
In response to his wife, the husband states “ساعتين بعد أخرين اشخاص تسعة مع التسوق في دوري سيحين 
اآلن من”. Tenses used by the three translators varied, depending on how they perceived the 
context. T1 and T3 used future tense, “my turn will come” and “my turn will be”; T2 used the 
simple present tense, “my turn comes”. We all know that simple present tense can be used to 
indicate the future, but it is less formal in academic writing. One more issue, T1 and T2 used 
“in two hours”. T3 used “two hours later”. T1 and T2 used common English usage, for 
example, “we will meet in two hours” or “the match will start in an hour”. The use of “later” 
implies a sense of comparison. So, the implicit meaning is “My turn will be two hours later 
than now, or from now”. The original text can be seen to imply this comparison, “ساعتين بعد”, 
which implies “االن من ساعتين بعد”, and this literarily means “two hours from now”. In my 
opinion, both cases can be suitable equivalents of the original text
Grammatical Issues:
Source Text
المهمة األشياء كل تسوق في الوقت استغل
Translator #1
Translator #2
Translator #3
Make use of time to buy all 
the important things
Buy ALL the necessities and 
don’t waste any time
Make use of time to buy all 
the important things

62
H. I. Turki
Source Text
Comments
The wife wants to urge her husband to get all that is needed for the time they will stay indoors; 
she says “المهمة األشياء كل تسوق في الوقت استغل”. T1 and T3 used “Make use of time to buy all the 
important things”. T2 used a strong imperative: “Buy ALL the necessities and don’t waste any 
time”. In the translations of T1 and T3, the wife seems to recommend or advise her husband 
about what to buy. T2 provided a more imperative commanding manner. Moreover, the phrase, 
“المهمة األشياء” means “important things”, which is what T1 and T3 used. T2 used “necessities”. 
We know that “important” is something that is valuable and good to have, while “necessary” 
is something that we cannot do without. We can say that what is necessary is definitely 
important, but what is important is not necessary. In times like this, people need to focus on 
the necessary things. I believe that the writer of the story should have used the word “ضروري”, 
which means necessary, because the wife emphasizes the shortage of time when she says, 
“make use of time”. And we also know from the context that people go shopping in turns, so 
the time period given to each is limited
Source Text
والتعب بالحمى أشعر“ :وداد.“
وداد يا كذلك وأنا“ :مراد.“
Translator #1
Translator #2
Translator #3
“I feel feverish and tired,” 
Widad tells Murad
“I do too, Widad,” Murad 
replies
“I’m feeling feverish and 
worn-out,” Wedad says, 
shivering
“Same here, Wedad,” Murad 
responds
Widad: I feel feverish and 
fatigued
Murad: Me too
Comments
In Episode Six entitled “The Symptoms”, the husband and the wife start talking about the 
symptoms of corona. The wife says “والتعب بالحمى أشعر”. The symptoms were translated in 
different ways, especially the word “تعب”. T1 used the word “tired”. T2 used “worn-out” and 
T3 used “fatigued”. We know that all three words refer to a state of exhaustion and weakness. 
However, the word “fatigue” is more common in describing symptoms or diseases. “Tired” 
refers to the way the body becomes weak because of work or overthinking. “Worn-out” refers 
to the way the body becomes weak because of overwork. “Fatigue” is a symptom of the 
exhaustion of the body, mostly due to illness. T3’s choice of this word is more accurate
The husband’s response of “كذلك وأنا” was rendered into English as “I do too” by T1, “Same 
here”, by T2, and “Me too”, by T3. It is important to highlight that the original text of the 
story is standard Arabic. For this reason, translators should have been aware of the use of 
formal English in their translations. “Same here” is not a formal way to respond to this serious 
issue. Neither is “me too”, which is used informally, and which is normally used as a way to 
respond to a case in which the referent is an object. “I do too” is the most appropriate way to 
respond to such situations

63
4  Issues in Translation: Three Different Target Texts
Issues in Translation:
Source Text
؟… هل أحد؟ الى تحدثت أم قبلت ،صافحت هل شيء؟ استنشقت أو لمست هل“ :وداد
وداد؟ يا ِوأنت …أفعل لم كال“ :مراد”
مراد؟ يا ًإذا لماذا …أنا وال“ :وداد”
وداد؟ يا شيء كل بدون العدوى اصابتنا هل“ :مراد!!”
Translator #1
Translator #2
Translator #3
Widad begins to worry that 
they may have contracted 
the virus. “Did you touch 
or inhale anything? Did you 
shake hands, kiss, or talk to 
anyone?” she asks Murad
“No, I didn’t do any of those 
things. What about you, 
Widad?” Murad responds
“Neither did I. So why do 
we feel sick, Murad?” Widad 
asks
Murad begins to panic. “Did 
we get infected for no reason, 
Widad?” he exclaims
“Did you touch or inhale 
something? Did you shake 
hands, kiss, or talk to some­
one?” Wedad inquires
“Nah, I didn’t. What about 
you, Wedad?” Murad replies
“Me neither. Why is this hap­
pening then, Murad?” Wedad 
questions
“Did we just catch the virus 
outta nowhere, Wedad?” 
Murad wonders aloud
Widad: Did you touch or 
inhale anything? Did you 
shake hands, kissed anyone ? 
Did you…
Murad: No, I did not, did 
you?
Widad: No, I did not, then 
why is it so?
Comments

64
H. I. Turki
Source Text
One problematic issue that non-native speakers may face is the use of “some/any”, “some­
body-something/anybody-anything”. When the wife asks whether her husband has done 
anything to get the infection, she asks, “أحد؟ الى تحدثت أم قبلت ،صافحت هل شيء؟ استنشقت أو لمست هل 
؟… هل”. As is seen, T1 and T3 used the same expressions of “anything/anybody”. T2 used 
“something/someone”. The sentence was an interrogative sentence, and the question was 
genuinely asked; for this reason, “anything/anybody” are more appropriate. If the question is 
not genuine or it is more like a recommendation, “something/ someone” will be normal
The reply of the husband in the source text is given in a short form: “أفعل لم كال”. T2 and T3 
used the exact equivalent in English to translate this, which is “No, I didn’t”, and “No, I did 
not” respectively. T1 used a longer answer to convey the meaning: “No, I didn’t do any of 
those things”. The same goes for the subsequent sentence. When the wife asks about how they 
got infected, “مراد؟ يا ًإذا لماذا”, T1 also used a long answer, “So why do we feel sick?” T1 may 
have thought that the short answer would be misunderstood, which is why they elaborated and 
provided an extended answer
Moreover, in trying to understand the main reason for their infection, the husband inquires “هل 
شيء؟ كل بدون العدوى اصابتنا”. T1 used “Did we get infected for no reason”, T2 “Did we just catch 
the virus out of nowhere”, and T3 “Did we get infected out of nowhere”. “Get infected” and 
“catch a virus” have almost the same meaning in English. Nevertheless, the difference is in the 
direction and also in the use of the passive voice. As I explained earlier, “infection” empha­
sizes the source of the infection more than the recipient. Since the focus in the sentence is on 
the recipients, the husband and the wife, catching a virus seems to be more appropriate
The use of the passive and active voice is also noticed here, “To get infected” with its passive 
voice shows that the subject of the passive voice is the object of the active voice. For this 
reason, it is the recipient of the action. However, the use of “to catch a virus” shows that the 
subject is technically the doer of the action. This is what the context of the original text tries 
to emphasize. The wife asked if they inhaled something or touched, kissed, or shook hands 
with anyone. This shows them as more than just passive recipients of the action but rather as 
active doers. What is more, there is a slight difference between “out of nowhere” and “for no 
reason”. The first means suddenly or unexpectedly. The second means that it happens without 
an obvious reason. The original text draws attention to the first meaning, not the second
Semantic Issues:
Source Text
المنزل يعم هدوء
Translator #1
Translator #2
Translator #3
Silence pervades the house
The house has lapsed into an 
expectant silence
The house is deadly silent
Comments
In the last episode, the stage directions show there is silence in the house, “المنزل يعم هدوء”. The 
first translation seems to be a good equivalent in normal cases. The second translation does 
not render the meaning of the original text. The third translation seems to be more creative. 
There is an implicit death atmosphere in the original text. The writer wants to indicate that the 
silence in the house is the result of death

65
4  Issues in Translation: Three Different Target Texts
Tenses and Semantic Issues
To sum up, the difficulties that the three translators faced related to cultural differ­
ences, difficulty in using the appropriate expression, word or phrase, and difficulty 
in using the right synonyms. The three translations were quite close to each other. 
However, what I have tried to do is to focus on the differences by explaining either 
the meanings of the different translations they used or the grammatical structures 
they followed.
Source Text
الفيروس على السيطرة تمت
Translator #1
Translator #2
Translator #3
The virus has been contained
The virus is now under 
control
The virus has been contained
Comments
Furthermore, the newscaster announces that “الفيروس على السيطرة تمت”. “Contained” and “under 
control” might seem similar in meaning. They are both used in such a context, but there is a 
difference in use. While both mean to prevent the outbreak of a virus, “virus containment” is 
more specific in use than “to keep a virus under control”. One more difference in the 
translation is the use of the tense. T1 and T3 used the present perfect tense, while T2 used the 
simple present. The use of the present perfect is underlined by the effect of the action in the 
story, which is stated by the following sentence, “Widad and Murad have been sleeping for 
two nights”. The effect of the containment of the virus is still in progress
Source Text
ليلتين منذ الفراش في نائمان ومراد وداد
Translator #1
Translator #2
Translator #3
Murad and Widad have been 
sleeping for two nights
Murad and Wedad have been 
asleep in their bed for two 
nights now
Murad and Widad have been 
sleeping for two nights
Comments
The last sentence in the story is “ليلتين منذ الفراش في نائمان ومراد وداد”. “Sleeping” can be seen as a 
verb and a noun at the same time. “Asleep” is an adjective. One of the meanings that the word 
“sleeping” may indicate is “death”, which the word “asleep” does not have. The writer wanted 
to indicate this meaning in the context of his story, through the use of “two nights” and also 
through the use of three exclamation marks “!!!”
Practical Question:
Read the three different translations of the source text and the comments care­
fully. Think about the translations and write your own suggestion for each episode, 
which may be totally different from those given:

66
H. I. Turki
Source Text
الوسواس سِهام—الكورونا مسلسل
التعريف—االولى الحلقة
باذاعة يستمر “.الموت حد الى خطير وهو كورونا يدعى جديد بفيروس أثنين إصابة“ :األخبار نشرة يُلقي المذيع نسمع 
لعالجه مضادات أليجاذ الخبراء وبأنتظار الفيروس لهذا عالج يوجد ال“ :َمرعوبا الخبر…”
والعشرين؟ الحادي القرن في نحن هل“ :وداد”
ياوداد الموضوع انسي“ :زوجته يُطمئن ”!اصدق ال“ :مراد.“
األخبار هذه مثل في ننشغل لماذا …مراد يا حق معك“ :وداد…”
Target Text
……………………………………………………………………………………………………
……………………………………………………………………………………………………
…………………….……………………………………………………………………………
……………………………….…………………………………………………………………
………………………………………….………………………………………………………
…………………………………………………….……………………………………………
……………………………………………………………….…………………………………
………………………………………………………………………….………………………
…………………………………………………………………………………….……………
……………………………………………………………………………………………….…
……………………………………………………………………………………………………
…….……………………………………………………………………………………………
……………….…………………………………………………………………………………
………………………….………………………………………………………………………
…………………………………….……………………………………………………………
……………………………………………….…………………………………………………
………………………………………………………….……………….………………
Source Text
األنتشار—الثانية الحلقة
اسبوع مرور بعد
العمل من عودته حال بالسؤال يبادر ”ياوداد؟ األخبار ما“ :مراد
مراد يا تُطمئن ال األخبار“ :االرتباك عليها ويبدو الحديث تواصل ”…السريع باألنتشار بدأ انه الى يشيرون“ :وداد.“
اليوم؟ ستطعميننا ماذا …بخير فنحن ًبعيدا مازال … وداد يا عليك ال“ :مراد”
Target Text

67
4  Issues in Translation: Three Different Target Texts
Source Text
……………………………………………………………………………………………………
……………………………………………………………………………………………………
…………………….……………………………………………………………………………
……………………………….…………………………………………………………………
………………………………………….………………………………………………………
…………………………………………………….……………………………………………
……………………………………………………………….…………………………………
………………………………………………………………………….………………………
…………………………………………………………………………………….……………
……………………………………………………………………………………………….…
……………………………………………………………………………………………………
…….……………………………………………………………………………………………
……………….…………………………………………………………………………………
………………………….………………………………………………………………………
…………………………………….……………………………………………………………
……………………………………………….…………………………………………………
………………………………………………………….……………….………………
Source Text
األبواب إغالق—الثالثة الحلقة
أيام ستة بعد
والخروج الدخول من الجميع ومُنع العبادة ودور المساجد أُغلقت يامراد؟ تعلم هل“ :وداد.“
إذاً؟ اختك زفاف حفل نحضر أن لنا كيف !…ياللهول“ :مراد
الحضور يخشى الجميع ألن الحفل ّأُلغي“ :وداد.“
Target Text
……………………………………………………………………………………………………
……………………………………………………………………………………………………
…………………….……………………………………………………………………………
……………………………….…………………………………………………………………
………………………………………….………………………………………………………
…………………………………………………….……………………………………………
……………………………………………………………….…………………………………
………………………………………………………………………….………………………
…………………………………………………………………………………….……………
……………………………………………………………………………………………….…
……………………………………………………………………………………………………
…….……………………………………………………………………………………………
……………….…………………………………………………………………………………
………………………….………………………………………………………………………
…………………………………….……………………………………………………………
……………………………………………….…………………………………………………
………………………………………………………….……………….………………

68
H. I. Turki
Source Text
بُعد عن التحكم—الرابعة الحلقة
ايام خمسة بعد
اليوم؟ الشارع في األوالد يفعل ماذا“ :مراد”
بعد عن بالدراسة وأبلغوهم مفتوحة إجازة منحوهم“ :وداد.“
الدار في سيجلس من الوحيد نفسي ظننت“ :مراد!”
مراد يا سوية البيت في جميلة أوقات سنقضي“ :وداد.“
Target Text
……………………………………………………………………………………………………
……………………………………………………………………………………………………
…………………….……………………………………………………………………………
……………………………….…………………………………………………………………
………………………………………….………………………………………………………
…………………………………………………….……………………………………………
……………………………………………………………….…………………………………
………………………………………………………………………….………………………
…………………………………………………………………………………….……………
……………………………………………………………………………………………….…
……………………………………………………………………………………………………
…….……………………………………………………………………………………………
……………….…………………………………………………………………………………
………………………….………………………………………………………………………
…………………………………….……………………………………………………………
……………………………………………….…………………………………………………
………………………………………………………….……………….………………
Source Text
العصر زومبي—الخامسة الحلقة
ايام اربعة بعد
التلفاز يشاهدان الدار في جالسان ومراد وداد
مراد يا الخضار لنا اجلب“ :وداد.“
ساعتين بعد أخرين اشخاص تسعة مع التسوق في دوري سيحين“ :مراد!”
المهمة األشياء كل تسوق في الوقت استغل“ :وداد.“
جاهزة منا واحد كل حصة تقلقي ال“ :مراد.“
Target Text

69
4  Issues in Translation: Three Different Target Texts
Source Text
……………………………………………………………………………………………………
……………………………………………………………………………………………………
…………………….……………………………………………………………………………
……………………………….…………………………………………………………………
………………………………………….………………………………………………………
…………………………………………………….……………………………………………
……………………………………………………………….…………………………………
………………………………………………………………………….………………………
…………………………………………………………………………………….……………
……………………………………………………………………………………………….…
……………………………………………………………………………………………………
…….……………………………………………………………………………………………
……………….…………………………………………………………………………………
………………………….………………………………………………………………………
…………………………………….……………………………………………………………
……………………………………………….…………………………………………………
………………………………………………………….……………….………………
Source Text
األعراض—السادسة الحلقة
أيام ثالثة بعد
والتعب بالحمى أشعر“ :وداد.“
وداد يا كذلك وأنا“ :مراد.“
؟… هل أحد؟ الى تحدثت أم قبلت ،صافحت هل شيء؟ استنشقت أو لمست هل“ :وداد
وداد؟ يا ِوأنت …أفعل لم كال“ :مراد”
مراد؟ يا ًإذا لماذا …أنا وال“ :وداد”
وداد؟ يا شيء كل بدون العدوى اصابتنا هل“ :مراد!!”
Target Text
……………………………………………………………………………………………………
……………………………………………………………………………………………………
…………………….……………………………………………………………………………
……………………………….…………………………………………………………………
………………………………………….………………………………………………………
…………………………………………………….……………………………………………
……………………………………………………………….…………………………………
………………………………………………………………………….………………………
…………………………………………………………………………………….……………
……………………………………………………………………………………………….…
……………………………………………………………………………………………………
…….……………………………………………………………………………………………
……………….…………………………………………………………………………………
………………………….………………………………………………………………………
…………………………………….……………………………………………………………
……………………………………………….…………………………………………………
………………………………………………………….……………….………………

70
H. I. Turki
Source Text
الحلقة األخيرة—الوقاية خير من العالج
…هدوء يعم المنزل … يُسمع صوت المذيع في نشرة األخبار
“.تمت السيطرة على الفيروس“
!!!وداد ومراد نائمان في الفراش منذ ليلتين
Target Text
……………………………………………………………………………………………………
……………………………………………………………………………………………………
…………………….……………………………………………………………………………
……………………………….…………………………………………………………………
………………………………………….………………………………………………………
…………………………………………………….……………………………………………
……………………………………………………………….…………………………………
………………………………………………………………………….………………………
…………………………………………………………………………………….……………
……………………………………………………………………………………………….…
……………………………………………………………………………………………………
…….……………………………………………………………………………………………
……………….…………………………………………………………………………………
………………………….………………………………………………………………………
…………………………………….……………………………………………………………
……………………………………………….…………………………………………………
………………………………………………………….……………….………………
References
Harper Collins Publishers, Glasgow, (1994). Collins English Dictionary (3rd Ed.).
Hornby, Albert Sydney. (1995). Oxford Advanced Learner’s Dictionary of Current English [by] 
A.S. Hornby; editor Jonathan Crowther. Oxford, England: Oxford University Press.
Merriam-Webster, Inc. (2019). Merriam-Webster’s collegiate dictionary. (11th Ed.).
Richards, Jack C., 1943-. (2002). Longman Dictionary of Language Teaching and Applied 
Linguistics. London; New York: Longman.

71
Chapter 5
Translating Arabic Text into English: 
Concepts and Practices
Abdulkhaliq Alazzawie
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2024
A. Jasim Mohammed (ed.), Literary Translation in Practice, 
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-59333-8_5
Introduction
The primary aim of this instructional module is to assist students in understanding 
the concepts and practices of translation, and to develop their abilities to translate 
from Arabic to English. The model translation acts as a practical learning aid to 
identifying students’ errors, allowing them to compare and contrast translations, 
learn from their mistakes, and understand key translation strategies and methods. 
It promotes a hands-on approach to translation education, allowing students to 
critically evaluate and improve their work. By the end of this chapter, students will 
be able to:
•	 Accurately recognize and address issues that hinder understanding and success­
ful communication.
•	 Translate texts from Arabic to English accurately and effectively.
•	 Critically assess their own translations as well as those produced by their class­
mates and exemplary translations.
•	 Gain a comprehensive understanding of the step-by-step translation process, 
and apply it to their professional endeavors.
The material in this chapter is designed to provide students with the knowledge 
and abilities required to develop into competent and self-assured translators. 
This will empower them to generate translations of superior quality, all the while 
comprehending the multifaceted nature and subtleties of the translation process. 
Through a process of practice and feedback, learners will gain translation profi­
ciency, critical analysis skills, and enhanced and effective communication, and 
finally will develop their cross-cultural and linguistic sensitivity.
The following translations (Translation 1 and Translation 2) of the Arabic 
source text were undertaken by two students who have recently graduated with a 
A. Alazzawie (*) 
Abdulkhaliq Alazzawie, Vancouver, Canada

72
A. Alazzawie
BA degree in English. The third translation is by the contributor himself. A brief 
general commentary on specific errors is given after the texts, followed by a gen­
eral review and commentary on the translations.
Translation # 1
Ahmed Hamad Kareem.
TT
ST
Reality and Dreamsوالواقع األحالم
I joined that meeting which was headed by 
one of the responsibles when I was one of 
the people invited to that meeting. A formal 
discussion happened about work and the boss 
talked about one of the important tasks. He 
lifted two files which were the size of two 
heavy books and he said this report carried 
information about the office that can damage 
it. All looked at the folder; also those who 
were busy turning on their mobiles or turning 
the pages of the books or do not have atten­
tion. All people looked carefully and I also 
thought about it. The owner of the office took 
the file from the hand of the responsible and 
turned the pages to look at the important but 
he could not. So he asked for a summary to 
be able to understand what is inside it
من كنت إذ المسؤولين أحد ترأسه الذي االجتماع حضرت 
يتعلق رسمي حديث جرى .االجتماع ذلك الى المدعوين 
المواضيع أحد بالعمل الرئيس واستعرض العمل بأمور 
واشار ثقيلين كتابين بحجم حجمه ًملفا رفع ان وبعد المهمة 
ما المعلومات من المؤسسة على يحمل التقرير هذا ان“ 
موقوتة قنبلة بمثابة أنه“ بالقول بعدها علق “.ينسفها ان يمكن 
يقلب كان من حتى الملف الى الجميع التفت .”المؤسسة على 
أو كتيب في مالحظة يدون كان من او المحمول بجهازه 
نحو الجميع انظار اتجهت .لبرهة الذهن شارد كان من حتى 
اتأمل بطريقة حدقت انني يخفى وال به محدقين الملف 
وبدأ المسؤول يد من الملف المؤسسة مالك سحب .قراءته 
عن عجز ان وبعد المهم عن بها يبحث بطريقة به يقلب 
ًملخصا طلب السريعة اللحظات هذه في يفيده ما وجود 
بداخله ما فهم له يتيح بشكل للملف
I was seeing deeply to know what is inside it 
and if it was really loaded with a bomb and 
what was inside it to say that about it. I was 
busy for a few seconds talking to myself and 
I was sitting and absent minded. The visitor 
began to talk and he gave advise. How to 
work as team and spirit. Not to look at the 
poison of the past. Victory over difficulty and 
mistakes. Without attention about the mis­
takes of the past and to have good mind. Nice 
speech but the question how to apply it
وهل فيه ما متأمال الملف الى وشوق شغف بكل انظر كنت 
لكي الملف يحتوي ان يمكن وماذا ؟"موقوتة قنبلة“ فعال انه 
نفسي مع اتحدث ثوان لبضعة انشغلت الكالم؟ هذا عنه يقال 
النصائح معطيا بالكالم الزائر بدأ .الذهن شارد جالس وانا 
االلتفات وعدم الفريق بروح العمل وكيفية العمل بخصوص 
اخطاء وتجنب الصعاب على والتغلب الماضي ”سموم“ الى 
كالم .ويشتته انتباهنا يثير بشكل عليها التأكيد وعدم االخرين 
التطبيق؟ نحو طريقه يجد هل والسؤال جميل
I did not converse a word because they didn't 
ask me for it. I could not find a subject to talk 
about. I stayed there to listen to the last time. 
Also no talking for me after the meeting and 
after going to the restaurant and had good and 
the hot and cold drinks. I did not talk
اجد ولم الحديث مني يُطلب لم ألنه واحدة بكلمة اتحدث لم 
حتى ًمستمعا وبقيت فيه اتحدث موضوعا ًايضا لنفسي 
انتهاء بعد حتى وانما فحسب هذا ليس .االخيرة اللحظة 
وتناول للمسامرة المفتوح البوفيه الى وذهابنا االجتماع 
ال اتحدث لم والباردة الساخنة والمشروبات الخفيفة االكالت 
تصرفاتهما متابعا انظر وبقيت المالك مع وال الزائر مع 
المدعوين احد واألخرى الفينة بين احدهما الى يتقدم حيث 
األحاديث لتبادل

73
5  Translating Arabic Text into English: Concepts and Practices
TT
ST
I looked to my friend. He is the responsible 
to the technical hitting. I followed the doings 
of the visitor and the owner. I wanted to 
receive the account from my friend. I gave a 
demand to change my account because of its 
destruction and over time. It could not do the 
work quickly. He was busy with the food to 
eat it. He told me the account is readily. Get it 
any time wanted
المؤسسة في الفني الدعم مسؤول وهو زميلي الى نظرت 
اود ألنني الحديث لمبادلته باتجاهه الخطوات بعض وتقدمت 
قدمت وان سبق الذي القديم من بدال جديد حاسوب استالم 
عن ناهيا االفتراضية مدته وانتهاء تهالكه بسبب لتبديله ًطلبا 
مشغوال كان .السريع بالشكل االعمال انجاز على قدرته عدم 
بل الي يلتفت ولم التهامها يود التي الخفيفة الوجبة ترتيب في 
أي في استالمه وبأماكنك جاهز الحاسوب“ بالقول اعانني 
تشاء وقت.“
After end meeting and gave back greeting 
and left the meeting room went to the office 
of the technical hitting to give them the old 
and get the new. We will do all the structure 
of the agenda and give you but you do the 
information to change to your system. Maybe 
personal without seeing it. The old employer 
said and the other employer said give the 
old system and sign the demand of the new 
system to finish the settings. Really there is 
many information in my old system and many 
pictures personal which stored in it but how 
move the information on it. I thought about 
it. I said is available way suitable to move the 
information with no using outer hard disk. 
After many conferences I arrived to starting 
from the president of the technical hitting 
when saying buy the system and change the 
information to it like you like it and slowly. 
Beautiful thinking and how much the price 
of it. Does not more than thirty. You can push 
the amount to the counting and receive it 
immediately
من وخرجنا التحية تبادلنا بعده وما االجتماع انتهى ان بعد 
الستالم الفني الدعم مكتب الى ذهبت .االجتماعات غرفة 
بعمل سنقوم“ .القديم الجهاز وتسليم الجديد الجهاز 
ويتم الجهاز في البرامج لبعض الضرورية التنصيبات 
من هي القديم جهازك من المعلومات نقل مهمة لكن تسليمه 
تكون لربما معلومات على االطالع لعدم مسؤوليتك 
الموظفة اكملت ثم ومن القسم موظفة اجابتني ”شخصية 
طلب وتوقيع القديم الجهاز تسليم عليك“ بالقول األخرى 
هنالك الحقيقة في “.االجراءات ألنهاء الجديد الجهاز استالم 
الصور من والكثير القديم جهازي في المعلومات من الكثير 
هذه كل نقل لي كيف ولكن عليه تخزينها تم التي الشخصية 
طريقة من هل“ بالقول وبادرت األمر في فكرت .المعلومات 
صلب بقرص“ االستعانة غير من المعلومات لنقل مناسبة 
مبادرة الى توصلت االستشارات من العديد وبعد ؟"خارجي 
الجهاز اشتري“ :القول بادر حين الفني الدعم قسم رئيس من 
“.مهلك من اقل وعلى تشاء التي بالطريقة معلوماته وانقل 
الحل بأنه شعرت ان بعد له قلت ”سعره؟ وكم .جميلة فكرة“ 
مبلغه دفع وبإمكانك .الثالثون يتجاوز ال“ .المناسب 
ًفورا واستالمه للحسابات.“
I finished the proceedings in the quick 
manner and paid the money and got the two 
systems and returned back to the home. I 
brought to you a computer system possible 
to help you for your work. I gave the news 
to my wife because she wanted to buy one 
for her. She lost the computer between her 
hands like the sparrow and went the smile 
full her face and said I will start work in it to 
see back all the lost lessons since going out. 
I went turning my computer new and trying 
to move the programs to it and loving the 
new features. No hiding I was tired and left 
the account after put in the bag special for 
it. I put it in the angle of the room where my 
wife put her accounting. I was busy for my 
daughter and seeing television and going after 
the news of the world
واستلمت ثمنه ودفعت السريع بالشكل االجراءات انهيت 
حاسوب جهاز ِلك جلبت“ .البيت الى ورجعت الجهازين 
فرحت حيث زوجتي اخبرت ”العمل في يفيدك ان ممكن 
بين الحاسوب تفقدت .لها واحدا شراء تنوي كانت ألنها كثيرا 
سأبدأ“ :وقالت وجهها تمأل البسمة وراحت كالعصفورة يديها 
ورحت “.تخرجي مذ دروس من فقدته ما لمراجعة به العمل 
اليه البرامج بعض نقل محاوال الجديد حاسوبي اقلب انا 
وتركت ًمتعبا كنت انني يخفى ال .الجميلة بخصائصه والتمتع 
في ووضعته به الخاصة الحقيبة في رزمه بعد الحاسوب 
مع انشغلت .حاسوبها زوجتي وضعت حيث الغرفة زاوية 
العالم اخبار ومتابعة التلفاز ومشاهدة طفلتي

74
A. Alazzawie
TT
ST
I found myself very busy with a car. It was 
white. It was white and it was Toyota. It was 
from a car trade. I did not know him. But he 
was fifty years old with a chin and experi­
ence. Wearing a white shirt and black clothes. 
With a man in his company and seventy years 
old. The old man giving me advices because 
I did not know. I looked at the contract of 
buying signed contained all the conditions to 
protect the trade. What was the problem of 
the car. I wanted to sell it at the majan but it 
was there the contact of buying and respon­
sibility. The problem is the car has a bomb to 
it and poison at the courthouse. I don't know 
how the car came to me and how bought it I 
and when I thought to buy other my car. Why 
I was between them. I didn't explain it. The 
problem very afraid was I. I don't know how 
to leave it and I see with the mother of my 
eye the trade who sold the car for me. They 
were very happy
بيك نوع من مستعملة حديثة سيارة في متورطا نفسي وجدت 
تجار احد من ابتعتها انني إذ اللون بيضاء تويوتا أب 
وذو العمر من الخمسينيات في لكنه اعرفه ال الذي السيارات 
ومعه االبيض والقميص األسود السروال يرتدي وذكاء حنكة 
يصل السن في كبير لكنه شريكه انه يبدو ما على آخر رجل 
الرجل كان .العمر من السبعينات نهاية يقارب ما الى 
اتطلع اعرف؟ ال شيء أي في لي بالنصيحة يدلي العجوز 
كل على يحتوي معهم وقعته الذي والشراء البيع عقد الى 
السيارة؟ تلك في الورطة هي ما .التاجر تحمي التي الشروط 
لكن بالمجان ولو حتى منها التخلص واود العبرات تحسرني 
هذه مسؤولية اتحمل ان يلزمني وشراء بيع عقد هنالك 
بحوزتها مسك وان سبق السيارة ان هي الورطة .السيارة 
في عليها التي القضية تخليص تم ولكن “.وسم قنبلة“ 
لي السيارة وصلت كيف اعرف ال .التجار قبل من المحكمة 
سيارتي؟ غير سيارة شراء في فكرت ومتى اشتريتها وكيف 
لم بينهم؟ انا ولماذا التجار هؤالء هم ومن استبدلتها؟ ولماذا 
شديدة درجة الى خائف انني المشكلة لكن ،ذلك تفسير استطع 
كيف اعرف ال اتقلب .السيارة لهذه حوزتي مسؤولية من 
السيارة لي باعوا الذين التجار عيني بأم وارى منها اتخلص 
منها والتخلص البيع فرحة تمألهم
Suddenly I got up from my sleep. I felt of 
great comfort I didn't feel before as though 
I left a big heaviness on my shoulder. There 
existed no car and no trade and no problems. 
Thank you Allah for the dream only. I got up 
and washed my face and sit in the salon of 
the house. I looked at the angle of the house 
and found two bags. One for the old account 
and for the new account. From the foundation 
gifted to me in the last day. I readied myself 
and wear my clothes and took the two sys­
tems to the technical hitting store. There were 
the two staff sitting in their two places. I said 
to the greeting: I want to return back the two 
systems to the foundation. I buy a system and 
pay for it privately
شعرت .فراشي في نفسي ووجدت النوم من استيقظت فجأة 
تخلصت وكأنني قبل من الواقع في به اشعر لم كبير بارتياح 
وال التجار وال السيارة توجد ال .كتفي على كبير ثقل من 
مع قلت ."حلم انه هلل الحمد" ."الخرابيط" تلك من ًايا يوجد 
في متأمال وجلست وجهي وغسلت نهضت ان بعد نفسي 
ووجدت البيت صالة في الزاوية الى نظرت .البيت صالة 
والثانية استخدمه الذي القديم للحاسوب األولى :حقيبتان 
الذي اليوم في لي المؤسسة اهدته الذي الجديد للحاسوب 
واخذت العمل مالبس ولبست نفسي جهزت .مضى 
وجدت حيث الفني الدعم قسم الى متوجها الجهازين 
بعد مسرعا بالقول بادرت .مكانيهما في جالستان الموظفتان 
.المؤسسة الى الجهازين ارجاع اريد" :سريعة تحية 
الخاصة نفقتي على جهازا سأشتري." 

75
5  Translating Arabic Text into English: Concepts and Practices
Translation # 2
Aseel Hamad Al-Azzawi.
TT
ST
Dreams and realityوالواقع األحالم
I went to the meeting presided by an official. 
I was asked to that meeting. There was 
official conversation related to duty, and 
president at work reviewed one important 
topic, and after he gave which was heavy 
like two books, he indicated This report 
has data on the school that are very bad. He 
then commented, “It’s a ticking time bomb 
for the establishment.” Everyone saw to the 
file, even the one who were looking through 
their laptop, or the one who was writing on a 
book, or even the one who were forgetful for 
a while. Everyone had their eye towards the 
file, looking at it, and it is obvious so much 
I liked to read it. The manager took the file 
from clerk and started checking it to search 
for the important thing. But he cannot find 
anything. So, he did not understand
من كنت إذ المسؤولين أحد ترأسه الذي االجتماع حضرت 
يتعلق رسمي حديث جرى .االجتماع ذلك الى المدعوين 
المواضيع أحد بالعمل الرئيس واستعرض العمل بأمور 
واشار ثقيلين كتابين بحجم حجمه ًملفا رفع ان وبعد المهمة 
ما المعلومات من المؤسسة على يحمل التقرير هذا ان“ 
موقوتة قنبلة بمثابة أنه“ بالقول بعدها علق “.ينسفها ان يمكن 
يقلب كان من حتى الملف الى الجميع التفت .”المؤسسة على 
أو كتيب في مالحظة يدون كان من او المحمول بجهازه 
نحو الجميع انظار اتجهت .لبرهة الذهن شارد كان من حتى 
اتأمل بطريقة حدقت انني يخفى وال به محدقين الملف 
وبدأ المسؤول يد من الملف المؤسسة مالك سحب .قراءته 
عن عجز ان وبعد المهم عن بها يبحث بطريقة به يقلب 
ًملخصا طلب السريعة اللحظات هذه في يفيده ما وجود 
بداخله ما فهم له يتيح بشكل للملف
I was fond of looking at the binder, wonder­
ing about a “time bomb”? and about the file 
included what content. I was busy for a few 
seconds talking and confused. The visitor was 
talking, and advice about work, about a team 
spirit, not paying attention to the “toxins” in 
the past time, passing difficulties, keep away 
the mistakes, and not stressing them All the 
words are good, and the question is, how to 
apply that
وهل فيه ما متأمال الملف الى وشوق شغف بكل انظر كنت 
لكي الملف يحتوي ان يمكن وماذا ؟"موقوتة قنبلة“ فعال انه 
نفسي مع اتحدث ثوان لبضعة انشغلت الكالم؟ هذا عنه يقال 
النصائح معطيا بالكالم الزائر بدأ .الذهن شارد جالس وانا 
االلتفات وعدم الفريق بروح العمل وكيفية العمل بخصوص 
اخطاء وتجنب الصعاب على والتغلب الماضي ”سموم“ الى 
كالم .ويشتته انتباهنا يثير بشكل عليها التأكيد وعدم االخرين 
التطبيق؟ نحو طريقه يجد هل والسؤال جميل
I did not speak there one word because I was 
not request to say, and I also has no subject 
to converse with, and I remain quiet until 
the end. Not even that, but even the meeting 
was over and we walked to the buffet open 
to discuss and eat small food and drink hot 
and cold drinks, I did not say anything to the 
visitor or to the manager or owner, and I was 
watching their behavior, they came one after 
another to talk
اجد ولم الحديث مني يُطلب لم ألنه واحدة بكلمة اتحدث لم 
حتى ًمستمعا وبقيت فيه اتحدث موضوعا ًايضا لنفسي 
انتهاء بعد حتى وانما فحسب هذا ليس .االخيرة اللحظة 
وتناول للمسامرة المفتوح البوفيه الى وذهابنا االجتماع 
ال اتحدث لم والباردة الساخنة والمشروبات الخفيفة االكالت 
تصرفاتهما متابعا انظر وبقيت المالك مع وال الزائر مع 
المدعوين احد واألخرى الفينة بين احدهما الى يتقدم حيث 
األحاديث لتبادل

76
A. Alazzawie
TT
ST
I looked at a friend. He is the technical sup­
port in the college, and I took some walking 
to talk with him, because I would like to get 
new computeer instead of that one which is 
old. not to mention it is no able to complete 
the work quickly He was busy with the food 
he wanted to eat quickly. He said to me, “The 
computer is complete and you can take it any­
time you want.”
المؤسسة في الفني الدعم مسؤول وهو زميلي الى نظرت 
اود ألنني الحديث لمبادلته باتجاهه الخطوات بعض وتقدمت 
قدمت وان سبق الذي القديم من بدال جديد حاسوب استالم 
عن ناهيا االفتراضية مدته وانتهاء تهالكه بسبب لتبديله ًطلبا 
مشغوال كان .السريع بالشكل االعمال انجاز على قدرته عدم 
بل الي يلتفت ولم التهامها يود التي الخفيفة الوجبة ترتيب في 
أي في استالمه وبأماكنك جاهز الحاسوب“ بالقول اعانني 
تشاء وقت.“
Then after the meeting I said hi to them and 
went out the meeting. I go to the technical 
support office to give me the new computer. 
“We will do all the important installations for 
some program in the computer and it will be 
given, but you do all the rest of the programs 
because it can be personal,” the department 
answered me, and then the other emplooyee 
continued to say, “You give to me the old 
device and sign the paper to receive the new 
computer to complete the form.” In fact, there 
are a lot of information on my old computer 
and many personal photos that were on it, 
but how can I move all this informations. I 
thought about it and took the initiative to say, 
“are there a suitable way to transfer infor­
mation without the use of an ‘external hard 
disk’?” After many talks, I reached a move­
ment from the president of the technical sup­
port when he moved to say: “Buy the device 
and change its information as you want and at 
the least and not expensive. ” “That is good. 
And how much is it cost?” I informed him. I 
felt that it was the right answering. “Not more 
over thirty. And you can give the amount to 
the accounts and receive it now.”
من وخرجنا التحية تبادلنا بعده وما االجتماع انتهى ان بعد 
الستالم الفني الدعم مكتب الى ذهبت .االجتماعات غرفة 
بعمل سنقوم“ .القديم الجهاز وتسليم الجديد الجهاز 
ويتم الجهاز في البرامج لبعض الضرورية التنصيبات 
من هي القديم جهازك من المعلومات نقل مهمة لكن تسليمه 
تكون لربما معلومات على االطالع لعدم مسؤوليتك 
الموظفة اكملت ثم ومن القسم موظفة اجابتني ”شخصية 
طلب وتوقيع القديم الجهاز تسليم عليك“ بالقول األخرى 
هنالك الحقيقة في “.االجراءات ألنهاء الجديد الجهاز استالم 
الصور من والكثير القديم جهازي في المعلومات من الكثير 
هذه كل نقل لي كيف ولكن عليه تخزينها تم التي الشخصية 
طريقة من هل“ بالقول وبادرت األمر في فكرت .المعلومات 
صلب بقرص“ االستعانة غير من المعلومات لنقل مناسبة 
مبادرة الى توصلت االستشارات من العديد وبعد ؟"خارجي 
الجهاز اشتري“ :القول بادر حين الفني الدعم قسم رئيس من 
“.مهلك من اقل وعلى تشاء التي بالطريقة معلوماته وانقل 
الحل بأنه شعرت ان بعد له قلت ”سعره؟ وكم .جميلة فكرة“ 
مبلغه دفع وبإمكانك .الثالثون يتجاوز ال“ .المناسب 
ًفورا واستالمه للحسابات.“

77
5  Translating Arabic Text into English: Concepts and Practices
TT
ST
I did all that procedures quick, I paid for it, I 
received the two device, I went to the house. 
“I brought you a computer for the work,” I 
told wife, was very happy she purposed to 
buy one for her. She looked on the com­
puter in her hands like a a sparrow, and a 
she smiled about all her face. She said: “I 
will start working on it to review the lessons 
I has lost since my graduation.” I started 
turning over my new computer trying to 
transfer some programs to it and enjoy its 
beautiful feature. I was tired and I had left the 
computer, I also put it inside case and in the 
corner room. my wife put her computer. I was 
busy with my baby, I watched TV, I saw news 
about world
واستلمت ثمنه ودفعت السريع بالشكل االجراءات انهيت 
حاسوب جهاز ِلك جلبت“ .البيت الى ورجعت الجهازين 
فرحت حيث زوجتي اخبرت ”العمل في يفيدك ان ممكن 
بين الحاسوب تفقدت .لها واحدا شراء تنوي كانت ألنها كثيرا 
سأبدأ“ :وقالت وجهها تمأل البسمة وراحت كالعصفورة يديها 
ورحت “.تخرجي مذ دروس من فقدته ما لمراجعة به العمل 
اليه البرامج بعض نقل محاوال الجديد حاسوبي اقلب انا 
وتركت ًمتعبا كنت انني يخفى ال .الجميلة بخصائصه والتمتع 
في ووضعته به الخاصة الحقيبة في رزمه بعد الحاسوب 
مع انشغلت .حاسوبها زوجتي وضعت حيث الغرفة زاوية 
العالم اخبار ومتابعة التلفاز ومشاهدة طفلتي
I found me in a modern, used, white Toyota 
pick-up, as I bought it from a car seller whom 
I knew not, but he is in his fifties, with good 
manners and good workings, wearing black 
trousers and a white shirt, and with him 
another man his associated, but he is old age. 
To about the of the seventies. Was the old 
man giving me advice about I don't know 
well? I hoped to the buy and contract that I 
signed, and it contain all the conditions for 
the merchant
What is it that is wrong with the car? I very 
regret and sorry the lessons and I like to 
throw them, even if for free, however there is 
a sale contract to force me to be responsible 
for this car. The problem is that the car has 
possession of a “poisoning bomb.” the case in 
the court was clear by the merchants. I don't 
know how the car came over to me, how I 
bought the car, when I think of buying the 
car? Who are these merchants and why am I 
there inside them? I could not discuss it, but 
the problem is that I am very afraid of the 
responsibility of the car. I turn not knowing 
how to throw it and see with my own eyes the 
dealers who sold me the car happy to sell the 
car to me
بيك نوع من مستعملة حديثة سيارة في متورطا نفسي وجدت 
تجار احد من ابتعتها انني إذ اللون بيضاء تويوتا أب 
وذو العمر من الخمسينيات في لكنه اعرفه ال الذي السيارات 
ومعه االبيض والقميص األسود السروال يرتدي وذكاء حنكة 
يصل السن في كبير لكنه شريكه انه يبدو ما على آخر رجل 
الرجل كان .العمر من السبعينات نهاية يقارب ما الى 
اتطلع اعرف؟ ال شيء أي في لي بالنصيحة يدلي العجوز 
كل على يحتوي معهم وقعته الذي والشراء البيع عقد الى 
السيارة؟ تلك في الورطة هي ما .التاجر تحمي التي الشروط 
لكن بالمجان ولو حتى منها التخلص واود العبرات تحسرني 
هذه مسؤولية اتحمل ان يلزمني وشراء بيع عقد هنالك 
بحوزتها مسك وان سبق السيارة ان هي الورطة .السيارة 
في عليها التي القضية تخليص تم ولكن “.وسم قنبلة“ 
لي السيارة وصلت كيف اعرف ال .التجار قبل من المحكمة 
سيارتي؟ غير سيارة شراء في فكرت ومتى اشتريتها وكيف 
لم بينهم؟ انا ولماذا التجار هؤالء هم ومن استبدلتها؟ ولماذا 
شديدة درجة الى خائف انني المشكلة لكن ،ذلك تفسير استطع 
كيف اعرف ال اتقلب .السيارة لهذه حوزتي مسؤولية من 
السيارة لي باعوا الذين التجار عيني بأم وارى منها اتخلص 
منها والتخلص البيع فرحة تمألهم

78
A. Alazzawie
TT
ST
Immediately I got up and I was in my bed. I 
felt very comfortable and relaxed that I never 
felt before, like taken a large weight from 
my shoulders. There is no car, no dealers, no 
any of those problems. “Thank God it was a 
dream.” I said that to myself then I stood up, 
washed my face, and started thinking in the 
house. I searched in the corner of the house 
and I found two bags: the first bag was for the 
computer which was old that I used, and the 
second was for the new computer gave me 
by the institution the day before. I got ready, 
put on clothes, and I took the two devices, I 
went to the support department, I found two 
employees in the office there. I said quickly, I 
greeted them quickly:
شعرت .فراشي في نفسي ووجدت النوم من استيقظت فجأة 
تخلصت وكأنني قبل من الواقع في به اشعر لم كبير بارتياح 
وال التجار وال السيارة توجد ال .كتفي على كبير ثقل من 
مع قلت .”حلم انه هلل الحمد“ .”الخرابيط“ تلك من ًايا يوجد 
في متأمال وجلست وجهي وغسلت نهضت ان بعد نفسي 
ووجدت البيت صالة في الزاوية الى نظرت .البيت صالة 
والثانية استخدمه الذي القديم للحاسوب األولى :حقيبتان 
الذي اليوم في لي المؤسسة اهدته الذي الجديد للحاسوب 
واخذت العمل مالبس ولبست نفسي جهزت .مضى 
وجدت حيث الفني الدعم قسم الى متوجها الجهازين 
بعد مسرعا بالقول بادرت .مكانيهما في جالستان الموظفتان 
سريعة تحية:
“I like to give you back the two devices to 
the institution. I shall buy one by my own 
money.”
“على جهازا سأشتري .المؤسسة الى الجهازين ارجاع اريد 
الخاصة نفقتي.”
Translation # 3
Abdulkhaliq Alazzawie.
TT
ST
Reality and Dreamsوالواقع األحالم
I attended the meeting as invited. It was 
chaired by one of the eminent officials. 
There was a formal discussion about work 
matters, and the president reviewed one of 
the important agenda items. And after he 
submitted a file the size of two heavy books, 
he stated “This report contains information 
about the institution that could destroy it.” He 
then added “It represents a ticking time bomb 
for the establishment”, and suddenly all eyes 
were on the file. All doodling, laptop surfing 
and absent minded activity stopped. It is no 
secret that I also stared at it, hoping to read 
it. The owner of the institution grabbed the 
file from the official’s hands to scour for the 
revelations. Unable to find anything useful in 
such a short time, he requested a summary of 
the report to get a better understanding of its 
ominous content
من كنت إذ المسؤولين أحد ترأسه الذي االجتماع حضرت 
يتعلق رسمي حديث جرى .االجتماع ذلك الى المدعوين 
المواضيع أحد بالعمل الرئيس واستعرض العمل بأمور 
واشار ثقيلين كتابين بحجم حجمه ًملفا رفع ان وبعد المهمة 
ما المعلومات من المؤسسة على يحمل التقرير هذا ان“ 
موقوتة قنبلة بمثابة أنه“ بالقول بعدها علق “.ينسفها ان يمكن 
يقلب كان من حتى الملف الى الجميع التفت .”المؤسسة على 
أو كتيب في مالحظة يدون كان من او المحمول بجهازه 
نحو الجميع انظار اتجهت .لبرهة الذهن شارد كان من حتى 
اتأمل بطريقة حدقت انني يخفى وال به محدقين الملف 
وبدأ المسؤول يد من الملف المؤسسة مالك سحب .قراءته 
عن عجز ان وبعد المهم عن بها يبحث بطريقة به يقلب 
ًملخصا طلب السريعة اللحظات هذه في يفيده ما وجود 
بداخله ما فهم له يتيح بشكل للملف

79
5  Translating Arabic Text into English: Concepts and Practices
TT
ST
I was eagerly looking at the file, wonder­
ing about its intrigue; about whether it was 
actually a “time bomb”, and what accounts 
in that file could be described as such. While 
I was busy talking to myself, a guest speaker 
had begun advising on work-related matters, 
dispensing pearls of wisdom on teamwork 
spirit, not dwelling on the “toxins” of the 
past, surmounting hurdles, learning from the 
mistakes of others. His captivating words, 
however, struggled to retain credibility, as 
everyone's stare seemed to question whether 
they could ever be translated into reality
وهل فيه ما متأمال الملف الى وشوق شغف بكل انظر كنت 
لكي الملف يحتوي ان يمكن وماذا ؟"موقوتة قنبلة“ فعال انه 
نفسي مع اتحدث ثوان لبضعة انشغلت الكالم؟ هذا عنه يقال 
النصائح معطيا بالكالم الزائر بدأ .الذهن شارد جالس وانا 
االلتفات وعدم الفريق بروح العمل وكيفية العمل بخصوص 
اخطاء وتجنب الصعاب على والتغلب الماضي ”سموم“ الى 
كالم .ويشتته انتباهنا يثير بشكل عليها التأكيد وعدم االخرين 
التطبيق؟ نحو طريقه يجد هل والسؤال جميل
I did not speak a single word since I was not 
asked; then, neither did I have an interest 
in making any comments, so I focused on 
listening intently. Not only that, but even 
after the meeting, while everyone chatted 
while handling finger foods, hot and cold 
drinks and surveying the open buffet, I did 
not participate in the sought for a chat with 
either the guest speaker or the owner. Instead, 
I kept observing them, as they made light 
conversation
اجد ولم الحديث مني يُطلب لم ألنه واحدة بكلمة اتحدث لم 
حتى ًمستمعا وبقيت فيه اتحدث موضوعا ًايضا لنفسي 
انتهاء بعد حتى وانما فحسب هذا ليس .االخيرة اللحظة 
وتناول للمسامرة المفتوح البوفيه الى وذهابنا االجتماع 
ال اتحدث لم والباردة الساخنة والمشروبات الخفيفة االكالت 
تصرفاتهما متابعا انظر وبقيت المالك مع وال الزائر مع 
المدعوين احد واألخرى الفينة بين احدهما الى يتقدم حيث 
األحاديث لتبادل
I looked at my colleague, the technical sup­
port officer at the institution, and made my 
way towards him to discuss the possibility of 
replacing the old computer with a new one. I 
had already submitted a request due to wear 
and tear and expiry of its default period; not 
to mention its slowness. He was busy arrang­
ing the snacks he planned to devour and did 
not pay much attention to me but relieved my 
concerns by saying: “The computer is ready 
and you can pick it up anytime you wish.”
المؤسسة في الفني الدعم مسؤول وهو زميلي الى نظرت 
اود ألنني الحديث لمبادلته باتجاهه الخطوات بعض وتقدمت 
قدمت وان سبق الذي القديم من بدال جديد حاسوب استالم 
عن ناهيا االفتراضية مدته وانتهاء تهالكه بسبب لتبديله ًطلبا 
مشغوال كان .السريع بالشكل االعمال انجاز على قدرته عدم 
بل الي يلتفت ولم التهامها يود التي الخفيفة الوجبة ترتيب في 
أي في استالمه وبأماكنك جاهز الحاسوب“ بالقول اعانني 
تشا وقت”

80
A. Alazzawie
TT
ST
After the meeting ended, we exchanged 
greetings and left the meeting room. I went 
to the technical support office to collect the 
new device and hand over the old one. “We 
will download the necessary programs, and 
deliver it to you, but transferring information 
from your old device to the new one remains 
your responsibility because we should not 
access sensitive information,” the female staff 
said. And then another female staff added, 
“You must hand over the old device and sign 
the requisition form to receive the new one.” I 
began to wonder how I would have trans­
ferred all the information stored in my old 
computer, and took the initiative to ask, “Is 
there a suitable way to transfer information 
without the use of an ‘external hard disk’?” 
After many consultations, the head of the 
technical support unit proposed: “Buy the 
device and you may transfer the information 
at your convenience”. Feeling it was the most 
convenient solution, I said “That sounds good 
to me; how much does it cost?” “No more 
than thirty; you will receive the computer 
immediately once the amount is paid”
من وخرجنا التحية تبادلنا بعده وما االجتماع انتهى ان بعد 
الستالم الفني الدعم مكتب الى ذهبت .االجتماعات غرفة 
بعمل سنقوم“ .القديم الجهاز وتسليم الجديد الجهاز 
ويتم الجهاز في البرامج لبعض الضرورية التنصيبات 
من هي القديم جهازك من المعلومات نقل مهمة لكن تسليمه 
تكون لربما معلومات على االطالع لعدم مسؤوليتك 
الموظفة اكملت ثم ومن القسم موظفة اجابتني ”شخصية 
طلب وتوقيع القديم الجهاز تسليم عليك“ بالقول األخرى 
هنالك الحقيقة في “.االجراءات ألنهاء الجديد الجهاز استالم 
الصور من والكثير القديم جهازي في المعلومات من الكثير 
هذه كل نقل لي كيف ولكن عليه تخزينها تم التي الشخصية 
طريقة من هل“ بالقول وبادرت األمر في فكرت .المعلومات 
صلب بقرص“ االستعانة غير من المعلومات لنقل مناسبة 
مبادرة الى توصلت االستشارات من العديد وبعد ؟"خارجي 
الجهاز اشتري“ :القول بادر حين الفني الدعم قسم رئيس من 
“.مهلك من اقل وعلى تشاء التي بالطريقة معلوماته وانقل 
الحل بأنه شعرت ان بعد له قلت ”سعره؟ وكم .جميلة فكرة“ 
مبلغه دفع وبإمكانك .الثالثون يتجاوز ال“ .المناسب 
ًفورا واستالمه للحسابات.”
I completed the transaction quickly, paid 
the amount, received the two devices, and 
returned home. “I brought you a computer 
that can help you with your work,” I told my 
wife, who was very happy to have it since 
she had planned to buy one. She looked at 
the computer in her hands happy as a lark as 
a smile spread on her face. She said: “I can 
finally review the lessons I have lost since 
my graduation.” I then started trying my new 
computer attempting to add some programs 
and enjoy its beautiful features, but overcome 
by a day’s tiredness, I ended up placing it 
back on its package and placed it in the cor­
ner of the room, next to my wife’s computer. 
I was busy now with my child, watching TV, 
and watching world news
واستلمت ثمنه ودفعت السريع بالشكل االجراءات انهيت 
حاسوب جهاز ِلك جلبت“ .البيت الى ورجعت الجهازين 
فرحت حيث زوجتي اخبرت ”العمل في يفيدك ان ممكن 
بين الحاسوب تفقدت .لها واحدا شراء تنوي كانت ألنها كثيرا 
سأبدأ“ :وقالت وجهها تمأل البسمة وراحت كالعصفورة يديها 
ورحت “.تخرجي مذ دروس من فقدته ما لمراجعة به العمل 
اليه البرامج بعض نقل محاوال الجديد حاسوبي اقلب انا 
وتركت ًمتعبا كنت انني يخفى ال .الجميلة بخصائصه والتمتع 
في ووضعته به الخاصة الحقيبة في رزمه بعد الحاسوب 
مع انشغلت .حاسوبها زوجتي وضعت حيث الغرفة زاوية 
العالم اخبار ومتابعة التلفاز ومشاهدة طفلتي

81
5  Translating Arabic Text into English: Concepts and Practices
TT
ST
I found myself allured to a modern, white 
second-hand Toyota pick-up, and ended up 
buying it from a car dealer whom I did not 
know—a man in his fifties, with sophis­
tication and intelligence, wearing a black 
suit and white shirt. There was another man 
with him, appearing to be his partner—an 
elderly man at the end of his seventies. Was 
the old man giving me advice on anything 
I didn’t already know? I looked forward to 
concluding the purchase and signing the sale 
contract, undeterred by the thick lists of terms 
and conditions. I was soon busy wondering 
was not wrong with that car, distressed to the 
point that I was choking back tears and ready 
to be rid of it even for free were it not for the 
sale and purchase contract that obliged me to 
take responsibility for this car. The problem 
was that “a bomb and toxin” were previously 
found in that vehicle. However, the case was 
cleared by the merchants through the court. 
I didn't know how the car got to me, how 
I bought it, or what compelled me to buy 
another car. Why did I have to replace my old 
one? Who were these merchants and why did 
I get myself involved with them? I could not 
explain it, gripped by the panic over the lia­
bility for owning such a car. I looked around 
not knowing how to get rid of it, obsessed by 
the memory of how overjoyed the car dealers 
were for getting rid of it
بيك نوع من مستعملة حديثة سيارة في متورطا نفسي وجدت 
تجار احد من ابتعتها انني إذ اللون بيضاء تويوتا أب 
وذو العمر من الخمسينيات في لكنه اعرفه ال الذي السيارات 
ومعه االبيض والقميص األسود السروال يرتدي وذكاء حنكة 
يصل السن في كبير لكنه شريكه انه يبدو ما على آخر رجل 
الرجل كان .العمر من السبعينات نهاية يقارب ما الى 
اتطلع اعرف؟ ال شيء أي في لي بالنصيحة يدلي العجوز 
كل على يحتوي معهم وقعته الذي والشراء البيع عقد الى 
السيارة؟ تلك في الورطة هي ما .التاجر تحمي التي الشروط 
لكن بالمجان ولو حتى منها التخلص واود العبرات تحسرني 
هذه مسؤولية اتحمل ان يلزمني وشراء بيع عقد هنالك 
بحوزتها مسك وان سبق السيارة ان هي الورطة .السيارة 
في عليها التي القضية تخليص تم ولكن “.وسم قنبلة“ 
لي السيارة وصلت كيف اعرف ال .التجار قبل من المحكمة 
سيارتي؟ غير سيارة شراء في فكرت ومتى اشتريتها وكيف 
لم بينهم؟ انا ولماذا التجار هؤالء هم ومن استبدلتها؟ ولماذا 
شديدة درجة الى خائف انني المشكلة لكن ،ذلك تفسير استطع 
كيف اعرف ال اتقلب .السيارة لهذه حوزتي مسؤولية من 
السيارة لي باعوا الذين التجار عيني بأم وارى منها اتخلص 
منها والتخلص البيع فرحة تمألهم
Suddenly I woke up and found myself in my 
own bed. I felt great relief like never before, 
as if a huge weight was taken off my shoul­
ders. There were neither cars nor dealers, nor 
any of that awful mess. “Thank God it was 
a dream” I said to myself whilst getting up, 
washing my face, and sitting meditating in 
the living room. I looked at the corner of the 
living room and saw two bags: the first was 
the old computer’s, and the second was the 
new one’s the institution gave me the day 
before. I got dressed and ready for work, 
picked up the two computers, and headed to 
the technical support department, where I 
found the two female staff at the help desk. 
Greeting them, I said:
شعرت .فراشي في نفسي ووجدت النوم من استيقظت فجأة 
تخلصت وكأنني قبل من الواقع في به اشعر لم كبير بارتياح 
وال التجار وال السيارة توجد ال .كتفي على كبير ثقل من 
مع قلت .”حلم انه هلل الحمد“ .”الخرابيط“ تلك من ًايا يوجد 
في متأمال وجلست وجهي وغسلت نهضت ان بعد نفسي 
ووجدت البيت صالة في الزاوية الى نظرت .البيت صالة 
والثانية استخدمه الذي القديم للحاسوب األولى :حقيبتان 
الذي اليوم في لي المؤسسة اهدته الذي الجديد للحاسوب 
واخذت العمل مالبس ولبست نفسي جهزت .مضى 
وجدت حيث الفني الدعم قسم الى متوجها الجهازين 
بعد مسرعا بالقول بادرت .مكانيهما في جالستان الموظفتان 
سريعة تحية:
“I would like to return both devices to the 
institution. I will buy a computer at my own 
expense.”
“على جهازا سأشتري .المؤسسة الى الجهازين ارجاع اريد 
الخاصة نفقتي.”

82
A. Alazzawie
Types of Errors
The errors in Translation 1 and 2 can be classified into orthographic, lexical, gram­
matical and semantic errors (Hsu, 2014):
Orthographic errors are those of spelling, capitalization, and punctuation, 
including periods, commas, colons, semi-colons, etc. These can be regarded as 
minor errors, errors that do not significantly affect meaning. The message is con­
veyed but the translation may be described as tentative and disfluent.
Lexical errors include missing words, added words, incorrect diction (wrong 
choice of word class, i.e., verbs, nouns and adjectives), wrong collocations, etc. 
Incorrect word choice creates confusion, even total confusion—in fact, in some 
cases the meaning becomes totally obscure. There are many missing words in the 
translated texts, including head nouns modified by various descriptors, verbs and 
modifiers, omission of various other syntactic categories (parts of speech).
Grammatical errors include wrong tense, incorrect subject‒verb agreement, 
missing subject, missing verbs, incorrect word order, incorrect or missing deter­
miners, and incorrect use of prepositions. They also include tense matching, plu­
rality matching between subject/s and verb, and conjugation of verbs. Some of 
these errors can also be classified as semantic and grammatical errors that cause 
confusion in the mind of the reader. The meaning here is contorted, vague or 
totally lost. Such errors can be classified as major—errors that affect fluency but 
general meaning is conveyed. The overall meaning of the translation would also 
be clearer if sentences about two different, though inter-related, events happening 
in different contexts were separated. Two different tenses combined with different 
events or subjects may serve to confuse the reader.
Semantic errors relating to the choice of non-equivalent words can occur due 
to the ambiguity of the source text caused by homophony, polysemy and/or syn­
onymy. Such errors are rated as critical. The meaning is either distorted or not 
conveyed. Clarity may be missing if items are deleted because the referent of the 
deletion is not determined. For example:
I did not converse a word because they didn't ask me for it (from Translation 1)
Is ‘it’ related to taking the file or turning the pages or……?
In some cases, the meaning is generally understood. However, if the rendering had 
been more clearly expressed, there would be no confusion or ambiguity. The over­
all meaning is obscured due to lack of specification. Absolute specificity is needed 
in every part of the sentence. Referents cannot be ambiguous.
All in all, in terms of meaning and adequacy, both Translations 1 and 2 can be 
described as either incomprehensible and non-fluent, or as having some fluency 
but many omissions, grammatical errors, incorrect diction, wrong verb tenses, plu­
rality issues, wrong prepositions, words that are incorrect or do not suit the context 
‒ all of which create a fluency problem.

83
5  Translating Arabic Text into English: Concepts and Practices
General Survey
Translation scholars (Catford 1965; Vinay and Darblenet 1958/2004; Nida 1964; 
Newmark 1988; Baker 1992, 2004) have suggested various strategies and pro­
cedures to handle the notion of equivalence. Vinay and Darblenet proposed two 
translation methods: direct and oblique.
There are three elements to direct translation:
Borrowing entails adopting foreign words or phrases directly into the target lan­
guage without translation. These terms (the adopted foreign words or phrases) are 
used just as they are, and they often preserve their original sound and spelling. 
Borrowing is more about assimilating a foreign term than it is about interpreting it. 
Examples of borrowing in the translated text are transferring the Arabic source text 
(ST) words البوفية as buffet and تويوتا أب بيك as Toyota pick-up. Many words are 
introduced into Arabic through borrowing, such as كومبيوتر ,انترنت ,ماركت سوبر, etc. 
Words borrowed from Arabic include shawarma, falafel, cotton, algorithms.
Literal translation is word-for-word translation. This procedure is used most 
often for translating between closely related languages (e.g., French and Italian). It 
can be adopted in translating religious, legal and scientific texts. The following are 
some examples of word-for-word literal translation:
المهمة المواضيع أحد بالعمل الرئيس واستعرض.
and reviewed the president in work one of the topics important.
نفسي مع قلت.
I said with myself.
Calque is a subset of borrowing in which a phrase or structure is adopted piece by 
piece with little change. Calques, or direct translations, from other languages may 
often be found in everyday use in the English language. To illustrate, the English 
phrase “compliments of the season” would be translated into French as 
“Compliments de la saison!”, maintaining the grammatical structure of the origi­
nal English phrase. “Adam’s apple” is a calque of the French pomme d’Adam. 
Numerous instances of prevalent phrases that have been translated in this style 
include Secretary General translated as العام األمين, and “life is a journey” translated 
as رحلة الحياة and “play a role” rendered as دورا يلعب, retaining the word order and 
structure of the original phrase. The Arabic term الصحة نظام can be calqued into 
English as “health system”, keeping the original phrase's word order and structure.
Both strategies, borrowing and calque, have a role in translation and language 
adaptation, and their use is determined by the context and the intended effect in 
the target language. Calque attempts to mimic the structure and components of the 
foreign word or phrase, which often results in a literal but possibly uncomfortable 
translation. It stresses the importance of preserving the original form of the term 
in the translation. Borrowing, on the other hand, is the process of immediately 
importing a foreign term into the target language while maintaining its original 
form, sound and meaning. The term (word or phrase) is not translated or adapted 
to the target language.

84
A. Alazzawie
The four elements of oblique translation are modulation, transposition, adapta­
tion and equivalence.
Modulation
Modulation is covers semantic changes including substituting a part for a whole, 
reversing a point of view, abstract to concrete, negative to positive, active to pas­
sive and vice versa. In the following example the ST is expressed in the active 
voice; the translator has changed it to passive, applying modulation in the TT:
كتفي على كبير ثقل من تخلصت وكأنني.
as if a huge weight was taken off my shoulders.
In the following example the singular form التحية is changed to plural greetings:
التحية تبادلنا بعده وما.
we exchanged greetings.
The regular structural pattern of Arabic is to place the verb at the beginning of the 
sentence, whereas the English regular pattern begins with a noun. This is another 
application of the modulation procedure.
Transposition
Transposition refers to a change in the syntactic category, that is, changing the 
word class without changing the meaning. This procedure is exemplified by 
changing the ST verb عجز to the adjective unable in the TT, changing the ST verb 
يفيد to the adjective useful and changing the prepositional phrase to the noun 
content:
بداخله ما فهم له يتيح بشكل للملف ًملخصا طلب السريعة اللحظات هذه في يفيده ما وجود عن عجز ان وبعد.
Unable to find anything useful in such a short time, he requested a summary of the 
report to get a better understanding of its content. 
Another example illustrating Vinay and Darblenet’s transposition is translating كنت 
الملف الى وشوق شغف بكل انظر as I was eagerly looking at the file. Here a prepositional 
phrase with a conjunction of two nouns has been changed into an adverb, eagerly. 
The word order shift from the verb-initial order of the ST to the subject-initial order 
in the TT is a further example of transposition. Such changes were described by 
Catford (1965) as translation shifts, which covers such alterations in the features of 
the linguistic system of the source language and the target language as word order, 
syntactic categories (word classes or parts of speech), tense, number, voice (active 
and passive voice) and aspect. According to Catford, a rank is a unit of linguistic 
analysis, irrespective of its length; it can be a morpheme, a word, a phrase, that is, a 
group of words, a clause or a sentence. A translation can be rank-bound or rank-un­
bounded. A rank-bound translation provides only TL equivalents or units at the 
same rank ‒ word-for-word, clause-for-clause or sentence-for-sentence translation. 

85
5  Translating Arabic Text into English: Concepts and Practices
In unbounded translation, however, TL equivalence is not tied to a particular lin­
guistic rank, thus a verb can be translated as a noun, an adjective as a propositional 
phrase, a noun as an adverb, etc.:
نعيما Nice haircut.
What a beautiful day! جميل يوم من ياله!
I arrive at the airport late today. اليوم ًمتأخرا المطار إلى وصلت أنا .اليوم متأخرا المطار وصلت.
اليوم المطار إلى ًمتأخرا وصلت .اليوم متأخرا المطار إلى وصولي كان.
All these translations are valid and reflect the linguistic changes that occur when 
translation from English to Arabic or vice versa is carried out. Similarly, the sen­
tence from our story can be translated in the following ways: الى الجهازين ارجاع ريد 
المؤسسة.
I would like to return the two devices to the institution.
I want to return the two computers to the company.
I am returning both devices to the organization.
I am here to give back the two computers.
I’d like to hand in both devices.
Class shift has occurred in the translation. The noun ارجاع is translated into a dif­
ferent grammatical class (syntactic category), in this case the verb return. These 
translations also show another kind of shift which Catford termed level shift ‒ a 
translation where an ST word at one linguistic level (such as grammar) has an 
equivalent in the TT at a different level (such as the lexis, meaning vocabulary). 
For example, الجهازين is a dual form meaning “two devices”; here a meaning that is 
expressed by the grammar of the Arabic language is expressed by the words the 
two devices in the translation. Another example that explicates this type of level 
shift is.
مكانيهما في جالستان الموظفتان.
I found the two female staff at the help desk.
The dual meaning of الموظفتان is conveyed by the grammar of Arabic, but con­
veyed in the translation by the addition of the word two. This example illustrates 
another level shift—the female gender is conveyed by the grammar in Arabic but 
by the lexis—the addition of the word female ‒ in the English translation.
The change observed in translating the singular form of the noun تحية into the 
plural form greetings in the following example can be described as what Catford 
terms intra-system shift:
التحية تبادلنا بعده وما.
we exchanged greetings.
Intra-system shift applies when a singular form in the ST is changed into plural 
form in the TT or the other way around. Another example of intra-system shift is 
translating the singular form of English a lion into the Arabic plural form األسود, 
and translating السيارات صبغ as car painting:
The lion is a strong predatorقوية مفترسة حيوانات األسود.
السيارات صبغ car painting.
Another kind of shift proposed by Catford is structural shift. This shift is 
the change of the syntactic patterns of the ST, as exemplified in the following 
translation:

86
A. Alazzawie
ًملفا رفع ان وبعد المهمة المواضيع أحد بالعمل الرئيس واستعرض العمل بأمور يتعلق رسمي حديث جرى 
ثقيلين كتابين بحجم حجمه.
There was a formal discussion about work-related matters, and the president 
reviewed one of the important topics, and after he submitted a file the size of two 
heavy books.
In the Arabic text the noun precedes the adjective in رسمي حديث but it occurs 
after the adjective in the translated text formal discussion. The same applies to the 
noun and its modifier بأمورالعمل يتعلق when translated as work-related matters, 
المهمة المواضيع important topics, and ثقيلين كتابين two heavy books. In all these exam­
ples and many more, the position of the head nouns in relation to their modifiers 
changes in the translation. According to Catford’s theory of shift in translation, 
this obvious difference between the two texts is termed structure shift. 
Another translation strategy proposed by Catford (1965) is unit shift, a strategy 
that changes the unit of the source text, such as a sentence into a word. Here is an 
example showing this shift from Arabic to English:
االجتماع ذلك الى المدعوين من كنت إذ المسؤولين أحد ترأسه الذي االجتماع حضرت.
I attended the meeting as invited.
In this example, the sentence االجتماع ذلك الى المدعوين من كنت إذ is changed into a word 
or a phrase as invited.
Another example of unit shift can be seen in the following translation where the 
ST word unit die is changed into a relative clause يموتون الذين.
How many people die of smoking every year?
التدخين؟ من سنة كل في يموتون الذين األشخاص عدد ما
Adaptation
Adaptation handles cases in the ST culture which do not exist in the TL culture, 
particularly in literary genres. This procedure is often used for translating titles of 
books, stories, movies and for dealing with differences between the ST and the TT 
cultures. For example, هلل الحمد can be adapted as I’m well, thanks, and عليكم السالم 
can be adapted as Hi there. Knowing the linguistic features of a proverb or a fixed 
expression may not be sufficient for the processing of its meaning. The translator 
has to either belong to the local culture in which the saying originates or be famil­
iar with it and with the particular occasion to which that saying refers.
As an example, let us consider the Arabic proverb جمل ال و فيها لي ناقة ال which 
says, literally, I neither have a female nor a male camel in this matter. In English, 
one might say I want nothing to do with it or I’ll have nothing to do with it, or I 
think I’ll keep away from it; such a form, which means exactly what it says, loses 
the aesthetic feature of the proverb. Or, one might say I want no part of it. An 
operator retired and got another job as a financial advisor trying to get money from 
people to invest in an American company called Primerica. When this was 

87
5  Translating Arabic Text into English: Concepts and Practices
mentioned to her, her sister said “I don’t want anything to do with it”. In other 
words, she would never ask other people to give their money, and especially not to 
put their hard-earned money at risk. In English, one might say: “What’s the point 
in doing that? It’ll get you nowhere” or “There is no point in doing (something)”. 
For example, “There is no point in voting for the Green Party. They’ll never win; 
you might as well throw your vote away.” Politicians say “No comment” when 
they want to evade an issue or do not want to choose sides, especially when it con­
cerns controversial issues. People may say, “It doesn’t matter to me one way or 
another” when they may not have a preference or when they are easy-going.
If an English speaker lived in an Arabic country or had someone explain this 
proverb to them in terms of its usage and intended meaning in Arabic, then they 
might grasp its meaning. But taken out of context, and without any knowledge 
of Arabic language and culture, this Arabic saying would have no meaning to a 
native English speaker other than a literal translation—that that person does not 
have a female or male camel. Camels do not exist in most English-speaking coun­
tries. English speakers may talk about camels in general terms when they (albeit 
rarely) come up in conversation, but they never talk about owning a camel, let 
alone distinguishing the gender of a camel, although a zoologist who specializes 
in camels might do so. Although there are some expressions in English to do with 
camels, such as that is the straw that broke the camel’s back, camels rarely come 
up in conversation. Or, one could make an analogy or a simile or a metaphor based 
on our knowledge of camels, and expressions of this sort can probably be found 
in English texts. I presume Australians have numerous ones since the camels they 
imported have done so well in the outback (a huge problem; there are millions). 
For example, that runner is like a camel. Doesn’t he/she ever stop to drink? But, 
apart from that, most English speakers would have no cultural reference or real-
life experience with which to understand this Arabic saying.
Henri Richard was a French-Canadian hockey player who acquired the nick­
name “Rocket Richard” because of his power and speed on the ice. People in 
Arabic-speaking countries may never have heard of the game of hockey or, if they 
have, may know little about the game, its rules, its players or its history, and what 
the intended meaning is—literal meaning, a sarcastic joke, etc. One needs to expe­
rience life in that “other” culture to understand, first, the words/expression in that 
language and what they refer to (a camel, hockey). In other words, a translator 
has to be professionally sensitive to language use, and develops insights into the 
complex problems of culture, of similarities and differences between Arabic and 
English.
In this connection, as Dweik and Suleiman (2013) stated, unfamiliar cultural 
terms pose problems for translators. Baker (1992) makes a similar statement about 
the difficulty associated with translating culture-bound expressions.
Take another related example:
صحيحة حول الجرباء تربط ال
تجربا أن الصحيحة على خوفي

88
A. Alazzawie
The English version that may serve as textual equivalent is One bad apple spoils 
the whole bunch. The proverb can refer to people, or anything really, including 
fruit. Birds of a feather flock together may have either a positive or negative asso­
ciation but there is nothing here to suggest a bad one will spoil or ruin a good one 
or ones. Like ones associate with each other. There is a proverb The apple doesn’t 
fall far from the tree—rather like like father, like son. But it still implies these peo­
ple are alike. There is the idiom black sheep of the family but still there is nothing 
that suggests he/she is spoiling anyone else. A bad seed is defined as someone who 
is congenitally disposed to wrongdoing and who is likely to be a bad influence on 
others.
The concept of context, its nature and its types need to be comprehensively 
understood if SL and TL are to be understood and consequently meaning is to be 
transferred in the course of translation.
On a similar note, the linguistic context will not be of much help in determin­
ing the meaning of the slang expressions Holy saint, Holy Father and holy smoke! 
Holy crap! Holy shit and Holy mackerel.
The ancient Roman author, politician and lawyer Cicero (106–43 BCE) dis­
cussed how translation of religious, philosophical and rhetorical texts should be 
carried out. In his commentary on the translation into Latin of the Greek orators, 
Demosthenes and Aeschines, Cicero stated that he translated the text as an orator, 
not as a literal interpreter, in order to maintain the same ideas in the same form 
and mold. This reveals Cicero’s attitude towards translation. His concern is to 
translate the ideas of the original text and to avoid word-for-word, literal or verba­
tim translation.
The fact that fixed expressions like idioms may seem to have both a literal 
and a non-literal meaning can be a major source of confusion and difficulty for 
student translators. The string of words John hit the sack, or John hit the road 
might describe John as engaged in the act of striking the sack or the road with 
his fist or with a stick (literal meaning), or John could be going to sleep or going 
to travel (idiomatic meaning). However, once students realize in the initial phase 
of translation—the comprehension phase ‒ that the string is an idiom, they must 
discount and discard the literal meaning and opt for the idiomatic meaning of the 
expression.
Let us consider the French idiom se perdre les chèvres. This idiom literally 
means to lose your goats but what it actually means is to forget what you were 
just saying or to lose your place in a conversation. In English the literal trans­
lation makes sense, but an English speaker would wonder if they had heard the 
person correctly because they would have no idea what the person was talking 
about, especially if uttered by someone in an urban setting where no one has goats. 
English speakers would misconstrue the meaning or, if lucky, make a correct guess 
as to its actual meaning. The actual meaning would have to be explained and only 
then might English speakers think of something similar in their own language in 
an attempt to understand this new language and language knowledge and relate 
it to their language which they would rely on as a source of reference and under­
standing. It helps them learn and remember the new language. In English there is 

89
5  Translating Arabic Text into English: Concepts and Practices
no idiom that I am aware of that relates language about losing an animal to losing 
one’s place in conversation, or forgetting what we were just saying. English speak­
ers would, in this instance, usually speak quite literally, such as “Oh … what were 
we talking about? What did you just say?” or “Oh, I forgot what we were talk­
ing about.” However, they might also relate it to losing something, as in “I must 
be losing my mind”; or “I lost my train of thought”—related to one’s mind; or “I 
must be losing my marbles.” All these expressions are related to the mind or one’s 
memory or mental capacity. This perhaps explains why an English native speaker 
would be disconcerted by this French idiom which combines losing goats with los­
ing one’s place in conversation or forgetting what was just said. The English con­
nection makes sense because our conversation stems from, is directed, controlled 
and affected by our mind and mental capacity. Marbles are a toy, but we know the 
English expression “to lose one’s marbles” relates to our mind and mental capac­
ity. Although I can think of no direct equivalent in English, it might help the native 
English speaker to think of “losing something” like one’s marbles to relate to this 
French idiom.
The first task, if possible, is to translate word for word. This should be rela­
tively easy to do between languages where the cultures, climates, geographic 
landforms and languages share many similarities (in reference to languages: gram­
mar, syntax, etymology, vocabulary, etc.). The meaning can easily be explained if 
it does not automatically make sense to the listener. This might be the case even 
within the same country speaking the “same” language where different ways of 
life exist along with different language varieties. For example, many people speak­
ing Standard English across Canada cannot understand the accents and dialects 
spoken by Maritime fishermen and villagers. Much would have to be explained.
Take the French idiom faire la grasse matinée as spoken in this sentence: J’ai 
décidé de faire la grasse matinée. If translated into English literally, faire la grasse 
matinée means “to have a fat morning”. An English native speaker would be very 
likely to presume or guess that this idiom would mean to eat a wonderful deca­
dent breakfast like pancakes and French toast smothered with butter and maple 
syrup and further served with eggs and bacon and hash browns and coffee or tea. 
However, the sentence actually means I decided to sleep in. When the real mean­
ing is explained to a native English speaker, they can automatically relate and 
adjust their understanding, associating a “fat morning” with the “luxury” of sleep­
ing in, of “indulging” oneself with extra sleep and relaxation, as the word “fat” 
in English implies having extra or an over-abundance of something. Baker (2011: 
80) classes this translation strategy “[t]ranslation by paraphrase”. So, there are 
some French idioms and expressions which would have to be explained and others 
of which a native English speaker would very likely be able to guess the correct 
meaning right away, especially with added context.
Equivalence
Equivalence is the strategy adopted for the translation of idioms, proverbs, clichés 
and other phraseologies. Illustrative examples from the passage are translating   بأم 
عيني as with my own eyes and كالعصفورة as happy as a lark, or as happy as a calm, 
or informally, happy as Larry.

90
A. Alazzawie
The Translation of Idioms
The final section of this module briefly deals with the translation of English idi­
oms. Idioms are vital for English language learners and translators. Here are some 
reasons why idioms are important for EFL and translation students:
Cultural understanding: Idioms are typically firmly established in a language's 
history. Learning idioms may reveal English-speaking cultures and lifestyles. 
Effective communication and integration into English-speaking workplaces need 
cultural awareness.
Improved communication: Understanding idioms is essential for clear and 
successful communication in spoken and written language. Ignoring idioms may 
cause miscommunication.
Translation obstacles: Idioms provide distinct obstacles for translation students. 
Direct word-for-word translations of idioms sometimes produce incomprehensi­
ble or odd outcomes. To accurately translate idioms, translators must comprehend 
their meaning and cultural background in both languages.
Natural language use: Idioms are part of daily language, making them real and 
natural. English-language learners must master idiomatic terms to seem more nat­
ural in speech and writing.
Literature, poetry, and creative writing employ idioms. Students can better 
understand and evaluate literature when they know idioms.
Understanding and using idiomatic language successfully is a critical compo­
nent of being a professional, skilled and culturally sensitive translator.
The following are among the strategies for translating idioms suggested by 
Baker (1992).
Using an Idiom of Similar Meaning and Form 
Some idioms can be translated directly:
•	 A drowning man will hang on a straw بقشة يتعلق الغريق
•	 All that glitters is not goldّذهبا يتألق ما كل ما
•	 Head over heel / upside down has an equivalent in Arabic عقب على رأسا
•	 The end justifies the means الوسيلة تبرر الغاية 
Word-for-word translation produces a correct, acceptable, meaningful and idio­
matic expression in the target language. As can be observed, the translated version 
of the proverbs above has retained the same or similar syntax, meaning and style 
as the original.

91
5  Translating Arabic Text into English: Concepts and Practices
Using an Idiom of Similar Meaning but Dissimilar Form
The expression good luck in English can be rendered into Arabic as لك ييسر هللا; the 
meaning is similar but the form is different.
•	 Don’t put your head in the lion’s mouth التهلكة الى بأيديكم تلقوا وال
•	 Don’t carry coals to Newcastle السقّائين حارة في الماء تبع ال
•	 Make hay while the sun shines ساخن هو و الحديد اضرب
•	 Let sleeping dogs lie نائمة الفتنة دع
•	 Scare the hell/life/shit out of him الرعب؛ من يقشعر بدنه جعل عروقه؛ في يتجمد الدم جعل 
يقف الرأس شعر جعل 
As illustrated, the proverbs and idioms are translated through the equivalence tech­
nique by using a completely different expression to transmit the same message. 
Other fixed or more or less fixed collocations, clichés, proverbs and slogans can be 
translated by applying the same technique.
The line “Shall I compare thee to a summer’s day?” is a good example of what 
Lado (1957: 114) describes as “same form, different meaning”, also referred to as 
“false friend”. If translated literally into Arabic as قائض ٌيوم or الصيف في يوم, it would 
evoke negative connotations and unpleasant reactions. In both cultures, there are 
words which stand for positive or for negative values. What is judged as being 
favorable in one culture may be judged as being pejorative in the other culture. 
Bi-cultural sensitivity and bi-linguistic competence are required for effective and 
appropriate translation of such culture-specific expressions. As the example shows, 
the connotation is affected by inadequate literal translation: summer’s day may 
have a positive connotation for one culture but a negative connotation for another 
culture.
Translation by Paraphrase
The content of the ST idiom can be effectively reproduced in TT but without the 
form and the cultural tone of the original. It is adapted and made accessible to tar­
get readers. The English idiom revealed his true colors can be rendered as على ظهر 
حقيقته. The output is smoother, clearer, simpler and more direct, ensuring that the 
recipient of the source idiom will understand the message.
Let us consider the Arabic saying االبل تورد هكذا ما whose literal translation is 
“Camels are not watered like this”. Of similar intent and purpose is the expression
الكتف تؤكل هكذا ما, literally: “this is not the way the shoulder is eaten”. Since these 
are idiomatic, a literary translation is called for, not a literal one, to transmit the 
implied, underlying, metaphorical and non-literal meaning. The literal translation 
corrupts the meaning and intent of the idiom. The source culture in which the 
idiom exists is based on a hot, desert or semi-desert environment which is entirely 
different from the target culture’s cold climatic conditions. This expression is used 

92
A. Alazzawie
in Arabic to point out that someone has handled a problem wrongly and to draw 
attention to the mistake in their strategy of dealing with some issue. It simply 
means “this is not the way it is done”, or “this is not the way to do it”. These 
expressions convey the idea and are compatible with the content and intent of the 
Arabic idiom, but the figurative sense of the camel being led to water is lost. The 
constituent words within the expression have the status of a single lexeme under­
stood as one semantic unit. Their form and their order are fixed within the idiom. 
If the order is changed, for example, placing the word for camel االبل at the begin­
ning of the expression, it results in a grammatical and meaningful sentence. The 
shift in word order, however, renders the sentence non-idiomatic; it ceases to be an 
idiom.
Translation by Omission of Entire Idiom
An idiom may be omitted, just as a single word can be omitted when there is no 
equivalent for the ST idiom and it cannot be paraphrased easily, or for stylistic 
reasons.
Linguist and translation theorist Eugene Nida made substantial contributions 
to translation studies. Addition and subtraction (omission) were introduced in his 
notion of dynamic or functional equivalence in translation. Translators should han­
dle source text components in such a way as to provide a natural and understand­
able translation in the target language. Nida defines addition as adding elements 
to the translation that were not in the original text. This adds information, clarifies 
meaning, or makes the translation more natural in the target language. This proce­
dure is exemplified in the following translation, where the word sipped is added to 
the TT to clarify the meaning:
والباردة الساخنة والمشروبات الخفيفة االكالت وتناول.
and ate light food and had sipped hot and cold drinks.
Another example is the addition of the adjective eminent to modify official. It is 
introduced in the target text to make the underlying meaning explicit.
Omission or subtraction involves deleting source text components that are irrel­
evant to the intended audience. It is typically used to simplify translation and elim­
inate unnecessary elements from the target text.
The purpose of omission is to deliver a succinct and focused translation that 
highlights key components of the original text. It may remove cultural or language 
complexity that the target reader may not need. Here is an example from the trans­
lation of our story:
األحاديث لتبادل المدعوين احد واألخرى الفينة بين احدهما الى يتقدم حيث تصرفاتهما متابعا انظر وبقيت.
Instead, I kept observing them, as they made light conversation with a guest.
As can be seen from the translated text, the following words have been omitted:
واألخرى الفينة بين احدهما الى يتقدم حيث.
Adding the word instead to the TT further illustrates the application of addition 
procedure.

93
5  Translating Arabic Text into English: Concepts and Practices
Exercises
•	 Accurately define the difference between level shifts and category shifts, giving 
an example for each.
•	 Accurately define structure shift, giving two examples.
•	 The translation of a single phrase or word in the ST can convey the occurrence 
of more than one type of shift in the TT. Explain this, providing two examples.
•	 Discuss the types of shifts that have been applied in the following translation, 
with reference to Catford’s translation shifts.
"القديم جهازك من المعلومات نقل مهمة لكن تسليمه ويتم الجهاز في البرامج لبعض الظرورية التنصيبات بعمل سنقوم 
مسؤوليتك من هي"
We will download the necessary programs, and deliver it to you, but transferring information 
from your old device to the new one remains your responsibility.
•	 Some of the grammatical features which may be the source of problems in 
translation are number, tense and aspect, voice, person and gender. Explain this, 
supporting your answers with examples.
•	 Fill in the table below with the following translation procedures proposed by 
Vinay and Darbelnet.
ModulationBorrowingEquivalenceAdaptationTransposition Calque.
OmissionAddition.
ST
TT
Translation procedure
1. I had falafel for lunchالغذاء لوجبة الفالفل تناولت
2. Boutros-Ghali had been the 
Secretary General for the 
United Nations for one term
العام األمين منصب غالي بطرس تولى 
واحدة لفترة المتحدة لألمم
3. Students should follow the 
regulations of the University
الجامعة بقوانين اإللتزام الطالب على يجب
4. Trump was sworn in as 
President of Egypt
كرئيس الدستورية اليمين أدى/يؤدي ترامب 
لمصر
5. My friend knows which side 
of the bread is buttered
الكتف تؤكل اين من يعرف صديقي
6. She is my girlfriendخطيبتي إنها
7. After many consultations, the 
head of the technical support unit 
proposed
الى توصلت األستشارات من العديد وبعد 
بادر حين الفني الدعم قسم رئيس من مبادرة 
القول
8. The car dealers were overjoyed 
for getting rid of it
منها والتخلص البيع فرحة تمألهم
9. This book is written by the 
teacher
الكتاب ذلك المدرس كتب

94
A. Alazzawie
ST
TT
Translation procedure
10. You will receive the computer 
immediately once the amount 
is paid
واستالمه للحسابات مبلغه دفع وبامكانك 
ًفورا
•	 Explain three oblique translation procedures and give an example for each.
•	 Explain three direct translation procedures, giving an example for each 
procedure.
•	 What is the difference between a translation strategy and procedure?
Which are the two general types of translation proposed by Vinay and Darbelnet? Choose (A), 
(B) or (C).
(A)
Direct and indirect translation
(B)
Direct and oblique translation
(C)
Literal and oblique translation
Which of the following is correct? Choose (A), (B) or (C).
(A)
In English, cotton is a borrowing while sushi 
is a calque
(B)
In English, cotton is a calque while sushi is a 
borrowing
(C)
In English, both cotton and sushi are 
borrowings
The following are Baker’s translation procedures. Choose the procedures used for 
translating the idioms provided in the table below. A given procedure may be used 
more than once.
Translation by paraphrase
Translation by omission of entire idiom.
Using an idiom of similar meaning and form.
Borrowing the source language idiom.
Translation by omission of a play on idiom.
Using an idiom of similar meaning but dissimilar form.
ST
TT
Strategy used
1. Don’t bite off more than 
you can chew.
لحافك قدر على رجلك مدUsing an idiom of similar 
meaning but dissimilar form

95
5  Translating Arabic Text into English: Concepts and Practices
ST
TT
Strategy used
2. Don’t build castles in the 
air
ال تبن قصور في الهواءUsing an idiom of similar 
meaning and form
3. Make hay while the sun 
shines
 اضرب الحديد و هو ساخنTranslation by omission of a 
play on idiom
4. Do not defer till tomorrow 
what must be done today
ال تؤجل عمل اليوم ألى الغدUsing an idiom of similar 
meaning and form
5. He revealed his true 
colours
ظهر على حقيقتهTranslation by omission of 
entire idiom
6. This is not the way it is 
done
 ما هكذا تورد االبلTranslation by paraphrase
7. They were supposed to but 
Dave got cold feet and called 
the wedding off
 كان من المفترض أن يتزوجا ولكن
ديف غيّر رأيه وألغى حفل الزفاف
Translation by paraphrase
8. The manager did nothing 
to solve the problem
، لم يفعل المدير شيئا لحل المشكلة
أسمع جعجعة و ال أرى طحنا
Translation by omission of 
entire idiom
References
Baker, M. (1992). In Other Words: A Course book on Translation (2nd Ed.). London and New 
York: Routledge.
—. (2004). The Status of Equivalence in Translation Studies: An Appraisal. In Z. Yang (Ed), 
English-Chinese Comparative Study and Translation. Shanghai: Foreign Languages 
Education Press.
Lado, R. (1957). Linguistics across Cultures. Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press.
Nida, E. (1964). Towards a Science of Translating: With Special Reference to Principles and 
Procedures Involved in Bible Translating. Leiden: E.J. Brill.
Newmark, P. (1988). Approaches to Translation. Singapore: Prentice Hall.
Vinay, J. and Darblenet, J. (1958/2004). A Methodology for Translation. In J.C. Sager & M.J. 
Hamel (Trans.) and L. Venuti (Ed.), The Translation Studies Reader (pp. 128‒137). London 
and New York: Routledge.

97
Chapter 6
Translating Arabic Text into English: Form 
and Meaning
Rafid Ghaeb
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2024
A. Jasim Mohammed (ed.), Literary Translation in Practice, 
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-59333-8_6
Introduction
This chapter is divided into three parts. The first part is a translation by the con­
tributor, an academic who teaches translation studies in Iraq, followed by com­
ments and questions for students. The second part includes two translations set 
alongside each other: the first by the contributor, and the second by the author of 
the Arabic text himself. After reading the contributor’s translation, the author sug­
gests some changes to fit more closely to the original text. In the third part, stu­
dents are asked to write their own translation after reading both translations and 
the source text. By the end of this chapter students will be able to:
–	 Recognize the theme of the story in Arabic and its equivalence in English.
–	 State how the translator and the author of the story think.
–	 Identify difficult forms of words and translate them in a way that fits the NAS 
reader’s understanding.
Students should refer to the NAS readers’ comments and opinions on this text 
given in Chapter 9 before and after writing their own translation.
Translation of the Source Text by Rafid Ghaeb 
TT
ST
Stray Bulletsرصاصات طائشة
The First Bullet……الرصاصة االولى
R. Ghaeb (*) 
Baghdad, Iraq

98
R. Ghaeb
TT
ST
- “It is not possible to obtain a machine-read­
able passport for your newborn daughter. It is 
only possible to obtain a temporary passport 
for one-time entry into the country.” the 
embassy employee answered me
- “ألنها إلبنتك ًآليا مقروء سفر جواز إستخراج يمكن ال 
مؤقت سفر جواز إستخراج فقط وباإلمكان الوالدة حديثة 
السفارة موظف أجابني “.البلد الى واحدة لمرة للدخول
- “But how can I return with her when the 
visas are suspended due to the pandemic… 
It is also not allowed to obtain a residence 
permit for her on the temporary passport?” I 
asked him with astonishment…
- “بسبب متوقفة والتاشيرات بها العودة لي كيف ولكن 
الجواز على لها إقامة بإستخراج ًأيضا يُسمح وال …الجائحة 
ًمستغربا سألته ”المؤقت؟…
- “I don't know! …. It’s the instructions.” The 
employee answered me embarrassedly
- “بحرج الموظف أجابني “.التعليمات إنها .… !أعرف ال
I turned back and decided to go to my coun­
try to meet parents and kins after a long time 
of absence. I also found it an opportunity to 
complete the official papers for the child after 
receiving her temporary passport and the visa 
of my foreign nationality wife…
بعد األهل لرؤية بلدي الى الذهاب وقررت ًراجعا قفلت 
األوراق إلكمال ًأيضا فرصة وجدتها وكذلك طويل انقطاع 
وتأشيرة المؤقت سفرها جواز إستالم بعد للطفلة الرسمية 
آخر لبلد مواطنة هي التي زوجتي…
The Second Bullet…الثانية الرصاصة…
I decided to get back to the country of 
residence to start working after obtaining the 
child's machine-readable passport
إستخراج بعد بالعمل للمباشرة إقامتي بلد إلى العودة قررت 
ًآليا المقروء الطفلة سفر جواز
- “What is your job?” the airline employee 
asked
- “الجوية الخطوط موظفة سألتني ”مهنتك؟ ماهي
- “University Professor.” I answered with the 
hope of booking the ticket!
- “التذكرة بحجز أمل وكلي أجبتها “.جامعي استاذ!
- “Sorry… only citizens and doctors are 
allowed to travel to your country of resi­
dence” the female employee answered me 
after knowing my job
- “لغير إقامتك بلد إلى السفر في يُسمح ال … ًعذرا 
وظيفتي معرفة بعد الموظفة أجابتني ”واألطباء المواطنين
- “But how can I get there?”
- “هناك؟ إلى الوصول لي كيف ولكن”
- “You must stay in another country for not 
less than fourteen days, after which country 
of residence will receive you.” The employee 
explained the law of residence
- “عشر أربعة عن تقل ال لمدة آخر بلد في اإلقامة عليك 
الموظفة لي وضحت “.إقامتك بلد يستقبلك وبعدها ًيوما 
إقامتي بلد قانون
The Third Bullet…الثالثة الرصاصة…
Three days later… a new decision of 
residence was issued allowing me to enter 
directly from my country, but after taking 
two doses of covid-19 vaccine and at least 
fourteen days after the second dose
يجيز إقامتي بلد من جديد قرار صدر… أيام ثالثة مرور بعد 
من جرعتين أخذ بعد ولكن بلدي من مباشرة بالدخول لي 
تاريخ من ًيوما عشر أربعة األقل على مرور وبعد اللقاح 
الثانية الجرعة
- “Your daughter cannot board the plane 
because she does not have a visa to enter your 
country of residence,” the airlines employee 
explained
- “تأشيرة تحمل ال ألنها الطائرة صعود إلبنتك يمكن ال 
الخطوط موظفة أجابتني ”إقامتك بلد الى الدخول

99
6  Translating Arabic Text into English: Form and Meaning
TT
ST
- “But her mother and I have residence, so is 
it logical for us to leave without her?”
- “من والذهاب تركها لنا يجوز فهل إقامة لدينا وأمها ولكني 
دونها؟”
- “I don't know… it's the instructions.” The 
employee answered me embarrassedly
- “بحرج الموظفة أجابتني “.التعليمات إنها … أعرف ال
The Fourth Bullet…الرابعة الرصاصة…
Where do I go, there is no embassy for my 
country of residence in my original country, 
and I asked a colleague to inquire about the 
matter in my country of residence, hoping 
that the visas have been released…
من وطلبت بلدي في إقامتي لبلد سفارة توجد فال أذهب أين 
ان عسى إقامتي بلد في األمر عن يستفسر أن الزمالء أحد 
اطلقت قد التأشيرات تكون…
- “Visas are still suspended due to the ongo­
ing pandemic.” My colleague answered me 
after inquiring about the matter
- “إستمرار بسبب اآلن الى متوقفة تزال ال التأشيرات 
األمر عن إستفسر أن بعد زميلي أجابني “.الجائحة
I was confused about what to do… Then I 
decided to go to my wife's country to give her 
the opportunity to see her family and relatives 
and wait for the new instructions…
قررت وبعدها … أفعل ماذا أمري من حيرة في بقيت 
واالقرباء األهل رؤية فرصة لمنحها زوجتي بلد الى الذهاب 
الجديدة التعليمات وإنتظار…
Fifth Bullet…الخامسة الرصاصة…
- “You have to obtain the approval of the 
authorities in order to take your daughter.” 
The airline employee answered me when I 
went to ask how I could take my one year 
and seven month old daughter back to her 
mother's country
- “إصطحاب أجل من السلطات موافقة استخراج عليك 
عن للسؤال ذهبت عندما الخطوط موظفة أجابتني “.إبنتك 
سنة العمر من البالغة إبنتي بها اصطحب التي الطريقة 
أُمها بلد إلى شهور وسبعة
- “But is it possible to obtain a visa at the 
airport, as if she is going to her mother’s 
country to see her grandfather and grand­
mother?” I asked the airline employee
- “باعتبارها المطار في التأشيرة أخذ باألمكان هل ولكن 
الخطوط موظفة سألت ”وجدتها؟ جدها لرؤية أمها لبلد ذاهبة
- “Let me inquire about this matter and I will 
get back to you with the news… Wait for me 
a few moments,” the airline employee said, 
after she was convinced of what I said…
- “لك وسأعود الموضوع هذا بخصوص أستفسر دعني 
بعد الخطوط موظفة قالت ”لحظات إنتظرني …بالخبر 
قلت بما إقتناعها…
- “Sorry, it’s not possible… it’s the instruc­
tions.” The employee answered me with 
embarrassment after she came back!!!
- “الموظفة أجابتني “.التعليمات إنها …يمكن ال ًعذرا 
السؤال من عادت أن بعد بحرج!!!
I submitted all the papers proving that my 
daughter and her mother belong to the coun­
try they are going to
إلى تنتمي وأمها إبنتي بأنها تثبت التي األوراق كل قدمت 
إليه المتوجهين البلد
The three of us remained in a triangle in 
which stray bullets continued, hoping to see 
the moment when a cease-fire decision would 
be issued!!!
الطائشة الرصاصات فيه تتوالى مثلث في الثالثة نحن بقينا 
إطالق وقف قرار فيها يصدر التي اللحظة تأتي أن عسى 
النار!!!

100
R. Ghaeb
Commentary
Consider the following notes on some Arabic terms or expressions and try to find 
alternatives.
1. Is there any alternative translation of the story’s title?
Yes ‒ we can translate it as “Misguided Bullets”, “False Targets”, “Futile 
Attempts”, and so on. It is a metaphorical expression which can be translated into 
metaphor in the TL to keep the force of the original, and here it refers to attempts 
which were contrary to expectations.
TT
ST
“Misguided Bullets”, “False Targets”, “Futile Attempts”طائشة رصاصات
2. What are the possible alternative translations of اليمكن?
Of course the Arabic expression is one of the lexicalized modals in Arabic which 
usually corresponds to the English closed system of modality (i.e., through modal 
auxiliaries or through the more formal lexicalized modals. So one can translate it 
as can’t, may not, it is not possible, etc. Choosing the closed system (i.e., gram­
maticalized) is more natural in English. Consider the words in bold in the table 
below.
TT
ST
- “It is not possible to obtain a machine-read­
able passport for your newborn daughter. It is 
only possible to obtain a temporary passport 
for one-time entry into the country.” the 
embassy employee answered me
- “ألنها إلبنتك ًآليا مقروء سفر جواز إستخراج يمكن ال 
مؤقت سفر جواز إستخراج فقط وباإلمكان الوالدة حديثة 
السفارة موظف أجابني “.البلد الى واحدة لمرة للدخول
……………………………………………….
……….
- “Your daughter cannot board the plane 
because she does not have a visa to enter your 
country of residence,” the airlines employee 
explained
- “تأشيرة تحمل ال ألنها الطائرة صعود إلبنتك يمكن ال 
الخطوط موظفة أجابتني ”إقامتك بلد الى الدخول
………………………………………………
…………
- “Sorry, it’s not possible… it’s the instruc­
tions.“ The employee answered me with 
embarrassment after she came back!!!
……………………………………………….
- “الموظفة أجابتني “.التعليمات إنها …يمكن ال ًعذرا 
السؤال من عادت أن بعد بحرج!!!
3. The expression االهل لرؤية is translated here as meet parents and kins. Here a part 
represents the whole (synecdoche), as in the Arab world it stands as a symbol for 
the whole family. It could also be translated as see parents, brothers, sisters, and 
relatives, which expresses the intended meaning in Arabic, where familial bonds 
and solidarity are strong and extend beyond the closed circle of parents.

101
6  Translating Arabic Text into English: Form and Meaning
4. The expression طويل انقطاع بعد which literally means “after a long break” is trans­
lated as after a long absence which gives the intended meaning, as break indicates 
no communication, which is not the actual situation since technological communi­
cation is available and انقطاع indicates physical absence.
5. The expression العودة قررت is translated here as get back, preferable to “return” 
which is mostly associated with the home country.
6. The Arabic اليا المقروء السفر جواز is readily translated as machine-readable pass­
port as the Arabic phrase itself seems to be translated from English (i.e., a phrase 
of a global identity with no Arabic flavor).
7. The Arabic expression مهنتك is translated as job because it is the normal way of 
conversational exchange in such a situation, and the direct equivalent word “pro­
fession” seems awkward in this situation. However, it could also be translated as 
“occupation” to reflect current terminology in the business sector.
8. The Arabic امل وكلي — an exaggerated form of expressing hope and a widely 
used expression reflecting sentiment in dealing with such issues ‒ is neutralized in 
English as with the hope, reflecting the fact that administrative systems in the 
English-speaking world are controlled by law and rights are secured accordingly. 
People are thus accustomed to avoiding such an overly sentimental expression.
9. The Arabic موظفة is translated as female employee. In Arabic the word is 
inflected for gender morphologically. In English, however, morphology is of no 
help here, and the word is lexically inflected for gender.
10. The Arabic الوصول لي كيف is a highly formal replacement for the more casual 
اصل كيف Here it.is translated into a more natural form as How can I…. This is 
mainly due to the big difference between Standard Arabic and everyday Arabic. 
The disparity in English is less pronounced.
11. The Arabic يوما عشر اربعة عن التقل لفترة is quite formal, where فترة is redundant in 
conversational English. Therefore, the equivalent of فترة is omitted altogether to 
make the translation more natural.
12. The Arabic اقامتك بلدis translated without the possessive ك for brevity’s sake.
13. The Arabic اقامتي بلد قانون is translated generally as law of residence, as the con­
text determines that it indicates the country where the story’s narrator resides.
14. The Arabic اللقاح من جرعتين is rather general, with the context determining the 
kind of vaccine. However, in English the specific vaccine is highlighted and covid-
19 is added since there has been a break since the first mention of the pandemic 
and the current situation.
15. The Arabic وامها انا is rendered as the cultural her mother and I as a sign of 
courtesy where the wife is introduced first.
16. The Arabic لنا يجوز هل is translated as logical.يجوز is not intended to refer to 
possibility and/or permission.
17. The Arabic دونها من والذهاب تركها carries repetition, which is quite common in 
Arabic, a more assertive language than English where repetition is regarded as 
tautology.
18. The Arabic الخطوط موظفة اجابتني is translated as explained because there is no 
conversational exchange with the customer.

102
R. Ghaeb
19. The Arabic بلدي في اقامتي لبلد سفارة is translated as my original country to high­
light the meaning and avoid any ambiguity.
20. The Arabic السؤال من عادت ان بعد is translated as after she came back because the 
context indicates that the answer came after she returned from making inquiries.
Questions
1.	 Can you try giving an alternative to point (1) above?
2.	 Can you find any difficult word (s) which can be translated in different ways?
3.	 Do you have any other idea in mind regarding point (2) above?
4.	 Do you agree with points 3‒20?
General Evaluation
In any literary work, two dimensions are generally taken into consideration: form 
and theme. The form of the story (language and style) is written in a globally com­
municable way because:
1.	 It is written in Standard Arabic and includes the frequently used style of writ­
ing. The writer seems to be well acquainted with the global style of story writ­
ing which is unconsciously reflected in his style.
2.	 What makes a literary work difficult for translation is the intricate, perfect use 
of language which makes the writer’s style unique and does not easily lend 
itself to translation.
3.	 The story contains very few rhetorical devices, which are of paramount diffi­
culty in translation.
4.	 However, the plot of the story is strange as it depicts events that only happen 
in third-world countries where instructions are interpreted inflexibly when it 
comes to finding solutions to individual cases.
Translation by the Author, Azeez Jasim Mohammed
Have a look at the different suggested translations by the translator and the author 
of the story himself. This can help students to think and write at the same time.
Suggested translation by a 
translator
Suggested amendments to 
translation by author of the 
story
Source Text
Stray Bullets
Unexpected Strikesطائشة رصاصات

103
6  Translating Arabic Text into English: Form and Meaning
Suggested translation by a 
translator
Suggested amendments to 
translation by author of the 
story
Source Text
The First Bullet…
The First Strike…االولى الرصاصة…
- “It is not possible to obtain 
a machine-readable passport 
for your newborn daughter. 
It is only possible to obtain a 
temporary passport for one-
time entry into the country.” 
the embassy employee 
answered me
- “It is not possible to get a 
machine-readable passport 
for your newborn daughter. 
It is only possible to get a 
temporary passport for a 
single entry.” the embassy 
employee answered me
- “سفر جواز إستخراج يمكن ال 
الوالدة حديثة ألنها إلبنتك ًآليا مقروء 
سفر جواز إستخراج فقط وباإلمكان 
“.البلد الى واحدة لمرة للدخول مؤقت 
السفارة موظف أجابني
- “But how can I return 
with her when the visas 
are suspended due to the 
pandemic… It is also not 
allowed to obtain a residence 
permit for her on the tempo­
rary passport?” I asked him 
with astonishment…
- “But how can I take 
her back since visas 
are suspended due to the 
pandemic… It is also not 
allowed to get a residence 
permit for her on the tem­
porary passport?” I asked 
astonishingly…
- “بها العودة لي كيف ولكن 
…الجائحة بسبب متوقفة والتاشيرات 
لها إقامة بإستخراج ًأيضا يُسمح وال 
سألته ”المؤقت؟ الجواز على 
ًمستغربا…
- “I don’t know! …. It’s the 
instructions.“ The employee 
answered me embarrassedly
- “I don’t know!… They 
are rules.“ The employee 
answered me embarrassedly
- ““.التعليمات إنها … !أعرف ال 
بحرج الموظف أجابني
I turned back and decided 
to go to my country to meet 
parents and kins after a long 
time of absence. I also found 
it an opportunity to com­
plete the official papers for 
the child after receiving her 
temporary passport and the 
visa of my foreign nationality 
wife…
I turned back and decided 
to go to my country to meet 
parents and kins after a long 
time of absence. I also found 
it an opportunity to complete 
the official documents for 
the child after receiving her 
temporary passport and the 
visa of my foreign national­
ity wife…
بلدي الى الذهاب وقررت ًراجعا قفلت 
وكذلك طويل انقطاع بعد األهل لرؤية 
األوراق إلكمال ًأيضا فرصة وجدتها 
جواز إستالم بعد للطفلة الرسمية 
التي زوجتي وتأشيرة المؤقت سفرها 
آخر لبلد مواطنة هي…
The Second Bullet…
The Second Strike…الثانية الرصاصة…
I decided to get back to the 
country of residence to start 
working after obtaining the 
child's machine-readable 
passport
I decided to go back to the 
country of residence to start 
working after obtaining the 
child's machine-readable 
passport
للمباشرة إقامتي بلد إلى العودة قررت 
الطفلة سفر جواز إستخراج بعد بالعمل 
ًآليا المقروء
- “What is your job?” the 
airline employee asked
- “What is your job?” the 
airline employee asked
- “موظفة سألتني ”مهنتك؟ ماهي 
الجوية الخطوط
- “University Professor.” I 
answered with the hope of 
booking the ticket!
- “A Professor.” I answered 
with hope of booking a 
ticket!
- “أمل وكلي أجبتها “.جامعي استاذ 
التذكرة بحجز!

104
R. Ghaeb
Suggested translation by a 
translator
Suggested amendments to 
translation by author of the 
story
Source Text
- “Sorry… only citizens and 
doctors are allowed to travel 
to your country of resi­
dence” the female employee 
answered me after knowing 
my job
- “Sorry… only citizens and 
physicians are allowed to 
travel to your country of resi­
dence.” the female employee 
answered after having 
known my occupation
- “إلى السفر في يُسمح ال … ًعذرا 
”واألطباء المواطنين لغير إقامتك بلد 
وظيفتي معرفة بعد الموظفة أجابتني
- “But how can I get there?”
- “But how can I get there?”
- “إلى الوصول لي كيف ولكن 
هناك؟”
- “You must stay in another 
country for not less than 
fourteen days, after which 
country of residence will 
receive you.” The employee 
explained the law of 
residence
- “You must stay in another 
country for not less than 
fourteen days, after which 
the country of your 
residence will give you 
permission to enter. ”The 
employee explained the 
rule of allowing expatri­
ates enter the country of 
residence
- “ال لمدة آخر بلد في اإلقامة عليك 
وبعدها ًيوما عشر أربعة عن تقل 
لي وضحت “.إقامتك بلد يستقبلك 
إقامتي بلد قانون الموظفة
The Third Bullet…
The Third Strike…الثالثة الرصاصة…
Three days later… a new 
decision of residence was 
issued allowing me to enter 
directly from my country, 
but after taking two doses 
of covid-19 vaccine and at 
least fourteen days after the 
second dose
Three days later… a new 
decision of residence was 
issued allowing me to enter 
directly from my country, 
but after taking two doses of 
covid-19 vaccine and spend­
ing a span of fourteen days 
in between the two doses
قرار صدر… أيام ثالثة مرور بعد 
بالدخول لي يجيز إقامتي بلد من جديد 
أخذ بعد ولكن بلدي من مباشرة 
على مرور وبعد اللقاح من جرعتين 
تاريخ من ًيوما عشر أربعة األقل 
الثانية الجرعة
- “Your daughter cannot 
board the plane because she 
does not have a visa to enter 
your country of residence,” 
the airlines employee 
explained
- “Your daughter cannot be 
on board because she does 
not have a visa to enter your 
country of residence,” the 
airlines employee stated
- “الطائرة صعود إلبنتك يمكن ال 
بلد الى الدخول تأشيرة تحمل ال ألنها 
الخطوط موظفة أجابتني ”إقامتك
- “But her mother and I have 
residence, so is it logical for 
us to leave without her?”
- “But her mother and I have 
residence. It is unbelievable 
to leave without her!”
- “يجوز فهل إقامة لدينا وأمها ولكني 
دونها؟ من والذهاب تركها لنا”
- “I don’t know… it’s the 
instructions.” The employee 
answered me embarrassedly
- “I don’t know… They 
are rules” The employee 
answered embarrassedly
- ““.التعليمات إنها … أعرف ال 
بحرج الموظفة أجابتني
The Fourth Bullet…
The Fourth Strike…الرابعة الرصاصة…

105
6  Translating Arabic Text into English: Form and Meaning
Suggested translation by a 
translator
Suggested amendments to 
translation by author of the 
story
Source Text
Where do I go, there is no 
embassy for my country 
of residence in my origi­
nal country, and I asked a 
colleague to inquire about the 
matter in my country of res­
idence, hoping that the visas 
have been released…
Where I go, there is no 
embassy for my country of 
residence in the country 
of my origin. I asked a 
colleague to enquire about 
the matter in my country of 
residence, hoping that the 
visas have been released…
إقامتي لبلد سفارة توجد فال أذهب أين 
أن الزمالء أحد من وطلبت بلدي في 
عسى إقامتي بلد في األمر عن يستفسر 
اطلقت قد التأشيرات تكون ان…
- “Visas are still suspended 
due to the ongoing pan­
demic.” My colleague 
answered me after inquiring 
about the matter
- “Visas are still suspended 
due to the ongoing pan­
demic.” My colleague 
answered after making 
some investigations
- “اآلن الى متوقفة تزال ال التأشيرات 
أجابني “.الجائحة إستمرار بسبب 
األمر عن إستفسر أن بعد زميلي
I was confused about what 
to do… Then I decided to go 
to my wife’s country to give 
her the opportunity to see her 
family and relatives and wait 
for the new instructions…
I was confused about what 
to do… Then I decided to go 
to my wife’s country to give 
her the opportunity to see her 
family and relatives, and I 
have also the chance to wait 
for the new rules…
… أفعل ماذا أمري من حيرة في بقيت 
زوجتي بلد الى الذهاب قررت وبعدها 
واالقرباء األهل رؤية فرصة لمنحها 
الجديدة التعليمات وإنتظار…
Fifth Bullet…
The Fifth Strike…الخامسة الرصاصة…
- “You have to obtain the 
approval of the authorities in 
order to take your daugh­
ter.” The airline employee 
answered me when I went to 
ask how I could take my one 
year and seven month old 
daughter back to her mother's 
country
- “You need to get approval 
of the concerned authority 
to let your daughter with 
your accompany.” The 
airline employee answered 
when I went to ask how I 
could take my one year and 
seven month old daughter 
back to her mother's country
- “من السلطات موافقة استخراج عليك 
موظفة أجابتني “.إبنتك إصطحاب أجل 
عن للسؤال ذهبت عندما الخطوط 
إبنتي بها اصطحب التي الطريقة 
شهور وسبعة سنة العمر من البالغة 
أُمها بلد إلى
- “But is it possible to obtain 
a visa at the airport, as if 
she is going to her mother’s 
country to see her grandfather 
and grandmother?” I asked 
the airline employee
- “But is it possible to get a 
visa at the airport? She is 
going to her mother’s coun­
try to see her grandfather and 
grandmother!” I asked the 
airline employee
- “في التأشيرة أخذ باألمكان هل ولكن 
لرؤية أمها لبلد ذاهبة باعتبارها المطار 
الخطوط موظفة سألت ”وجدتها؟ جدها
- “Let me inquire about this 
matter and I will get back to 
you with the news… Wait 
for me a few moments,” the 
airline employee said, after 
she was convinced of what I 
said…
- “Let me check and I will 
revert to you. Please wait 
for a while.” The airline 
employee said as she feels 
sorry
- “هذا بخصوص أستفسر دعني 
…بالخبر لك وسأعود الموضوع 
موظفة قالت ”لحظات إنتظرني 
قلت بما إقتناعها بعد الخطوط…

106
R. Ghaeb
Suggested translation by a 
translator
Suggested amendments to 
translation by author of the 
story
Source Text
- “Sorry, it's not possible… 
it's the instructions.” The 
employee answered me with 
embarrassment after she 
came back!!!
- “Sorry, it's not possi­
ble… they are rules.” The 
employee answered with 
embarrassment after she 
came back!!!
- ““.التعليمات إنها …يمكن ال ًعذرا 
عادت أن بعد بحرج الموظفة أجابتني 
السؤال من!!!
I submitted all the papers 
proving that my daughter 
and her mother belong to the 
country they are going to
I submitted all documents 
to prove that the child 
is my daughter and her 
mother belongs to the 
country to which we are 
heading
بأنها تثبت التي األوراق كل قدمت 
المتوجهين البلد إلى تنتمي وأمها إبنتي 
إليه
The three of us remained in a 
triangle in which stray bullets 
continued, hoping to see the 
moment when a cease-fire 
decision would be issued!!!
Three of us stood idle like 
a soldier in a battle who 
did not know from which 
direction the bullets might 
come. A soldier who was 
just waiting for the moment 
to hear about the final 
decision of cease-fire!!!
فيه تتوالى مثلث في الثالثة نحن بقينا 
تأتي أن عسى الطائشة الرصاصات 
وقف قرار فيها يصدر التي اللحظة 
النار إطالق!!!
Exercise
Try another translation of the original text, paying particular attention to the bold 
underlined phrases.
TT
ST
……………………………………………………………طائشة رصاصات
…………………………………………………….
…………………………………………………….
االولى الرصاصة…
…………………………………………………….
……………………………………………………………
- “ًآليا مقروء سفر جواز إستخراج يمكن ال 
فقط وباإلمكان الوالدة حديثة ألنها إلبنتك 
لمرة للدخول مؤقت سفر جواز إستخراج 
السفارة موظف أجابني “.البلد الى واحدة
…………………………………………………….
…………………………………………………….
- “والتاشيرات بها العودة لي كيف ولكن 
ًأيضا يُسمح وال …الجائحة بسبب متوقفة 
”المؤقت؟ الجواز على لها إقامة بإستخراج 
ًمستغربا سألته…
…………………………………………………….
……………………………………………………………
- “أجابني “.التعليمات إنها .… !أعرف ال 
بحرج الموظف

107
6  Translating Arabic Text into English: Form and Meaning
TT
ST
…………………………………………………….
…………………………………………………….
…………………………………………………….
لرؤية بلدي الى الذهاب وقررت ًراجعا قفلت 
وجدتها وكذلك طويل انقطاع بعد األهل 
الرسمية األوراق إلكمال ًأيضا فرصة 
المؤقت سفرها جواز إستالم بعد للطفلة 
لبلد مواطنة هي التي زوجتي وتأشيرة 
آخر…
……………………………………………………………
…………………………………………………….
الثانية الرصاصة…
…………………………………………………….
…………………………………………………….
للمباشرة إقامتي بلد إلى العودة قررت 
الطفلة سفر جواز إستخراج بعد بالعمل 
ًآليا المقروء
……………………………………………………………
…………………………………………………….
- “الخطوط موظفة سألتني ”مهنتك؟ ماهي 
الجوية
…………………………………………………….
…………………………………………………….
- “بحجز أمل وكلي أجبتها “.جامعي استاذ 
التذكرة!
……………………………………………………………
…………………………………………………….
- “بلد إلى السفر في يُسمح ال … ًعذرا 
أجابتني ”واألطباء المواطنين لغير إقامتك 
وظيفتي معرفة بعد الموظفة
…………………………………………………….
…………………………………………………….
- “هناك؟ إلى الوصول لي كيف ولكن”
……………………………………………………………
…………………………………………………….
- “عن تقل ال لمدة آخر بلد في اإلقامة عليك 
بلد يستقبلك وبعدها ًيوما عشر أربعة 
بلد قانون الموظفة لي وضحت “.إقامتك 
إقامتي
…………………………………………………….
…………………………………………………….
الثالثة الرصاصة…
……………………………………………………………
…………………………………………………….
…………………………………………………….
من جديد قرار صدر… أيام ثالثة مرور بعد 
من مباشرة بالدخول لي يجيز إقامتي بلد 
وبعد اللقاح من جرعتين أخذ بعد ولكن بلدي 
من ًيوما عشر أربعة األقل على مرور 
الثانية الجرعة تاريخ
…………………………………………………….
……………………………………………………………
…………………………………………………….
- “ال ألنها الطائرة صعود إلبنتك يمكن ال 
”إقامتك بلد الى الدخول تأشيرة تحمل 
الخطوط موظفة أجابتني
…………………………………………………….
…………………………………………………….
- “لنا يجوز فهل إقامة لدينا وأمها ولكني 
دونها؟ من والذهاب تركها”
……………………………………………………………
…………………………………………………….
- “أجابتني “.التعليمات إنها … أعرف ال 
بحرج الموظفة
…………………………………………………….
…………………………………………………….
الرابعة الرصاصة…
……………………………………………………………
…………………………………………………….
في إقامتي لبلد سفارة توجد فال أذهب أين 
يستفسر أن الزمالء أحد من وطلبت بلدي 
تكون ان عسى إقامتي بلد في األمر عن 
اطلقت قد التأشيرات…

108
R. Ghaeb
TT
ST
…………………………………………………….
…………………………………………………….
- “اآلن الى متوقفة تزال ال التأشيرات 
بعد زميلي أجابني “.الجائحة إستمرار بسبب 
األمر عن إستفسر أن
……………………………………………………………
…………………………………………………….
… أفعل ماذا أمري من حيرة في بقيت 
زوجتي بلد الى الذهاب قررت وبعدها 
واالقرباء األهل رؤية فرصة لمنحها 
الجديدة التعليمات وإنتظار…
…………………………………………………….
…………………………………………………….
الخامسة الرصاصة…
……………………………………………………………
…………………………………………………….
…………………………………………………….
- “أجل من السلطات موافقة استخراج عليك 
الخطوط موظفة أجابتني “.إبنتك إصطحاب 
التي الطريقة عن للسؤال ذهبت عندما 
سنة العمر من البالغة إبنتي بها اصطحب 
أُمها بلد إلى شهور وسبعة
…………………………………………………….
……………………………………………………………
- “في التأشيرة أخذ باألمكان هل ولكن 
لرؤية أمها لبلد ذاهبة باعتبارها المطار 
الخطوط موظفة سألت ”وجدتها؟ جدها
…………………………………………………….
…………………………………………………….
- “الموضوع هذا بخصوص أستفسر دعني 
”لحظات إنتظرني …بالخبر لك وسأعود 
بما إقتناعها بعد الخطوط موظفة قالت 
قلت…
…………………………………………………….
……………………………………………………………
- ““.التعليمات إنها …يمكن ال ًعذرا 
من عادت أن بعد بحرج الموظفة أجابتني 
السؤال!!!
…………………………………………………….
…………………………………………………….
إبنتي بأنها تثبت التي األوراق كل قدمت 
إليه المتوجهين البلد إلى تنتمي وأمها
…………………………………………………….
……………………………………………………………
…………………………………………………….
فيه تتوالى مثلث في الثالثة نحن بقينا 
اللحظة تأتي أن عسى الطائشة الرصاصات 
النار إطالق وقف قرار فيها يصدر التي!!!

109
Chapter 7
Arabic Translation into English: Between 
“sense for sense” and “word for word”
Azeez Jasim Mohammed
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2024
A. Jasim Mohammed (ed.), Literary Translation in Practice, 
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-59333-8_7
Introduction
The aim of this chapter is to differentiate between human translation and machine 
translation. It focuses on the idea of “word-for-word” and “sense-for-sense” trans­
lation explored in Jeremy Munday’s (2016) book Introducing Translation Studies. 
In Chapter 2, Munday shows how a machine translates, on one hand, and how 
humans think while translating a text, on the other. The extent to which Munday’s 
“word-for-word” or “sense-for-sense” idea recurs is demonstrated in the six trans­
lations in this chapter. How the translator thinks when rendering the source text is 
also explored. Munday discusses Jerome’s concept of literal and free translation: 
“Jerome’s statement is now usually taken to refer to what came to be known as 
‘literal’ (word-for-word) and ‘free’ (sense-for-sense) translation” (Munday, 2016, 
p. 31). But when it comes to the implementation of the two approaches and their 
effect on equivalence, “Jerome rejected the word-for-word approach because, by 
following so closely the form of the ST, it produced an absurd translation, cloak­
ing the sense of the original” (p. 31). Jerome emphasizes the sense-for-sense 
approach because it “allowed the sense or content of the ST to be translated” (p. 
31). Particular attention, therefore, is paid in this chapter to the translators’ use of 
word-for-word or sense-for-sense techniques.
The short story given in this chapter is very short and can be quickly and eas­
ily translated. The source text is translated by six academics from two different 
communities holding an MA in English language and literature, linguistics and/
or translation studies, none of whom have discussed the text with each other. The 
contributor, who is the author of the story, is an academic who teaches English 
language and literature at university level. Following the main idea introduced by 
Munday in Chapter 2 of Introducing Translation Studies (2016), the contributor 
A. J. Mohammed (*) 
Department of English, College of Education, IJSU, Baghdad, Al-Qahira District, Iraq

110
A. J. Mohammed
compares the translations to each other and finally to a machine-translated version, 
providing annotations on each. The contributor then illustrates the main thesis of 
mind and machine translation by dividing the work into columns under the head­
ings of literal (word-for-word) and free (sense-for-sense) translations of the text. 
Analysis of each statement or sentence rendered by the translators is followed by 
the author’s own translation. Students should read the six translations before stud­
ying the author’s final translation and should also review the machine-translated 
version.
The contributor’s final translation demonstrates to students the wide disparity in 
the translations. The contributor—who is also the author of the story and the edi­
tor of this book—aims to show the translators how to think in the same way that 
authors think when writing a story, as well as how the machine “thinks”.
The chapter is in two parts. The first part includes the six translations, which 
are printed in two columns, one for the ST and the other for the TT. Students 
should read and compare all the translations before reviewing the comments. 
Comparison of translation 7, by the author of the story and translation 8, by 
Google Translate, shows students the real differences between word for word and 
sense for sense. The NAS reader’s perspective is further explored in Chapter 9.
The second part of the chapter contains comments on the translations by the 
story’s author. After reviewing the translations, students can give their own final 
translation, making use of the explanatory material in this part of the chapter. 
Finally students will find some questions for their consideration.
The aim of this chapter is to help the student understand the following:
1.	 The difference between a translator’s work and the author of the story’s own 
translation.
2.	 How to amend translations by translators relying on machine or Internet 
translators.
3.	 How to compare their own translation with others’ and with machine versions.

111
7  Arabic Translation into English …
Translation # 1
Renad Said Nabeel.
TT
ST
The Blind stone
“You are the one who did it and you will be 
punished,” the manager angrily told him and 
left hastily. …
With nothing to do, upon hearing the news 
he went back home puzzled about his 
situation…
“Pack your bags, we will return home soon 
…” he told his family
The girl: “What will I do with my doll? I 
haven't enjoyed playing with her yet! “
The boy: “And what will I do with my new 
school bag?”
The mother: “And what will we do with the 
furniture and household items we bought just 
a month ago?”
The next day: The witness: “I suspected him, 
but he was not the one who did it.”
“The manager: “I am really sorry…”
When he returned home, he found nothing 
but a small rug
The boy gave his school bag to his classmate, 
the girl gave her toy to her neighbor, and the 
mother distributed all the household items to 
those in need
Everyone sat on the small rug, enjoying the 
lunch that their neighbor had prepared for the 
farewell party!
العمياء الحَجَرة
“وذهب بغضب المدير أخبره ”عقابك وستنال فعلها من أنت 
ًمسرعا…
في البيت إلى ًراجعا قفل الخبر سماع بعد ،حيلة باليد ما 
أمره من حيرة…
“عائلته بلغ ”… ًقريبا ديارنا إلى سنعود ،حقائبكم احزموا
بعد معها باللهو استمتع لم بدميتي؟ سأفعل ماذا“ :البنت!”
الجديدة؟ المدرسية بحقيبتي سأفعل وماذا“ :األبن”
ابتعناها التي ومستلزماته المنزل بأثاث سنفعل وماذا “ :األم 
شهر؟ قبل”
التالي اليوم في:
فعلها من هو يكن ولم به ًمُشتبها ُكنت“ :الشاهد.“
متأسف“ :المدير…”
صغيرة سجادة سوى يجد لم الدار إلى رجوعه عند
لعبتها البنت وأهدت زميله إلى المدرسية حقيبته الولد أهدى 
المحتاجين إلى البيت أغراض كل األم ووزعت جارتها إلى
الغداء طعام يتناولون الصغيرة السجادة على الجميع جلس 
التوديع حفل أجل من جارتهم اعدته الذي!

112
A. J. Mohammed
Translation # 2
Mohammed Abdulrahman.
TT
ST
The Blind Rock
“You’re the one who’ve done it! And you will 
be punished!” told him the manager angrily 
and left hurriedly
Upon hearing this news, he had no choice but 
to return home in bewilderment
“Pack your bags. We’re going back home 
soon,” informed his family
“What am I going to do with my doll? I’ve 
yet to enjoy playing with it!” exclaimed his 
little girl
“And what am I going to do with my new 
school bag?!” added his son
The mother: “What are we going to do with 
all the furniture and home appliances we 
bought a month ago?”
The next day:
The witness: “I was a suspect and he did not 
commit it.”
“I apologize…” replied the manager
Upon returning home he found nothing but a 
small rug
The boy gifted his school bag to his class­
mate, the girl gifted her doll to her neighbor, 
and the mother donated all the newly-pur­
chased household appliances to the needy
They all sat on the small rug having the lunch 
prepared by their neighbor for their farewell 
party
العمياء الحَجَرة
“وذهب بغضب المدير أخبره ”عقابك وستنال فعلها من أنت 
ًمسرعا…
في البيت إلى ًراجعا قفل الخبر سماع بعد ،حيلة باليد ما 
أمره من حيرة…
“عائلته بلغ ”… ًقريبا ديارنا إلى سنعود ،حقائبكم احزموا
بعد معها باللهو استمتع لم بدميتي؟ سأفعل ماذا“ :البنت!”
الجديدة؟ المدرسية بحقيبتي سأفعل وماذا“ :األبن”
ابتعناها التي ومستلزماته المنزل بأثاث سنفعل وماذا “ :األم 
شهر؟ قبل”
التالي اليوم في:
فعلها من هو يكن ولم به ًمُشتبها ُكنت“ :الشاهد.“
متأسف“ :المدير…”
صغيرة سجادة سوى يجد لم الدار إلى رجوعه عند
لعبتها البنت وأهدت زميله إلى المدرسية حقيبته الولد أهدى 
المحتاجين إلى البيت أغراض كل األم ووزعت جارتها إلى
الغداء طعام يتناولون الصغيرة السجادة على الجميع جلس 
التوديع حفل أجل من جارتهم اعدته الذي!

113
7  Arabic Translation into English …
Translation #3
Dina Ali.
TT
ST
The Blind Rock
“You are the one who did it and you will be 
punished for it”, the manager told him angrily 
then ran off
Nothing can be done! After hearing the new, 
he went back home feeling perplexed
“Pack up your bags. We're going home soon”, 
he informed his family
The daughter said, “What will I do about my 
doll? I haven't had fun playing with it, yet!”
The son said, “And what about my new 
school bag?”
The mother said, “And what will we do about 
the house furniture and supplies that we 
bought a month ago?”
The next day:
The witness said, “I was suspicious of him 
and it was not him who did it”
The manager said, “Sorry…”
When he returned home, he found nothing 
but a small rug
The son had gifted his school bag to his 
classmate, the daughter had gifted her doll to 
her neighbour, and the mother had distributed 
all house stuff to the needy
Everybody sat on the small rug to eat the 
lunch meal that their neighbour prepared for 
their farewell party!
العمياء الحَجَرة
“وذهب بغضب المدير أخبره ”عقابك وستنال فعلها من أنت 
ًمسرعا…
في البيت إلى ًراجعا قفل الخبر سماع بعد ،حيلة باليد ما 
أمره من حيرة…
“عائلته بلغ ”… ًقريبا ديارنا إلى سنعود ،حقائبكم احزموا
بعد معها باللهو استمتع لم بدميتي؟ سأفعل ماذا“ :البنت!”
الجديدة؟ المدرسية بحقيبتي سأفعل وماذا“ :األبن”
ابتعناها التي ومستلزماته المنزل بأثاث سنفعل وماذا “ :األم 
شهر؟ قبل”
التالي اليوم في:
فعلها من هو يكن ولم به ًمُشتبها ُكنت“ :الشاهد.“
متأسف“ :المدير…”
صغيرة سجادة سوى يجد لم الدار إلى رجوعه عند
لعبتها البنت وأهدت زميله إلى المدرسية حقيبته الولد أهدى 
المحتاجين إلى البيت أغراض كل األم ووزعت جارتها إلى
الغداء طعام يتناولون الصغيرة السجادة على الجميع جلس 
التوديع حفل أجل من جارتهم اعدته الذي!

114
A. J. Mohammed
Translation # 4
Hayder Ban Reekab.
TT
ST
The Blind Gravel
“It was you who has done it, and for that, 
you shall be punished.” Boomed the Manger 
angrily, then left in haste
Nothing to be done, he thought in bewilder­
ment as he reverted homeward after receiving 
the judgment
“Pack your bags… we are leaving back 
home… soon…” he declared to his family
“What about my doll? We didn’t play… 
many” whimpered his Daughter
“and my new school bag? What am I gonna 
do with ‘t?” exclaimed his Son
“and the furniture… and… and all these 
things? It’s not even been a month since we 
bought them.” Grumbled his Wife
On The Next Day
“I had mistaken him for someone else. He 
didn’t do it.” Stated the Witness
“I… I am sorry….” Blurted the Manager
At the time he arrived home, he found noth­
ing but a small rug
The Son has gifted his school bag to his 
classmate, and the Daughter did the little doll 
the same to the neighbour. For the Wife, she 
has given away all the furniture for charity
On the small rug, they sat gnawing on the 
lunch that was made by the neighbour as a 
gesture of farewell
العمياء الحَجَرة
“وذهب بغضب المدير أخبره ”عقابك وستنال فعلها من أنت 
ًمسرعا…
في البيت إلى ًراجعا قفل الخبر سماع بعد ،حيلة باليد ما 
أمره من حيرة…
“عائلته بلغ ”… ًقريبا ديارنا إلى سنعود ،حقائبكم احزموا
بعد معها باللهو استمتع لم بدميتي؟ سأفعل ماذا“ :البنت!”
الجديدة؟ المدرسية بحقيبتي سأفعل وماذا“ :األبن”
ابتعناها التي ومستلزماته المنزل بأثاث سنفعل وماذا “ :األم 
شهر؟ قبل”
التالي اليوم في:
فعلها من هو يكن ولم به ًمُشتبها ُكنت“ :الشاهد.“
متأسف“ :المدير…”
صغيرة سجادة سوى يجد لم الدار إلى رجوعه عند
لعبتها البنت وأهدت زميله إلى المدرسية حقيبته الولد أهدى 
المحتاجين إلى البيت أغراض كل األم ووزعت جارتها إلى
الغداء طعام يتناولون الصغيرة السجادة على الجميع جلس 
التوديع حفل أجل من جارتهم اعدته الذي!

115
7  Arabic Translation into English …
Translation # 5 
Asma Yahya Jaffal.
TT
ST
The Blind Stone
“You did it and you will be punished soon” 
the manager told him angrily and went fast…
After hearing the news, he went home con­
fused, there is nothing to do …
He informed his family “ pack your bags, we 
will back to our homeland soon”
The daughter said: “what will I do with my 
doll, I didn’t enjoy playing with it yet”
The son added: “what will I do in my new 
school bag?”
The mother: “and what will we do in the 
house furniture and its items that we bought 
month ago”
In the next day:
The witness: “I suspected him but he was 
innocent”
The manager: “sorry…”
When he went back home, he found only a 
small rug
The boy gave his school bag to his friend, 
the girl gave her doll to her friend from her 
neighbours and the mother distributed all the 
house items to those whom are in need
All sit on the small rug having launch that 
their neighbour made for the farewell party
العمياء الحَجَرة
“وذهب بغضب المدير أخبره ”عقابك وستنال فعلها من أنت 
ًمسرعا…
في البيت إلى ًراجعا قفل الخبر سماع بعد ،حيلة باليد ما 
أمره من حيرة…
“عائلته بلغ ”… ًقريبا ديارنا إلى سنعود ،حقائبكم احزموا
بعد معها باللهو استمتع لم بدميتي؟ سأفعل ماذا“ :البنت!”
الجديدة؟ المدرسية بحقيبتي سأفعل وماذا“ :األبن”
ابتعناها التي ومستلزماته المنزل بأثاث سنفعل وماذا “ :األم 
شهر؟ قبل”
التالي اليوم في:
فعلها من هو يكن ولم به ًمُشتبها ُكنت“ :الشاهد.“
متأسف“ :المدير…”
صغيرة سجادة سوى يجد لم الدار إلى رجوعه عند
لعبتها البنت وأهدت زميله إلى المدرسية حقيبته الولد أهدى 
المحتاجين إلى البيت أغراض كل األم ووزعت جارتها إلى
الغداء طعام يتناولون الصغيرة السجادة على الجميع جلس 
التوديع حفل أجل من جارتهم اعدته الذي!

116
A. J. Mohammed
Translation # 6 
Walaa Sultan.
TT
ST
The Blind Rock
“you are the one who did it. You’ll be pun­
ished for it”, the manager told him angrily 
and went in haste…
It can’t be helped then, having heard this 
piece of news, he came back home at a loss…
“Pack your bags. We'll be home soon…” he 
told his family
His daughter: “ What am I gonna do with my 
toy, I haven't enjoyed it yet!”
His son: “ What am I gonna do with my new 
school bag?”
The mother: “What are we gonna do with the 
home furniture and equipment we bought a 
month ago”
The following day:
The witness: “I was suspicious of him though 
he hadn't done it.”
The manager: “ Sorry…”
On coming back home, he just found a small 
rug
The boy gave his school bag to his colleague 
and the girl gave her toy to her neighbor and 
the mother distributed all the items of the 
house to the needy
Everyone sat on the little carpet eating lunch 
prepared by their neighbor for the goodbye 
party!
العمياء الحَجَرة
“وذهب بغضب المدير أخبره ”عقابك وستنال فعلها من أنت 
ًمسرعا…
في البيت إلى ًراجعا قفل الخبر سماع بعد ،حيلة باليد ما 
أمره من حيرة…
“عائلته بلغ ”… ًقريبا ديارنا إلى سنعود ،حقائبكم احزموا
بعد معها باللهو استمتع لم بدميتي؟ سأفعل ماذا“ :البنت!”
الجديدة؟ المدرسية بحقيبتي سأفعل وماذا“ :األبن”
ابتعناها التي ومستلزماته المنزل بأثاث سنفعل وماذا “ :األم 
شهر؟ قبل”
التالي اليوم في:
فعلها من هو يكن ولم به ًمُشتبها ُكنت“ :الشاهد.“
متأسف“ :المدير…”
صغيرة سجادة سوى يجد لم الدار إلى رجوعه عند
لعبتها البنت وأهدت زميله إلى المدرسية حقيبته الولد أهدى 
المحتاجين إلى البيت أغراض كل األم ووزعت جارتها إلى
الغداء طعام يتناولون الصغيرة السجادة على الجميع جلس 
التوديع حفل أجل من جارتهم اعدته الذي!

117
7  Arabic Translation into English …
Translation # 7
Azeez Jasim Mohammed.
TT
ST
Shattered Stones
“You did something wrong and you will be 
punished for that.” The manager said and left 
immediately
There was no other choice, having heard his 
manager’s words let him decide to go back 
home thinking of the next step
“Be ready for packing. We are going back 
home soon.” He asked his family. The girl: 
“But what about my doll, I have not yet 
enjoyed playing with it? The son: “and what 
about my new school bag?”
The mother: what about the home furniture 
and the newly purchased home stuff?
The following day:
The witness: “ I was mistaken. It was not 
him”
The manager: “ Sorry…”
But on having come back home, he just found 
a small rug
The boy had given his school bag to his 
colleague, the girl had given her doll to her 
neighbour and the mother had distributed all 
the items of the house
Everyone sat on the small rug eating lunch 
which had been prepared by their neighbour 
for the farewell party
العمياء الحَجَرة
“وذهب بغضب المدير أخبره ”عقابك وستنال فعلها من أنت 
ًمسرعا…
في البيت إلى ًراجعا قفل الخبر سماع بعد ،حيلة باليد ما 
أمره من حيرة…
“عائلته بلغ ”… ًقريبا ديارنا إلى سنعود ،حقائبكم احزموا
بعد معها باللهو استمتع لم بدميتي؟ سأفعل ماذا“ :البنت!”
الجديدة؟ المدرسية بحقيبتي سأفعل وماذا“ :األبن”
ابتعناها التي ومستلزماته المنزل بأثاث سنفعل وماذا “ :األم 
شهر؟ قبل”
التالي اليوم في:
فعلها من هو يكن ولم به ًمُشتبها ُكنت“ :الشاهد.“
متأسف“ :المدير…”
صغيرة سجادة سوى يجد لم الدار إلى رجوعه عند
لعبتها البنت وأهدت زميله إلى المدرسية حقيبته الولد أهدى 
المحتاجين إلى البيت أغراض كل األم ووزعت جارتها إلى
الغداء طعام يتناولون الصغيرة السجادة على الجميع جلس 
التوديع حفل أجل من جارتهم اعدته الذي!

118
A. J. Mohammed
Translation # 8
 
TT
ST
The Blind Room
“You did it and you will be punished,” the 
manager angrily told him and hurried…
What a trick, after hearing the news, he 
locked up and returned home in confusion…
“Pack your bags, we'll be home soon…” 
Inform his family
Girl: “What am I going to do with my doll? I 
haven’t enjoyed having fun with her yet!”
Son: “And what am I going to do with my 
new school bag?”
Mother: “And what are we going to do with 
the furniture and accessories we bought a 
month ago?”
The next day:
Witness: “I was a suspect and he wasn't the 
one who did it.”
Director: “Sorry…”
When he returned to the house, he found only 
a small carpet
The boy gave his school bag to his colleague, 
the girl gave her toy to her neighbor, and the 
mother distributed all the household items to 
the needy
Everyone sat on the small carpet eating the 
lunch prepared by their neighbor for the 
farewell party!
الحَجَرة العمياء
أخبره المدير بغضب وذهب“ ” أنت من فعلها وستنال عقابك
…مسرعاً
 ما باليد حيلة، بعد سماع الخبر قفل راجعاً إلى البيت في
…حيرة من أمره
بلغ عائلته“ ”… ًاحزموا حقائبكم، سنعود إلى ديارنا قريبا
ماذا سأفعل بدميتي؟ لم استمتع باللهو معها بعد“ :”!البنت
وماذا سأفعل بحقيبتي المدرسية الجديدة؟“ :”األبن
وماذا سنفعل بأثاث المنزل ومستلزماته التي ابتعناها “ : األم
”قبل شهر؟
:في اليوم التالي
كنتُ مُشتبهاً به ولم يكن هو من فعلها“ :“.الشاهد
متأسف“ :”…المدير
عند رجوعه إلى الدار لم يجد سوى سجادة صغيرة
 أهدى الولد حقيبته المدرسية إلى زميله وأهدت البنت لعبتها
إلى جارتها ووزعت األم كل أغراض البيت إلى المحتاجين
 جلس الجميع على السجادة الصغيرة يتناولون طعام الغداء
!الذي اعدته جارتهم من أجل حفل التوديع
Review and Commentary
This section provides a broad explanation and questions about the six translations, 
with reference to specific words and phrases in six extracts. The aim is to analyse 
the translation mechanisms used by the translators. Following the comments on 
each extract, the author of the story suggests his own translation.

119
7  Arabic Translation into English …
Extract # 1 
Translator
Sense for sense (free)
Word for word (literal)
ST
Translator # 1
“You are the one who 
did it and you will be 
punished,” the man­
ager angrily told him 
and left hastily. …
“”عقابك وستنال فعلها من أنت 
وذهب بغضب المدير أخبره 
ًمسرعا…
Translator # 2
“You’re the one 
who’ve done it! And 
you will be punished!” 
told him the man­
ager angrily and left 
hurriedly
Translator # 3
“You are the one who 
did it and you will 
be punished for it”, 
the manager told him 
angrily then ran off
Translator # 4
Boomed the Manger 
angrily, then left in 
haste
“It was you who has 
done it, and for that, 
you shall be punished.”
Translator # 5
“You did it and you 
will be punished soon” 
the manager told him 
angrily and went 
fast…
Translator # 6
“you are the one 
who did it. You’ll be 
punished for it”, the 
manager told him 
angrily and went in 
haste…
Comments
Translators 1, 2, 3 and 6 think in the same way, using the phrase You are the one 
who did it as an equivalence for فعلها من انت. Translator 4 gives It was you who has 
done it, but still expressing the same literal meaning and using the word-for-word 
technique. But it seems that translator 5 thinks exactly the same way as the 
machine translator and the equivalence they give can be categorized as a very lit­
eral way of translating the ST. In respect to the phrase عقابك وستنال, it is clear that 
all translators use the same phrase as the machine reads, and with no semantic 
change from the ST, I think the meaning can be clear to NAS readers.

120
A. J. Mohammed
Translators 4 and 5 try to use a different form to avoid the word-for-word tech­
nique. But again they find themselves going in a literal direction although transla­
tor 4 avoids it in the second part of this extract.
Suggestions by Author of the Story
By translating this section as ‘You did something wrong and you will be pun­
ished for that,’ the manager said and left immediately, the translator may avoid the 
trap of literal translation (word for word). There is a difference between the two 
expressions You are the one who did it and You did something wrong. Compare the 
two expressions and see to what extent you can avoid the literal translation.
In this translation the student should check tense consistency. grammatical 
issues and punctuation marks.
Extract #2
Translator
Sense for sense (free)
Word for word (literal)
ST
Translator # 1
With nothing to do, 
upon hearing the news 
he went back home 
puzzled about his 
situation…
الخبر سماع بعد ،حيلة باليد ما 
حيرة في البيت إلى ًراجعا قفل 
أمره من…
Translator # 2
Upon hearing this 
news, he had no choice 
but to return home in 
bewilderment
Translator # 3
Nothing can be done!
he went back home 
feeling perplexed
After hearing the new,
Translator # 4
Nothing to be done, he 
thought in bewilder­
ment as he reverted 
homeward after receiv­
ing the judgment
Translator # 5
he went home con­
fused, there is nothing 
to do …
After hearing the 
news,
Translator # 6
It can't be helped then, 
having heard this piece 
of news, he came back 
home at a loss…

121
7  Arabic Translation into English …
Comments
The expression in the Translators 2 and 5 could not find the exact substitute in 
English for the ST expression حيلة باليد ما so they avoid rendering it, which also 
avoids pragmatic issues and helps avoid confusion for the NAS reader. Translators 
1, 3 and 4 use the expressions With nothing to do, Nothing can be done! and 
Nothing to be done, respectively, each considering the word “nothing” followed by 
the verb “to do” the best substitute for the negative meaning of the Arabic expres­
sion. But translator 6 uses an expression which feels as though it will match the 
NAS reader’s understanding: It can’t be helped then.
In rendering the expression ًراجعا قفل, however, they all agree on avoiding the 
term “close”, a word-for-word translation that would not be understood by the 
NAS reader at all, choosing instead reverted, went back, came back and returned 
back. The term قفل is not easily translated unless you understand its exact meaning. 
It may be rendered as decided as in the following translation by the author: [he] 
decides to go back home.
The other expression in the ST, أمره من حيرة في, creates some difficulty in con­
veying the exact meaning to the NAS reader unless the translator already under­
stands this term. The trainee translator will undoubtedly either have to use the 
word-for-word technique or omit it altogether to avoid confusion. The best choice 
is neither of these, but rather a sense-for-sense term such as puzzled, bewilder­
ment, perplexed, at a loss or even an expression that gives a link to the meaning 
such as translator 4’s after receiving the judgment. But translator 5 avoids it 
entirely.
Questions
1.	 Give your comments on الخبر سماع بعد.
………………………………………………………………………………………………
………………………………………………………………………………………………
………………………………………………………………………………………………
………………………………………………………………………………………………
………………
2.	 Check the author’s suggestion below.
3.	 Give your own translation.
………………………………………………………………………………………………
………………………………………………………………………………………………
………………………………………………

122
A. J. Mohammed
Suggestions by Author of The Story
If we want to think of the ST expressions as having meanings that can help the 
NAS reader’s understanding, we need to look for expressions that the NAS reader 
can understand. The following expressions in the ST cannot easily be rendered: ما 
ًراجعا قفل ,حيلة باليد and أمره من حيرة في. The simplest way of making it clear to the 
NAS reader is the following: There was no other choice, having heard his manag­
er’s words let him decide to go back home thinking of the next step.
Extract # 3
Translator
Sense for sense (free)
Word for word (literal)
ST
Translator # 1
“Pack your bags, we 
will return home soon 
…” he told his family
The girl: “What will 
I do with my doll? I 
haven't enjoyed play­
ing with her yet! ”
The boy: “And what 
will I do with my new 
school bag?”
The mother: “And 
what will we do with 
the furniture and 
household items we 
bought just a month 
ago?”
“إلى سنعود ،حقائبكم احزموا 
عائلته بلغ ”… ًقريبا ديارنا
بدميتي؟ سأفعل ماذا“ :البنت 
بعد معها باللهو استمتع لم!”
بحقيبتي سأفعل وماذا“ :األبن 
الجديدة؟ المدرسية”
بأثاث سنفعل وماذا “ :األم 
التي ومستلزماته المنزل 
شهر؟ قبل ابتعناها”
Translator # 2
“Pack your bags. 
We’re going back 
home soon,” informed 
his family
“What am I going to 
do with my doll? I’ve 
yet to enjoy playing 
with it!” exclaimed his 
little girl
“And what am I going 
to do with my new 
school bag?!” added 
his son
The mother: “What are 
we going to do with all 
the furniture and home 
appliances we bought 
a month ago?”

123
7  Arabic Translation into English …
Translator
Sense for sense (free)
Word for word (literal)
ST
Translator # 3
“Pack up your bags. 
We're going home 
soon”, he informed his 
family
The daughter said, 
“What will I do about 
my doll? I haven't had 
fun playing with it, 
yet!”
The son said, “And 
what about my new 
school bag?”
The mother said, “And 
what will we do about 
the house furniture 
and supplies that we 
bought a month ago?”
Translator # 4
“What about my doll? 
We didn’t play… 
many” whimpered his 
Daughter
“Pack your bags… 
we are leaving back 
home… soon…” he 
declared to his family
“and my new school 
bag? What am I gonna 
do with ‘t?” exclaimed 
his Son
“and the furniture… 
and… and all these 
things? It’s not even 
been a month since 
we bought them.” 
Grumbled his Wife
Translator # 5
He informed his fam­
ily “pack your bags, 
we will back to our 
homeland soon”
The daughter said: 
“what will I do with 
my doll, I didn’t enjoy 
playing with it yet”
The son added: “what 
will I do in my new 
school bag?”
The mother: “and what 
will we do in the house 
furniture and its items 
that we bought month 
ago”

124
A. J. Mohammed
Translator
Sense for sense (free)
Word for word (literal)
ST
Translator # 6
“Pack your bags. We’ll 
be home soon…'’ he 
told his family
The girl: “What am 
I gonna do with my 
toy, I haven’t enjoyed 
it yet!”
The son: “What am I 
gonna do with my new 
school bag?”
The mother: “What 
are we gonna do with 
the home furniture and 
equipment we bought 
a month ago”
Comments
In this long extract, neither the translators nor the author could find many sub­
stitutes for the terms used in the Arabic language and, except for a few cases in 
translator’s 4 text, they are forced to use the word-for-word technique. Translators 
4 and 6 use the slang term gonna. All translators use pack your bags but translator 
3 uses pack up your bags instead. There are many misuses of prepositions and the 
conjunction and at the beginning of sentences.
Suggestions by Author of The Story
Although not very different from the suggested translations, the author prefers the 
following translation to make the ideas clear for the NAS reader.
“Be ready for packing. We are going back home soon.” He asked his family. His daughter: 
“But what about my doll, I have not yet enjoyed playing with it?” His son: “and what 
about my new school bag?” The mother: “what about the home furniture and the newly 
purchased home stuff?”
Questions
1.	 Check the use of the definite article the by the translators, as in the girl, the 
mother, the son, the boy, etc.
2.	 Analyze the difference between pack your bags and pack up your bags.

125
7  Arabic Translation into English …
3.	 Do you think there are alternatives to the slang language used? Give any suita­
ble substitutes.
………………………………………………………………………………………
………………………………………………………………………………………
………………………………………………………………………………………
………………………………………………………………………………………
………………………………………………………………………………………
……………………………………………………………………………
4.	 Review the author’s comments on the significance of the obligatory word-for-
word technique in this extract, then give your own comments on every item.
………………………………………………………………………………………
……………………………………………………………………………………
……………………………………………………………………………………
……………………………………………………………………………………
……………………………………………………………………………………
……………………………………………………………………………………
……………………………………………………………………………………
……………………………………………………………………………………
………………………………………………………………………………………
………………………………………………………………………………………
………………………………………………………………………………………
………………………………………………………………………………………
………………………………………………………………………………………
………………………………………………………………………………………
………………………………………………………………………………………
………………………………………………………………………………………
………………………………………………………………………………………
……………………………………………………………………………………
……………………………………………………………………………………
……………………………………………………………………………………
……………………………………………………………………………………
……………………………………………………………………………………
……………………………………………………………………………………
………………………………………………………………………

126
A. J. Mohammed
Extract # 4
Translator
Sense for sense (free)
Word for word (literal)
ST
Translator # 1
The next day: The 
witness: “I suspected 
him, but he was not the 
one who did it.”
“The manager: “I am 
really sorry…”
التالي اليوم في:
ولم به ًمُشتبها ُكنت“ :الشاهد 
فعلها من هو يكن.”
متأسف“ :المدير…”
Translator # 2
“I apologize…” replied 
the manager
The next day:
The witness: “I was a 
suspect and he did not 
commit it.”
Translator # 3
The next day:
The witness said, “I 
was suspicious of him 
and it was not him who 
did it”
The manager said, 
“Sorry…”
Translator # 4
“I… I am sorry….” 
Blurted the Manager
On The Next Day
“I had mistaken him 
for someone else. He 
didn’t do it.” Stated the 
Witness
Translator # 5
In the next day:
The witness: “I sus­
pected him but he was 
innocent”
The manager: 
“sorry…”
Translator # 6
The following day:
The witness: “I was 
suspicious of him 
though he hadn't done 
it.”
The manager: 
“Sorry…”

127
7  Arabic Translation into English …
Comments and Questions
	 1.	 The expression التالي اليوم في is rendered as next day by all translators except 
translator 6 who uses the following day, suggesting that Arabic native transla­
tors think in the same way when they try to translate this type of expression.
	 2.	 The witness and The witness said. There is a slight difference in these transla­
tions of the word الشاهد. Both explain what the witness said to the manager, so 
the meaning is quite clear to the reader, whether or not the past tense form 
“said” is added. Check how translator 4 translates this term.
	 3.	 For the expression به ًمُشتبها ُكنت, I suspected him may make sense more than I 
was suspicious of him, I was a suspect and I had mistaken him. The first one 
can be considered sense for sense while the others are word for word.
	 4.	 Comment on the translators’ renderings of متأسف“ :المدير…”
	 5.	 Comment on the use of prepositions in on the next day and in the next day, 
and on their deletion in the next day.
	 6.	 Comment on the use of tenses in I was … I had…, he hadn’t…, etc.
	 7.	 Comment on the use of the pronoun him when rendering the Arabic statement 
به ًمُشتبها.
	 8.	 The word though in translation 6 does not give the correct meaning of what 
happens in the story. It implies that the speaker deliberately accused him, 
knowing that he was not guilty. Find another case like this, if any, in the TTs.
	 9.	 Do you think the term innocent which is used by translator 5 is appropriate to 
convey the meaning using the sense-for-sense technique? Explain why.
	10.	 Check the sense-for-sense translations which the author suggests translators 2, 
4 and 6 use. Do you agree? If not, why?
Suggestions by Author of The Story
Students should review all the comments and questions above then consider the 
following suggested translation by the author himself:
The following day:
The witness: “I was mistaken. It was not him”
The manager: “Sorry…”
Students may compare this with the other translations and refer to the NAS read­
ers’ perspective discussed in Chapter 9.

128
A. J. Mohammed
Extract # 5
Translator
Sense for sense (free)
Word for word (literal)
ST
Translator # 1
When he returned 
home, he found noth­
ing but a small rug
The boy gave his 
school bag to his 
classmate, the girl gave 
her toy to her neighbor, 
and the mother distrib­
uted all the household 
items to those in need
يجد لم الدار إلى رجوعه عند 
صغيرة سجادة سوى
المدرسية حقيبته الولد أهدى 
لعبتها البنت وأهدت زميله إلى 
كل األم ووزعت جارتها إلى 
المحتاجين إلى البيت أغراض
Translator # 2
Upon returning home 
he found nothing but a 
small rug
The boy gifted his 
school bag to his 
classmate, the girl 
gifted her doll to her 
neighbor, and the 
mother donated all 
the newly-purchased 
household appliances 
to the needy
Translator # 3
When he returned 
home, he found noth­
ing but a small rug
The son had gifted 
his school bag to his 
classmate, the daughter 
had gifted her doll to 
her neighbour, and the 
mother had distributed 
all house stuff to the 
needy
Translator # 4
At the time he arrived 
home, he found noth­
ing but a small rug
The Son has gifted his 
school bag to his class­
mate, and the Daughter 
did the little doll the 
same to the neighbour. 
For the Wife, she has 
given away all the 
furniture for charity

129
7  Arabic Translation into English …
Translator
Sense for sense (free)
Word for word (literal)
ST
Translator # 5
When he went back 
home, he found only a 
small rug
The boy gave his 
school bag to his 
friend, the girl gave her 
doll to her friend from 
her neighbours and 
the mother distributed 
all the house items 
to those whom are in 
need
Translator # 6
On coming back home, 
he just found a small 
rug
The boy gave his 
school bag to his 
colleague and the 
girl gave her toy to 
her neighbor and the 
mother distributed all 
the items of the house 
to the needy
Comments and Questions 
1.	 Comment on the statementصغيرة سجادة سوى يجد لم الدار إلى رجوعه عند.
2.	 The term أهدى is rendered using the verb give by translators 1, 5 and 6, whereas 
translators 2, 3 and 4 use gift. Comment on the use of give and gift in this 
context.
3.	 Comment on the use of the words but, just and only as they appear in the six 
translations.
4.	 Are there any similarities among the six translations? Refer to each and give 
alternatives.
5.	 Analyze the syntactic structure of the second statement in each of the six 
translations.
Suggestions by Author of The Story
There is no doubt that the following extract can be rendered word for word as the 
whole meaning of the statement has the same equivalence in English.
But on having come back home, he just found a small rug.

130
A. J. Mohammed
The boy had given his school bag to his colleague, the girl had given her doll to 
her neighbor and the mother had distributed all the items of the house.
Extract # 6
Translator
Sense for sense 
(free)
Word for word 
(literal)
TT
ST
Translator # 1
Everyone sat on 
the small rug, 
enjoying the 
lunch that their 
neighbor had 
prepared for the 
farewell party!
على الجميع جلس 
الصغيرة السجادة 
الغداء طعام يتناولون 
جارتهم اعدته الذي 
التوديع حفل أجل من!
Translator # 2
They all sat on 
the small rug 
having the lunch 
prepared by 
their neighbor 
for their farewell 
party
Translator # 3
Everybody sat 
on the small rug 
to eat the lunch 
meal that their 
neighbour pre­
pared for their 
farewell party!
Translator # 4
On the small 
rug, they sat 
gnawing on 
the lunch that 
was made by 
the neighbour 
as a gesture of 
farewell
Translator # 5
All sit on the 
small rug having 
launch that their 
neighbour made 
for the farewell 
party
Translator # 6
Everyone sat on 
the little carpet 
eating lunch 
prepared by 
their neighbor 
for the goodbye 
party!

131
7  Arabic Translation into English …
Questions:
1.	 Some of the translators use small carpet in this extract instead of rug which 
they all use in the previous one. Comment on the difference between rug and 
carpet as used in the six translations.
2.	 Find an appropriate equivalent for each sentence, statement or word in this 
extract.
3.	 Make a list of words in Arabic which are not collocated.
4.	 Parse the Arabic statement الذي الغداء طعام يتناولون الصغيرة السجادة على الجميع جلس 
التوديع حفل أجل من جارتهم اعدته!
5.	 Check the use of the tenses in the six translations.
6.	 Comment on the translation of التوديع حفل by the six translators.
Title of The Story
Translator
Sense for sense 
(free)
Word for word 
(literal)
TT
ST
Translator # 1
The Blind Stoneالعمياء الحجرة
Translator # 2
The Blind Rock
Translator # 3
The Blind Rock
Translator # 4
The Blind 
Gravel
Translator # 5
The Blind Stone
Translator # 6
The Blind Rock
Questions
1.	 There is a pragmatic issue in translating the title of the story. The machine 
reads the word الحَجَرة as room since the term has multiple meaning in Arabic, 
one of which is “room”. Can you find any similar examples in the story? 
Elaborate.
2.	 Compare stone, rock and gravel. What makes translator 4 use the word gravel 
in his translation of the title?
3.	 Read the comments on the title of the story given by Pattanaik in Chapter 9 
when he says: “I could not however catch any relation between the story and 
either of the two titles proposed. What does the rock/stone signify here?”

132
A. J. Mohammed
Find below the full suggestions by the author of the story.
Comments by author of the story
Source Text
It can be “Shattered Stones”الحَجَرة العمياء
“You did something wrong and you will be 
punished for that.” The manager said and left 
immediately
“أخبره المدير بغضب وذهب ” أنت من فعلها وستنال عقابك
…مسرعاً
There was no other choice, having heard his 
manager’s words let him decide to go back 
home thinking of the next step
 ما باليد حيلة، بعد سماع الخبر قفل راجعاً إلى البيت في
…حيرة من أمره
“Be ready for packing. We are going back 
home soon.” He asked his family. The girl: 
“But what about my doll, I have not yet 
enjoyed playing with it? The son: “and what 
about my new school bag?”
The mother: what about the home furniture 
and the newly purchased home stuff?
“بلغ عائلته ”… ًاحزموا حقائبكم، سنعود إلى ديارنا قريبا
ماذا سأفعل بدميتي؟ لم استمتع باللهو معها بعد“ :”!البنت
وماذا سأفعل بحقيبتي المدرسية الجديدة؟“ :”األبن
وماذا سنفعل بأثاث المنزل ومستلزماته التي ابتعناها “ : األم
”قبل شهر؟
The following day:
The witness: “ I was mistaken. It was not 
him”
The manager: “ Sorry…”
:في اليوم التالي
كنتُ مُشتبهاً به ولم يكن هو من فعلها“ :“.الشاهد
متأسف“ :”…المدير
But on having come back home, he just found 
a small rug
The boy had given his school bag to his 
colleague, the girl had given her doll to her 
neighbour and the mother had distributed all 
the items of the house
عند رجوعه إلى الدار لم يجد سوى سجادة صغيرة
 أهدى الولد حقيبته المدرسية إلى زميله وأهدت البنت لعبتها
إلى جارتها ووزعت األم كل أغراض البيت إلى المحتاجين
Everyone sat on the small rug eating lunch 
which had been prepared by their neighbour 
for the farewell party
 جلس الجميع على السجادة الصغيرة يتناولون طعام الغداء
!الذي اعدته جارتهم من أجل حفل التوديع
References
The following book provides more information about sense-for-sense and word-for-word 
techniques:
Munday, J. (2016). Introducing Translation Studies: Theories and Applications (4th ed.). 
Routledge. https://doi.org/10.4324/9781315691862

133
Chapter 8
Translating Arabic Text into English: 
Reading and Understanding
Eyhab Abdulrazak Bader Eddin
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2024
A. Jasim Mohammed (ed.), Literary Translation in Practice, 
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-59333-8_8
Introductory Remarks
Trying to produce a translation has never been an easy task, let alone if the task 
focuses on literature, a genre that has sparked heated debates across the years. 
Under the umbrella of ‘literature’ falls a voluminous body of drama, poetry and 
prose fiction. It is under ‘prose fiction’ that the genre under discussion here—short 
story—comes.
The Arabic source text, titled ‘ ’مكتوف األيديwas given as a translation exercise to 
five fourth-year students at the Department of Foreign Languages at Nizwa 
University. They were invited to work on the text on campus with a time limit of 
three hours, and only a paper dictionary was allowed. The students were happy to 
participate in the study, but wished their identities to be kept anonymous, a wish any 
researcher would—and indeed should—respect. All students submitted their trans­
lations long before the end of the session. Each student was assigned an identifying 
letter: A, B, C, D and E. The final translation by their instructor is given below.
For reasons of space, I will confine my commentary to the most essential points 
I believe are useful to readers. Pared down, the commentary will focus on the most 
salient features of the students’ attempts.
By the end of this chapter, the students will have learnt how to:
1.	 Read the source text carefully and understand it before proceeding with the 
translation.
2.	 Pay extra attention to the ideas rather than the words and try to avoid literal 
translation.
3.	 Identify the meaning of the homographic terms in Arabic before translation.
4.	 Avoid lack of vocabulary which hinders selecting the proper term in the target 
text.
E. A. B. Eddin (*) 
Department of Foreign Languages, Nizwa University, P. O. Box 33, Nizwa 616, 
Sultanate of Oman

134
E. A. B. Eddin
Final Translation by Eyhab Abdulrazak Bader Eddin 
TT
ST
A time I Stood Idly byاأليدي مكتوف تقف عندما
As usual in the morning, I headed out to 
work, taking the path I go along every day: 
It was a paved, tree-lined street. Yet, it was 
long. While walking, an excerpt from the 
beginning of a film I had watched yester­
day flashed across my mind in which the 
camera lens -in slow motion-zoomed in on a 
scene in which a lion was solitarily chasing 
a doe. It was a scene that unfolded as a doe 
desperately struggled to survive. The lion was 
relentlessly giving chase to the prey, fearing 
none. None could stop it from carrying out 
its mission, which was ignited by the sight 
of the doe whose death was brought by the 
sealed fate
في أمشي العمل نحو ًمتجها الصباح عند كالمعتاد خرجت 
ولكنه جميل معبد شارع في يوم كل اسلكه الذي طريقي 
وردت ٍماش وأنا .الجوانب على من األشجار تزينه طويل 
والذي الماضية الليلة في شاهدته لفيلم مقدمة مخيلتي الى 
مشهد على البطيء وبالتصوير عدستها الكاميرا فيه تُسلط 
من وتتقطع تتفانى فريسة يطارد أسد .غزال يطارد أسد فيه 
ال ،وعنفوان قوة بكل األسد يطارد .بقائها على الحفاظ اجل 
التي مهمته إنجاز من يمنعه ان ألحد يمكن ال .احد يخشى 
حتفه الى القدر به جاء الذي الغزال رؤية حال بدأها
The camera lens focuses on the lion to 
catch passionately the facial features which 
furiously appeared like thunder. The lion 
never wanted to fritter away any further a 
result which would bring in failure that would 
dent its fierce pride and shake its powerful 
image before its lioness. Then, the lens rolled 
to zoom in on the doe which was about to 
desperately cry if it had the time or found 
the tears to shed: Bewilderment unequiv­
ocally shattered it altogether. The doe was 
desperately- yet silently- begging for help 
but all in vain. The long-lens shot captured 
the doe’s heart-stopping last moments before 
it all turned into a sumptuous feast for the 
king of the jungle. It was only that tiny lens 
that witnessed all those horrifying incidents; 
it was that tourist-placed lens mounted by 
chance that documented what happened in a 
lawless place
مدى شغف بكل وتصور األسد نحو عدستها الكاميرا تُسلط 
.الغضب شدة من ينفجر أن يكاد نراه حيث وجهه تعابير حدة 
يُهزم ال لكي بالمتابعة الوقت من المزيد يهدر أن يريد ال 
.لبوته أمام عظمته ويزعزع ويذله كبريائه من الفشل فيحط 
يبكي أن يكاد الذي الغزال نحو عدستها لتسلط الكاميرا تتجه 
شيء كل شتت االرتباك ألن الدموع وال الوقت يجد ال ولكنه 
لنا تُصّور .مغيث ال ولكن المساعدة عينيه في يلتمس .فيه 
يتحول أن قبل الغزال يعيشها التي األخيرة اللحظات العدسة 
عدسة سوى األحداث يشهد ال .الغابة لملك وجبة الى كله 
من سائح بها جاء حيث بالصدفة المكان في كانت صغيرة 
القانون يسوده ال مكان في يجري ما يوثق ان أجل
On the one hand, the lion was absorbed in 
achieving its goal while the doe was busy 
trying to survive. On the other, the tourist was 
absorbed in catching on camera unforgettable 
scenes while the viewer was intensely curious 
to know what the inevitable result would be. 
Would the lion prevent the tourist from vid­
eotaping if the former knew the latter’s lens 
would take away its prey?
الحفاظ في مشغول والغزال هدفه تحقيق في مشغول األسد 
تُنسى ال لقطات تصوير في مشغولة والسائح نفسه على 
السائح األسد سيمنع هل .النتيجة معرفة في مشغول والمشاهد 
فريسته؟ دون ستحول عدسته بأن علم اذا التصوير من

135
8  Translating Arabic Text into English: Reading and Understanding
TT
ST
None ever could interfere. The struggle is 
but for survival. The scene is horrifying and 
tragic to some while it is comic to some 
others. However, we have been watching the 
tourist’s lens-taken scenes through the small 
screen. At a certain moment, the scene must 
come to an end
،البقاء اجل من إال ليس الصراع .التدخل بمقدوره أحد ال 
عند وملهاة ومثير البعض عند ومأساة حزين فالمنظر 
الصغيرة الشاشة خالل من بشغف نتابع لكننا .اآلخر البعض 
سينتهي ما لحظة في .السائح عدسة لنا تنقلها التي األحداث 
السيناريو…
All of a sudden I got disrupted when a 
foreign body fell and distracted me. It heavily 
fell to the ground like a stone from one tree 
which was about ten metres away from me. 
The body was almost apple-sized or (slightly 
smaller). However, it was pallid grayish in 
colour. It convulsively shivered, looked at 
me then came to a standstill. Staring at it 
unblinkingly, I realised it was a motionless 
sparrow, completely unable to move. Having 
looked around, I could neither find anything 
to help the sparrow, not was I able to know 
why it fell off the tree. While I had been 
cudgeling my brains to find a way to save 
it, the sparrow remained sprawled on the 
ground. Despite all the advanced technology 
and the exceptional human ability I have, I 
stood idly by, petrified as what to do
سقوط انتباهي َشتت عندما المشهد ذلك من خرجت وفجأة 
التي االشجار احدى أعلى من مفاجئ بشكل غريب جسم 
ان يكاد صغير الجسم .عني أمتار عشرة حوالي تبعد كانت 
مائل اللون باهت ولكنه )بقليل اصغر أو( تفاحة بحجم يكون 
ثم ّالي ونظر صغيرة رجفة رجف .الرمادي اللون الى 
على يقوى ال عصفورا وجدته منه اقتربت عندما .سكت 
ًشيئا اجد فلم حولي نظرت .مسانده جميع شُلّت وقد الحركة 
بينما .الشجرة من سقوطه سبب ما أعرف ولم به أسعفه 
،مساعدته في تعينني ان ممكن طريقة في افكر لوهلة وقفت 
التكنولوجيا كل من الرغم على .هامدة جثة العصور بقي 
وقفت لكنني الهائلة البشرية والقدرة املكها التي الحديثة 
افعله الذي ما اعرف ال ًوعاجزا األيدي مكتوف
Eventually, I had no choice but to leave the 
sparrow and continue my walk
السير وتابعت ورائي العصفور ُتركت …ٌبُد ّلي ما …!
General Commentary
Newmark (1998: 10) states that it is the ‘personal value-judgement, supported by 
a reasoned argument with examples’ that readers wish to obtain from any critic 
of literary translation. In translation, a translator should have a flair for language 
(Newmark 1988). I would go on further to say that a literary translator should be 
a poet or writer, depending on the text he is working on. The literary translator’s 
flair is not merely for language in general; rather it is for connotations, imagery, 
and sensitivity to shades and nuances of meanings. What a literary translator 
fathoms in a text is beyond the reach of lay people or ordinary readers, I firmly 
believe. A piece of literature is perceived differently by a literary translator, who 
is assumed to be equipped with a knack for appreciating sounds which are always 
‒ and actually must be ‒ alive, throbbing with the aesthetic dimensions uniquely 
acquired by literary translators. While a literary text might not be more than a few 
lines on a page, the same lines are an album of colour action photos, to which a 
literary translator passionately sets to with vim and vigour.

136
E. A. B. Eddin
One more important point to make is the fact that a translation—no matter who 
its producer is—can never be a final or finished one. In other words, new transla­
tions will keep coming out with every attempt, even by the same translator. One 
very interesting example is worth bringing up here: Holmes (1988b, a) adduces 
the evidence of back-translation to argue against the possibility of there being any 
“real” or identical equivalence between a poem and its translation. Following his 
reasoning, a hypothetical experiment in which a poem is translated by five inde­
pendent translators, and then each of the five inevitably different translations are 
back-translated to produce 25 versions, all distinct from each other and from the 
original text, demonstrates that any claim of equivalence is “perverse” (ibid). A 
top-notch translation never discards any subsequent translations on the grounds 
that it can be second to none. Different translations of the same source text keep 
emerging because of the variety of crucial factors attached to the translators. Such 
factors include the translator’s educational and social background, the way the text 
is perceived by the translator, the translator’s diction and ways of expression, the 
way a translator tries to retain the text’s identity, and the way the text reacts at the 
tips of the translator’s nimble fingers to the tune of his reading, understanding and 
analyzing abilities. The translator possesses a scheme of literary translation philos­
ophy lying deep in his mentality which—in turn—keeps receiving new fascinating 
aspects as newcomers arrive on the burgeoning translation scene.
Given that literary aspects are not merely restricted to properties of lexi­
cal items, stylistic devices or certain linguistic features (Carter and Nash 1990), 
giving a commentary on a literary translation is a gargantuan multi-layered task 
characterized by different overlapping layers of the source and target texts along 
with their effects. Despite valiant attempts by literary translators to produce an 
ideal replica of the source text, we need to concede that it is not always possible 
to come up with such a utopian distant dream. What a sensible literary transla­
tor understands is that a literary target text, far from an identical version of the 
source text, always comes out as a similar or new form of the source text. Here 
we need to reflect on what aspects are meant by ‘a replica’. Is it a replica of mean­
ing? Of equivalence? Of style? Of grammar? Of register? Or of function and 
form? Some of the strongly chiseled features of language constituents in transla­
tion include grammar, lexis, style and phonology (Ghazala 2012). Translation is 
usually regarded as a product in the form of the target text which receives the read­
ership’s rapt attention. However, it is worth noting that translation is—on the face 
of it ‒ a linguistic process from A to Z (Newmark 1998), but between the point 
of departure and that of arrival, the translator steers the vessel of translation into 
port through many stages which rarely attract enough attention. The sea of trans­
lation between the two ports is immeasurably deep. Sadly enough, many are still 
not cognizant of the fact that much in translation does not revolve around the lin­
guistic elements such as logic, quality of writing and style, comprehensible con­
tent, world knowledge or extralinguistic knowledge, etc. The following discussion 
is based on translation theory which comprises a body of correlative principles. A 
comprehensive frame of reference will be specified to assist readers in their exam­
ination of both texts.

137
8  Translating Arabic Text into English: Reading and Understanding
Specific Commentary and Discussion
Perhaps the most striking feature characterizing the translation given by the author 
is its length. The same is true of the students’ attempts. While the source text is 
392 words long, the author’s translation is over 500 words long. This is a leading 
indicator showing that one-to-one correspondence between the source and target 
texts fails. Put differently, target texts differ greatly in the extent to which they 
conform to and match with the norms of the target system. This common phenom­
enon can be accounted for by the equivalence typology provided by Kade (1968), 
which divides equivalence into total (one-to-one), facultative (one-to-many), 
approximative (one-to-part) and zero (one-to-none) equivalence. Venuti (2008) 
states that a translation cannot be valued according to mathematics-based concepts 
of one-to-one correspondence.
Title
Students A and C give the title a too literal translation of ‘Arms folded’ and 
‘Hands tied’, respectively. Both give a translation which means ‘to bring one’s 
arms close to one’s chest and hold them together’. This is seen in the code of body 
language as an intentional protective or defensive gesture. Diving deep into the 
writer’s intended meaning by reading the full source text, the translator under­
stands it as the protagonist’s inability to act. Many expressions can be used in lan­
guage to convey a literal and figurative meaning. One example is ‘the little boy got 
his dad’s shoes on'. While it could mean that the boy literally tried out his dad’s 
pair of shoes as a funny act, it could also, figuratively, mean he took on his dad’s 
duties and shouldered his responsibility. It is critically important for the translator 
to read the full text at least twice before embarking on their task. Here the trans­
lator makes a bold attempt by trying to give a translation of varying length, bound 
together by the vowel-rhyme known as assonance. In prosody, assonance is the 
repetition of the same vowel sounds used with different consonants in the stressed 
syllables of the rhyming words. The translator is keen to give the translation of 
the title some euphonic effect on the reader’s ear. The assonance-carrying words 
have to be near enough to each other that the similar vowel sounds are noticeable. 
Usually, but not always, the recurring vowel sounds will be in the middle of words 
that start and end with different consonants. The title ‘A time I stood idly by’, car­
ries the closing diphthong /ai/ in four successive words, creating euphony. The 
translations of the title given by the students keep the reader in the dark regarding 
who is being talked about, since it is a subjectless title.
The opening lines of the source text usually set the scene of the story. Since it is 
a story, students A, B and E show their awareness of the style by starting the trans­
lation with Once upon a time, a cliché used to introduce a narrative of past events, 
typically in fairy tales and folk tales. However, this phrase is not appropriate 

138
E. A. B. Eddin
because the story is not a fairy or folk tale. Moreover, this phrase is usually intro­
duced when telling a story in the third person rather than the first person.
A Lexical Discussion of Translation
This section discusses such common areas relating to lexis and semantics as the 
sense relationships, collocations and shades of meaning possessed by certain lexi­
cal items, focusing on some common issues noticed in the attempted translations. 
The aim is to help obviate the risk of the loss of the source text’s aesthetic lexical 
richness.
Perhaps the most common problem in translation is the too strict approach 
taken to translation, in the sense that students usually try to follow the source text 
literally in all aspects (position of words, prepositions, word order, literal word 
choices, etc.). To start with, Students A and C translated the prepositions الصباح عند 
and العمل نحو as at morning and towards work, a too literal rendition. This is a liv­
ing example of what Newmark (1988) refers to as “faithful translation”. It is to 
reproduce the precise contextual meaning of the original within the constraints of 
the TL grammatical structures.
Student B translates الجوانب على من األشجار تزينه طويل ولكنه جميل معبد شارع في as but 
it was a long temple street which is decorated by trees from the boundaries. It is 
interesting to wonder why temple is used. The student must have understood that a 
temple is situated in the street concerned. Probably this is an example of homo­
graph. Arabic and English abound in a limitless number of homographs.
Students C and D are taken in by translating the syndetic device or tie in وأنا 
ماش. They did not identify this syndetic tool as a connective which is not literally 
translated into English. They started their sentence as and when I walked came to 
my mind …., a strange construction which gives rise to a serious problem. The stu­
dents did not realize that we have two actions (a shorter one (scene watched last 
night) interrupting the progress of the longer one (walking)). Their inability to 
decipher the actions has fragmented the sequence and duration of the actions in 
question. Again, the students appear not to be aware of the English word order 
sentence patterns, in which the subject normally precedes its predicate.
All students’ attempts use the past simple in the lion ran after the deer. The 
past continuous, on the other hand, brings into focus the duration of the action 
of chase. It shows that the scene being retrieved took some time in the narrator’s 
mind, giving more time to watch what happened. The lion was relentlessly giv­
ing chase to the doe is an elegant structure that has some literary pigment, and 
the use of doe enlists the reader’s sympathy with a female deer rather than a male 
being chased by a male lion. This psychological aspect powerfully influences 
the minds of the readership, arousing great affection. The word ‘deer’ is neutral 
and has no contrast with sex. However, ‘doe’, ‘hind’ or even ‘cow’ all specifi­
cally refer to the female animal. Timidity and weakness are contrasted with the 
lion’s ferocity. One more interesting choice could be ‘gazelle’, which would be a 

139
8  Translating Arabic Text into English: Reading and Understanding
clear foreignization instance in the Venutian sense (Venuti 1995). In other words, 
‘gazelle’ would deliberately retain something of the foreignness of the original. In 
our case, it shows that this ‘deer’ in the story has roots in Arab literature, since 
the story’s author is an Arab scholar. Foreignization is meant to oppose the domi­
nance of hegemonic languages by highlighting the alterity of the foreign text. It is 
a means to orientalize the Arabic culture, and makes it stand out in the target text 
(Allen 2010). Although ‘gazelle’ is now well-established in the English lexicon, 
its Arabic roots traced back in etymology cannot be denied, the succession of its 
sounds, unfamiliar in English, hint at Arabic. This is similar to the use of ‘apart­
heid’ (renounced in 1992) in reference to the system of racist discrimination and 
political and economic oppression imposed and upheld by white people in South 
Africa.
The phrase الغزال رؤية حال بدأها التي مهمتهwas translated by the students as when 
the deer was seen. Using the adverbial dependent clause here obliterates some of 
the aesthetic features intended by the original author. The word حال indicates ‘as 
soon as’ and ‘promptness’, which could be translated in either of two ways: by 
using a conjunction like ‘once’, ‘as soon as’ or ‘as’, or by using a verb of prompt 
change like the one used by the translator, namely ignite or kindle.
The word عصفور is translated as a bird by all students. Although it is a natural­
ized term here, it bears no characteristic features of any bird since it is a superordi­
nate term or hyponym in what is semantically known as a paradigmatic sense 
relation (Cruse 2000). There are two main ways of being more specific: by nar­
rowing down to a subclass (hyponymic specialization), and by narrowing down to 
a subpart (metronymic specialization) (ibid). Under a sketchy superordinate 
umbrella of ‘bird’ come a limitless number of designated birds like eagle, falcon, 
hoopoe, ostrich, vulture, etc. The translator opts to specify the reference with a 
specific hyponym by using a sparrow which is the most common bird in the Arab 
world, an example of foreignization. If the translator wants to use the domestica­
tion strategy for readership in England, he could have used ‘the wren’, while he 
could have used ‘the common chaffinch’ if he knew the readership is from 
Germany, and again he would use ‘the dunnock’ if he knew the readership is from 
France. One reason why it is wiser to adopt ‘foreignization’ is provided by Spivak 
(1993), who states that Third-World writers are losing their individual culture, and 
the alterities they write about, through a homogenized translation.
Because of the opulence of the highly charged overtones retained by the source 
text and their effect on source text readers, the translator tries to maintain the same 
effect for their target text counterparts. One effective strategy is using intensifi­
ers as adverbs and adjectives so as to infuse the translation with the pulse of the 
source text. Some interesting examples from our text are relentlessly, unequivo­
cally, silently, intensely, convulsively, horrifying, unblinkingly, sumptuous. This is 
a manifestation of what Catford (1965) refers to as level shifts, which are further 
subdivided into grammatical and lexical shifts.
Collocations, defined as a sequence of lexical items which habitually co-occur, 
are very important, and hard for non-native speakers to master in both languages. 
Such expressions as ‘fine weather’, ‘torrential rain’, ‘light drizzle’ and ‘high 

140
E. A. B. Eddin
winds’ are examples of collocations (Cruse 1986). Some examples in Arabic could 
be سميك خيط but سمين ولد. In a parallel fashion, we also say عال جدار but طويل شاب. 
Students fail to use the correct natural verb-noun collocation in translating أتم 
المهمة. They use ‘to finish the mission’, where they should have used any of the fol­
lowing verbs preceding ‘the mission’: carry out (used by the translator in the 
translation), ‘conduct, complete, accomplish’. The same is true of the adjec­
tive-noun collocation of المحتوم القدر. The students fail to say the sealed fate, choos­
ing instead drawn fate. It is interesting to know that the noun ‘fate’ as a subject 
collocates with the verb ‘intervene’, rather than ‘interfere’ or ‘meddle’. Using 
verbs that collocate with ‘camera’ and ‘lens’ is not as easy as some may think. 
Some of the attempts choose ‘come close’ while the translator uses such more nat­
urally occurring verbs as zoom in on, roll, focus, mount, and capture.
A Syntactic Discussion of the Translation
The first sentence of the story is relatively long in Arabic. It starts with خرجت and 
ends with الجوانب على. The five attempts follow the source text in keeping the trans­
lation as a single sentence, making the resultant target text awkward and unnatural. 
Achieving naturalness has always been a crucial component of excellent transla­
tions. Referred to as the degree to which a translation is communicated in clear, 
unforced terms in the target language, naturalness is characterized by “the use of 
grammatical constructions and combinations of words which do not violate the 
ordinary patterns of a language” (Nida and Taber 1982). This gives us the confi­
dence to relocate the source text components into their natural positions in the tar­
get text. The adverbials as usual in the morning and every day are kept in the 
middle of the sentence between the subject I and the predicate. This has made the 
structure shaky, and different from the structural fluency of the source text 
(Beekman and Callow 1974). Each language has its linguistic preferences and 
style. My translation starts with the adverbial of time, which functions as a depic­
tion of the time of the action, an introductory phrase to avoid any unnatural inser­
tion of the long adverbial between the subject and its predicate. My 
recommendation to my students is always to either start with the adverbial or leave 
it till the end unless there is any other coercive factor that pushes you to act other­
wise. In my translation, I prefer to devote a new sentence to the description of the 
path, and use a compound adjective to keep the structure compact and unified. The 
students’ attempts keep the description as part of the first sentence in their transla­
tion, a feature which has weakened the structure.
Extra care must be exercised to distinguish between adverbials which are usu­
ally optional and mobile in position and adverbial complements which are obliga­
tory constituents and fixed in position (after the verb). Using compound adjectives 
solves a serious dilemma by not using a relative clause or a new sentence. This 
makes the sentence more unified and economical. Examples from the translation 
are tree-lined, tourist-placed lens, heart-stopping, tourist’s lens-taken scenes, and 

141
8  Translating Arabic Text into English: Reading and Understanding
apple-sized. Forming compound adjectives is not an easy task, however; it requires 
a mastery of language. It is worth noting that compound adjectives are not all 
listed in the dictionary; their number is unlimited due to their high degree of pro­
ductivity. It would be a stalemate in translation if you went for another option, let 
alone the time taken to pin it down, and the loss of cohesion. 
Students A, B and E approach بقائها على الحفاظ اجل من وتتقطع تتفانى فريسة يطارد أسد 
without using a relative clause or a gerund. They translate it literally as a lion ran 
after a prey struggle and break for the sake of keeping its existence. Apart from the 
correct choice of the verbs used, my main concern here is the verb form of strug­
gle and break. Seeing that a prey is an antecedent, the students should have either 
used a tense-carrying relative clause or a tenseless gerund, since the latter is non­
finite. The students seem to have followed the “semantic approach to translation”, 
which is an attempt—within the bare syntactic and semantic constraints of the 
TL—to reproduce the precise contextual meaning of the author (Newmark 1981). 
They tend to strive to give out the form of the original as closely as target language 
norms will allow; furthermore, no effort is made to shift the ST into the target cul­
tural context (Shuttleworth and Cowie 1997). By contrast, the translator prefers to 
generally orient their output towards the needs of the target language reader or 
recipient, the main concern being to retain the source text’s original function and 
to reproduce its effect on the new readership. This is known as ‘communicative 
translation’ (Newmark 1988 and Roberts 1985). 
Students C, D and E translate األسد نحو عدستها الكاميرا تُسلط in the past simple, 
using different verbs. Their reason for doing so is to keep tense consistency. My 
translation translates it into the present simple tense. This is so for a very good 
reason: in certain types of narrative, especially in informal style, the present tense 
is used instead of the preterite for past-time events, even in discourses that have 
begun in the preterite (Huddlestone and Pullum 2005). Using the present tense in 
fiction creates a sense of suspense, where no one can tell what might happen next, 
a key aspect meant to be emphasized in the story. Using the present simple tense 
fosters demonstration of this narrative function. The use of present simple here 
functions as a tool to provoke anticipation and suspense, with the senses fully 
engaged in the action, an advantage that the past simple tense does not achieve.
The statement البقاء أجل من إال ليس الصراع is translated too literally, making it 
unnatural and rather jarring to the target text reader. One interesting attempt is 
made by Student A who translates it as wrestling is only for staying. This attempt 
is noteworthy for two reasons. The word wrestling is not appropriate in such con­
texts since the participants in the action are not humans. Second, the style known 
as الحصر أو القصر or ‘exclusivity style’ is not naturally expressed the way it is 
attempted. One possible functional translation could be ‘is but’ which is found in 
formal texts. A well-educated translator must recall the echoes of this statement 
since it dates back to “survival of the fittest”, a phrase made famous in the fifth 
edition (published in 1869) of the British naturalist Charles Darwin’s On the 
Origin of Species. It argues that organisms best adapted to their environment are 
the most successful in surviving and reproducing.

142
E. A. B. Eddin
One more interesting example can be found in تفاحة بحجم يكون أن يكاد which is 
rendered as it is going to in the size of the apple. This translation reveals an inter­
esting level of understanding. It shows that the student understands that it is an 
action to take place in the future, rather than a statement of fact showing a com­
parison of ‘nearly’ relationship. Using the compound adjective is a good choice to 
avoid any confusion over the correct preposition to use before the word ‘size’. 
Would it be ‘in the size? Or ‘with the size?’ etc.
The grammatical arrangement by the translator of hypotactical sentences 
ensures that the phrases therein are organized as a main clause bolstered by sub­
ordinate clauses. The conjunctions clarify the relationship between the clauses, be 
it chronology, cause and effect, or another form of comparison. Hypotaxis is use­
ful to encourage the reader to deeply analyze the relationships between clauses 
while allowing the author to highlight the importance of one clause over another. 
Some examples in the translation are while I had been, despite all the advanced 
…, etc. The translator’s style deploys non-finite clauses functioning as an adjunct, 
as in having looked around, and he utilizes ‘dangling modifiers’, as in staring at it 
and having looked around. Such structures have been completely avoided by the 
students. Students tend to be familiar only with parataxis, where two clauses are 
placed next to one another without the use of any subordinating conjunctions or 
coordinating conjunctions to clarify the relationship between the clauses.
The ‘exclusivity’ construction expressed by صغيرة عدسة سوى األحداث يشهد ال can­
not be translated in the same style as the source text. In order to place emphasis on 
the ‘lens’, I resort to the cleft-sentence structure, putting the focus on one part of 
it. The cleft sentence proper (Greenbaum and Quirk 1990) is introduced by ‘it’, 
followed by a verb phrase whose main verb is generally ‘be’. The focused part 
comes next, and then the rest of the sentence is introduced by a relative pronoun 
(in our case). A cleft sentence is a great way of giving prominence to a certain 
constituent in the sentence and to express الحصر أو القصر اسلوب.
The last point is the translation of التصوير؟ من السائح األسد سيمنع هل. All the stu­
dents translate it into future simple, thinking it is a closed or open conditional 
clause. However, it is a hypothetical conditional clause which has to be translated 
as shown in the text.
Conclusion
Literary translation has always been a bone of contention due to the plethora of 
theories, practices and discussions which all have arrived at the crucible of transla­
tion studies. As stated at the outset of this chapter, there is no one proper translation 
(Toury 1995) of any literary text, simply because each translator has their own iden­
tity to retain in the text. The translation in this chapter has proved that the literary 
target text is by no means a textual equivalence. Rather it is an attempt to arrive at 
matchings or correspondences of varying degrees. (Holmes 1988b, a). The estab­
lishment of a hierarchy of correspondence for literary texts is much more difficult 

143
8  Translating Arabic Text into English: Reading and Understanding
than in any other genre. While students in general and mine in particular have 
proved their adoption of the word-for-word approach to literary translation, I adopt 
the sense-for-sense approach which stresses preference of the ‘soul’ of the source 
text over the too accurate original wording. The ultimate goal is to generate a text 
which conforms to the linguistic and textual norms of the target language and cul­
ture (Bassnett 1991). A bold attempt is made here to propound some theory-based 
grounds to explain both students’ attempts and what has been offered in their place.
Exercises
1.	 How would you translate the following expressions into English, explaining the 
strategy you find appropriate.
	
A.	تصوير في مشغولة والسائح نفسه على الحفاظ في مشغول والغزال هدفه تحقيق في مشغول األسد 
النتيجة معرفة في مشغول والمشاهد تُنسى ال لقطات. 
	
…………………………………………………………………………………
…………………………………………………………………………………
…………………………………………………………………………………
…………………………………………………………………………………
………………………………
	
B.	شارع في يوم كل اسلكه الذي طريقي في أمشي العمل نحو ًمتجها الصباح عند كالمعتاد خرجت 
الجوانب على من األشجار تزينه طويل ولكنه جميل معبد. 
	
…………………………………………………………………………………
…………………………………………………………………………………
…………………………………………………………………………………
…………………………………………………………………………………
………………………………
	
C.	حتفه الى القدر به جاء الذي الغزال رؤية حال بدأها التي مهمته إنجاز من يمنعه ان ألحد يمكن ال. 
	
…………………………………………………………………………………
…………………………………………………………………………………
…………………………………………………………………………………
…………………………………………………………………………………
………………………………
	
D.	ومثير البعض عند ومأساة حزين فالمنظر ،البقاء اجل من إال ليس الصراع .التدخل بمقدوره أحد ال 
اآلخر البعض عند وملهاة. 
	
…………………………………………………………………………………
…………………………………………………………………………………
…………………………………………………………………………………
…………………………………………………………………………………
………………………………
	
E.	السير وتابعت ورائي العصفور ُتركت …ٌبُد ّلي ما …! 
	
…………………………………………………………………………………
…………………………………………………………………………………
…………………………………………………………………………………
…………………………………………………………………………………
………………………………

144
E. A. B. Eddin
2.	 Susan Bassnett stated in the Independent of November 15, 2001 that ‘in order 
to maintain today’s children’s interest in Shakespeare, Shakespeare’s language 
needs to be rendered into modern English’..’ What type of Jakobson’s categori­
zation of translation is Bassnett referring to? Mention the other types Jakobson 
discusses along with their definitions.
3.	 There is no absolute synonymy between words in the same language. How 
valid is this statement? Give examples from the short story above and discuss 
them.
4.	 Discuss the semantic properties that each of the following verbs possess. What 
context does each occur in?
	
Incinerate, scald, singe, scorch, cremate, combust
5.	 Why do you think we are most likely to come out with different equivalent 
translations of the same source text?
6.	 Below are short statements for you to 1) translate, and 2) provide your own 
commentary on, justifying the target text you produce and mentioning any 
problems you encountered and the reasons for them.
	شهر طقس على تعليقاته إحدى في -الجوية األرصاد وخبير السعودي الفلكي -الزعّاق خالد الدكتور يقول 
فبراير:
	
( بنابلهم حابلهم ّوخل ،وألبطهم اشبطهم شباط يا.)
	
Can you find any equivalence in the source text?
7.	 Translate the following short text, and comment on the salient features of 
the text, its translation and the hardest challenges you encountered while 
translating.
	احدى أعلى من مفاجئ بشكل غريب جسم سقوط انتباهي َشتت عندما المشهد ذلك من خرجت وفجأة 
اصغر أو( تفاحة بحجم يكون ان يكاد صغير الجسم .عني أمتار عشرة حوالي تبعد كانت التي االشجار 
عندما .سكت ثم ّالي ونظر صغيرة رجفة رجف .الرمادي اللون الى مائل اللون باهت ولكنه )بقليل 
ًشيئا اجد فلم حولي نظرت .مسانده جميع شُلّت وقد الحركة على يقوى ال عصفورا وجدته منه اقتربت 
في تعينني ان ممكن طريقة في افكر لوهلة وقفت بينما .الشجرة من سقوطه سبب ما أعرف ولم به أسعفه 
البشرية والقدرة املكها التي الحديثة التكنولوجيا كل من الرغم على .هامدة جثة العصور بقي ،مساعدته 
افعله الذي ما اعرف ال ًوعاجزا األيدي مكتوف وقفت لكنني الهائلة.
8.	 Fill in the blanks.
	
A.	 It is ………………………………. which lists all the possible translation 
procedures.
	
B.	 Translation theory is futile if it does not arise from the.……………. of 
translation practice.
	
C.	 A translation which is uneven in style or quality or characterized by poorly 
related parts is referred to as.…………….. in the field of translation 
studies.
	
D.	 Assembling words eloquently to avoid any clumsiness forms is Dolet’s 
principle No. … …………. which in turn corresponds to Tytler’s principle 
No. …
	
E.	 …… urges translators to compensate for the inevitable loss of beauty in 
poetry translation by using ‘……………of……………….’.

145
8  Translating Arabic Text into English: Reading and Understanding
	
F.	 A ‘verbal copier’ was the name ………………… gave to … ……………. 
as opprobrium and scathing criticism.
	
G.	 It is the …………. level in translation which is concerned with the prop­
erty of unity and syndeticity in a written text.
	
H.	 … ……. method of translation is the most probable to be used in religious 
translation where abiding by the word order and idiomatic expressions 
results in a translation which is hard to understand.
	
I.	
The practice of translation was first discussed by …………………in the 
first century BCE, to be followed by a scrutiny by …………………….. in 
the fourth century CE.
	
J.	
…………………………….. is a technique used in translation for the pur­
pose of differentiating a set of words based on the level-oriented approach.
	
K.	 Possessing a perfect knowledge of STL and TTL, so as not to belittle or 
depreciate the majesty of the language is principle No. …….…. put for­
ward by …………… in the sixteenth century.
	
L.	 Writing is a seen a matter which involves ……………, whereas 
……………… is a matter of text comprehension.
9.	 The following table shows the points from the students’ texts that have been 
discussed in this chapter. Suggest your own alternatives.
Student(s)
ST
Students’ 
Attempts
One possible 
better alternative
Your attempt
A and Cمكتوف تقف عندما 
األيدي
Arms folded and 
hands tied
A time I stood 
idly by
B and E
Keep mum
A, B and Eكالمعتاد خرجت
(خرجت المقصود أي 
يوم كل اخرج كما)
Once upon a 
time
No opening 
cliché is used
A and C
ًمتجها الصباح عند 
أمشي العمل نحو
At morning, and 
towards work
Re-arrangement 
of the structure
Bجميل معبد شارع 
تزينه طويل ولكنه 
على من األشجار 
الجوانب
But it was a 
long temple 
street which is 
decorated by 
trees from the 
boundaries
It was a paved, 
tree-lined street. 
Yet, it was long
C and Dالى وردت ٍماش وأنا 
مخيلتي
And when I 
walked came to 
my mind
While walking, 
…
A, B, C. D and Eغزال يطارد أسدThe lion ran 
after the deer
The lion was 
relentlessly 
giving chase to 
the doe

146
E. A. B. Eddin
Student(s)
ST
Students’ 
Attempts
One possible 
better alternative
Your attempt
A, B, C. D and Eحال رؤية الغزالWhen the deer 
was seen
Once, as soon as 
or as
A, B, C. D and EعصفورA bird
Sparrow
A, B, C. D and Eجاء به القدر الى حتفهThe drawn fate
The sealed fate
A, B and E أسد يطارد فريسة
 تتفانى وتتقطع من اجل
الحفاظ على بقائها
A lion ran after 
a prey struggle 
and break for the 
sake of keeping 
its existence
It was a scene 
that unfolded as 
a doe desper­
ately struggled to 
survive
C, D and E تُسلط الكاميرا عدستها
نحو األسد
The lens concen­
trated on the lion
The camera lens 
focuses on the 
lion
A الصراع ليس إال من
اجل البقاء
Wrestling is only 
for staying
The struggle is 
but for survival
A, B, C. D and E الجسم صغير يكاد ان
يكون بحجم تفاحة
It is going to be 
in the size of the 
apple
The body was 
almost apple-
sized or (slightly 
smaller)
A, B, C. D and E هل سيمنع األسد
…السائح من
Will the lion stop 
the tourist from 
…
Would the lion 
stop the tourist 
from …
References
Allen, R.M.A. (2010). ‘The Happy Traitor: Tales of translation’, Comparative Literature Studies 
47(4): 472–486.
Bassnett, S. (1991). Translation studies. Routledge.
Beekman, J. & Callow, J. (1974). Translating the Word of God. Zondervan.
Carter, A. and Nash, W. (1990). Seeing through language: A guide to styles of English writing. 
Basil Blackwell.
Catford, J. C. (1965) A Linguistic Theory of Translation. Oxford University Press.
Cruse, A. (1986). Lexical semantics. Cambridge University Press.
Cruse, A. (2000). Meaning in language. Oxford University Press.
Ghazala, H. (2012). Arabization from A to Z. A textbook for university students. Kinooz Al 
Marifa.
Greenbaum, S. and Quirk, R. (1990). A student’s grammar of the English language. Longman.
Holmes, James S. (1988) Translated! Papers on Literary Translation and Translation Studies. 
Rodopi.
Holmes, J. (1988). Translated! Papers on Literary Translation and Translation Studies. Rodopi.
Huddlestone, Pullum, G. (2005). A Student's introduction to English grammar. Cambridge 
University Press.
Kade, O. (1968). Zufall und Gesetzmässigkeit in der Übersetzung, VEB Enzyklopädie. [Beiheft 
zur Zeitschrift Fremd-sprachen I.]
Newmark, P. (1981). Approaches to translation. Prentice Hall.
Newmark, P. (1988). A textbook of translation. Multilingual Matters.

147
8  Translating Arabic Text into English: Reading and Understanding
Newmark, P. (1998) More paragraphs on translation. Multilingual Matters.
Nida, E. A. & Taber, C. (1982). The theory and practice of translation. E. J. Brill.
Roberts, R. (1985). “Translation and Communication”, in Nucleo 1, 139-76.
Shuttleworth, M. and Cowie, M. (1997). A dictionary of Translation Studies. Routledge.
Spivak, G.C. (1993). Outside in the Teaching Machine. Routledge.
Toury, G. (1995). Descriptive translation studies and beyond. John Benjamins Publishing 
Company.
Venuti, L. (1995). The translator’s invisibility. Routledge.
Venuti, L. (2008) The translator’s invisibility: A history of translation, second edition, Routledge.

149
Chapter 9
Non-Arabic Speaking Readers’ Perspective
Yogesh Sinha and Dipti Ranjan Pattanaik
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2024
A. Jasim Mohammed (ed.), Literary Translation in Practice, 
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-59333-8_9
Editor’s Introduction
The short stories presented in the preceding chapters of this book are translated 
from Arabic into English by academics who teach translation studies. They are 
Arabic native speakers from Middle Eastern countries. The aim of this chapter is 
to clarify the extent to which the content can be understood by the non-Arabic 
speaking reader of the text. The stories were written by an Arabic native speaker 
and set as a translation exercise for teaching purposes. The role of the NAS reader 
is to read the stories and to decide whether they can be easily understood by the 
NAS reader. The comments in the present chapter by NAS readers aim to help 
learners of English avoid using vague statements, phrases, words, terms, or expres­
sion which are not easily understood by their peers. The NAS readers of the stories 
suggest substitutes for confusing words or difficult expressions used by Arabic-
speaking translators where they find it necessary for better understanding of the 
target text.
The comments on the final version of the translated stories are by Yogesh Sinha 
and Dipti Ranjan Pattanaik, both esteemed non-Arabic speaking academics who 
have been teaching English for a long time. Their comments are followed by ques­
tions for students by the editor of this book who is also the author of the stories. 
Note that further information relating to the structure and purpose of the book can 
be found in the Introduction to Chapter 1.
The students are asked to read the final translation and navigate the source texts 
(ST) and the target texts (TT) throughout the book, following which they should 
read the comments in the present chapter by Yogesh Sinha and D. R. Pattanaik. 
Y. Sinha (*) 
132 North Lancaster Street, Athens, OH 45701, USA
D. R. Pattanaik 
Department of English, BHU, Varanasi, UP 221005, India

150
Y. Sinha and D. R. Pattanaik
Students should then work on the practical task in Chapter 10, using what they 
have learnt from Chapters 2‒8.
Pre-comments by Yogesh Sinha 
The purpose of providing comments on translated texts, particularly stories, from 
the perspective of a non-Arabic native speaker, is to offer a nuanced understanding 
and assessment of the translation's clarity, coherence, and linguistic distinctions. 
As a non-native speaker of Arabic, my role is confined to highlighting potential 
challenges that might arise for individuals encountering translated texts, especially 
in comprehending the text's content, structure, and context.
Throughout this process, certain aspects might pose difficulties for non-native 
speakers of Arabic. I will focus on identifying sentences, phrases, or words that 
might present obstacles in comprehension. By offering potential substitutes for 
these segments, I seek to enhance clarity and understanding for readers not famil­
iar with the intricacies of the Arabic language.
Furthermore, I will analyze whether the context of the story remains clear and 
if the main idea is effectively conveyed in the translated text. If any cultural or lin­
guistic elements specific to Arabic impact the text's context, such instances will be 
highlighted and suitable substitutes or suggestions for clarification provided.
The goal is to contribute to a more comprehensive understanding of the text, 
facilitate easier comprehension for non-Arabic speakers, and offer insights that 
help improve the quality and accessibility of the translated content.
The three important learning outcomes that students will be able to achieve by 
the end of this chapter are:
1.	 To enhance their comprehension through substitution.
2.	 To analyze contextual clarity and main ideas.
3.	 To engage with improved quality and accessibility.
Short Story # 1
By Azeez Jasim Mohammed
Translated by Ali R. Al-Hassnawi
Author’s suggested title: ‘Tied Hands’
Translator’s suggested title: ‘Virtue and Law’
Please Refer to Chapter 3
The doves came rushing toward us, waiting for the food we used to scatter for 
them every day. My little girl of two-and-a-half years old went down to feed them 
as usual after all the pigeons had gathered around her and safely and cheerfully 
ate the grains she spread for them. I sat near her contemplating what was going on 

151
9  Non-Arabic Speaking Readers’ Perspective
around me. The doves were colored in like a spectrum. My child happily and inno­
cently scattering grains of wheat for them. There were some people walking on the 
sides of the road with fresh air breezing. While seeing her immersed in her pleas­
ure and joy with the baths, I remembered the scene of the little calf and his mother 
in one of the most wonderful scenes shown by the National Geographic channel.
The herd headed towards the other bank of the river, and among them was a 
young calf with his mother. As soon as they entered the river, its fast waves pushed 
the young calf away after its mother failed to keep him floating with the right 
rhythm of the river till it reached the other bank. The mother stood up, helpless 
and strengthless to chase him or even help him, but she kept gazing at him, not 
knowing what to do. The little calf spent a whole night on the river cliff as the 
river waves pushed him away from the herd.
The dawn broke, the morning came with its light, and the sun shone on him 
again, as he was destined to survive and live, but this time alone without care. 
While he was turning left and right looking for a living away from his mother, 
he was spotted by a hungry wolf who suddenly turned around after it smelled the 
little calf. The wolf ran towards the little calf while the geese standing on the other 
side started screaming with a voice that caught the attention of the little calf, as if 
they sensed the danger hovering around the calf. While the geese were screaming, 
the wolf hurried his steps to reach the prey as soon as possible. The little calf fled 
when he saw the wolf with death in his eyes, but there was no way he could, nei­
ther time nor place could help him, not even the geese had the ability to intervene. 
The wolf grabbed the little calf from its neck, trying to knock it to the ground to 
get hold of it, but the little calf resisted the wolf for a few seconds, and while the 
wolf's attempts to knock its prey to the ground increased, the geese continue to 
scream, looking for help, while the little calf is still defending its presence with 
whatever power it possesses, even if it was simple. Suddenly, the wolf's attempts 
to complete his mission with movements that leave no doubt of impression that the 
wolf wants to kill him that is the best meal to eat.
Suddenly, after all these quick attempts to overthrow the little calf, the wolf left 
him and moved away from half a meter or less. The mother of the little calf ran 
quickly towards her calf, where she finally found him after wandering the place all 
night in search of him. The little calf gathered his strength and felt the safety and 
strength brought by the presence of its mother around him and started attacking 
the wolf. The mother took her little one and walked after he had his meal of his 
mother's milk, which cannot be replaced by all the meals in the world.
I suddenly got out of the scene after I heard a modern luxury car coming 
towards me. The car stopped, and while my daughter was immersed in her joy 
with the doves, they left her and flew several meters away. Two young men, aged 
between 30 and 40 years, got out of the car and put food for the doves. The herd 
was so startled that even my daughter started crying when she lost the doves that 
were going around here with confidence and pleasure.
“What’s wrong with you, my little girl? They want to feed her like you want.” I 
tried to calm my little girl after she felt sad for doves. While we were watching the 
doves eating from the food of the two young men, one of them pulled out a long 

152
Y. Sinha and D. R. Pattanaik
and thin piece of metal stick that he had apparently inserted for them in the food 
while he was spreading it. Then I saw a group of doves dancing onto the stick. 
‘What's going on? I thought to myself, but soon I saw the doves flapping their 
colorful wings, asking for help, but there was no hope because I myself did not 
have the strength to help me help them. I did not figure out what was going on but 
the two young men hastily put the doves in the car and drove fled off.
The doves turned away from me and my little daughter, as they turned away 
from the food we were giving them, while we kept looking at each other from a 
distance. The rest of the doves were afraid of us and our food for a while… Then: 
I took my child and walked quickly away as I still have the strength to protect her.
Comments by NAS Readers
Yogesh Sinha
Difficulties
The sentence structure in some parts of the story might be challenging to 
follow due to complex descriptions and long sentences. For instance, the 
descriptions of the calf and the wolf encounter might be challenging to grasp 
at first read
Some phrases, such as the wolf's attempts to complete his mission with move­
ments that leave no doubt of impression that the wolf wants to kill him that is 
the best meal to eat, are convoluted and might be confusing
Substitutes
Simplification can enhance clarity: The wolf attempted to attack the calf 
aggressively, indicating its intent to prey on the vulnerable animal
Breaking down complex sentences into simpler ones may improve 
understanding
Context understanding
The story includes vivid descriptions of nature and animal encounters that 
might require a few readings to fully understand the sequence of events and 
the emotions involved. Breaking down the descriptions into smaller parts 
could aid comprehension
Main idea and understanding
The main idea revolves around observing events involving doves, a calf, 
a wolf encounter, and a disturbing incident with the doves caused by two 
young men. These events highlight moments of vulnerability, helplessness, 
and the protective instinct of a parent towards a child
Influence of Arabic native language
Some phrases, such as as he was destined to survive and live, reflect the 
more descriptive and narrative style that is commonly found in Arabic story­
telling. A more direct substitute could be as he was meant to survive and live
Overall, the story depicts a series of events involving animals and humans, 
illustrating themes of helplessness, protection, and witnessing distressing sit­
uations. Simplifying complex sentences and breaking down descriptive parts 
might aid non-native speakers in understanding the narrative more effectively

153
9  Non-Arabic Speaking Readers’ Perspective
Comments by NAS Readers
D. R. 
Pattanaik
This narrative intertwines moments of innocence and nature’s harsh realities, 
from the joyful scene of a child feeding doves to the distressing story of a 
calf’s struggle for survival against a wolf. Language-wise, the story employs 
descriptive language and vivid imagery, which might pose challenges for 
non-native speakers due to its complexity and occasional figurative expres­
sions. The story’s intricate storytelling and occasional use of vivid descrip­
tions might present obstacles for non-native speakers to fully understanding 
the emotional depth and intensity of the narrative. The abrupt shift between 
the serene scene with the child and the distressing encounter with the two 
young men creates a stark contrast that might require extra attention for 
non-native speakers to follow the story’s emotional transitions and their 
impact on the narrative
I feel that the title ‘Tied Hands’ is more appropriate for the story. The lan­
guage does not feel natural in some places and it is apparent that it has been 
translated from another language. Some effort could be put into that aspect 
of the story
Editor’s Questions
1. In his comments on the context understanding, Sinha suggests translating the text by imple­
menting what is known as Russian formalism. He says: “Breaking down the descriptions 
into smaller parts could aid comprehension.” He also suggests: “Breaking down complex 
sentences into simpler ones may improve understanding.”
Break the text into pieces and translate it
2. In his comments on the language, Pattanaik concludes: “The language does not feel natural 
in some places and it is apparent that it has been translated from another language. Some 
effort could be put into that aspect of the story.”
Re-translate the ST using language that makes things easier for the NAS reader
Short Story # 2
By Azeez Jasim Mohammed
Translated by Harith Ismael Turki
Author’s suggested title: ‘Arrows of Fear—Covid-19’
Translator’s suggested title: ‘Corona Series’
Please Refer to Chapter 4
Episode 1: The Definition
We listen to the anchor reading the newscast “Two people were infected with a 
new deadly virus called Corona”. Terrified, the anchor continues: “There is no 
cure for this virus, we are waiting for the scientists to find one”.
Widad: Are we in the twenty-first century?
Murad: I don’t believe”, trying to comfort his wife, “Forget about it”.
Widad: You are right, why should we be concerned with such news?

154
Y. Sinha and D. R. Pattanaik
Episode 2: Outbreak
A week later.
Murad: What’s up, he asked as soon as he arrived home.
Widad: They said that it is spreading fast, she seemed to be confused but she con­
tinued “It doesn’t seem to be reassuring”.
Murad: Don’t worry, it is still far, we are fine. What is for lunch?
Episode 3: Closure
Six days later.
Widad: Do you know that all mosques and other worshiping places are closed, and 
people are not allowed to come in or leave?
Murat: Oh God, how can we attend your sister’s wedding ?
Widad: It is called off, because everyone is afraid of attending.
Episode 4: Distance Learning
Five days later.
Murad: What are the kids doing out?
Widad: They gave them an open leave and told them that classes will be online.
Murad: I thought I am the only one staying home.
Widad: We will spend good times home together.
Episode 5: Zombie of the Time
Four days Later.
Widad and Murad are home watching the TV.
Widad: You should do some grocery.
Murad: My turn with nine other people’s will be 2 hours later.
Widad: Make use of time to buy the important things.
Murat: Don’t worry. Everybody’s share is ready.

155
9  Non-Arabic Speaking Readers’ Perspective
Episode 6: Symptoms 
Three days later.
Widad: I feel feverish and fatigued.
Murad: Me too.
Widad: Did you touch or inhale anything? Did you shake hands, kissed anyone? 
Did you…
Murad: No, I did not, did you?
Widad: No, I did not, then why is it so?
Finale: Precaution is Better Than Cure
The house is deadly silent, the voice of the anchor was heard.
The virus has been contained.
Widad and Murad have been sleeping for two nights!!
Comments by NAS Readers
Yogesh Sinha
Difficulty Grasping
In Episode 5, the line My turn with nine other people’s will be 2 hours later 
is a bit confusing due to the phrasing
Substitutes
A clearer phrasing for the sentence in Episode 5 could be: I will have my 
turn along with nine others, but it will be in 2 hours
Understanding the Context
The story illustrates the progression of a family’s experiences and reactions 
to the outbreak of the COVID-19 pandemic through different episodes, 
showcasing the impact on their daily lives, their concerns, and the precau­
tions they take
Clarity of the Main Idea
The main idea is the family’s journey and reactions to the COVID-19 pan­
demic, emphasizing how their lives are affected by the spread of the virus 
and the precautions they take to stay safe. Clearer phrasing could enhance 
comprehension for non-native speakers
Influence of Arabic Language
The phrase My turn with nine other people’s will be 2 hours later, which 
perhaps reflects a direct translation from Arabic, might sound a bit awkward 
in English. It could be rephrased more smoothly for clarity

156
Y. Sinha and D. R. Pattanaik
Comments by NAS Readers
D. R. 
Pattanaik
This narrative unfolds in episodic snapshots, capturing the profound and 
evolving impact of the COVID-19 virus outbreak on the lives of Widad 
and Murad and shedding light on how the pandemic disrupts the fabric of 
everyday existence at the grassroots level. The succinct storytelling style 
immerses readers in the escalating crisis while presenting a progression 
of events that may demand careful attention to follow the narrative’s swift 
transitions. Murad's attempt to reassure Widad reflects the initial dismissal 
of concern. However, as the situation escalates, their nonchalance fades, and 
uncertainty seeps in
As the outbreak intensifies, the closure of essential places and cancellation 
of events begin to disrupt their lives, reflecting the rapid societal changes 
wrought by the virus. The move to distance learning and the confinement to 
home life signal an adaptation to the new normal, capturing the impact of 
the virus on daily routines. This narrative, while brief, encapsulates the swift 
evolution of a crisis, offering a snapshot of the impact of a viral outbreak 
on an ordinary couple's life. Its succinctness might demand keen attention 
from readers to discern the progression of events and the shifting emotional 
landscape within each episode. There are some typos present throughout the 
story which can be rectified
Editor’s Questions
1. Compare the difficult statement and the substitute given by Yogesh. Then do the same with 
all statements that you feel may be unclear to NAS readers
2. Pattanaik summarizes the story. Read the source text carefully, then compare his under­
standing of the main idea in the target text with your own
3. What do you think of Yogesh’s analysis of the clarity of the main idea? Is it the same as is 
given by the author in Arabic? Explain in detail
Short Story # 3
By Azeez Jasim Mohammed
Translated by Abdulkhaliq Alazzawie
Author’s suggested title: ‘Reality and Dreams’
Translator’s suggested title: ‘Reality and Dreams’
Please refer to Chapter 5
I attended the meeting as invited. It was chaired by one of the eminent officials. 
There was a formal discussion about work matters, and the president reviewed 
one of the important agenda items. And after he submitted a file the size of two 
heavy books, he stated “This report contains information about the institution that 
could destroy it.” He then added “It represents a ticking time bomb for the estab­
lishment”, and suddenly all eyes were on the file. All doodling, laptop surfing and 
absent minded activity stopped. It is no secret that I also stared at it, hoping to 
read it. The owner of the institution grabbed the file from the official’s hands to 

157
9  Non-Arabic Speaking Readers’ Perspective
scour for the revelations. Unable to find anything useful in such a short time, he 
requested a summary of the report to get a better understanding of its ominous 
content.
I was eagerly looking at the file, wondering about its intrigue; about whether it 
was actually a “time bomb”, and what accounts in that file could be described as 
such. While I was busy talking to myself, a guest speaker had began advising on 
work-related matters, dispensing pearls of wisdom on teamwork spirit, not dwell­
ing on the “toxins” of the past, surmounting hurdles, learning from the mistakes 
of others. His captivating words, however, struggled to retain credibility, as every­
one's stare seemed to question whether they could ever be translated into reality.
I did not speak a single word since I was not asked; then, neither did I have an 
interest in making any comments, so I focused on listening intently. Not only that, 
but even after the meeting, while everyone chatted while handling finger foods, 
hot and cold drinks and surveying the open buffet, I did not participate in the 
sought for a chat with either the guest speaker or the owner. Instead, I kept observ­
ing them, as they made light conversation.
I looked at my colleague, the technical support officer at the institution, and 
made my way towards him to discuss the possibility of replacing the old com­
puter with a new one. I had already submitted a request due to wear and tear and 
expiry of its default period; not to mention its slowness. He was busy arranging 
the snacks he planned to devour and did not pay much attention to me but relieved 
my concerns by saying: “The computer is ready and you can pick it up anytime 
you wish.”
After the meeting ended, we exchanged greetings and left the meeting room. I 
went to the technical support office to collect the new device and hand over the old 
one. “We will download the necessary programs, and deliver it to you, but trans­
ferring information from your old device to the new one remains your responsi­
bility because we should not access sensitive information,” the female staff said. 
And then another female staff added, “You must hand over the old device and sign 
the requisition form to receive the new one.” I began to wonder how I would have 
transferred all the information stored in my old computer, and took the initiative to 
ask, “Is there a suitable way to transfer information without the use of an ‘exter­
nal hard disk’?” After many consultations, the head of the technical support unit 
proposed: “Buy the device and you may transfer the information at your conven­
ience”. Feeling it was the most convenient solution, I said “That sounds good to 
me; how much does it cost?” “No more than thirty; you will receive the computer 
immediately once the amount is paid.
I completed the transaction quickly, paid the amount, received the two devices, 
and returned home. “I brought you a computer that can help you with your work,” 
I told my wife, who was very happy to have it since she had planned to buy one. 
She looked at the computer in her hands happy as a lark as a smile spread on her 
face. She said: “I can finally review the lessons I have lost since my graduation.” I 
then started trying my new computer attempting to add some programs and enjoy 
its beautiful features, but overcome by a day's tiredness, I ended up placing it back 

158
Y. Sinha and D. R. Pattanaik
on its package and placed it in the corner of the room, next to my wife's computer. 
I was busy now with my child, watching TV, and watching world news.
I found myself allured to a modern, white second-hand Toyota pick-up, and 
ended up buying it from a car dealer whom I did not know—a man in his fifties, 
with sophistication and intelligence, wearing a black suit and white shirt. There 
was another man with him, appearing to be his partner—an elderly man at the end 
of his seventies. Was the old man giving me advice on anything I didn’t already 
know? I looked forward to concluding the purchase and signing the sale contract, 
undeterred by the thick lists of terms and conditions. I was soon busy wondering 
was not wrong with that car, distressed to the point that I was choking back tears 
and ready to be rid of it even for free were it not for the sale and purchase contract 
that obliged me to take responsibility for this car. The problem was that “a bomb 
and toxin” were previously found in that vehicle. However, the case was cleared 
by the merchants through the court. I didn't know how the car got to me, how I 
bought it, or what compelled me to buy another car. Why did I have to replace my 
old one? Who were these merchants and why did I get myself involved with them? 
I could not explain it, gripped by the panic over the liability for owning such a car. 
I looked around not knowing how to get rid of it, obsessed by the memory of how 
overjoyed the car dealers were for getting rid of it.
Suddenly I woke up and found myself in my own bed. I felt great relief like 
never before, as if a huge weight was taken off my shoulders. There were neither 
cars nor dealers, nor any of that awful mess. “Thank God it was a dream” I said 
to myself whilst getting up, washing my face, and sitting meditating in the living 
room. I looked at the corner of the living room and saw two bags: the first was the 
old computer's, and the second was the new one's the institution gave me the day 
before. I got dressed and ready for work, picked up the two computers, and headed 
to the technical support department, where I found the two female staff at the help 
desk. Greeting them, I said:
“I would like to return both devices to the institution. I will buy a computer at my own 
expense.”

159
9  Non-Arabic Speaking Readers’ Perspective
Comments by NAS Readers
Yogesh Sinha
Difficulties
The phrasing I did not speak a single word since I was not asked; then, 
neither did I have an interest in making any comments might seem a bit 
convoluted or overly elaborate
The sentence Feeling it was the most convenient solution, I said ‘That sounds 
good to me; how much does it cost?’ is slightly complex due to its structure
Substitutes:
Simplification could enhance clarity: I stayed silent as I wasn't prompted and 
didn't feel inclined to comment
The second sentence could be rephrased for clarity: I found it the most con­
venient solution and inquired about the cost
Context understanding
The story shifts between a meeting about a potentially problematic file to 
exchanging computers and purchasing a car, and concludes with the protag­
onist waking up from a dream. The transition between these events might be 
challenging to follow initially, especially in view of the dream sequence at 
the end
Main idea and understanding
The main idea revolves around a series of events and decisions that seem 
real but are ultimately revealed as part of a dream. The narrative reflects the 
protagonist's thoughts, concerns and actions, interwoven with a sense of con­
fusion and apprehension, ultimately resolved when they wake up
Influence of Arabic native language
Some phrases, like dispensing pearls of wisdom or happy as a lark, might 
reflect idiomatic expressions or figurative language that could be more 
common in Arabic storytelling. A more direct substitute could be sharing 
valuable advice or extremely happy
Overall, the narrative involves a mix of events, thoughts and emotions, 
leading to a surprising conclusion that it was all a dream. Simplifying certain 
sentences and maintaining a clearer transition between different scenes could 
enhance understanding, especially for non-native speakers
D. R. 
Pattanaik
This story intricately weaves together various scenarios—a meeting with dis­
cussions about a potentially detrimental report, the protagonist’s procurement 
of a new computer, and the unsettling purchase of a problematic car. From a 
language perspective, the narrative employs a mix of formal and descriptive 
language that might pose challenges for non-native speakers. The story’s 
structure oscillates between different events, from the intense discussion dur­
ing the meeting to the protagonist’s interactions regarding the acquisition of a 
new computer and the distressing purchase of an alarming car. This narrative 
style might demand careful attention from non-native speakers to navigate 
the shifts between these disparate events and their interconnectedness within 
the story. Certain phrases, like dispensing pearls of wisdom, happy as a lark, 
or choking back tears, contain idiomatic expressions that could potentially be 
unfamiliar or harder to interpret for individuals not well-versed in English idi­
oms. Such expressions may impede the full comprehension of the narrative’s 
subtleties for non-native speakers, particularly regarding the relationships 
between different events and their significance within the narrative

160
Y. Sinha and D. R. Pattanaik
Comments by NAS Readers
Editor’s Questions
1. Sinha states: “The phrasing ‘I did not speak a single word since I was not asked; then, 
neither did I have an interest in making any comments’ might seem a bit convoluted or overly 
elaborate.”
Reread the statement in Arabic and try to make it more concise and less convoluted
2. Pattanaik starts his comments by saying: “This story intricately weaves together various 
scenarios—a meeting with discussions about a potentially detrimental report, the protago­
nist’s procurement of a new computer, and the unsettling purchase of a problematic car. From 
a language perspective, the narrative employs a mix of formal and descriptive language that 
might pose challenges for non-native speakers.”
Where can you find the “mix of formal and descriptive language that might pose challenges 
for non-native speakers”? Check the source text first
3. What makes both readers emphasize the lack of proper sentence structure?
4. Identify the difficult sentences and try to simplify them as Sinha suggests
5. Re-translate the story with a narrative style that leads to comfortable attention by NAS 
reader, as suggested by Pattanaik
6. Review the difficult expressions and phrases explained by both readers and rectify them
Short Story # 4
By Azeez Jasim Mohammed
Translated by Rafid Ghaeb
Author’s suggested title: ‘Unknown Strikes’
Translator’s suggested title: ‘Stray Bullets’
Please refer to Chapter 6
The First Bullet…
“It is not possible to obtain a machine-readable passport for your newborn daugh­
ter. It is only possible to obtain a temporary passport for one-time entry into the 
country.”, the embassy employee answered me.
“But how can I return with her when the visas are suspended due to the pan­
demic… It is also not allowed to obtain a residence permit for her on the tempo­
rary passport?” I asked him with astonishment…
“I don't know! …. It's the instructions.” The employee answered me 
embarrassedly.

161
9  Non-Arabic Speaking Readers’ Perspective
I turned back and decided to go to my country to meet parents and kins after a 
long time of absence. I also found it an opportunity to complete the official papers 
for the child after receiving her temporary passport and the visa of my foreign 
nationality wife…
The Second Bullet…
I decided to get back to the country of residence to start working after obtaining 
the child's machine-readable passport.
–	 “What is your job?” the airline employee asked.
–	 “University Professor.” I answered with the hope of booking the ticket!
–	 “Sorry… only citizens and doctors are allowed to travel to your country of resi­
dence” the female employee answered me after knowing my job.
–	 “But how can I get there?”.
–	 “You must stay in another country for not less than fourteen days, after which 
country of residence will receive you.“ The employee explained the law of 
residence.
The Third Bullet…
Three days later… a new decision of residence was issued allowing me to enter 
directly from my country, but after taking two doses of covid-19 vaccine and at 
least fourteen days after the second dose.
–	 “Your daughter cannot board the plane because she does not have a visa to enter 
your country of residence,” the airlines employee explained.
–	 “But her mother and I have residence, so is it logical for us to leave without 
her?”.
–	 “I don't know… it's the instructions.” The employee answered me 
embarrassedly.

162
Y. Sinha and D. R. Pattanaik
The Fourth Bullet…
Where do I go, there is no embassy for my country of residence in my original 
country, and I asked a colleague to inquire about the matter in my country of resi­
dence, hoping that the visas have been released…
- “Visas are still suspended due to the ongoing pandemic.” My colleague 
answered me after inquiring about the matter.
I was confused about what to do… Then I decided to go to my wife's country 
to give her the opportunity to see her family and relatives and wait for the new 
instructions…
Fifth Bullet…
–	 “You have to obtain the approval of the authorities in order to take your daugh­
ter.” The airline employee answered me when I went to ask how I could take my 
one year and seven month old daughter back to her mother's country.
–	 “But is it possible to obtain a visa at the airport, as if she is going to her moth­
er’s country to see her grandfather and grandmother?” I asked the airline 
employee.
–	 “Let me inquire about this matter and I will get back to you with the news… 
Wait for me a few moments,” the airline employee said, after she was convinced 
of what I said…
“Sorry, it’s not possible… it's the instructions.” The employee answered me with 
embarrassment after she came back!!!
I submitted all the papers proving that my daughter and her mother belong to 
the country they are going to.
The three of us remained in a triangle in which stray bullets continued, hoping 
to see the moment when a cease-fire decision would be issued!!!

163
9  Non-Arabic Speaking Readers’ Perspective
Comments by NAS Readers
Yogesh Sinha
Difficulties
Some sentences contain complex structures, making it challenging to follow 
the sequence of events and understand the specific circumstances related to 
visas and travel
The use of indirect responses by the employees (“I don't know… it's the 
instructions”) creates uncertainty and might be confusing
Substitutes
Simplification could aid comprehension: The embassy employee informed 
me that getting a machine-readable passport for my newborn daughter was 
not possible due to restrictions amid the pandemic
Replacing indirect responses with clearer explanations might improve clar­
ity: “I'm sorry, but it's the policy we follow” or “I'm not sure, as this is the 
guideline provided to us.”
Context understanding
The story revolves around the protagonist's struggle to navigate bureaucratic 
challenges related to visas, passports, and travel restrictions amid the pan­
demic. Breaking down the sequence of events more explicitly could enhance 
comprehension
Main idea and understanding
The main idea centers on the frustration and challenges faced by the protag­
onist while trying to travel with their daughter amidst various visa and travel 
restrictions. The story highlights the confusion and helplessness resulting 
from unclear or restrictive regulations
Influence of Arabic native language
The use of indirect responses like “it's the instructions” or “I don't know” 
might reflect a tendency in Arabic storytelling to portray situations where 
the characters are unable to provide a direct answer or explanation. A sub­
stitute could be a more straightforward response or a clearer explanation of 
the situation
Overall, the story portrays the protagonist's struggle with bureaucratic hur­
dles and ambiguous instructions when trying to travel with family members 
amidst pandemic-related travel restrictions. Simplifying sentences and 
providing clearer explanations for regulations could enhance understanding 
for non-native speakers
D. R. Pattanaik
This narrative intricately details the frustrating bureaucratic hurdles faced by 
an individual endeavoring to navigate the complex world of passport issu­
ance and travel regulations for their newborn daughter amid the backdrop of 
pandemic-induced restrictions. The language employed in the story, while 
generally straightforward, delves into a labyrinth of governmental proce­
dures, visa intricacies, and airline regulations, which could pose consider­
able challenges for non-native speakers due to their intricate and legalistic 
nature. Expressions such as machine-readable passport and temporary 
passport, and discussions centred on residency laws and airline protocols 
introduce a layer of complexity that might necessitate additional scrutiny 
from non-native speakers to fully comprehend the nuanced legal and admin­
istrative intricacies embedded within the narrative’s fabric

164
Y. Sinha and D. R. Pattanaik
Comments by NAS Readers
Editor’s Questions
1. Yogesh comments that using indirect responses can create uncertainty and might be 
confusing
Refer to the suggested substitutes, then re-translate the source text avoiding this type of 
structure
2. Pattanaik focuses on the use of vague expressions borrowed from native language which 
can “introduce a layer of complexity that might necessitate additional scrutiny from non-na­
tive speakers to fully comprehend the nuanced legal and administrative intricacies embedded 
within the narrative’s fabric”
Review the vague expressions mentioned and try to reduce the complexity to avoid “necessi­
tating additional scrutiny from non-native speakers”
3. Both NAS readers suggested certain expressions for rectification purposes. Find better 
expressions than those used by the translator of the story
Short Story # 5
By Azeez Jasim Mohammed
Translated by Dina Ali
Author’s suggested title: ‘Shattered Stones’
Translator’s suggested title: ‘The Blind Rock’
Please refer to Chapter 7, noting the comments made there by the NAS 
readers.
“You are the one who did it and you will be punished for it”, the manager told him 
angrily then ran off.
Nothing can be done! After hearing the new, he went back home feeling perplexed.
“Pack up your bags. We're going home soon”, he informed his family.
The daughter said, “What will I do about my doll? I haven't had fun playing with 
it, yet!”.
The son said, “And what about my new school bag?”.
The mother said, “And what will we do about the house furniture and supplies that 
we bought a month ago?”.
The next day:
The witness said, “I was suspicious of him and it was not him who did it”.
The manager said, “Sorry…”.
When he returned home, he found nothing but a small rug.
The son had gifted his school bag to his classmate, the daughter had gifted her doll 
to her neighbour, and the mother had distributed all house stuff to the needy.
Everybody sat on the small rug to eat the lunch meal that their neighbour prepared 
for their farewell party!

165
9  Non-Arabic Speaking Readers’ Perspective
Comments by NAS Readers
Yogesh Sinha
Difficulties
The sentence After hearing the new, he went back home feeling perplexed 
might be confusing due to the word new being used instead of news
The phrase Nothing can be done! might lack clarity without further context
Substitutes
After hearing the news, he went back home feeling perplexed by what had 
happened
A clearer statement could be He felt helpless upon receiving the information
Context understanding
The story revolves around a situation where someone is wrongly accused 
by the manager but is later vindicated by a witness. The family reacts to 
the news by giving away their possessions before leaving, showcasing their 
generosity
Main idea and understanding
The main idea revolves around the consequences of false accusations and the 
family's compassionate response to the situation. They choose to give away 
their belongings to others in need before leaving, displaying kindness and 
generosity
Influence of Arabic native language
The phrase Nothing can be done! perhaps reflects an expression commonly 
found in Arabic storytelling to convey a sense of helplessness or resignation. 
A substitute could be a more direct statement of the character's feelings or 
situation
Overall, the narrative conveys a message of empathy and kindness in 
response to a false accusation. Simplifying certain phrases and providing 
more context in some sentences could enhance understanding for non-native 
speakers
D. R. 
Pattanaik
This concise yet powerful story encapsulates a tale of unjust accusation and 
selfless sacrifice. The language employed, while simple and direct, encom­
passes a depth that resonates with profound emotions. The abrupt accusation, 
devoid of evidence or due process, drives the protagonist into a state of 
confusion and distress. Upon returning home, the abrupt decision to leave 
brings about a poignant exchange among family members, highlighting their 
attachments to personal belongings and the material world. The manager's 
apology falls short of undoing the damage already done. The poignant reso­
lution brings to the surface the selfless acts of the family members. Despite 
their ordeal, they demonstrate remarkable altruism by giving away their 
belongings to those in need. Their shared meal on the small rug symbolizes 
unity, compassion, and the enduring strength of their familial bond. In the 
simplicity of its narrative and the brevity of its prose, this story speaks vol­
umes about resilience, sacrifice, and the enduring spirit of generosity. I could 
not, however, identify any relation between the story and either of the two 
titles proposed. What does the rock/stone signify here?

166
Y. Sinha and D. R. Pattanaik
Comments by NAS Readers
Editor’s Questions
1. Give your response to Pattanaik’s question about title of the story, showing how you under­
stand it
2. It is suggested that Nothing can be done! is a phrase which is literally translated from 
Arabic. Along with other phrases mentioned by Yogesh, try to re-render them to make a 
better equivalence
3. Pattanaik says: “The language employed, while simple and direct, encompasses a depth 
that resonates with profound emotions.”
Does this mean that the translator succeeds in transferring the main idea of the ST? Why?
4. Review the difficulties, substitutes and the influence of Arabic suggested by Yogesh. Can 
you rectify them?
5. Compare the overall opinions of both NAS readers. As an Arabic native speaker, do you 
feel they have grasped the idea expressed by the author in the source text? Why?
Short Story # 6
By Azeez Jasim Mohammed
Translated by Eyhab Abdulrazak Bader Eddin
Author’s suggested title: ‘When You Keep Mum’
Translator’s suggested title: ‘A Time I Stood Idly by;
Please refer to Chapter 8
As usual in the morning, I headed out to work, taking the path I go along every 
day: It was a paved, tree-lined street. Yet, it was long. While walking, an excerpt 
from the beginning of a film I had watched yesterday flashed across my mind in 
which the camera lens -in slow motion-zoomed in on a scene in which a lion was 
solitarily chasing a doe. It was a scene that unfolded as a doe desperately struggled 
to survive. The lion was relentlessly giving chase to the prey, fearing none. None 
could stop it from carrying out its mission, which was ignited by the sight of the 
doe whose death was brought by the sealed fate.

167
9  Non-Arabic Speaking Readers’ Perspective
The camera lens focuses on the lion to catch passionately the facial features 
which furiously appeared like thunder. The lion never wanted to fritter away any 
further a result which would bring in failure that would dent its fierce pride and 
shake its powerful image before its lioness. Then, the lens rolled to zoom in on 
the doe which was about to desperately cry if it had the time or found the tears 
to shed: Bewilderment unequivocally shattered it altogether. The doe was desper­
ately- yet silently- begging for help but all in vain. The long-lens shot captured the 
doe’s heart-stopping last moments before it all turned into a sumptuous feast for 
the king of the jungle.
It was only that tiny lens that witnessed all those horrifying incidents; it was 
that tourist-placed lens mounted by chance that documented what happened in a 
lawless place.
On the one hand, the lion was absorbed in achieving its goal while the doe was 
busy trying to survive. On the other, the tourist was absorbed in catching on cam­
era unforgettable scenes while the viewer was intensely curious to know what the 
inevitable result would be. Would the lion prevent the tourist from videotaping if 
the former knew the latter’s lens would take away its prey?
None ever could interfere. The struggle is but for survival. The scene is hor­
rifying and tragic to some while it is comic to some others. However, we have 
been watching the tourist’s lens-taken scenes through the small screen. At a certain 
moment, the scene must come to an end.
All of a sudden I got disrupted when a foreign body fell and distracted me. It 
heavily fell to the ground like a stone from one tree which was about ten metres 
away from me. The body was almost apple-sized or (slightly smaller). However, 
it was pallid grayish in colour. It convulsively shivered, looked at me then came 
to a standstill. Staring at it unblinkingly, I realised it was a motionless sparrow, 
completely unable to move. Having looked around, I could neither find anything to 
help the sparrow, not was I able to know why it fell off the tree. While I had been 
cudgeling my brains to find a way to save it, the sparrow remained sprawled on the 
ground. Despite all the advanced technology and the exceptional human ability I 
have, I stood idly by, petrified as what to do.
Eventually, I had no choice but to leave the sparrow and continue my walk.

168
Y. Sinha and D. R. Pattanaik
Comments by NAS Readers
Yogesh Sinha
Difficulties
The sentence Having looked around, I could neither find anything to help 
the sparrow, nor was I able to know why it fell off the tree might be a bit 
complex due to its structure and phrasing
The phrase convulsively shivered might be hard for non-native speakers to 
grasp at first
Substitutes
Simplifying the sentence structure could make it clearer, for example: I 
looked around but couldn't find anything to help the sparrow or understand 
why it fell from the tree
Convulsively shivered could be replaced with shook uncontrollably or trem­
bled involuntarily
Understanding the context
The overall context of the story is understandable, but some parts, especially 
the detailed descriptions and phrasings in the scenes of the lion and the doe, 
might require a bit more focus to grasp fully
Main idea and understanding
The main idea of witnessing a scene of distress, feeling powerless to 
intervene, and continuing with daily life despite the internal turmoil is clear. 
However, some parts with vivid descriptions might take a moment to fully 
understand and visualize
Influence of Arabic native language
Certain phrases, like cudgeling my brains, might reflect a more figurative or 
descriptive way of expressing thoughts, which could be attributed to influ­
ences from Arabic, where metaphorical language is common. A substitute 
for this phrase could be thinking hard or trying to figure out
Overall, the story conveys the feeling of witnessing a distressing situa­
tion but feeling helpless to intervene, even with advanced abilities. The 
emotional conflict and the portrayal of human reaction, when faced with a 
situation beyond immediate control, are central to the narrative. Simplifying 
a few sentences and phrases could enhance clarity for non-native speakers 
without compromising the story's essence
D. R. 
Pattanaik
From a language perspective, the story displays rich imagery and descriptive 
language that vividly paints the scenes of the lion chasing the doe and the 
sparrow falling from the tree. However, there are instances where the com­
plexity of certain phrases or expressions might pose a challenge to non-na­
tive speakers due to their symbolic or descriptive nature. For instance, the 
phrases furiously appeared like thunder or bewilderment unequivocally shat­
tered it altogether might present difficulties in understanding due to their 
elaborate and metaphorical construction. Some idiomatic expressions, such 
as fritter away or cudgeling my brains, might be less familiar to non-native 
speakers, potentially causing comprehension hurdles. The narrative’s flow 
occasionally shifts between the intense, descriptive scenes of the lion and 
the doe to the sudden event of the sparrow falling, which might require 
careful attention to follow the contrasting scenarios. Overall, while the story 
offers vivid imagery and descriptive language, some intricate phrases and 
idiomatic expressions might challenge non-native speakers to fully grasp the 
narrative’s subtleties and nuances

169
9  Non-Arabic Speaking Readers’ Perspective
Comments by NAS Readers
Editor’s Questions
1. Rephrase the difficult statements mentioned by NAS readers
2. Compare the substitutes given by Sinha with the Arabic context
3. How could you avoid less familiar idiomatic expressions given by Pattanaik?
4. Analyze the influence of the Arabic native language on the target text
5. Both readers give the same reaction to the story. How and why?
6. Pattanaik says: “Overall, while the story offers vivid imagery and descriptive language, 
some intricate phrases and idiomatic expressions might challenge non-native speakers to fully 
grasp the narrative’s subtleties and nuances.” Sinha, on the other hand, says “Overall, the 
story conveys the feeling of witnessing a distressing situation but feeling helpless to intervene, 
even with advanced abilities. The emotional conflict and the portrayal of human reaction, 
when faced with a situation beyond immediate control, are central to the narrative.”
Comments on the ideas given by both NAS readers

Part III
Non-Arabic Speaking Reader’s 
Comments on Translated Texts into 
English by Arabic Native Speaker

173
Chapter 10
Literary Translation in Practice
Azeez Jasim Mohammed
© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2024
A. Jasim Mohammed (ed.), Literary Translation in Practice, 
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-59333-8_10
This chapter contains two different translations of a short story, both by Arabic 
native speakers who hold a Master’s degree in translation studies and have taught 
translation courses along with Basic English to diverse students whose native lan­
guage is Arabic. One of the translators is a graduate of Baghdad University, Iraq 
and the other is a graduate of Sultan Qaboos University, Muscat, Oman.
In this chapter, the translations are not followed by comments from either 
native or non-native Arabic speaker academics; they are simply left for the stu­
dents’ perusal. The translators do not know each other and have not met, as they 
live in different communities and countries, and are from different cultural and 
academic backgrounds.
Having carefully reviewed the contributors’ comments in the previous chapters, 
the student’s role in this chapter is to implement the contributors’ recommenda­
tions in respect of the translation presented here. Students should make use of the 
comments from NAS in Parts I and III as well as the academics’ comments in Part 
II. They can compare sentences and try to avoid the issues—syntactic or prag­
matic—in translation which have been noted by the other translators. There will be 
questions on the translation. The students need to answer the questions carefully, 
consulting their instructor for more information about their answers.
By the end of this book, students will be able to evaluate their own achieve­
ments, having ensured that all the learning outcomes mentioned in each chapter 
have been properly achieved. Indeed, the student can take on the role of an instruc­
tor implementing a teaching philosophy based around student-centred learning. 
This exercise provides an opportunity to solve problems and answer questions 
carefully which are among their course learning outcomes.
A. J. Mohammed (*) 
Department of English, College of Education, Imam Ja’afar Al-Sadiq University (IJSU), 
Baghdad, Al-Qahira District, Iraq

174
A. J. Mohammed
Translation # 1
Suaad Kadhim Zayer.
TT
ST
The Way of Freedomالحرية طريق
I got out of the house at night wearing my lit­
tle bag on my shoulder not knowing what my 
fate would be or where am I heading, maybe 
I can find a place where I have more freedom 
from where I am right now. The night felt 
dark, as dark as a person with no hope but a 
slight light that I could see my way through. 
The street was empty of pedestrians but those 
whose jobs required them to attend so early 
or those whose jobs required them to leave 
so late at night. Stars sparkling above my 
head maybe they’re the ones that led my way! 
What would happen to me where am I going 
who am I going to meet? I thought to myself, 
I thanked God anyway and walked, not know­
ing where I’ll be…
ال كتفي على الصغيرة حقيبتي ًحامال ًليال البيت من خرجت 
مكانا اجد لعلي متجه انا اين والى مصيري هو ما اعرف 
.فيه انا الذي المكان من اكثر الحرية فيه اجد ان استطيع 
من إال فيه األمل يكن لم الذي الظالم صبغة الليل على ضفت 
خلى .الطريق ظالل خالله من أرى كنت الذي ضئيل نور 
يتطلب الذي العمل الى ذاهبا كان من إال المارة من الشارع 
في ينتهي عمل من عائدا كان من او مبكر وقت في حضوره 
فهي تتألأل رأسي فوق النجوم .الليل من متأخرة ساعة 
نفسي في فكرت !الطريق رؤية لي مهدت لربما التي الوحيدة 
و سألتقي وبمن ذاهب انا اين والى لي سيحصل ترى يا ماذا 
اعرف ال وسرت حال كل على هللا حمدت ؟.… و و و و 
سأنتهي اين…
Five years later… the shine of moon and 
sun… safe and rich living… water, air…clean 
weather… the way of freedom…
العيش …والقمر الشمس نور …سنوات خمس مرور بعد 
طريق …النقي الجو … والهواء الماء … الرغيد اآلمن 
الحرية …
The sound of my child crying in my face “I 
want a birdy just like the one on YouTube.” 
The baby used to watch YouTube videos and 
wanting for what she saw to become true. 
Maybe that is just how the generation who 
grew in the age of technology is now, frankly 
I don’t blame them because this is the genera­
tion that they were born in not knowing what 
the previous generations were because they 
never got to live in them
كالذي ًعصفورا اريد“ بوجهي صارخة تبكي طفلتي صوت 
في المقاطع مشاهدة على الطفلة اعتادت “.اليوتيوب في اراه 
هذا ربما .رأته ما يتحقق ان تريد مشاهدة كل وبعد اليوتيوب 
الومه وال التكنولوجيا عصر في نشأ الذي الجيل حال هو 
معنى ما يعرف وال عليه عينيه فتح الذي العصر ألنه 
تجربتها له يسبق لم ألنه األخرى العصور
I went to the bird market thinking maybe 
I could find her a bird that she could play 
with, after I found out how bored she feels. 
“Maybe she is right” I said to myself as I was 
heading to the market… maybe she’s looking 
for a change in which she finds the freedom 
in the same way I did years ago?
بعد معه تتسلى عصفورا اجد لعلي الطيور سوق الى ذهبت 
نفسي في قلت .يطاق ال الذي الملل الوحدة في هي وجدت ان 
تبحث هي لربما …حق على لعلها السوق الى متجها وانا 
انا بها بحثت التي بالطريقة الحرية فيه تجد الذي التغيير عن 
قبل؟ من
A week later and she was bored again, the 
child finds the bird boring as it is in a cage 
and so, she asked me to change it because it 
became old and she has gotten used to it! As 
usual I did change the cage…
الملل تجد الطفلة وأصبحت أخرى مرة الملل عاد أسبوع بعد 
ألنها تبديله مني وطلبت القفص بنفس العصفور بقاء في 
كالعادة !التغيير ويستحق قديما بنظرها واصبح عليه اعتادت 
القفص غيّرت …

175
10  Literary Translation in Practice
TT
ST
After a while I noticed something that caught 
my attention… there is another bird that 
comes to hang out with our bird trying to 
enter the old cage that we placed near the 
new bird cage… one day as the child was 
watching the bird moving inside the cage the 
other bird got into the cage and she quickly 
rushed to shut the cage door on the little bird. 
She was thrilled and filled with happiness; 
she caught another bird! I told her to let the 
bird go although she refused, after two hours 
the bird found its way out and escaped
آخر عصفور هنالك…انتباهي اثار شيء شاهدت فترة بعد 
الى الدخول محاوال عصفورنا مع الوقت بعض لقضاء يأتي 
وبينما يوم ذات …له مجاورا وضعناه الذي القديم القفص 
دخل بعيد من العصفور تحركات تراقب الطفلة كانت 
سارعت له الطفلة مشاهدة وعند القفص اآلخر العصفور 
اصطادت فقد الطفلة قلب الفرحة مألت .عليه الباب بغلق 
وبعد رفضت لكنها تتركه ان منها طلبت !آخر عصفورا 
بطريقته الحرية طريق العصفور وجد تقريبا ساعتين 
وهرب الخاصة
The child waited for it to return silently… 
indeed the bird did return and in the same 
way she shut the door and styed beside it 
until the next morning… apparently she fell 
asleep because she was so tired but the bird 
refused to do so until it found its way out to 
freedom… and when she woke up the next 
day she did not find the bird in the cage… 
she waited for it hoping its return… a week 
passes by and the bird is nowhere to be 
seen…
عاد بالفعل …أخرى مرة بعودته متأملة الطفلة بقيت 
الباب عليه غلقت الطريقة وبنفس أخرى مرة العصفور 
ما وعلى لكن …الثاني اليوم صباح حتى بجاوره ومكثت 
العصفور ولكن التعب شدة من ونامت تعبت الطفلة ان يبدو 
من استيقاضها وعند …الحرية طريق يجد حتى ينام ان ابى 
وكلها يعود ان انتظرته… القفص في العصفور تجد لم النوم 
عنه يُعرف ال غائب والعصفور أسبوع مر…عودته في امل 
شيء…
The child’s heart filled with sorrow and she 
cried her heart out after she lost all hope of 
its return, for it was one of the reasons of her 
joy; only this time the bird’s heart was filled 
with joy because it found the way of freedom 
that I have searched for before!
وبكت الطفلة قلب الحزن مأل عودته في األمل فقدت ان بعد 
المرة هذه لكن لها التسلية أسباب من ًواحدا ألنه فقدانه على 
الذي الحرية طريق وجد ألنه العصفور قلب الفرحة مألت 
قبل من انا عنه بحثت!

176
A. J. Mohammed
Translation # 2
Thaer Al-Abdullah.
TT
ST
Path to Freedomالحرية طريق
I ventured out of my home one night, car­
rying a modest bag on my shoulder, unsure 
of my destiny or my destination. Perhaps I 
sought a place where I could discover greater 
freedom than the one I left behind. The night 
draped itself in the shroud of darkness, offer­
ing me only the faintest glimmers of light by 
which I could hope to discern the shadows of 
the road. The streets lay bereft of pedestrians, 
save for those hurrying to early-morning 
work or those returning from labor that lin­
gered late into the night. The stars overhead 
glittered, perhaps the sole beacons guiding 
me on my journey. Inwardly, I pondered, 
“What lies ahead for me? Where am I 
headed? Whom shall I encounter? And so 
on and so forth.” I offered gratitude to Allah 
for all that had transpired and continued my 
journey, my destination still unknown to me.
ال كتفي على الصغيرة حقيبتي ًحامال ًليال البيت من خرجت 
مكانا اجد لعلي متجه انا اين والى مصيري هو ما اعرف 
.فيه انا الذي المكان من اكثر الحرية فيه اجد ان استطيع 
من إال فيه األمل يكن لم الذي الظالم صبغة الليل على ضفت 
خلى .الطريق ظالل خالله من أرى كنت الذي ضئيل نور 
يتطلب الذي العمل الى ذاهبا كان من إال المارة من الشارع 
في ينتهي عمل من عائدا كان من او مبكر وقت في حضوره 
فهي تتألأل رأسي فوق النجوم .الليل من متأخرة ساعة 
نفسي في فكرت !الطريق رؤية لي مهدت لربما التي الوحيدة 
و سألتقي وبمن ذاهب انا اين والى لي سيحصل ترى يا ماذا 
اعرف ال وسرت حال كل على هللا حمدت ؟.… و و و و 
سأنتهي اين…
Five years later, bathed in the sun's radiance 
and the moon’s gentle glow, I reveled in a life 
of tranquility and security, surrounded by the 
pure elements of water and air. The atmos­
phere was pristine, and I had found the path 
to freedom
العيش …والقمر الشمس نور …سنوات خمس مرور بعد 
طريق …النقي الجو … والهواء الماء … الرغيد اآلمن 
الحرية …
My daughter’s cries echoed through the air. 
“I want a bird like the ones I always see on 
YouTube.” She had grown accustomed to 
watching YouTube videos, and after each 
viewing, she would yearn for the fantastical 
creatures she witnessed to become a reality. 
Such is the plight of a generation raised in the 
technological era, and I could not fault her, 
for it was the only world she had known, and 
other epochs remained a mystery to her.
كالذي ًعصفورا اريد“ بوجهي صارخة تبكي طفلتي صوت 
في المقاطع مشاهدة على الطفلة اعتادت “.اليوتيوب في اراه 
هذا ربما .رأته ما يتحقق ان تريد مشاهدة كل وبعد اليوتيوب 
الومه وال التكنولوجيا عصر في نشأ الذي الجيل حال هو 
معنى ما يعرف وال عليه عينيه فتح الذي العصر ألنه 
تجربتها له يسبق لم ألنه األخرى العصور
I journeyed to the bird market, hoping to 
find a feathery companion for her, as she had 
grown weary of the stifling solitude. Heading 
towards the market, I inwardly mused, 
“Perhaps she is right. Maybe she seeks a 
change that will grant her the freedom in the 
same way I did before.”
بعد معه تتسلى عصفورا اجد لعلي الطيور سوق الى ذهبت 
نفسي في قلت .يطاق ال الذي الملل الوحدة في هي وجدت ان 
تبحث هي لربما …حق على لعلها السوق الى متجها وانا 
انا بها بحثت التي بالطريقة الحرية فيه تجد الذي التغيير عن 
قبل؟ من

177
10  Literary Translation in Practice
TT
ST
A week passed, and her restlessness resur­
faced. She had grown bored of the bird 
confined to the same cage. Therefore, she 
implored me to replace it, asserting that it 
had become mundane and was deserving of 
change. In accordance with her request, I 
switched the cage.
الملل تجد الطفلة وأصبحت أخرى مرة الملل عاد أسبوع بعد 
ألنها تبديله مني وطلبت القفص بنفس العصفور بقاء في 
كالعادة !التغيير ويستحق قديما بنظرها واصبح عليه اعتادت 
القفص غيّرت …
In due course, I noticed something that 
caught my attention: another bird began vis­
iting, spending time with our bird, attempting 
to enter the old cage we had placed nearby. 
One day, as my daughter observed the bird's 
actions from afar, the interloper entered 
the cage. When she saw this, she hastened 
to close the door. Joy inundated her heart; 
she had captured another bird. I urged her 
to release it, but she refused. After nearly 
two hours, the bird, in its own unique way, 
discovered the path to freedom and made its 
escape
آخر عصفور هنالك…انتباهي اثار شيء شاهدت فترة بعد 
الى الدخول محاوال عصفورنا مع الوقت بعض لقضاء يأتي 
وبينما يوم ذات …له مجاورا وضعناه الذي القديم القفص 
دخل بعيد من العصفور تحركات تراقب الطفلة كانت 
سارعت له الطفلة مشاهدة وعند القفص اآلخر العصفور 
اصطادت فقد الطفلة قلب الفرحة مألت .عليه الباب بغلق 
وبعد رفضت لكنها تتركه ان منها طلبت !آخر عصفورا 
بطريقته الحرية طريق العصفور وجد تقريبا ساعتين 
وهرب الخاصة
The little girl continued to anticipate its 
return. True to her hopes, the bird returned 
once more. She repeated the same ritual, 
shutting the door and remaining close until 
the morning of the second day. However, it 
seemed the child had grown weary and suc­
cumbed to sleep due to exhaustion. Yet, the 
bird remained vigilant, refusing slumber until 
it found its own path to freedom. When she 
awoke, she discovered the cage empty. She 
patiently awaited the bird's return, her hope 
undiminished. A week passed, and the bird 
remained absent, its whereabouts unknown.
عاد بالفعل …أخرى مرة بعودته متأملة الطفلة بقيت 
الباب عليه غلقت الطريقة وبنفس أخرى مرة العصفور 
ما وعلى لكن …الثاني اليوم صباح حتى بجاوره ومكثت 
العصفور ولكن التعب شدة من ونامت تعبت الطفلة ان يبدو 
من استيقاضها وعند …الحرية طريق يجد حتى ينام ان ابى 
وكلها يعود ان انتظرته… القفص في العصفور تجد لم النوم 
عنه يُعرف ال غائب والعصفور أسبوع مر…عودته في امل 
شيء…
As her hope of its return dwindled, sorrow 
overcame the child's heart, and she wept for 
its loss. It had been one of her sources of 
amusement. However, this time, joy filled the 
bird's heart for it had discovered the path to 
freedom I had sought long ago.
وبكت الطفلة قلب الحزن مأل عودته في األمل فقدت ان بعد 
المرة هذه لكن لها التسلية أسباب من ًواحدا ألنه فقدانه على 
الذي الحرية طريق وجد ألنه العصفور قلب الفرحة مألت 
قبل من انا عنه بحثت!
Specific questions for students
1.	 The table below shows the different words used by the two translators, high­
lighted in bold.
a.	 Which do you think is most appropriate? Can you suggest another one?
b.	 Compare the underlined statements in the table.
c.	 What makes Translation # 2 longer than Translation # 1?

178
A. J. Mohammed
Translation # 1
Translation # 2
Source Text
Your suggestion
The Way of Freedom
Path to Freedomالحرية طريق
I got out of the house 
at night wearing my 
little bag on my shoul­
der not knowing what 
my fate would be or 
where am I heading, 
maybe I can find a 
place where I have 
more freedom from 
where I am right now. 
The night felt dark, as 
dark as a person with 
no hope but a slight 
light that I could see 
my way through. The 
street was empty of 
pedestrians but those 
whose jobs required 
them to attend so 
early or those whose 
jobs required them to 
leave so late at night. 
Stars sparkling above 
my head maybe 
they’re the ones that 
led my way! What 
would happen to me 
where am I going who 
am I going to meet? I 
thought to myself, I 
thanked God anyway 
and walked, not know­
ing where I’ll be…
I ventured out of 
my home one night, 
carrying a modest 
bag on my shoulder, 
unsure of my destiny 
or my destination. 
Perhaps I sought a 
place where I could 
discover greater 
freedom than the one I 
left behind. The night 
draped itself in the 
shroud of darkness, 
offering me only the 
faintest glimmers of 
light by which I could 
hope to discern the 
shadows of the road. 
The streets lay bereft 
of pedestrians, save 
for those hurrying 
to early-morn­
ing work or those 
returning from labor 
that lingered late into 
the night. The stars 
overhead glittered, 
perhaps the sole bea­
cons guiding me on 
my journey. Inwardly, 
I pondered, “What lies 
ahead for me? Where 
am I headed? Whom 
shall I encounter? 
And so on and so 
forth.“ I offered grat­
itude to Allah for all 
that had transpired and 
continued my journey, 
my destination still 
unknown to me
ًحامال ًليال البيت من خرجت 
ال كتفي على الصغيرة حقيبتي 
والى مصيري هو ما اعرف 
مكانا اجد لعلي متجه انا اين 
الحرية فيه اجد ان استطيع 
.فيه انا الذي المكان من اكثر 
صبغة الليل على ضفت 
فيه األمل يكن لم الذي الظالم 
كنت الذي ضئيل نور من إال 
.الطريق ظالل خالله من أرى 
من إال المارة من الشارع خلى 
الذي العمل الى ذاهبا كان 
وقت في حضوره يتطلب 
من عائدا كان من او مبكر 
متأخرة ساعة في ينتهي عمل 
رأسي فوق النجوم .الليل من 
لربما التي الوحيدة فهي تتألأل 
!الطريق رؤية لي مهدت 
ترى يا ماذا نفسي في فكرت 
انا اين والى لي سيحصل 
و و و و سألتقي وبمن ذاهب 
كل على هللا حمدت ؟.… و 
اين اعرف ال وسرت حال 
سأنتهي…

179
10  Literary Translation in Practice
Translation # 1
Translation # 2
Source Text
Your suggestion
Five years later… the 
shine of moon and 
sun… safe and rich 
living… water, air…
clean weather… the 
way of freedom…
Five years later, 
bathed in the sun's 
radiance and the 
moon's gentle glow, 
I reveled in a life of 
tranquility and secu­
rity, surrounded by the 
pure elements of water 
and air. The atmos­
phere was pristine, 
and I had found the 
path to freedom
…سنوات خمس مرور بعد 
العيش …والقمر الشمس نور 
الماء … الرغيد اآلمن 
…النقي الجو … والهواء 
الحرية طريق …
2.	 Comment on the two paragraphs below, then write another sentence or phrase 
which enhances your elaboration.
Translation # 1
Translation # 2
Source Text
Your suggestion
The sound of my child 
crying in my face “I 
want a birdy just like 
the one on YouTube.” 
The baby used to 
watch YouTube videos 
and wanting for what 
she saw to become 
true. Maybe that is just 
how the generation 
who grew in the age 
of technology is now, 
frankly I don’t blame 
them because this is 
the generation that 
they were born in not 
knowing what the pre­
vious generations were 
because they never got 
to live in them.
My daughter's cries 
echoed through the 
air. “I want a bird like 
the ones I always see 
on YouTube.” She had 
grown accustomed 
to watching YouTube 
videos, and after each 
viewing, she would 
yearn for the fantas­
tical creatures she 
witnessed to become 
a reality. Such is the 
plight of a generation 
raised in the techno­
logical era, and I could 
not fault her, for it was 
the only world she 
had known, and other 
epochs remained a 
mystery to her.
صارخة تبكي طفلتي صوت 
ًعصفورا اريد“ بوجهي 
“.اليوتيوب في اراه كالذي 
مشاهدة على الطفلة اعتادت 
وبعد اليوتيوب في المقاطع 
ما يتحقق ان تريد مشاهدة كل 
الجيل حال هو هذا ربما .رأته 
عصر في نشأ الذي 
ألنه الومه وال التكنولوجيا 
عليه عينيه فتح الذي العصر 
العصور معنى ما يعرف وال 
له يسبق لم ألنه األخرى 
تجربتها

180
A. J. Mohammed
3.	 Read the source text along with the two translations below.
a.	 Select a list of terms then translate them with an alternative term to the one 
used by the two translators.
b.	 Identify the words that you feel are difficult for you to translate. You may 
use different options in your translation to convey the idea.
c.	 Replace the words or phrases in bold with synonyms
Translation # 1
Translation # 2
Source Text
Your suggestion
I went to the bird 
market thinking 
maybe I could find her 
a bird that she could 
play with, after I found 
out how bored she 
feels. “Maybe she is 
right” I said to myself 
as I was heading to the 
market… maybe she’s 
looking for a change 
in which she finds the 
freedom in the same 
way I did years ago?
I journeyed to the 
bird market, hoping to 
find a feathery com­
panion for her, as she 
had grown weary of 
the stifling solitude. 
Heading towards the 
market, I inwardly 
mused, “Perhaps 
she is right. Maybe 
she seeks a change 
that will grant her the 
freedom in the same 
way I did before.”
لعلي الطيور سوق الى ذهبت 
بعد معه تتسلى عصفورا اجد 
الوحدة في هي وجدت ان 
في قلت .يطاق ال الذي الملل 
السوق الى متجها وانا نفسي 
هي لربما …حق على لعلها 
تجد الذي التغيير عن تبحث 
التي بالطريقة الحرية فيه 
قبل؟ من انا بها بحثت
A week later and she 
was bored again, the 
child finds the bird 
boring as it is in a cage 
and so, she asked me 
to change it because it 
became old and she 
has gotten used to it! 
As usual I did change 
the cage…
A week passed, 
and her restlessness 
resurfaced. She had 
grown bored of the 
bird confined to the 
same cage. Therefore, 
she implored me to 
replace it, asserting 
that it had become 
mundane and was 
deserving of change. 
In accordance with her 
request, I switched 
the cage
مرة الملل عاد أسبوع بعد 
تجد الطفلة وأصبحت أخرى 
بنفس العصفور بقاء في الملل 
تبديله مني وطلبت القفص 
واصبح عليه اعتادت ألنها 
ويستحق قديما بنظرها 
القفص غيّرت كالعادة !التغيير 
…

181
10  Literary Translation in Practice
Translation # 1
Translation # 2
Source Text
Your suggestion
After a while I noticed 
something that caught 
my attention… there 
is another bird that 
comes to hang out 
with our bird trying 
to enter the old cage 
that we placed near 
the new bird cage… 
one day as the child 
was watching the bird 
moving inside the 
cage the other bird 
got into the cage and 
she quickly rushed 
to shut the cage door 
on the little bird. She 
was thrilled and filled 
with happiness; she 
caught another bird! 
I told her to let the 
bird go although 
she refused, after two 
hours the bird found 
its way out and 
escaped
In due course, I 
noticed something that 
caught my attention: 
another bird began 
visiting, spending 
time with our bird, 
attempting to enter 
the old cage we had 
placed nearby. One 
day, as my daughter 
observed the bird's 
actions from afar, the 
interloper entered the 
cage. When she saw 
this, she hastened to 
close the door. Joy 
inundated her heart; 
she had captured 
another bird. I urged 
her to release it, but 
she refused. After 
nearly two hours, the 
bird, in its own unique 
way, discovered the 
path to freedom and 
made its escape
اثار شيء شاهدت فترة بعد 
آخر عصفور هنالك…انتباهي 
مع الوقت بعض لقضاء يأتي 
الى الدخول محاوال عصفورنا 
وضعناه الذي القديم القفص 
وبينما يوم ذات …له مجاورا 
تحركات تراقب الطفلة كانت 
دخل بعيد من العصفور 
وعند القفص اآلخر العصفور 
سارعت له الطفلة مشاهدة 
مألت .عليه الباب بغلق 
فقد الطفلة قلب الفرحة 
!آخر عصفورا اصطادت 
لكنها تتركه ان منها طلبت 
تقريبا ساعتين وبعد رفضت 
الحرية طريق العصفور وجد 
وهرب الخاصة بطريقته
4.	 Read carefully the final section from the ST and the two translations given 
below.
a.	 Using your own words in English, but not translating the text, give the main 
idea in just two to three sentences.
b.	 Paraphrase the section in your own words to convey the core of the idea in 
this text.

182
A. J. Mohammed
Translation # 1
Translation # 2
Source Text
Your suggestion
The child waited for 
it to return silently… 
indeed the bird did 
return and in the 
same way she shut 
the door and styed 
beside it until the next 
morning… apparently 
she fell asleep because 
she was so tired but 
the bird refused to do 
so until it found its 
way out to freedom… 
and when she woke up 
the next day she did 
not find the bird in the 
cage… she waited for 
it hoping its return… a 
week passes by and the 
bird is nowhere to be 
seen…
The little girl con­
tinued to anticipate 
its return. True to 
her hopes, the bird 
returned once more. 
She repeated the same 
ritual, shutting the 
door and remaining 
close until the morn­
ing of the second day. 
However, it seemed 
the child had grown 
weary and succumbed 
to sleep due to 
exhaustion. Yet, the 
bird remained vigilant, 
refusing slumber until 
it found its own path 
to freedom. When she 
awoke, she discovered 
the cage empty. She 
patiently awaited the 
bird's return, her hope 
undiminished. A week 
passed, and the bird 
remained absent, its 
whereabouts unknown
بعودته متأملة الطفلة بقيت 
عاد بالفعل …أخرى مرة 
وبنفس أخرى مرة العصفور 
الباب عليه غلقت الطريقة 
صباح حتى بجاوره ومكثت 
ما وعلى لكن …الثاني اليوم 
ونامت تعبت الطفلة ان يبدو 
ولكن التعب شدة من 
حتى ينام ان ابى العصفور 
وعند …الحرية طريق يجد 
تجد لم النوم من استيقاضها 
… القفص في العصفور
امل وكلها يعود ان انتظرته 
أسبوع مر…عودته في 
يُعرف ال غائب والعصفور 
شيء عنه…
The child’s heart filled 
with sorrow and she 
cried her heart out 
after she lost all hope 
of its return, for it was 
one of the reasons of 
her joy; only this time 
the bird’s heart was 
filled with joy because 
it found the way of 
freedom that I have 
searched for before!
As her hope of its 
return dwindled, 
sorrow overcame the 
child's heart, and she 
wept for its loss. It 
had been one of her 
sources of amuse­
ment. However, this 
time, joy filled the 
bird's heart for it had 
discovered the path to 
freedom I had sought 
long ago
عودته في األمل فقدت ان بعد 
وبكت الطفلة قلب الحزن مأل 
من ًواحدا ألنه فقدانه على 
هذه لكن لها التسلية أسباب 
قلب الفرحة مألت المرة 
طريق وجد ألنه العصفور 
انا عنه بحثت الذي الحرية 
قبل من!
Overall questions
1.	 Evaluate the two translations and make your own translation after commenting 
on how you feel the translation should be developed. In your translation pay 
particular attention to the following:
•	 passive voice and active voice
•	 different types of tenses

183
10  Literary Translation in Practice
•	 a group of words shifting into a single word
•	 use of long sentences exactly like the Arabic way of writing
2.	 In which chapter of this book does the contributor concentrate on Catford’s 
theory of translation? Identify this theory and implement it on the above 
translations.
3.	 Re-read Chapter 2 and use the notes given by NAS reader Florian Klaeger to 
make a fair translation of the above source text.
4.	 What is the main thesis of Chapter 3? Can you find any ways of implementing 
the ideas in Chapter 3 in this chapter?
5.	 Re-read the notes given by the contributors in Chapters 4‒8 and implement 
them on the two translations in this chapter.
6.	 Re-read the notes by NAS readers Yogesh Sinha and D. R. Pattanaik in Chapter 
9 and apply them to the source text above.
7.	 Re-read Chapter 7 carefully and then check whether there are any sense-for-
sense and word-for-word techniques in the above two translations. Discuss 
them individually.

185
© The Editor(s) (if applicable) and The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer 
Nature Switzerland AG 2024 
A. Jasim Mohammed (ed.), Literary Translation in Practice, 
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-59333-8
A
ability, 19, 29, 31, 35, 36, 42, 71, 135, 136, 
151, 167–169
academic, 1–5, 9, 29, 45, 55, 57, 61, 97, 109, 
149, 173
academicians, 4
achieve, 4, 10, 20, 21, 141, 150, 173
acquainted, 102
activity, 10, 54, 78, 156
albeit, 10, 87
ambiguity, 11, 17, 20, 23, 82, 102
ambiguous, 2, 20, 82, 163
Arabic conventions, 11
Arabic culture, 2, 9, 16, 23, 24, 57, 139
Arabic into English, 2–4, 9, 149
Arabic literature, 2, 9, 15, 23
Arabic-speaking, 1–4, 24, 87
Arabic-speaking translators, 1, 3, 4, 149
assumptions, 11, 15, 16, 23
authored, 2, 3
B
bilingual, 2
boon, 9
C
careful understanding, 3
classroom, 4
commentaries, 1–4, 33
communities, 2, 4, 109, 173
confusing, 2, 4, 149, 152, 155, 163–165
constraints, 10, 138, 141
content of the stories, 3
contingency, 10
contributors, 2, 3, 5, 45, 72, 97, 109, 110, 173, 
183
criticism, 2, 10, 145
cultural bilingualists, 10
cultural differences, 10, 65
cultural translators, 10
culture, 10, 16, 23, 86, 87, 89–91, 139, 143
customs, 10
D
daily life, 3, 168
dictionaries, 1, 58, 60
diversities, 4, 173
E
Eastern, 2, 149
economy, 11, 17, 23
editor, 2–5, 22, 110, 149
Englishing Arabic language, 10
English language, 1, 3, 4, 45, 83, 90, 109
English versions, 9, 22, 88
equivalence, 10, 20–22, 83–85, 89, 91–93, 
97, 109, 119, 129, 136, 137, 142, 
144, 166
estrangement, 11
etymology of ‘translate’, 10
expertise, 9
F
a faithful rendering of the original Arabic text, 
37
Index

Index
186
186
features, 10–12, 73, 77, 80, 84, 86, 93, 133, 134, 
136, 137, 139, 140, 144, 157, 167
feedback, 1, 4, 71
final drafts, 2
functional equivalence, 33, 92
fundamental beliefs, 10
G
genre, 11, 15, 22, 86, 133, 143
globalized, multicultural, 10
guide, 2, 4
guide budding translators, 11
H
hermeneutic mode of being, 10
historically, 10
House's theory, 33
I
identity, 10, 101, 136, 142
identity of meaning, 10
idioms, 2, 88–91, 94, 159
ignorance, 9
implications, 11, 37
inescapability of translation, 10
influence, 3, 88, 138, 152, 155, 159, 163, 165, 
166, 168, 169
intended learning outcomes, 4
inter- and transcultural translation, 9
introduction, 3, 51
K
key issues, 9
L
lack of knowledge, 9
life routine, 156
linguistic, 10, 22, 34, 45, 71, 84–86, 88, 91, 
109, 136, 140, 143, 150
literary scholar, 9
literary viewpoint, 4
literature, 3, 5, 9, 11, 90, 109, 133, 135, 139
M
machine translation, 109, 110
main idea, 2–4, 24, 29, 38, 41, 109, 150, 152, 
155, 156, 159, 163, 165, 166, 168, 
181
monkey business, 15, 23
‘The Monkey’s Profession’, 9, 11, 12, 15, 20, 
22–24
N
native language, 1–3, 152, 159, 163–165, 168, 
169, 173
native speaker, 2, 4, 9, 59, 89, 139, 149, 150, 
166, 173
navigate, 4, 149, 159, 163
necessity, 10, 49, 61, 62
non-Arabic speaking (NAS), 1, 3, 5, 11
non-Arabic speaking reader, 1–5, 11, 15–17, 
23–25, 29, 45, 97, 110, 119, 121, 
122, 124, 127, 149, 152, 153, 155, 
156, 159, 160, 163, 164, 166, 168, 
169, 183
O
One Way, 9, 11, 18, 20, 22, 24, 87
original text, 10, 33, 38, 39, 41, 53, 56–59, 61, 
62, 64, 88, 92, 97, 106, 136
P
parts, 2, 11, 29, 82, 84, 97, 110, 144, 152, 153, 
168, 173
pedagogical process, 1
perspective, 3, 9, 10, 110, 127, 150, 159, 160, 
168
phrase, 1–3, 15–17, 20, 22, 24, 25, 33, 34, 38, 
41, 53, 56, 59, 62, 65, 83–86, 93, 
101, 106, 118, 119, 137–142, 149, 
150, 152, 155, 159, 160, 165, 166, 
168, 169, 179, 180
plot, 3, 4, 21, 22, 34, 102
point out, 9, 92
politically, 10
professional, 3, 71, 87, 90
Proposed translation, 33, 38
R
rendered, 1, 53, 56, 57, 62, 83, 91, 101, 110, 
121, 122, 127, 129, 142, 144
S
seniors, 1
sensitive, 10, 80, 87, 90, 157
sentence, 1–3, 16, 17, 21, 22, 25, 36, 37, 
39, 52–54, 56, 59, 61, 64, 65, 82, 

Index
187
187
84–86, 89, 92, 110, 124, 131, 138, 
140, 142, 150, 152, 153, 155, 159, 
160, 163, 165, 168, 173, 179, 181, 
183
sequence, 4, 11, 34, 36–38, 138, 139, 152, 
159, 163
a severe lack of sources, 4
short stories, 2, 5, 9, 149
simulate, 1
socially, 10
social relations, 15, 23
solutions, 2, 3, 17, 80, 102, 157
solve the problem, 1, 95
statement, 1–3, 15, 18, 22, 23, 25, 45, 87, 109, 
110, 127, 129, 131, 141, 142, 144, 
149, 156, 160, 165, 169, 177
stories, 2, 3, 5, 9–11, 14, 16, 22, 23, 25, 86, 
149, 150
subjectivity of translators, 10
substitutes, 2, 3, 23, 38, 121, 124, 125, 149, 
150, 152, 155, 156, 159, 163–166, 
168, 169
suggest questions, 9
T
target language, 3, 10, 33, 83, 84, 90, 92, 140, 
141, 143
target text (TT), 1–3, 29, 66–70, 92, 133, 136, 
137, 139–142, 144, 149, 156, 169
task, 9–11, 29, 47, 72, 89, 133, 136, 137, 141, 
150
teaching English Language, 5, 45
technical texts, 9
terms, 2, 4, 15–17, 20–22, 33, 37, 38, 54, 
81–83, 85, 87, 90, 93, 100, 121, 
124, 127, 129, 131, 133, 139, 140, 
149, 158, 180
text, 1–4, 11, 16, 22–25, 29, 33, 34, 41, 45, 51, 
52, 54–66, 71, 72, 82, 83, 86–88, 
92, 97, 109, 110, 124, 132, 133, 
135–145, 149, 150, 153, 156, 160, 
164, 166, 178–183
thematic links, 11
theory of translation, 2, 33, 183
third party, 9
threefold, 9
translated texts into English, 3, 71
translating, 2–4, 9, 52–54, 56, 83–87, 89, 90, 
94, 109, 119, 120, 131, 138, 140, 
144, 153, 181
translation studies, 1, 4, 5, 9, 92, 97, 109, 142, 
144, 149, 173
translator of literary, academic, 9
translators, 3–5, 9–11, 22, 45, 51–53, 55–57, 
59–62, 65, 71, 87, 88, 90, 92, 109, 
110, 118–121, 124, 127, 129, 131, 
135, 136, 144, 173, 177, 180
U
ubiquity, 10
unfamiliar with the Arabic language, 9
university levels, 1, 3–5, 45, 109
V
vague and unclear, 2
viewpoint, 2, 4, 29
W
websites, 1
Western, 11, 15–17, 21, 23
Western short story, 2, 11, 23
word, 1–3, 15, 18, 22, 24, 40, 41, 51–55, 57, 
58, 60, 62, 65, 72, 75, 79, 82–93, 
97, 100–102, 109, 110, 117–122, 
124–133, 136–145, 149, 150, 157, 
160, 165, 177, 180, 181, 183
writing literature, 2

