Arabic  
Linguistics
edited by Karin Christina Ryding  
and David Wilmsen
The Cambridge Handbook of


The Cambridge Handbook of Arabic Linguistics
Arabic linguistics encompasses a range of language forms and functions from
formal to informal, classical to contemporary, written to spoken, all of which
have vastly different research traditions. Recently, however, the increasing
prominence of new methodologies such as corpus linguistics and sociolinguis-
tics have allowed Arabic linguistics to be studied from multiple perspectives,
revealing key discoveries about the nature of Arabic-in-use and deeper knowl-
edge of traditional ﬁelds of study. With contributions from internationally
renowned experts on the language, this handbook provides a state-of-the-art
overview of both traditional and modern topics in Arabic linguistics. Chapters
are divided into six thematic areas: applied Arabic linguistics, variation and
sociolinguistics, theoretical studies, computational and corpus linguistics,
new media studies, and Arabic linguistics in literature and translation. It is
an essential resource for students and researchers wishing to explore the
exciting and rapidly moving ﬁeld of Arabic linguistics.
K A R I N
C H R I S T I N A
R Y D I N G is Professor Emerita of Arabic linguistics in the
Department of Arabic and Islamic Studies at Georgetown University. In 2008,
she was granted the Lifetime Achievement Award by the American Association
of Teachers of Arabic, and the Distinguished Service Award from the
Georgetown Faculty of Languages and Linguistics. Recent publications include
Arabic: A Linguistic Introduction (Cambridge University Press, 2014).
D A V I D
W I L M S E N is Professor and Head of the Department of Arabic and
Translation Studies at the American University of Sharjah. He has lived thirty
years in the Arabophone world, studying the local dialects of the regions in
which he has lived, publishing numerous studies in Arabic dialectology, and
teaching in and administering translation and Arabic-as-foreign-language
study-abroad programmes.

cambridge handbooks in language and linguistics
Genuinely broad in scope, each handbook in this series provides a complete
state-of-the-ﬁeld overview of a major sub-discipline within language study and
research. Grouped into broad thematic areas, the chapters in each volume
encompass the most important issues and topics within each subject, offering
a coherent picture of the latest theories and ﬁndings. Together, the volumes
will build into an integrated overview of the discipline in its entirety.
Published titles
The Cambridge Handbook of Phonology, edited by Paul de Lacy
The Cambridge Handbook of Linguistic Codeswitching, edited by Barbara E. Bullock
and Almeida Jacqueline Toribio
The Cambridge Handbook of Child Language, Second Edition, edited by Edith
L. Bavin and Letitia Naigles
The Cambridge Handbook of Endangered Languages, edited by Peter K. Austin and
Julia Sallabank
The Cambridge Handbook of Sociolinguistics, edited by Rajend Mesthrie
The Cambridge Handbook of Pragmatics, edited by Keith Allan and Kasia
M. Jaszczolt
The Cambridge Handbook of Language Policy, edited by Bernard Spolsky
The
Cambridge
Handbook
of
Second
Language
Acquisition,
edited
by
Julia Herschensohn and Martha Young-Scholten
The Cambridge Handbook of Biolinguistics, edited by Cedric Boeckx and Kleanthes
K. Grohmann
The Cambridge Handbook of Generative Syntax, edited by Marcel den Dikken
The Cambridge Handbook of Communication Disorders, edited by Louise Cummings
The Cambridge Handbook of Stylistics, edited by Peter Stockwell and Sara Whiteley
The Cambridge Handbook of Linguistic Anthropology, edited by N. J. Enﬁeld,
Paul Kockelman and Jack Sidnell
The Cambridge Handbook of English Corpus Linguistics, edited by Douglas Biber and
Randi Reppen
The Cambridge Handbook of Bilingual Processing, edited by John W. Schwieter
The Cambridge Handbook of Learner Corpus Research, edited by Sylviane Granger,
Gae¨tanelle Gilquin and Fanny Meunier
The Cambridge Handbook of Linguistic Multicompetence, edited by Li Wei and
Vivian Cook
The Cambridge Handbook of English Historical Linguistics, edited by Merja Kyto¨ and
Pa¨ivi Pahta
The Cambridge Handbook of Formal Semantics, edited by Maria Aloni and
Paul Dekker
The Cambridge Handbook of Morphology, edited by Andrew Hippisley and
Greg Stump
The Cambridge Handbook of Historical Syntax, edited by Adam Ledgeway and
Ian Roberts
The Cambridge Handbook of Linguistic Typology, edited by Alexandra Y. Aikhenvald
and R. M. W. Dixon
The Cambridge Handbook of Areal Linguistics, edited by Raymond Hickey
The Cambridge Handbook of Cognitive Linguistics, edited by Barbara Dancygier
The Cambridge Handbook of Japanese Linguistics, edited by Yoko Hasegawa

The Cambridge Handbook of Spanish Linguistics, edited by Kimberly L. Geeslin
The Cambridge Handbook of Bilingualism, edited by Annick De Houwer and
Lourdes Ortega
The
Cambridge
Handbook
of
Systemic
Functional
Linguistics,
edited
by
Geoff Thompson, Wendy L. Bowcher, Lise Fontaine and David Scho¨nthal
The Cambridge Handbook of African Linguistics, edited by H. Ekkehard Wolff
The Cambridge Handbook of Language Learning, edited by John W. Schwieter and
Alessandro Benati
The Cambridge
Handbook of World Englishes, edited by Daniel Schreier,
Marianne Hundt and Edgar W. Schneider
The Cambridge Handbook of Intercultural Communication, edited by Guido Rings and
Sebastian Rasinger
The Cambridge Handbook of Germanic Linguistics, edited by Michael T. Putnam and
B. Richard Page
The Cambridge Handbook of Discourse Studies, edited by Anna De Fina and
Alexandra Georgakopoulou
The Cambridge Handbook of Language Standardization, edited by Wendy Ayres-
Bennett and John Bellamy
The Cambridge Handbook of Korean Linguistics, edited by Sungdai Cho and
John Whitman
The Cambridge Handbook of Phonetics, edited by Rachael-Anne Knight and
Jane Setter
The Cambridge Handbook of Corrective Feedback in Second Language Learning and
Teaching, edited by Hossein Nassaji and Eva Kartchava
The Cambridge Handbook of Experimental Syntax, edited by Grant Goodall
The Cambridge Handbook of Heritage Languages and Linguistics, edited by
Silvina Montrul and Maria Polinsky
The Cambridge Handbook of Arabic Linguistics, edited by Karin Christina Ryding
and David Wilmsen


The Cambridge
Handbook of Arabic
Linguistics
Edited by
Karin Christina Ryding
Georgetown University, Washington DC
David Wilmsen
American University of Sharjah

University Printing House, Cambridge CB2 8BS, United Kingdom
One Liberty Plaza, 20th Floor, New York, NY 10006, USA
477 Williamstown Road, Port Melbourne, VIC 3207, Australia
314–321, 3rd Floor, Plot 3, Splendor Forum, Jasola District Centre,
New Delhi – 110025, India
103 Penang Road, #05–06/07, Visioncrest Commercial, Singapore 238467
Cambridge University Press is part of the University of Cambridge.
It furthers the University’s mission by disseminating knowledge in the pursuit of
education, learning, and research at the highest international levels of excellence.
www.cambridge.org
Information on this title: www.cambridge.org/9781108417303
DOI: 10.1017/9781108277327
© Cambridge University Press 2021
This publication is in copyright. Subject to statutory exception
and to the provisions of relevant collective licensing agreements,
no reproduction of any part may take place without the written
permission of Cambridge University Press.
First published 2021
Printed in the United Kingdom by TJ Books Limited, Padstow Cornwall
A catalogue record for this publication is available from the British Library.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Names: Ryding, Karin C. editor. | Wilmsen, David William, editor.
Title: The Cambridge handbook of Arabic linguistics / edited by Karin Ryding, David
Wilmsen.
Description: Cambridge, UK ; New York : Cambridge University Press, 2021. | Series:
Cambridge handbooks in language and linguistics | Includes bibliographical
references and index.
Identiﬁers: LCCN 2021006812 (print) | LCCN 2021006813 (ebook) | ISBN
9781108417303 (hardback) | ISBN 9781108277327 (ebook)
Subjects: LCSH: Arabic language.
Classiﬁcation: LCC PJ6073 .C36 2021 (print) | LCC PJ6073 (ebook) | DDC 492.7–dc23
LC record available at https://lccn.loc.gov/2021006812
LC ebook record available at https://lccn.loc.gov/2021006813
ISBN 978-1-108-41730-3 Hardback
Cambridge University Press has no responsibility for the persistence or accuracy of
URLs for external or third-party internet websites referred to in this publication
and does not guarantee that any content on such websites is, or will remain,
accurate or appropriate.

Contents
List of Figures
page ix
List of Tables
x
Notes on Contributors
xii
Acknowledgements
xvii
List of Abbreviations
xviii
Introduction
Karin Christina Ryding and David Wilmsen
1
Part I
Arabic Applied Linguistics
1
Arabic Applied Linguistics
Mohammad T. Alhawary
11
2
Language Planning in the Arab World in an Age of
Anxiety
Hussein M. Elkhafaiﬁ
32
3
The Study of Arabic Language Acquisition: A Critical
Review
Karen Froud and Reem Khamis-Dakwar
48
4
Issues in Arabic Language Testing and
Assessment
Michael Raish
83
5
Arabic Study Abroad: Critical Contextualization and
Research-Based Interventions
Emma Trentman
106
6
Models of Arabic Pronunciation
Kassem M. Wahba
127
Part II
Arabic Variation and Sociolinguistics
7
Diglossia, Variation, and Structural Complexity
Samira Farwaneh
155
8
Sociolinguistic Variation and Variation in
Sociolinguistics
Uri Horesh
181
9
What Is Formal Spoken Arabic?
Gunvor Mejdell
199
10
Arabic Dialectology
Stephan Procha´zka
214
11
Maltese: A Peripheral Dialect in the Historical Dialectology
of Arabic
David Wilmsen
244

Part III
Theoretical and Descriptive Studies
12
Grammaticalization in Arabic
Mohssen Esseesy
277
13
Arabic and Onomastics
Terrence Potter
309
14
The Intonation of Arabic: Review and Hypotheses
Khaled Rifaat
330
15
Case in Arabic
Karin Christina Ryding
353
16
On Arabic Morphosyntax and Its Implications for the
Theory of Generative Grammar
Usama Soltan
371
17
Arabic Morphology: Inﬂectional and Derivational
Janet
C. E. Watson
405
Part IV
Arabic Computational and Corpus Linguistics
18
Arabic Computational Linguistics
Nizar Habash
427
19
Arabic Corpus Linguistics and Related Tools: An Overview
and Some Critical Observations
Mark Van Mol
446
20
The Utility of Arabic Corpus Linguistics
Mai Zaki, David
Wilmsen, and Dana Abdulrahim
473
Part V
Arabic Linguistics and New Media Studies
21
Language Policy and the Arabic Localization
of Twitter
Amy Johnson
507
22
Variation and Social Change on Syrian Dissidents’ Social Media:
A Sociopolitical Approach to a Digital Sociolinguistics of
Arabic
Francesco L. Sinatora
532
Part VI
Arabic Linguistics in Literature and Translation
23
Vernacular Varieties in Recent Arabic
Literature
Eva Marie Haºland
565
24
Stylistics and Translation: A Corpus-Based Case Study
of English–Arabic Demonstratives
Mai Zaki
583
Index
612
viii
Table of Contents

Figures
6.1
Modern fus˙h˙a¯ vowels
page 135
6.2
The vowels of Egyptian Arabic ʿa¯mmiyya (A)
136
6.3
A skill–variety model for learning Arabic as a foreign
language
141
8.1
Percentage of weak and strong palatalization by private
and public schools for women and men
191
8.2
Regionality and stopping of interdentals in Mecca
193
8.3
Pharyngeal realization of /ʿ/ and /h˙ / in Hebrew spoken by
Jaffa Palestinians, by speaker
193
10.1
Map of Arabic dialects
222
11.1
The Mediterranean Sea, showing Malta in relation to Sicily
and Tunisia
245
11.2
The Maltese archipelago
248
14.1
Major accents in Arabic
333
14.2
Intonational trendlines in Arabic
337
14.3
Arabic intonational phrases
344
14.4
Variation in PWd tonal conﬁguration
344
14.5
The effect of changing accent level on a previous accent
345
14.6
Multi-accent PWds in EA and the accent-preservation
process
346
21.1
Five examples of Arabic strings in the process of being
localized, from the Twitter Translation Center, 2012–2016 512
21.2
A translator account proﬁle in the Twitter Translation
Center, April 2013
524
21.3
Twitter organized its Translation Center around interfaces 526

Tables
3.1 Representative summary of phonetic inventories
described in various varieties of spoken Arabic
page 56
3.2 Summary of selected studies of aspects of
morphological and syntactic development in Arabic
64
6.1 The consonants and vowels as presented by Sı¯bawayhi
131
6.2 Number of Arabic language textbooks for Standard Arabic
compared to vernacular Arabic
132
6.3 Textbooks of the F variety distributed across three
categories: knowledge, skill, and knowledge/skill
133
6.4 Distribution of textbooks across grammar, vocabulary,
language skills, and pronunciation
133
6.5 Materials for pronunciation in comparison with other
language components and language skills
134
6.6 The consonants of Modern fus˙h˙a¯ (MF)
135
6.7 The consonants of Colloquial Egyptian Arabic:
ʿa¯mmiyya (A)
136
6.8 The phonetic differences between MF and A as they occur
in Egyptian Arabic i.e., Cairene dialect
136
6.9 The occurrence of /t¯/ and its variants across the ﬁve levels
as posited by Badawi
137
6.10 The pronunciation of interdental phonemes in both F and
A varieties
139
6.11 Three main Arabic pronunciation models: MF, ESA, and A
142
6.12 Selected descriptive and empirical research that supports
Arabic language teaching pronunciation
144
7.1 CA/RA comparison
158
7.2 Tense and aspect
160
7.3 Negation of nouns, pronouns, adjectives, and prepositions 171
8.1 Regionality index for palatalization based on Alghamdi
(2014)
192
10.1 Old Arabic verb forms
229
10.2 Marked vs. unmarked imperfect
230

10.3
Present progressive
230
10.4
Arabic dialect renderings of the meaning ‘two mountains’ 231
10.5
Analytic nominal annexation
232
10.6
Arabic dialect renderings of ‘he wrote’ – ‘it was written’
233
10.7
Analytic passive voice
233
10.8
Interrogatives and pronominal sufﬁxes
233
11.1
Wh-interrogatives in select Arabic varieties and Maltese
255
12.1
Synchronic continuum of Arabic prepositional forms and
constructions
285
12.2
Selected body-part terms grammaticalized to
prepositionals
286
17.1
Demonstrative pronouns in Najdi Arabic
415
17.2
Independent pronouns in San’ani Arabic
416
17.3
Perfect paradigm of gambar ‘to sit’ in San’ani Arabic
416
17.4
Imperfect paradigm of gambar ‘to sit’ in San’ani Arabic
417
17.5
The comparative in Cairene Arabic
419
18.1
A summary of the number of publications in ‘natural
language processing’ for a number of languages between
1997 and 2016
439
19.1
Frequency of words in the same documents calculated by
Word and Van Mol’s program
455
24.1
Translation strategies in the corpus
584
24.2
Data sets used in the study
591
24.3
Translation strategies for demonstratives in the corpus
591
24.4
Situational use of demonstratives
592
24.5
Non-conjunctive use of overmarked demonstratives
602
List of Tables
xi

Notes on Contributors
Dana Abdulrahim is an Assistant Professor of Linguistics at the
Department of English Language and Literature at the University of
Bahrain. She specializes in semantics, cognitive linguistics, and corpus
linguistics. She has been involved in numerous projects involving the
creation and annotation of corpora, and she’s currently working on
building a corpus of spoken Bahraini Arabic.
Mohammad T. Alhawary is Professor of Arabic Linguistics and Second
Language Acquisition at the University of Michigan. In addition to hav-
ing authored many articles and book chapters, he is the editor of Al-
ʿArabiyya journal and the Journal of Arabic Linguistics Tradition. His recent
books include Arabic Second Language Acquisition of Morphosyntax (Yale
University Press, 2009), Modern Standard Arabic Grammar: A Learner’s
Guide (Wiley-Blackwell, 2011), Arabic Grammar in Context (Routledge,
2016), The Routledge Handbook of Arabic Second Language Acquisition
(Routledge, 2018), and Arabic Second Language Learning and Effects of Input,
Transfer, and Typology (Georgetown University Press, 2019).
Hussein M. Elkhafaiﬁearned his MA and PhD in Arabic language and
applied linguistics from the University of Utah, USA. He has taught
Arabic at all levels and as a second/foreign language, as well as socio-
linguistics, Arab culture, language conﬂict and identity, and media, at
the University of Pennsylvania, Middlebury College, Vermont, the
University of California at Berkeley and at Los Angeles, and at the
University of Utah. He is currently Associate Professor of Arabic,
Adjunct Associate Professor of Linguistics, and a member of the Core
Faculty-Graduate Certiﬁcate in Second and Foreign Language Teaching
at the University of Washington. His research interests include applied
linguistics, foreign/second language teacher training, language politics
and ideology, Arabic linguistics, and language culture and identity. He
has published articles in Language Problems & Language Planning, Modern

Language Journal, Al-ʿArabiyya, and Foreign Language Annals, in addition to
chapters in other scholarly publications. He has served numerous times
on the executive board of the American Association of Teachers of
Arabic.
Mohssen Esseesy is Professor of Arabic and international affairs at
George Washington University. He is co-editor of Global Business
Languages journal and an editorial board member of the Routledge
Studies in Language and Identity series. His recent publications
include Al-Munjiz: Advanced Business Arabic (Georgetown University
Press
2020)
and
a
book
chapter
in
Narrog
and
Heine,
Grammaticalization from a Typological Perspective (Oxford University
Press 2018). Prior publications span grammaticalization, Arabic for
speciﬁc purposes, semantic bleaching, semantic extension, and appo-
sitives in Arabic.
Samira Farwaneh is Associate Professor of Linguistics in the School of
Middle Eastern and North African Studies (MENAS) at the University of
Arizona. Her research spans several subﬁelds, including phonology,
morphology, dialectology, language and gender, society, and politics.
She has taught all levels of Arabic, and is the director of the Linguistics of
Middle Eastern Languages track in MENAS.
Karen Froud is Associate Professor of Neuroscience and Education at
Columbia University Teachers College, where she teaches graduate-
level courses on neuroscience methods and research. She is director of
the Neurocognition of Language Lab, a brain-imaging facility that
focuses on the neural correlates of typical and disordered processing of
speech and language across the lifespan.
Nizar Habash is Professor of Computer Science at New York University
Abu Dhabi, and the director of the Computational Approaches to
Modeling Language (CAMeL) Lab. He specializes in Arabic and Arabic
dialect computational linguistics. Professor Habash has over 200 pub-
lications, including a book entitled Introduction to Arabic Natural Language
Processing.
Eva Marie Haºland received her PhD in Arabic language and literature
from the University of Oslo in 2018, specializing in the language of
Egyptian literature. She subsequently held the position as Senior
Lecturer of Arabic at the University of Oslo. Her research interests lie
within the ﬁeld of Arabic sociolinguistics.
Uri Horesh is Senior Lecturer at the Department of Arabic Language and
Literature Instruction at Achva Academic College, having previously
taught at academic institutions in the US and the UK. Their research in
variationist sociolinguistics has appeared, inter alia, in Journal of
Sociolinguistics, Zeitschrift fu¨r arabische Linguistik, Language in Society, and
Encyclopedia of Arabic Language and Linguistics. They are co-editor, with
Enam Al-Wer, of The Routledge Handbook of Arabic Sociolinguistics (2019),
and their textbook, Arabic Sociolinguistics (co-authored with Enam Al-Wer,
Notes on Contributors
xiii

Rudolf de Jong, and Bruno Herin) is expected to be published in 2021 by
Cambridge University Press.
Amy Johnson is a linguistic anthropologist and digital science and tech-
nology studies (STS) scholar who researches intersections of language,
sociotechnical structures, and digital play to investigate contemporary
forms of governance and personhood. Dr Johnson has been a research
fellow at the Center for Humanistic Inquiry at Amherst College and
a research afﬁliate at the Berkman Klein Center for Internet and
Society at Harvard University.
Reem Khamis-Dakwar is Professor of Communication Sciences and
Disorders (CSD) and director of the Neurophysiology in Speech-
Language-Pathology Lab at Adelphi University. She teaches courses on
language development and research methods in CSD. Her research
focuses on examining language development, perceptual processing,
and clinical service provision in Arabic diglossia.
Gunvor Mejdell is Professor Emeritus at the University of Oslo, Norway.
Her research interests are primarily in Arabic sociolinguistics: language
use in context, language norms and change, mixed varieties. She has
taught Arabic at all levels, including language history and dialectology,
and has also contributed to the ﬁeld of Arabic literature and translation.
Terrence Potter is teaching Professor Emeritus at Georgetown University.
He has taught Arabic language and linguistics at Georgetown and at the
US Military Academy. His research interests include Arabic onomastics,
applied sociolinguistics, and online collaborative language learning.
Stephan Procha´ zka studied Arabic and Turkish in Vienna, Tunis, and
Istanbul. Since 2006 he has held the Chair for Arabic Studies at the
University of Vienna. He has published several books and numerous
articles on Arabic dialectology, including comparative and syntactic
studies as well as descriptions of local dialects relying on data gathered
during long-term ﬁeldwork.
Michael Raish completed his PhD in Arabic at Georgetown University,
where his research interests focused on educational measurement and
assessment in the context of adult Arabic acquisition. He is currently a
research, testing, and evaluation design consultant based in Philadelphia,
Pennsylvania.
Khaled Rifaat is Professor of Phonetics in the Department of Phonetic
and Linguistic Sciences at the University of Alexandria, Egypt. His
research interests lie in the area of experimental phonetics with
a focus on intonation. He has collaborated with researchers in other
areas, particularly clinical phonetics and linguistics. He has published
on intonation, voice onset time, normal phonological development, and
the acoustic characteristics of pathological voice and speech in Arabic.
Karin Christina Ryding is Sultan Qaboos bin Said Professor Emerita of
Arabic Linguistics at Georgetown University. Ryding is past president of
the American Association of Teachers of Arabic (AATA), and has served
xiv
Notes on Contributors

on the executive committee of the Modern Language Association (MLA)
as well as on the board of directors of Georgetown University Press.
Recent publications include Arabic: A Linguistic Introduction (Cambridge
University Press, 2014) and Teaching and Learning Arabic as a Foreign
Language (Georgetown University Press, 2013).
Francesco L. Sinatora is Assistant Professor of Arabic at the George
Washington University in Washington DC. His research focuses on the
intersection of language, identity, and digital discourses of political pro-
test and social activism. He is the author of the monograph, Language,
Identity, and Syrian Political Activism on Social Media (Routledge, 2020).
Usama Soltan is Professor of Arabic and Linguistics at Middlebury College
in Vermont, USA, where he teaches courses on Arabic language and
culture, Arabic linguistics and sociolinguistics, as well as general lin-
guistics. He holds a PhD in linguistics from the University of Maryland,
College Park, USA, and his research primarily focuses on the investiga-
tion of syntactic and morphosyntactic phenomena in Arabic dialects,
particularly in Standard Arabic and Egyptian Arabic.
Emma Trentman is Associate Professor of Arabic at the University of New
Mexico. Her research focuses on language learning during study abroad,
telecollaboration, and in the language classroom, and she is particularly
interested in multilingual approaches and the role of language ideolo-
gies. She teaches all levels of Arabic at the University of New Mexico and
directs the UNM Arabic STARTALK Student Program.
Mark Van Mol is Professor Emeritus of Arabic and contemporary Islam at
the Katholieke Universiteit Leuven. He has written a grammar and text-
book (in Dutch) for the Moroccan dialect (1981) and a lexicon of Moroccan
Arabic (1983). He compiled an entirely corpus-based Learners’ Dictionary
of Modern Standard Arabic–Dutch / Dutch–Modern Standard Arabic in
2001. He also designed a tagger for the Arabic language, which served as
the basis for a study on variation in Modern Standard Arabic in radio
broadcasts (2003). In 2007 he developed a new method to teach Modern
Standard Arabic, called La Mafarr (3 Vols.). He also compiled the Modern
Arabic Representative – 2000 Corpus (MARC-2000) of more than
12 million words. This corpus is still in the process of being integrated
into the lexical relational database and will serve as a basis for language
studies and electronic exercises. An electronic version of the Arabic–
Dutch–Arabic Learners’ Dictionary has been completed and is available
online. He composed the Longitudinal Representative Arabic News
Corpus (LoRANC), which will make a comparison possible between lan-
guage use in news broadcasts over a time span of twenty-ﬁve years
(1990–2015). As he also specialized in computer linguistics and database
management, he is currently designing and developing an online perso-
nalized feedback system for the study of Modern Arabic, the contents of
which are based on the La Mafarr volumes.
Notes on Contributors
xv

Kassem M. Wahba is a former teaching professor in the Department of
Arabic and Islamic Studies, Georgetown University. He has published
several articles on Arabic phonetics, sociolinguistics, and dialectology,
and he has edited two handbooks on teaching Arabic as a foreign lan-
guage. He received his PhD in linguistics from Alexandria University.
Janet C. E. Watson has held academic posts in Edinburgh, Durham, and
Salford, and visiting posts in Heidelberg (2003–4) and Oslo (2004–5). She
took up the Leadership Chair for Language@Leeds in Leeds in 2013, and
was elected Fellow of the British Academy in 2013. Her main research
interests lie in the documentation of Modern South Arabian languages
and modern Arabic dialects, with particular focus on theoretical phono-
logical and morphological approaches to language varieties spoken
within the south-western Arabian Peninsula.
David Wilmsen has held positions at the American University of Cairo,
the American University of Beirut, and the American University of
Sharjah. He is interested in the linguistic history and prehistory of the
Arabic dialects, especially their syntactic features. He is currently doc-
umenting remnant pre-diaspora features of northern Emirati Arabic.
Mai Zaki is Associate Professor at the Department of Arabic and
Translation Studies at the American University of Sharjah. She has
a PhD in Linguistics from Middlesex University, UK. Her research inter-
ests include corpus linguistics, corpus stylistics, translation, and
Teaching Arabic as a Foreign Language.
xvi
Notes on Contributors

Acknowledgements
I would like to acknowledge the following people who helped in the
production of this book: Helen Barton of Cambridge University Press for
her initiative, patience, good will, and unwavering support for this com-
plex project; Brenda Bickett, of Georgetown University Library, who
helped me obtain obscure articles of considerable importance and walked
me through the intricacies of interlibrary loan. Special thanks also go to
Sue Browning, editor and proofreader extraordinaire, and to Bethany
Johnson,
who
got
us
through
the
demanding
ﬁnal
stages.
And
a thousand thanks go to my husband, Victor Litwinski, who not only
tolerated but encouraged my dedication to this project and helped me
stay on track.
In a book such as this, we editors owe a primary debt to the contributors
who have made this collection of articles a strong and expansive one, and
who have patiently waited out the sometimes-tedious process of editing
and compiling. Thank you to all.
Karin Christina Ryding
Adding to my colleague’s expression of profound thanks to all who have
contributed to this volume, I extend my own sincere thanks to them for
their forbearance with the delays in bringing this volume to press, owing,
I fear, largely to my own propensity for taking on more than I should and
the interruptions and interventions to my schedule that resulted there-
from. Thank you all for your sublime patience.
David Wilmsen

Abbreviations
A
ʿa¯mmayyah
A CT FL
American Council on Teaching of Foreign Languages
A CC
accusative
A CT
active
Adj
adjective
AFL
Arabic as a foreign language
AM
autosegmental-metrical
A P
active participle
Asp
aspect
APS
argument from poverty of stimulus
CA
Classical Arabic
CEA
Cairene Egyptian Arabic / Colloquial Egyptian Arabic
CEFR
Common European Framework for Foreign Languages
CF
classical fus˙h˙a¯
CD
coreferential dative
CL
computational linguistics
C O N J
conjunction
C O M P
complementizer
C O N T
continuous
CoP
communities of practice
D AT
dative
D E F
deﬁnite
D E M
demonstrative
D E T
determiner
DO
direct object
D O M
differential object marking
DP
determiner phrase
DST
deictic shift theory
D U
dual
EA
Egyptian Arabic
EALL
Encyclopedia of Arabic Language and Linguistics

EIT
elicited information test
E L A
elative
ELRA
European Language Resources Association
E V
epenthetic vowel
ESA
Educated Spoken Arabic
E X C L A M exclamation
E X I S T
existential
F0
fundamental frequency
F/f
fus˙h˙a¯ / feminine
FCA
ﬁrst conjunct agreement
FIGS
French, Italian, German, Spanish
FSA
Formal Spoken Arabic
FUT
futurity; future
GB
Government and Binding
GE N
genitive
H
high
HA B
habitual
I M P
imperative
IND
indicative
I N D F
indeﬁnite
IO
indirect object
IP
intonation phrase
IP FV
imperfective
JU S
jussive
L
low
L1
ﬁrst language
L2
second language
LA
Lebanese Arabic / Literary Arabic
LDC
Linguistic Data Consortium
M/m
masculine
MA
Moroccan Arabic
MENA
Middle East and North Africa
MF
modern fus˙h˙a¯
ML
machine learning
MSA
Modern Standard Arabic
N E G
negator/negative
NLP
natural language processing
NNS
non-native speaker
N O M
nominative
NP
noun phrase
NPI
negative polarity item
NS
native speaker
N U M
number
OA
old Arabic
Obj
object
O B L
oblique case
List of Abbreviations
xix

OPI
oral proﬁciency interview
P&P
principles and parameters
PA
Palestinian Arabic
PFV
perfective
PL
plural
POS
part of speech
P O S S
possessive
PP
prepositional phrase
PPT
passive participle
P R E P
preposition
P R E S
present (tense)
P R O
pronoun
P R O G
progressive
P R O H
prohibitive
PTCP
participle
P T V
partitive
PWd
prosodic word
Q
interrogative
QNT
quantiﬁer
RA
regional Arabic
R E L
relative pronoun
SA
Standard Arabic
S BJV
subjunctive
S EQ
sequential
S G
singular
SLA
second language acquisition
SLI
Speciﬁc Language Impairment
SLP
speech-language pathology
S P E C
speciﬁc
ST
source text
Subj
subject
SV
subject/verb (word order)
SVAA
subject-verb agreement asymmetry
SVO
subject-verb-object
T
tense
TAFL
teaching Arabic as a foreign language
TT
target text
UG
Universal Grammar
V O C
vocative
VP
verb phrase
VS
verb-subject (word order)
VSO
verb-subject-object
WALS
World Atlas of Language Structures
1
1st person
2
2nd person
3
3rd person
xx
List of Abbreviations

Introduction
Karin Christina Ryding and David Wilmsen
i.1
Overview
Arabic linguistics is a ﬁeld that has both expanded and shifted over the
last ﬁfty years. The coming to the fore of Arabic sociolinguistics, varia-
tion theory, corpus linguistics, language acquisition, intercultural prag-
matics, and Arabic media studies has enlarged the nature of research
topics, strategies, and results so that both spoken and written forms of
Arabic
have
come
to
be
examined
from
multiple
perspectives.
Moreover, the development of social media and discussion platforms
has had a profound effect on the interface of spoken and written
language that has yielded new forms of Arabic discourse. This handbook
brings together articles on a range of traditional and contemporary
topics from a wide spectrum of research interests. We hope that the
integration of new and traditional will represent both the broadened
horizon for Arabic linguistic analysis and new congruence within this
disciplinary area.
In discussing the ﬁeld of Arabic studies, Jonathan Owens has referred to
‘the immensity of the ﬁeld itself’ (2013: 9). Arabic linguistics distinguishes
itself not only by being both broad and at the same time single-language
focused, but also by being profoundly characterized by variation and
language change built upon the architecture of a written tradition that
has remained relatively stable for over a millennium. Instead of fragmen-
tation, however, there is a new unity to Arabic linguistic research. That
unity is complex and emergent, but nonetheless vital and groundbreaking
in its depth and in its reach. Arabic is one language, old and new, tradition-
bound yet transformative, linking past and future in myriad ways. As
Arabic linguistics research develops and extends beyond the classical
tradition, it transforms into an interdisciplinary ﬁeld both linked and
divided by the rapid spread and valorization of vernacular studies and
the interplay between spoken and written discourse.

Whereas theoretical linguistics has been primarily concerned with lan-
guage in itself, the ﬁeld of Arabic linguistics provides a range of language
forms and functions from formal to informal, classical to contemporary,
from written to spoken, from individual to nation, that have vastly differ-
ent research traditions and different sets of problems to identify and
address. Most languages have similar issues, but for Arabic, the centrality
of the fact of diglossia has long distanced traditional indigenous scholar-
ship from vernacular studies and has resulted in politically, culturally, and
socially fraught attitudes towards spoken discourse. This is now changing.
A new synthesis is bringing these different strands of research together.
i.2
Arabic and Linguistics Research
Indeed, so vast is the study of Arabic that it would seem impossible for
individual researchers to encompass it in its entirety. Perhaps this is
a reason why Arabic, as an eminently accessible language, often none-
theless escapes the notice of the larger ﬁeld of linguistics. That is not to say
that no mention is ever made of Arabic in current linguistics literature; it
occasionally is mentioned, but not in proportion to its size or importance,
with upwards of 300 million native speakers, as the ﬁfth largest language
on the planet.1 Even when mention of Arabic is made, the facts of Arabic
are often presented incorrectly. Consider, for example, these recent works
in the generativist or language typology traditions. Roberts and Roussou
(2003: 31–3) in discussing wh-interrogative movement, a topic of para-
mount interest to generativists, state that those of Iraqi Arabic remain
in situ with occasional wh-fronting:
(1)
Iraqi Arabic
a. mona
sˇa¯f-at
meno
name
see.IP FV-3 F S G
Q
‘Whom did Mona see?’
b. meno
sˇa¯f-at
mona
Q
see.iPFV-3F SG
name
‘Whom did Mona see?’
Quite to the contrary, the formation in (1b) is the normal unmarked
sequence, with (1a) being marked or even ill-formed.
In a work on the typology of predicate possession, Stassen (2009) states
of Cairene Arabic that ‘the dative marking [li] on the possessor has been
replaced by a preposition with the basic meaning “at”’ (2009: 323), when
this is clearly not the case:
1 In the Roberts and Rousseau work discussed immediately below, Arabic is given eight references, two for what the
authors call ‘Classical’ Arabic, and three references each for the spoken Arabic of Iraq and Morocco. By contrast, Greek,
with between 15 and 20 million native speakers – equal to the population of Cairo – enjoys a full 155 references.
2
K A R I N C H R I S T I N A R Y D I N G & D A V I D W I L M S E N

(2)
Cairene Arabic2
a. ma¯
la-k-sˇ
daʕwa¯
bi-ya
N E G
D A T- P R O.2M S G- N EG
invitation
P R E P-P R O.1 S G
‘You have nothing to do with me’
b. kull
wa¯h˙ id
wa
l-uh
ra¯ʔy-uh
every
one
C O N J
D A T- P R O.3M S G
view- P R O.2M S G
‘Everyone has his own opinion’
Finally, the World Atlas of Language Structures Online (Dryer and Haspelmath
2013), drawing upon an obscure work on Palestinian Arabic (Shahin 1995:
30–1), types Palestinian Arabic as having no 2nd-person imperative, as
opposed to northern Levantine and Moroccan Arabic, the only other two
Arabic varieties – aside from Maltese – on the map charting the morpho-
logical imperative in world languages (70A). In point of fact, all varieties of
Arabic form their imperatives from the 2nd-person imperfective verb in
much the same manner all across the Arabophone world:
(3)
Palestinian Arabic
a. sˇu¯
b-ti-nsa¯
ya¯
zalame
E X C L A M
H AB-2S G-forget.IP FV
VOC
man
‘How you forget, man!’
b. insa¯
ya¯
zalame
forget.I M P
VO C
man
‘Forget [it], man!’
Similarly, in the Atlas, Palestinian Arabic and Maltese are classed as pos-
sessing two different types of prohibitives, when Maltese generally and
Palestinian often form their prohibitives in the same manner, with post-
positive -sˇ alone:
(4)
a. Palestinian Arabic
ti-nsa¯-sˇ
inn-u
zalame
mitl-ak
2-forget.P R O H-N E G
C O MP- P R O.2 MS G
man
P R E P-P R O.2 M SG
‘Forget not that he [is] a man like you’
b. Maltese
Tinsiex li G˙ esu` wkoll ibati mil-lonliness, bh¯ alek u bh¯ ali
ti-nsı¯-sˇ
li
gˇe¯su
wkoll
i-bati
. . .
2-forget.P R O H- N EG
R E L
Jesus
A D V
3-suffer.I PFV
b-h¯ al-ek
P R EP-condition-P RO.2M S G
‘Forget not that Jesus also suffers . . . like you’
2 See, also, the examples in Woidich (2006: 335).
Introduction
3

These sources are not entirely to be blamed for misrepresenting Arabic,
especially inasmuch as they have referenced few and obscure works about
the language. But for that very reason they can be questioned for their
choice of references. Roberts and Roussou only list two, both from the
1980s, in their nineteen pages of references. Likewise, Stassen in an even
larger reference section of thirty-two pages. To be sure, Stassen lists only
one or two references each for most of the 420 languages in his sample. All
the more reason for exercising care in the choice of representative works.
For its part, the WALS must perforce list more for its mapping of the
features of twenty Arabic varieties (twenty-one with written Arabic, but
listing that variety achieves the perverse result of its being listed both
everywhere on the map of the Arabophone world and nowhere). So, too, do
most of its references (twenty-six of thirty-eight) come from the 1980s or
earlier; the remainder are from the 1990s, with one from 2000. True, three
of those are from the excellent series of indispensable reference grammars
published by Georgetown University Press in the 1960s. Nevertheless, by
skewing the sample to works from the mid twentieth century – many of
them obscure, narrowly focused, and hard to obtain – the compilers of the
WALS miss many up-to-date important standard reference works about
Arabic dialects, a sterling example of which being Woidich’s (2006) author-
itative reference grammar of Cairene Arabic.
It would be unrealistic to expect such linguistic surveys as these three
recent works to provide comprehensive listings of all pertinent references
to the languages that they address, but it is not too much to ask that those
works that they do reference be accessible general references. On the
contrary, it is the place of a handbook to guide its readers to the wide
range of research and reference works available in any of the subﬁelds that
it treats, and the contributors to this volume shoulder that responsibility
admirably, such that any interested comparative linguist consulting the
subsections of this handbook should, by following the references therein,
be able to ﬁnd accurate representation of the facts and any matters of
uncertainty or dispute that Arabic can contribute to their reviews of
phenomena in which they may be interested.
We have asked contributors to address whenever possible what Arabic
speciﬁcally has to offer to linguistic theory. This cannot always be done
overtly, some matters being of primary concern to the internal discussions
in the ﬁeld of Arabic linguistics proper. Nevertheless, contributions to
each of the subsections should guide general linguists toward the involve-
ment of Arabic in matters of crucial concern to linguistics as a whole.
i.3
In This Volume
This handbook offers a wide range of articles on contemporary Arabic
linguistics, from theoretical studies of Arabic morphosyntax to studies of
4
K A R I N C H R I S T I N A R Y D I N G & D A V I D W I L M S E N

Arabic use in online communities. It connects traditional research areas
with new questions, new problems, and new approaches to language use,
language learning, theoretical analysis, computational linguistics, and
vernacular studies. We have gathered articles from specialists in
a number of different areas, reﬂecting new perspectives on Arabic linguis-
tics as well as updates on traditional areas of investigation. In terms of
content, the handbook is divided into six thematic areas: Arabic applied
linguistics, Arabic variation and sociolinguistics, theoretical and descrip-
tive studies, Arabic computational and corpus linguistics, Arabic linguis-
tics and new media studies, and Arabic linguistics in literature and
translation. Here we provide an outline of chapter topics, along with
a more detailed summary of each chapter.
i.4
Outline of Topics
In the ﬁrst part, which addresses matters of applied linguistics,
Mohammad Alhawary begins with a broad overview of the ﬁeld as
it applies to Arabic and as matters peculiar to Arabic intersect with the
broader ﬁeld of linguistics. This is followed by Hussein Elkhafaiﬁ’s minute
examination of matters of particular concern to ofﬁcial language planners
in the Arabophone world, having essentially to do with the matter of
Arabic diglossia and widespread bilingualism in Arab countries. Karen
Froud and Reem Khamis-Dakwar provide a broad overview of language
acquisition studies in Arabic, a subﬁeld of Arabic linguistics in which they
are central ﬁgures, language acquisition itself being a matter of central
concern in linguistics. Michael Raish provides a state-of-the-art study of
Arabic testing and assessment, an area of rapidly growing concern as
learners need professional assessment and documentation of their oral
as well as written skills. He examines both end-of-training and formative
assessments in task-based and performance-based formats, including com-
puter-assisted language testing, study-abroad testing, the C-test, and self-
assessment. This is followed by Emma Trentman’s practical guide to issues
involved in teaching Arabic as a foreign language (TAFL) in study-abroad
settings, language study abroad attracting much interest in the ﬁeld of
applied linguistics. Kassem Wahba’s chapter completes the applied lin-
guistics section, addressing the implications of diglossia in Arabic and the
teaching of Arabic as a foreign language, that being how to teach students
the phonetics of a language with a multitude of dialects representing wide
phonological variation between them.
The sociolinguistics part begins with two contributions that pertain to
wider concerns in the ﬁeld before narrowing the frame to matters internal
to Arabic. Samira Farwaneh discusses the issue of language complexity,
a theme central to Arabic, inasmuch as the Arabic of writing is widely and
inaccurately perceived to be more complex than the dialects of Arabic. At
Introduction
5

the same time, the question of the relative equality of complexity in
languages is a matter often taken for granted in linguistics, only lately
beginning to be challenged. As far as challenging widely held precepts is
concerned, Uri Horesh provides an overview of sociolinguistic approaches
to Arabic, some of those, of course, being of purely parochial interest to the
practice of Arabic sociolinguistics, but others conforming to and at times
challenging the basic tenets of sociolinguistics as a whole. From there,
things begin to focus on matters internal to Arabic. Gunvor Mejdell returns
again to matters of Arabic diglossia, addressing its manifestations in
speech production in the Arabophone world, a concern that she has
spent her entire career examining. Stephan Procha´zka then gives
a thorough-going overview of the study of Arabic dialects across the
width and breadth of the Arabophone world. The sociolinguistics section
ends with David Wilmsen’s examination of a peripheral dialect of Arabic,
Maltese, showing how that language variety is instrumental in charting
the unwritten history of the modern dialects of Arabic, at the same time
showing how it conforms nicely to the ﬁndings of historical linguistic
studies of isolated language varieties.
The part on theoretical and descriptive studies fulﬁls the promise of the
handbook more easily than others because its contributors are as a group
more involved in matters current in the study of human language.
Mohssen Esseesy places Arabic ﬁrmly at the centre of grammaticalization
theory, a matter to which he has been devoting himself for the better part
of two decades. Terrence Potter looks at the onomastics of Arabic, a ﬁeld
not often addressed in Arabic linguistics itself, but of wide implication for
historical linguistics. Similarly, Khaled Rifaat addresses matters of intona-
tion in Arabic, something that has been stoutly ignored since the earliest
medieval descriptions of Arabic and still gains little purchase in discus-
sions of Arabic linguistics, but which is, nonetheless, of great interest to
linguistic studies of prosody in language. The ﬁnal three chapters bring
Arabic into morphosyntax, with co-editor Karin Ryding’s contribution on
case in Arabic, Usama Soltan’s demonstration of the applicability of Arabic
morphosyntax to the enterprise of generative grammar, and Janet
Watson’s discussion of the inﬂectional and derivational morphology of
Arabic. All three of these chapters come from recognized authorities in
their respective approaches to morphosyntax.
With that, the handbook turns to matters both applied and theoretical
in addressing the computational linguistic and corpus linguistic dimen-
sions of Arabic. First Nizar Habash, a central ﬁgure in Arabic computa-
tional linguistics, provides an overview of the ﬁeld. His overview is
followed by Mark Van Mol, another ﬁgure central to the ﬁeld, whose
contribution dissects the supreme complexity and difﬁculty of construct-
ing Arabic corpora. The part ends with a contribution from Mai Zaki, Dana
Abdulrahim, and the other co-editor of the Handbook, three of the few
linguists to use Arabic corpora in answering questions pertinent to both
6
K A R I N C H R I S T I N A R Y D I N G & D A V I D W I L M S E N

theoretical and applied concerns in the ﬁeld of linguistics in general and
Arabic linguistics in particular.
Remaining in the ﬁeld of electronic language resources, a part on new
media studies presents contributions from two researchers who utilize the
media. Amy Johnson addresses localization and internationalization, spe-
ciﬁcally in the social media platform Twitter and its approach to and effect
on language use in the Arab world. Francesco Sinatora examines social
activism on Facebook. Neither contribution can escape the parochiality of
the wider themes that have concerned Arabic linguistics for half a century,
but in revisiting them they interrogate their basic tenets.
The ﬁnal part, too, is more concerned with applied matters internal to
Arabic than with issues of interest to a broader linguistics readership. Eva
Haºland looks at the tension between the Arabic of formal writing and the
informal (read ‘spoken’) features that occasionally appear in it – a matter
of central concern to the study of diglossia in Arabic from its beginning –
and that are encroaching with increasing regularity on formal writing. Mai
Zaki applies parallel corpora to the translation of deixis in Arabic novels
into English, ﬁnding, unsurprisingly, that the deictic categories of the two
languages do not overlap seamlessly.
i.5
Final Remarks
It should not be surprising that the intensive study of any language, and
thus a handbook of the linguistics of that study, often turns inward to
address matters of parochial concern. There are probably as many deﬁni-
tions of linguistics and the core concerns of linguistics as there are practis-
ing linguists. Nevertheless, it is possible to outline two broad approaches
to linguistic analysis: either linguistics is interested in explaining the
human capacity for language, in which case it attempts broad general-
izations, often missing the details of daily language use; or it is interested
in those details, only subsequently attempting to ﬁt its observations into
a theory of language. Another way of stating this is that linguistics is either
interested in the inherent mechanisms common to all human languages
and how those shape language in general, or it is interested in how
language users themselves shape their languages in particular. Arabic
linguistics in its diverse manifestations acknowledges both, but at the
same time, it is captivated by the entrancing details of the language itself.
Often this has resulted in the ﬁeld of Arabic linguistics speaking largely to
itself. For that reason, perhaps Arabic linguistics as a ﬁeld is itself to blame
for its low proﬁle in the larger ﬁeld of linguistics and for the misrepresen-
tations that linguistics makes of Arabic. Nevertheless, the very complexity
of the subject matter perhaps contributes both to linguists’ superﬁcial
dabbling in the sea that is Arabic, making barely a ripple in the surface
of the waters, and the bemused indulgence of those dilettantes by the
Introduction
7

mariners engaged in the navigation of those waters. One of those seasoned
mariners, Clive Holes, has summed up the matter best:
Arabic, and in particular the Arabic dialects, remain ‘on the outside look-
ing in’ when it comes to their proﬁle in general linguistics journals. In
part, the blame for this low visibility can be laid at the door of Arabic
linguists themselves for their failure to use Arabic data to test and critique
current theoretical models. Many of them would counter, however, that
current linguistic model-building is simply too theory-driven, too abstract,
and too distant from their interests to justify the expenditure of time.
(Holes 2018: 28)
The contributions of this handbook do show how Arabic can contribute to
linguistic theorizing and model-building; but they also show where those
involved in the study of Arabic are preoccupied with forming the ground-
work for describing the language in its vast but intricate whole.
References
Dryer, M. S. and Haspelmath, M. (eds.) (2013). The World Atlas of Language
Structures
Online.
Leipzig:
Max
Planck
Institute
for
Evolutionary
Anthropology.
(Available
online
at
http://wals.info;
last
accessed
8 November 2020.)
Holes, C. (2018). Introduction. In C. Holes, ed., Arabic Historical Dialectology:
Linguistic
and
Sociolinguistic
Approaches.
Oxford:
Oxford
University
Press, 1–28.
Owens, J. (2013). A house of sound structure, of marvelous form and
proportion: An introduction. In J. Owens, ed., The Oxford Handbook of
Arabic Linguistics. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1–22.
Roberts, I. and Roussou, A. (2003). Syntactic Change: A Minimalist Approach to
Grammaticalization. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Shahin, K. N. (1995). Rural Palestinian Arabic (Abu Shusha dialect). Munich:
Lincom Europa.
Stassen, L. (2009). Predicative Possession. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Woidich, M. (2006). Das Kairenisch-Arabische: Eine Grammatik. Wiesbaden:
Harrassowitz.
8
K A R I N C H R I S T I N A R Y D I N G & D A V I D W I L M S E N

Part I
Arabic Applied
Linguistics


1
Arabic Applied Linguistics
Mohammad T. Alhawary
1.1
Introduction
As the term ‘applied’ implies, broadly speaking the deﬁnition ‘applied
linguistics’ encompasses every ﬁeld where language is applied. The study
or application of language with respect to its use and users is far and wide
and covers ﬁelds such as language learning, language testing and assess-
ment, language processing and cognition, discourse and conversation
analysis, language and law, language policy and planning, bilingualism
and multilingualism, language contact, language variation and change,
dialectology, language disorders and pathology, translation and interpre-
tation, and natural language processing, to name but a few. In addition,
many areas in applied linguistics draw on theoretical approaches, some of
which are language related (i.e., across the different language domains
including syntax, semantics, phonology, morphology, and pragmatics)
and some are from other disciplines, such as psychology, anthropology,
sociology, communication, and cognitive neuroscience. Indeed, the ﬁelds
which fall within the conﬁnes of applied linguistics and the topics which
are treated have become so many that at least two encyclopedias have so
far been published in English (Chapelle 2013; Berns 2010). The present
chapter focuses on applied linguistics as it relates to second language
acquisition (SLA), second language pedagogy, and second language proﬁ-
ciency testing. The ﬁrst two sub-disciplines were central to the preoccupa-
tion of applied linguists since the ﬁeld’s early inception in the twentieth
century (especially during the earliest formative period of second language
acquisition in the 1940s–60s) and continued for the greater part of the
twentieth century, for English as a second/foreign language in particular.
For Arabic, second language acquisition and second language pedagogy, as
well as testing, have remained to the present the central topics of Arabic
applied linguistics in the USA and in the Arabic-speaking world. Other
areas in theoretical linguistics and sociolinguistics are also discussed,

since they have a direct bearing on Arabic second language acquisition
and second language pedagogy with respect to both their development and
practice. Other related areas and sub-disciplines of Arabic applied linguis-
tics are covered in other chapters. The remainder of the chapter is orga-
nized as follows: Section 1.2 provides an overview of the different
approaches investigated within Arabic SLA, Section 1.3 deals with Arabic
proﬁciency testing and assessment, in particular the status of testing–SLA
interface; and Section 1.4 discusses Arabic second language pedagogy with
respect to the ongoing debate of addressing diglossia and teaching Arabic
variation. The chapter concludes with challenges and future directions.
1.2
Arabic SLA: Past and Present Approaches
Arabic SLA kept abreast, progressively more so, with the development of
the general SLA ﬁeld and its different approaches and models, from con-
trastive and error analysis to the present (for a detailed survey, see
Alhawary 2009a). Thus, Arabic SLA studies started (a decade after the
emergence of error analysis) with the appearance of a few error analysis
studies (e.g., Al-Ani 1972–1973; Rammuny 1976), where the approach of
SLA analysis relied on analysing L2 learners’ competence-related errors.
Despite the insights such studies (based on cross-sectional written compo-
sition data) lent about types of errors made by English-speaking learners of
Arabic (e.g., orthographic/phonological, lexical, structural, and stylistic),
one of the main limitations of error analysis studies in general is that they
did not provide the bigger picture of what and how much the learners got
right versus what and how much they got wrong.
Error analysis limitations led to the abandonment of the approach and
the adoption of no fewer than seven approaches since then. One such
approach sought to analyse the overall performance of the learner (i.e.,
the big picture) or to identify emerging patterns or developmental
sequences in acquiring a given form or a set of forms (see Larsen-
Freeman and Long 1991). Within this approach, Al-Buainain (1986) exam-
ined the acquisition of negation and interrogation by British English-
speaking learners of Arabic (based on cross-sectional written translation
and manipulation data). Al-Buainain’s ﬁndings indicated that, in acquiring
the target forms, participants progressed along intermediate stages from
simple and deviant interlanguage forms to ones that are more acceptable
and target-like. Relatedly, Alhawary (2009a) examined negation construc-
tions and relevant mood endings (based on longitudinal production data).
The ﬁndings showed the emergence of a certain order of the constructions
and such order was impacted by input effects, such as amount and expo-
sure timing.
A second post-error analysis approach considered other phenomena not
previously examined, such as communication strategies(e.g., generalizations,
1 2
M O H A M M A D T . A L H A W A R Y

avoidance, circumlocution, message adjustment, prefabricated patterns, and
codeswitching). Althoughinitially thought to bepeculiarto L2learnerscoping
with their limited knowledge of the L2, communication strategies were later
problematized as not being dissimilar to adjustments made by L1 speakers to
accommodate real-time processing and communication constraints (e.g.,
Tarone 1980; Bialystok 1990). At least one study, Fakhri (1984), examined
communication strategies in Arabic L2 acquisition (based on production
data from an L1 English speaker). In addition to observing similar commu-
nication strategies used by the participant, Fakhri found the strategies were
constrained by the speciﬁc narrative genre components (i.e., the orientation,
episodic, and evaluation parts) in that certain strategies were used more often
during one part than other parts.
A third post-error analysis approach is the application of SLA to two
major cognitive processing models. The ﬁrst is that of speech processing
constraints adopted by Processability Theory (PT). The theory seems attrac-
tive, as it provides a detailed framework and a strong committed stance
towards foreign language pedagogy through its learnability and teachabil-
ity claims. In particular, it provides a cognitive account for L2 grammatical
development and posits that L2 learners create L2 language-speciﬁc pro-
cessing resources or prerequisites along an implicational hierarchy of
stages which cannot be skipped; i.e., structures which are from a higher
stage cannot be learned before those from a lower one. This learnability
prediction lends itself to another prediction to do with teachability: that
instruction can be beneﬁcial if it focuses on structures from the next stage
(e.g., Pienemann 1998, 2005; Pienemann and Keßler 2011; Baten et al.
2015). However, based on longitudinal and cross-sectional production
data, Arabic SLA studies produced mixed evidence on a number of mor-
phosyntactic structures. Such studies either found evidence contrary to
the hypothesized implicational processing hierarchy (e.g., Nielsen 1997;
Alhawary 2003, 2009a, 2009b, 2019) or claimed evidence in support of it
(e.g., Mansouri 2000; Al Shatter 2008) (for a review of such studies, see
Alhawary 2009a, 2019). The second cognitive model which was tested by
Arabic L2 studies is the Competition Model developed by Bates and
MacWhinney (1987). Arabic L2 studies on sentence processing within the
Competition Model produced mixed evidence. Abu Radwan (2002) found
that English-speaking learners of Arabic initially relied on Arabic L2 cues
of case markings, followed by gender and animacy and did not exhibit L1
transfer, though the study did not investigate word order.1 By contrast, Al-
Thawahrih (2018) found English L1 learners of Arabic initially exhibited L1
transfer by relying on L1 word-order cues and started utilizing L2 verbal
agreement cues in processing Arabic L2 sentences and assigning agency
with more exposure to the language.
1 For a detailed review of the study and input factors that may explain the ﬁndings, see Alhawary 2009a: 39–41.
1 Arabic Applied Linguistics
13

A fourth post-error analysis approach is that of formal (rule-based)
Universal Grammar (UG)-based accounts of Principles and Parameters,
especially in relation to notions of UG access and L1 transfer.2 A number
of hypotheses have been advanced that the L2 learner has access, to vary-
ing degrees, to UG, though indirectly through L1 (see Meisel 1983, 1991;
Clahsen 1984; Clahsen and Muysken 1986, 1989; Felix 1985; Bley-Vroman
1989, 1990; Schachter 1989). The following are the most prominent
hypotheses and their brief claims:
• The Minimal Tree Hypothesis posits that only lexical categories transfer
(e.g., Vainikka and Young-Scholten 1996).
• The Weak Transfer Hypothesis (e.g., Eubank 1993/94, 1996) or the Local
Impairment Hypothesis claims that both lexical and functional cate-
gories transfer but the feature values associated with functional cate-
gories do not (Beck 1997, 1998; Eubank et al. 1997; Eubank and Beck
1998).
• The Full Transfer/Full Access Hypothesis proposes that the entirety of L1
grammar (including lexical categories, functional categories, and
abstract feature values associated with functional categories) is avail-
able to L2 learners from the onset of L2 acquisition (e.g., Schwartz and
Sprouse 1996; Schwartz 1998).
• The Missing Surface Inﬂection Hypothesis (e.g., Lardiere 1998, 2000;
Pre´vost and White 2000; Bruhn de Garavito and White 2002; Pre´vost
2008) claims that the feature system is temporarily impaired at the
morphophonological (surface) level due to complexity in mapping
between surface forms and underlying abstract features.
• The Representational Deﬁcit/Interpretability Hypothesis, which is
a reformulation of the Failed Functional Features Hypothesis (Hawkins
and Chan 1997; Hawkins 2001), claims that uninterpretable ϕ-features
(e.g., agreement features of person, number, and gender) are subject to
maturational constraints and therefore if such features are not instan-
tiated in L1 prior to the critical period, they become no longer accessible
later (e.g., Hawkins 2005; Hawkins and Hattori 2006; Hawkins et al.
2008; Tsimpli 2003; Tsimpli and Dimitrakopoulou 2007; Tsimpli and
Mastropavlou 2008).
• The Feature Reassembly Hypothesis, which is a reformulation of the
Missing Surface Inﬂection Hypothesis, adopts a contrastive linguistic
feature-based approach in which ultimate attainment of native-like L2
morphosyntactic knowledge depends on the extent to which learners
are able to reconﬁgure the feature values in functional categories and
2 See also Arabic L2 studies on the mechanism of structural derivation and representation of the latest modiﬁed version
of Generative Grammar theory: the Minimalist Programme. These include Alhawary (2007a) on abandoning or
maintaining proposals for the Split-INFL Hypothesis based on tense and agreement ﬁndings in Arabic SLA data, and
Algady (2018) on the role of economy conditions (i.e., whether they are operative) in the syntactic derivation of Arabic
L2 resumptive pronouns within four types of relative clause constructions.
1 4
M O H A M M A D T . A L H A W A R Y

lexical items, and the conditions under which these are realized, from
those of the L1 to the L2 (Lardiere 2008, 2009; Hwang and Lardiere 2013).
With respect to the general notions of UG access and L1 transfer, a number
of Arabic studies examined UG access and L1 transfer claims (Bolotin 1996;
Alhawary 2007b, 2009a). Based on performance of L2 English-speaking
learners of Arabic on a grammaticality judgement task, Bolotin (1996)
found that whereas the beginner and intermediate groups exhibited evi-
dence for L1 transfer by retaining their English L1 non-resumptive-
pronoun [+movement] setting, the advanced group showed evidence for
(indirect) access to UG as they were able to reset the parameter to
a resumptive-pronoun [−movement] setting exhibited in their L2 Arabic.
Similarly, based on production data of null subjects from participants
whose L1s are set to [−null] (English) and [+null] (Spanish and Japanese),
Alhawary (2007b, 2009a) concluded that since the three groups of L1
participants were able to set the parameter value to [+null] in their L2
learning of Arabic from early on, the data provide evidence for UG access
(through the English L1 participants) and L1 transfer (through the Spanish
L1 and Japanese L1 participants). In addition, a contingent relationship was
found between the Spanish L1 participants’ development of verbal agree-
ment morphology and their use of null subjects (see also Alhawary 2019,
for further evidence of L1 transfer based on null-subject use by Russian-
speaking learners of Arabic).
As for the speciﬁc predictions made by the above-mentioned hypoth-
eses, a series of studies conducted by Alhawary (e.g., 2002, 2005, 2009a,
2009b, 2019) investigated the acquisition of nominal gender and verbal
gender agreement based on longitudinal and cross-sectional data from
learners
of
different
L1
backgrounds,
including
English,
French,
Japanese, Chinese, and Russian. The studies found an asymmetry in the
acquisition of nominal gender and verbal gender agreement, where parti-
cipants of certain L1s encountered more difﬁculty with the former than
the latter. The data are argued to be best accounted for by the Full Transfer/
Full Access Hypothesis, while the others fall short of adequately account-
ing for the data. Thus, due to the availability and transfer of the uninter-
pretable ϕ-feature gender (nominal) agreement from L1, French-speaking
learners of Arabic outperformed their English and Japanese counterparts
on nominal gender agreement (e.g., Alhawary 2009a). A similar ﬁnding
was yielded where Russian-speaking learners of Arabic maintained an
advantage over their Chinese counterparts on the same forms (Alhawary
2019). Alhawary concludes that the data are compatible with the Full
Transfer/Full Access hypothesis, and that such a difference in performance
is likely due to structural proximity, in particular the presence or absence
of a feature in L1, and not necessarily due to complexity in mapping
between surface forms and underlying abstract features (a` la the Missing
Surface
Inﬂection
Hypothesis)
or
learning
difﬁculties
involved
in
1 Arabic Applied Linguistics
15

reconﬁguring the nominal gender agreement features in conformity with
those of the L2 (a` la the Feature Reassembly Hypothesis), since there is no
such complexity involved in gender agreement between an attributive
adjective and a head noun within the Arabic noun phrase. This asymme-
trical performance may seem to be compatible with the Representational
Deﬁcit/Interpretability Hypothesis assuming a permanent impairment
where a feature becomes no longer accessible in the UG inventory if it is
not instantiated in L1. However, contrary to such a permanent impairment
account, the underperformance on gender nominal agreement seems to
be temporary, since it was shown it can be mitigated by extra input (most
notably in the beginning stage), and ultimate attainment is possible, in
principle, since some individual (L1 English and L1 Chinese) participants
were able to perform at ceiling on such forms (e.g., Alhawary 2009a,
2019).3 With respect to performance on verbal gender agreement by parti-
cipants with different L1s that exhibit gender verbal agreement (such as
Russian in the past tense) or do not exhibit verbal gender agreement (such as
English, French, Japanese, and Chinese), it was attributed to other contribut-
ing factors such as the nature of the target forms. Thus, present-tense verbs
in Arabic, in particular those inﬂected for third-person singular and mascu-
line, have both the feature tense/aspect and feature (gender, number, and
person) agreement conﬂated in the preﬁx. Relatedly, the different L1s of the
participants involve some type of structural similarity with Arabic, whether
in exhibiting a tense distinction between the past and the present (i.e., all
the L1s including Chinese and Japanese), tense and verbal (person and
number) agreement (i.e., English and French), or tense and verbal (gender,
person, and number) agreement (i.e., Russian). It is claimed that evidence for
L1 transfer through the acquisition asymmetry in nominal gender agree-
ment though not in verbal agreement (due to the nature of the target forms)
may make the role of L1 transfer appear selective in this case (e.g., Alhawary
2019), or what I call the Robustness of L1 Transfer Hypothesis. Finally, Azaz
(2016) investigated acquisition of Arabic deﬁniteness by English-speaking
learners of Arabic, using a grammaticality judgement task and a forced
choice (written) task. The study found L1 negative transfer effects in low-
proﬁciency learners, but advanced learners were able to recover from such
effects and assign more target-like deﬁnite nouns (i.e., having reconﬁgured
deﬁniteness features from their L1 to L2). Accordingly, the data were inter-
preted in support of the Feature Reassembly Hypothesis.
A ﬁfth post-error analysis strand of studies are those conducted on
heritage learners, which is a relatively new area of investigation.
Following Polinsky (2008) and Montrul (2008), the L1 of the heritage
learner ‘has not been completely acquired because of the switch to another
3 One other non-UG account proposed for the underperformance on nominal gender agreement by such L2 learners is
that absence of the gender agreement feature is expectedly more entrenched (à la usage-based and frequency
accounts of language learning) in participants whose L1s do not exhibit such features (e.g., English L1 and Japanese L1
speakers) than those (French L1 and Russian L1 speakers) whose L1s do (Alhawary 2019).
1 6
M O H A M M A D T . A L H A W A R Y

dominant language’ at or before school age (Polinsky 2008: 149). Because
of their stronger dominant L2 and some areas in their L1 that may have
undergone loss or attrition over time, heritage speakers are described as
‘unbalanced bilinguals’ (Polinsky 2015). A series of studies on Arabic heri-
tage learners conﬁrmed the presence of gaps in their morphosyntactic and
lexical knowledge (Albirini et al. 2011, 2013; Albirini and Benmamoun
2014, 2015), root and pattern morphological knowledge (Benmamoun
et al. 2014), and sociolinguistic competence to utilize both colloquial
Arabic and Standard Arabic (Albirini and Chakrani 2016).4 Due to L1
(positive) transfer from colloquial Arabic, Albirini (2014) further found
that whereas elementary heritage learners in his study maintained an
advantage over their Arabic L2 learner counterparts, such an advantage
diminished in his advanced heritage participants. Albirini (2014) specu-
lated that the lack of such an advantage in the advanced participants was
due to lack of effective instructional materials which would have allowed
heritage learners to beneﬁt more signiﬁcantly from formal instruction and
promote their language skills more noticeably.
A sixth post-error analysis strand of studies examined Arabic L2 phonol-
ogy and vocabulary as well as the different processes and skills, such as
reading, writing, listening, and speaking, mainly by English-speaking
learners of Arabic. Arabic L2 phonology studies mainly focused on the
perception and production of Arabic consonant contrasts by L2 learners
at various levels of Arabic L2 development (e.g., Alosh 1987; Al Mahmoud
2013; Shehata 2015; for more recent studies on Arabic L2 phonology, see
Alhawary 2018a). Two studies on Arabic L2 vocabulary examined morpho-
logical awareness of word-formation (including knowledge of root and
pattern). The ﬁndings revealed that such awareness either led to robust
knowledge development of Arabic L2 vocabulary (Redouane 2003) or at
least facilitated guessing the meanings of unfamiliar words and producing
new ones (Khoury 2008). As for Arabic L2 skills and processes, studies on
Arabic L2 reading focused on word recognition in relation to Arabic pho-
nological and orthographic systems, posing potential problems for
English-speaking learners of Arabic in early stages of their language acqui-
sition (Khaldieh 1996). Studies on Arabic L2 reading were examined in
relation to comprehension and knowledge of case and mood markings
(Khaldieh 2001) and the role of diacritics in reading speed and reading
comprehension (Hansen 2010; Al Midhwah and Alhawary 2020). At least
one study, conducted by Shakir and Obeidat (1991), focused on writing and
examined use of textual features, such as content-organization and cohe-
sion devices. Similar to writing, at least one study on listening comprehen-
sion (Elkhafaiﬁ2005) was conducted with respect to the effectiveness of
different types of advanced organizers (for a detailed discussion with
4 Classroom teachers and foreign language practitioners have long been aware of such knowledge gaps in heritage
learners’ knowledge, but thanks to heritage learning studies, such gaps are now empirically proven.
1 Arabic Applied Linguistics
17

pedagogical implications of studies on Arabic L2 phonology, vocabulary,
and processes and skills, see Alhawary 2018b).5 Processes and skills remain
by far among the most under-investigated areas in Arabic SLA and also
happen to be crucial for second language pedagogy and pedagogical prac-
tices in the classroom.
Finally, a seventh, current, approach, which has received recent but little
attention, although already well established in psychology and language
learning, is that which investigates language learning based on usage-based
accounts. Usage-based or frequency (aka ‘statistical learning’) accounts hold
that target forms emerge from usage and exposure to input, in that the
learner tracks and extracts structural regularities and idiosyncrasies from
the frequency distribution of target forms in the input, and, upon repeated
exposure and extraction, begins to approximate the target forms (e.g., Bybee
and Hopper 2001; Ellis 2012). Recently, one Arabic L2 study investigated
usage-based claims by examining the acquisition of lexical stress by L1
English and L1 Chinese learners of Arabic as an L2 (Lin and Alhawary
2018). The study found partial support for frequency effects in particular,
with study participants exhibiting higher ﬂuency and accuracy in their
production of stress when the stimuli had a relatively more frequent stress
pattern than others. In addition, the study found L1 transfer effects, as study
participants’ performance seemed to have been conditioned by perception
of acoustic cues and prosodic characteristics of their L1.
1.3
Arabic Proﬁciency Testing: The Status of Arabic Testing–
SLA Interface
Hand in hand with SLA research goes second language learning assess-
ment and proﬁciency testing (e.g., Bachman and Cohen 1998; Alderson
2005). In particular, a strong interface connects between second language
acquisition data and proﬁciency tests such as the American Council on
Teaching of Foreign Languages (ACTFL) oral proﬁciency interview (OPI),
which relies on the elicitation and rating of unrehearsed speech. Because
of this reliance on unplanned and impromptu speech, the SLA–testing
interface is at its strongest when SLA data are based on the spontaneous
output production of L2 learners rather than on certain conscious mea-
sures, such as grammaticality judgement and writing tasks, which are
metalinguistic in nature and do not necessarily reﬂect the underlying
often
unconscious
knowledge
of
the
L2
learner’s
interlanguage.
However, despite the fact that ACTFL OPI guidelines have gone through
at least two revisions since they were ﬁrst formulated in 1989 and that
5 As for studies on speaking, previous studies in Arabic L2 were conducted primarily in relation to the production or
processing of Arabic morphosyntactic features in order to test PTclaims (discussed above in connection with Arabic SLA
approaches dealing with cognitive processing models).
1 8
M O H A M M A D T . A L H A W A R Y

certain ‘annotations’ or updates were introduced to the latest version
(ACTFL 2012), such guidelines have a number of limitations due to lack
of reliance on actual SLA data.6
One major limitation of current ACTFL guidelines is inclusion of vague
descriptors such as ‘syntax may be strongly inﬂuenced by the ﬁrst lan-
guage’ (in the Novice High level rubrics), ‘limitations in grammar and/or
syntax’ (in the Intermediate Mid level rubrics), presence of ‘a certain
grammatical roughness’ (in the Advanced Low level rubrics), ‘an imperfect
grasp of some forms’ (in the Advanced High level rubrics), and ‘virtually no
pattern of error in the use of basic structures’ (in the Superior level
rubrics). Despite the introduction of ‘speciﬁc annotations’ in ACTFL
(2012), such annotations remain too few and too vague and do not beneﬁt
from Arabic SLA data and ﬁndings. For example, we are not told what
forms are included in the ‘grammatical roughness’ category, nor are we
informed how L1 transfer effects are manifested at different levels based
on test takers’ L1s. Accordingly, testers are left to ﬁgure out on their own,
for example, what constitutes ‘grammatical roughness’ and which struc-
tures are ‘basic’ and which are not. Hence placing primary emphasis on
rubrics related to meaning and functions, to the exclusion of forms, may
not sufﬁciently aid in identifying the exact proﬁciency level of test
takers.7
Bringing a closer alignment between proﬁciency testing and second
language acquisition research can potentially address ACTFL guidelines’
current limitations, as SLA ﬁndings can make a signiﬁcant difference.
Findings relevant to acquisition tendencies and patterns of emergence
and acquisition by speakers of similar and different L1s can inform proﬁ-
ciency testing and mitigate the confusion and ambiguity entailed by cur-
rent descriptors and annotations and help guide testers away from
misidentifying the proper proﬁciency levels of test takers. The challenge
is that we need far more research and replication studies to enrich Arabic
SLA ﬁndings both in depth and in breadth.
1.4
Arabic Second Language Pedagogy: One Path or
Multiple Paths for Teaching Variation
Although there have been signiﬁcant advances in Arabic second language
pedagogy over the past half century, especially in the USA (for detailed
reviews, see McCarus 1992; Abboud 1993; Ryding 2006), the current status
is far from being rosy, and much remains to be done, such as the need to
6 The problems are compounded by the fact that the ACTFL guidelines were initially articulated while taking into account
languages which are not as digolossic as Arabic (i.e., where the distance between the spoken and written/standard
codes are not as wide) and primarily catered to the commonly (Western European) taught languages.
7 For a detailed discussion of the problematic nature of the vague descriptors as well as the newly introduced annotations
of the ACTFL Guidelines (2012), see Alhawary (2019).
1 Arabic Applied Linguistics
19

develop more textbooks beyond the few ones available and to clarify the
status of integrating dialectal varieties with fus˙h˙ a¯ ‘Modern Standard Arabic’
(MSA) in the teaching of Arabic as a second/foreign language. With respect
to the latter, teaching Arabic language variation or addressing the diglossic
character of Arabic in foreign language teaching has taken at least three
different approaches. All three approaches aim at developing proﬁciency,
with knowledge of MSA and at least one dialect, but they follow different
routes. The standard approach has been to introduce MSA in the ﬁrst one
to three years and then introduce courses in the dialects later, followed
possibly by further study abroad where learners get more intensive dialec-
tal linguistic input, and (pragmatic) language use as well as additional
cultural components of the language. Serious programmes adopting this
route introduce one dialect or more at home and do not simply relegate the
learning of a dialect to study abroad. A second approach is to start with
teaching a dialect during the ﬁrst one to two years, then to transition to
integrate the teaching of MSA. A third approach, which has gained more
momentum recently, especially with the publication of two textbooks
(Brustad et al. 2011, 2014; Younes et al. 2013 and Younes and Al-Masri
2013), attempts to integrate the teaching of dialects with MSA from early
on. Of note, authors of the two textbooks also produced two books to
advocate for the approach: Younes (2015) and Al-Batal (2018). The remain-
der of this section deals with the rationale of the third teaching approach
integrating the teaching of dialects with MSA together with its limitations,
both theoretical and methodological.
There is no doubt that integrating a dialect and MSA in Arabic language
teaching from early on would be quite advantageous, since it would reﬂect
authentic language input and use and would respond to the growing needs
of learners to interact with native speakers (particularly in the USA), as
indicated in some questionnaire surveys (e.g., Kuntz and Belnap 2001;
Belnap 2006; Husseinali 2006; Palmer 2007). Advocates of such integration
believe the advantages outweigh all other considerations. In an exception-
ally short monograph of ﬁfty-eight pages, Younes (2015) provides an over-
view of well-known sociolinguistic accounts of Arabic diglossia and
describes his personal experience integrating his own Palestinian dialect
in a form of educated spoken Arabic in which he seems to believe that
integration (versus MSA ﬁrst or colloquial ﬁrst) is the only correct pedago-
gical way to deal with diglossia and language variation.8 Although provid-
ing a sociolinguistic account is a necessary component for advocating for
a particular pedagogical approach, three other components, which are at
least equally necessary, are completely absent from Younes’ treatment. No
discussion is provided about the theoretical language-learning underpin-
nings or how variation is assumed to be learned, given the variability or
8 For a detailed critique and counterarguments of Younes’ arguments for one correct path for dealing with Arabic diglossia
versus multiple possible paths each of which being subject to speciﬁc considerations, see Eisele (2018).
2 0
M O H A M M A D T . A L H A W A R Y

entailed optionality of language use (i.e., with such optionality a given
code is not guaranteed to be learned or produced), timing of acquisition,
and other input effect considerations.9 A second absent component which
would be expected but is completely missing is any discussion of
a methodological rationale for how to test and assess learning using the
new approach. A third missing component is an explicit account of the
linguistic input (i.e., where criteria for what, when, where, and how MSA is
integrated with a colloquial variety or varieties are explicitly articulated),
which is a pedagogical prerequisite for contents for drill and practice by
the learner in the classroom and for language input modelling and error
correction (by means of recast or other methods) by the teacher.10 Instead
of providing a rigorous and reliable account of such an input for learning,
Younes (2015: 53) goes as far as saying that even in the event a teacher has
no knowledge of a target dialect, the alternative of teaching MSA in con-
versation is not an option, suggesting perhaps that a teacher can teach
what they want and how they want.11
Al-Batal’s (2018) is a more substantial attempt to advocate for integrating
MSA and colloquial varieties or teaching Arabic variation within a one-
language approach from early on. Notwithstanding the inclusion of seven-
teen chapters by different authors, Al-Batal’s (2018) treatment, similar to
that of Younes, lacks three necessary components: theoretical language-
learning underpinnings of how variation is assumed to be learned, given
the variability or entailed optionality of language use; a methodological
rationale for how to test and assess student learning using an Arabic-
as-one-language approach; and an explicit account of the linguistic input
with criteria for what, when, where, and how MSA is integrated with
a colloquial variety, despite inclusion of some general proposals. Of all
the chapters, three chapters dealt with L2 acquisition and spoken output
production. However, the three studies suffer from methodological limita-
tions. One study (Shiri and Joukhadar 2018) relied on classroom observa-
tions and end-of-semester skits. Another study (Nassif 2018) used end-of-
9 Alhawary (2013) suggests that such an approach would require more learning time as well as for forms and functions
belonging to different codes to be drilled and practised in different contexts, at least on par with synonym learning (p.
31). In addition, a recent study on Arabic L2 lexical stress by L1 English and L1 Chinese learners of Arabic (Lin and
Alhawary 2018) did not reveal proﬁciency effects (i.e., learning gains) from ﬁrst to second year learning even for
frequent stress patterns and even though the participants were exposed to one variety (MSA). The authors concluded
that the task of the participants would have been further compounded had they been exposed to other varieties,
especially those which exhibit different stress patterns, and cautioned (following Alhawary 2013) that at the very least
‘incorporating more items in the instructional input should translate into more instruction time in the classroom and
more input related to such items available, which, in turn, should be subsequently sufﬁciently recycled’ (Lin and
Alhawary 2018: 32).
10 Cf. Ryding’s approach and explicit description of formal spoken Arabic (1990, 1991).
11 Cf. Alhawary (2013: 30) who suggests that ‘even in contexts where MSA does not fall in complementary distribution
with a given dialect, one can argue for the notion of authentic language use not at the level of product but rather at the
level of process, where in instructed second language learning receptive skills are reinforced by productive skills and
vice versa’ at least in the early stages of language learning (see also Alosh 2000). In addition, recent approaches for
teaching dead languages such as Greek and Latin have advocated for incorporating productive skills.
1 Arabic Applied Linguistics
21

semester skits and presentations in addition to end-of-semester inter-
views. Aside from lack of any speciﬁcity as to how classroom observations
were analysed,12 relying on end-of-semester skits and presentations is far
from being reliable to examine the underlying interlanguage systems of the
learners, since such tasks are heavily rehearsed and students receive aca-
demic credit for them. The third study (Leddy-Cecere 2018), similarly used
classroom observations and additionally oral interviews. Leddy-Cecere
(2018) claimed to have found four codeswitching patterns along four stages
(based on four groups of four participants belonging to one to four years of
language exposure) and that no evidence of fossilization or mixing of codes
was found. However, aside from lack of information of how classroom
observations were analysed, the study seems to have focused on codeswitch-
ing use, but did not provide any frequency for the codeswitching patterns
nor any focus on a speciﬁc feature throughout the output productions of the
participants. The latter is essential to prove or disprove existence of fossili-
zation (of speciﬁc features) or pidginized forms. Finally, of all three studies,
only Leddy-Cecere (2018) provides samples of L2 learners’ output production.
Many of the examples provided are neither natural nor authentic native-like
speech, e.g., minsˇa¯n huwwe la¯ yurı¯d ʾan yaʾkul ‘Because he doesn’t want to eat,’
yatakallam ʾal-ʿarabiyy maʿa ʿa¯ʾilathu bzza¯f ‘He speaks Arabic with his family
a lot,’ and huwa yaru¯h˙ fı¯ ʿira¯q ‘He goes to Iraq’ (Leddy-Cecere 2018: 204–5).
In sum, the approach of teaching dialectal varieties with MSA in tandem
requires far more explicit articulation in terms of the nature of language
learning involved, testing and assessing such learning, and the nature of
the linguistic input to be taught and learned. Alhawary (2013) suggests that
the optimal route to teaching Arabic variation seems to be one starting
with MSA ﬁrst to develop a working knowledge of the language and
introducing a dialect one to two years later, since introducing two or
more codes at the same time ‘would increase the learning burden for the
learner who would be faced with too much input to comprehend and
proceduralize’ (30).13 The latter would amount to making the instructional
input difﬁcult to comprehend or understand. In fact, a common observa-
tion of the reaction of the majority of learners exposed to the integrated or
mixed language approach is that it is confusing to them and they often do
not know what code they are using and in which context. This is even
12 Shiri and Joukhadar (2018) seem to have used coarse-grained criteria to distinguish between MSA and a dialectal
variety: ‘Words that were close in both varieties but did not share all the consonants were counted as different. The
word “mixing” is used to describe the use, by students, of a dialectal feature or lexical item in a class or activity where
MSA is the designated variety and vice versa’ (Shiri and Joukhadar 2018: fn163). Moreover and oddly enough, the
authors seem to consider only ‘random mixing’ as part of the interlanguage systems of the participants: ‘“Random
mixing” is used to describe switching between MSA and dialect that is not intentional and is merely considered as
interlanguage’ (163; emphasis added).
13 Following Nation (2001), Redouane (2003), and Webb (2007), Alhawary explains that ‘[a]t the early stage of learning
an L2, even learning vocabulary is less efﬁcient than at a later stage, since the learner has not acquired sufﬁcient basic
working knowledge’ (Alhawary 2013: 30). Of course, this does not preclude teaching basic functions such as greetings
and similar functions. For other reasons to do with delaying the introduction of a dialect, see Alhawary (2013: 29–31).
2 2
M O H A M M A D T . A L H A W A R Y

conﬁrmed by a questionnaire survey conducted by Al-Batal and Glakes
(2018), published in Al-Batal (2018) advocating for the integrated or mixed
approach. The survey reveals that about two-thirds of the respondents who
were exposed to the mixed-language curriculum stated that ‘learning
a dialect simultaneously with MSA is confusing’ (268). With the current
cognitive constructionist paradigm of language learning, including the
adoption of the communicative approach, the working assumption is
that adult L2 learners do not learn that which they do not understand. As
is widely known by second language practitioners, this was one of the
main causes for the abandonment of the audio-lingual approach and the
adoption of the communicative approach.
1.5
Conclusion: Challenges and Future Directions
Despite the fact that the three main sub-disciplines of Arabic applied
linguistics – second language acquisition, second language proﬁciency
testing and assessment, and second language pedagogy – have seen signiﬁ-
cant advances, much remains to be done and many challenges lie ahead, as
Arabic remains understudied and underexamined, compared to other lan-
guages. More studies in second language acquisition are needed to cover (in
depth and breadth) the different linguistic subdomains as well as the
different processes and skills (speaking, listening, reading, and writing).
More structural speciﬁcity is required to be introduced to Arabic ACTFL
proﬁciency testing rubrics and annotations as well as more reliance
on second language acquisition data (in order to help the tester identify
the exact proﬁciency level of the test taker) and taking into account acqui-
sition variations exhibited by test takers of different L1 backgrounds. More
reﬂective and explicit articulation of the pedagogical route of helping the
L2 learner of Arabic achieve proﬁciency in Arabic, including its variation, is
needed. While the debate of which teaching/learning route most effectively
leads to proﬁciency in Arabic variation, the ﬁeld will need to look beyond
this debate and consider other more sophisticated issues relevant to the
learners, such as the socio-psychological or socio-affective factors of atti-
tude and identity. We all know too well that negative anecdotal accounts of
encounters between Arabic L2 learners and native speakers due to speaking
in MSA (see Younes 2015) or a dialect (see Eisele 2018) abound. Since Arabic
is a global language,14 it may be important to consider whether or not the
Arabic L2 learner tends to index the variety they adopt (whether a dialect or
the standard) to position, preserve, or negotiate an (im)personal or (non)
religious identity on par with studies on English as a second language (e.g.,
Dalton and Seidlhofer 1994; Lippi-Green 1997; Bent and Bradlow 2003).
Finally, due to advances in technology and its impact on technology-
14 In this case, English is, of course, a super-global language.
1 Arabic Applied Linguistics
23

mediated learning and teaching, and if the objectives include catering to
learners’ needs such as those reported in surveys (e.g., Kuntz and Belnap
2001; Belnap 2006; Husseinali 2006; Palmer 2007), the quest for a method
of how best to teach language variation within one curriculum may be
a mirage. It may be the case that the future will favour the implementation
of modules or capsules from different instructional materials rather than
using one single curriculum, since technology-mediated learning and teach-
ing can quite ﬂexibly reﬂect different prioritization and foci of language
modalities and registers. By the same token, insisting on one curriculum so
that one size ﬁts all may end up being counterproductive and contrary to
students’ needs. Clearer articulation from institutions, programme adminis-
trators, and stakeholders about their programmatic missions and objectives
pertaining to language teaching and learning would be paramount and
would help alleviate, if not solve, many of the existing problems.
References
Abboud, P. (1993). The teaching of Arabic in the United States: A brief
sketch of its history, achievements, and challenges. In Proceedings of the
1st Annual Symposium of the Institute of Islamic and Arabic Sciences in America.
Fairfax, VA: IISA Research Center, 89–93.
Abu Radwan, A. (2002). Sentence processing strategies: An application of the
Competition Model to Arabic. In D. Parkinson and E. Benmamoun, eds.,
Perspectives on Arabic Linguistics XIII–XIV. Amsterdam: John Benjamins,
185–209.
ACTFL (American Council on the Teaching of Foreign Languages). (2012).
ACTFL Proﬁciency Guidelines: Speaking. [www.actﬂ.org/publications/guide
lines-and-manuals/actﬂ-proﬁciency-guidelines-2012/Arabic]
Al-Ani, S. H. (1972–1973). Features of interference in the teaching of Arabic
composition. An-Nashra, V–VI, 3–13.
Al-Batal, M. (2018). Arabic as One Language. Washington, DC: Georgetown
University Press.
Al-Batal, M. and Glakes, C. (2018). Dialect integration: Students’ perspec-
tives within an integrated program. In M. Al-Batal, ed., Arabic as One
Language. Washington, DC: Georgetown University Press, 260–78.
Albirini, A. (2014). The role of the colloquial varieties in the acquisition of
the standard variety: The case of Arabic heritage speakers. Foreign
Language Annals, 47(3), 447–63.
Albirini, A. and Benmamoun, E. (2014). Concatenative and non-concatenative
plural formation in L1, L2, and heritage speakers. The Modern Language
Journal, 98(3), 854–871.
Albirini, A. and Benmamoun, E. (2015). Factors affecting the retention of
sentential negation in heritage Egyptian Arabic. Bilingualism: Language
and Cognition, 8(3), 470–89.
2 4
M O H A M M A D T . A L H A W A R Y

Albirini, A. and Chakrani, B. (2016). Switching codes and registers: An
analysis of heritage Arabic speakers’ sociolinguistic competence.
International Journal of Bilingualism, 20, 1–23.
Albirini, A., Benmamoun, E., and Saadah, E. (2011). Grammatical features
of Egyptian and Palestinian Arabic heritage speakers’ oral production.
Studies in Second Language Acquisition, 33, 273–303.
Albirini, A., Benmamoun, E., and Chakrani, B. (2013). Gender and number
agreement
in
the
oral
production
of
Arabic
heritage
speakers.
Bilingualism: Language and Cognition, 16(1), 1–18.
Al-Buainain, H. (1986). Second Language Acquisition of Arabic: The Development
of Negation and Interrogation Among Learners in the UK. Unpublished PhD
thesis, University of Edinburgh.
Alderson, J. C. (2005). Designing Foreign Languages Proﬁciency: The Interface
Between Learning and Assessment. London: Continuum.
Algady, D. (2018). The acquisition of resumptive pronouns: How do second
language learners of Arabic do it? In M. T. Alhawary, ed., The Routledge
Handbook of Arabic Second Language Acquisition. London: Routledge,
181–200.
Alhawary, M. T. (2002). Role of L1 transfer in L2 acquisition of inﬂectional
morphology. In D. Parkinson and E. Benmamoun, eds., Perspectives on
Arabic Linguistics XIII–XIV. Amsterdam: John Benjamins, 219–48.
Alhawary, M. T. (2003). Processability Theory: Counter-evidence from
Arabic second language acquisition data. Al-ʿArabiyya, 36, 107–66.
Alhawary, M. T. (2005). L2 acquisition of Arabic morphosyntactic features:
Temporary
or
permanent
impairment?
In
M.
T.
Alhawary
and
E.
Benmamoun,
eds.,
Perspectives
on
Arabic
Linguistics
XVII–XVIII.
Amsterdam: John Benjamins, 273–311.
Alhawary, M. T. (2007a). The Split-INFL Hypothesis: Findings from English
and Japanese L2 learners of Arabic. In M. Mughazy, ed., Perspectives on
Arabic Linguistics XX. Amsterdam: John Benjamins, 135–52.
Alhawary, M. T. (2007b). Null subjects use by English and Spanish learners
of Arabic as an L2. In E. Benmamoun, ed., Perspectives on Arabic Linguistics
XIX. Amsterdam: John Benjamins, 217–45.
Alhawary, M. T. (2009a). Arabic Second Language Acquisition of Morphosyntax.
New Haven, CT: Yale University Press.
Alhawary, M. T. (2009b). Speech processing prerequisites or L1 transfer:
Evidence from English and French L2 learners of Arabic. Foreign Language
Annals, 42, 367–90.
Alhawary, M. T. (2013). Arabic second language acquisition research
and second language teaching: What the teacher, textbook writer, and
tester need to know. Al-ʿArabiyya, 46, 23–35.
Alhawary, M. T. (2018a). The Routledge Handbook of Arabic Second Language
Acquisition. London: Routledge.
Alhawary, M. T. (2018b). Empirical directions in the future of Arabic second
language acquisition and second language pedagogy. In K. M. Wahba,
1 Arabic Applied Linguistics
25

Z. A. Taha, and L. England, eds., Handbook for Arabic Language Teaching
Professionals in the 21st Century, vol. II. London: Routledge, 408–21.
Alhawary, M. T. (2019). Arabic Second Language Learning and Effects of Input,
Transfer, and Typology. Washington, DC: Georgetown University Press.
Al Mahmoud, M. S. (2013). Discrimination of Arabic contrasts by American
learners. Studies in Second Language Learning and Teachings, 3(2), 261–92.
Al Midhwah, A. and Alhawary, M. T. (2020). Arabic diacritics and their role
in facilitating reading speed, accuracy, and comprehension by English
L2 learners of Arabic. The Modern Language Journal, 104(2), 418–38.
Alosh, M. M. (1987). The Perception and Acquisition of Pharyngealized Fricatives by
American Learners of Arabic and Implications for Teaching Arabic Phonology.
Unpublished PhD thesis, Ohio State University.
Alosh, M. M. (2000). Instructor’s Handbook of Ahlan Wa Sahlan: Functional Modern
Standard Arabic for Beginners. New Haven, CT: Yale University Press.
Al Shatter, G. (2008). The development of verbal structures in L2 Arabic. In
J.-U. Keßler, ed., Processability Approaches to Second Language Development and
Second Language Learning. Newcastle, UK: Cambridge Scholars, 267–99.
Al-Thawahrih, J. (2018). Arabic L2 learners’ use of word order and subject-
verb agreement for actor role assignment. In M. T. Alhawary, ed., The
Routledge
Handbook
of
Arabic
Second
Language
Acquisition.
London:
Routledge, 201–21.
Azaz, M. (2016). Crosslinguistic effects in L2 acquisition: The case of Arabic
determiner phrase. Al-ʿArabiyya, 49, 1–24.
Bachman, L. F. and Cohen, A. D. (1998). Interfaces between Second Language
Acquisition and Language Testing Research. Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press.
Baten, K., Buyl, A., Lochtman, K., and Van Herreweghe, M. (2015). Theoretical
and Methodological Developments in Processability Theory. Amsterdam: John
Benjamins.
Bates, E. and MacWhinney, B. (1987). Competition, variation, and language
learning. In B. MacWhinney, ed., Mechanisms of Language Acquisition.
Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum, 157–93.
Beck, M.-L. (1997). Regular verbs, past tense, and frequency: Tracking down
one potential source of NS/NNS syntactic competence differences. Second
Language Research, 13, 93–115.
Beck, M.-L. (1998). L2 acquisition and obligatory head movement: English
speaking learners of German and the Local Impairment Hypothesis.
Studies in Second Language Acquisition, 20, 311–48.
Belnap, K. (2006). A proﬁle of students of Arabic in US universities. In
K. M. Wahba, Z. A. Taha, and L. England, eds., Handbook for Arabic
Language Teaching Professionals in the 21st Century. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence
Erlbaum, 169–78.
Benmamoun, E., Albirini, A., Montrul, S., and Saadah, E. (2014). Arabic
plurals and root and pattern morphology in Palestinian and Egyptian
heritage speakers. Linguistic Approaches to Bilingualism, 4(1), 89–123.
2 6
M O H A M M A D T . A L H A W A R Y

Bent, L. and Bradlow, A. (2003). The interlanguage speech intelligibility
beneﬁt. Journal of the Acoustical Society of America, 114, 1600–10.
Berns, M. (2010). Concise Encyclopedia of Applied Linguistics. Oxford: Elsevier.
Bialystok, E. (1990). Communication Strategies. Oxford: Blackwell.
Bley-Vroman, R. (1989). What is the logical problem of foreign language
learning. In S. Gass and J. Schachter, eds., Linguistic Perspectives on Second
Language Acquisition. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 41–68.
Bley-Vroman, R. (1990). The logical problem of foreign language learning.
Linguistic Analysis, 20, 3–49.
Bolotin, N. (1996). Resetting parameters in acquiring Arabic. In M. Eid and
D. Parkinson, eds., Perspectives on Arabic Linguistics IX. Amsterdam: John
Benjamins, 166–78.
Bruhn de Garavito, J. and White, L. (2002). The second language acquisition
of Spanish DPs: The status of grammatical features. In A. T. Pe´rez-Leroux
and J. M. Liceras, eds., The Acquisition of Spanish Morphosyntax. Dordrecht:
Kluwer, 153–78.
Brustad, K., Al-Batal, M., and Al-Tonsi, A. (2011). Al-Kitaab ﬁi Taʿallum al-
ʿArabiyya: Part One, 3rd ed. Washington, DC: Georgetown University Press.
Brustad, K., Al-Batal, M., and Al-Tonsi, A. (2014). Al-Kitaab ﬁi Taʿallum al-
ʿArabiyya: Part Two, 3rd ed. Washington, DC: Georgetown University Press.
Bybee, J. L. and Hopper, P. J. (2001). Frequency and the Emergence of Linguistic
Structure. Amsterdam: John Benjamins.
Chapelle, C. A. (2013). The Encyclopedia of Applied Linguistics. West Sussex, UK:
Wiley-Blackwell.
Clahsen, H. (1984). The acquisition of German word order: A test case for
cognitive approaches to second language acquisition. In R. Anderson,
ed., Second Language. Rowley, MA: Newbury House, 219–42.
Clahsen, H. and Muysken, P. (1986). The availability of Universal Grammar
to adult and child learners: A study of the acquisition of German word
order. Second Language Research, 5, 93–119.
Clahsen, H. and Muysken, P. (1989). The UG paradox in L2 acquisition.
Second Language Research, 2, 1–29.
Dalton, C. and Seidlhofer, B. (1994). Pronunciation. Oxford: Oxford
University Press.
Eisele, J. (2018). One path or multiple paths: Munther Younes on the
integrated approach to Arabic instruction. Al-ʿArabiyya 51, 1–23.
Elkhafaiﬁ, H. (2005). The effects of prelistening activities on listening
comprehension in Arabic learners. Foreign Language Annals, 38(4), 505–13.
Ellis, N. C. (2012). Frequency-based accounts of second language acquisi-
tion. In S. Gass and A. Mackey, eds., The Routledge Handbook of Second
Language Acquisition. New York: Routledge, 193–210.
Eubank, L. (1993/94). On the transfer of pragmatic values in L2
development. Language Acquisition, 3, 183–208.
1 Arabic Applied Linguistics
27

Eubank, L. (1996). Negation in early German-English interlanguage: More
valueless features in the L2 initial state. Second Language Research, 12,
73–106.
Eubank, L. and Beck, M.-L. (1998). OI-like effects in adult L2 acquisition. In
A. Greenhill, M. Hughes, H. Littleﬁeld, and H. Walsh, eds., Proceedings of
the 22nd Annual Boston University Conference on Language Development, vol. 1.
Somerville, MA: Cascadilla Press, 189–200.
Eubank, L, Bischof, J., Huffstutler, A., Leek, P., and West, C. (1997). ‘Tom
eats slowly cooked eggs’: Thematic verb raising in L2 knowledge.
Language Acquisition, 6, 171–99.
Fakhri, A. (1984). The use of communicative strategies in narrative dis-
course: A case study of Moroccan Arabic as a second language. Language
Learning, 34(3), 15–37.
Felix, S. W. (1985). More evidence on competing cognitive systems. Second
Language Research, 1, 47–72.
Hansen, G. F. (2010). Word recognition in Arabic as a foreign language
(AFL). The Modern Language Journal, 94, 567–81.
Hawkins, R. (2001). Second Language Syntax. Malden, MA: Blackwell.
Hawkins, R. (2005). Revisiting wh-movement: The availability of an unin-
terpretable [wh] feature in interlanguage grammars. In L. Dekydtspotter,
D. R. Sprouse, and A. Liljestrand, eds., Proceedings of the 7th Generative
Approaches
to
Second
Language
Acquisition
Conference
(GASLA
2004).
Somerville, MA: Cascadilla, 124–37.
Hawkins, R. and Chan, Y.-H. (1997). The partial availability of Universal
Grammar in second language acquisition: The ‘Failed Functional
Features Hypothesis’. Second Language Research, 13, 187–226.
Hawkins, R. and Hattori, H. (2006). Interpretation of English multiple
wh-questions by Japanese speakers: A Missing Uninterpretable Feature
account. Second Language Research, 22, 269–301.
Hawkins, R., Casillas, G., Hattori, H., Hawthorne, J., Husted, R., Lozano, C.,
et al. (2008). The semantic effects of verb raising and its consequences
in second language grammars. In J. M. Liceras, H. Zobl, and H. Goodluck,
eds., The Role of Formal Features in Second Language Acquisition. New York:
Lawrence Erlbaum, 328–51.
Husseinali, G. (2006). Who is studying Arabic and why? A survey of stu-
dents’ orientation at a major university. Foreign Language Annals, 39(3),
395–412.
Hwang, S. H. and Lardiere, D. (2013). Plural-marking in L2 Korean: A
feature-based approach. Second Language Research, 29, 57–86.
Khaldieh, S. (1996). Word recognition of Arabic as a foreign language by
American learners: The role of phonology and script. Al-ʿArabiyya, 29,
129–52.
Khaldieh, S. (2001). The relationship between knowledge of iʿraab, lexical
knowledge, and reading comprehension of nonnative readers of Arabic.
The Modern Language Journal, 85(3), 416–31.
2 8
M O H A M M A D T . A L H A W A R Y

Khoury, G. (2008). Vocabulary Acquisition in Arabic as a Foreign Language: The
Root and Pattern Strategy. Unpublished PhD thesis, Boston University, MA.
Kuntz, P. and Belnap, K. (2001). Beliefs about language learning held by
teachers and their students at two Arabic programs abroad. Al-ʿArabiyya,
34, 91–113.
Lardiere, D. (1998). Case and tense in the ‘fossilized’ steady state. Second
Language Research, 14, 1–26.
Lardiere, D. (2000). Mapping features to forms in second language acquisi-
tion. In J. Archibald, ed., Second Language Acquisition and Linguistic Theory.
Oxford: Blackwell, 102–29.
Lardiere, D. (2008). Feature-assembly in second language acquisition. In
J. M. Liceras, H. Zobl, and H. Goodluck, eds., The Role of Formal Features in
Second Language Acquisition. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum, 106–40.
Lardiere, D. (2009). Some thoughts on a contrastive analysis of features
in second language acquisition. Second Language Research, 25, 173–227.
Larsen-Freeman, D. E. and Long, M. L. (1991). An Introduction to Second
Language Acquisition Research. New York: Longman.
Leddy-Cecere, T. (2018). Diverse speaker output in the integrated Arabic
classroom: Trends and interpretations. In M. Al-Batal, ed., Arabic as One
Language. Washington, DC: Georgetown University Press, 199–220.
Lin, C.-W. and Alhawary, M. T. (2018). Frequency and L1 transfer effects for
the perception and production of Arabic lexical stress by L1 English and
L1 Chinese learners of Arabic as an L2. In M. T. Alhawary, ed., The
Routledge
Handbook
of
Arabic
Second
Language
Acquisition.
London:
Routledge, 9–37.
Lippi-Green, R. (1997). English with an Accent. London: Routledge.
McCarus, E. (1992). History of Arabic studies in the United States. In
A. Rouchdy, ed., The Arabic Language in America. Detroit. MI: Wayne State
University Press, 207–21.
Mansouri, F. (2000). Grammatical Markedness and Information Processing in the
Acquisition of Arabic L2. Munich, Germany: Lincom Europa.
Meisel, J. (1983). Strategies of second language acquisition: More than one
kind of simpliﬁcation. In R. W. Anderson, ed., Pidginization and Creolization
as Second Language Acquisition. Rowley, MA: Newbury House, 120–57.
Meisel, J. (1991). Principles of Universal Grammar and strategies of language
use: On some similarities and differences between ﬁrst and second lan-
guage acquisition. In L. Eubank, ed., Point-Counterpoint: Universal Grammar
in the Second Language. Amsterdam: John Benjamins, 231–71.
Montrul, S. (2008). Incomplete Acquisition in Bilingualism: Re-examining the Age
Factor. Amsterdam: John Benjamins.
Nassif, L. (2018). Integrating colloquial Arabic into the Arabic L2 curricu-
lum: An analysis of learner speech. In M. Al-Batal, ed., Arabic as One
Language. Washington, DC: Georgetown University Press, 175–98.
Nation, I. S. (2001). Learning Vocabulary in Another Language. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
1 Arabic Applied Linguistics
29

Nielsen, H. L. (1997). On acquisition order of agreement procedures in
Arabic learner language. Al-ʿArabiyya, 30, 49–93.
Palmer, J. (2007). Arabic diglossia: Teaching only the standard variety is
a disservice to students. Arizona Working Papers in Second Language
Acquisition and Teaching, 14, 111–22.
Pienemann, M. (1998). Language Processing and Second Language Development:
Processability Theory. Amsterdam: John Benjamins.
Pienemann, M. (2005). Cross-Linguistic Aspects of Processability Theory.
Amsterdam: John Benjamins.
Pienemann, M. and Keßler, J.-U. (2011). Studying Processability Theory: An
Introductory Textbook. Amsterdam: John Benjamins.
Polinsky, M. (2008). Heritage language narratives. In D. Brinton, O. Kagan,
and S. Bauckus, eds., Heritage Language Education: A New Field Emerging.
London: Routledge, 149–64.
Polinsky, M. (2015). When L1 becomes an L3: Do heritage speakers make
better L3 learners? Bilingualism: Language and Cognition, 18(2), 163–78.
Pre´vost, P. (2008). Knowledge of morphology and syntax in early adult L2
French: Evidence for the Missing Surface Inﬂection Hypothesis. In
J. M. Liceras, H. Zobl, and H. Goodluck, eds., The Role of Formal Features in
Second Language Acquisition. New York: Lawrence Erlbaum, 352–77.
Pre´vost, P. and White, L. (2000). Missing surface inﬂection or impairment
in second language acquisition? Evidence from tense and agreement.
Second Language Research, 16, 103–33.
Rammuny, Raji M. (1976). Statistical study of errors made by American
students in written Arabic. Al-ʿArabiyya, 9, 75–94.
Redouane, R. (2003). Learners’ variability in coining new words in L2. Al-
ʿArabiyya, 36, 49–80.
Ryding, K. C. (1990). Formal Spoken Arabic: Basic Course. Washington, DC:
Georgetown University Press.
Ryding, K. C. (1991). Proﬁciency despite diglossia: A new approach for
Arabic. The Modern Language Journal, 75(2), 212–18.
Ryding, K. C. (2006). Teaching Arabic in the United States. In K. M. Wahba,
Z. A. Taha, and L. England, eds., Handbook for Arabic Language Teaching
Professionals in the 21st Century. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum, 13–20.
Schachter, J. (1989). Testing a proposed universal. In S. Gass and
J. Schachter, eds., Linguistic Perspectives on Second Language Acquisition.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 73–88.
Schwartz, B. D. (1998). On two hypotheses of ‘transfer’ in L2A: Minimal
Trees and Absolute L1 Inﬂuence. In S. Flynn, G. Martohardjiono, and
W. O’Neil, eds., The Generative Study of Second Language Acquisition.
Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum, 35–59.
Schwartz, B. D. and Sprouse, R. A. (1996). L2 cognitive states and the Full
Transfer/Full Access Model. Second Language Research, 12, 40–72.
Shakir, A. and Obeidat, H. (1991). Maturity in AFL student-written texts:
A case study. Al-ʿArabiyya, 24, 65–81.
3 0
M O H A M M A D T . A L H A W A R Y

Shehata, A. (2015). Problematic Arabic consonants for native English
speakers: Learners’ perspectives. The International Journal of Educational
Investigations, 2(9), 24–47.
Shiri, S. and Joukhadar, C. (2018). Arabic diglossia speaking without mix-
ing: Practices and outcomes from a beginning level. In M. Al-Batal, ed.,
Arabic as One Language. Washington, DC: Georgetown University Press,
154–72.
Tarone, E. (1980). Communication strategies, foreigner talk, and repair in
interlanguage. Language Learning, 20, 417–31.
Tsimpli, I. M. (2003). Clitics and determiners in L2 Greek. In J. M. Liceras,
H. Zobl, and H. Goodluck, eds., Proceedings of the 6th Generative Approaches
to Second Language Acquisition Conference (GASLA 2002). Somerville, MA:
Cascadilla, 331–9.
Tsimpli, I. M. and Dimitrakopoulou, M. (2007). The Interpretability
Hypothesis: Evidence from wh-interrogatives in second language
acquisition. Second Language Research, 23, 215–42.
Tsimpli, I. M. and Mastropavlou, M. (2008). Feature interpretability in L2
acquisition and SLI: Greek clitics and determiners. In J. M. Liceras,
H. Zobl, and H. Goodluck, eds., The Role of Formal Features in Second
Language Acquisition. New York: Lawrence Erlbaum, 142–83.
Vainikka A. and Young-Scholten, M. (1996). Gradual development of L2
phrase structure. Second Language Research, 12, 7–39.
Webb, S. (2007). The effects of synonymy on second-language vocabulary
learning. Reading in a Foreign Language, 19(2), 120–36.
Younes, M. (2015). The Integrated Approach to Arabic Instruction. London:
Routledge.
Younes, M. and Al-Masri, H. (2013). Arabiyyat al-Naas, Part Two. London and
New York: Routledge.
Younes, M., Weatherspoon, M., and Foster, M. S. (2013). Arabiyyat al-Naas,
Part One. London: Routledge.
1 Arabic Applied Linguistics
31

2
Language Planning in
the Arab World in an
Age of Anxiety
Hussein M. Elkhafaiﬁ
2.1
Introduction
When the New York Times publishes an article on the perilous state of the
Arabic language in the Arabian Gulf nations, it is evidence of the enormous
challenge facing all Arab countries. The Qatar campus of Illinois-based
Northwestern University found that the ability to communicate at the
level of Arabic appropriate for media, such as on the Aljazeera network,
was seriously lacking in many of the Arab students who enrol in their
communications and journalism programmes. Their solution is to offer
and require more courses in Arabic (for native speakers) to try to produce
students who can function effectively in the Arab media. The underlying
cause of this linguistic quandary, according to the Times, is the ‘rise of
English as a lingua franca throughout the Arab world and the consequent
decline of Arabic’ (Guttenplan 2012). As Gerd Nonneman, Dean of
Georgetown University’s School of Foreign Service in Qatar, noted in the
article, ‘Quite a few of these kids have never really had an Arabic educa-
tion.’ This, then, reﬂects the anxiety mentioned in the title of this chapter:
the fear that Arabic is falling behind in the modern world and even its
native speakers might struggle to measure up. In his essay on language
anxiety as a factor in Arabic language planning, Yasir Suleiman notes the
prevalence of anxiety-linked terms in language-related conferences ‘The
Arabic language is in danger: We are all partners in protecting it’) and in
published works, noting that the deteriorating state of Arabic education
for Arabs is regarded by many in the ﬁeld as a crisis (Suleiman 2014: 62).
The linguistic, social, and cultural state of the Arabic language has been
trending to this point for decades. This chapter will brieﬂy examine the
history of Arabic language planning, then turn to the current state of
affairs in Arabophone countries, and conclude with some ﬁnal thoughts
on how it might achieve success.

2.2
Historical Perspective
For nearly a century, the status of Arabic as a local, regional, and global
language has occupied the attention and efforts of linguists, journalists,
politicians, and educators. Arabic1 is the ofﬁcial language of twenty-two
countries and is spoken and taught in numerous other nations as a lan-
guage of religion, culture, education, arts, diplomacy, and commerce.2
However, this ofﬁcial status does not guarantee its exclusive use in all
areas of endeavour. An Arab nation may declare, with unanimous popular
support, that Arabic is the ofﬁcial language of state, but in reality, the
ofﬁcial language is the mother tongue of no citizen of that nation. As
Ferguson noted, the existence of two separate varieties of Arabic in every
country where Arabic is spoken constitutes a diglossic situation wherein
the High variety Modern Standard Arabic (or MSA) is the ofﬁcial state
language, and the spoken or vernacular Low varieties are what Arabs use
for daily communication (Ferguson 1959: 15). This diglossic situation pre-
sents a major challenge to educators, government ofﬁcials, and language
planners who are expected to facilitate the exclusive use of Arabic within
each country, on every level.
2.2.1
Ofﬁcial Arabic Language Organizations
The Arabic language academies include: Majmaʿ al-ʿIlmı¯ al-ʿArabı¯ (The
Arab Academy of Science) in Damascus, inaugurated in 1919. In Cairo,
Majmaʿ al-Lugha al-ʿArabı¯yya (The Academy of the Arabic Language) was
founded in 1932, followed in 1947 by al-Majmaʿ al-ʿIlmı¯ al-ʿIra¯qı¯ (The Iraqi
Academy of Science) in Baghdad. In Rabat, al-Maktab al-Da¯’im li-Tansı¯q al-
Taʿrı¯b fı¯ al-Wat˙an al-ʿArabı¯ (Permanent Bureau of Coordination of
Arabization in the Arab World, or PBA) was launched under the auspices
of
Al-Munaz˙z˙amah
al-ʿArabı¯yyah
li-al-Tarbı¯yyah
wa-al-Thaqa¯fah
wa-
al-ʿUlu¯ m (Arab League Educational, Cultural and Scientiﬁc Organization,
or ALECSO) in 1962. In 1976, Majmaʿ al-Lugha al-ʿArabı¯yya al-Urdunnı¯ was
established in Amman.3 These institutions were established both to pro-
vide a speciﬁc response to perceived challenges to the natural elegance of
Arabic emanating from external linguistic forces, such as colonial powers,
and economic and political challenges, and to better equip the language
1 For the purposes of this article, Arabic means Modern Standard Arabic (MSA), deﬁned by S. Suleiman as ‘any variety of
Arabic that is found in contemporary books, newspapers, and magazines, and that is used orally in formal speeches, and
learned debates in newscasts over radio and television’ (S. Suleiman 1985: 7). Thus, MSA is a standardized variety of
the language, which is conﬁned almost entirely to written or formal discourse and is rarely spoken. The colloquial
dialects, on the other hand, are rarely written and vary greatly from one country to another. A discussion of dialects, while
certainly of interest to language planners, is beyond the scope of the present chapter.
2 The Arabophone nations include current members of the Arab League: Algeria, Bahrain, Comoros, Djibouti, Egypt, Iraq,
Jordan, Kuwait, Lebanon, Libya, Mauritania, Morocco, Oman, Palestine, Qatar, Saudi Arabia, Somalia, Sudan, Syria,
Tunisia, United Arab Emirates, and Yemen.
3 For further information about the establishment of the Arabic language academies and their work, see Elkhafaiﬁ(1985).
2 Language Planning in the Arab World
33

for its role in the modern era. Often modelled on Western language
academies like the Acade´mie Franc¸aise, the Arab academies initially
sought to preserve Arabic from the inﬂux of foreign words (particularly
English words) and to maintain the unique character of Arabic that had
developed over the centuries. Arabic, once a premier language of scholar-
ship in the Middle Ages, had been a valued conduit of intellectual and
scientiﬁc discovery, and Europeans studied Arabic in order to beneﬁt from
Arab research and innovation. The Arab academies of the twentieth cen-
tury hearkened back to that long-vanished but highly regarded time when
European languages adopted Arabic terms and concepts and made them
part of their educational and intellectual systems. Among the many ‘bor-
rowings’ are terms like zero, cypher, nadir, alkali, almanac, to note just
a handful (Langacker 1973: 181–3).
Bentahila has commented that it would be of value to revisit the meth-
ods employed by medieval Arabs to address their needs for scientiﬁc or
technical terminology during the heyday of Arab science (Bentahila 1983:
133). In medieval times, new terminology was created as needed by
exploiting the derivational capacity of Arabic morphology, as well as
borrowing terms from Greek and Persian, in particular. In modern times,
similar intrinsic means may be adapted to today’s needs.
The Arabic language-planning organizations undertake tasks beyond
ofﬁcial adaptation of the language to modern usage. The collection and
archiving of older Arabic sources and the restoration of classical works to
make them available for present generations are also in their mandate.
Journals and publications from the language planners help to disseminate
their decisions on language solutions and to encourage public awareness
and wider acceptance of their ongoing work, which, as we shall see below,
consists largely of terminology creation. In many countries, language
planners actively solicit the works of contemporary authors to increase
the body of modern Arabic literature and to afﬁrm the place of Arabic in
the modern social, cultural, and educational scenes. Recognizing the value
of introducing the literature of other world languages to Arab society, the
planning institutions also sponsor translations of selected foreign publica-
tions into Arabic (Abuhamdia 1984: 59).
Despite general agreement that there is a need to modernize at the very
least, the Arabic lexicon, the Arabic-speaking community still strives to
protect and preserve the language from the ﬂood of foreign lexical and
grammatical inﬂuences that seep into the language from all sides. The
Arabic language-planning agencies have mounted many diverse cam-
paigns to meet these challenges, with decidedly mixed success. The main
thrust of these language-planning agencies has been, from the beginning,
Arabization, i.e., mandating the use of Arabic in all areas of national life,
including education on all levels, government business, commercial activ-
ity, and communications (Shaaban and Ghaith 1999: 14). Early efforts
contended with the residual effects of colonization, especially the French
3 4
H U S S E I N M . E L K H A F A I F I

and English educational and administrative systems put in place to facil-
itate colonial powers’ governance. During the colonial and pre-modern
era, Arab traditions, including language, social, cultural, and religious
practices, were often, as Findlow has put it, ‘swept under the carpet’
(Findlow 2001). This tense situation informed much of the impetus for
the independence movements of the twentieth century.
After independence, many of these foreign-inﬂuenced institutions
remained as the only intact governmental bodies tasked with running
the country. Thus it is no surprise that these entities would be the ﬁrst to
be selected for Arabization. While the intentions of the newly independent
nations and their language-planning organizations were good, the results
were less than spectacular.
2.2.2
Problems of Early Language Planning
Among the major handicaps faced by language planners in every Arab
country was the lack of skilled personnel to create new Arabic language
policies. In the former colonial states, the education systems had focused
on producing trained individuals to further the business of government
primarily in the language of the colonizers. There was a dearth of trained
teachers, administrators, and ofﬁcials who could function as well in stan-
dard Arabic as they had in French or English during the colonial era.
Although immediate plans were developed to train new cadres of educa-
tors and linguists to facilitate the countries’ Arabization efforts, the crea-
tion of a body of experts was and remains a daunting and complex task for
Arab nations.
Before the national efforts to Arabize could be realized and coalesce into
linguistic reality, another factor came into play that tested the ﬂedgling
efforts of language planners. The phenomenon of globalization, affecting
international communications, business, and diplomacy, added urgency
to planning processes which were still struggling to rise above the vestiges
of the colonial period. In light of the worldwide surge in technical and
scientiﬁc innovation, it is worth remembering that Karam deﬁnes lan-
guage planning as ‘the management of linguistic innovation’ (Karam
1974: 18). This term, ‘linguistic innovation’, is one that should be on the
daily agenda of every Arabic language-planning organization.
2.3
Contemporary Arabic Language Planning
Every Arabic-speaking country publicly and ofﬁcially avows its support for
ofﬁcial, comprehensive language planning. In actuality, lack of organiza-
tion, resources, and expertise hampers the process in every country.
Arabic differs signiﬁcantly from other languages designated for ‘revival’
or reform by language planners. It is spoken daily by almost 350 million
2 Language Planning in the Arab World
35

native speakers, and used by millions more as a language of religion and
education (Fassi Fehri 2013: 180). Arabic is not a marginalized or minority
language like Gaelic or Berber, and has never been considered ‘dead’ like
Hebrew. For centuries, vernacular Arabic has been the primary language of
communication for millions of native speakers who use it for every pur-
pose of daily life, yet often ﬁnd it inadequate for scientiﬁc, technical, or
advanced educational purposes.
The experience of Morocco is an excellent example of the persistent
problem with Arabicization. In 1989, Cooper observed that Morocco’s
Arabicization programme that was intended to include all ofﬁcial, govern-
mental, and educational spheres had yet to achieve the majority of its
goals three decades after independence (Cooper 1989: 101). In many
instances, national and local governmental and educational institutions
took the path of least resistance and ceded the stage to older, established
colonial practices, wherein French was the preferred language for ofﬁcial
business and was paramount in classrooms and commerce alike. Today,
while progress has been made, it cannot be said that all branches of
Moroccan government use Arabic exclusively for all their ofﬁcial business.
A major study of language planning, human development, and educa-
tion
in
Arabic-speaking
countries
was
mounted
in
1998
by
the
International Literacy Institute in Philadelphia, which also examined
Arabic language policy and planning efforts. The Institute’s analysis con-
cluded that the attitudes of Arab governments and Arabic speakers could
be described as a three-pronged hierarchy (Maamouri 1998: 55–6). These
attitudes prevail today, with only minor differences (Daoud 2002: 207). The
more conservative and traditional opinion maintains that Arabic, in its
current state, is more than sufﬁcient for all ofﬁcial, educational, and social
needs, so ‘language planning’ as a policy is not required. On the other
hand, a more moderate position holds that the ofﬁcial, educational and
social fabric of the Arabic-speaking community would beneﬁt from some
processes of simpliﬁcation and standardization. This middle-of-the-road
group aligns with the more traditional view that the fundamental struc-
ture of Arabic should not be changed. Diverging considerably from the ﬁrst
two groups, a third contingent calls for major – sometimes draconian–
changes to the language. These have included both changing Arabic script
to a romanized version and a comprehensive revision of traditional gram-
matical rules. In each Arab country that supports language-planning pro-
grammes, representatives of each of these views work together – not
always harmoniously – to bring the language into the modern world.
In addition to terminology creation for science and technology, the
Arabic language planners strive to produce modern terminology for the
social and natural sciences, as well as for the arts and humanities. There
are fewer deﬁcits in these ﬁelds, perhaps reﬂecting the less frenetic pace of
change. Apart from remedying any deﬁciencies in terminology, Arabic
language planners strive to preserve the essential nature of the language,
3 6
H U S S E I N M . E L K H A F A I F I

lest it be haphazardly altered by the intrusion of foreign words, gramma-
tical structures, or other non-Arabic linguistic elements. Arabic language
planners tend to be conservative and this may account for the slowness of
their response to the demand for new terminology. New lexical items must
conform to standard Arabic lexical, morphological, syntactic, and phono-
logical rules. While the easier route might be to permit wholesale ‘pseudo-
Arabization’ (as in simply writing a foreign term in Arabic script), the
majority of Arabic planners are understandably reluctant to permit such
a challenge to the essential grammatical and lexical principles of the
language.
2.3.1
Planning Agency Functions
All Arabic language-planning agencies work in much the same way. They
publish records of their works and ﬁndings, including minutes of meet-
ings, terminology lists, decisions on usage, and other matters related to the
Arabic language. Committees create scientiﬁc and technical terminology
lists for selected ﬁelds, using traditional methods for the expansion of the
Arabic lexicon: derivation (from existing Arabic roots – ishtiqa¯q), com-
pounding (combining existing words to create a new lexical item (nah˙ t),
revival of native sources (istinba¯t
˙
), and borrowing (taʿrı¯b).
The Arabic term taʿrı¯b is sometimes rendered interchangeably as
Arabization or Arabicization. However, there are fundamental differ-
ences in what this term means to language planners. In one sense,
which applies mostly in the Arab Middle East, Libya, and Egypt, taʿrı¯b
entails both corpus and status planning issues as planners incorporate
foreign or borrowed terms into Arabic and endorse Arabic as the lan-
guage of instruction, especially in higher education. This interpretation
is usually translated as ‘Arabization’. In North Africa, among the former
French colonies (Morocco, Algeria, and Tunisia), taʿrı¯b refers to the re-
placement of French and the promotion of Arabic for all ofﬁcial and
unofﬁcial capacities as an instrument of national cohesiveness and afﬁr-
mation of Arab identity.4 Because taʿrı¯b in this context goes beyond
simple linguistic innovation, it is often translated as ‘Arabicization’
(Suleiman 1999: 109). Language-planning organizations circulate lists of
terminology that they prepare to other planning bodies, schools, govern-
ment ofﬁces, and research institutions both within their own country
and often among other nations where Arabic is spoken. Unfortunately,
much of the language planners’ work never reaches the audience for
whom it is intended. In many cases, the governments pay only lip service
to the recommendations offered by the planners, and often, publication
or circulation of the new lists is severely limited (Elkhafaiﬁ1985: 74; El-
Mouloudi 1986: 92).
4 For an interesting discussion of this interpretation of taʿrīb, see Benabdi (1980: 35).
2 Language Planning in the Arab World
37

2.3.2
Problems in Arabic Language Planning
Because science and technology change and evolve so rapidly, many
Arab researchers choose to write and publish in the language in which
they were trained (usually not Arabic) and even if they wish to publish
in Arabic, they ﬁnd themselves stymied by the lack of accurate and
appropriate terminology in all areas, not only scientiﬁc and technical
ﬁelds. So, although they may agree in principle that Arabization is
a desirable linguistic goal, they are unlikely to wait for language
planners to provide them with the terminologies they need.
All Arabic language-planning agencies lack the appropriate person-
nel for accomplishing their mission. An essential member of any
project to develop modern chemistry terminology, for example, is
a trained, highly educated chemist. However, trained chemists may
command substantial salaries in business and industry and be rather
less drawn to the essential but poorly paid and mundane job of
terminology
development.
Additionally,
that
professional
chemist
may already be active in adapting or even creating the terminology
they need to do their job well, and in most cases that trove of lexical
inventions they and their fellow scientists use among themselves may
never be seen by others in the ﬁeld, especially if they do not regularly
publish their research in widely disseminated journals, and it is cer-
tainly not seen by any language planner. Unfortunately, because their
area of expertise is science and not language or linguistics, the terms
they devise to meet their own immediate needs would likely be unac-
ceptable to a planning organization which strives for consistency
among similar terms using traditional Arabic morphology.
The founders of the Arabic language-planning organizations seriously
underestimated the dimensions of the task they had set for themselves.
In 1919 no one could have predicted nuclear power, the Internet,
3-D printing, or many of the other scientiﬁc and technological innova-
tions we take for granted today. Nor did they envision the enormous
changes in communication technology, where a word or term sponta-
neously ‘invented’ in Cairo might become widely known in Beirut the
same day. At this point, putting the genie back in the bottle becomes an
exercise in futility and frustration. As Maamouri puts it, ‘lexical instru-
mentalization is . . . an important need which is not yet taken care of by
the efforts of all the existing Arabic language academies and terminol-
ogy-focused institutions’ (Maamouri 1998: 68). Duplication of effort
because of lack of cooperation among the various Arabic language plan-
ners has led to years of wasted time and resources, while corpus creation,
educational
reform,
and
status
planning
has
languished.
When
Dr Abdelkareem Khaleefa, President of the Jordanian Arabic Academy,
addressed a colloquium on Arabic language issues in 1993, he noted with
exasperation:
3 8
H U S S E I N M . E L K H A F A I F I

I ﬁrst visited this lovely country [Morocco] 30 years ago upon the establish-
ment of the Permanent Bureau of Coordination of Arabization in the Arab
World, or PBA (al-Maktab al-Da¯ ‘im li-Tansı¯q al-Taʿrı¯b fı¯ al Wat˙an al-ʿArabı¯)
and here I am again today. And after 30 years, we are still talking about the
same methods of coining terminology. This is unbelievable!
(Khaleefa 1993: 347)
Another barrier to the creation of a standardized Arabic scientiﬁc and
technical lexicon is the absence of any accord among the Arab countries
with regard to terminology use or creation. In effect, each country is
developing its own terminologies (if indeed development is taking place
at all). The language-planning situation reﬂects accurately a similar lack of
unity in other ﬁelds in the Arab world (Bentahila 1983: 137).
2.4
Global Language-Planning Efforts
Sweden provides an example of successful language planning that Arab
language planners might consider emulating. Swedes borrow new termi-
nology from other languages freely and adapt the new terms to Swedish.
This is contrary to the approach recommended by many Arabic language
planners, for whom the excision of foreign elements from the language
and the preservation of Arabic as it has traditionally existed is often
paramount. Such a rigid adherence to historical precedent is not
a primary goal for Swedish language planners (Eastman 1983: 43).
Sweden, unlike the twenty-two Arabophone nations, is a single homo-
geneous country with well-established linguistic and cultural norms and
a well-developed plan for terminology production in its government,
schools, and research institutions. Unlike the majority of the Arab coun-
tries, Sweden can boast of a central planning agency and a countrywide
commitment to a uniﬁed language of research, education, and government.
The concept of borrowing from another language is not entirely foreign
to Arabic, and in an analysis of medieval Arabic medical and pharmacology
texts, Bin Murad (1985) found that foreign or borrowed terms used in these
works accounted for 67 per cent in one text and 46 per cent in the second.5
Scholars in medieval times adopted foreign terminology as appropriate to
their ﬁelds of study without fear that these words would fundamentally
alter the structure of the language. Among scores of well-known examples,
we ﬁnd kalsiyu¯m (calcium) from Latin, and na¯rjı¯s (narcissus) from Greek (Bin
Murad 1985: 152, 202).
All Arabic-speaking countries are members of the ISO (International
Organization for Standardization), whose mission is the establishment of
globally accepted standards, principles, and methods for creating
5 Al-adwıˉya al-mufrada [A Collection of Simple Drugs] by Al-Ghaˉﬁqıˉ (d. 1165); Ajmiʿ Ibn al-Bit˙aˉr [The Compendium (of
Drugs)] by Al- Bit
˙
aˉr (d. 1248).
2 Language Planning in the Arab World
39

terminology in the natural and exact sciences. The social sciences, which
are deeply rooted in local culture and ethos, are more difﬁcult to standar-
dize. The ISO’s publications in terminology and standardization are widely
distributed in Europe and most, if not all, research facilities and institu-
tions of higher education use these standards. Not so those of the Arabic
language academies. In reference to the terminology lists produced by the
various Arab language-planning agencies, one of the participants in
a language-planning conference said: ‘these [the aforementioned lists]
are gathering dust on your shelves instead of being used by the language
community for whom they were intended. The efforts are admirable but
where is their value if they are not used?’ (Khaleefa 1993: 387–8).
Such remarks illustrate the continuing paradox of Arabic language
planning, wherein much effort is expended to produce a working termi-
nology document, only to ﬁnd that it is ignored by the users for whom it
was created. As Shaaban notes, during the 1990s, the Bureau of
Coordination of Arabization in Rabat and ALECSO produced many ‘uni-
ﬁed dictionaries’ in ﬁelds from hydrology to pedagogy. What is still
unknown is whether or not these dictionaries were ever actually used
(Shaaban 2007: 702). In an earlier instance, the Algerian government
invited a group of sociolinguists from the University of California at
Berkeley to prepare a sociolinguistic proﬁle of the country. Their recom-
mendation to institutionalize Algerian Arabic and Berber as the most
widely used languages was met with instant opposition, and the results
of their work were permanently suppressed, as Islamic leaders rejected
any language other than the Arabic of the Qur’a¯n (Benrabah 2013: 54).
These and many other examples illuminate just a few of the difﬁculties
facing
Arabic
language
planners
from
the
establishment
of
the
Academies until the present.
Another global organization, Infoterm (International Information
Centre for Terminology), was founded by UNESCO in 1971 to serve as
a repository and resource for scientiﬁc and technical terminology.
Infoterm is not afﬁliated with any world government or particular lan-
guage and serves the needs of many clients in the arenas of global busi-
ness, education, scientiﬁc research, and diplomacy. Working closely with
the ISO, Infoterm promotes global cooperation and provides expertise in
terminology creation, linguistic theory, and relevant legal and copyright
issues.
Modelling itself on Infoterm, an Arabic-language organization called
Arabterm was formed in 1986 to collect and standardize the diverse collec-
tions of Arabic terminologies in use at the time. Unfortunately, a lack of
vision, resources, and a uniﬁed mission foretold its demise before it pro-
duced any results. A new entity also called Arabterm was established by
ALECSO, led by the Arabization Coordination Bureau (BCA) in Rabat and
the German Federal Ministry for Economic Cooperation and Development
(BMZ) in 2008. It now acts as a clearing house and resource for technical
4 0
H U S S E I N M . E L K H A F A I F I

terminology that is available online to all users, and serves as a forum for
the discussion of terminology-production issues and as a receiver for new
terms.6
In another example of a cooperative venture among European and Arab
lexicographers, the Catholic University of Louvain has created a three-
million-word corpus of Arabic terms culled from written and spoken
modern Arabic materials. While the original purpose of the project was
to provide a Dutch–Arabic dictionary, the collection of entries represents
an important landmark in the corpus analysis of the Arabic language, and
may provide practical guidance to those engaged solely in Arabic language
planning (Van Mol and Paulussen 2001: 1).
2.5
Arabic Today
In 1999, then Infoterm Director Christian Galinski observed that many
individuals whose mother tongue is underdeveloped from the point of
view of specialized language for technology and the sciences, or who may
be unable to attend school or receive adequate training using their
mother tongue, may view themselves as disadvantaged (Galinski
1998: 1). One may assume, correctly, that this is what is happening in
countries where Arabic is spoken. Every year, large numbers of students
from Arabic-speaking countries leave their native lands and travel to
foreign countries to study in ﬁelds such as engineering, medicine, and
computer science. While most of these students are successful studying
in English or French or German and other languages, an important dis-
advantage is immediately recognizable. If these students return to their
own home countries with foreign degrees, they are ill equipped to teach
in their own educational systems because they have not mastered the
necessary technical terminology in Arabic. The gap between this cadre of
Arab students educated abroad and students in their countries’ national
school systems is signiﬁcant. It not only contributes to linguistic dispar-
ity but to social differences as well, because the returning students often
form the upper layer of the educated elite.
Issues of education, literacy, political and civil rights, and others were
reviewed in a United Nations report focusing on human development in
the Arab world. Not unexpectedly, it was revealed that research funding in
the Arab countries, which include some of wealthiest oil-producing
nations, is among the lowest in the world (UNDP 2002: 65). This lack of
funding not only contributes to inadequate educational facilities, but
often drives students abroad to acquire skills and training unavailable in
their own country. The generous scholarships and support these students
receive often disadvantages their home country in two ways. The funds
6 See www.arabterm.org/index.php.
2 Language Planning in the Arab World
41

spent on study abroad do not contribute to the home economy, education,
or research. The students who study abroad do not always return to their
homes to share the beneﬁts of their education with their country. This last
is often the case because suitable employment is unavailable for these
highly educated, skilled returnees. Despite strong social, economic, and
political incentives to work together on scientiﬁc and technological issues,
including of course creation and standardization of terminology, inter-
Arab cooperation has been meagre at best.
A positive note included in the UN report states that although
Arabization using systems or models developed or existing in English has
been unsuccessful, Arab researchers have developed a computerized sys-
tem for which Arabic is the main operating language. The system can be
programmed to work with English. (UNDP 2002: 74). It is to be hoped that
innovations of this kind will become more numerous, but more impor-
tantly, that the Arab governments will recognize the critical need for tools
of this kind and provide funding and support for their development and
training for their use.
Lexical modernization is more likely to be an important issue if eco-
nomic factors are in play. If Arabic is working well as a vehicle for daily
communication, there is little incentive to alter or expand it. However,
when an Arab country lags behind on the global scene economically or
culturally because of deﬁciencies in technology and science, the impetus
to correct that deﬁcit is likely to become more intense, and governments
must recognize the truth about Arabic: that it ‘serves its speakers well in
all but the technical registers’ (Kaplan and Baldauf 1997: 72).
According to Canadian economist Richard G. Harris, ‘the communica-
tions medium most likely to be used is that which is most efﬁcient for the
purpose at hand’ (Harris 1998: 1). In the Arabic-speaking community,
people are naturally more likely to employ the easiest way to commu-
nicate, no matter what their level of education or training might be, and
this means that in many cases, people choose to conduct research, and to
write and to publish in English and French instead of opting to use their
own language. Aside from the advantages of a broader technical lexicon
in languages other than Arabic, the factor of prestige must also be con-
sidered, since Arabic is still not widely viewed as a language of science, so
it offers fewer opportunities for international scholars or commercial
entities to share their work. It is unfortunate but true that ‘Arabic mono-
lingual higher education risks the professional future of those subjected
to it, depriving them of close and direct contact with developments
in their ﬁelds, let alone contributing to advances in those ﬁelds’
(Abuhamdia 1984: 71).
Language change, whether for technological or scientiﬁc purposes, or
even for daily communication needs, is often ineffective if the individuals
who need those changes are not part of the process. Fishman noted that
corpus planning and lexical expansion entail many factors beyond simply
4 2
H U S S E I N M . E L K H A F A I F I

assembling a committee of linguists and scientists in one room. If even
those dedicated, skilled language planners cannot produce a corpus that is
‘liked, learned, and used’ (Fishman 1983: 115), their efforts will be for
naught. Complicating the corpus planners’ production is their necessarily
slow pace, as each new item requires multiple layers of expertise to ensure
its accuracy, its compatibility with Arabic, and its ease of use in the ﬁeld.
Abuhamdia describes Arabic planners’ pace as ‘lethargic’ and blames their
lethargy for the increasing gap between Arabic scientiﬁc terminology and
that in other world languages (Abuhamdia 1984: 73).
Fishman further warns that ‘there is substantial risk that corpus planners
will lose contact with the public . . . as the balance changes between “old”
and “new”, “theirs” and “ours”, between neologistic and traditionalistic . . .
Narrow-gauged corpus planners often become the butts of humor, sarcasm,
and ridicule, unappreciated at best and viliﬁed at worst’ (Fishman 1983:
115–16). The current dominance of English, although not yet complete
linguistic hegemony, presents an even greater challenge to Arabic. In
a world where even the smallest language communities are likely to experi-
ence some exposure to English, Arabic cannot afford to be left behind like
a bit player on a global stage. Twenty-two countries share one language,
despite their local varieties and differing politics. They are a not insignif-
icant part of the modern world and must create the tools they need to
compete and succeed on all linguistic levels.
2.6
Arabic Language Planning: Traditional Methods
for Modern Times?
The ﬁrst step towards achieving linguistic parity among the Arab countries
and also with the rest of the world has been undertaken by Arab language
planners for decades, with some measure of success, but also some notable
failures. Efforts to Arabize education on all levels was naturally one of the
ﬁrst goals of the planners. For example, in countries like Morocco, Algeria,
and Tunisia, this entailed revising the curriculum for K-12 schooling to be
entirely taught in Arabic. All-Arabic instruction is the case in many, but not
all, state schools, but is less prevalent in private schools where wealthier
families still value and prefer an education that prepares their children to
be competitive on a global basis, not just as Arab citizens within their own
country. On the higher education level, there are still struggles to fully
Arabize advanced subjects, especially in the sciences and technology. In
one instance, instead of embracing all-Arabic instruction, an Arab univer-
sity rejected efforts by the ofﬁcial language planners to institute an Arabic
language curriculum. The University of Jordan refused to use science text-
books which had been translated into Arabic especially for their curricu-
lum by the Jordanian Language Academy (Khaleefa 1983). This unexpected
and controversial rebuff of an Arabic-based curriculum infuriated the
2 Language Planning in the Arab World
43

Secretary General of the Jordanian Academy, who angrily declared that the
Arab universities were ‘the gatekeepers of foreign languages and the grave-
yards of Arabic’ (Abuhamdia 1984: 72).
A practical suggestion for terminology production was advanced by Antia
in 2000. He suggested that university students in the Arab countries could
work on projects in their ﬁelds that would create new terminology lists for
general distribution in the educational system (Antia 2000: 232). Projects
like these may accelerate the production and dissemination of new scien-
tiﬁc and technical terminology and lessen the overall burden on the ofﬁcial
language-planning agencies. Although his suggestions have not yet been
implemented on a large scale, the potential for useful terminology creation
is intriguing. In nineteenth-century Egypt, cleric and scholar Rifaat al-
Tahtawi mandated that Egyptian students who had studied abroad were
required to translate into Arabic all of the work they had completed, and to
share this information with their colleagues in Egypt (Sawaie 2000: 400).
It is unfortunate that to a great extent, the work of modern Arabic
language planners consists of holding annual meetings to discuss the
state of language planning, to pledge to improve their efforts and embrace
new technology in the effort to catch up to the rest of the world in science
and technology, among other ﬁelds. Much of the time in these meetings is
devoted to bemoaning the increasing incursion of foreign terms in Arabic.
It is also dismaying that valuable time is still devoted to discussion of such
mundane and insular issues as the language of shop signs. The fact that
some bodies still call for exclusively Arabic signage is an indication of their
disinclination to engage with the wider world and present a welcoming
and inclusive face to non-Arabic-speaking foreign visitors.
Rubin states accurately that any corpus or linguistic planning once imple-
mented must be thereafter controlled and evaluated to see whether or not it
is meeting the needs of the users for whom it was undertaken. Without
these steps, the best-intentioned language planners will waste signiﬁcant
amounts of time and resources and fail to accomplish their goals. We are
reminded by Rubin that language planning is an ongoing process, or ‘one
continuous integrated event’, and is therefore never ﬁnished (Rubin 1983:
330). Adding to the steps noted above, Clyne calls for restructuring language
plans during the process; and if the plan’s goals are reached, then further
revisions of plans should take place, given the changing nature of languages
and the people who use them (Clyne 1997: 451).
2.7
Conclusion
Since 1919, the year that the Syrian Arabic Language Academy was
founded, Damascus University has been teaching medicine in Arabic suc-
cessfully. This has remained the case in spite of, and even during, the
period of French colonization (Abuhamdia 1984: 60). It would not be
4 4
H U S S E I N M . E L K H A F A I F I

inapt to say that engineering, computer science, informatics, and other
highly technical subjects could also be taught in Arabic if the will were
there to produce the necessary terminology and textbooks that are essen-
tial to establishing curriculums for these and other ﬁelds. Language plan-
ning, as Cooper has observed, cannot be understood apart from its social
context or the history that produced that context (Cooper 1989: 3).
Throughout history, Arab culture, language, and identity have proven
their resilience and their capacity to adapt. The need for adaptation is
increasing, and now is the time for inter-Arab cooperation to transcend
national borders and focus its energies on achieving the shared goals that
will ensure the vitality of Arabic for generations to come.
Finally, as the United Nations (2003) Arab Human Development Report
pointed out, the absence of coordinated linguistic policy is the prime cause
of the linguistic crisis in the Arab world. Such a policy cannot be effective
without systematic language planning that is based on deep understand-
ing of the linguistic, cultural, and social context that gave rise to Arabic,
and where any revised language will be used. The report states, ‘there is
a marked absence of linguistic policy at the national level, which
diminishes the authority of language centers, limits their resources, and
eventually results in poor coordination among them’ (UNDP 2003: 122).
Another vital and missing component in the effort to achieve local and
inter-Arab Arabization is, as Benkharafa puts it, ‘a lack of real commitment
to this process’ (Benkharafa 2013: 205).
Despite the work of some Arab governments and a few dedicated indi-
viduals, the lack of linguistic policy referenced in the 2003 UN report
continues to plague and stiﬂe their best efforts to bring Arabic into the
modern age as a fully functioning medium of communication in every part
of the global stage. Fourteen years on, the situation is not perceptibly
different. It is to be hoped that continuing labours in the ﬁeld will achieve
greater success than their predecessors. As Fassi Fehri has noted, through
concerted ofﬁcial and private efforts, there can be an equitable and efﬁ-
cient balance between maintaining and modernizing Arabic while simul-
taneously acknowledging the vital role of English and other world
languages in the Arab world (Fassi Fehri 2013: 78–9).
References
Abuhamdia, Z. A. (1984). The dilemma of academies of Arabic: An analysis
of the environment and work of the Jordan Academy of Arabic. Muslim
Education Quarterly, 1, 57–84.
Antia, B. E. (2000). Terminology and Language Planning: An Alternative
Framework of Practice and Discourse. Amsterdam: Benjamins.
Benabdi, L. C. (1980). Arabization in Algeria: Processes and Problems. PhD dis-
sertation, Indiana University, Bloomington.
2 Language Planning in the Arab World
45

Benkharafa, M. (2013). The present situation of the Arabic language and
the Arab World Commitment to Arabization. Theory and Practice in
Language Studies, 3(2), 201–8.
Benrabah, M. (2013). Language Conﬂict in Algeria, From Colonialism to Post-
Independence. Bristol, UK: Multilingual Matters.
Bentahila, A. (1983). Language Attitudes among Arabic–French Bilinguals in
Morocco. Clevedon, UK: Multilingual Matters.
Bin Murad, I. (1985). Al-mus˙t
˙
alah˙ al-ʿajamı¯ fı¯ kutub al-t
˙
ibb wa-al-s˙aydal al-ʿara-
biyya [Arabic Terminology in Medicine and Pharmacy Books], vol. 1. Beirut: Da¯r
al-Gharb al-Islamı¯.
Clyne, M. (1997). Undoing and Redoing Corpus Planning. New York: Mouton de
Gruyter.
Cooper, R. L. (1989). Language Planning and Social Change. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
Daoud, M. (2002). Language policy and planning in Tunisia: Accommodating
language rivalry. In Steven J. Baker, ed., Language Policy: Lessons from Global
Models. Monterey, CA: Monterey Institute of International Studies,
206–24.
Eastman, C. M. (1983). Language Planning: An Introduction. San Francisco, CA:
Chandler and Sharp.
Elkhafaiﬁ, H. M. (1985). The Role of the Cairo Academy in Coining Arabic Scientiﬁc
Terminology: An Historical and Linguistic Evaluation. PhD dissertation, Salt
Lake City, University of Utah.
El-Mouloudi, A. B. (1986). Arabic Language Planning: The Case of Lexical
Modernization. PhD dissertation, Washington, DC, Georgetown University.
Fassi Fehri, A. (2013). Al-sı¯ya¯sa al-lughawiyya fı¯ al-bila¯d al-ʿarabyiyya (Language
Policy in the Arab Countries). Beirut: Da¯r al-Kita¯b al-Jadı¯d al-Muttah˙ ida.
Ferguson, C. (1959). Diglossia. Word, 15, 325–40.
Findlow, S. (2001). Global and local tensions in an Arab Gulf State:
Conﬂicting values in UAE higher education Paper delivered at interna-
tional conference, Traveling Policy/Local Space: Globalization, Identities, and
Education Policy in Europe, Keele University, 27–29 June.
Fishman, J. (1983). Modeling rationales in corpus planning: modernity and
tradition in images of the good corpus. In Juan Cobarrubias and Joshua
A. Fishman, eds., Progress in Language Planning: International Perspectives.
Berlin: Mouton, 107–18.
Galinski, C. (1998). Terminology infrastructures and the terminology mar-
ket in Europe. Internet-Zeitschrift fu¨r Kulturwissenschaften. www.inst.at/trans/
0Nr/galinski.htm.
Guttenplan, D. D. (2012). Battling to preserve Arabic from English’s onslaught.
New York Times, Monday, 11 June 2012. www.nytimes.com/2012/06/11/
world/middleeast/11iht-educlede11.html.
Harris, R. G. (1998). Economic Approaches to Language and Bilingualism: New
Canadian
Perspectives.
Ottawa:
Department
of
Public
Works
and
Government Services, Canada.
4 6
H U S S E I N M . E L K H A F A I F I

Kaplan, R. B. and Baldauf, R. D., Jr. (1997). Language Planning. From Practice to
Theory. Clevedon, UK: Multilingual Matters.
Karam, F. X. (1974). Toward a deﬁnition of language planning. In J. A. Fishman,
ed., Advances in Language Planning. The Hague: Mouton, 103–24.
Khaleefa, A. (1983). What JAA Stands for. Open House Meeting with the press
and the public, 9 October 1983. In Arabic.
Khaleefa, A. (1993). Qad˙a¯ya¯ istiʿma¯l al-lugha al-ʿarabı¯ya f ı¯ al-maghrib. [Issues in
the Use of Arabic in Morocco]. Proceedings of the Rabat Colloquium.
Mat˙bu¯ ʿa¯t Aka¯dimı¯yyat al-Mamlaka al-Maghribı¯ya.
Langacker, R. (1973). Language and Its Structure: Some Fundamental Linguistic
Concepts. New York: Harcourt Brace Jovanovich.
Maamouri, M. (1998). Language Education and Human Development. Arabic
Diglossia and Its Impact on the Quality of Education in the Arab Region.
Discussion
paper
prepared
for
the
World
Bank.
Philadelphia:
International Literacy Institute.
Rubin, J. (1983). Evaluating status planning: What has the past decade
accomplished? In J. Cobarrubias and J. Fishman, eds., Progress in
Language Planning: International Perspectives. Berlin: Mouton, 329–43.
Sawaie, M. (2000). Rifaʿa Raﬁʿ al-Tahtawi and his contribution to the lexical
development of modern literary Arabic. International Journal of Middle East
Studies, 32(3), 395–410.
Shaaban,
K.
(2007).
Language
policies
and
language
planning.
In
K. Versteegh, M. Eid, A. Elgibali, M. Woidich, and A. Zaborski, eds.,
Encyclopedia of Arabic Language and Linguistics, vol. II. Leiden: Brill, 694–707.
Shaaban, K. and Ghaith, G. (1999). Lebanon’s language-in-education poli-
cies: from bilingualism to trilingualism. Language Problems and Language
Planning, 23(1), 1–16.
Suleiman, S. M. (1985). Jordanian Arabic between Diglossia and Bilingualism:
Linguistic Analysis. Amsterdam: John Benjamins.
Suleiman, Y. (1999). Language education policy – Arabic-speaking coun-
tries. In Bernard Spolsky, ed., Concise Encyclopedia of Educational Linguistics.
Amsterdam: Elsevier. 106–16.
Suleiman, Y. (2014). Arab(ic) language anxiety. Tracing a ‘condition.’ Al-
ʿArabiyya, 47, 57–81.
UNDP (United Nations Development Programme). (2002). Arab Human
Development Report 2002: Creating Opportunities for Future Generations.
UNDP Regional Bureau for Arab States.
UNDP (United Nations Development Programme). (2003). Arab Human
Development Report 2003: Building a Knowledge Society. UNDP Regional
Bureau for Arab States.
Van Mol, M. and Paulussen, H. (2001). AraLat: A relational database for the
development of bilingual Arabic dictionaries. In S. Lee, ed., Proceedings of
Asialex 2001, Asian Bilingualism and the Dictionary. Seoul, August 2001
206–11.
2 Language Planning in the Arab World
47

3
The Study of Arabic
Language Acquisition
A Critical Review
Karen Froud and Reem Khamis-Dakwar
3.1
Introduction
Recent years have seen a notable growth in investigations of Arabic lan-
guage development (for a review see Albirini 2018), likely prompted in
large part by a growing awareness of the vital role played by language
acquisition studies in informing current theoretical debates, alongside
recognition of the necessity of such studies for enhancing educational
and clinical practices in working with children and adults with typical
and atypical language development. Better understanding of Arabic lan-
guage development may inform pedagogical practices in language and
literacy teaching and educational and clinical assessment and interven-
tion for children with special needs, as well as social practices related to
child rearing, schooling, and services. We argue that the study of Arabic
development may be impactful in two main directions: one, adding to our
understanding of cross-dialectal language development, which is the focus
of this paper; the other, the interplay between diglossia and language
development in Arabic, is discussed elsewhere (see Khamis-Dakwar and
Froud 2019). Expanding these two approaches to the study of Arabic across
all language domains would provide a window into the interplay between
sociolinguistic characteristics of diglossia, speciﬁc linguistic features of
different dialects, and processes involved in language acquisition. Such
investigations are also necessary to avoid the overgeneralization of evi-
dence from one Arabic dialect to another, especially in cases where there
are non-shared structural properties. This has particular importance for
the evidence-based application of clinical and academic practices. Such
unwarranted generalizations may hinder the identiﬁcation of differential
developmental pathways within different Arabic dialects. This chapter
offers an overview of the potential contribution of comprehensive cross-
dialectal language development investigations in Arabic that also control

for dialectal differences and diglossic features, known to interact with
language development in Arabic-speaking children.
In what follows we ﬁrst review Arabic language acquisition studies in
native speakers of Arabic, and highlight the dialectal and cross-linguistic
similarities and differences revealed by these investigations. This back-
ground provides an opportunity to consider the potential contribution of
systematic, comprehensive investigations of language development across
different Arabic dialects, relatively understudied compared to investiga-
tions of language development across different languages (e.g., English vs.
Arabic: Abu-Rabia and Siegel 2002; Saiegh-Haddad and Geva 2008; Swedish
vs. Arabic: Salameh et al. 2004). Within this framework, we focus in turn
on phonological development, the most widely studied domain in Arabic
language acquisition so far; then on other aspects of lexical development
(especially morphosyntax); and brieﬂy on syntactic and pragmatic devel-
opment (brieﬂy because there is still a paucity of studies in these domains).
Second, we discuss a developmental approach to speech and language
assessment and intervention, focusing on early childhood, to emphasize
the importance of a solid evidence base for valid and reliable clinical and
educational decision-making related to language assessment, therapy, and
teaching. Finally, we offer some commentary on the importance of colla-
borative interprofessional frameworks for conducting authentic and rig-
orous investigations into language acquisition in Arabic.
3.2
Dialectal Variation: An Overview of Evidence from Arabic
Language Development Studies
Within the study of language development, subdomains of research have
developed to permit more ﬁne-grained approaches to the wide range of
phenomena that form the object of investigation. One such subdomain,
lexical development research, is focused on the development of phonolo-
gical, morphosyntactic, and semantic knowledge of words. Much work in
this arena is focused on examining the early lexicon in terms of quantity
and quality. For instance, there exist apparently universal lexical mile-
stones whereby children across many languages produce their ﬁrst words
around 9–13 months of age, and expand their expressive vocabulary to
reach ﬁfty words by 14–24 months (e.g., Nelson 1973; Benedict 1979; Dale
and Fenson 1996). First words are usually stressed, highly salient syllables
or (reduplicated) disyllables (e.g., Demuth 1996; Gerken 1996; Fee and
Ingram 1982). In addition, early words are typically nouns (e.g., Gentner
1982; Goldin-Meadow et al. 1976), and encompass a limited range of pre-
dictable semantic categories, including names of people, animals, activ-
ities, food, body parts, clothing, vehicles, household items, space and
motion, and social routines (e.g., Slobin 1973; Bowerman 1980). Findings
like these were originally based mainly on studies of English early word
3 The Study of Arabic Language Acquisition
49

productions, although cross-linguistic evidence has accumulated (for
example, see Slobin (1985) for an early survey and Hickmann et al. (2018)
for current perspectives on universals and variation in language develop-
ment across many different languages). Nevertheless, Arabic-speciﬁc
investigations of early words and early language are lacking, and are very
much warranted.
Work that has attempted to report on early lexical development in
Arabic to date has been difﬁcult to evaluate, for various reasons, discussed
here in the context of a call for rigorous and authentic studies of clearly
deﬁned aspects of lexical acquisition in Arabic-speaking children. For
example, Omar (1973) produced a famous and wide-ranging study of lan-
guage development in a sample of Egyptian Arabic-speaking children (a
middle Egyptian dialect, not Cairene), and this work has provided a basis
for much of the received wisdom about language milestones in this popu-
lation. However, there are signiﬁcant methodological ﬂaws apparent in
this work that should limit its application to our current understanding of
Arabic acquisition. For instance, in a chapter entitled ‘Early communica-
tion and initial vocabulary’, Omar (1973) provided several lists of ﬁrst-word
productions for four children (aged 11 months to 2.8 years). Although
valuable as a source of preliminary data, issues related to the selection of
participants, and the speciﬁc lexical items reported, mean that these data
cannot be used to provide the much-needed basis for a detailed under-
standing of lexical development in Arabic. First, no inclusion or exclusion
criteria were applied to the children whose early linguistic abilities form
the basis for this work, and it is apparent that some of the participants may
have been experiencing atypical development of one kind or another. For
example, the responses of one child were excluded from an assessment of
vocabulary and verbal directions because the child was ‘restless’ during all
interactions; another child was reported to start walking at age 3½ years.
These descriptions may suggest the presence of attentional disorder and
developmental delay, respectively. Certainly, such issues were not ruled
out of the sample. In addition, examination of the participants’ back-
grounds reveals that there was no control of socioeconomic status, and
most of the children may have been from environments instantiating
economic hardship. This makes it difﬁcult to determine which of the
observed behaviours reﬂect actual developmental abilities and skills and
which may reﬂect the impact of poverty or a lack of familiarity with
assessment tasks. Furthermore, many of the reported ﬁrst words appeared,
per Omar’s (1973) methodological descriptions, to have been elicited
through imitation. As a result, they constitute input-dependent elicitations
rather than spontaneously produced words used by the children in their
daily interactions. Hence, detailed investigations of early words and early
language in Arabic are still very much desired. Here we present a critical
overview of the work that is currently available on the phonological and
morphosyntactic properties of the early lexicon in Arabic.
5 0
K A R E N F R O U D & R E E M K H A M I S - D A K W A R

3.2.1
Phonological Development
In general, studies of phonological development are focused on examina-
tions of the developing phonemic and allophonic systems for speech
sound representation in children. Studies in that domain may include
examinations of (1) the perception of phonemic distinctions, (2) pre-
speech/pre-linguistic development, (3) the sequence of production of the
different phonemes and allophones of a language, (4) phonological pro-
cesses and their age of elimination, and (5) the development of the phono-
logical awareness skills needed for literacy in typical and atypical language
development. Given these varied approaches and applications, phonologi-
cal development is one of the most investigated domains in studies of
Arabic language acquisition.
A review of published studies in this domain reveals they are mainly
guided by theoretical models that look for universal processes in speech
sound acquisition (e.g., Ingram 1989) and provide evidence for speciﬁc
developmental milestones that can support clinical assessment of indivi-
duals with articulation and/or phonological disorders (e.g., Omar 1973;
Amayreh and Dyson 1998; Amayreh 2003; Hamdan and Amayreh 2007;
Ayyad et al. 2016; Ayyad and Bernhardt 2009). Some recent studies in
speech production research have included examination of children’s pro-
ductions of Modern Standard Arabic (MSA) sounds, not only sounds pro-
duced within the phonological system of the spoken dialect (e.g., Hamdan
and Amayreh 2007). MSA is used for formal contexts, reading, and writing,
and the examination of MSA sounds was excluded from earlier studies of
consonant productions in Arabic-speaking children (Amayreh and Dyson
1998). This expansion of the scope of phonological development research
in Arabic builds on studies that have elucidated the phonological aware-
ness of children speciﬁcally for Arabic sounds present in MSA but absent
from spoken dialects (e.g., Saiegh-Haddad 2003, 2004, 2007; Saiegh-
Haddad et al. 2011). Such studies of metaphonological awareness and of
MSA-speciﬁc speech sound production investigations were carried out at a
time when larger cross-linguistic studies in literacy development were
focused on the role of phonemic awareness as a major predictor for the
successful acquisition of reading (e.g., Stanovich 2000) and provided a
substantial contribution to this larger topic.
A variety of spoken Arabic dialects have been examined with respect to
phonological development, including Jordanian (Amayreh and Dyson 1998;
Amayreh 2003; Hamdan and Amayreh 2007), Egyptian (e.g., Omar 1973;
Abou-Elsaad et al. 2009; Ragheb and Davis 2014), Kuwaiti (e.g., Ayyad et al.
2016), and Palestinian (e.g., Saiegh-Haddad 2003, 2004, 2007; Saiegh-Haddad
et al. 2011) (and see Table 3.1 below, outlining selected consonant inventory
studies in Arabic). However, even though many of these studies indicate the
presence of language-speciﬁc effects in phonological development, none
opted for a systematic examination of phonological development across
Arabic dialects. In addition, very few studies focused on the examination of
3 The Study of Arabic Language Acquisition
51

speciﬁc phonological processes that are contrastive in Arabic, such as gemi-
nation (e.g., Ragheb and Davis 2014). This is in spite of the existence of
evidence that some developmental processes may appear different in
Arabic when compared to established norms. For example, Saleh et al.
(2007) reported the presence of the phonological process of glottal replace-
ment in typical phonological development in Egyptian Arabic-speaking
children. Glottal replacement is associated with phonological delay or dis-
order in monolingual American English-speaking children, because typi-
cally developing children acquiring Standard American English do not
usually substitute front sounds with back sounds (e.g., Bowen 2015: 81).
However, cross-linguistic differences in the incidence of speciﬁc phonolo-
gical processes may reﬂect speciﬁc properties of the linguistic system being
acquired – for instance, the higher frequency of gliding processes (i.e., the
replacing of a liquid /r/, /l/ with a glide /w/, /j/) in English phonological
development compared to French (Ingram 1979). Similarly, variations
between Arabic- and English-speaking children have been reported in
terms of consonant acquisition. For example, Amayreh and Dyson (1998)
found that consonant productions in Arabic follow the typical universal
sound acquisition sequence in general, but productions of back consonants
/k/, /h- /, and the glide /l/ were observed earlier in Jordanian Arabic when
compared to English – presumably due to the higher frequency of occur-
rence of these sounds in Arabic. Earlier productions of gutturals and glides
in Arabic compared to English were also reported in Kuwaiti Arabic (Ayyad
et al. 2016).
In addition to the sequence of acquisition of speciﬁc phonemes, a few
studies have provided evidence about the phonological structures of words
in the early Arabic lexicon. Salim and Mehawesh (2014) reported on early
words produced by a monolingual Jordanian Arabic-speaking child
between the ages of 11 and 20 months. Examination of the phonological
characteristics of these reported ﬁrst words shows that CVCV (e.g., /mama/,
mother; /bata/, duck; /biːda/, egg) and CVCVC (e.g., /h- aliːb/, milk; /dadɛh/,
hen; /sahin/, plate) shapes are the most prevalent structures, consistent
with the observation that codas emerge early in Arabic acquisition (e.g.,
Ammar 1999; Abdoh 2011). Consonant clusters were noted in medial
positions (e.g., /imbu/, water; /miftaːh/, key) and once word-ﬁnally (/θald͡ ʒ/,
ice). These ﬁndings accord with the consonant production studies in
Arabic summarized in Table 3.1 (e.g., Ammar and Morsi 2006; Ayyad et
al. 2016).
Abdoh (2011) reported the ﬁrst words of twenty-two Hijazi-speaking
children aged 1;0–1;9, and showed that they produced disyllables 60.9
per cent of the time, followed by monosyllables at 38.2 per cent and
trisyllables at 0.9 per cent. Coda production was apparent from the earliest
utterances (e.g., /dub/, bear; /baːb/, door), and gemination was also seen to
be used early on, especially in medial position (Abdoh 2011: 149). One
possible explanation for this put forward by Abdoh is that medial
5 2
K A R E N F R O U D & R E E M K H A M I S - D A K W A R

geminates often appear in child-directed speech (e.g., /dubba/, teddy bear).
However, gemination appears to be early-acquired in other dialects, too.
For example, Ammar (2002) examined syllable structure in the utterances
of ten Egyptian Arabic-speaking children aged 2;0 to 3;0, and found that 90
per cent of them used all available syllable types in their dialect. Ammar
also showed that the phonological process of ﬁnal consonant deletion was
accompanied by a lengthening process that was applied to the preceding
vowel. Although all the children in this study applied cluster reduction up
to age 4, in general, Ammar (1999) noted that clusters in CVCC word shapes
are acquired earlier by Egyptian children than by English-speaking
children.
Khattab and Al-Tamimi (2013) set out to evaluate explicitly whether
gemination might be inﬂuential for children acquiring Arabic, possibly
helping them attend to non-initial positions in early words. They based
their study on the premise that phonological templates are applied in
early language acquisition, to capture the ways in which phonological
structures of early words are similar across languages but still show a
strong inﬂuence of the phonology of the adult ambient language.
Phonological templates can be broadly deﬁned as idiosyncratic word-
production patterns that seem to derive from the very ﬁrst words of a
child – utterances that are usually close in form to their adult targets
(Vihman 2014). The tendency of children to produce early words that
conform to such templates has been demonstrated cross-linguistically.
For instance, English has a dominant trochaic pattern with stress typi-
cally falling on the ﬁrst syllable, and the most common pattern for
children’s early ‘core syllables’ is therefore CV(CV) (e.g., Demuth 1996;
Fee 1995). In Arabic, disyllables are more common than monosyllables,
with most nouns being di- or trisyllabic. In particular, CVC:V(C) is a
frequent and productive pattern, being used in both nouns and form II
verbs (Watson 2002). Khattab and Al-Tamimi (2013) recorded the utter-
ances of ﬁve children (mean age 1;04 at the start of their study) who were
exposed to Lebanese Arabic (from Beirut) over several months (from their
4-word point to their 25-word point – a range of 4 to 9 months), during
naturalistic interactions with parents and other caregivers in their
homes. Their analyses revealed that the children produced more disylla-
bles with geminates or lengthened consonants than any other Arabic
word shapes. Gemination appeared to be a productive phonological pro-
cess for these children, who would apply the lengthening process to both
vowels and consonants in their early Arabic utterances. These were
children who were also exposed to French and English in their daily
lives, but the gemination processes that were apparent in their earliest
Arabic utterances did not generalize to their other languages, strongly
suggesting that their earliest words were sensitive to the characteristic
phonological structures in the adult forms of the language(s) that they
were targeting (Khattab and Al-Tamimi 2013).
3 The Study of Arabic Language Acquisition
53

We argue that differences observed between Arabic and other lan-
guages, and between spoken varieties of Arabic and MSA, are likely to be
exhibited between Arabic dialects, too. Systematic differences between
dialects with regard to syllable structure and/or consonantal frequencies
should be reﬂected in age of acquisition and phonological processes appar-
ent in typical language development. Opportunities to evaluate such simi-
larities and differences between Arabic dialects have not so far been taken
up. For instance, in their study of the effects of phonological processing on
literacy in Arabic-speaking children from Jeddah, Taibah and Haynes
(2011) reported that their participants spoke several distinct dialects, but
they were evaluated only in MSA. Dyson and Amayreh (2000) note that
there are many dialects spoken in Jordan, and correspondingly many
‘acceptable’ consonantal variants in their survey of children’s phonetic
inventories, but their suggestions for comparing across dialects are limited
to the idea that speech-language pathologists can use their observations as
the basis for ‘the establishment of a local database’ (p. 81). Even work that
is designed to be speciﬁcally useful for clinical and pedagogical
approaches to the multidialectal nature of Arabic, such as the develop-
ment of an articulation test for Arabic-speaking children described by
Abou-Elsaad et al. (2009), seems to gloss over dialectal differences, stating
that all Arabic dialects are ‘mutually intelligible’ (p. 275) and therefore
implying that an articulation assessment developed with reference to
normative data derived from one dialect (in this case, a variety of
Egyptian Arabic) can be readily used for evaluating speakers of other
dialects too – this, despite their explicit acknowledgement that previously
developed assessments of Arabic articulation (e.g., Kotby et al. 1985; Morsi
2003) were inadequate for evaluating all the consonants of Cairene
Egyptian Arabic.
Moreover, researchers examining Arabic phonological development
have only recently started to pay attention to the speciﬁc demands asso-
ciated with the presence of diglossia in Arabic. Diglossia refers to a speciﬁc
sociolinguistic situation in which two language varieties coexist in a com-
plementary functional distribution (Ferguson 1959). The ﬁrst variety, the
spoken dialect, is acquired naturally and used for daily communication;
the second variety, MSA in this case, is learned formally and used in formal
settings and for reading and writing. Hence, the consonantal proﬁle of a
child acquiring Arabic will expand upon the introduction and mastery of
MSA. In order to authentically evaluate the phonetic inventory and the
phonological processes of an Arabic-speaking child, it is necessary to
address not only consonants of the spoken dialect, but consonants of
MSA too. This expansion of the consonantal proﬁle to include speech
sounds associated with different varieties of the same language during
typical development is speciﬁc to Arabic and other languages exhibiting
diglossia. Even though MSA is supposedly a uniﬁed linguistic system
available to all Arabic speakers, the differences between spoken dialects
5 4
K A R E N F R O U D & R E E M K H A M I S - D A K W A R

may play a role in the age of acquisition of MSA consonants, depending on
their presence in the spoken system(s). Through their examinations of
children’s productions of MSA consonants, Hamdan and Amayreh (2007)
were able to demonstrate that there exists a complex phonological system
whereby children’s ability to produce MSA sounds interacted with the
presence or absence of the same sounds in the phonological system asso-
ciated with their spoken language variety – in this case, Jordanian Arabic.
They showed that MSA consonants that had dialectal congeners were
typically not acquired by ﬁrst grade, but were subject to substitution
processes. Table 3.1 provides a summary of selected studies of phonologi-
cal development with reference to phonetic inventories, across different
dialects.
This review of studies examining Arabic phonological development
reveals dialectal variations that bring into question any assumption that
developmental milestones observed in one Arabic dialect can be general-
ized to other dialects that have not yet been examined, such as Yemeni or
Moroccan Arabic. This is due to structural differences and similarities, and
a varying degree of overlap between dialects. For example, consonant
acquisition milestones derived from the study of children acquiring
Jordanian Arabic may not be applicable to Moroccan Arabic, a dialect in
which emphatic sounds are more frequent. Developmental milestones
relating to cluster reduction in Egyptian Arabic may not be applicable to
Moroccan Arabic, a dialect with a higher frequency of cluster use. The
expansion of the systematic study of phonological development across the
various Arabic dialects would also carry a theoretical value, possibly per-
mitting an evaluation of universal theory (e.g., Jakobson 1968), proposing
universal patterns of acquisition, against other theoretical frameworks
such as the functional load hypothesis (e.g., Ingram 1979) which maintains
that the utility of speciﬁc phonemes or contrasts in a sound system may
underlie sequences of acquisition. Such a comparison would be of value
across multiple Arabic dialects because universal approaches would pre-
dict similarities in the course of acquisition between phonological features
expressed differently in different dialects, while functional load hypoth-
eses would predict differences based on phonemic frequency variation
between dialects.
To conclude, current developments in the study of language develop-
ment in children are moving towards examination of all language varieties
of Arabic, doing away with any assumption of a limited set of sounds to
which a child is exposed. This move highlights the interplay between
exposure to spoken language (the spoken dialects) and the concurrent
acquisition of sounds in a different written language (MSA). Studies seek-
ing to elucidate this interplay may beneﬁt from fully examining all vari-
eties and languages to which the child is exposed in their natural
environment, including cases in which children are exposed to two lan-
guages interchangeably at home and in schools (such as Arabic and French
3 The Study of Arabic Language Acquisition
55

Table 3.1 Representative summary of phonetic inventories described in various varieties of spoken Arabic
Authors
Dialect
Age of
participants
Number of
participants
Stimuli
Phonetic inventory / comments
Amayreh and
Dyson (1998)
Jordanian Arabic
2;0–6;04
180
(10 boys, 10 girls in
each of 9 age
groups)
58 word picture-
naming task
Initial position: /b, d, t, Ɂ, m, l, w, j, h/
Final position: /b, t, Ɂ, m, n, w, j, ʃ, h/
Early (<2:0 to 3:10): /b, t, d, k, f, h- , m, n, l, w/
Intermediate (4:0 to 6:4): /s, ʃ, χ, ʁ, h, j, r/
Late (>6:4): tˤ / dˤ, q, ʔ, θ, ð, ðˤ, z, sˤ, ʕ, dʒ/
‘Acceptable’ productions of consonants developed gradu-
ally but were generally acquired prior to ‘standard’ pro-
ductions of the same consonants.
Emphatic consonants are acquired later than their non-
emphatic cognates.
/f/, /t/, and /l/ are acquired earlier in Arabic than English.
/dʒ/, /ð/ and /j/ are acquired later in Arabic than in
English.
Hamdan and
Amayreh
(2007)
Jordanian Arabic
Mean age 6;04
(1st grade chil-
dren, onset of
school year)
100
(50 boys, 50 girls)
65 picture stimuli
and object stimuli.
Delayed imitation
was used for non-
standard/deviant
productions
Standard Arabic productions occurred 90% or more of the
time for all consonants in all positions except these 6
dialectal deviants: /dˤ, q, ð, θ, ðˤ, dʒ/
Frequency of use did not account for this since other less
frequent sounds were observed, diglossia: more likely
explanation. Standard Arabic sounds were substituted
by dialectal congeners.
Amayreh (2003)
Jordanian Arabic
6;06–8;08
60 total, 30 in each
of two age
groups:
6;06–7;04 and
7;08–8;04
Reading and
picture-naming
task (80 target sti-
muli; the ﬁrst 58
words were also
used by Amayreh
and Dyson 1998)
Examination of later-acquired consonants: /tˤ dˤ, q, θ, ð, ðˤ,
z, sˤ, ʕ, dʒ/
Sounds acquired by 7;04: /dˤ, q, z, ʕ, ʔ/
Sounds acquired by 8;04: /tˤ/
Sounds acquired later than 8;04: /θ, ð, ðˤ, sˤ, dʒ/
Later-acquired sounds are more marked, and associated
with low functional load related to late and inconsistent
exposure. Potentially →impact of diglossia on reading
and acquisition (brieﬂy discussed).

Omar (1973)
Egyptian
1 month – 7
years
37
Spontaneous
recordings
Acquisition of phonemes
Age 1;05: /b, m, w, y, Ɂ, h, a, i, u/
Age 2;00: /t, d, s, z, n, k, æ /
Age 2;03: / f, l, x, g, e, o/
Age 2;06: /ɣ/
Age 3;00: /hː/ Long vowels, diphthongs
Age 3;06: geminated consonants /sː, zː, tː, dː, lː/
Age 4;00: /j/
Age 4;06: /ʕ, sˤ/
Age 5;00: /r/
Age 6;06: /q/
Consonant clusters emerge between 1;05 and 5;00.
Ayyad et al.
(2016)
Kuwaiti
3;10–5;02
(46 to 62
months)
80
(38 boys, 42 girls)
88 stimuli, picture-
naming task
Mastery (at >90%):
Age 3;10 – 4;06: /b, bː, t, d, tːˤʰ, k, g, qː, ʔ, m, n, f, ðˤ, χː, h- , h,
t͡ ʃ, rː,w, j/
Age 4;07 – 5;02: /tˤ, qː, ʃ, χ, ʁ, l, w, j(ː)/
At 75–89% accuracy:
Age 3;10 – 4;06: /tˤ, q, sːˤ, ð, ʃ, χ, ʁ, ʕ, l
Age 4;07 – 5;02: /θ, ð, ʕ, d͡ ʒ/
Saleh et al.
(2007)
Egyptian
12 months – 30
months
30 children divided
into 3 groups
(each covering a
6-month interval)
1-hour long tape
recording for each
child. Free play
with parents,
elicited speech
while playing with
toys or viewing
pictures
Results were presented in 3 groups:
Before age of 2;06:
/ʔ, b, t, d, k, g/
/s, z, ʃ, f, x, Ɣ, h, h- , ʕ/
/l, r, m, n, w, j/
2 non-Egyptian phonemes /v, θ/
/dˤ/ was the only emphatic consonant produced, by 2
children.
Frequently observed consonants, 12–30 months: /b, t, d, ʔ,
m, n, j, w, h, s, l/
Word-ﬁnal position associated with highest proportion of
correct articulations.
Medial position: higher in correct phonemes than initial.
Word-initial position showed highest degree of incorrect
phoneme production.

Table 3.1 Continued
Authors
Dialect
Age of
participants
Number of
participants
Stimuli
Phonetic inventory / comments
Ammar and
Morsi (2006)
Egyptian
3;00–5;00
22
Coloured pictures
Naming and
deferred imita-
tion tasks, audio-
recorded
13 phonemes at mastery:
/w, k, m, f, χ, h- , ʔ, t, j, n, l, ç, h/
11 correctly produced at >50%:
/ ʕ, w, h- , m, h, n, j, t, f, χ, l/
7 correctly produced at 25–49%: /k, tˤ, ʕ, b, s, ç, d/
7 correctly produced at <25%:
/ sˤ, r, dˤ, g, z, ʁ, zˤ/
Both cluster simpliﬁcation and velar fronting were
observed in the speech of 19 children (86%).
Final consonant deletion was observed in 15 chil-
dren (68%).
/w/ was produced correctly most often for both groups.

in Morocco and Lebanon). As Table 3.1 shows, certain dialects have been
studied in this way more, and in more detail, than others. It is important to
extend the study of phonological development in the many varieties of
Arabic so as to provide accurate survey data across all Arabic speech
communities. It should also be noted that advances in acoustic recording
devices, as well as techniques for analysis and experimental design, mean
that diary notes, anecdotal evidence (e.g., Salim and Mehawesh 2014) or
case studies (e.g., Ayyad and Bernhardt 2009; Ragheb and Davis 2014)
should be avoided in favour of more objective and reliable methods,
even though such approaches may have been appropriate during the
early stages of these explorations. Future research can more readily
make use of controlled experimental designs and/or more complete meth-
ods of naturalistic data collection that could enable generalization of
ﬁndings and provide a basis for further studies of phonological develop-
ment in children, including those who have speech sound disorders such
as speech delay, developmental phonological disorders, childhood apraxia
of speech, and/or structurally based speech disorders (e.g., dysarthria, cleft
palate).
3.2.2
Morphosyntactic Development
In this section, we describe and discuss studies that have examined word-
level reﬂexes of syntactic operations in Arabic language development (syn-
tactic operations that operate at the clause and sentence levels are discussed
in Section 3.2.3, on syntactic development). Studies of lexical processing
and organization reveal that language typology impacts the structure of the
early lexicon, and in Arabic, morphology is central to lexical organization,
especially based on the ubiquity of root and pattern connectivity (e.g.,
Boudelaa and Marslen-Wilson 2004a and b). Boudelaa and Marslen-Wilson
(2004b) argued that Arabic provides some of the strongest evidence for
morphological derivations that are dynamically derived from underlyingly
underspeciﬁed lexical representations – that is, stems that constitute a
single lexical entry are very tolerant of surface-form variation, so long as
that variation is predictable. On this view, a lexical entry combines abstract
semantic, phonological, and syntactic information. Such units are then
combinatorially engaged during language processing in order to build dif-
ferent surface forms. Boudelaa and Marslen-Wilson’s evidence in support of
this view comes from experimental studies of morphological priming in
adults, speciﬁcally in MSA (Boudelaa and Marslen-Wilson 2004a, b), and to
date there is no work with either adults or children that has sought to
directly address this issue in the spoken dialects. Badry (1983) examined
older children (aged 7–9 years) who were acquiring Moroccan Arabic, and
showed that they were able to establish semantic referents associated with
root and pattern morphological properties of words (the causative and
reciprocal forms of verbs, for instance) when writing novel forms of verbs.
3 The Study of Arabic Language Acquisition
59

This research built on pilot work (Badry 1982) demonstrating that irregular
roots led younger children (aged 3–4 years) to produce misformed patterns,
interpreted as evidence that they were able to construct and deconstruct
speciﬁc words on the basis of root and pattern morphological properties.
However, to our knowledge, there has been no further examination of
children’s ﬁrst words based on root and patterns speciﬁc to Arabic.
Indeed, most of the research on ﬁrst words has highlighted the inﬂuence
of phonology, rather than morphology, on productive vocabulary. Given
the rich morphological system of Arabic and its central role in lexical
organization and access in adults, we argue that Arabic provides a good
case to examine not only the relationship between phonological develop-
ment and lexical acquisition, but also the role and importance of morpho-
logical processes and representation for word learning. As well as having
theoretical signiﬁcance, such investigations could be important for applied
domains – for example, a greater understanding of the interplay between
morphological processing and lexical acquisition could be instrumental in
identifying markers of language delay versus language impairment early in
communication development.
Other highly salient aspects of Arabic morphosyntax remain similarly
understudied in ﬁrst-language acquisition, such as the acquisition of gen-
der and case marking (see Faquih 2014, for a study examining bound
pronouns, which encompasses some of these functional morphemes in
children with and without learning disabilities who are acquiring Hijazi
Arabic), verbal agreement, and others. Verbal inﬂections were examined
by Aljenaie (2010) in children acquiring Kuwaiti Arabic. The recorded
spontaneous utterances of three children between the ages of 1;08 and
3;01 were analysed for evidence of verbal inﬂections, speciﬁcally in the
light of the Optional Inﬁnitive (OI) stage proposed by Wexler (1994, 1996,
1998), which holds that there is an early stage in the development of verbal
inﬂection cross-linguistically whereby children optionally use a non-
inﬂected verb form in root clauses, when their target language requires
an inﬂected form. Aljenaie showed that inﬂected verb forms were present
almost all the time in children’s utterances, and that there were very few
errors. Interestingly, this ﬁnding stands in contrast with the early work
from Omar (1973) indicating that verb inﬂections were acquired late in the
course of Arabic acquisition. Omar’s data include many verb inﬂection
substitution errors. Aljenaie, on the other hand, using a more constrained
and controlled approach, showed that verb inﬂections are mastered early
in development, between the ages of 2;00 and 2;06. In only 2–12 per cent of
recorded instances requiring an obligatory inﬂected form, Aljenaie (2010)
found that verbs were produced as bare imperfectives – argued by
Benmamoun (1999, 2000) to represent the default form for verbs in
Arabic. Benmamoun suggests that the imperfective form of a verb is not
speciﬁed for tense, which renders it effectively an inﬁnitival form – hence,
Aljenaie’s data support the OI proposal for Arabic acquisition. The data
6 0
K A R E N F R O U D & R E E M K H A M I S - D A K W A R

presented in this study are suggestive that verbal inﬂections are acquired
early and used accurately in the acquisition of Arabic, and it remains to be
discovered whether there is supporting evidence for an OI stage from
cross-dialectal investigations.
One morphosyntactic operation that has received some investigative atten-
tion is plural formation. Arabic plural formation consists of at least four
categories. Sound plural is a rule-governed concatenative operation that is
partly governed by grammatical gender. It involves afﬁxation of regular
plural markers (which have masculine and feminine forms), with no changes
to the noun stem. Dual marking is also concatenative and highly regular in
nature, requiring afﬁxation of markers that refer to two of the singular noun
referents. Broken plural is a highly productive instantiation of root and pattern
morphology (discussed above), whereby pluralization is achieved by chan-
ging the stem itself – as such, broken plural is akin to irregular pluralization
(e.g., Plunkett and Nakisa 1997; Boudelaa and Gaskell 2002). Finally, collective
plural constitutes an atypical category that is typically realized as a count
noun, though it refers to a collection of entities rather than a single entity. Its
realization is idiosyncratic and lexically determined.
Investigations of the sequences of acquisition of plural in various spoken
varieties of Arabic, including Palestinian, Jordanian, and Kuwaiti, have
consistently shown that the earliest plural categories acquired by native
speakers of Arabic are feminine sound plural and dual (e.g., Ravid and Farah
1999, 2009; Aljenaie et al. 2011; Albirini 2015). In a longitudinal case study
following a monolingual Arabic-speaking child from the age of 1;08 to 2;08,
Ravid and Farah (2009) observed that feminine plural and broken plural
were the most frequently produced forms, with dual and masculine sound
plural forms making up between 4 and 22 per cent of pluralized nouns. This
ﬁnding was consistent with earlier experimental work, using a sentence-
completion paradigm to probe the pluralization abilities of forty-eight
children aged 2 to 5 years (Ravid and Farah 1999). Not only was feminine
plural the earliest acquired form, used consistently by age 3, but this was
also the most frequently used pattern in children’s pluralization errors,
substituted
for
masculine
sound
plural
and
broken
plural
items.
Masculine sound plural was the least preferred form. Similar sequences of
acquisition have been found upon the examination of plural formation in
other dialects, including Kuwaiti (Aljenaie et al. 2011) and Jordanian
(Albirini 2015). These studies showed that dual and feminine plural are
acquired within the ﬁrst ﬁve years, while sound masculine plural and
broken plural are acquired later. Although regularities in terms of
sequences of acquisition are emerging from these continued cross-dialectal
studies, more data are needed to be able to answer outstanding questions.
Why is sound feminine plural preferred across dialects, for example? Is it
simply more frequent, or is there something structurally more salient about
the morphological marking of the feminine rather than the strongly dis-
preferred masculine sound plural?
3 The Study of Arabic Language Acquisition
61

Dual marking, by contrast, although acquired relatively early in Arabic
language development, appears to be a morphological operation that is in
diachronic ﬂux. Dual marking holds a semi-optional status in terms of
morphological operations in the examined dialects of Arabic (e.g., Blanc
1970). The semantic property of ‘dual’ is very productive, in the sense that
it refers to two of the singular noun referents. But this semantic property
can equally well be conferred by using the number ‘two’ as a determiner,
rather than marking the noun with the relevant (masculine or feminine)
dual afﬁx. In this sense, dual presents a puzzle for Arabic language acquisi-
tion: why should it be acquired early, albeit more slowly than the feminine
sound plural, and yet hold this optional status?
Collective plural marking presents a different kind of challenge for the
current research. Ravid and Hayek (2003) examined productions of dual,
collective, and sound feminine plurals, again using a sentence-completion
paradigm (rather than naturalistic data). Presenting data from ﬁfty-eight
typically developing Palestinian-speaking children between the ages of
3;06 and 8 years, they provided more evidence that feminine plural and
dual are acquired earlier than masculine plural and, especially, collective
plural marking. Collective plurals are of particular interest in the study of
children’s lexical development, because of the apparent mismatch
between their realization as count nouns and their semantic reference to
collections of entities. The problem for developmental linguists is deter-
mining how children are able to acquire understanding and reference for
collective nouns, since they violate putative learning mechanisms such as
the whole-object constraint (Markman 1990, 1991), thought to support the
acquisition of nominal reference. Indeed, several studies have shown that
English-speaking children ﬁnd collective nouns difﬁcult to acquire (e.g.,
Bloom 1996; Bloom and Kelemen 1995), possibly because of difﬁculties in
distinguishing individual vs. collective referents. Cross-linguistically, the
determination of nominal reference appears to be constrained by proper-
ties of the adult language – similarly to the discussion of phonological
templates above. For example, Gathercole and Min (1997) compared the
interpretations of novel nouns by children acquiring English, Spanish, and
Korean, and showed that these interpretations were constrained by the
characteristic properties of nouns in each language. Fewer collective inter-
pretations were made by children acquiring English and Spanish, lan-
guages with mainly individuated nouns. More collective interpretations
were evidenced by children acquiring Korean, a language with relatively
few individuated contexts for nominal reference. Ravid and Hayek (2003)
showed that collective plural marking in Palestinian Arabic is late-
acquired, still error-prone until the age of 8 years, with no apparent
learning curve (correct productions remaining around 50 per cent across
age groups). As the authors themselves comment, the existence of natur-
alistic input data would be extremely useful in determining underlying
causes for this delayed acquisition, but such data do not exist. They
6 2
K A R E N F R O U D & R E E M K H A M I S - D A K W A R

speculate, therefore, that the acquisition of collective plurals is challen-
ging for various reasons: input of collectives is restricted, inconsistent,
semantically non-coherent (collectives do not form a speciﬁc natural class,
for instance, but must be lexically learned) and prosodically non-salient.
There are no other investigations extant of collective noun acquisition in
any variety of spoken Arabic, nor in MSA, despite the obvious need for
cross-dialectal comparisons. If differences between Arabic dialects, or
between diglossic varieties of Arabic, were found in the case of collective
noun acquisition, this could shed light on the underlying nature of collec-
tive plural representation in language development, and the ways in
which children navigate acquisition of plural formation in semantically
contrastive contexts.
Table 3.2 summarizes selected studies of aspects of morphological and
syntactic development in Arabic, specifying the dialect examined in the
different studies, research methodology and ﬁndings.
Once again, research into lexical and linguistic development in Arabic
should take account of the cross-dialectal and diglossic variations that are
so central to this domain of study. Such approaches may be able to further
elucidate the relationship between phonological, morphosyntactic, and
other kinds of knowledge that inform the course of language develop-
ment. In what follows, we extend the discussion from lexical development
into the syntactic domain, and then into metalinguistic knowledge that
informs pragmatics.
3.2.3
Syntactic Development
Studies of the syntax of Arabic languages from generative perspectives
are extensive (e.g., see Benmamoun 2009 for a review) and have expanded
to include comparative syntax of the different dialects of Arabic. Cross-
dialectal investigations of Arabic acquisition may reveal similarities and
differences between the early syntactic systems of Arabic-speaking chil-
dren in different dialects that can be traced to underlying structural
differences and categories. Many studies of Arabic syntactic development
to date have taken a primarily descriptive perspective (e.g., Omar 1973;
Smadi 1979; Al-Buainain 2002). However, some are more theoretically
governed, demonstrating that the study of syntactic development in
Arabic can inform theoretical perspectives on language development (e.
g., Mohamed and Ouhalla 1995; Khamis-Dakwar 2011; Botwinik, Bshara
and Armon-Lotem 2015; for a comprehensive review, see Albirini 2018).
In this section, we review evidence from three domains of syntactic
development in Arabic-speaking children: negation, canonical subject-
verb-object (SVO) / verb-subject-object (VSO) word order, and relative
clauses.
3 The Study of Arabic Language Acquisition
63

Table 3.2 Summary of selected studies of aspects of morphological and syntactic development in Arabic
Authors
Dialect
examined
Structure examined
Participants
Stimuli
Main ﬁndings
Faquih 2014
Hijazi
12 bound pronouns
and their inﬂec-
tions (gender,
number, person)
52 participants com-
pleted the study,
aged 3;0–6;11. 38 in
the typically develop-
ing (TD) group and
14 in the group of
children with lan-
guage disorders (LD)
24 stimuli
Pictures (through an iPad),
sentence stimuli as well as
manipulatives such as play
scenarios
TD participants aged 6;5–6;11 mastered all target bound
pronouns
TD participants aged 3;0–3;5 produced more errors compared to
the older groups.
Participants with LD only mastered target 11 at the 6;5–6;11 age
group.
Errors of LD groups were characterized by omission or substitu-
tion by using the possessive free pronoun
Signiﬁcant difference between the TD and LD groups
Marginally signiﬁcant effect of age on production of bound pro-
nouns for the LD group only
Aljenaie
2010
Kuwaiti
Imperfective and
perfective verb
inﬂections
3 children (1 male and
2 females), exam-
ined over a 6-month
period.
Age range at study
onset: 1;08 – 2;10
Recorded interactions, 2 parti-
cipants at home, 1 at
daycare.
Verbal inﬂections were correct almost all the time (89–97%)
Agreement errors 3–11%
Verbs left uninﬂected in obligatory contexts 2–12%
Children were predicted to select a default form in place of fully
inﬂected forms; they used a non-ﬁnite form identical to the
imperfective verbal bare stem to describe ongoing action. This
is consistent with Benmamoun’s (1999, 2000) argument that
imperfective bare verbs are the default forms in Arabic.
Ntelitheos
and Idrissi
(2017)
Emirati
Developmental
indices of lan-
guage growth
6 children acquiring
Emirati who also had
exposure to English
through domestic
helpers
Naturalistic recordings of chil-
dren interacting together
and with adults, 30 minutes
long, every 2 weeks over a
2-year period.
MLUm: mean number of mor-
phemes per utterance
Signiﬁcant correlation between age and MLUm
The relation between age and MLUm growth is stronger in earlier
stages but non-signiﬁcant by around 4 years of age
From ~2 to 3 years old, children display a mean MLUm increase of
1.53 morphemes per utterance
Albirini
(2015)
Jordanian
Plural
60 Jordanian children,
aged 3–8 years
Oral real-word and
pseudoword
pluralization tasks
Younger children use feminine sound plural as the default form;
FSP is overgeneralized at ages 5–6 years; by age 7–8 years FSP
and broken plural are both used as default forms.

Botwinik,
Bshara and
Armon-
Lotem
(2015)
Palestinian
The learning trajec-
tory of acquisition
of relative clause
Monolingual children
(groups of 20): ages
3;00–4;00,
5;01–5;11, 8;01–9;00
Adults, native speakers
of PA (10: 6 female, 4
male, 20–40
years old)
Picture-elicitation task; pairs of
pictures showing identical
characters engaged in dif-
ferent activities.
Relative clause elicitation
question: ‘which X did you
point to?’
Palestinian Arabic (PA) is a true resumptive language (requiring a
PP in the relative clause). Subject relatives were mastered ﬁrst.
Learning trajectory is similar to other languages but the errors
are different.
Errors:
1. Overuse of resumptive pronouns
2. Use of resumptive DPs
3. Omission of resumptive PPs
4. Subject fronting
5. Complementizer doubling
In the experiment: children’s main errors were 2, 4, 5.
Error 2 occurs across languages but errors 4 and 5 appear unique
to PA.
Children aged 5;01–5;11 made more errors than younger and
older groups
→attests to acquisition process.
Acquisition process:
Subject relatives are acquired ﬁrst, then non-subject relatives,
followed by DO/IO relatives and PP relatives.
Errors favour a movement model.
Al-Buainain
(2002)
Qatari
Negation and
interrogation
Children aged
1;06–9;00
Daily routines of researcher’s
own children; written notes
Developmental stages of Negation:
One-word negation
A. Anaphoric negation (negation word does not refer to rest of
utterance, e.g., ‘no milk’ means the child doesn’t want milk, not
that there is no milk)
B. Non-anaphoric negation (negation word relates to rest of
utterance)

Table 3.2 Continued
Authors
Dialect
examined
Structure examined
Participants
Stimuli
Main ﬁndings
C. Intra-sentential negation: masters use of negative imperative
with correct markers
Overlap between stages does occur.
Developmental stages of interrogation:
A. yes/no questions
B. declarative and intonational
C. verbal and nominal
D. equational
E. information questions
F. negative questions
Ravid and
Hayek
(2003)
Palestinian
Number categories
(feminine plural,
dual and
collective)
58 monolingual chil-
dren in 4 age groups:
3;06–4;06 (13)
5;00–6;00 (15)
6;01–7;00 (15)
7;00–8;00 (15)
Stimulus-labelling task (30
target stimuli)
FSPs are the default number category for a child acquiring PA.
Dual showed slower learning curve but still acquired early.
Collective nouns showed no learning curve even in the oldest age
group and stayed around 50% throughout.
Ravid and
Farah
(1999)
Palestinian
Sound plurals and
broken plurals
48 children (24 boys
and 24 girls)
2;03–3;03 (12)
3;04–4;01 (12)
4;02–5;02 (12)
5;02–6;02 (12)
Stimulus-labelling task (42
target stimuli)
14 masculine
14 feminine
14 broken
FSPs are fully acquired by age 3.
Masculine sound plurals and broken plurals have a more gradual
acquisition that is still ongoing through the oldest group.

Omar (1973) was the ﬁrst to propose a sequence of negation acquisition
during development, based on her observations of children acquiring
Egyptian Arabic. She identiﬁed three stages, as follows:
Stage 1: The free morpheme /laʔ/, no, used by itself or combined with an
utterance. Typically, /laʔ/ appears sentence-ﬁnally, though utter-
ances with sentence-initial /laʔ/ were also observed.
For example:
This stage lasts until about age 3;06, and therefore overlaps
with the types of negation observed to emerge in stages 2 and 3
below. Mohamed and Ouhalla (1995) point out that distinct posi-
tions of the negation morpheme even at this early stage could
have semantic and syntactic correlates, speciﬁcally whether the
negation morpheme is being used anaphorically or whether it
has a modality reﬂex. Sentence-initial negation appears to be
primarily anaphoric in the sense that it negates a preceding
sentence, while sentence-ﬁnal negation might reﬂect the emer-
gence of modal negation, taking scope over its containing clause.
Stage 2: The negative particle /miʃ/ is used, overgeneralized from the bound
negation morpheme /ma ... ʃ/ (e.g., /miʃ yalla/, ‘not “let’s go”’).
Stage 3: Thisstageismarkedbyacquisitionoftheboundmorpheme/ma... ʃ/
, requiring preﬁxation and sufﬁxation of bound morphemes to
speciﬁc negated words – operations that can also trigger phonologi-
cal changes suchas changes to vowellengthorstressmarking. Omar
(1973) pointed out that a negated stative verb formation /maﬁʃ/
(‘there isn’t/aren’t’) also appears at an earlier stage, but that it does
not contrast with the afﬁrmative form /ﬁ/ (‘there is’) until later in
development, suggesting that this is ﬁrst learned as a unit rather
than a decomposable multi-morphemic structure /ﬁ/ + /ma ... ʃ/.
Smadi (1979) points out similarities and differences between Omar’s
account of acquisition stages in Egyptian negation and her own observa-
tions of a single child acquiring negation in Jordanian Arabic. She proposes
four stages, rather than three, in particular to account for observations of
the gradual stepwise emergence of the negation complex /ma . . . ʃ/. In
Smadi’s stage 1, her informant relies on single-word negation using the
morpheme /laː/ and its derivatives /laʔah/, /laʔ/ and /naʔ/. Smadi (1979)
reports that /naː/ and /naʔ/ are used as standalone negators from as early
as 15 months of age in Jordanian Arabic. Her observations in this study
began when the child was 19 months of age, so Smadi assumes that use of
/laʔ/
‘no’
/‘lummi laʔ/
‘my mother no’ (not my mother)
/laʔ di wizzah/
‘no, this is a goose’
3 The Study of Arabic Language Acquisition
67

the freeform single-word negative marker preceded the beginning of her
investigation. Smadi’s Stage 1 is unlike Omar’s Stage 1, in that Omar reports
productions of the unbound negation marker in sentential contexts even at
this early stage; for Smadi, this is mainly a single-word stage (she describes
the representation of negation at this stage as a syntactic rule of the form S
→/laː/; p. 135). Al-Buainain (2002), in an examination of negation in early
Qatari Arabic, also refers to a preliminary stage that is characterized by
single-word productions, starting around 19 months of age, but the children
in her study used the morpheme /baːhˤ/ at this stage, which Al-Buainain
refers to as ‘baby talk’ (p. 18). Al-Buainain (2002) refers to stage 1 as the
emergence of /laː/ in sentence-initial contexts, similar to Omar (1973).
Al-Buainain’s (2002) stage 2 of negation acquisition is characterized by
data from children aged 1;10 through to 8;0, focusing on two morphemes:
/maː/, used to negate past-tense-inﬂected verbs, and /mob/, which is a
negation marker for imperfectives. By contrast, Smadi (1979) reports sev-
eral changes in the morphosyntax of negation starting as young as 21.1
months, and she therefore splits Stage 2 into two periods. In Stage 2a, /ʃ/
appears as a bound negation sufﬁx attached to verbs, presumably part of
the /ma . . . ʃ/ complex that is fully acquired later (e.g., /ʔiddiʃ hada/ –
literally ‘want-N EG this’ for ‘I don’t want this’). During this stage Smadi
(1979) also reports a single instance of non-anaphoric negation – that is,
sentence-initial use of the marker /laʔ/ to refer to negation of that sentence,
not a predecessor. This is signiﬁcant because previous studies of negation
suggested that anaphoric negation had to precede non-anaphoric (e.g., Wode
1977) – so this single utterance provides evidence that this proposed
sequence may not be absolute. Third in Smadi’s Stage 2a was the observation
of a kind of hybrid negation using /laʔ/ together with either /-ʃ/ or /muː/ –
though never /ma .. . ʃ/. This hybrid use of negation markers appeared to have
a pragmatic purpose, speciﬁcally emphatic rejection of an adult utterance.
Al-Buainain (2002) reports on a similar phenomenon in Qatari Arabic, in
which combinations of two different negation markers are used by children
to emphasize negation (e.g., /laː/ plus the negative morpheme /mob/ or /maː/,
or
sequences
following
the
structure
/maːʔbiː/+Verb+/walaː/+Noun).
However, Al-Buainain reports the emergence of such utterances around
age 6 (p. 21), which is much later than Smadi’s stage 2a.
For Smadi, Stage 2b starts at 24.1 months, with the emergence of /muː/ as
a negative particle, but only sentence-initially and still not as part of the
/ma . . . ʃ/ negation complex. Negation of imperatives also appears during
this stage, using sentence-initial /laʔ/ but omitting required markers on the
imperfective verb; the imperfective marker on the verb begins to emerge
late in stage 2b.
By Smadi’s (1979) Stage 3, starting at 26.16 months, correct productions
of several of the negation morphemes are observed, including adult-like
uses of /ma . . . ʃ/ (ﬂuctuating with continued uses of /-ʃ/ alone), sentence-
medial productions of the /muː/ marker that was observed only sentence-
6 8
K A R E N F R O U D & R E E M K H A M I S - D A K W A R

initially in stage 2b, and emergence of appropriate imperative negation
including the required imperfective on the verbal form. Smadi also reports
on additional ways of marking negation in Jordanian Arabic, including the
free morpheme /wala/ (‘not a’), that emerge in Stage 3 or later.
Smadi’s (1979) observations allow for conceptualization of a stepwise
progression towards complex forms of negation such as the preﬁxa-
tion/afﬁxation involved in the application of /ma . . . ʃ/ and the nega-
tion of imperatives that require the imperfective marker, but this is
still a data-driven approach. Mohamed and Ouhalla (1995) took a more
theoretically oriented perspective on data reﬂecting the acquisition of
negation by Palestinian Arabic-speaking children (Nablus dialect),
using these data to inform a linguistic debate about the presence vs.
absence of functional categories in child grammars. This approach led
them to suggest that some, but probably not all, functional categories
are already present in early stages of language development; namely,
those that contribute directly to (sentential) meaning. They consider
the functional head associated with negation (Neg) to be present in
child language, while more abstract functional categories that drive
syntactic operations without speciﬁc semantic reﬂexes (e.g., AgrS)
appear to be absent.
Mohamed and Ouhalla (1995) also draw a distinction between two read-
ings of negation in child language: neutral negative sentences, where
negation markers are sentential negators, and modality negation, where
negation markers function as modality operators. Drawing on data from
adult speakers, they show that distribution of the preﬁx and sufﬁx in the
negation complex /m . . . ʃ/ can take two forms: m-V-ʃ when the markers
attach to a verb, or m-ʃ-(modal)-XP (where an XP is a predicate other than a
verb). They account for this by proposing an obligatory process of verb
movement to a head position higher than that occupied by the functional
head Neg, in order for the verb to become associated with tense and
inﬂectional features. This movement is non-obligatory for other kinds of
predicates, including modal verbs or nominal predicates, because these
need not be associated with tense. This alternation yields the two distinct
patterns of afﬁxation associated with the /m . . . ʃ/ negation marker.
In data from the acquisition of negation in Palestinian Arabic, the con-
texts of appearance for these two negation patterns do not, at ﬁrst pass,
appear to reﬂect the target grammar. Mohamed and Ouhalla begin by
discussing the acquisition of anaphoric negation marked by sentence-
initial /laʔ/, equivalent to the /laː/ free negation marker seen in Egyptian
and Jordanian (Omar 1973; Smadi 1979), and show how this can be used
anaphorically, non-anaphorically and modally in early utterances (in this
case, modal negation is non-anaphoric and denotes a boulomaic (‘I don’t
want’) semantic quality). They move on to the later-acquired examples of
negation that follow the patterns of m-V-ʃ or m-ʃ-(modal)-XP described
above, and show that attempted productions of these in child language
3 The Study of Arabic Language Acquisition
69

might appear random, but actually reveal properties of sentential struc-
ture at early stages in development.
In particular, Mohamed and Ouhalla (1995) show that nominal sen-
tences are usually negated with the adult-like pattern m-ʃ-XP, while verbal
sentences appear to be subject to either negation with the inappropriate
m-ʃ-XP pattern, or the adult-like m-V-ʃ formation. The exception to this is
when negation is modal in nature; such instances are appropriately
marked with the m-V-ʃ morpheme order. This surface variation is readily
interpretable as evidence that verb movement to the higher position
associated with inﬂectional marking is not obligatory in early child
Palestinian – though it is possible. This explanation offers support for
Mohamed and Ouhalla’s proposal that early child syntactic derivations
are governed by the partial speciﬁcation of functional structures, in parti-
cular the unavailability of functional heads that do not directly affect
meaning. The availability of a Neg functional category triggers movement
in modal structures, and optionally in verbal negation, but the lack of an
inﬂectional projection in the functional domain means that verb move-
ment is not obligatorily triggered in structure-building. In this way,
Ouhalla and Mohamed (1995) capture insights into underlying structures
in child grammars from observations of a relatively narrow range of
phenomena.
Similarly, Khamis-Dakwar (2011) used data on the acquisition of word
order in Palestinian Arabic to shed light on a theoretically motivated
question: whether order of acquisition with respect to speciﬁc types of
syntactic movement is determined by markedness or by some universal
constraint. Khamis-Dakwar pointed out that two relative orderings of
subject, verb, and object exist, and are in principle interchangeable, in
Arabic dialects: subject-verb-object (SVO) and verb-subject-object (VSO)
(e.g., Benmamoun 1992; Fassi Fehri 1993; Shlonsky 1997). It is generally
accepted that the base order generated within the verb phrase (VP) in
Palestinian Arabic is SVO (Benmamoun 1992, 1997; Fassi Fehri 1993;
Mohammad 2000; Ouhalla 1994; Shlonsky 1997), which under current
assumptions about syntactic derivations (e.g., Chomsky 2015) means that
a surface order of SVO in an inﬂected sentence requires movement of both
the verb to a higher, inﬂectional functional head (an instance of head
movement), and corresponding movement of the noun phrase occupying
subject position to the speciﬁer position of that head (an instance of NP
movement that establishes a referential connection called an A-chain). By
contrast, the derivation of VSO sentences would require head movement,
but the noun phrase acting as the subject would not need to move up to the
sentential speciﬁer position. According to Borer and Wexler (1987),
A-chains appear later in development than head movement (universally,
by hypothesis). These background observations about Palestinian Arabic
(PA) permit the development of an empirical question: if children acquir-
ing PA are subject to the late development of A-chains, then head
7 0
K A R E N F R O U D & R E E M K H A M I S - D A K W A R

movement should be easier for them than NP movement, resulting in a
preference during development for the production of VSO over SVO struc-
tures. By contrast, if preferences for word order are governed by frequency
of exposure, SVO should be preferred during development, since it is the
unmarked order in PA (Shlonsky 1997).
Khamis-Dakwar took a novel approach to addressing this issue, devel-
oping a play-elicitation experiment that required children to repeat sen-
tences spoken by an adult to a ‘shy’ puppet (based on Crain and Nakayama
1987). Children aged 1;07–3;00 years were recruited for the task, and
ﬁndings revealed that PA-speaking children evidence a preference for the
VSO structure over the SVO structure in two ways: they were very poor at
repeating SVO structures produced by the adult, and tended in their
natural utterances to produce VSO even when SVO was targeted. As chil-
dren got older, these tendencies became less pronounced. Not only does
this study shed light on the acquisition of word order in Palestinian Arabic-
speaking children, but it also supports the theoretical perspective that the
order of syntactic operations in language development is maturationally,
and possibly universally, determined. Similar to Mohamed and Ouhalla’s
(1995) proposal for the acquisition of negation, Khamis-Dakwar accounts
for her ﬁndings in terms of a partially unavailable functional domain
during language development that limits the types of syntactic movement
available to children as they acquire their L1.
In terms of understanding the development of syntactic movement in
Arabic language acquisition, the development of relative clauses could also
provide a useful test case. There is only one study currently available in this
domain, again examining Palestinian Arabic (Botwinik et al. 2015). Relative
clause acquisition follows well-established patterns cross-linguistically,
with subject relatives acquired before other types of relative clauses (e.g.,
Friedmann, Belletti and Rizzi 2009; Gu¨ nzberg-Kerbel et al. 2008). Botwinik
et al. employed a picture-based elicitation task to record productions of
various kinds of relatives from children split into three age groups (3;0–
4;0, 5;0–5;11, and 8;0–9;0). Their ﬁndings supported the assumption of a
universal order of acquisition for relatives: subject relatives were acquired
ﬁrst, with a gradient in the other types of relatives indicating that preposi-
tional relatives were acquired later than direct and indirect object relative
constructions. However, despite the cross-linguistic similarities in order of
acquisition for these structures, Botwinik et al. point out that the types of
errors made by the children were in some respects unique to Palestinian.
One of these, called the ‘subject-fronting’ error, suggested to the authors
that children in the two youngest age groups were working from a hypoth-
esis that relative clauses are derived without any movement of the nominal
predicates in the sentence (p. 51) – consistent with the observation that
A-chain formation appears to come late in acquisition of PA (Khamis-
Dakwar 2011). Speciﬁcally, children in early acquisition of Palestinian
Arabic do not appear to have full feature speciﬁcations for resumptive
3 The Study of Arabic Language Acquisition
71

pronouns, like illi, which must typically move to speciﬁer positions high in
the functional domain for feature checking (Botwinik et al. 2015). As chil-
dren gain knowledge about the features of illi, they attempt movement of
some nominal predicate to the feature-checking position, but if they do not
know that illi can meet this requirement, instead they move the closest
nominal – resulting in subject fronting.
Although the investigation of syntactic development in Arabic-speaking
children is growing, there is much work still needed that is grounded in
theoretical frameworks rather than purely descriptive approaches. One
domain still very much lacking investigation is the development of
pragmatics.
3.2.4
Pragmatic Development
Pragmatics concerns the use of language in communicative interactions,
including the recovery of speaker meaning and intention, which is vastly
underdetermined in the linguistic form of utterances (e.g., Sperber and
Wilson 2002). There are no published studies of pragmatic development in
Arabic, despite the evident need for understanding of the pragmatic chal-
lenges
associated
with
the
complementary
functional
distribution
between spoken and Standard Arabic in all Arabic-speaking communities.
Osman et al. (2011) reported on the performance of sixty Egyptian
Arabic-speaking children aged 4–6 years on a pragmatic screening test
(unpublished, developed by Anter, Hoshy, Khaled, Shohdi, and Osman in
2008, as cited in Osman et al. 2011). Half of the children assessed were
typically developing, while half were diagnosed with Speciﬁc Language
Impairment (SLI). The screening test evaluated various pragmatic skills,
including eye-contact, joint attention, understanding and descriptions of
object functions, conversational skills including initiation, turn-taking
and repairs, a range of speech acts, and narrative skills (story retelling).
Findings showed that typically developing children were more adept in all
areas compared to the children with SLI, apart from the non-verbal skills,
where participants were equally matched. Although this study reports
some ﬁndings relating to pragmatic development in two groups of
Arabic-speaking children, its main goal was to test the reliability of the
screening test for identiﬁcation of pragmatic markers in Arabic-speaking
children with SLI. Importantly, the assessment itself does not address the
multiple levels of variation in Arabic language use, including dialectal and
diglossic variation, both vital for developing an understanding of appro-
priate language use in different contexts (e.g., formal vs. non-formal,
spoken vs. written). Little, if anything, is presently known about speciﬁc
pragmatic features of language use in different Arabic dialectal commu-
nities. Such speciﬁcities are becoming more relevant to Arabic language
acquisition in light of the increased use of social media and exposure to
dialectal differences from early in development.
7 2
K A R E N F R O U D & R E E M K H A M I S - D A K W A R

Overall, this review suggests that systematic cross-dialectal examina-
tions of Arabic language development can be used to inform theoretically
governed linguistic queries, as well as shedding light on the sequences of
acquisition in various linguistic domains. Such investigations should take
into account the interactions between the dialects, as well as the effects of
the diglossic situation in Arabic (see Khamis-Dakwar and Froud 2019).
Carefully controlled experimental approaches will be of particular value
in moving forward from the earlier descriptive work that provided the
foundation for much of our current understanding of Arabic language
development. The approaches exempliﬁed here also have value in applied
domains, and we will close this discussion by commenting on the impor-
tance of information about Arabic language development for clinical and
pedagogical efﬁcacy.
3.3
The Descriptive Developmental Approach in Speech
Pathology Services
Speech-language pathology (SLP) is a clinical profession whose members
provide primary care for communication and swallowing disorders. Its
recognition as an independent clinical profession is growing, and corre-
spondingly there are growing numbers of certiﬁed Arab speech-language
pathologists and academic speech-language pathology training institu-
tions in the Arab world (for a review, see Khamis-Dakwar and Khattab
2014). In general, SLP services aim to ‘optimize individuals’ abilities to
communicate and swallow, thereby improving quality of life’ (ASHA 2016:
12). This is achieved via an array of services including communication
disorder prevention and pre-referral, screening, assessment/evaluation,
consultation, diagnosis, treatment, intervention, counselling, research,
education, collaboration, documentation, and referral (ASHA 2016).
Speech-language pathologists serve diverse populations, including chil-
dren and adults with typical and atypical development who present with
disorders of communication or swallowing, due to acquired or develop-
mental aetiologies, in several domains, including ﬂuency (individuals who
stutter), voice (for example, for individuals who are transgender and seek-
ing voice change or individuals with hyper-nasality), articulation disorders
(such as individuals post-stroke who have dysarthria, or people with devel-
opmental issues affecting their articulators and the clarity of their speech),
language (from children with language delay to individuals with language
impairment after a brain injury), swallowing (such as children with feed-
ing problems or ageing adults), or communication (for example, people
with Autism Spectrum Disorders or traumatic brain injuries) (ASHA 2016).
One of the most prominent approaches in paediatric SLP assessment and
intervention is the descriptive developmental approach (Singleton 2014).
Within this approach, different assessment tools suit different purposes;
3 The Study of Arabic Language Acquisition
73

criterion-based and dynamic assessment tools may be more useful for
determining a prognosis or planning intervention, while standardized
assessments may be more suitable for diagnostic purposes, such as identi-
fying the presence of speech-language delay or disorder (e.g., Kohnert
2008). In addition, speech-language pathologists often take dynamic
assessment approaches, designed to elicit optimal achievement by provid-
ing graded contextual support (Paul and Norbury 2012). Informal assess-
ment approaches may be most appropriate for assessing individuals from
culturally and linguistically diverse populations, to minimize the impact
of linguistic and cultural biases. All assessment tools, whether formal or
informal, standardized or non-standardized, are designed and developed
based on informed knowledge of the developmental milestones of lan-
guage acquisition in a speciﬁc language. Hence, given the shortage of
developmental studies in Arabic and the complexities related to dialectal
differences and diglossia, Arabic speech-language pathologists may engage
in clinical services without having full access to necessary information
about relevant developmental milestones, a situation likely to impact the
quality of SLP services provided to individuals with communication dis-
orders in the Arab world.
In this review, we provided summary information about speciﬁc aspects
of Arabic language development in Tables 3.1 and 3.2. Tables like these,
and the other data reported in this review, can be used as preliminary
information sources for speech-language pathologists (with the caveat, of
course, that generalizability across Arabic dialects is limited). For instance,
an SLP seeking to assess speech development for a child acquiring one of
the dialects investigated thus far could refer to Table 3.1; if planning a
language assessment, to Table 3.2. Using the available information to
develop informal or criterion-referenced assessments could help ensure
that evaluation approaches are appropriate for speciﬁc speech commu-
nities, rather than adapting some more formal assessment developed with
respect to developmental norms from English or another language.
Such approaches have several advantages for clinicians. Speech sounds
unique to Arabic, such as emphatics, will not be ignored; children exhibit-
ing phonological processes such as backing will not be misidentiﬁed as
having a phonological disorder; and age of acquisition for speciﬁc conso-
nants will be more accurately recognized (for example, acquisition of the
consonants /l/ and /x/ happens around 4;06–6;00 in English, but much
earlier, around 3;06–3;10, in Arabic: Amayreh and Dyson 2000). Effects of
the interference of spoken dialects in the production of speciﬁc sounds
could be more accurately identiﬁed from such an informed perspective,
and therefore not treated as articulation or phonological errors.
Similarly, the examination of language comprehension and production
can beneﬁt from referring to the developmental milestones described
above. Production of bound pronouns is expected to be acquired at age
3;06 and above in typical development, with number and person
7 4
K A R E N F R O U D & R E E M K H A M I S - D A K W A R

agreement later than gender agreement. Faquih (2014) has shown that
bound morphemes and their gender, number, and person agreements
are acquired by children with language disorder much later, at age 6;05
and above. Until that age, errors of bound pronoun omission or substitu-
tion with the possessive free pronoun /h- ag/ (‘mine’) could be considered
ﬂags for a communication impairment. Clinicians planning to analyse
Arabic language samples for clinical purposes could consider the ﬁndings
from Aljenaie (2010), showing that present tense (imperfective) is the
default verb form and is acquired before the past tense (perfective); and
ﬁndings from Khamis-Dakwar (2011), showing that SVO is acquired later in
comparison to VSO word order. Both of these ﬁndings stand in contrast
with the typical acquisition order in English. Examination of plural pro-
duction should include categories for feminine plural found to be acquired
early (at age 3 years), masculine and broken plural forms that are acquired
later, as well as dual afﬁxes found to be acquired early in dialects where the
dual is maintained.
There is a growing focus on developing and standardizing speech and
language assessments in various Arabic dialects, with the dual purpose of
developing valid, reliable clinical tools and learning about relevant devel-
opmental milestones through the processes of standardization (e.g.,
Qanawati and Hamdan 2017; Al-Abdulkarim and deVilliers 2017). Still,
such assessments need a reliable base of information that is culturally
and linguistically relevant to the targeted speech communities to ensure
their validity, cultural relevance, and functionality for use in the Arabic-
speaking world. Formal assessment tools may use tasks based on cultural
norms that hold for Western, white, middle-class communities. Such tasks
may be invalid when evaluating individuals from culturally diverse popu-
lations. For Arabic-speaking communities, a further challenge is incorpor-
ating awareness of, and sensitivity to, dialectal and diglossic effects on
language comprehension, production, and use. The development of com-
puterized language analysis software as an alternative tool for evaluating
language development in children who speak Arabic dialects would also be
valuable. This would have additional applications in research, too.
3.4
Closing Comments
The study of Arabic language acquisition is a growing ﬁeld, and this
chapter presented a general overview of currently inﬂuential studies on
language development in Arabic. However, we should caution that this
presentation was based only on accessible English scholarly work; many
studies conducted and published in Arabic, for example as doctoral dis-
sertations in Arab universities, were not available to inform this review.
We look forward to much wider availability of the growing body of work
on Arabic language development. Meanwhile, we wish to emphasize that
3 The Study of Arabic Language Acquisition
75

comparative cross-dialectal studies of language development informed in
design and analysis by theoretical linguists, teachers, and speech-language
pathologists are crucial. Such studies will continue to add to the accumula-
tion of high-quality evidence, much needed to inform clinical practices in
speech-language pathology assessment and intervention, as well as educa-
tional practices and social policy. Furthermore, Arabic provides valuable
test cases for a number of outstanding questions in linguistic theory – as
illustrated through the studies we have reviewed in this chapter. Hence,
data from the study of Arabic and its development will continue to eluci-
date our current understanding of the nature of language, its develop-
ment, representation, and processing.
References
Abdoh, E. (2011). A Study of the Phonological Structure and Representation of
First Words in Arabic. Unpublished PhD dissertation, University of
Leicester.
Abou-Elsaad, T., Baz, H., and El-Banna, M. (2009). Developing an articula-
tion test for Arabic-speaking school-age children. Folia Phoniatrica et
Logopaedica, 61, 275–82.
Abu-Rabia, S. and Siegel, L. S. (2002). Reading, syntactic, orthographic, and
working memory skills of bilingual Arabic-English speaking Canadian
children. Journal of Psycholinguistic Research, 31(6), 661–78.
Al-Abdulkarim, L. and deVilliers, J. (2017). Development and Validation of a
Speech and Language Test for Saudi Arabic Children. Poster presented at the
American Speech-Language-Hearing Association Annual Convention,
Los Angeles, CA, November.
Al-Buainain, H. (2002). Developmental stages of the acquisition of negation
and interrogation by children native speakers of Qatari Dialect. Journal of
the Faculty of Humanities and Social Sciences, 25, 9–45.
Albirini, A. (2015). Factors affecting the acquisition of plural morphology
in Jordanian Arabic. Journal of Child Language, 42(4), 734–62.
Albirini, A. (2018). The acquisition of Arabic as a ﬁrst language. In E.
Benmamoun and R. Bassiouni, eds., Routledge Handbook of Arabic
Linguistics, London: Routledge, 227–48.
Aljenaie, K. (2010). Verbal inﬂection in the acquisition of Kuwaiti Arabic.
Journal of Child Language, 37(4), 841–63.
Aljenaie, K., Abdalla, F., and Farghal, M. (2011). Developmental changes in
using nominal number inﬂections in Kuwaiti Arabic. First Language, 31
(2), 222–39.
Amayreh, M. M. (2003). Completion of the consonant inventory of Arabic.
Journal of Speech, Language, and Hearing Research, 46, 517–29.
Amayreh, M. M. and Dyson, A. T. (1998). The acquisition of Arabic conso-
nants. Journal of Speech, Language, and Hearing Research, 41, 642–53.
7 6
K A R E N F R O U D & R E E M K H A M I S - D A K W A R

Amayreh, M. M. and Dyson, A. T. (2000). Phonetic inventories of young
Arabic-speaking children. Clinical Linguistics and Phonetics, 14(3), 193–215.
Ammar, W. (1999). The acquisition of consonant clusters in Egyptian
children from two to four years. Language Sciences, 2(3), 10–37.
Ammar, W. (2002). Acquisition of syllabic structure in Egyptian Colloquial
Arabic. In F. Windsor, L. M. Kelly and N. Hewlett, eds., Investigations in
Clinical Phonetics and Linguistics. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates,
153–60.
Ammar, W. and Morsi, R. (2006). Phonological development and disorders:
Colloquial Egyptian Arabic. In Z. Hua and B. F. Dodd, eds., Multilingual
Matters: Phonological Development and Disorders in Children. Amsterdam:
John Benjamins, 263–85.
ASHA: American Speech-Language-Hearing Association. (2016). Scope of
Practice in Speech-Language Pathology. Available from www.asha.org/pol
icy/.
Ayyad, H. and Bernhardt, M. (2009). Phonological development of Kuwaiti
Arabic: Preliminary data. Clinical Linguistics and Phonetics, 23(11), 794–807.
Ayyad, H., Bernhardt, M., and Stemberger, J. (2016). Kuwaiti Arabic:
Acquisition of singleton consonants. International Journal of Language and
Communication Disorders, 511(5), 531–45.
Badry, F. (1982). The centrality of the root in Semitic lexical derivation. Papers
and Reports on Child Language Development (Stanford University), 21, 9–15.
Badry, F. (1983). Acquisition of Lexical Derivational Rules in Moroccan Arabic:
Implications for the Development of Standard Arabic as a Second Language
Through
Literacy.
Unpublished
PhD
dissertation,
University
of
California, Berkeley.
Benedict, H. (1979). Early lexical development: Comprehension and pro-
duction. Journal of Child Language, 6(2), 183–200.
Benmamoun, E. (1992). Structural conditions on agreement. In K.
Broderick, ed., Proceedings of NELS 22. Amherst, MA: GLSA, 17–32.
Benmamoun, E. (1997). Licensing of negative polarity items in Moroccan
Arabic. Natural Language and Linguistic Theory, 15(2), 263–87.
Benmamoun, E. (1999). Arabic morphology: The central role of the imper-
fective. Lingua, 108(2–3), 175–201.
Benmamoun, E. (2000). The Feature Structure of Functional Categories: A
Comparative Study of Arabic Dialects. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Benmamoun, E. (2009). Arabic syntax. In L. Edzard and R. de Jong, eds., The
Brill Encyclopedia of Arabic Language and Linguistics, vol. IV. Leiden,
Netherlands: Brill Academic Publishers, 389–91.
Blanc, H. (1970). Dual and pseudo-dual in Arabic dialects. Language, 46,
43–55.
Bloom, P. (1996). Possible individuals in language and cognition. Current
Directions in Psychological Science, 5, 90–4.
Bloom, P. and Kelemen, D. (1995). Syntactic cues in the acquisition of
collective nouns. Cognition, 56, 1–30.
3 The Study of Arabic Language Acquisition
77

Borer, H. and Wexler, K. (1987). The maturation of syntax. In T. Roeper and
E. Williams, eds., Parameter Setting: Studies in Theoretical Psycholinguistics,
vol. 4. Dordrecht: Springer, 123–72.
Botwinik, I., Bshara, R., and Armon-Lotem, S. (2015). Children’s produc-
tions of relative clauses in Palestinian Arabic: Unique errors and their
movement account. Lingua, 156, 40–56.
Boudelaa, S. and Gaskell, M. G. (2002). A re-examination of the default
system for Arabic plurals. Language and Cognitive Processes, 17(3), 321–43.
Boudelaa, S. and Marslen-Wilson, W. (2004a). Abstract morphemes and lex-
ical representation: The CV-skeleton in Arabic. Cognition, 92(3), 271–303.
Boudelaa, S. and Marslen-Wilson, W. (2004b). Allomorphic variation in
Arabic: Consequences for lexical processing and lexical architecture.
Brain and Language, 90, 106–16.
Bowen, C. (2015). Terminology, classiﬁcations, descriptions, measurement
and targets. In C. Bowen, ed., Children’s Speech Sound Disorders, 2nd ed.
Oxford: Wiley-Blackwell, 62–121.
Bowerman, M. (1980). The structure and origin of semantic categories in
the language learning child. In M. L. Foster and S. H. Brandes, eds., Symbol
as Sense. New York: Academic Press, 277–99.
Chomsky, N. (2015). The Minimalist Program: 20th Anniversary Edition.
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Crain, S. and Nakayama, M. (1987). Structure dependence in grammar
formation. Language, 63(3), 522–43.
Dale, P. S. and Fenson, L. (1996). Lexical development norms for young
children. Behavior Research Methods, Instruments, and Computers, 28(1), 125–7.
Demuth, K. (1996). The prosodic structure of early words. In J. Morgan and
K. Demuth, eds., Signal to Syntax: Bootstrapping from Speech to Grammar in
Early Acquisition. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, 171–84.
Dyson, A. T. and Amayreh, M. M. (2000). Phonological errors and sound
changes in Arabic-speaking children. Clinical Linguistics and Phonetics, 14
(2), 79–109.
Faquih, N. O. (2014). Production of Arabic Bound Pronouns by Typically Developing
Children and by Children with Language Disorders. Unpublished PhD disserta-
tion, Howard University, Washington, DC.
Fassi Fehri, A. (1993). Issues in the Structure of Arabic Clauses and Words.
Dordrecht: Kluwer Academic Publishers.
Fee, J. (1995). Two strategies in the acquisition of syllable and word struc-
ture. In E. V. Clark, ed., Proceedings of the 27th Child Language Research Forum.
Stanford, CA: CSLI Publications, 29–38.
Fee, J. and Ingram, D. (1982). Reduplication as a strategy of phonological
development. Journal of Child Language, 9(1), 41–54.
Ferguson, C. (1959). Diglossia. Word, 15, 325–40.
Friedmann, N., Belletti, A., and Rizzi, L. (2009). Relativized relatives: Types
of intervention in the acquisition of A-bar dependencies. Lingua, 119,
67–88.
7 8
K A R E N F R O U D & R E E M K H A M I S - D A K W A R

Gathercole, V. C. M. and Min, H. (1997). Word meaning biases or language-
speciﬁc effects? Evidence from English, Spanish and Korean. First Language,
17, 31–56.
Gentner, D. (1982). Why nouns are learned before verbs: Linguistic relativ-
ity versus natural partitioning. In S. A. Kuczaj, ed., Language Development,
vol. 2: Language, Thought, and Culture. Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum
Associates, 301–34.
Gerken, L. (1996). Prosodic structure in young children’s language produc-
tion. Language, 72(4), 683–712.
Goldin-Meadow, S., Seligman, M., and Gelman, R. (1976). Language in the
two-year-old. Cognition, 4, 189–202.
Gu¨ nzberg-Kerbel, N., Shvimer, L., and Friedmann, N. (2008). ‘Take the hen
that the cow kissed the hen’: The acquisition of comprehension and
production of various relative clauses in Hebrew. Language and Brain, 7,
23–43 (in Hebrew).
Hamdan, J. M. and Amayreh, M. (2007). Consonant proﬁle of Arabic-speaking
school-age children in Jordan. Folia Phoniatrica et Logopaedica, 59, 55–64.
Hickmann, M., Veneziano, E. and Jisa, H. (eds.) (2018). Sources of Variation in
First Language Acquisition: Languages, Contexts, and Learners. Amsterdam:
John Benjamins.
Ingram, D. (1979). Phonological patterns in the speech of young children.
In P. Fletcher and M. Garman, eds., Language Acquisition. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press, 133–49.
Ingram, D. (1989). First Language Acquisition: Method, Description, and
Explanation. New York: Cambridge University Press.
Jakobson, R. (1968). Child Language, Aphasia and Phonological Universals. The
Hague: Mouton.
Khamis-Dakwar, R. (2011). Early acquisition of SVO and VSO order in
Palestinian Arabic. In E. Broselow and H. Ouali, eds., Perspectives on
Arabic Linguistics XXII–XXIII. Amsterdam: John Benjamins, 281–92.
Khamis-Dakwar, R. and Froud, K. (2019). Diglossia and language develop-
ment. In. E. Al-Wer and U. Horesh, eds., The Routledge Handbook of Arabic
Sociolinguistics. New York: Routledge, 300–14.
Khamis-Dakwar, R. and Khattab, G. (2014). Cultural and linguistic consid-
eration in language assessment and intervention for Levantine Arabic
speaking children. Perspectives on Communication Disorders and Sciences in
Culturally and Linguistically Diverse Populations, 21, 78–87.
Khattab, G. and Al-Tamimi, J. (2013). Inﬂuence of geminate structure
on early Arabic templatic patterns. In M. M. Vihman and T. Keren-
Portnoy, eds., The Emergence of Phonology: Whole Word Approaches, Cross-
Linguistic Evidence. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 374–414.
Kohnert, K. (2008). Language Disorders in Bilingual Children and Adults. San
Diego, CA: Plural Publications.
Kotby, M. N., Bassiouny, S., Elzomor, M., and Mohsen, N. (1985). Pilot study
for standardization of an articulation test. In Proceedings of the 10th Annual
Ain-Shams Medical Congress, Cairo.
3 The Study of Arabic Language Acquisition
79

Markman, E. M. (1990). Constraints children place on word meanings.
Cognitive Science, 14(1), 57–77.
Markman, E. M. (1991). The whole-object, taxonomic, and mutual exclusiv-
ity assumptions as initial constraints on word meanings. In S. A. Gelman
and J. P. Byrnes, eds., Perspectives on Language and Thought: Interrelations in
Development. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 72–106.
Mohamed, L. and Ouhalla, J. (1995). Negation and modality in early child
Arabic. In M. Eid, ed., Perspectives on Arabic Linguistics VII. Amsterdam: John
Benjamins, 69–91.
Mohammad, M. A. (2000). Word Order, Agreement and Pronominalization in
Standard and Palestinian Arabic. Amsterdam: John Benjamins.
Morsi, R. (2003). A tentative articulation test for phonologically disordered
Egyptian children. In Program and Papers of the Child Language Seminar,
University of Newcastle upon Tyne, UK.
Nelson, K. (1973). Structure and strategy in learning to talk. Monographs of
the Society for Research in Child Development, 38, serial number 149.
Ntelitheos, D. and Idrissi, A. (2017). Language growth in child Emirati
Arabic. In H. Ouali, ed., Perspectives on Arabic Linguistics XXIX, Amsterdam:
John Benjamins, 229–48.
Omar, M. (1973). The Acquisition of Egyptian Arabic as a Native Language. Berlin:
Walter de Gruyter.
Osman, D. M., Shohdi, S., and Adel-Aziz, A. (2011). Pragmatic difﬁculties in
children with Speciﬁc Language Impairment. International Journal of
Pediatric Otorhinolaryngology, 75, 171–6.
Ouhalla, J. (1994). Verb movement and word order in Arabic. In D. Lightfoot
and N. Hornstein, eds., Verb Movement. Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press, 41–72.
Paul, R. and Norbury, C. (2012). Language Disorders from Infancy Through
Adolescence: Listening, Speaking, Reading, Writing, and Communicating. St.
Louis, MO: Elsevier.
Plunkett, K. and Nakisa, R. C. (1997). A connectionist model of the Arabic
plural system. Language and Cognitive Processes, 12(5–6), 807–36.
Qanawati, L. and Hamdan, J. (2017). Developing a Language Assessment Battery
for Arabic-Speaking Children. Poster presented at American Speech-
Language-Hearing Association Annual Convention, Los Angeles, CA,
November.
Ragheb, M. and Davis, S. (2014). On the L1 development of ﬁnal consonant
clusters in Cairene Arabic. In R. Khamis-Dakwar and K. Froud, eds.,
Perspectives on Arabic Linguistics XXVI. Amsterdam: John Benjamins, 263–85.
Ravid, D. and Farah, R. (1999). Learning about noun plurals in early
Palestinian Arabic. First Language, 19(56), 187–206.
Ravid, D. and Farah, R. (2009). Noun plurals in early Palestinian Arabic: A
longitudinal case study. In U. Stephany and M. D. Voeikova, eds.,
Development of Nominal Inﬂection in First Language Acquisition: A Cross-
Linguistic Perspective (SOLA 30). Amsterdam: Mouton de Gruyter, 411–32.
8 0
K A R E N F R O U D & R E E M K H A M I S - D A K W A R

Ravid, D. and Hayek, L. (2003). Learning about different ways of expressing
number in the development of Palestinian Arabic. First Language, 23(1),
41–63.
Saiegh-Haddad, E. (2003). Linguistic distance and initial reading acquisition:
The case of Arabic diglossia. Applied Psycholinguistics, 24, 431–51.
Saiegh-Haddad, E. (2004). The impact of phonemic and lexical distance on
the phonological analysis of words and pseudowords in a diglossic con-
text. Applied Psycholinguistics, 25, 495–512.
Saiegh-Haddad, E. (2007). Linguistic constraints on children’s ability to
isolate phonemes in Arabic. Applied Psycholinguistics, 28, 605–25.
Saiegh-Haddad, E. and Geva, E. (2008). Morphological awareness, phonolo-
gical awareness, and reading in English–Arabic bilingual children.
Reading and Writing, 21(5), 481–504.
Saiegh-Haddad, E., Levin, I., Hende, N., and Ziv, M. (2011). The Linguistic
Afﬁliation Constraint and phoneme recognition in diglossic Arabic.
Journal of Child Language, 38, 297–315.
Salameh, E. K., Haºkansson, G., and Nettelbladt, U. (2004). Developmental
perspectives on bilingual Swedish-Arabic children with and without
language impairment: A longitudinal study. International Journal of
Language and Communication Disorders, 39(1), 65–90.
Saleh, M., Shoeib, R., Hegazi, M., and Ali, P. (2007). Early phonological
development
in
Arabic
Egyptian
children:
12–30
Months.
Folia
Phoniatrica et Logopaedica, 59, 234–40.
Salim, J. A. and Mehawesh, M. (2014). Stages in language acquisition: A case
study. English Language and Literature Studies, 4(4), 16–24.
Shlonsky, U. (1997). Clause Structure and Word Order in Hebrew and Arabic: An
Essay in Comparative Semitic Syntax. New York: Oxford University Press.
Singleton, N. C. (2014). Language assessment and intervention: A develop-
mental approach. In N. C. Singleton and B. B. Shulman, eds., Language
Development: Foundations, Processes and Clinical Applications. Burlington, MA:
Jones and Bartlett, 1–20.
Slobin, D. I. (1973). Cognitive prerequisites for the development of gram-
mar. Studies of Child Language Development, 1, 75–208.
Slobin, D. I. (ed.) (1985). The Cross-Linguistic Study of Language Acquisition, vol.
1: The Data. Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Smadi, O. M. (1979). The Acquisition of Jordanian Arabic Interrogation and
Negation by a Three-Year-Old Native Speaker of Jordanian Arabic. PhD disserta-
tion, The University of Texas at Austin.
Sperber, D. and Wilson, D. (2002). Pragmatics, modularity and mind-reading.
Mind and Language, 17(1-2), 3–23.
Stanovich, K. E. (2000). Progress in Understanding Reading: Scientiﬁc Foundations
and New Frontiers. New York: The Guilford Press.
Taibah, N. J. and Haynes, C. W. (2011). Contributions of phonological
processing skills to reading skills in Arabic speaking children. Reading
and Writing, 24(9), 1019–42.
3 The Study of Arabic Language Acquisition
81

Vihman, M. M. (2014). Phonological Development: The First Two Years. Malden,
MA: Wiley-Blackwell.
Watson, J. (2002). The Phonology and Morphology of Arabic. Oxford: Oxford
University Press.
Wexler, K. (1994). Optional inﬁnitive, head movement and economy of
derivation. In D. Lightfoot and N. Hornstein, eds., Verb Movement.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 305–63.
Wexler, K. (1996). The development of inﬂections in a biologically based
theory of language acquisition. In M. Rice, ed., Toward a Genetics of
Language. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, 113–44.
Wexler, K. (1998). Very early parameter setting and a unique checking
constraint: A new explanation of the optional inﬁnitive stage. Lingua,
106, 23–79.
Wode, H. (1977). Four early stages in the development of LI negation.
Journal of Child Language, 4(1), 87–102.
8 2
K A R E N F R O U D & R E E M K H A M I S - D A K W A R

4
Issues in Arabic Language
Testing and Assessment
Michael Raish
4.1
Introduction
Language tests are a widely used form of educational evaluation that
provide information about various aspects of test takers’ language abil-
ities, and often represent a crucial component of the ongoing assessment
process that ideally characterizes the healthy functioning of a language
curriculum. In the context of teaching Arabic as a foreign language (TAFL),
learners, instructors, and other language professionals are likely familiar
with formats such as the in-class multiple-choice or ﬁll-in-the-blank exam,
as with more comprehensive end-of-term examinations. Many are likewise
familiar with performance-based testing formats, such as the oral proﬁ-
ciency interview (OPI), a proprietary instrument of the American Council
on the Teaching of Foreign Languages (ACTFL). In the context of second
language acquisition (SLA) studies, Arabic language tests often take the
form of diagnostic instruments such as the cloze or C-test, or of discrete
measures of structural aspects of linguistic production elicited via an
experimental task.
Different testing formats access different types of information. Discrete-
point formats such as a multiple-choice test might provide useful informa-
tion about a test taker’s declarative knowledge of vocabulary items pre-
sented in a recent textbook unit, for example, while a more open-ended,
performative format such as the OPI provides test users with a wealth of
information spanning a range of linguistic competencies. Ideally, Arabic
language professionals should consider tests as merely one – albeit impor-
tant – component in a larger process of ongoing language programme
assessment, in which assessment describes the use of language tests for
particular purposes in language classrooms and programmes (Norris 2000).
Developments in the types of tests available to Arabic language profes-
sionals, and the purposes to which the information provided by these tests
is put, have been closely informed by developments in the broader TAFL

ﬁeld, which has seen historical shifts in emphasis from a focus on transla-
tion to proﬁciency testing, to education through effective assessment. This
chapter traces these developments and discusses the Arabic-speciﬁc chal-
lenges to designing and implementing language tests in a variety of con-
texts. Current uses for tests as assessment tools in the context of Arabic
curriculums are discussed, followed by a presentation of the trends and
challenges inherent to computer-based assessment of Arabic, and the role
of Arabic language tests in SLA. Finally, this chapter concludes by present-
ing a number of recommendations to Arabic language professionals
engaged with test design and implementation in the TAFL ﬁeld.
4.2
Historical Approaches to Arabic Teaching
and Assessment
Arabic has been taught in the United States for nearly as long as many of
the country’s oldest universities have existed. During this time, Arabic was
traditionally taught as a literary language, as were other ‘Oriental’ lan-
guages such as Hebrew, Sanskrit, and Persian (Ryding 2017). The philolo-
gical tradition of teaching Arabic in Europe stretches back even longer,
where it has been a focus of instruction in universities since the Middle
Ages (Nielsen 2011). For centuries, the deﬁning principle of Arabic instruc-
tion in the United States and Europe was translation – in the grammar-
translation method, Arabic is taught by, through, and for the purpose of
translating texts from and into Arabic. In a curriculum oriented towards
the grammar-translation method, Arabic learners are principally tested on
their ability to successfully translate passages of text, as well as demon-
strate knowledge about grammatical and lexical structures pertinent to
passages translated in their courses. This approach dominated the ﬁeld of
Arabic instruction until the second half of the twentieth century, and
translation continues to occupy an important place in many Arabic curri-
culums in the United States and Europe as a principal focus of instruction
and assessment.
The advent of the Second World War led to the elaboration of the so-
called ‘Army method’ of language instruction in the United States, as the
US government and US universities were confronted with an acknowl-
edged and unmet need for large numbers of capable interpreters and
other language specialists. This in turn spurred the adaptation of novel
language teaching methodologies that emphasized practical skills such as
reading and oral production (Richards and Rodgers 2014: 58). The
American Army Language School subsequently began teaching Arabic
a few years after the end of the War (Nielsen 2011: section 3, para. 2).
The Army method, and the related audio-lingual method of language
instruction, quickly found purchase in academic language programmes
in the United States, although the broader academic shift towards an
8 4
M I C H A E L R A I S H

emphasis on practicality and production in foreign language instruction
actually predated the elaboration of the Army method by several decades.
The Georgetown University School of Foreign Service (SFS) notably adopted
an explicitly functional approach to language education from its inception
in 1919, and was thus an early adopter of production-oriented instructional
methods and assessment formats. A 1921 SFS course catalogue states that
the curriculum for its Arabic course emphasizes ‘grammer [sic], conversa-
tion and reading’, and that it is taught ‘by native instructors employing
practical methods to impart a working knowledge of the language’
(Georgetown University 1921: 329). End-of-programme assessment was
principally articulated around a series of oral exams intended to certify
that a candidate for graduation is ‘capable of conducting creditably
a diplomatic, consular or commercial transaction in the given foreign
language’ (ibid.: 311–12). Even at this early stage, however, Arabic was
recognized in the curriculum as posing special challenges for performance-
based testing – the catalogue notes that ‘in the case of certain oriental
languages such as Chinese, Japanese and Arabic, such modiﬁcations of this
ruling as may be judged reasonable may be allowed’ (ibid.: 312).
Translation-based tests remained the principal medium through which
language assessment was conducted in the majority of academic Arabic
curriculums until the latter part of the twentieth century, although testing
formats that emerged from the audio-lingual method of language instruction
began to percolate into the ﬁeld of Arabic instruction in the 1960s and 1970s
(Rammuny, 1999). A major development in this regard was the Arabic proﬁ-
ciency test (APT), developed and popularized by Rammuny (1975, 1983),
which emphasized measuring test takers’ declarative knowledge of Arabic
grammatical and lexical structures. An early and important ﬁnding of large-
scale implementation of the APT was that the number of years an Arabic
learner had studied Arabic is an imperfect indicator of their test
performance.
Prior to these developments, entities within the US government had
been faced with the challenge of a lack of tools for assessing the general
foreign language ability of the large numbers of language professionals
that were being trained (Liskin-Gasparro 1984), leading to efforts at identi-
fying and assessing language training outcomes (Sparks et al. 1997).
Eventually, ACTFL and the Educational Testing Service were tasked by
the US Department of Education to articulate what became the ACTFL
proﬁciency guidelines, building upon previous efforts by the Interagency
Language Roundtable and Foreign Service Institute (Lowe and Stansﬁeld
1988). Ultimately, the ACTFL guidelines represent a series of statements
about what a language user can ‘do’ with a language at the various elabo-
rated proﬁciency levels. The guidelines have been elaborated for the core
skills of reading, writing, listening, and speaking, and are associated with
the ACTFL OPI, a proprietary instrument that purports to elicit a rateable
sample of test-taker speech in the context of a 10–20-minute ‘interview’.
4 Issues in Arabic Language Testing and Assessment
85

The elaboration of the ACTFL guidelines and the OPI coincided with the
growing inﬂuence of the communicative model of language proﬁciency,
elaborated by Canale and Swain (1980). According to this model, declara-
tive grammatical knowledge forms only a part of a language user’s global
L2 competency, and assessments must likewise take into account L2 users’
varied capacities to use the L2 in a contextually appropriate manner. The
various competencies identiﬁed by Bachman (1990), and expanded upon by
Bachman and Palmer (1996, 2010) – including strategic competence, meta-
linguistic knowledge, and topical knowledge – undergird many tests of
language proﬁciency. However, the variety of approaches to performance-
based proﬁciency testing currently available to practitioners reﬂects the
fact that there is a general lack of consensus for how best to measure the
communicative competencies of language learners (Kuiken et al. 2010: 83).
The growing inﬂuence of the ACTFL guidelines quickly led to the elabora-
tion of guidelines speciﬁc to Modern Standard Arabic (MSA), as well as the
development of proﬁciency-oriented instructional materials for learners of
Arabic (Barhoum 1989). Developments in reorienting Arabic instruction,
testing, and assessment towards a communicative, communication-based
approach in the United States were mirrored by similar developments in
Europe (Nielsen 2011, section 3, para. 3). Similar in many ways to ACTFL’s
Proﬁciency Guidelines, the Common European Framework of Reference for
Languages (CEFR) is in part a series of ‘can-do’ statements that describe the
functions that language learners at various levels of ability can successfully
carry out. Soliman (2018) describes efforts to triangulate individual Arabic
tests with the CEFR.
Although the ACTFL guidelines and the OPI format have undoubtedly
had a positive effect on Arabic instruction in the United States in the form
of increased focus on communicative skills, as well as increased general
awareness about proﬁciency-oriented instruction on the part of instructors
and programme administrators, the OPI remains both time-consuming and
costly to administer to large numbers of learners. Researchers have noted
that the guidelines themselves lack an empirical basis (Liskin-Gasparro
2003; Fulcher 1996), and the scores resulting from an OPI have been
shown to be subject to inﬂuence by extra-linguistic factors such as anxiety
(Young 1986; MacIntyre et al. 1997) and variability between raters (Brown
2003). Currently, however, the OPI and its related formats remains the gold
standard of proﬁciency testing for academic and professional placement
and achievement purposes in the United States, although a number of
alternative formats are available to Arabic language professionals.
4.3
Arabic-Speciﬁc Challenges to Proﬁciency Testing
Given the considerable linguistic diversity of Arabic, and the wide variety
of linguistic tools leveraged by native speakers (NSs) to navigate their daily
8 6
M I C H A E L R A I S H

linguistic landscapes, proﬁciency testing of Arabic learners is a challenge-
fraught process. It was acknowledged early on by the TAFL ﬁeld that the
‘MSA only’ approach to conceptualizing Arabic proﬁciency might be inade-
quate for a variety of reasons (Rammuny, 1999: 165). Indeed, the full scope
of Arabic proﬁciency encompasses a range of linguistic tasks that will
rarely – if ever – be completed in MSA by NSs. Even if the ‘educated native
speaker’ is adopted as the aspirational model of learner achievement
(Wahba 2006), authentic performance of these functions requires knowl-
edge of colloquial forms of Arabic on the part of learners. For its part,
ACTFL recognizes this fact in its instructional materials and alerts test
takers to the fact that testers will ‘accommodate to the variety of lan-
guage that the test taker is producing’ (ACTFL 2012), although there
currently exists a general acceptance of the fact that a Superior score
on the OPI requires the test taker to compose lengthy stretches of dis-
course in MSA.
Ultimately, the extent to which individual ACTFL OPI testers accommo-
date to non-MSA forms produced by test takers in the context of OPI tasks
is unclear, leading to the possibility that individual test takers may be
relatively advantaged or disadvantaged depending on individual prefer-
ences of their tester with respect to the necessity of MSA forms in
a particular task. Belnap and Abuamsha (2015) discuss this issue in the
context of measuring language gain after a period of Arabic study abroad,
noting that an OPI tester’s insistence on MSA may conﬂict with the highly
individualized learning trajectories of Arabic test takers. Related to this is
the acknowledgement that – given that MSA is typically acquired through
formal education even by NSs – a Superior or Distinguished rating on the
ACTFL scale is tied in part to a test taker’s access to Arabic education. This
consideration is doubly true when applied to writing. ‘Educated’ or not,
Arabic NSs freely employ a diverse mixture of codes, registers, scripts, and
languages when completing day-to-day literacy tasks (e.g., Panovic´ 2018;
Palfreyman and Al Khalil 2003; Hallajow 2016). However, this diversity
typically remains well outside the purview of standard Arabic instruction.
An advanced Arabic learner’s ability to write in a ‘native-like’ way may not
be recognized or validated by many current approaches to conceptualizing
and testing Arabic proﬁciency.
The discussion of the role of formal Arabic education in the judgement
that an Arabic user is highly proﬁcient mirrors the model proposed by
Hulstijn (2011), who distinguishes between basic language cognition (BLC)
and higher language cognition (HLC). According to this model, BLC is
largely limited to the oral mode, encompasses core linguistic competen-
cies, and is largely innate to – i.e., does not vary between – NSs. HLC, on the
other hand, is typically achieved through education and shows a great deal
of variation among NSs. In this formulation, access to the upper levels of
formal discourse represented by literary and classical Arabic would be
situated within the domain of HLC. Subsequent SLA researchers have
4 Issues in Arabic Language Testing and Assessment
87

argued that BLC-oriented language proﬁciency measures may be more
effective for discriminating between the L2 performance of language lear-
ners (Tracy-Ventura et al. 2014).
Although the ACTFL OPI remains preeminent in discussions of Arabic
proﬁciency testing in the United States, it is far from the only format that
learners and programme administrators typically encounter. In the United
States government, versions of the Defense Language Proﬁciency Test
(DLPT) exist for multiple Arabic dialects as well as MSA. Arabic practi-
tioners in academia may turn to one or more commercially available
instruments that may be more feasible for individual Arabic programmes
to include for use as placement or achievement tests. These include the
current
version
of
the
APT
and
the
STAMP
4S
(Standards-Based
Measurement of Proﬁciency, Clark 2012: 28). The computer-assisted
screening tool (CAST) is speciﬁcally designed for use as a formative assess-
ment tool in the context of Arabic instruction and is available in three
varieties of Arabic from the San Diego State University Language Resource
Center (Malone and Montee 2010).
In a promising recent effort, Norrbom and Al-Shamrani (2017) describe
the development and validation of the Standardized Test of Arabic
Proﬁciency in Speakers of Other Languages (STAPSOL). Noting the relative
dearth of peer-reviewed research to guide the development of Arabic
proﬁciency test design, the authors detail the process of test design and
validation in which they draw on a large pool of Arabic non-native speaker
(NNS) participants drawn from several international educational contexts.
The authors describe a test item design process that includes careful
consideration
of
target
language
use
(TLU)
domain,
noting
that
a standardized test of Arabic proﬁciency poses particular problems in the
listening domain, given that, ‘in academic lectures, speakers are likely to
use colloquial forms of Arabic quite extensively’ (ibid.: 216). This in turn
complicates the generalizability of listening scores if test listening items
are composed entirely in MSA, as is the case in most widely available
proﬁciency tests.
4.4
Language Tests and Their Role in Arabic Instruction
Most learners and instructors of Arabic are familiar with various forms of
Arabic language testing as they have been implemented within the class-
room, or for informing high-stakes decisions that affect learners, such as
placement- and achievement-related decisions. Inside the Arabic class-
room, tests are used for a variety of purposes, including formative and
evaluative assessment. These might include discrete-point assessments
such as multiple-choice tests of grammatical knowledge, or choosing the
correct lexical item from a list to complete a provided sentence. These
types of tests are easy to score and administer, as well as allowing test
8 8
M I C H A E L R A I S H

designers to access a wide range of potential knowledge on the part of
learners;
however,
they
can
be
more
time-consuming
to
design.
Constructed response assessment formats, on the other hand, require
test takers to compose an answer, and might take the form of short-
answer or essay questions. These answers are more difﬁcult to score, but
potentially provide much more information about a test taker’s productive
capacities.
Regardless of their individual format, language tests in educational
settings are ideally used as a single component in an ongoing process of
assessment. Messick’s (1989) inﬂuential validity framework allows test
designers and users to think about the criteria of reliability and validity
in the context of language assessment and educational assessment. Linn
et al. (1991) propose an assessment framework that takes into account
criteria such as test consequences, intended uses of assessment, fairness,
cost, and efﬁciency, urging language professionals to consider each factor
when carrying out assessment. Undergirding this is the acknowledgement
that triangulation with student learning outcomes (SLOs) is a key compo-
nent of an educational test’s validity. Effective assessment in the context of
a language programme thus requires delineating (a) the type of informa-
tion supplied by the language test, (b) the intended users of the informa-
tion, (c) the intended uses of the information, or the decisions made on its
bases, and (d) the consequences of these decisions (Norris 2000). Bualuan
and Martin (2015) explore this process in the context of a university-level
Arabic programme, detailing the use of questionnaires, focus groups, and
other forms of feedback from stakeholders in assessing learner achieve-
ment of SLOs.
These developments have led to increasing emphasis in language cur-
riculums on performance-based and task-based language testing (Norris
1998) that have begun to see acceptance in the TAFL ﬁeld. Performance-
based testing – of which the OPI can be considered an exemplar – asks the
test taker to complete real-world tasks, and a score is rendered on the
basis of that performance. In the context of Arabic, the inﬂuence of
proﬁciency frameworks such as ACTFL and the CEFR have undoubtedly
had a positive ‘washback’ effect on Arabic instruction. De Graaf et al.
(2012) note that triangulating an Arabic examination in the Netherlands
with the CEFR facilitated the reorientation of instruction to be more
‘competence-oriented’, increased the transparency of the assessment
process for stakeholders, and allowed for the transferability of results
to other international contexts in which the CEFR is used as a criterion
(ibid.: 52). Conversely, Shohamy et al. (1996) found that, while relatively
minor modiﬁcations to a national English test in Israel had signiﬁcant
washback effects on instruction, similar effects were not found with
respect to a national test of Arabic. The authors speculate that this may
be due to Arabic’s relative lack of social prestige in that national context,
as well as the low stakes of the test, among other factors.
4 Issues in Arabic Language Testing and Assessment
89

4.4.1
End-of-Term ‘Proﬁciency’ Tests
In keeping with broader trends in language instruction in the United
States (Salaberry 2000), many Arabic programmes include some form of
proﬁciency test as an end-of-term or end-of-study requirement. In the
absence of the signiﬁcant funds required to provide an ofﬁcial ACTFL OPI
to each student, however, these ‘in-house’ proﬁciency examinations may
vary widely in form and content. Many Arabic language programmes
may lack the funding and resources necessary to develop these instru-
ments at all (Winke and Aquil 2006). Indeed, although knowledge of the
OPI and the ACTFL guidelines is widespread in Arabic curriculums,
individual Arabic instructors often lack speciﬁc training regarding their
implementation (Abdalla and Al-Batal, 2011: 15). Additionally, there is
a notable disconnect between the types of formative assessments com-
monly used in Arabic language courses and the performative nature of
formats such as the OPI that learners are likely to encounter if they
leverage their knowledge of Arabic for employment or academic place-
ment after they graduate.
Arabic language programmes in the United States also frequently count
among their students a number of heritage learners of Arabic who in turn
often speak various dialects of Arabic at home. Although many of these
heritage learners may have formally or informally studied MSA in some
way, their knowledge of MSA is often incomplete and inconsistent
between learners. Like heritage learners in general, heritage learners of
Arabic are often speakers of dialects that are under-emphasized in most
curriculums (Valde´s 2001). Even in the Arab world, the relative linguistic
distance between Arabic learners’ native dialects and MSA can cause difﬁ-
culties, as ‘Standard Arabic remains a difﬁcult language for them with
difﬁcult sounds to master’ (Necibi et al. 2015: 1). The presence of heritage
learners in a given instructional context in turn complicates issues of
instructing, testing, and assessment where these learners are concerned.
In the case of Arabic in particular, instruction and assessments are often
articulated using MSA as the default register of communication. In these
cases, Elder (2009) stresses that effective communication between stake-
holders, evaluators, and evaluands is particularly important when imple-
menting Arabic language curriculums for heritage learners.
4.4.2
Study-Abroad Testing
Study abroad presents additional challenges to assessment and testing
within academic Arabic programmes. Arabic students often go abroad
with little or no preparation in the dialect of their host country before
departing, and individual academic programmes in the United States often
send students to many linguistically divergent Arab countries, complicat-
ing the measurement of their varied gains while abroad. Although a wide-
ranging strand of SLA research is concerned with capturing the many and
9 0
M I C H A E L R A I S H

multifaceted ways in which language learners grow and change as a result
of a study-abroad period (Freed 1995; Pe´rez-Vidal 2014), the study-abroad
experiences of Arabic learners remain relatively under-explored. There is
great potential for thoughtful exploration of the role of language tests in
informing decisions about study-abroad curriculums. Vande Berg et al.
(2009), for example, demonstrate the ability of pre-/post-proﬁciency test
design to elucidate language gains in a variety of study-abroad contexts,
including Arabic programmes, although it should be noted that most
external testing instruments available to measure generalized proﬁciency
gain while abroad are administered in MSA, rather than in the many varied
dialects typically acquired by study-abroad participants. Thus, these instru-
ments may be unable to reveal many aspects of an individual learner’s
progress while abroad which will necessarily have been bound with acqui-
sition of colloquial Arabic (see Belnap and Abuamsha 2015). However,
when achievement assessments such as pre-/post-tests in the form of an
OPI, simulated oral proﬁciency interview (SOPI), or alternative perfor-
mance-based assessment, the production elicited therein can be analysed
by SLA researchers to investigate the acquisition of structural elements of
Arabic while abroad, including gains in sociolinguistic competence (Shiri
2015; Trentman 2017; Raish 2015).1
4.5
Computer-Assisted Language Assessment
Computer-based assessment is practised in many Arabic curriculums in the
United States. In some cases, language programmes are able to take advan-
tage of certain computer-adaptive testing formats (Chalhoub-Deville and
Deville 1999) or commercially available tools such as the STAMP 4S. Many
university and university-level study-abroad programmes include either the
SOPI (Stansﬁeld et al. 1990) or computer oral proﬁciency interview (COPI). In
most cases, however, computer-based assessment of Arabic takes the form of
electronic interaction between instructor and student, such as by the sub-
mission of student production to the instructor for grading and feedback.
For example, it is common practice for Arabic instructors to ask their
students to electronically submit recordings of their spoken production
(e.g., by emailing an audio ﬁle to their instructor). Many language pro-
grammes likewise require their students to contribute to an e-portfolio
(e.g., Huang and Hung 2010) that might be maintained in cooperation
between language programme and student over the course of a trajectory
of study, or require students to maintain a ‘vlog’ or collect video recordings
of student oral production in a related format (Hung 2011). These learner
artefacts are then accessed by the instructor, who can in turn provide feed-
back electronically. The existence of these artefacts also allows both
1 See the contribution by Trentman in this volume for a discussion of Arabic in the study-abroad context.
4 Issues in Arabic Language Testing and Assessment
91

instructor and learner to track learner development over the course of
a term of study. In most cases, these texts will be accessible by learners
later in their Arabic learning careers, and can be used later by learners who
may need to submit writing samples or recordings of oral production as they
apply to Arabic-oriented scholarship programmes and jobs.
4.5.1
Automatic Scoring
Recent years have seen a number of developments in the ﬁeld of automa-
tically scored computer-based assessments of Arabic that show promise for
application to various purposes in Arabic programmes. Cheng et al. (2009)
describe the elaboration of the Versant Arabic Test (VAT), an automatically
scored instrument available from Pearson, a multinational publishing, edu-
cational, and testing corporation. The authors argue that automatically
scored tests such as the VAT represent an attempt to access Arabic users’
Arabic ‘facility’, rather than the ‘proﬁciency’ construct accessed by more
traditional, human-scored instruments such as the OPI. Facility, as opposed
to proﬁciency, refers to language users’ ability to understand and respond
appropriately to input on everyday topics, as well as to formulate appro-
priate responses at a native-like pace. Tests of language facility are more
limited in construct – that is, they do not assess the pragmatic, sociocul-
tural, or subject-matter competencies of Arabic users that are argued to be
elicited by an OPI. However, facility-oriented assessments can nevertheless
serve as proxies for more encompassing assessment formats that may be
more difﬁcult or time-consuming to administer.
Researchers developing automatically scored assessments have paid parti-
cular attention to the automatic scoring of Arabic language users’ pronuncia-
tion (typically operationalized as pronunciation of MSA). Khan et al. (2013)
describe an effort to improve the training available to L2 Arabic instructors in
Malaysia by developing an automatically scored assessment of Arabic pro-
nunciation. This has also been pursued for use in the education of NS learners
of MSA in the Arab world (Necibi and Bahi 2015; Necibi et al. 2015). However,
both automatically and manually scored computer-administered tests of
Arabic remain expensive and complicated to develop, and are likewise
impeded by ongoing challenges such as the lack of relevant Arabic corpora,
which in turn complicates test development (Necibi and Bahi 2015). Although
promising work has been done in this ﬁeld, for example in the automatic
discrimination between the oral production of different Arabic dialects (Lei
and Hansen 2011), a great deal of research remains to be carried out.
4.5.2
Tests of Writing
Computer-administered tests of writing are perhaps doubly complicated
in Arabic. The modality of writing is often under-emphasized in Arabic
curriculums, and indeed literacy-related issues remain under-investigated
9 2
M I C H A E L R A I S H

in Arabic when compared to many other languages (Mahfoudhi et al.
2011). Furthermore, automatically scored writing assessments work best
with electronic, i.e., typed, texts. Several commercially available Arabic
testing instruments currently include an analysis of test-taker writing,
such as ACTFL’s Writing Proﬁciency Test (WPT), the STAMP 4S, and the
New York University Foreign Language Proﬁciency Test. Although some of
these standardized formats allow for handwritten samples to be submitted
via mail, other formats such as the STAMP 4S allow typed samples to be
submitted electronically.
Adequate attention has not yet been paid to the role of modality in L2
Arabic writing, however. Not only does typing on a computer require
substantially different cognitive processing than writing on paper, which
in turn complicates efforts to interpret the results of an automatically
scored writing assessment (Winke and Fei 2008: 362), typing itself is
often completely ignored as a skill in many Arabic curriculums. Learners
of languages encoded in non-Latinate scripts such as Arabic tend to be
recently acquainted with their new scripts, and the act of typing in Arabic
may impose an additional cognitive burden that will affect test-taker
performance on other measures of linguistic aptitude. Furthermore,
results from an automatically scored test of Arabic writing may be difﬁcult
to compare to other languages, given that variable punctuation and dis-
course strategies often lead to highly unpredictable sentence length in the
writing even of Arabic NSs (Farghaly and Shaalan 2009). All of these issues
combine to place additional burdens on the individual instructors, testers,
and programmes deciding how best to choose an Arabic test that ﬁts their
needs and the needs of their students, as well as how to interpret the
results in the context of their Arabic curriculum.
4.6
Arabic Tests and SLA
The issue of Arabic language testing – i.e., reliably eliciting useful informa-
tion about a test taker’s varied Arabic capacities via a testing instrument –
is approached quite differently by researchers investigating the varied
aspects of Arabic SLA. In these cases, researchers may be interested in
revealing whether the manipulation of an experimental condition will
result in divergent language gains for two different groups of participants,
or comparing the language gains of ‘at-home’ vs. study-abroad students
after a period of study. For example, a study investigating the effects of
implicit vs. explicit learning conditions on participant acquisition of
a novel grammatical structure would greatly beneﬁt from the ability to
group participants based on their overall Arabic ability before they are
compared. Arabic-oriented researchers, instructors, and curriculum
designers have a vested interest in knowing what a typical trajectory of
L2 Arabic acquisition ‘looks like’ from a structural perspective, as this
4 Issues in Arabic Language Testing and Assessment
93

knowledge aids in the designing of pedagogic tasks, sequencing of tasks,
and the design and assessment of SLOs.
However, SLA researchers working with Arabic are frequently con-
fronted with a lack of widely available, easily administered and inter-
preted instruments for inclusion in studies. In many cases, individual
OPIs are too expensive and time-consuming to administer to every parti-
cipant, a consideration that can be extended to many of the other com-
mercially available testing instruments for Arabic mentioned above.
Researchers therefore often rely on participants’ self-reported years or
semesters of Arabic study as a proxy for general Arabic proﬁciency/ability.
This variable is both easy to collect and (seemingly) easy to interpret for
learners, instructors, and programme administrators. However, as demon-
strated empirically by Rammuny’s (1975) development of the APT, this
variable is often a highly unreliable indicator of an individual test taker’s
score on a standardized test of Arabic ability. This value says nothing about
the materials used in learners’ courses, for example, or about the teaching
methodologies used by their instructors. It likewise reveals nothing about
the amount of time in or outside of class that learners were required to
spend engaging in spoken or written pedagogic tasks that might affect
their performance in the study in question.
4.6.1
Self-Assessment
Self-assessments, in which learners are asked to provide an estimation
regarding their overall L2 Arabic ability, or regarding speciﬁc aspects of
their performance, are both easily collected and easily interpreted. Self-
assessments are widely used in experimental SLA studies (Shameem 1998)
and have been shown to correlate with other domains of linguistic perfor-
mance (Flege et al. 2002). In the context of Arabic, self-assessments have
been shown to be predictive of various structural qualities of writing
among both Arabic learners and NSs (Raish 2017). Given that self-
assessments have likewise been used to provide useful information to
Arabic researchers and language professionals such as programme admin-
istrators (Katbi 2000), and given the unreliability of years of study as
a predictor of structural aspects of L2 Arabic production, the ease of their
collection argues strongly for their inclusion as an additional measure of
global Arabic ability in Arabic SLA studies.
4.6.2
Paper Test Format
Many studies of Arabic employ alternative paper-based test formats that act
as ‘shortcut’ estimates of test-taker proﬁciency, including the cloze and C-test
formats. These function according to the principle of reduced redundancy
(Spolsky 1971), which is premised on the notion that, by removing informa-
tion from an L2 text and asking a test taker to reproduce it, test designers can
9 4
M I C H A E L R A I S H

access a language user’s ability to produce and manipulate the L2. Cloze tests
typically remove several whole words from a text or series of texts, while
C-tests present test takers with 100–125 half-deleted words spread over four–
ﬁve texts. Toiemah (1978) describes a detailed process of Arabic cloze test
development and validation, and subsequent researchers have likewise
explored the special considerations imposed by Arabic on the development
of cloze tests (Hofman and Habib-Allah 1982; Sesi, 1982). The format has been
used as a concurrent measure of general Arabic ability in a number of studies
of L1 and L2 Arabic (Parry and Child 1990; Mansouri 1995; Abu-Rabia and
Siegel 2003; Noor 2007; Yusoff et al. 2016). The C-test has received less
attention from researchers working with Arabic. Although C-tests have
seen wide dissemination in studies of German and English, their application
to non-European languages has been more limited.2 Early efforts at Arabic
C-test design explored the issue of word-initial vs. word-ﬁnal deletions
(Khoshaba 2004), and a recent study (Raish 2018) details the Arabic-speciﬁc
challenges in C-test design, including difﬁculties in text selection, deletion
strategy, and the difﬁculties posed by regional variation in MSA. However,
many of the automated tools available to researchers working with European
languages, such as Beinborn et al.’s (2014) system for automatically predict-
ing the difﬁculty of a C-test based on the nature of the input text, remain to be
developed for Arabic.
4.6.3
Other Feasible Test Formats
The Elicited Imitation Test (EIT) format seems ripe for adaptation to Arabic.
Already developed for estimating the global L2 ability of learners of Spanish
(Bowden 2016) Chinese (Wu and Ortega 2013), and French (Gaillard 2014),
among other languages, elicited imitation tasks require test takers to repeat
increasingly long stretches of the L2. EIT scores are argued to be related to
global proﬁciency/L2 ability (see Yan et al. 2016). Given that learner perfor-
mance on many of these test formats (for example, cloze and EIT) are related
(Gaillard and Tremblay 2016), it stands to reason that they have much to
offer SLA researchers working with Arabic. Administering a cloze, C-test, or
EIT to Arabic-learning study participants is much more economically feasi-
ble than providing each participant with an OPI; however, the Arabic-
speciﬁc studies detailing the complicated process of test design, validation,
and results analysis are limited, offering Arabic SLA researchers little to go
on when they select appropriate concurrent measures of proﬁciency for
inclusion in experimental research.
Many Arabic-oriented researchers are interested in using language tests
to investigate speciﬁc domains of L2 Arabic ability, such as syntactic or
lexical knowledge, or speciﬁc structural elements of oral and written
2 A recent volume (Norris 2018) explores the process and challenges of C-test design and validation for several non-
European languages, including several languages written in non-Latinate scripts.
4 Issues in Arabic Language Testing and Assessment
95

Arabic production. Lexical knowledge seems to lend itself particularly well
to testing within the context of Arabic SLA. The relationship between
declarative or procedural lexical knowledge and the Arabic acquisitional
process has been investigated by several researchers (Khaldieh 1996;
Khoury 2008; Golonka et al. 2015). Recent research has focused on the
design of lexical knowledge tests for learners of Arabic, as well as the
Arabic-speciﬁc challenges inherent to the design of such tests (Ricks
2015; Hamed and Zesch 2017).
Likewise, SLA researchers are often interested in examining speciﬁc
structural aspects of L1 or L2 Arabic production, applying speciﬁc linguis-
tic measures to production that was elicited via a performance-based or
task-based test such as an OPI. This test-elicited production can be sub-
jected to a variety of measurements of linguistic complexity, accuracy, and
ﬂuency (CAF), which emerge from Skehan’s (1998, 2009) Trade-off
Hypothesis, in which language learners engaged in communicative tasks
are forced to allocate differing amounts of attentional energy to either the
complexity, accuracy, or ﬂuency of their production. Increased attention
to one area arguably results in fewer attentional resources available for
allocation to the other areas. Production that is more ﬂuent (i.e., more
quickly produced) is therefore expected to display lower rates of complex-
ity and accuracy, for example. Direct measures of CAF, as opposed to the
global rating provided by an OPI or similar testing format, are able to
provide information about speciﬁc structural aspects of a test taker’s
Arabic acquisition. Although some researchers have applied direct mea-
sures of CAF to Arabic production, including in studies of written Arabic
lexical complexity (Fareh 1988), syntactic complexity (Al-Jabr 2006), and
‘maturity’ (Shaakir and Obeidat 1991), their application to studies of the
acquisition of L2 Arabic remains somewhat limited.
4.6.4
Arabic-Speciﬁc Challenges
Arabic poses interesting language-speciﬁc challenges to SLA researchers
investigating structural aspects of L2 Arabic acquisition. These challenges
include the fact that sentence length in Arabic is highly variable – even in
the writing of NSs – making the sentence an unreliable unit of analysis
when analysing syntactic complexity of written Arabic texts. Additionally,
written Arabic may exhibit several stylistic features that result in diver-
gence according to some measures of CAF from other languages.
Researchers have noted, for example, that formal Arabic is marked by
extensive use of coordination, rather than subordination, as multiple
independent clauses are linked together in paragraph-length sentences
(Al-Jabr 2006; Farghaly and Shaalan 2009). Arabic also has variable word
order that is context-linked, with SVO being more common in less formal
contexts and VSO being more common in more formal contexts. These
features combine to complicate the extrapolation of SLA ﬁndings from
9 6
M I C H A E L R A I S H

other languages to the context of Arabic, and their inﬂuence on Arabic
acquisition deserves more study.
The measurement of linguistic accuracy poses Arabic researchers
additional challenges. Although the study of accuracy in written and
spoken Arabic has a long pedigree (see early studies by Hanna 1964;
Al-Ani 1972; Rammuny 1976), there is no general consensus regarding
what constitutes an ‘error’ in written or spoken Arabic. Brosh (2015), for
example, employed a classiﬁcation of orthographic errors in Arabic writ-
ing. However, most such studies are typically predicated on the assump-
tion that an ‘error’ is synonymous with ‘a departure from MSA’, in spite
of the fact that Arabic NS production is highly varied within and across
contexts. While the traditional approach to error classiﬁcation may be
useful in the context of SLA research, it nevertheless negates the wide
diversity in written and spoken Arabic employed by NSs on a daily basis.
This raises the question of how to best consider learner or NS use of
colloquial Arabic with respect to the measurement of accuracy in
a performance-based test. The construct of accuracy in oral and written
Arabic should arguably be able to accommodate the great diversity of NS
production in these modalities.3
4.7
Conclusion and Recommendations for Future Action
This chapter has approached the topic of Arabic language tests, and the
role that tests play in Arabic curriculums, from a number of different
perspectives. Outside the context of an individual classroom, tests of
Arabic may be used to inform high-stakes decisions affecting the lives of
individual test takers. These may be related to a learner’s placement
within a particular programme, or employment-related decisions made
on the basis of a test taker’s rating on an OPI, for example. In the ﬁeld
of second language acquisition, Arabic-speaking or -learning participants
frequently complete diagnostic tests, often used as concurrent measures of
language ability collected prior or subsequent to participant completion of
an experimental task. The consequences of tests thus vary greatly for
individual test takers depending on a test’s intended use.
Although recent years have seen a number of promising developments
in the domain of Arabic test design for various purposes, such as de Graaf
et al.’s (2012) consideration of Arabic tests within a national-scale curri-
culum, and Norrbom and Al-Shamrani’s (2017) detailed elaboration of
the development of the STAPSOL in Saudi Arabia, a great deal of research
remains to be done. To this end, this chapter concludes with a few
recommendations for future research and consideration on the part of
3 A recent volume edited by Høigilt and Mejdell (2017) explores the political and ideological issues associated with the
act of writing colloquial Arabic in a number of Arab national and social contexts.
4 Issues in Arabic Language Testing and Assessment
97

Arabic test designers, language professionals, and related assessment
stakeholders:
1. The dissemination of freely available, easily administered tests of Arabic ability
for use in SLA studies of Arabic acquisition. Researchers in a variety of ﬁelds
would greatly beneﬁt from the availability of formats such as the C-test,
the EIT, or even alternative lexical-oriented instruments such as that
developed by Ricks (2015) for quickly and reliably estimating test
takers’ global Arabic ability. These formats should not be seen as replace-
ments for performance-based tests such as the OPI, which necessarily
elicit a wide range of linguistic production. However, they should be
recognized as useful for speciﬁc purposes, whether as a concurrent
measure of proﬁciency, or as one component in a placement test, such
as the effort reported by Norris (2006) to develop a German C-test for use
in the placement process.
2. Renewed consideration of the variety/varieties of Arabic to be tested. Arabic
language professionals should be clear and realistic about the models of
NS
production
that
inform
what
‘successful’
performance
on
a performance- or task-based test represents. How can the diversity typical
of NS production be elicited by a test, and how can learners hope to
approach this type of production? Practitioners thinking about assess-
ment should likewise consider the role that Arabic variety will play in
a learner’s trajectory, as reﬂected in Eisele’s (2006) proposal that Arabic
educators adopt a ﬂexible assessment framework that takes into account
learning context, target country/Arabic variety, and learner goals.
3. The clear elaboration by test developers of the item composition, pilot testing, and
statistical analyses constituent to test development. Arabic language profes-
sionals seeking to integrate a new test format into a curriculum or
placement process typically desire access to information regarding
the speciﬁc mechanics that governed the process of test design and
validation. To this end, Norrbom and Al-Shamrani (2017: 221) urge that
‘[a]s a bare minimum, all test publishers should present psychometric
and content documentation and evidence that supports the proposed
use(s) of their tests’ in order to increase the accessibility of tests to
stakeholders and to facilitate collaboration between test designers.
A clear understanding of the item-design and test-reﬁnement process
helps test users to make informed decisions regarding which testing
format to use, and for what purposes.
4. Increased focus on assessment literacy on the part of Arabic language profes-
sionals. TAFL practitioners should consider the speciﬁc role that lan-
guage tests play in the ongoing assessment process that characterizes
a given curriculum or language programme. Working to disseminate
and improve best practices for assessment in the context of Arabic
language education will help practitioners to determine whether
their tests are useful and working in the intended fashion.
9 8
M I C H A E L R A I S H

Although SLA researchers and Arabic language professionals currently
have at their disposal a wide variety of language-testing tools designed to
provide various types of information to test users, a number of challenges
remain to be addressed. These include grappling with the language-
speciﬁc challenges Arabic poses to test designers, a lack of relevant exem-
plars and corpora to guide new test-development efforts, and a general
need for a framework to guide the discussion of assessment in Arabic
language curriculums. By addressing these and other challenges, however,
it is hoped that the TAFL ﬁeld can improve best practices for purposeful
and constructive use of language tests as tools to guide a variety of deci-
sions, which will ultimately have the effect of improving Arabic language
education as a whole.
References
Abdalla, M. and Al-Batal, M. (2011). College-level teachers of Arabic in the
United States: A survey of their professional and institutional proﬁles
and attitudes. Al-ʿArabiyya, 44/45, 1–28.
Abu-Rabia, S. and Siegel, L. S. (2003). Reading skills in three orthographies:
The case of trilingual Arabic–Hebrew–English-speaking Arab children.
Reading and Writing, 16(7), 611–34.
ACTFL (American Council on the Teaching of Foreign Languages). (2012).
Arabic Consensus Project: Speaking. Retrieved November 27, 2017, from
www.actﬂ.org/resources/actﬂ-proﬁciency-guidelines-2012/arabic/arabic-
consensus-project/speaking; last accessed 20 November 2020.
Al-Ani, S. H. (1972). Features of interference in the teaching of Arabic
composition. An-Nashra, 5/6, 3–13.
Al-Jabr, A. F. (2006). Effect of syntactic complexity on translating from/into
English/Arabic. Babel, 52(3), 203–21.
Bachman, L. F. (1990). Fundamental Considerations in Language Testing. Oxford:
Oxford University Press.
Bachman, L. F. and Palmer, A. S. (1996). Language Testing in Practice: Designing
and Developing Useful Language Tests, vol. 1. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Bachman, L. and Palmer, A. (2010). Language Assessment in Practice. Oxford:
Oxford University Press.
Barhoum, K. (1989). Proﬁciency testing: Rating vs. proﬁling. Al-ʿArabiyya, 22
(1/2), 63–80.
Beinborn, L., Zesch, T., and Gurevych, I. (2014). Predicting the difﬁculty of
language proﬁciency tests. Transactions of the Association for Computational
Linguistics, 2, 517–29.
Belnap, R. K. and Abuamsha, K. (2015). Taking on the ‘Ceiling Effect’ in Arabic.
In T. Brown and J. Bown, eds., To Advanced Proﬁciency and Beyond: Theory and
Methods for Developing Superior Second Language Ability. Washington, DC:
Georgetown University Press, 105–16.
4 Issues in Arabic Language Testing and Assessment
99

Bowden, H. W. (2016). Assessing second-language oral proﬁciency for
research: The Spanish elicited imitation task. Studies in Second Language
Acquisition, 38(4), 647–75.
Brosh, H. (2015). Arabic spelling: Errors, perceptions, and strategies. Foreign
Language Annals, 48(4), 584–603.
Brown, A. (2003). Interviewer variation and the co-construction of speak-
ing proﬁciency. Language Testing, 20(1), 1–25.
Bualuan, G. and Martin, A. (2015). Developing learning outcomes for ﬁrst-
year Arabic at the University of Notre Dame. In J. M. Norris and
J. McE. Davis, eds., Student Learning Outcomes Assessment in College Foreign
Language Programs. Honolulu, HI: University of Hawai’i, National Foreign
Language Resource Center, 123–41.
Canale, M. and Swain, M. (1980). Theoretical bases of communicative
approaches to second language teaching and testing. Applied Linguistics,
1(1), 1–47.
Chalhoub-Deville, M. and Deville, C. (1999). Computer-adaptive testing
in second language contexts. Annual Review of Applied Linguistics, 19, 273–99.
Cheng, J., Bernstein, J., Pado, U., and Suzuki, M. (2009). Automatic assess-
ment of spoken modern standard Arabic. In Proceedings of the Fourth
Workshop on Innovative Use of NLP for Building Educational Applications -
EdAppsNLP ’09, 1–9. https://doi.org/10.3115/1609843.1609844.
Clark, M. (2012). STAMP 4S (STAndards-Based Measurement of Proﬁciency – 4 Skills):
Arabic Technical Report. Avant Assessment. https://static1.squarespace.com
/static/5b5110cda9e0283700e2a0fa/t/5e8617327bff26175a542aec/
1585846076487/arabic-avant-stamp-technical-document.pdf; last accessed
20 November 2020.
de Graaf, A., Richters, J., and de Ruiter, J. J. (2012). Assessing Arabic in the
secondary Dutch school system. In F. Grande, J. J. de Ruiter, and
M. Spotti, eds., Mother Tongue and Intercultural Valorization: Europe and Its
Migrant Youth. Milan: Angeli, 49–60.
Eisele, J. (2006). Developing frames of reference for assessment and cur-
ricular design in a diglossic L2: From skills to tasks (and back again). In
K. M. Wahba, Z. A. Taha, and L. England, eds., Handbook for Arabic
Language Teaching Professionals in the 21st Century. London: Routledge,
197–220.
Elder, C. (2009). Reconciling accountability and development needs in
heritage language education: A communication challenge for the eva-
luation consultant. Language Teaching Research, 13(1), 15–33.
Fareh, S. I. (1988). Paragraph Structure in Arabic and English Expository Discourse.
PhD dissertation, University of Kansas.
Farghaly, A. and Shaalan, K. (2009). Arabic natural language processing:
Challenges and solutions. ACM Transactions on Asian Language Information
Processing (TALIP), 8(4), 1–19.
Flege, J. E., Mackay, I. R. A., and Piske, T. (2002). Assessing bilingual
dominance. Applied Psycholinguistics, 23(04), 567–98.
1 0 0
M I C H A E L R A I S H

Freed, B. F. (ed.) (1995). Second Language Acquisition in a Study Abroad Context.
Philadelphia, PA: John Benjamins.
Fulcher, G. (1996). Invalidating validity claims for the ACTFL oral rating
scale. System, 24(2), 163–72.
Gaillard, S. (2014). The Elicited Imitation Task as a Method for French Proﬁciency
Assessment in Institutional and Research Settings. PhD dissertation, University
of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, Urbana, IL.
Gaillard, S. and Tremblay, A. (2016). Linguistic proﬁciency assessment
in second language acquisition research: The elicited imitation task.
Language Learning, 66(2), 419–47.
Georgetown University. (1921). A Catalogue of the Ofﬁcers and Students of
Georgetown University. Washington, DC: University Press. books.google.
com/books?id=o6BGAQAAMAAJ&printsec=frontcover&source=gbs_ge_
summary_r&cad=0#v=onepage&q&f=false; last accessed 14 November
2020.
Golonka, E., Bowles, A., Silbert, N., Kramasz, D., Blake, C., and
Buckwalter, T. (2015). The role of context and cognitive effort in voca-
bulary learning: A study of intermediate-level learners of Arabic. The
Modern Language Journal, 99(1), 19–39.
Hallajow, N. (2016). The interplay of technology and context in Syrian
university students’ electronic literacy practices. Computers in Human
Behavior, 55, 178–89.
Hamed, O. and Zesch, T. (2017). The role of diacritics in designing lexical
recognition tests for Arabic. Procedia Computer Science, 117, 119–28.
Hanna, S. A. (1964). Quantitative measurement of errors in reading Arabic.
The Modern Language Journal, 48(6), 349–52.
Hofman, J. E. and Habib-Allah, M. (1982). The cloze technique in Arabic:
Words or semantic units? Journal of Psycholinguistic Research, 11(4), 275–82.
Høigilt, J. and Mejdell, G. (eds.) (2017). The Politics of Written Language in the
Arab World: Writing Change, vol. 90. Leiden: Brill.
Huang, H.-T. D. and Hung, S.-T. A. (2010). Implementing electronic speak-
ing portfolios: Perceptions of EFL students. British Journal of Educational
Technology, 41(5), 84–8.
Hulstijn, J. H. (2011). Language proﬁciency in native and nonnative speak-
ers: An agenda for research and suggestions for second-language
assessment. Language Assessment Quarterly, 8(3), 229–49.
Hung, S. T. (2011). Pedagogical applications of Vlogs: An investigation into
ESP learners’ perceptions. British Journal of Educational Technology, 42(5),
736–46.
Katbi, H. K. (2000). Arabic Language Proﬁciency and the Academic Achievement of
Foreign University Students at the University of Jordan, PhD dissertation,
Wayne State University, Detroit, Michigan.
Khaldieh, S. (1996). Word recognition of Arabic as a Foreign language by
American learners: The role of phonology and script. Al-ʿArabiyya, 29,
129–52.
4 Issues in Arabic Language Testing and Assessment
101

Khan, A. F. A., Mourad, O., Dahan, H. B. A. M., Abushariah, M. A. M., and Bin
Mannan, A. M. K. (2013). Automatic Arabic pronunciation scoring for
computer aided language learning. In Proceedings of the 1st International
Conference on Communications, Signal Processing, and their Applications
(ICCSPA), Sharjah, UAE, 168–71. https://doi.org/10.1109/ICCSPA
.2013.6487246; last accessed 20 November 2020.
Khoshaba, M. P. (2004). The integrative test of Arabic (IAT). Dialogue on
Language Instruction, 16(1), 53–65.
Khoury, G. (2008). Vocabulary Acquisition in Arabic as a Foreign Language: The Root
and Pattern Strategy. PhD dissertation, Boston University, Boston, MA.
Kuiken, F., Vedder, I., and Gilabert, R. (2010). Communicative adequacy
and linguistic complexity in L2 writing. In I. Bartning, M. Martin, and
I. Vedder (eds.), Communicative Proﬁciency and Linguistic Development.
European Second Language Association, 81–100.
Lei, Y. and Hansen, J. H. (2011). Dialect classiﬁcation via text-independent
training and testing for Arabic, Spanish, and Chinese. IEEE Transactions on
Audio, Speech, and Language Processing, 19(1), 85–96.
Linn, R. L., Baker, E. L., and Dunbar, S. B. (1991). Complex, performance-based
assessment: Expectations and validation criteria. Educational Researcher, 20
(8), 15–21.
Liskin-Gasparro, J. (1984). The ACTFL proﬁciency guidelines: A historical
perspective. In T. Higgs, ed., Teaching for Proﬁciency, the Organizing Principle.
Lincolnwood, IL, National Textbook Co, 11–42.
Liskin-Gasparro, J. E. (2003). The ACTFL proﬁciency guidelines and the oral
proﬁciency interview: A brief history and analysis of their survival.
Foreign Language Annals, 36(4), 483–90.
Lowe, P. and Stansﬁeld, C. W. (eds.) (1988). Second Language Proﬁciency
Assessment: Current Issues. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall Regents.
MacIntyre, P. D., Noels, K. A., and Cle´ment, R. (1997). Biases in self-ratings
of second language proﬁciency: The role of language anxiety. Language
Learning, 47(2), 265–87.
Mahfoudhi, A., Everatt, J., and Elbeheri, G. (2011). Introduction to the
special issue on literacy in Arabic. Reading and Writing, 24(9), 1011–18.
Malone, M. E. and Montee, M. J. (2010). Oral proﬁciency assessment:
Current approaches and applications for post-secondary foreign lan-
guage programs. Language and Linguistics Compass, 4(10), 972–86.
Mansouri, F. (1995). The acquisition of subject-verb agreement in Arabic as
a second language. Australian Review of Applied Linguistics, 18(2), 65–84.
Messick, S. (1989). Validity. In R. L. Linn, ed., Educational Measurement, 3rd
ed. New York: Macmillan, 13–104.
Necibi, K. and Bahi, H. (2015). A statistical-based decision for Arabic pro-
nunciation assessment. International Journal of Speech Technology, 18(1),
37–44.
Necibi, K., Frihia, H., and Bahi, H. (2015). On the use of decision trees for
Arabic pronunciation assessment. In Proceedings of the International
1 0 2
M I C H A E L R A I S H

Conference on Intelligent Information Processing, Security and Advanced
Communication – IPAC ’15. Batna, Algeria: ACM Press, 1–6. doi.org/10
.1145/2816839.2816866.
Nielsen, H. L. (2011). Second language teaching. In Lutz Edzard and Rudolf
de Jong, eds., Encyclopedia of Arabic Language and Linguistics. Brill Online
(2017): http://dx.doi.org/10.1163/1570-6699_eall_EALL_COM_0297; last
accessed 14 November 2020.
Noor, H. H. (2007). Competency in ﬁrst language: Does it affect the quality
of second language writing? Dirasat: Human and Social Sciences, 34(2), 412–24.
Norrbom, B. and Al-Shamrani, A. (2017). The development and validation
of an Arabic language test in Saudi Arabia. In A. Gebril, ed., Applied
Linguistics in the Middle East and North Africa: Current Practices and Future
Directions. Amsterdam: John Benjamins, 203–26.
Norris, J. M. (1998). Designing Second Language Performance Assessments (No.
18). (National Foreign Language Resource Center technical reports).
Honolulu, HI: University of Hawai’i Press.
Norris, J. M. (2000). Purposeful language assessment. English Teaching Forum,
38(1), 18–23.
Norris, J. (2006). Development and evaluation of a curriculum-based
German C-test for placement purposes. In R. Grotjahn, ed., Der C-test:
theorie, empirrie, anwendungen/the C-test: theory, empirical research, applica-
tions. Frankfurt am Main: Peter Lang, 45–83.
Norris, J. M. (ed.) (2018). Developing C-Tests for Estimating Proﬁciency in Foreign
Language Research. Frankfurt am Main: Peter Lang.
Palfreyman, D. and Al Khalil, M. (2003). ‘A Funky Language for Teenzz to
Use:’ Representing Gulf Arabic in instant messaging. Journal of Computer-
Mediated Communication, 9(1). https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1083-6101
.2003.tb00355.x.
Panovic´, I. (2018). ‘You don’t have enough letters to make this noise’: Arabic
speakers’ creative engagements with the Roman script. Language Sciences,
65, 70–81. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.langsci.2017.03.010.
Parry, T. S. and Child, J. R. (1990). Preliminary investigation of the relation-
ship between VORD, MLAT, and language proﬁciency. In T. S. Parry and
C. W. Stansﬁeld, eds., Language Aptitude Reconsidered. Washington, DC:
Center for Applied Linguistics, 30–66.
Pe´rez-Vidal, C. (ed.) (2014). Language Acquisition in Study Abroad and Formal
Instruction Contexts. Philadelphia, PA: John Benjamins.
Raish, M. (2015). The acquisition of an Egyptian phonological variant by US
students in Cairo. Foreign Language Annals, 48(2), 267–83.
Raish, M. (2017). The Measurement of the Complexity, Accuracy, and Fluency of
Written Arabic. Unpublished doctoral dissertation, Georgetown University,
Washington, DC.
Raish, M. (2018). Design and development of an Arabic C-test. In
J. M. Norris, ed., Developing C-Tests for Estimating Proﬁciency in Foreign
Language Research. Frankfurt am Main: Peter Lang.
4 Issues in Arabic Language Testing and Assessment
103

Rammuny, R. M. (1975). Arabic Proﬁciency Test. Al-ʿArabiyya, 8(1/2), 93–7.
Rammuny, R. M. (1976). Statistical study of errors made by American
students in written Arabic. Al-ʿArabiyya, 9(1/2), 75–94.
Rammuny, R. M. (1983). Arabic Proﬁciency Test: Implementation and
implications. Al-ʿArabiyya, 16(1/2), 85–96.
Rammuny, R. M. (1999). Arabic language testing: The state of the art. Al-
ʿArabiyya, 32, 157–89.
Richards, J. C. and Rodgers, T. S. (2014). Approaches and Methods in Language
Teaching. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Ricks, R. (2015). Development of Frequency-Based Assessments of Vocabulary
Breadth and Depth for L2 Arabic. Unpublished doctoral dissertation,
Georgetown University, Washington, DC.
Ryding, K. (2017). Teaching Arabic in the United States II. In K. M. Wahba,
Z. A. Taha, and L. England, eds., Handbook for Arabic Language Teaching
Professionals in the 21st Century, vol. II. New York: Routledge, 11–19.
Salaberry, R. (2000). Revising the revised format of the ACTFL Oral
Proﬁciency Interview. Language Testing, 17(3), 289–310.
Sesi, G. H. (1982). Validity of Cloze Procedure as an Index of Readability of Arabic
Language Reading Materials. Doctoral dissertation, Wayne State University,
Detroit, MI.
Shakir, A. and Obeidat, H. (1991). Maturity in AFL student-written texts:
A case study. Al-ʿArabiyya, 24, 65–81.
Shameem, N. (1998). Validating self-reported language proﬁciency by test-
ing
performance
in
an
immigrant
community:
The
Wellington
Indo-Fijians. Language Teaching, 15(1), 86–108.
Shiri, S. (2015). Intercultural communicative competence development
during and after language study abroad: Insights from Arabic. Foreign
Language Annals, 48(4), 541–69.
Shohamy, E., Donitsa-Schmidt, S., and Ferman, I. (1996). Test impact revisited:
Washback effect over time. Language Testing, 13(3), 298–317.
Skehan, P. (1998). A Cognitive Approach to Language Learning. Oxford: Oxford
University Press.
Skehan, P. (2009). Modelling second language performance: Integrating
complexity, accuracy, ﬂuency, and lexis. Applied Linguistics 30(4),
510–32.
Soliman, R. (2018). The implementation of the Common European
Framework of Reference for the teaching and learning of Arabic as
a second language in higher education. In K. M. Wahba, L. England,
and Z. A. Taha, eds., Handbook for Arabic Language Teaching Professionals in
the 21st Century, vol. II. London: Routledge, 118–38.
Sparks, R. L., Ganschow, L., Patton, J., Artzer, M., Siebenhar, D., and
Plageman, M. (1997). Prediction of foreign language proﬁciency. Journal
of Educational Psychology, 89(3), 549.
Spolsky, B. (1971). Reduced redundancy as a language testing tool. In
G. E. Perren and J. L. M. Trim, eds., Applications of Linguistics: Selected papers
1 0 4
M I C H A E L R A I S H

of the Second International Congress of Applied Linguistics, Cambridge 1969.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 383–90.
Stansﬁeld, C. W., Kenyon, D. M., Paiva, R., Doyle, F., Ulsh, I., and
Cowles, M. A. (1990). The development and validation of the Portuguese
speaking test. Hispania, 73(3), 641–51.
Toiemah, R. A. (1978). The Use of Cloze to Measure the Proﬁciency of Students of
Arabic as a Second Language in Some Universities in the United States. Doctoral
dissertation, University of Minnesota.
Tracy-Ventura, N., McManus, K., Norris, J. M., and Ortega, L. (2014). ‘Repeat
as much as you can’: Elicited imitation as a measure of oral proﬁciency
in L2 French. In P. Leclercq, A. Edmonds, and H. Hilton, eds., Measuring L2
Proﬁciency: Perspectives from SLA. Bristol, UK: Multilingual Matters, 43–66.
Trentman, E. (2017). Oral ﬂuency, sociolinguistic competence, and language
contact: Arabic learners studying abroad in Egypt. System, 69, 54–64.
Valde´s, G. (2001). Heritage language students: Proﬁles and possibilities. In
J. K. Peyton, D. A. Ranard, and S. McGinnis, eds., Heritage Languages in
America: Preserving a National Resource. Washington, DC: Delta Systems,
37–77.
Vande Berg, M., Connor-Linton, J., and Paige, R. M. (2009). The Georgetown
consortium project: Interventions for student learning abroad. Frontiers:
The Interdisciplinary Journal of Study Abroad, 18, 1–75.
Wahba, K. M. (2006). Arabic language use and the educated language user.
In K. M. Wahba, Z. A. Taha, and L. England, eds., Handbook for Arabic
Language Teaching Professionals in the 21st Century Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence
Erlbaum Associates, 139–57.
Winke, P. M. and Aquil, R. (2006). Issues in developing standardized tests of
Arabic language proﬁciency. In K. M. Wahba, Z. A. Taha, and L. England,
eds., Handbook for Arabic Language Teaching Professionals in the 21st Century.
Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, 221–35.
Winke, P. M. and Fei, F. (2008). Computer-assisted language assessment. In
N. Van Deusen-Scholl and N. H. Hornberger, eds., Encyclopedia of Language
and Education, vol. IV. New York: Springer, 353–64.
Wu, S. L. and Ortega, L. (2013). Measuring global oral proﬁciency in SLA
research: A new elicited imitation test of L2 Chinese. Foreign Language
Annals, 46(4), 680–704.
Yan, X., Maeda, Y., Lv, J., and Ginther, A. (2016). Elicited imitation as
a measure of second language proﬁciency: A narrative review and
meta-analysis. Language Testing, 33(4), 497–528.
Young, D. J. (1986). The relationship between anxiety and foreign language
oral proﬁciency ratings. Foreign Language Annals, 19(5), 439–45.
Yusoff, N. M. R. N., Sulong, S., and Zakaria, W. N. W. (2016). The level of
Cloze reading comprehension and its relationship with Arabic language
achievement. Isla¯miyya¯t, 38(1), 71–5.
4 Issues in Arabic Language Testing and Assessment
105

5
Arabic Study Abroad
Critical Contextualization and Research-Based Interventions
Emma Trentman
5.1
Changing Demographics of Study Abroad
Since the turn of the twenty-ﬁrst century, the numbers of US Students
studying Arabic and studying abroad have increased dramatically
(Trentman 2018b). According to enrolment data from the Modern
Language Association, only 5,505 students were studying Arabic in US
institutions of higher education in 1998. By 2013, there were 32,286
students enrolled in Arabic classes, a 486 per cent increase (Modern
Language Association 2013). Recent years have also seen a remarkable
increase in the numbers of US students studying abroad in the Middle
East and North Africa (MENA) region, with 6,834 students studying in this
region in 2015–16, a 184 per cent increase from the 2,410 students who
studied in this region in 2000–01 (Institute of International Education
2016). This overall increase has been sustained despite drops in the num-
bers of students studying abroad immediately following the September 11,
2001 terrorist attacks and the 2011 Arab Spring (Institute of International
Education 2016). There are also notable shifts in the countries that stu-
dents travel to, reﬂecting political changes. For example, although the
number of students studying in Egypt increased from 426 in 2000–01 to
1,923 in 2009–10 (the year immediately preceding the 2011 Egyptian
revolution), only 109 students studied abroad there in 2014–15, likely
a result of post-revolution security concerns. In contrast, the numbers of
students studying in Jordan, where there was not a revolution, have
increased from 83 in 2000–01, to 745 in 2009–10, to 985 in 2014–15
(Institute of International Education 2016). Thus, while students of
Arabic are more likely to be interested in politics than students studying
in more traditional destinations, and may even relate their interest in
studying in the region to political events such as the September 11, 2001
terrorist attacks (Gore 2005; Lane-Toomey 2014, Trentman 2013b), it is
clear that political events shape their destinations within this region.

Although language learning is not necessarily a component of study
abroad (Gore 2005; Kinginger 2009), and it is not clear how many of the
students studying in the MENA region (which also includes countries such
as Turkey, Israel, and Iran that are not predominantly Arabic speaking) are
studying Arabic, research on students studying abroad in Arabic-speaking
countries demonstrates that many of these students are focused on
language, and view Arabic proﬁciency as crucial to their future success
(Lane-Toomey 2014; Trentman 2013b).
In addition to the rise in the numbers of students studying Arabic and
studying abroad in the MENA region, the early twenty-ﬁrst century has
also seen an increase in government funding for US students of Arabic and
other ‘critical languages’ (Belnap 2008; Lane-Toomey 2014). The National
Security Language Initiative announced by President George W. Bush in
2006 aimed to increase the number of Americans learning ‘critical’ lan-
guages (including Arabic) in educational settings and the workplace
(US Department of State 2006). This initiative led to the expansion of
existing language programmes (such as Title VI, Fulbright, and the
National Security Education Program) as well as the creation of new pro-
grammes (such as the National Language Flagship and STARTALK).
Although this type of funding has declined in recent years, and the nature
of the relationship between the increased funding and the increased
numbers of students is not transparent, there is some evidence that this
increase in funding has supported the increase in students. For example,
Lane-Toomey (2014) found that students studying in the MENA region
were more likely to have received ﬁnancial support than those studying
in traditional destinations, and that some students stated that the avail-
ability of funding was a factor in their decision to focus their studies on the
MENA region.
Finally, it is worth noting that the rising numbers of students studying
abroad in the MENA region reﬂect an overall rise in the number of US
students studying abroad, which increased 103 per cent from 154,168 in
2000–01 to 313,495 in 2014–15 (Institute of International Education 2016).
There is a notable trend towards short-term study abroad, with 60 per cent
of students participating in programmes of eight weeks or less in duration
compared to the 32 per cent that study abroad for a semester and the
3 per cent that study abroad for an academic year (Institute of
International Education 2016). Although study abroad of any length is
popularly assumed to lead automatically to language and intercultural
learning, researchers have noted the challenges that students may have
entering local social networks and using the target language even when
studying abroad for a semester or longer (Coleman 2015; Freed 2008;
Kinginger 2009; Vande Berg and Paige 2012), a ﬁnding that raises concerns
about the proliferation of short-term study abroad programmes. Yet at the
same time, these programmes allow a greater diversity of students to study
abroad (Twombly et al. 2012). Thus, for those interested in promoting
5 Arabic Study Abroad
107

language and intercultural learning during study abroad, a pressing issue
is how to ensure these outcomes for students given the changing nature of
US study abroad. In the remainder of this chapter, I describe trends and
ﬁndings from research on study abroad generally and study abroad to the
Arab world in particular, concluding with the need for research-based
interventions if promoting language and intercultural learning for all
students is to be a goal of these experiences. Although this chapter focuses
primarily on US students studying abroad, there may be parallels in other
contexts.
5.2
Linguistic and Intercultural Outcomes of Study Abroad
A prominent strand of study-abroad research focuses on examining the
linguistic and intercultural outcomes of study abroad by examining
students’ skills before and after they study abroad or compared to an at-
home group. Oral proﬁciency has been a particular focus, likely due to
the expectation that regular interactions in the target language are
a main beneﬁt of study abroad. The Oral Proﬁciency Interview (OPI)
developed by the American Council on the Teaching of Foreign
Languages (ACTFL), is one instrument commonly used to measure stu-
dent progress while abroad, and in general, research demonstrates that
students do improve on this measure while abroad (Baker-Smemoe et al.
2014; Brecht et al. 1995; Davidson 2010; Magnan and Back 2007;
Segalowitz and Freed 2004; Vande Berg et al. 2009). However, these
studies also show that not all students improve, and that there may be
considerable individual variation. Baker-Smemoe et al. (2014) further
note that global proﬁciency measures such as the OPI may mask more
modest gains, particularly at higher levels.
Students’ oral skills have also been analysed in terms of complexity,
accuracy, and ﬂuency measures considered to represent distinct dimen-
sions in second language acquisition (Housen et al. 2012). Fluency fea-
tures consisting of temporal and hesitation measures are the most
commonly used. As with the oral proﬁciency results, the research demon-
strates that study-abroad students generally improve on these measures
during study abroad (Collentine 2004; Du 2013; Freed et al. 2004;
Garcı´a-Amaya 2009; Segalowitz and Freed 2004; Trentman 2017).
However, they do not always make signiﬁcant gains on all of the mea-
sures studied, especially those related to syntactic or grammatical devel-
opment (Collentine 2004; Freed 2008; Freed et al. 2004; Kinginger 2011;
Segalowitz and Freed 2004), and study-abroad students may be outper-
formed by learners in domestic immersion (Freed et al. 2004) or at home
(Garcı´a-Amaya 2009) on some measures. As with oral proﬁciency, there
also tends to be signiﬁcant individual variation on these measures, and
not all students make gains abroad.
1 0 8
E M M A T R E N T M A N

5.2.1
Sociolinguistic Variation
Researchers have also examined students’ development of sociolin-
guistic abilities, and this is a particularly relevant focus for learners
of Arabic, who must learn to navigate Arabic diglossia but are not
necessarily exposed to multiple registers in their language classes at
home (Al-Batal and Belnap 2006; Shiri 2013). Research on speakers of
French (Howard et al. 2006; Howard 2012; Regan 1995, 1998; Regan
et al. 2009) and Chinese (Li 2010) has demonstrated that while stu-
dents studying abroad tend to move towards more native-like use of
sociolinguistic variants, they still overuse formal variants in their
speech, and are more likely to pick up older and more stable variables
than newer ones (Regan et al. 2009). Looking at regional variants in
Spanish, researchers have found that students studying in Spain were
unlikely to adopt Spanish regional variants (Geeslin and Gudmestad
2008;
George
2014; Knouse
2012;
Ringer-Hilﬁnger 2012). Ringer-
Hilﬁnger (2012) surmised that this may be due to their desired afﬁlia-
tion with other varieties of Spanish.
Research on the acquisition of sociolinguistic variation in Arabic is
limited. However, in contrast to the Spanish studies above, Raish (2015)
found that Arabic learners studying abroad in Egypt demonstrated high
usage of the Egyptian variant /g/ (instead of the standard ʒ) which can
indicate both regional afﬁliation and use of Egyptian dialect. Although
the study did not report learners’ previous dialect experience, after only
a few weeks in Egypt, learners used the Egyptian variant 38.9 per cent of
the time on average, and this percentage increased to 61.5 per cent by the
end of their time abroad. Looking at a wider variety of Egyptian dialect
elements, I (Trentman 2017) also found a rapid acquisition of Egyptian
dialect by learners who had not studied a dialect previously, with parti-
cipants using the Egyptian variant 64.3 per cent of the time after only
a few weeks in Egypt, and 79.4 per cent by the end of the semester.
Notably, all of the students in this study made gains in their acquisition
of Egyptian dialect, including several students who made no gains on
measures of ﬂuency. As a result, I conclude that relying solely on general
measures of linguistic gain abroad may mask gains in sociolinguistic
competence.
5.2.2
Pragmatic Competence and Intercultural Development
The development of pragmatic competence is another area that has been
examined in study abroad. Researchers have found that while students
make gains abroad, they still differ considerably from native speaker
norms for a variety of reasons (Bataller 2010; Cohen and Shively 2007;
Shively 2010). For example, Shively (2010) notes that students may not be
aware of pragmatic errors they make, as they rarely receive direct feedback
on them. Wilkinson (2002) analyses tensions between students’ attempts
5 Arabic Study Abroad
109

to apply US classroom interactional norms to various situations abroad.
Brown (2013) and Taguchi (2016) note that sometimes learners know the
pragmatically appropriate behaviour, but choose not to use it due to
linguistic difﬁculty or uncertainty, or due to identity-related negotiations,
such as being foreigners who are not expected to conform to local prag-
matic norms, or who feel that local pragmatic norms are in conﬂict with
their personal values.
Along with language learning, intercultural development is an expected
beneﬁt of study abroad. Yet like language learning, research on intercul-
tural development shows mixed results and considerable individual varia-
tion. Research measuring students’ intercultural development on the
Intercultural Development Inventory (Hammer 2012) ﬁnds that students
make substantial gains only when they have participated in guided,
reﬂected inquiry aimed at their intercultural development during or fol-
lowing their experience abroad (Jackson 2013; Vande Berg and Paige 2012).
Jones (2014) found that students returning from study abroad were in fact
more nationalistic and had fewer warm feelings towards their host coun-
try than those about to study abroad. Focusing on Arabic learners abroad,
Shiri (2015a) found that these learners did self-report gains in intercultural
competence on a survey aligned with intercultural measures developed by
the Interagency Language Roundtable (ILR). However, it is worth noting
that these students were enrolled in a programme that actively intervened
to guide their intercultural development.
Thus, regardless of the type of language or intercultural learning stu-
died, research reveals that these are not automatic outcomes of study
abroad, and that there is considerable individual variation, even among
students of similar backgrounds in the same programme (Coleman 2015;
Kinginger 2009). For these reasons, researchers have turned to examining
students’ experiences of study abroad more closely. This has been done
through quantitative studies that seek to predict language or intercultural
learning based on certain variables in the study-abroad experience as well
as qualitative studies that aim to provide a deeper understanding of what
students do abroad.
5.3
The Experience Abroad
Research making quantitative predictions about the outcomes of study
abroad typically focuses on student and experiential variables, such as
prior language experience, living situation, or use of the target language
abroad to predict the outcomes of language learning. Some of these studies
demonstrate an intuitive relationship between these variables and out-
comes. For example, Davidson (2010) found that pre-programme listening
proﬁciency and control of language structure best predicted gains in oral
proﬁciency for Russian learners abroad. Examining learners of Chinese
1 1 0
E M M A T R E N T M A N

(Du 2013) and Spanish (Herna´ndez 2010), researchers found greater gains
among students who used the target language more. In a large-scale study
including six languages, Baker-Smemoe et al. (2014) found that higher
intercultural sensitivity and strong social networks were the best predic-
tors of gains in oral proﬁciency. Isabelli-Garcı´a (2006) also found that
students with more extensive local social networks made greater gains
in oral proﬁciency. Li (2010) reported that learners who had been in
China more than four years showed more native-like use of ‘DE’,
a morphosyntactic sociolinguistic variable that is sometimes optional in
informal situations.
Yet not all studies looking at language use outside of the classroom have
found a relationship between use of the target language and linguistic gain
(Mendelson 2004; Segalowitz and Freed 2004). Magnan and Back (2007)
found a negative relationship between language gain and speaking the
target language with classmates, and researchers have also found
a positive correspondence between linguistic gain and the English proﬁ-
ciency of local acquaintances (Baker-Smemoe et al. 2014; Dewey et al.
2014). Ferna´ndez and Tapia (2016) note that the categories in quantitative
measures of language contact such as the Language Contact Proﬁle (LCP)
are not necessarily clear to students, which results in variation between
their self-reported language use overall, with particular interlocutors, or in
different tasks.
Researchers have also questioned whether the study-abroad experi-
ence can be reduced to discrete variables (Coleman 2013), particularly
in light of qualitative research that shows that experiences measured as
the same variable may in fact be quite different (Kinginger 2009). For
example, living situation is often operationalized as the variables of
homestay, dorm stay, or apartment. Yet research examining the home-
stay experience demonstrates that these experiences can vary consider-
ably, from close relationships that introduce students into existing
social networks and continue following study abroad to ones that are
limited to basic formulaic exchanges (Allen 2010; Ferna´ndez and Tapia
2016; Gutel 2007; Jackson 2008; Knight and Schmidt-Rinehart 2002;
Shiri 2015b).
Thus, a second prominent strand in research on study abroad is qualita-
tive research that sheds light on the actual experiences of students abroad.
A major ﬁnding in this research is the struggles some students report in
gaining access to local social networks and using the target language
(Kinginger 2008, 2009). Coleman (2013, 2015) describes a concentric-
circles model of student social networks abroad, where the inner circle
consists of co-nationals, the next circle of ‘other outsiders’, such as inter-
national students from other countries, and the outer circle is local social
networks. He notes that many students never reach the outer circle during
their time abroad, a ﬁnding conﬁrmed by studies that report study-abroad
students’ tendency to socialize primarily with other study-abroad students
5 Arabic Study Abroad
111

and to use the target language only in service encounters (Bataller 2010;
Coleman
2013;
Herna´ndez
2010;
Jackson
2013;
Kinginger
2008;
Mendelson 2004).
5.3.1
Arabic in Particular
Although the majority of study-abroad research focuses on US students
travelling to European countries, research on US learners of Arabic abroad
draws similar conclusions (Trentman 2018b). Kuntz and Belnap (2001)
found that students studying abroad in Morocco and Yemen reported little
use of Arabic outside of class with either locals or their peers, and in fact
claimed that using Arabic could cause their peers to accuse them of
‘showing off’. Dewey et al. (2013) found variation in the social network
sizes of students studying in Jordan and Morocco, with some students
having no friends or acquaintances outside of their homestay family
while others had as many as ﬁfteen. These networks also varied as to the
languages used within them, and the authors report that students whose
Arab friends were more proﬁcient in English were more likely to make
gains in Arabic, potentially as they were able to use their English skills to
gain access to bilingual Arab social networks. I (Trentman 2013a, 2013b)
note a similar trend for some Arabic learners in Egypt who found it
challenging to gain access to local social networks and socialized instead
with other international students. I note that the communities of practice
(Wenger 1998) students were able to gain access to shaped their ability to
participate in social networks and use Arabic, and that participation in
a particular network typically entailed having a skill valuable to that net-
work (Trentman 2013b). Shiri (2015b) found that learners in the Arab
world were able to exploit their well-designed homestay experience to
enter a ‘ready-made’ social network, although there was again individual
variation. Examining the experiences of students studying in Jordan, Bown
et al. (2015) found that those learners mostly engaged in intermediate-level
‘pleasantries’ with locals due to their struggles with proﬁciency gaps and
unsympathetic interlocutors who switched to English or were uninter-
ested in continuing the conversation. Although romantic relationships
are frequently ignored in study-abroad research, Coleman (2013) notes
that they may be an important way to gain access to local social networks,
a ﬁnding supported by Trentman (2015b), where I noted that two women
in Egypt reported gaining access to local social networks through their
Egyptian boyfriends.
Student explanations for their tendency to socialize with other interna-
tional students rather than locals generally involve the difﬁculty of mak-
ing local friends (Allen 2010; Bataller 2010; Mendelson 2004). This may be
a result of their limited proﬁciency in the local language (DeKeyser 2010),
including a lack of knowledge of local pragmatic norms (Shively 2010;
Wilkinson 2002). English speakers may ﬁnd that locals want to practise
1 1 2
E M M A T R E N T M A N

English with them, and that locals’ English skills exceed those of the
students in the local language. This can result in a trend towards conversa-
tions in English (Kinginger 2008; Mitchell et al. 2015; Trentman 2013a). For
Arabic learners, proﬁciency difﬁculties can be exacerbated by a lack of
preparation to engage with locals in the vernaculars used for everyday
social activities (Kuntz and Belnap 2001; Trentman 2013a).
5.3.2
Negotiating Identity
The need to negotiate new identities abroad can also be a challenge for
students. At times, students may be able to negotiate national, gendered,
racial, and religious identities in ways that support their access to local
social networks, while in other instances unpleasant identity-related inci-
dents may cause them to withdraw from interactions with locals (Kinginger
2008, 2009, 2013). For example, encountering unpopular perceptions of US
policies abroad can cause some students to retreat into ideals of national
superiority, while others may try to renegotiate an identity as a ‘good
American’ (Dolby 2007). Although US students studying in the Arab world
are frequently interested in politics and Arab–US relations (Lane-Toomey
2014; Lane-Toomey and Lane 2012; Trentman 2013b), they may still experi-
ence frustration with being associated with unpopular US foreign policies
or if they are unable to gain access to the political discussions they desire
(Trentman 2012, 2013b; Trentman and Diao 2017).
In a variety of locations abroad, US women report negative experiences due
to sexual harassment and difﬁculties of making female friends, which they
feel results in greater difﬁculties entering local social networks compared to
their male peers (Anderson 2003; Isabelli-Garcı´a 2006; Kinginger 2008, 2009;
Polyani 1995). Women studying in the Arab world report similar frustrations
(Bown et al. 2015; Kuntz and Belnap 2001; Trentman 2013a, 2015b). However,
Kinginger (2008, 2009) notes that these studies rarely take into account local
interpretations of gendered incidents, and I (2015b) note that female US
students studying in Egypt were also able to negotiate gendered identities
in ways that positively impacted their language learning and integration into
local social networks, such as talking to Egyptian women, visiting Egyptian
families (especially overnight), and dating Egyptian men.
Students may also negotiate racial and ethnic identities abroad, and be
discouraged from interacting with locals due to the racism they encounter
(Talburt and Stewart 1999; Van Der Meid 2003). White US students, who
are racially unmarked at home, may experience stares and other forms of
‘othering’ as racially marked foreigners when studying in locations such as
Japan (Iino 2006; Siegal 1995, 1996), China (Du 2015), and Egypt (Trentman
2012, 2013a; Trentman and Diao 2017). Racially marked foreigners in
these locations are also typically expected to have low proﬁciency in the
local language and are usually addressed in English. While these experi-
ences can be frustrating for language learners, some racially marked
5 Arabic Study Abroad
113

foreigners in China (Du 2015) and Egypt (Trentman 2012; Trentman and
Diao 2017) were able to use locals’ curiosity about the apparent contrast
between their racial appearance and language skills as a conversation
opener that could lead to further interaction.
In contrast to these students, students who are minorities in their home-
land may ﬁnd that they are no longer minorities abroad. Anya (2017)
describes the experiences of African American learners studying in an Afro-
Brazilian city, and how they learned to negotiate and understand blackness
abroad. Heritage students studying in their ancestral homeland may also
ﬁnd that they are able to ‘blend in’ abroad in a way that they cannot at home,
though at the same time they may be held to higher standards of language
and cultural proﬁciency than visible foreigners (Du 2015; Petrucci 2007;
Riegelhaupt and Carrasco 2000; Van Der Meid 2003). In a study of Arab
heritage learners in Egypt, I (2015a) found that while heritage learners study-
ing in Egypt appreciated locals’ acceptance of their Arab identity, they could
also feel frustrated when their American identities were not recognized.
Furthermore, they were held to higher expectations of language proﬁciency,
and sometimes reported preferring English when locals mocked their Arabic
skills (a practice that did not occur with non-heritage students).
The negotiation of religious identities has also been raised in the study-
abroad literature (Coleman 2013; Trentman 2012), and is particularly
relevant for US learners studying in Arabic-speaking countries, as this is
likely their ﬁrst experience living in a Muslim-majority environment.
I (2012) explain that while this was frequently a positive experience for
Muslim learners, they could also become uncomfortable with beliefs they
were expected to have concerning gender relations and other religions.
Non-Muslim students sometimes felt alienated from local practices, but
also noted that discussing religious differences could lead to fruitful con-
versations. Jewish students in particular struggled with the anti-Semitism
they encountered abroad and their automatic association with Israeli
policies. Yet being Jewish could also be an interesting conversation opener
that led to discussions they found interesting.
In general, the recent focus in the study-abroad literature on how and with
whom students engage, as well as the challenges they face in entering local
social networks and using the local language, has illustrated the complexity
of this experience, and the reasons why two students of similar backgrounds
in the same programme may in fact have very different experiences abroad,
leading to the extensive individual variation in language and intercultural
learning outcomes that characterizes the study-abroad literature.
5.4
Ideologies of Study Abroad
In addition to research focusing on the linguistic and intercultural out-
comes of study abroad and highlighting the complexity of actual student
1 1 4
E M M A T R E N T M A N

experiences, a recent trend in the study-abroad research has been to focus
on ideologies surrounding study abroad, including how these inﬂuence
student experiences (Diao and Trentman 2016; Trentman and Diao 2017).
Gore (2005) used critical discourse analysis to examine international edu-
cation documents, revealing tensions between ‘standard’ voices that dis-
count the study-abroad experience and ‘alternative’ voices that promote
its value. The ‘standard’ discourses are study abroad as a Grand Tour of
Europe (a coming-of-age experience for the wealthy in the UK and US
starting in the early seventeenth century), study abroad as an insigniﬁcant
pursuit by wealthy women, and study abroad as a non-professional course
of study inferior to American education. The ‘alternative’ voices are study
abroad as a means of promoting peace and professional preparation, and
9/11 as a wake-up call for international education. Gore argues that the
entrenched presence of these standard voices is a reason that the numbers
of students studying abroad remain only 3 per cent of the total number of
undergraduates. More recent data from the Open Doors report (Institute of
International Education 2016) demonstrates that the overall number of
students studying abroad continues to be a small percentage of US under-
graduates (10 per cent studied abroad prior to graduation in 2014–15).
Analysing marketing materials for study abroad also reveals the continued
presence of these standard discourses for study abroad. Examining the web-
site of Arcadia University’s study-abroad programme, including student blogs
and programme-speciﬁc sections, Michelson and Alvarez Valencia (2016)
found that study abroad was consistently represented as a tourist commodity
rather than an educational experience. Zemach-Bersin (2007, 2009) argues
that marketing materials’ presentation of study abroad as a commodity for
tourism and personal development for US students in exotic locations in fact
represents the continuation of a colonial and imperial political tradition,
a concern also raised by Woolf (2006) and Ogden (2007).
Wenhao Diao and I have examined the intersection between discourses
of study abroad and student experiences in Egypt and China (Diao and
Trentman 2016; Trentman and Diao 2017). We (2016) note that these
diverse locations are bundled together in US media and policy documents
using an Orientalist perspective (Said 1979) that politicizes study abroad in
these locations as necessary for the goals of ‘national defense’, and ‘bridge
building’. These goals are also echoed by students abroad, and can be
a source of tension within their everyday experiences. For example,
despite their lofty goals of bridging cultural divides, students sometimes
struggled to engage in meaningful political discussions or understand
local views of political events. We (2017) argue that while there is
a discursive link established in media and policy documents as well as
student narratives between Gore’s ‘alternative’ discourses of peace and
professional preparation and non-traditional study-abroad destinations
such as Egypt and China, the actual experiences of students abroad contest
this distinction. We show that when these discourses are accepted without
5 Arabic Study Abroad
115

critique, they can sometimes impede language and intercultural learning
during study abroad, and allow this experience to recreate the colonial
map, mask global inequalities, and create a new global elite.
5.5
Research-Based Interventions
Thus, research on study abroad in locations across the world, including the
Arab world, demonstrates variability in language and intercultural out-
comes among students. Research focusing on the experiences of students
abroad reveals the struggles they may encounter in using the local language
and joining local social networks, and how this can stem from the need to
negotiate and renegotiate their identities in these contexts. Examining the
intersections between ideologies of study abroad and student experiences
also reveals tensions between the two, and the need to critically examine
these ideologies in order to promote language and intercultural learning.
Thus, as a whole, the research points to the need for research-based inter-
ventions in study abroad, especially at the programme level. While pro-
grammes cannot change factors related to individual students (such as their
interests), nor the larger social context (such as gender roles), it is critical
that programmes both at home and abroad (and preferably in coordination)
implement research-based interventions that help all students develop
their language and intercultural learning abilities abroad.
Three guiding principles for research-based interventions in study
abroad are that they (1) promote language and intercultural contact, (2)
guide students in reﬂection upon this contact to allow them to understand
how meaning is created in these experiences, and (3) connect the pre-
sojourn, sojourn, and post-sojourn experiences (Jackson 2013; Vande
Berg and Paige 2012). In terms of promoting language and intercultural
contact, the research makes it clear that this is not an automatic outcome
of study abroad, but that joining local social networks and using the target
language can be a struggle for students abroad (e.g., Coleman 2013;
Kinginger 2009). At the most basic level then, programme components
that provide the potential to introduce students into local social networks,
such as homestays, local roommates, language partners, service learning,
and participation in clubs and extracurricular activities are essential. It is
also important to consider the role of the local hosts in setting up these
activities, as contact can increase with sympathetic hosts interested in
intercultural learning themselves (Du 2015; Shiri 2015b). Furthermore,
students are most successful in developing their social networks through
extracurricular activities and clubs when they have a skill they can con-
tribute to this community (Mitchell et al. 2015; Trentman 2013b). Many
study-abroad programmes, including those in the Arab world, do incorpo-
rate these types of activities in order to enhance students’ abilities to join
local social networks and use the target language.
1 1 6
E M M A T R E N T M A N

However, it is crucial to realize that language and intercultural contact
alone is not enough to develop students’ abilities in these areas, as tales of
unsuccessful homestay experiences or students who withdraw from inter-
actions with locals from around the world show (Gutel 2007; Kinginger
2008; Knight and Schmidt-Rinehart 2002). In contrast, more successful out-
comes are typically a result of a carefully designed experience to encourage
both language and intercultural development that includes a reﬂective
component upon this language contact (Engle and Engle 2012; Shiri
2015a; Vande Berg and Paige 2012). The ﬁnal chapters of Vande Berg et al.
(2012) describe several interventions that have this goal. Guided reﬂection is
also crucial for two of the challenges to language and intercultural learning
described in this chapter, those of identity negotiation and ideologies of
study abroad (Kinginger 2013; Trentman 2015b). By reﬂecting upon how
identities are performed in interaction, as well as how they can be actively
negotiated to promote language and intercultural learning, learners may
feel less constrained by the negative identity-related incidents they encoun-
ter. For example, if female learners in Arabic-speaking countries are assisted
by their programmes in gaining access to families, and understand that
their gender assists with this access, they may feel less constrained by their
inability to engage in informal conversations with men in public spaces
(e.g., Trentman 2015b). In terms of examining language ideologies, guiding
students to explicitly recognize these ideologies and reﬂect upon the ten-
sions they form in everyday experiences abroad may allow for more positive
experiences.
5.6
Final Thoughts
Programme interventions in study abroad are most successful when they
connect the pre-departure, study-abroad, and post-sojourn experiences
(Jackson 2010, 2013; Lou and Bosley 2012). Some students may actually
gain the most in terms of intercultural competence following post-sojourn
opportunities for guided reﬂection (Jackson 2013), and intercultural pro-
ﬁciency prior to study abroad is one of the strongest predictors of language
gains (Baker-Smemoe et al. 2014). Although the bureaucratic structures
that typically separate programmes abroad from those at home, or set up
the former as service providers for the latter, make this a non-trivial
challenge in twenty-ﬁrst-century study abroad, it is essential to search
for creative solutions that can link these experiences. Modern communi-
cations technologies have the possibility to enhance these connections by
allowing students and their hosts to communicate prior to study abroad
and stay in touch during the post-sojourn period, or engage in tele-
collaboration projects (Campbell 2015; O’Dowd 2011; Shively 2010).
Ethnographic projects for study abroad (e.g., Trentman 2018a; Jackson
2006, 2008, 2010; Roberts et al. 2001; Roberts 2003) are a type of
5 Arabic Study Abroad
117

intervention that includes all three of these principles. These projects have
students complete a preparatory class prior to studying abroad, collect
data for a topic of their choice while abroad, and write up their ﬁndings
upon their return, while providing guided support and opportunities for
reﬂection throughout the process. These projects are also ﬂexible enough
to incorporate variations in student interests and programme curricu-
lums. After all, as Roberts (2003) explains, the purpose of these type of
projects is not to produce professional ethnographers: ‘They [the students]
are not professional ethnographers nor are they attempting a polished
account. Rather they are using the ethnographic process to develop
a reﬂexive intercultural understanding which may be transferable to
many different settings in the future’ (p. 123). These projects encourage
language and intercultural contact (by requiring students to interact with
locals in the target language to conduct observations and interviews, in
ways they might not otherwise) as well as develop their abilities to criti-
cally reﬂect upon the cultural material they encounter (by interpreting
cultural meanings from inside perspectives at home and abroad) (Jackson
2006; Roberts 2003).
Students’ linguistic analysis of their data can spur language and prag-
matic development (Jackson 2006; Shively 2010). In the case of Arabic, this
analysis is a way to address Arabic diglossia through analysing examples of
real language use, rather than relying on intuitions or ideologies concern-
ing what speakers do or should use. Finally, ethnographic projects for
study abroad provide a way to connect the pre-departure, study-abroad,
and post-sojourn periods as the project spans all of these time frames in
a way that encourages reﬂection.
Implementing research-based interventions at the programme level
that follow these guiding principles is certainly not without its chal-
lenges, given the diversity of programmes abroad and at home, and the
bureaucratic issues involved in coordinating between them, especially as
the former are often viewed simply as service providers for the latter.
However, the research ﬁndings are clear that despite the increasing
numbers of students studying abroad, including to Arabic-speaking coun-
tries, language and intercultural learning are not automatic outcomes of
this experience. For these reasons, if these outcomes are a programme
goal, it is important for programmes to focus on creative solutions that
take into account their particular context and constraints as well as
research ﬁndings. Contextual considerations include programme goals,
institutional factors, student demographics, and societal factors, and
research ﬁndings emphasize the need to promote language and inter-
cultural contact, to facilitate guided reﬂection upon this contact, and to
connect the pre-departure, study-abroad, and post-sojourn experiences.
While negotiating among all of these factors may be challenging, it has
the potential to promote increased language and intercultural learning
for students abroad.
1 1 8
E M M A T R E N T M A N

References
Al-Batal, M. and Belnap, R. (2006). The teaching and learning of Arabic in
the United States: Realities, needs, and future directions. In K. M.
Wahba, Z. A. Taha, and L. England, eds., Handbook for Arabic Language
Teaching Professionals in the 21st Century. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum,
389–99.
Allen, H. W. (2010). Language-learning motivation during short-term study
abroad: An activity theory perspective. Foreign Language Annals, 43(1), 27–49.
Anderson, A. (2003). Women and cultural learning in Costa Rica: Reading
the contexts. Frontiers: The Interdisciplinary Journal of Study Abroad, 9, 21–52.
Anya, U. (2017). Racialized Identities in Second Language Learning: Speaking
Blackness in Brazil. New York: Routledge.
Baker-Smemoe, W., Dewey, D. P., Bown, J., and Martinsen, R. A. (2014).
Variables affecting L2 gains during study abroad. Foreign Language Annals,
47(3), 464–86. doi:10.1111/ﬂan.v47.3.
Bataller, R. (2010). Making a request for a service in Spanish: Pragmatic
development in the study abroad setting. Foreign Language Annals, 43(1),
160–75.
Belnap, R. K. (2008). If you build it they will come. In Z. Ibrahim and
S. Makhlouf, eds., Linguistics in an Age of Globalization: Perspectives on
Arabic Language and Teaching. Cairo, Egypt: American University in Cairo
Press, 53–66.
Bown, J., Dewey, D. P., and Belnap, R. K. (2015). Student interactions during
study abroad in Jordan. In R. Mitchell, K. McManus, and N. Tracy-
Ventura, eds., Social Interaction, Identity, and Language Learning During
Residence Abroad. EUROSLA, 199–222. Retrieved from www.eurosla.org
/monographs/EM04/Bown_etal.pdf.
Brecht, R. D., Davidson, D. E., and Ginsberg, R. B. (1995). Predictors of
foreign language gain during study abroad. In B. F. Freed, ed., Second
Language Acquisition in a Study Abroad Context. Philadelphia, PA: John
Benjamins, 37–66.
Brown, L. (2013). Identity and honoriﬁcs use in Korean study abroad. In
C. Kinginger, ed., Social and Cultural Aspects of Language Learning in Study
Abroad. Philadelphia, PA: John Benjamins, 269–98.
Campbell, R. (2015). Life post-study abroad for the Japanese language
learner. In R. Mitchell, K. McManus, and N. Tracy-Ventura, eds., Social
Interaction, Identity, and Language Learning During Residence Abroad.
EUROSLA, 241–62. Retrieved from www.eurosla.org/monographs/
EM04/Campbell.pdf.
Cohen, A. D. and Shively, R. L. (2007). Acquisition of requests and apologies
in Spanish and French: Impact of study abroad and strategy-building
intervention. The Modern Language Journal, 91(2), 189–212. doi:10.1111/
j.1540-4781.2007.00540.x.
5 Arabic Study Abroad
119

Coleman, J. A. (2013). Researching whole people and whole lives. In
C. Kinginger, ed., Social and Cultural Aspects of Language Learning in Study
Abroad. Philadelphia, PA: John Benjamins, 17–46.
Coleman, J. A. (2015). Social circles during residence abroad: What stu-
dents do, and who with. In R. Mitchell, N. Tracy-Ventura, and
K. McManus, eds., Social Interaction, Identity and Language Learning During
Residence Abroad. EUROSLA, 33–52. www.eurosla.org/monographs/EM04/
Coleman.pdf; last accessed 15 November 2020.
Collentine, J. (2004). The effects of learning contexts on morphosyntactic
and lexical development. Studies in Second Language Acquisition, 26(2),
227–48. doi:10.1017/0S027226310406204.
Davidson, D. E. (2010). Study abroad: When, how long, and with what
results? New data from the Russian front. Foreign Language Annals, 43(1),
6–26. doi:10.1111/j.1944-9720.2010.01057.x.
DeKeyser, R. (2010). Monitoring processes in Spanish as a second language
during a study abroad program. Foreign Language Annals, 43(1), 80–92.
Dewey, D. P., Belnap, R. K., and Hillstrom, R. (2013). Social network devel-
opment, language use, and language acquisition during study abroad:
Arabic language learners’ perspectives. Frontiers: The Interdisciplinary
Journal of Study Abroad, 22, 84–110.
Dewey, D. P., Bown, J., Baker, W., Martinsen, R. A., Gold, C., and Eggett, D.
(2014). Language use in six study abroad programs: An exploratory ana-
lysis of possible predictors: Language Learning, 64(1), 36–71. doi:10.1111/
lang.2014.64.issue-1.
Diao, W. and Trentman, E. (2016). Politicizing study abroad: Learning Arabic
in Egypt and Mandarin in China. L2 Journal, 8(2), 31–50. Retrieved from
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/90g8r79m.
Dolby, N. (2007). Reﬂections on nation: American undergraduates and
education abroad. Journal of Studies in International Education, 11(2),
141–56.
Du, H. (2013). The development of Chinese ﬂuency during study abroad in
China. Modern Language Journal, 97(1), 131–43. doi:10.1111/j.1540-
4781.2013.01434.x.
Du, H. (2015). American college students studying abroad in China:
Language, identity, and self-presentation. Foreign Language Annals, 48(2),
250–66. doi:10.1111/ﬂan.12138.
Engle, L. and Engle, J. (2012). Beyond immersion: The American University
Center of Provence experiment in holistic intervention. In M. Vande
Berg, R. M. Paige, and K. H. Lou, eds., Student Learning Abroad: What Our
Students Are Learning, What They’re Not, and What We Can Do About It.
Sterling, VA: Stylus, 284–307.
Ferna´ndez, J. and Tapia, A. M. G. (2016). An appraisal of the Language
Contact Proﬁle as a tool to research local engagement in study abroad.
Study Abroad Research in Second Language Acquisition and International
Education, 1(2), 248–76. doi:10.1075/sar.1.2.05fer.
1 2 0
E M M A T R E N T M A N

Freed, B. (2008). Second language learning in a study abroad context. In
N. Van Deusen-Scholl and N. H. Hornberger, eds., Encyclopedia of Language
and Education, vol. 4: Second and Foreign Language Education. New York:
Springer, 113–25.
Freed, B. F., Segalowitz, N., and Dewey, D. P. (2004). Context of learn-
ing and second language ﬂuency in French: Comparing regular class-
room, study abroad, and intensive domestic immersion programs.
Studies in Second Language Acquisition, 26(2), 275–301. doi:10.1017/
0S0272263104062060.
Garcı´a-Amaya, L. (2009). New ﬁndings on ﬂuency measures across three
different learning contexts. In J. Collentine et al. eds., Selected Proceedings
of the 11th Hispanic Linguistics Symposium, 68–80. www.lingref.com/cpp/hls/
11/paper2203.pdf; last accessed 15 November 2020.
Geeslin, K. L. and Gudmestad, A. (2008). The acquisition of variation in
second-language Spanish: An agenda for integrating studies of the L2
sound system. Journal of Applied Linguistics, 5(2), 137–157. doi:10.1558/japl
.v5i2.2232.
George, A. (2014). Study abroad in central Spain: The development of
regional phonological features. Foreign Language Annals, 47(1), 97–114.
doi:10.1111/ﬂan.v47.1.
Gore, J. E. (2005). Dominant Beliefs and Alternative Voices: Discourse, Belief, and
Gender in American Study Abroad. New York: Routledge.
Gutel, H. (2007). The home stay: A gendered perspective. Frontiers: The
Interdisciplinary Journal of Study Abroad, 25, 173–88.
Hammer, M. (2012). The Intercultural Development Inventory: A new
frontier in assessment and development of intercultural competence.
In M. Vande Berg, R. M. Paige, and K. H. Lou, eds., Student Learning Abroad:
What Our Students Are Learning, What They’re Not, and What We Can Do About
It. Sterling, VA: Stylus, 115–36.
Herna´ndez, T. A. (2010). The relationship among motivation, interaction,
and the development of second language oral proﬁciency in a
study-abroad context. The Modern Language Journal, 94(4), 600–17.
doi:10.1111/j.1540-4781.2010.01053.x.
Housen, A., Kuiken, F., and Vedder, I. (2012). Complexity, accuracy and
ﬂuency. In Dimensions of L2 Performance and Proﬁciency: Complexity, Accuracy
and Fluency in SLA. Philadelphia, PA: John Benjamins, 1–20.
Howard, M. (2012). The advanced learner’s sociolinguistic proﬁle: On
issues of individual differences, second language exposure conditions,
and type of sociolinguistic variable. The Modern Language Journal, 96(1),
20–33. doi:10.1111/modl.2012.96.issue-1.
Howard, M., Leme´e, I., and Regan, V. (2006). The L2 acquisition of
a phonological variable: The case of /l/ deletion in French. Journal of
French Language Studies, 16, 1–24. doi:10.1017/S0959269506002298.
Iino, M. (2006). Norms of interaction in a Japanese homestay setting:
Toward a two-way ﬂow of linguistic and cultural resources. In
5 Arabic Study Abroad
121

M. A. DuFon and E. Churchill, eds., Language Learners in Study Abroad
Contexts. Tonawanda, NY: Multilingual Matters, 151–76.
Institute of International Education. (2016). Open Doors Report on inter-
national educational exchange. Retrieved from www.iie.org/opendoors.
Isabelli-Garcı´a, C. (2006). Study abroad social networks, motivation, and
attitudes: implications for second language acquisition. In M. A. DuFon
and E. Churchill, eds., Language Learners in Study Abroad Contexts.
Tonawanda, NY: Multilingual Matters, 231–58.
Jackson, J. (2006). Ethnographic preparation for short-term study and resi-
dence in the target culture. International Journal of Intercultural Relations, 30,
77–98.
Jackson,
J.
(2008).
Language,
Identity
and
Study
Abroad:
Sociocultural
Perspectives. Oakville, CT: Equinox Publishing.
Jackson, J. (2010). Intercultural Journeys: From Study to Residence Abroad.
New York: Palgrave Macmillan.
Jackson, J. (2013). The transformation of ‘a frog in the well’: A path to
a more intercultural, global mindset. In C. Kinginger, ed., Social and
Cultural Aspects of Language Learning in Study Abroad. Philadelphia, PA:
John Benjamins, 179–206.
Jones, C. W. (2014). Exploring the microfoundations of international com-
munity: Toward a theory of enlightened nationalism. International Studies
Quarterly, 58, 682–705.
Kinginger, C. (2008). Language learning in study abroad: Case studies of
Americans in France. The Modern Language Journal, 92(s1), 1–124.
Kinginger, C. (2009). Language Learning and Study Abroad: A Critical Reading of
Research. New York: Palgrave Macmillan.
Kinginger, C. (2011). Enhancing language learning in study abroad.
Annual Review of Applied Linguistics, 31, 58–73. doi:10.1017/S02671905
11000031.
Kinginger, C. (2013). Identity and language learning in study abroad.
Foreign Language Annals, 46(3), 339–58.
Knight, S. M. and Schmidt-Rinehart, B. C. (2002). Enhancing the homestay:
Study abroad from the host family’s perspective. Foreign Language Annals,
35(2), 190–201.
Knouse, S. M. (2012). The acquisition of dialectal phonemes in a study
abroad context: The case of the Castilian Theta. Foreign Language Annals,
45(4), 512–42. doi:10.1111/ﬂan.12003.
Kuntz, P. and Belnap, R. K. (2001). Beliefs about language learning held by
teachers and their students at two Arabic programs abroad. Al-ʿArabiyya,
34, 91–113.
Lane-Toomey, C. (2014). US government factors inﬂuencing an expansion
of
study
abroad
in
the
Middle
East/North
Africa.
Frontiers:
The
Interdisciplinary Journal of Study Abroad, 24, 121–40.
Lane-Toomey, C. K. and Lane, S. R. (2012). US students study abroad in the
Middle East/North Africa: Factors inﬂuencing growing numbers. Journal
1 2 2
E M M A T R E N T M A N

of
Studies
in
International
Education,
16(1),
1–24.
doi:10.1177/
1028315312447572.
Li, X. (2010). Sociolinguistic variation in the speech of learners of Chinese
as a second language: CSL sociolinguistic variation. Language Learning, 60
(2), 366–408. doi:10.1111/j.1467-9922.2009.00560.x.
Lou, K. H. and Bosley, G. W. (2012). Facilitating intercultural learning
abroad: The intentional, targeted interventions model. In M. Vande
Berg, R. M. Paige, and K. H. Lou, eds., Student Learning Abroad: What Our
Students Are Learning, What They’re Not, and What We Can Do About It.
Sterling, VA: Stylus, 259–335.
Magnan, S. S. and Back, M. (2007). Social interaction and linguistic gain
during study abroad. Foreign Language Annals, 40(1), 43–61.
Mendelson, V. G. (2004). Hindsight is 20/20: Student perceptions of lan-
guage learning and the study abroad experience. Frontiers, 10, 63–83.
Michelson, K. and Alvarez Valencia, J. A. (2016). Study abroad: Tourism or
education? A multimodal social semiotic analysis of institutional dis-
courses of a promotional website. Discourse and Communication, 10(3),
235–56. doi:10.1177/1750481315623893.
Mitchell, R., McManus, K., and Tracy-Ventura, N. (2015). Placement type
and language learning during residence abroad. In R. Mitchell, N. Tracy-
Ventura, and K. McManus, eds., Social Interaction, Identity and Language
Learning During Residence Abroad. EUROSLA, 115–38. Retrieved from www
.eurosla.org/monographs/EM04/Mitchell_etal.pdf.
Modern
Language
Association.
(2013).
Language
Enrollment
Database
1958–2013. Retrieved 6 January 2016 from apps.mla.org/ﬂsurvey_search;
last accessed 15 November 2020.
O’Dowd, R. (2011). Online foreign language interaction: Moving from the
periphery to the core of foreign language education? Language Teaching,
44(3), 368–380. doi:10.1017/S0261444810000194.
Ogden, A. (2007). The view from the veranda: Understanding today’s colo-
nial student. Frontiers: The Interdisciplinary Journal of Study Abroad, 15,
35–55.
Petrucci, P. R. (2007). Heritage scholars in the ancestral homeland: An
overlooked identity in study abroad research. Sociolinguistic Studies, 1(2),
275–96.
Polyani, L. (1995). Language learning and living abroad: Stories from the
ﬁeld. In B. F. Freed, ed., Second Language Acquisition in a Study Abroad
Context. Philadelphia, PA: John Benjamins, 271–92.
Raish, M. (2015). The acquisition of an Egyptian phonological variant by US
students in Cairo. Foreign Language Annals, 48(2), 267–83. doi:10.1111/
ﬂan.12140.
Regan, V. (1995). The acquisition of sociolinguistic native speech norms:
Effects of a year abroad on second language learners of French. In
B. F. Freed, ed., Second Language Acquisition in a Study Abroad Context.
Philadelphia, PA: John Benjamins, 245–67.
5 Arabic Study Abroad
123

Regan, V. (1998). Sociolinguistics and language learning in a study abroad
context. Frontiers: The Interdisciplinary Journal of Study Abroad, 4, 61–91.
Regan, V., Howard, M., and Leme´e, I. (2009). The Acquisition of Sociolinguistic
Competence in a Study Abroad Context. Tonawanda, NY: Multilingual
Matters.
Riegelhaupt, F. and Carrasco, R. L. (2000). Mexico host family reactions to
a bilingual Chicana teacher in Mexico: A case study of language and
culture clash. Bilingual Research Journal, 24, 405–21.
Ringer-Hilﬁnger, K. (2012). Learner acquisition of dialect variation in
a study abroad context: The case of the Spanish [θ]. Foreign Language
Annals, 45(3), 430–46. doi:10.111/j.1944-9720.2012.01201.x.
Roberts, C. (2003). Ethnography and cultural practice: Ways of learning
during residence abroad. In G. Alred, M. Byram, and M. P. Fleming, eds.,
Intercultural Experience and Education. Tonawanda, NY: Multilingual
Matters, 114–30.
Roberts, C., Byram, M., Barro, A., Jordan, S., and Street, B. (2001). Language
Learners as Ethnographers: Introducing Cultural Processes into Advanced
Language Learning. Tonawanda, NY: Multilingual Matters.
Said, E. W. (1979). Orientalism. New York: Vintage Books.
Segalowitz, N. and Freed, B. F. (2004). Context, contact, and cognition in
oral ﬂuency acquisition: Learning Spanish in at home and study abroad
contexts. Studies in Second Language Acquisition, 26(2), 173–99. doi:10.1017/
0S0272263104062023.
Shiri, S. (2013). Learners’ attitudes toward regional dialects and destination
preferences in study abroad. Foreign Language Annals, 46(4), 565–87.
doi:10.1111/ﬂan.v46.4.
Shiri, S. (2015a). Intercultural communicative competence development
during and after language study abroad: Insights from Arabic. Foreign
Language Annals, 48(4), 541–69. doi:10.1111/ﬂan.v48.4.
Shiri, S. (2015b). The homestay in intensive language study abroad: Social
networks,
language
socialization,
and
developing
intercultural
competence. Foreign Language Annals, 48(1), 5–25. doi:10.1111/ﬂan.12127.
Shively, R. L. (2010). From the virtual world to the real world: A model of
pragmatics instruction for study abroad. Foreign Language Annals, 43(1),
105–37.
Siegal, M. (1995). Individual differences and study abroad: Women learn-
ing Japanese in Japan. In B. F. Freed, ed., Second Language Acquisition in
a Study Abroad Context. Philadelphia, PA: John Benjamins, 225–44.
Siegal, M. (1996). The role of learner subjectivity in second language socio-
linguistic competency: Western women learning Japanese. Applied
Linguistics, 17(3), 356–82. doi:10.1093/applin/17.3.356.
Taguchi, N. (2016). Learning speech style in Japanese study abroad: Learners’
knowledge of normative use and actual use. In R. A. van Compernolle and
J. McGregor, eds., Authenticity, Language and Interaction in Second Language
Contexts. Tonawanda, NY: Multilingual Matters, 82–108.
1 2 4
E M M A T R E N T M A N

Talburt, S. and Stewart, M. A. (1999). What’s the subject of study abroad?
Race, gender, and ‘living culture’. Modern Language Journal, 83(2),
163–75.
Trentman, E. (2012). Study Abroad in Egypt: Identity, Access, and Arabic Language
Learning. Doctoral dissertation, Michigan State University. https://eric
.ed.gov/?id=ED545838.
Trentman, E. (2013a). Arabic and English during study abroad in Cairo,
Egypt: Issues of access and use. Modern Language Journal, 97(2), 457–73.
doi:10.1111/modl.v97.2.
Trentman, E. (2013b). Imagined communities and language learning dur-
ing study abroad: Arabic learners in Egypt. Foreign Language Annals, 46(4),
545–64. doi:10.1111/ﬂan.v46.4.
Trentman, E. (2015a). Arabic heritage learners abroad: Language use and
identity negotiation. Al-ʿArabiyya, 48, 141–56.
Trentman, E. (2015b). Negotiating gendered identities and access to social
networks during study abroad in Egypt. In R. Mitchell, K. McManus, and
N. Tracy-Ventura, eds., Social Interaction, Identity and Language Learning
During Residence Abroad. EUROSLA, 263–80. Retrieved from www
.eurosla.org/monographs/EM04/EM04tot.pdf#page=263.
Trentman, E. (2017). Oral ﬂuency, sociolinguistic competence, and lan-
guage contact: Arabic learners studying abroad in Egypt. System, 69,
54–64. doi:10.1016/j.system.2017.08.007.
Trentman, E. (2018a). Research-based interventions for language and inter-
cultural learning. In M. Al-Hawary, ed., The Routledge Handbook of Arabic
Second Language Acquisition. New York: Routledge, 303–27.
Trentman, E. (2018b). Study abroad Arabic programs: Issues of concern,
research, and future directions. In K. M. Wahba, L. England, and
Z. A. Taha, eds., Handbook for Arabic Language Teaching Professionals in the
21st Century, vol. II. New York: Routledge, 151–61.
Trentman, E., and Diao, W. (2017). The American gaze east: Discourses and
destinations of US study abroad. Study Abroad Research in Second Language
Acquisition
and
International
Education,
2(2),
175–205.
doi:10.1075/
sar.16001.tre.
Twombly, S. B., Salisbury, M. H., Tumanut, S. D., and Klute, P. (2012). Study
Abroad in a New Global Century: Renewing the Promise, Reﬁnding the Purpose.
San Francisco, CA: Wiley.
US Department of State. (2006). National Security Language Initiative.
5 January 2006. Retrieved from www.nsliforyouth.org/.
Van Der Meid, J. S. (2003). Asian Americans: Factors inﬂuencing the deci-
sion to study abroad. Frontiers: The Interdisciplinary Journal of Study Abroad,
9, 71–110.
Vande Berg, M. and Paige, R. M. (2012). Why students are and are not
learning abroad. In M. Vande Berg, R. M. Paige, and K. H. Lou, eds.,
Student Learning Abroad: What Our Students Are Learning, What They’re Not,
and What We Can Do About It. Sterling, VA: Stylus, 29–60.
5 Arabic Study Abroad
125

Vande Berg, M., Connor-Linton, J., and Paige, R. M. (2009). The Georgetown
Consortium Project: Interventions for student learning abroad. Frontiers:
The Interdisciplinary Journal of Study Abroad, 18, 1–75.
Vande Berg, M., Paige, R. M., and Lou, K. H. (eds.) (2012). Student Learning
Abroad: What Our Students Are Learning, What They’re Not, and What We Can
Do About It. Sterling, VA: Stylus.
Wenger, E. (1998). Communities of Practice: Learning, Meaning, and Identity.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Wilkinson, S. (2002). The omnipresent classroom during summer study
abroad: American students in conversation with their French hosts.
Modern Language Journal, 86(2), 157–73.
Woolf, M. (2006). Come and see the poor people: The pursuit of exotica.
Frontiers, 13, 135–46.
Zemach-Bersin, T. (2007). Global citizenship and study abroad: It’s all about
US. Critical Literacy: Theories and Practices, 1(2), 16–28.
Zemach-Bersin, T. (2009). Selling the world: Study abroad marketing and
the privatization of global citizenship. In R. Lewin, ed., The Handbook of
Practice and Research on Study Abroad. New York: Routledge, 303–20.
1 2 6
E M M A T R E N T M A N

6
Models of Arabic
Pronunciation
Kassem M. Wahba
6.1
Introduction
Arabic has held a unique status among the world languages. Not only is it
the ﬁrst language of millions of speakers, it is also the second and/or
foreign language of many others who use Arabic for a variety of reasons
that may include religious, professional, and communicative.
Arabic is a multi-diglossic language. This presents a dilemma to teachers
and learners of Arabic as a foreign language. Does one teach or learn a
regional variety of spoken Arabic before the formalized Arabic of writing?
Or does one begin with that variety, only later embarking upon the teach-
ing or study of a regional dialect? Regardless of the various goals of
language learners, the default has characteristically been to begin with
the Arabic of formal writing, called fus˙h˙ a¯ (‘the most eloquent’), henceforth
‘F’. Doing so, in turn, introduces a model of Arabic pronunciation that
disregards both the regional and social variations in the pronunciation of
the regional variety: ʿa¯mmayyah, henceforth ‘A’. This despite the trenchant
observation of Ferguson, who introduced the concept of diglossia to a
wider linguistic readership in his seminal paper of the same name in
1959. About the phonology of diglossic languages such as Arabic,
Ferguson observes: ‘The sound systems of H [for Arabic, = F] and L [= A]
constitute a single phonological structure in which the L phonology is the
basic system and the divergent features of the [F] phonology are a subsys-
tem or a parasystem’ (Ferguson 1959: 335). That being so, disregarding the
pronunciation of spoken varieties in teaching Arabic as a foreign language
(TAFL) pedagogy prejudices the ability of the non-native learner to com-
municate effectively in an Arabophone community.
The beginning of the twenty-ﬁrst century witnessed a substantial
increase in the number of learners of Arabic in the United States,
Europe, and other parts of the world (see Goldberg et al. 2013), which
was reﬂected in enrolment numbers in United States higher education

institutions. This increase was accompanied by changes in the goals and
needs of learners of Arabic as a foreign language (see Belnap 2006, for
example). The focus on the cultural literacy which includes religion and
literature, as well as other aspects of culture aiming to deepen the level of
communication with Arabs in all its spoken and literary forms, became the
current goal of learning Arabic and other foreign languages as well (MLA
2007: 236–7). Attaining such a deep level of communicative ability
requires, on the one hand, learning more than one variety of Arabic, and
on the other, intelligible, comprehensible, and accurate performance in
pronunciation skill(s). Without attaining those qualities, communication
fails regardless of how proﬁcient the speaker is (Wahba 2006; Derwing et
al. 2012).
The choice of a model of pronunciation for language learners is challen-
ging. It is usually linked with both the goals of the language programme
and the learner. Growing dissatisfaction with the traditional approach to a
pronunciation model for Arabic in terms of only one variety (i.e., the F
variety) leads to communication issues for non-native speakers, usually
when they persist in F pronunciation, but cannot always understand
people’s responses because these responses are pronounced with some
degree of interference from the regional variety, whether their intention is
the pronunciation of ‘modern fus˙h˙ a¯’, henceforth ‘MF’, or A. In any case,
regional pronunciation plays an important role in the intelligibility of
spoken Arabic across the Arab world (Mitchell 1990:1; Ryding 2013: 178–
80; Holes 2013: 283). In addition, the results of research in sociolinguistics
indicate that models of pronunciation in Arabic are in transition, and the
supremacy of the F variety model of pronunciation over other models has
been challenged (Ryding 1991; Wahba 1996, Badawi 2002). In the light of
this, many linguists of Arabic (e.g., Mitchell 1990) agree that some mod-
iﬁcations in terms of what we offer as models of pronunciation of Arabic as
a foreign/second language are inevitable.
The present chapter provides an overview of the major historical devel-
opments of pronunciation models for Arabic, followed by an examination
of sociolinguistic studies and language materials to explore changing
perspectives on models of pronunciation examined by or provided to
language learners as a result of changing the goals of teaching Arabic as
a foreign language. A modiﬁed model (or models) of pronunciation for the
foreign learner might make the process more effective for both teachers
and learners of Arabic. It calls for empirically established phonological/
linguistic norm(s) and classroom instructions in pronunciation models, in
which attention is paid to the following: intelligibility of the spoken
delivered message; how close the delivered pronunciation is to a native
speaker-like accent (Derwing and Munro 2005: 385); the dialect (whether
regional and/or social) and register (whether formal or informal) that the
pronunciation represents in the speciﬁc social context; the pronunciation
problems of speciﬁc L1 learner groups (Szpyra-Kozlowska 2015); and
1 2 8
K A S S E M M . W A H B A

priorities in speciﬁc aspects of Arabic pronunciation that should be taught
to foreign learners. Addressing the problems entailed, and their implica-
tions on research, motivate the present chapter.
6.2
Historical Development: Model of Pronunciation
of Arabic in Medieval Islam
Interest in the pronunciation of the Arabic language had a signiﬁcant role
not only in teaching and learning Arabic as a foreign language but in every
aspect of the arts of diction practised in the Arabic culture of medieval
Islam. With the revelation of the Qur’a¯ n in Arabic in the ﬁrst century AH/
seventh century AD, a strong link was established between the Arabic
language and Islam (Fu¨ ck 1951: 1). As Islam began to spread outside the
Arabian Peninsula, Arabic spread to many areas where other languages
were spoken, e.g., Syria, Iraq, Persia, Central Asia, the North African
regions, the Iberian Peninsula. Arabic became an important means of
communication for both converts and non-converts in the Islamic empire.
For non-converts, it was important for communication, professional pur-
poses, and understanding the new religion. For converts to Islam, it was
important to memorize and recite the Qur’a¯ n properly, in order to be able
not only to use it daily in their religious practice but to refer to it when
necessary as well. Within this context, learning to speak Arabic with a
focus on the F variety represented a common goal, and learning Qur’a¯ nic
recitation represented a pedagogical and a practice model of Arabic
pronunciation.
What made achieving the above goal a serious challenge was the increas-
ing errors heard in the speech of both non-Arab converts and many of the
Arabs who had direct contact with non-Arabs. Arab Muslims had deep
concerns for the purity of the Arabic language as a carrier of the sacred
scripture. Considered ‘corrupted speech’ or lah˙ n in Arabic, pronunciation
errors met with severe criticism from many Arab Muslims who were intent
upon preserving the F variety as a medium of the Qur’a¯ n free from distor-
tion or errors. Those collective ‘errors’, which were a result of many
variables, such as the language-learning process, language contact, and
the use of another regional dialect that diverged from the F variety, were
not only limited to speech but to reciting the Qur’a¯ n as well. Even though
the manifestation of those errors appeared across all language levels,
phonetic errors were prominent (See al-Ja¯ h˙ iz (d. 255/868), I: 71–3; Fu¨ ck
1951: 243–55; Abdel-Tawwa¯ b 2000: 13–34). In addition to the above, the
belief of many Arab and Muslim scholars in the supremacy of the F variety,
over not only other Arabic regional varieties but other languages as well
(see Ibn Fa¯ ris (d. 395/1004, 1963), in al-S˙a¯ h˙ ibı¯ (40–7)), motivated many
Muslim scholars to prescribe grammar and pronunciation rules for non-
Arabs to follow.
6 Models of Arabic Pronunciation
129

The F variety as represented in the Qur’a¯ n, classical poetry, and certain
Arabic dialects where the Bedouins were considered ‘the native speakers’
who had the correct Arabic usage (see Ibn Fa¯ ris (d. 395/1004) (1963, 52–3),
became the target model for non-native learners to study the Arabic lan-
guage, and then to understand the Qur’a¯ n as well. Since literacy was not
common for every individual in every community, memorization and
recitation of the Qur’a¯ n, poetry, and literary texts were the means of
preservation and transmission of knowledge, not only from one individual
to another but from one generation to the next. Thus, native speakers of
Arabic and learners of Arabic alike had easy access to the Qur’a¯ n and
literary texts as references on a daily basis. However, memorization and
recitation alone were not sufﬁcient for learning Arabic and preservation of
the text of Qur’a¯ n. As pronunciation and speaking practice depended only
on imitation and recitation, learners needed explicit instructions explain-
ing the rules governing the changes occurring to the individual sounds
when they are combined in larger units such as words and sentences.
As a result, many scholars, such as Al-Khalı¯l ibn Ah˙ mad (d. 175/791), who
was the ﬁrst lexicographer, offered an articulatory phonetic description of
the Arabic sounds in the F variety in Kita¯b al-ʿAyn to help users of Arabic
pronounce sounds properly in the collected words. Sı¯bawayhi (d. 180/796),
who was a non-native speaker of Arabic, took on the task of providing a
comprehensive description of grammar rules. Those grammar rules con-
tained phonetic description of the basic Arabic ‘phonemes’ representing
the Arabic sounds. It aimed rather to explain the phonological processes
(e.g., assimilation) occurring between Arabic sounds as pertaining to mor-
phophonology, to which learners need to pay special attention. According
to his description, the phonetic description of Arabic sounds was categor-
ized as one of the three main components representing Arabic grammar,
next to the structure of words and their derivations, and sentence
structure.
A brief discussion of Sı¯bawayhi’s description of the Arabic sounds fol-
lows. Table 6.1 presents an articulatory description of the Arabic sounds as
offered by Sı¯bawayhi (4: 433–6). As may be noted, three stop consonants
/ʾ, q, t
˙
/ are realized as voiced according to Sı¯bawayhi’s phonetic descrip-
tion. These three consonants are realized as voiceless in MF (see Badawi
1973/2011; Mitchell 1990). It may be noted also that the /ʿ/ pharyngeal
consonant in Sı¯bawayhi’s description has its own category in terms of
manner of articulation. It is realized as a pharyngeal fricative in MF across
most of the Arab world (Mitchell 1993: 32). In the present table, it is
categorized as a pharyngeal fricative. For more discussion of Sı¯bawayhi’s
description, see Al-Nassir (1993).
Sı¯bawayhi’s description of the pronunciation of the F variety has been
transmitted over centuries and studied by both Arab and non-Arab learn-
ers. Many treatises explaining and simplifying Sı¯bawayhi’s al-Kita¯b for
learners of Arabic were offered, see for example Ibn Ma¯ lik’s Alﬁyya (d. 1274/
1 3 0
K A S S E M M . W A H B A

672), and Ibn ʿA¯ jarurru¯m’s al-ʿA¯jarru¯miyya (d. 723/1323). These treatises are
still used as textbooks in many Islamic institutions (e.g., al-Azhar University).
6.3
Theoretical Frameworks
6.3.1
Changing Goals of Arabic Language Instruction
Prior to the twentieth century, ‘classical F’ (CF) and its pronunciation were
the norm for Arabic language instruction (Versteegh 2018). The inﬂuence
of the regional varieties began to be reﬂected in the discussions and the
writings of educated Arabs at the end of the nineteenth century (Newman
2013: 485). The contact of Arabs with the West (1798–1801), the modern
translation movement, the beginning of the press, and establishing secu-
lar education have paved the way for the rise of MF. The pioneering work
offered by Gairdner (1925) on Arabic pronunciation presented a phonetic
description of MF and the Egyptian Arabic.
Not until the early 1960s did teaching Arabic to non-native speakers
become dominated by the grammatical approach of both the F and A
varieties. Teaching pronunciation was conducted through learning either
the Arabic alphabet of the CF/MF varieties, or a transliteration system if
non-native learners intended to learn the regional dialects. Pronunciation
instruction was conducted through the reading of a few texts out loud
rather than through practising language orally (Al-Batal 1995: 117). An
Table 6.1 The consonants and vowels as presented by Sıˉbawayhi
Manner of
articulation
Labial
Dental
Dento-
alveolar
Alveo-
palatal
Palatal
Velar
Uvular
Pharyngeal
Glottal
P
Ea P
E
E
Plosive
VLb
t
k
VD
b
d
t˙
gˇ
q
ʾ
Fricative VL
f
tˉ
s
s˙
sˇ
h˘
h
˙
h
VD
dˉ
dˉ
z
g
˙
ʿ
Fricative
d˙
Nasal
m
n
Trill
r
Lateral
l
Approximant
ıˉ – i
uˉ -u
aˉ- a
a P means plain; E means emphatic. The traditional grammarians of Arabic, as pointed
out by Mitchell (1990: 28), ‘referred to emphasis as “lidding” (ˀibq), and it seems
plausible to believe that the reference was to the shape of a shallow dish (t
˙
abaq) serving
as an inverted lid or cover to the equally inverted container formed by the upper teeth
and the palate’. ‘The tongue may not only be raised or lowered in its several parts but
also laterally expanded or contracted along its length.’
b VL = voiceless; VD = voiced.
c [ʿ] is described as a pharyngeal stop by Al-Ani (1970: 65–70); and it is described as an
approximant by Heselwood (2007: 37/1).
6 Models of Arabic Pronunciation
131

example of materials used at the time is David Cowan’s An Introduction to
Modern Literary Arabic (1958).
Since 1970, teaching Arabic has moved towards audio-lingual methods.
Detailed phonetic instruction was offered for pronunciation accuracy (see
the Modern Standard Arabic textbook series by Abboud and McCarus 1983).
However, pronunciation instruction was practised through recitation,
reading, and mechanical drills in artiﬁcial conversations rather than in
the living oral language (Al-Batal 1995).
Adopting
the
functional,
proﬁciency,
and
communicative
approaches as a result of many variables, e.g., the motivations of
language learners to communicate with native speakers (see Brosh
2013; Husseinali 2006), has implied a prioritization of goals in lan-
guage instruction: ﬁrst, the choice of Arabic variety to be taught to
non-Arab speakers; second, the pronunciation model of Arabic to be
offered to language learners; and third, the approaches to be followed
in developing the productive skills, e.g., the speaking skill which
includes pronunciation. Before we address the above three mentioned
points, let us ﬁrst examine Arabic language teaching materials. From
this, it will be possible to ascertain how language professionals view
the appropriate Arabic variety for teaching, and consequently, the
model of pronunciation to be offered to non-native speakers of
Arabic. After that, we shall examine some sociolinguistic studies to
explore the situation facing learners of Arabic in the Arabic speech
communities in which they pursue their study abroad and their pro-
fessional pursuits.
6.3.2
Models of Pronunciation in Arabic Language Pedagogical
Materials
In a recent survey of 410 Arabic language textbooks (Wahba 2017), in
which the number of textbooks in both the F and A varieties were com-
pared (see Table 6.2), it was found that priority is given to teaching the F
variety at the expense of the A variety.
Inasmuch as the F variety predominates in Arabic language materials,
the question is: how is pronunciation represented in the F variety?
Table 6.2 Number of Arabic language textbooks for
Standard Arabic compared to vernacular Arabic
fus
˙
h
˙
aˉ (F)
ʿaˉmmiyya (A)
Total
321
89
410
1 3 2
K A S S E M M . W A H B A

Classifying Arabic materials in the 321 textbooks within the F variety
reﬂects three main categories:
a. Materials for skill development: listening, reading, speaking, and writing
b. Materials for knowledge development: vocabulary and grammar
c. Materials for both knowledge and skill development: pronunciation
Table 6.3 shows that while all language skills represent 56.6 per cent of the
materials, grammar and vocabulary represent 35.7 per cent, and pronun-
ciation materials represent 7.7 per cent (24 textbooks), which is small in
comparison to language skills.
The question is therefore why pronunciation textbooks represent such a
small percentage of the materials designated for the F variety.
In Table 6.4, twenty-four pronunciation textbooks are compared with
forty-eight textbooks representing separate skills (speaking, listening, read-
ing, writing) and seventy-nine textbooks representing each of the language
components: grammar and vocabulary. Table 6.4 shows that pronunciation
textbooks occupy the third category after grammar and reading. It may be
noted that while reading skill, grammar, and pronunciation are the most
prominent categories, listening, speaking, writing, and vocabulary are the
categories that are least emphasized in Arabic language instruction.
Comparing the textbooks of pronunciation with knowledge compo-
nents vocabulary and grammar and language skills across various levels
of proﬁciency reveals that pronunciation textbooks are designed to target
handwriting and pronunciation only at beginner’s level, see Table 6.5.
Table 6.4 Distribution of textbooks across grammar, vocabulary, language
skills, and pronunciation
Knowledge development
Language skills (separate)
Knowledge and
skill development
79
48
24
Grammar
Vocabulary
Reading
Writing
Speaking
Listening
Pronunciation
69
10
31
7
7
3
24
Number of textbooks is 151.
Table 6.3 Textbooks of the F variety distributed across three categories:
knowledge, skill, and knowledge/skill
Language skill
Knowledge development
Separate
Combined
Knowledge/ skill development
Grammar and vocabulary
48
93
Pronunciation
111 (35.7%)
141 (56.6%)
24 (7.7%)
Number of textbooks is 311.
6 Models of Arabic Pronunciation
133

It may be noted also that there are no other pronunciation materials
designated for higher proﬁciency levels that address intonation, stress,
rhythm, or remediation. This table suggests that materials writers and
teachers operate on the assumption that accurate pronunciation is to be
acquired in the initial stages of language learning. This may imply that
among Arabic teachers and professionals, pronunciation errors made by
learners at higher levels are acceptable as long as they do not interfere
with intelligibility.
Table 6.5 reveals also that the focus of Arabic language materials sur-
veyed is more on the receptive than the productive skills. As may be noted,
grammar comes ﬁrst, followed by reading and vocabulary. Fewer materials
are found to target speaking and writing skills. Listening materials are
almost non-existent. These results may contradict many Arabic teachers’
perception of the most important language skills for Arabic language
learners. In a survey conducted with 209 college teachers of Arabic in the
United States (Abdalla and Al-Batal 2011) assessing their attitudes towards
the importance of language skills for Arabic language learners, it was
found that pronunciation was considered to be the most difﬁcult skill
that faces non-native learners of Arabic. That is, according to Abdalla and
Al-Batal’s study, the one skill that teachers consider most difﬁcult is the
skill that is least emphasized in most existing Arabic curriculums. That
being the case, with the F variety as the dominant variety, pronunciation
of A varieties is clearly being given short shrift.
6.4
Sociolinguistic Studies and Models of Pronunciation
6.4.1
The Diglossic Model and Models of Pronunciation
The state of language in the Arab world has long been described as
diglossic. According to Ferguson (1959: 244–5), diglossia means that
two distinct, codiﬁed, relatively stable varieties of the same language
Table 6.5 Materials for pronunciation in comparison with other language
components and language skills
Language
component/level
Beginner
Intermediate
Advanced
Total
Grammar
55 (79.7%)
8 (11.6%)
6 (8.7%)
69 (45.7%)
Reading
12 (38.7%)
12 (38.7%)
7 (22.6)
31 (20.5%)
Pronunciation/
handwriting
24 (100%)
—
—
24 (15.9%)
Vocabulary
6 (35.3%)
1 (5.8%)
3 (17.6%)
10 (6.6%)
Speaking
6 (85.7%)
—
1 (14.3)
7 (4.7%)
Writing
2 (28.6%)
2 (28.6%)
3 (42.8%)
7 (4.7%)
Listening
1
1
1
3 (1.9%)
Total
106
24
21
151
1 3 4
K A S S E M M . W A H B A

exist side by side. Each variety has its own pronunciation norms,
with nothing, as Badawi has pointed out (1985: 16) to ﬁll the gap
between them. One, generally labelled as F (‘MF’ or ‘CF’), the other A,
which may vary from one region to another. According to this model,
learners of Arabic who attempt to achieve communicative proﬁciency
are to master two models of pronunciation. By doing so, learners will
be able to express themselves in either MF or A, depending on a set
of culturally deﬁned situational contexts. For the MF1 variety, see
Table 6.6 for consonants and Figure 6.1 for vowels as a simple repre-
sentation of the segmental system of MF. As for the A variety, see
Table 6.7 for consonants and Figure 6.2 for vowels as representation
of the segmental system of A, in this case, Egyptian Arabic.
Comparing the sound systems of the two varieties reveals that there are
more similarities than differences. As for the differences in consonants
and vowels, they are as shown in Table 6.8.
Following
Ferguson’s
diglossic
model,
many
Arabic
language
programmes (e.g., government programmes in the USA) and materials
follow similar lines by teaching the two varieties separately (Badawi
(1985: 16), i.e., with two targets of pronunciation to reach.
Table 6.6 The consonants of Modern fuṣḥaˉ (MF)
Dental
Dento-
alveolar
Manner of
articulation
Labial
P
Ea
P
E
Alveo-
palatal
Palatal
Velar
Uvular
Pharyngeal
Glottal
Plosive
VL
t
t˙
k
q
ʾ
VD
b
d
d˙
[g]
Fricative
VL
f
tˉ
s
s˙
sˇ
h˘
h
˙
h
VD
d
ˉ
d
ˉ ̣
z
g
˙
ʿ
Affricate
VD
gˇ b
Nasal
m
n
Trill
r
Lateral
l
Approximant
w
y
a P = plain; E = emphatic; VD = voiced; VL = voiceless.
b Note that the /gˇ/ phoneme is usually pronounced as [g] in Cairene Egyptian.
Figure 6.1 Modern fus
˙
h
˙
aˉ vowels
Long
Short
Front
Back
Front
Back
High
ıˉ
uˉ
i
u
Low
aˉ
a
1 MF is used here rather than CF since CF is restricted in its use.
6 Models of Arabic Pronunciation
135

6.4.2
Sociolinguistic Studies after Ferguson’s Study
Many sociolinguistic studies that appeared after Ferguson’s study have
indicated that the diglossic model is an inadequate reﬂection of the way
in which native speakers behave linguistically (Badawi 1973; Schmidt
1974, 1986; Parkinson 1991; Mitchell and El-Hassan 1994; Wahba 1993,
1996; Mejdell 2006; Hallberg 2016). The following subsections examine a
number of representative studies (Badawi 1973; Schmidt 1974; Parkinson
1991; Wahba 2006; Mejdell 2006).
Long
Short
Front
Back
Front
Back
High
ıˉ
uˉ
i
u
eˉ
oˉ
Low
aˉ
a
Figure 6.2 The vowels of Egyptian Arabic ʿaˉāmmiyya (A)
Table 6.8 The phonetic differences between MF and A as they occur in
Egyptian Arabic i.e., Cairene dialect
fus
˙
h
˙
aˉ (MF)
ʿaˉmmiyya (A)
ﻕq
[ʿ, q]
ﺝğ
g
ﺽḍ
[ẓ, ḍ]
ﺙt
ˉ
[t, s]
ﺫd
ˉ
[z, d]
ﻅdˉ
[ẓ, ḍ]
ﺀʿ
[ʿ, y, Ø]
ــــــــَﻲْ
ay
ē
ــــــــــَﻮaw
oˉ
Table 6.7 The consonants of Colloquial Egyptian Arabic: ʿaˉmmiyya (A)
Manner of
articulation
Labial
Dental
Dento-
alveolar
Palatal Velar
Uvular
Phary-
ngeal
Glottal
Pa
E
P
E
Plosive
VL
t
t˙
k
[q]b
ʾ
VD
b
d
d˙
g
Fricative
VL
f
s
s˙
sˇ
h˘
h
˙
h
VD
z
z
˙
g
˙
ʿ
Nasal
m
n
Liquids
Trill
r
Lateral
l
Approximant
w
y
a P = plain; E = emphatic; VD = voiced; VL = voiceless.
b Note that [q] alternates with [ʾ] in Cairene Arabic, but not all the time.
1 3 6
K A S S E M M . W A H B A

6.4.2.1
Badawi 1973, 1985
Badawi (1973) pointed out that the relationship between the two vari-
eties is more dynamic and interactive than stable. There are constant,
interrelated, and interactive relations between the two varieties that
result in the emergence of other varieties. Each variety has its own
distinctive (i.e., phonetic and other) features of a mixed nature.
Badawi’s multilevel descriptive model is based not only on linguistic
criteria but on sociolinguistic ones as well. One of the interpretations
of Badawi’s study is that no one speaker uses one variety exclusively
all the time.
Accordingly, there are three main varieties of Arabic: fus˙h˙ a¯ (F),
ʿa¯mmiyya (A), and an educated spoken variety, ʿa¯mmiyyat al-mutaqqafı¯n
(ESA). Each variety has its own linguistic and social functions. The A
variety contains two varieties. The pronunciation features of F and A
are spread across ﬁve varieties on a descending scale. At one end of
Badawi’s model is the highest degree of the pronunciation of F fea-
tures, at the other end is the highest degree of the pronunciation of A
features. Regardless of the number of varieties as posited by Badawi in
1973, which he reduced to three in 2002, his study indicates that the
middle variety is the most dynamic one with respect to both F and A
features (Table 6.9).
Table 6.9 The occurrence of /t
ˉ
/ and its variants across the ﬁve levels as
posited by Badawi
Three-levels model (2002)
Five-levels model
(1973 & 1985)
Consonant occurrence
1. fus
˙
h
˙
aˉ (F)
1. fus
˙
h
˙
aˉ al-turaˉtˉ
(Classical Arabic)
/tˉ /alone may occur at this
level.
Occasional occurrences of
/s/ may occur.
2. fus
˙
h
˙
aˉ al-ʿasr
(Modern Standard Arabic)
/s/ and /t
ˉ
/ may occur. The
occurrence of /s/ is more
common and it goes
almost unnoticed.
2. Educated Spoken
Arabic (ESA)
3. ʿaˉmmiyyat al-mutˉaqqafıˉn
(Educated Spoken Arabic)
/s/ and /t/occur with equal
frequency. /t
ˉ
/ occurs
occasionally.
3. ʿaˉmmiyya (A)
4. ʿaˉmmiyyat al-
mutanawwirıˉn
(Semi-literate Spoken
Arabic)
/t/ is a phoneme of this level.
It occurs with a high fre-
quency. /s/ appears less
frequently. /t
ˉ
/ disappears
completely.
5. ʿaˉmmiyyat al-ʾummiyyıˉn
(Illiterate Spoken Arabic)
/t/ is one of the phonemes of
this level. /s/ occurs within
high-culture and religion-
bound contexts.
6 Models of Arabic Pronunciation
137

The above scheme (Badawi 1973, 1985) in Table 6.9 shows the
phonetic distribution of the phoneme /t/ as reﬂected in three forms:
[t], [s], and [t] across the ﬁve levels. This distribution suggests that ESA
is the level that combines all the sound features distributed at other
levels or varieties. Since it is located in the middle of the above
scheme, it receives phonetic features from F and A equally. Thus, it
is assumed that more-educated speakers will pronounce a high degree
of /t/ and the lowest proportion of the other phonetic features. Less-
educated speakers are assumed to pronounce a high degree of /t/ and
/s/ as represented in the A variety (see Badawi 1973, 1985).
As for non-native learners, it is interesting to note the function of each
variety in the Egyptian speech community. Level 1, fus˙h˙ a¯ al-tura¯t, corre-
sponds to Classical Arabic (CA) as it represents Qur’a¯ nic recitation, poetry,
classical Arabic literature, and Islamic science literature. Level 2 corre-
sponds to what is known as MF or Modern Standard Arabic (MSA). It is
mostly written. Level 3 corresponds to ESA, which is mostly spoken. Both
level 2 and level 3 share the same interests, i.e., modern life and culture, in
society (p. 19) but in complementary distribution across language skills. The
remaining two levels, 4 and 5, are used mostly by semi and non-educated
speakers. Level 2, representing MSA, is inﬂuenced by CA and borrowings
from other foreign languages. Level 3 is inﬂuenced mainly by the vernacular
as represented by Levels 4 and 5, and relatively by Level 2 as represented in
MSA, since Level 3 is placed at an equal position from F and A. In other
words, Level 3 is mainly vernacular Arabic that may, depending upon the
individual speaker, be inﬂuenced by the F variety in its forms of MF and CF.
The interaction between F varieties as a written medium for learning (Levels
1 and 2) and A varieties (Levels 4 and 5) as a spoken medium for self-
expression has resulted in an educated spoken Arabic, ESA (Level 3), and
an educated written Arabic, MSA (Level 4) (see Badawi 1985: 21).
6.4.2.2
Wahba 1993, 1996
Wahba (1993, 1996) examined the choice made in the degree of the pro-
nunciation of emphatic (velarized) consonants by educated Arabic speakers
(from ‘fuller’ emphasis representing the F variety to ‘less’ emphasis repre-
senting the A variety) across the formal speech style in the Egyptian speech
community in Alexandria, Egypt, and how such variation is inﬂuenced by
social variables in an Alexandrian community. Data was collected from
seventy-four subjects and disaggregated according to education level, sex,
and age. Based on the assumption that the degree of education of the F
variety is the main variable that differentiates Arabic speakers across an
Arab speech community, the production of the full degree of emphasis
should be the prescriptive norm for the pronunciation in F, and accordingly
the prestigious preference of educated informants (those who are literate in
F) rather than the non-educated (the illiterate), who have not been exposed
to F at school. What was found was the opposite. Educated speakers were
1 3 8
K A S S E M M . W A H B A

found to produce a lesser degree of emphasis than non-educated speakers,
who tended to produce the full degree of emphasis. In other words, the
degree of emphasis of the pronunciation of emphatic consonants tends to
conform more with the pronunciation of the social norms of the regional
dialect, rather than with the literary variety. This means that educated
Arabic speakers prefer the lesser degree of emphasis as a prestigious norm
of pronunciation that conforms more with the pronunciation features of
the regional variety than with the F variety in formal situations. The study
suggests that that prestigious pronunciation of the regional variety is the
preferred pronunciation for educated native speakers. However, the speech
of educated speakers is characterized by a mixed variety of pronunciation
features that represent more than one level (i.e., MF and A).
6.4.2.3
Schmidt 1974
In another study, Schmidt (1974) investigated the choice made by twenty-
eight Egyptian Arabic speakers between the standard pronunciation (F
variety) and the colloquial pronunciation (A variety) across four levels of
styles: spontaneous speech, careful speech, reading style, and word lists.
Schmidt undertook to determine how F variety’s phonemes and their
counterparts in Egyptian colloquial Arabic were used by educated, as
opposed to less-educated, Egyptian speakers (see Table 6.10). In regard to
spontaneous speech style, that being the aspect most relevant to the
pronunciation used in spoken Arabic, Schmidt found that highly educated
Egyptian speakers tend to produce a higher percentage of interdentals
than less-educated subjects, whose speech included more allophones of
the interdentals, sibilants, and stops. However, in the case of the pronun-
ciation of /q/ (in contrast to the interdentals), the inﬂuence of sex was more
apparent than that of education. It was found that females use the urban,
non-standard variant [ʾ] more than males do. The study suggests that
different phonological variables are not uniformly affected in their pro-
nunciation by education or exposure to the MF variety, and it indicates
that the variation in their speech is a result of many interrelated socio-
linguistic variables: education, sex, and social status.
In searching for MF through the perception of Egyptians, Parkinson
(1991, 1996) found that Egyptians differed widely in their perception
Table 6.10 The pronunciation of interdental phonemes in both F and A
varieties
The phonemes of the F variety
Their phonetic manifestation in A variety
/t
ˉ
/
[s]
/dˉ/
[z]
/ dˉ /
[z˙]
6 Models of Arabic Pronunciation
139

of what MF really is. In the case of the Egyptian use of F, he indicated
that most informal users, in their attempts to use F in their speech,
end up using mixed forms with various amounts of A inﬂuence. In
conclusion, he pointed out that ‘most educated native speakers appear
to reside in the middle of a diglossic continuum, rather than at either,
or both ends’ (1996: 91). As for pronunciation, educated native speak-
ers prefer to use the phonology of the colloquial variety ‘A’ over other
varieties.
Another study, conducted by Mejdell (2006), examined the oral features
of the spoken Arabic used by lecturers in an academic context. She found
the spoken form used by academics in formal contexts to be unpredictable.
Her study showed that the use of the standard variety (i.e., MF) is restricted,
and users make many individual choices, from standard and non-standard
features, resulting in a range of mixed styles. She pointed out that the
mixed styles are a natural result of the tension between the attempts made
by educated Egyptians to use MF and the phonological habits of using the
Egyptian native variety.
The question, then, arises: If non-native speakers are learning Arabic to
communicate with native speakers, would not the educated speakers of
Arabic (ESA) in the regional variety be a more realistic target in the Arabic
language classroom than a pure FA model?
6.5
A Viable Pedagogical Model for Arabic Pronunciation
The issue of the choice between Arabic pronunciation models is much
debated in both Arabic theoretical and applied linguistics. Reviewing the
sociolinguistic studies on the varieties of Arabic, and the language skills
required for non-native learners to communicate with native speakers
reveals the following.
There are two functional varieties: MF and ESA (a selected variety of
A spoken varieties). MF is mostly written and based on CA, and ESA is
mostly spoken and based on the phonological system of A, i.e., the
regional colloquial variety (see Harrel 1957, 1963). These two varieties
function in an integrated manner according to language skills. MF is
for reading and writing while ESA is for listening and speaking. This
may suggest that the language learner should be learning both MF, to
represent the written form, and ESA, to represent the spoken form for
meeting the requirement of the four language skills: listening, speak-
ing, reading, and writing. Pragmatically, the ESA pronunciation model
seems to be the one that ﬁts the communicative goals of the Arabic
language learner on the one hand, and represents a pronunciation
model that serves as a point of reference for foreign learners, on the
other. The above situation suggests the following skill model for
learning Arabic as a foreign language (Figure 6.3).
1 4 0
K A S S E M M . W A H B A

In this model, the terms A and ESA will be used interchangeably
since the pronunciation of ESA depends mostly on the phonological
system of the A variety. The MF variety is the medium of written
communication and it is used for oral communication but in restricted
formal contexts, where it is usually realized as a form of educated
spoken Arabic. It may be noted that the A variety is used for written
communication (e.g., commercials, emails, text messages, and news-
paper articles) more often than it was in 1973 (Badawi 1973/2011).
Since the sociolinguistic studies suggest that the sound system of the
A (ESA) variety would be a realistic pronunciation model for non-
native speakers, the present study suggests the following two pronun-
ciation models for non-native speakers of Arabic:
a. A realistic pronunciation model: the introduction of the A (ESA)-
variety sound system as a pronunciation target for non-native
speakers, with the addition of a few of the phonetic features of
those consonants
and vowels
that
differ
from the A
variety
(Table 6.11).
b. A literary pronunciation model: the introduction of the MF-variety
sound system as a pronunciation target for non-native speakers, with
the addition of a few of those phonetic features of consonants and
vowels that differ from the MF variety.
In this model, ESA sounds will be added to the A phonetic system when
the learner or the programme started with ESA as the spoken variety. If the
learner or the programme decided to start with MF ﬁrst, the ESA sounds
will be added to the phonetic system of MF.
• Reading (A)
• Restricted in use
• Writing (A)
• Restricted only in 
formal context
• Listening (MF)
• Restricted in use
•
Restricted in use
Speaking (MF)
•
Speaking
(A)
Listening
(A)
Reading
(MF)
Writing
(MF)
Figure 6.3 A skill–variety model for learning Arabic as a foreign language
6 Models of Arabic Pronunciation
141

The ESA pronunciation model represents a realistic pronunciation
model for speaking Arabic. It consists of a mixed phonological, morpho-
logical, and syntactic forms, or a hybridization of A and F, representing the
speech of educated speakers that fulﬁls a range of functions, from the
various intellectual, technical, legal, and other themes to the needs of
daily life (Mitchell 1986). It is described as ‘a ﬂexible spoken standard’ by
Ryding (2009: 49). It represents a transitional pronunciation system that
could be added to either the MF or A variety. Thus, the MF pronunciation
model represents an alternative pronunciation target for non-native
speakers of Arabic whose goal is mainly reading and writing. It is proposed
with the introduction of a few of those phonetic features of consonants
and vowels that differ from the MF.
6.6
Implementing the A Variety or the MF Variety
Pronunciation Model in the TAFL Curriculum
Let us ﬁrst brieﬂy review the approach to learning Arabic by native and
non-native speakers. For native speakers, A is learned at home and F is
learned at school. Arabic programmes outside the Arab world vary in
their approaches. Most of them justify concentrating on MF by observing
that it is the variety of education in the Arab world. In that approach, if
learners are exposed to the A variety at all, it is in a few courses taken
later in their programmes, or they are obliged to wait until they study
Arabic abroad. A less commonly used approach starts with learning
Arabic in the opposite direction from that common approach in that
the A variety is the starting point, and MF is introduced later. This
approach was advocated by Woidich (2007) in the University of
Amsterdam, and it is currently used in several universities in the
United States, although each has its own way of adopting this approach,
Table 6.11 Three main Arabic pronunciation models: MF, ESA, and A
Labial
Dental
Dento-
alveolar
Liquid
Alveo-
palatal
Velar/
uvular
Guttural
Laryn-
geal
F
f, b, m, w t
ˉ
, d
ˉ
, s, z,
t, d
d
ˉ
, d
˙
, s˙ , t
˙
, l, r, n
sˇ , gˇ (g), y k, q
h˘, g
˙
, h˙, ʿ
ʾh
Iˉ i
aˉ a
uˉ u
ESA
d
ˉ
[z, d]
t
ˉ
[t, s]
d
ˉ ̣[z
˙
, d
˙
]
d
˙
[z, d]
g [gˇ]
ʾ, y, Ø, q
Iˉ i eˉ [ay]
aˉ a
oˉ [aw]
uˉ u
A
f, b,
m [ṃ]
t, d, s, z
d˙, z˙, s˙ ,
t
˙
, sˇ
r [ṛ],
l [l
˙
], n
y
k, g
h˘, g
˙
, h˙,
ʿ, h
ʾ [q]
Iˉ i eˉ
aˉ a
oˉ
uˉ u
1 4 2
K A S S E M M . W A H B A

e.g., Brigham Young University. Some language programmes expose stu-
dents to the two varieties, the written (MF) and the oral (A), at the same
time, either in two separate classes (e.g., the American University in Cairo
used to follow this approach in the 1990s) or in the same class (e.g.,
University of Texas, Austin, and Cornell University). However, each pro-
gramme has its own way of adopting what is called the integrated
approach. The problem with this approach is that students are confused
regarding the contextual conditions in which they should use one variety
or another. Confronting students with such alternation, sometimes with
the same words, in the early stages of their learning of Arabic is confusing
when there is no systematic pedagogical instruction to be followed or
agreed upon.
One way to solve this issue is to start with the sound system of one
variety and then to introduce the students gradually to the sound system of
the other variety. Later, if phonological elements that belong to the other
variety are encountered in speech, those elements could be contrasted
with their counterparts, by introducing the social context in which they
occur and the theme discussed. For more discussion of how the integrated
approaches are used in various Arabic language programmes, see Al-Batal
(2018) and Younes (2015, 2018).
Adopting either one of the two approaches proposed above depends
on the programme’s goals, the students’ motivations, and why they
are learning Arabic. If the programme goals of teaching Arabic are
textual, then the MF variety approach could be adopted. If the pro-
gramme goals are pragmatic and communicative, the ESA approach
could be adopted. As a result of following either one approach rather
than the other, materials could be developed according to the goals of
the programme. Acquiring one variety ﬁrst then the other one later
helps the students to form some strategy that they can build upon
when they are exposed to the next variety.
6.7
Towards Phonetic Research on Arabic Language
Pronunciation Instruction
Due to the lack of research on the pronunciation of Arabic, many research-
ers (e.g., Burnham 2013; Hellmuth 2014; Rifaat 2017) have called for a
research-based approach towards teaching Arabic pronunciation. For
example, Rifaat (2017: 338) has suggested that future research should be
‘on two fronts: theoretical and empirical’.
Except for a few studies done in the last quarter of the twentieth cen-
tury, studies investigating empirical questions began in earnest at the
beginning of the twenty-ﬁrst century (e.g., Huthaily 2008; Saadah 2011;
Alwabari 2013; Burnham 2013; Sawadogo 2015; Almelhes 2016; Shehata
2017; Lin 2018). These are summarized in Table 6.12.
6 Models of Arabic Pronunciation
143

These themes might shed light on some unanswered questions
addressing issues such as the problems of pronunciation acquisition
and production of Arabic sounds. It seems that there is an initial
documentation of the issues that teachers of Arabic need primarily to
focus their attention on, e.g., the perceptions of non-native learners of
learning one variety or two varieties of Arabic; the methods of inter-
vention that could be used to improve pronunciation intelligibility in
Arabic, and strategies Arabic language teachers could follow in class for
pronunciation instruction.
The descriptive phonetic work done by Gairdner (1925), Mitchell (1990,
1993), and Badawi (1973) represents a basic framework for teaching Arabic
pronunciation for MF and A varieties. However, there is a lack of descrip-
tive research on the current pronunciation of educated speakers within
each regional area with regard to MF and A varieties. This descriptive
research is needed to support Arabic teachers in their teaching of the
pronunciation of ESA.
The changing goals of teaching Arabic for communication has priori-
tized some essential research questions:
• Which pronunciation model of Arabic is important to teach for effective
and intelligible communication?
• Is there a threshold level of pronunciation, as Celce-Murcia and
Goodwin pointed out for English (1991: 136)? In our Arabic case, if a
given non-native speaker’s pronunciation of Arabic falls below that
Table 6.12 Selected descriptive and empirical research that supports Arabic
language teaching pronunciation
Theme
Examples of studies
1
Descriptive phonetic studies of Arabic
pronunciation
Mitchell 1990, 1993
2
Contrastive studies of Arabic versus
English
Huthaily, 2003
3
Production of Arabic sounds: conso-
nants and vowels
Asfoor 1982
Saadah 2011
Alwabari 2013
Alsabaan 2015
4
The impact of explicit phonetic
instruction on the phonological
improvement of learners’ percep-
tion and production of Arabic
sounds
Huthaily 2008
Burnham 2013
Almelhes 2016
Alsuhaim 2017
Lin 2018
5
Teachers’ beliefs, classroom practices
and learners’ perception and lan-
guage awareness
Al-Mamari 2011
Shehata 2017
Al-Mansour 2016
6
Teachers’ methods and strategies
Odisho 2005
Ryding 2013
Rifaat 2017
1 4 4
K A S S E M M . W A H B A

level, their pronunciation will not be considered as orally communica-
tive ‘no matter how good his or her control of Arabic grammar and
vocabulary might be’.
In addition to the above issues, the following themes are suggested for
future research:
1. Documentation of the Arabic language classroom teachers’ practice in
teaching pronunciation, whether it is oriented towards one variety or
another or both varieties.
2. Learners’ perceptions of learning the two Arabic varieties at the same
time or in sequence, and the impact of this process on the intelligibility
of their pronunciation.
3. Learners’ preferences regarding pronunciation instruction: explicit
versus implicit.
4. Learners’ pronunciation strategies towards successful oral communica-
tion with native speakers.
5. Issues of pronunciation that lead to misunderstanding in communica-
tion with native speakers.
6. Criteria of intelligibility of Arabic pronunciation within each of the
pronunciation models proposed above and the role of variation within
each.
7. What strategies do users of Arabic (native and non-native) adopt in their
speech in order to attain interdialectal intelligibility? For instance, if many
Egyptians (educated and non-educated) work in other Arab countries, and
they use their original dialects to communicate with other Arabs, this may
suggest that there is a level of interdialectal intelligibility of pronuncia-
tion that either allows successful communication or causes some failure
of communication, especially when it is known that the level of intellig-
ibility between Arabic dialects is not the same as is assumed in the
literature. Data need to be collected to facilitate this area of research.
8. What segmental contrasts carry high and low functional load in each
pronunciation model (Hellmuth 2014; Brown 1988)?
Empirical data need to be provided to inform teachers and learners regard-
ing these questions. Accordingly, pedagogical measures could be devised
to facilitate intelligible communication. On one hand, this information
will help teachers orient their instruction towards helping learners adjust
their speech. On the other hand, it will help learners adjust their strategies
in their pronunciation in the direction of MF or A.
6.8
Concluding Remarks and Discussion
In learning Arabic as a foreign language, the non-native learner faces more
than one model of pronunciation for communication: one for the literary
6 Models of Arabic Pronunciation
145

variety and the other for the spoken one. Learning one variety rather than
the other prejudices non-native learners in their efforts to communicate
effectively in the Arabic speech community.
The traditional orientation towards teaching only the pronunciation of
the literary variety is questioned here, and two proposals have been
offered to facilitate communication between learners and native speakers
of Arabic. One is to offer the learner an intermediate variety, ESA, that
reﬂects the regional native speaker’s segmental phonological system and
supplements it with the phonological differences that reﬂect MF.
However, there is as yet no comprehensive linguistic description of ESA
across the Arab world, nor even in one regional variety. The other
approach is to offer MF, supplementing it with the phonological differ-
ences that reﬂect dialectal variation. Both proposals require empirical
foundations in terms of classroom research. The ﬁrst one depends on the
availability of a phonetic description representing the educated speech of
each regional variety across the Arab world. The second one relies mainly
on the written variety, which is relatively standard across the Arab world.
The pronunciation of the written model is a prestigious, stable, and con-
sistent reference for the pronunciation of speech sounds. However, the
phonetic realization of MF is inﬂuenced by the regional dialect of the
speaker. The choice of one or the other as an appropriate pedagogical
norm depends on the context and goals of the learner and each language
programme in terms of its teaching, learning, and assessment.
Familiarity with the issues surrounding the use of one model rather
than the other is important, but it is not enough to base this only on
the experience and intuitions of teachers, professional administrators,
and language materials writers. It should rather be supported by
detailed descriptive and empirical phonetic research in the following
areas:
• Phonetic descriptive research covering ESA as a pronunciation model,
the pronunciation of educated native speakers of Arabic across the Arab
world.
• Classroom research to provide Arabic language professionals with infor-
mation about the acquisition of each variety by the various non-native
learners of Arabic and to establish the effectiveness of the methods/
techniques of teaching on the perception and production of Arabic
sounds by non-native speakers. Priorities for adopting one pronuncia-
tion model rather than the other are based on the learners’ motives for
learning Arabic and institutional decisions.
• Research on native speakers’ views on non-native pronunciations as a
result of teaching to these models.
The focus on segmental rather than suprasegmental features represents a
weak point in the empirical research. Research should be extended to
cover the regional dialects too.
1 4 6
K A S S E M M . W A H B A

Finally, pronunciation learning of another language requires articula-
tory, auditory, and phonological training that uses all the means available,
such as the writing system of the Arabic alphabet, transliteration, phon-
emic transcription, and technology. Teachers of Arabic need to be
equipped with the phonetic knowledge that enables them to deal with
the pronunciation errors (segmental and suprasegmental) of their lan-
guage learners. Curriculums of many MA programmes of TAFL do not
train graduates on this type of knowledge. Such lack of training prevents
future practitioners from dealing with pronunciation challenges over the
course of their careers.
References
Abboud, P. F. and McCarus, E. N. (1983). Elementary Modern Standard Arabic,
vol. I: Pronunciation and Writing: Lessons 1–30. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.
Abdalla, M. and Al-Batal, M. (2011). College-level teachers of Arabic in the
United States: A survey of their professional and institutional proﬁles
and attitudes. Al-ʿArabiyya, 44/45, 1–28.
Abdel-Tawwa¯ b, R. (2000). Lah˙ n al-ʿa¯mmah wa-l-tat
˙
awwur al-lug˙ awı¯. Cairo:
Zahraa’ al-r.
Al-Ani, Salman H. (1970). Arabic Phonology: An Acoustical and Physiological
Investigation. The Hague: Mouton.
Al-Batal, M. (1995). Issues in the teaching of productive skills in Arabic. In
M. Al-Batal, ed., The Teaching of Arabic as a Foreign Language: Issues and
Directions. Al-ʿArabiyya Monograph Series. Provo, TX: University of
Texas: The American Association of Teachers of Arabic (AATA), 115–33.
Al-Batal, M. (ed.) (2018). Arabic as One Language: Integrating Dialect in the
Arabic Language Curriculum. Washington, DC: Georgetown University
Press.
al-Ja¯ h˙ iz, Uthma¯ n ‘Amr ibn Bah˙ r (d. 868) (1968). Al-Baya¯n wel-Tabyı¯n. Beirut:
Da¯ r al-Fikr lil-Jamı¯‘.
al-Khalı¯l b. Ah˙ mad Al-Fara¯ hı¯dı¯. (175–791). Kita¯b al-ʿayn. [Baghda¯ d]: al-
Jumhu¯ rı¯yah al ‘Ira¯ qı¯yah, Wiza¯ rat al- Thaqa¯ fah wa-al-I‘la¯ m, Da¯ r al-
Rashı¯d : Tawzı¯‘ al-Da¯ r al-Wat˙anı¯yah, 1980–1984.
Al-Mamari, H. (2011). Arabic Diglossia and Arabic as a Foreign Language: The
Perception of Students in World Learning Oman Center. MA thesis, SIT
Graduate Institute in Brattleboro, Vermont.
Al-Mansour, N. S. (2016). Effect of attitude on foreign language acquisition:
Arabic pronunciation as a case study. Arab World English Journal, 7(1),
309–25.
Almelhes, S. (2016). Teaching of Arabic Language Proﬁciency (Pronunciation) to
Non-Native Speakers: Designing Interventions Using ICT. PhD dissertation,
Western Sydney University, Australia.
6 Models of Arabic Pronunciation
147

Al-Nassir, A. A. (1993). Sibawayh the Phonologist: A Critical Study of the Phonetic
and Phonological Theory of Sibawayh as Presented in His Treatise Al-Kitaab.
London: Kegan Paul International.
Alsabaan, M. (2015). Pronunciation Support for Arabic Learners. PhD disserta-
tion, University of Manchester, UK.
Alsuhaim, A. (2017). Teaching Pronunciation via Computer Technology: Principles
and Best Practices. MA thesis, University of Wisconsin-River Falls. https://
minds.wisconsin.edu/bitstream/handle/1793/77778/AhmadAlsuhaim.
pdf?sequence=1.
Alwabari, S. (2013). Non-Native Production of Arabic Pharyngeal and Pharyngealized
Consonants. MA thesis, Carleton University, Ottawa, Ontario, Canada.
Asfoor, M. A. (1982). Difﬁculties English Speakers Encounter in Arabic Phonology.
Unpublished doctoral dissertation, University of San Francisco.
Badawi, E. (1973/2011). Mustawaya¯t al-ʿarabiyya al-muʿa¯s˙ira fı¯ mis˙r (Levels of
Contemporary Arabic in Egypt), 2nd ed. 2011. Cairo: Dar al-Ma‘a¯ rif.
Badawi, E. (1985). Educated Spoken Arabic: A problem in teaching Arabic
as a foreign language. In K. R. Jankowsky, ed., Scientiﬁc and Humanistic
Dimensions of Language. Philadelphia, PA: John Benjamins, 15–22.
Badawi, E. (2002). In the quest for the Level 4+ in Arabic: Training Level 2–3
learners in independent reading. In B. L. Leaver and B Shekhtman, eds.,
Developing Professional-Level Language Proﬁciency. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press, 156–72.
Belnap, R. K. (2006). A proﬁle of students of Arabic in U.S. universities. In K.
M. Wahba, Z. A. Taha, and L. England., eds., Handbook for Arabic Language
Teaching Professionals in the 21st Century. New York: Routledge, 169–78.
Brosh, H. (2013). Motivation of American college students to study Arabic.
International Journal of Humanities and Social Science, 3(19), 27–38.
Brown, A. (1988). Functional load and the teaching of pronunciation. TESOL
Quarterly, 22, 593–606.
Burnham, K. R. (2013). Phonetic Training for Learners of Arabic. PhD disserta-
tion, University of Texas at Austin.
Celce-Murcia, M. and Goodwin, J. M. (1991). Teaching pronunciation. In M.
Celce-Murcia, ed., Teaching English as a Second or Foreign Language, 2nd ed.
Boston, MA: Heinle & Heinle.
Cowan, D. (1958). An Introduction to Modern Literary Arabic. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
Derwing, T. M. and Munro, M. J. (2005). Second language accent and
pronunciation teaching: A research-based approach. TESOL Quarterly,
39(3), 379–97.
Derwing, T. M., Diepenbroek, L. G., and Foote, J. A. (2012). How well do
general-skills ESL textbooks address pronunciation? TESL Canada Journal,
30 (1), 22–44.
Ferguson, C. A. (1959). Diglossia. Word. 15, 325–40.
Fu¨ ck, J. (1951). Al-ʿarabiyyah: dira¯sa¯t ﬁ-l-lug˙ ah wa-l-lahaja¯t wal-ʾasa¯lı¯b.
Translated into Arabic by A. H. al-Najja¯ r. Cairo: al- H˘ ankı¯.
1 4 8
K A S S E M M . W A H B A

Gairdner, W. H. T. (1925). The Phonetics of Arabic. Oxford: Oxford University
Press.
Goldberg, D., Looney, D., and Lusin, N. (2013). MLA Report: Enrollments in
Languages Other Than English in United States Institutions of Higher Education.
Modern Language Association web publication. February 2015. www
.mla.org/content/download/31180/1452509/EMB_enrllmnts.
Hallberg, A. (2016). Case Endings in Spoken Standard Arabic. PhD dissertation,
Lund University, Faculties of Humanities and Theology, Sweden.
Harrell, R. (1957). The Phonology of Egyptian Arabic. New York: American
Council of Learned Societies.
Harrell, R. (1963). Lessons in Colloquial Egyptian Arabic. Washington, DC:
Georgetown University Press.
Hellmuth, S. (2014). Towards a research-led approach to the teaching of
Arabic pronunciation. Concordia Working Papers in Applied Linguistics, 5,
295–309.
Heselwood, Barry. (2007). The ‘tight approximant’ variant of the Arabic
‘ʿayn’. Journal of the International Phonetic Association 37, 1–32.
Holes, C. (2013). Orality, culture, and language. In J. Owens, ed., The Oxford
Handbook of Arabic Linguistics. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 281–99.
Husseinali, G. (2006). Who is studying Arabic and why? A survey of Arabic
students’ orientations at a major university. Foreign Language Annals,
39(3), 395–412.
Huthaily, K. Y. (2003). Contrastive Phonological Analysis of Arabic and English.
MA thesis, University of Montana.
Huthaily, K. Y. (2008). Second Language Instruction with Phonological Knowledge:
Teaching Arabic to Speakers of English. PhD dissertation, University of Montana.
Ibn ʿA¯ jarru¯ m, Abu Abd-l-la¯ h Muh˙ ammad ibn Muh˙ ammad ibn Dawu¯d al-
s˙anha¯ jı¯ (d.723/1323). al-ʿA¯ jarru¯miyya., ed. H˙ a¯ yif al-Nabha¯ n.
Ibn Fa¯ ris, Abu l-Hussein Ah˙ mad (d. 395/1004) (1963). Al-s˙a¯ h˙ ibı¯ fı¯ ﬁgh al-lug˙ a
wa-sunan al-ʿArab fı¯ kala¯ miha¯ . ed. Moustafa el-Showe¯mı¯. Beiru¯t.
Ibn Ma¯ lik, Abu¯ ʿAbd -lla¯ h gˇ ama¯ l al-Dı¯n Muh˙ ammad. (d. 1274/672). Al-
H
˘
ula¯s˙ah al-‘Alﬁyya. Beiru¯ t: al-Maktabah al-shaʿbiyyah.
Lin, C.-W. (2018). The Perception and Production of Arabic Lexical Stress by
Learners of Arabic: A Usage-Based Account. PhD dissertation, University of
Michigan.
Mejdell, G. (2006). Mixed Styles in Spoken Arabic in Egypt: Somewhere between
Order and Chaos. Leiden: Brill.
Mitchell, T. F. (1986). What is educated Spoken Arabic? International Journal
of the Sociology of Language, 16, 7–32.
Mitchell, T. F. (1990). Pronouncing Arabic I. Oxford: Clarendon Press.
Mitchell, T. F. (1993). Pronouncing Arabic II. Oxford: Clarendon Press.
Mitchell, T. F. and El-Hassan, S. (1994). Modality, Mood, and Aspect in Spoken
Arabic. London: Kegan Paul International.
Modern Language Association of America (MLA) (2007). Foreign Languages
and Higher Education: New Structures for a Changed World. New York: MLA.
6 Models of Arabic Pronunciation
149

Newman, D. (2013). The Arabic literary language: The Nahda (and beyond).
In J. Owen, ed., Handbook of Arabic Linguistics. Oxford: Oxford University
Press, 472–94.
Odisho, E. Y. (2005). Techniques of Teaching Comparative Pronunciation in Arabic
and English. New Jersey: Gorgias Press.
Parkinson, D. (1991). Searching for modern fus˙h˙ a: Real-life formal Arabic.
Al-ʿArabiyya, 24, 31–64.
Parkinson, D. (1996). Variability in standard Arabic grammar skills. In A.
Elgibali, ed., Understanding Arabic. Cairo: American University in Cairo
Press, 91–101.
Rifaat, K. (2017). A strategy for teaching Arabic pronunciation. In K. M.
Wahba, Z. A. Taha, and L. England, eds., Handbook for Arabic Language
Teaching Professionals in the 21st Century II. New York: Routledge, 329–43.
Ryding, K. C. (1991). Proﬁciency despite diglossia. A new approach for
Arabic. Modern Language Journal, 75(2), 212–18.
Ryding, K. C. (2009). Educated Spoken Arabic: A ﬂexible spoken standard.
In special section on the teaching of Arabic in the US. The NECTFL Review,
64, 49–52.
Ryding, K. C. (2013).Teaching and Learning Arabic as a Foreign Language: A Guide
for Teachers. Washington, DC: Georgetown University Press.
Saadah, E. (2011). The Production of Arabic Vowels by English L2 Learners and
Heritage Speakers of Arabic. PhD dissertation, University of Illinois at
Urbana-Champaign.
Sawadogo, O. (2015). Perception of /q/ in the Arabic /q/–/k/ Contrast by Native
Speakers of American English: A Discrimination Task. MA thesis, Southern
Illinois University Carbondale. https://opensiuc.lib.siu.edu/theses/1695/.
Schmidt, R. W. (1974). Sociolinguistic Variation in Spoken Egyptian Arabic: A
Reexamination of the Concept of Diglossia. PhD dissertation, Brown
University.
Schmidt, R. W. (1986). Applied sociolinguistics: The case of Arabic as a
second language. Anthropological Linguistics, 28(1), 55–72.
Shehata, A. (2017). Teaching Arabic pronunciation to non-natives:
Cognition and practice. In M. O’Brien and J. Levis, eds., Proceedings
of the 8th Pronunciation in Second Language Learning and Teaching
Conference,
Calgary,
AB,
August
2016.
Ames,
IA:
Iowa
State
University. 110–20.
Sı¯bawayhi, ʿAmr ibn ʿUthma¯ n (d. 180/796). (1988). In Ha¯ ru¯ n, ʿAbd al-Sala¯ m
Muh˙ ammad, ed., Al-Kita¯b: Kita¯b Sı¯bawayh Abı¯ Bishr ʿAmr ibn ʿUthma¯n ibn
Qanbar, 3rd ed. Cairo: Maktabat al-Kha¯ njı¯.
Szpyra-Kozlowska, J. (2015). Pronunciation in EFL Instruction: A Research-Based
Approach. Bristol, UK: Multilingual Matters.
Versteegh, K. (2018). Learning Arabic in the Islamic World. In G. Ayoub and
K. Versteegh, eds., The Foundation of Arabic Linguistics III. Leiden: Brill.
Wahba, K. (1993). A Sociolinguistic Treatment of the Feature of Emphasis in Egypt.
PhD dissertation, University of Alexandria, Egypt.
1 5 0
K A S S E M M . W A H B A

Wahba, K. (1996). Linguistic variation in Alexandria Arabic: The feature of
emphasis. In A. Elgibali, ed., Understanding Arabic. Cairo: The American
University in Cairo Press, 103–28.
Wahba, K. (2006). Arabic language use and the educated language user. In
K. M. Wahba, Z. A. Taha, and L. England, eds., Handbook for Arabic Language
Teaching Professionals in the 21st Century. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum,
139–55.
Wahba, K. (2017). Materials development in Arabic language learning and
teaching: Realities, needs, and future directions. In K. M. Wahba, Z. A.
Taha, and L. Englan, eds., Handbook for Arabic Language Teaching
Professionals in the 21st Century II. New York: Routledge, 232–52.
Woidich, M. (2007). Teaching Arabic at the Universiteit van Amsterdam:
Colloquial ﬁrst. Idioma. 19, 75–95.
Younes, M. (2015). The Integrated Approach to Arabic Instruction. New York:
Routledge.
Younes, M. (2018). To separate or to integrate, that is the question: The
Cornell Arabic Program Model. In M. Al-Batal, ed., Arabic as One Language:
Integrating Dialect in the Arabic Curriculum. Washington, DC: Georgetown
University Press, 23–35.
6 Models of Arabic Pronunciation
151


Part II
Arabic Variation and
Sociolinguistics


7
Diglossia, Variation, and
Structural Complexity
Samira Farwaneh
7.1
Introduction
The question of whether languages can differ in grammatical complexity
and, if so, how relative complexity differences might be measured has
moved to the forefront of linguistic investigation in the last decade. This is
a stark departure from the central axiom of linguistics, which has long
been that languages are equally complex in their structure; i.e., there are
no ‘primitive’ or simplex languages. This linguistic axiom in turn is
a resounding refutation of the deeply held myth in many speech commu-
nities that written standard languages occupy a high point on the complex-
ity scale compared to what are deemed non-standard or oral spoken
varieties (Ferguson 1959a).
With respect to Arabic, the notion of complexity is inexorably linked
with the diglossic use of Arabic. The now familiar diglossic situation in
the Arab world is characterized by a hierarchical power relation
between two distinct varieties of Arabic: Classical/Modern Standard
Arabic (CA/MSA), perceived as a superior complex ofﬁcial language,
and regional Arabic (RA) comprising the various regional dialects,
deemed
as
non-standard,
reduced,
and
less
complex
varieties
(Ferguson 1959a, 1959b), or as Walters (2006) puts it ‘(dialects) come
to represent symbolically the absence of everything the fush˙ a¯ is claimed
to be’.
This ideological attitude – the complexity of CA vs. the dialects’ lack
thereof – remains unchallenged, despite the plethora of dialect grammars
and theoretical linguistic analyses. The intractable myth of CA superior
complexity has thus prevented the emergence of systematic scientiﬁc
approaches to measuring structural complexity objectively in Arabic.
The aim of this short chapter is to pave the way for more elaborate
examinations of complexity in various dialects, without attitudinal
barriers.

7.2
Measuring Complexity
The question of complexity and how to measure it has been a long-
established topic of debate amongst linguists. Sampson (2009, 2014,
2017) states that no precise metric exists or has been developed whereby
languages can be assigned numeric value on a complexity scale. This
scepticism arises due to the difﬁculty of deﬁning, measuring, and compar-
ing global complexity. However, a number of proposals have been put
forward attempting to develop measurement criteria or principles to
determine the degree of linguistic complexity of one language compared
to others. Miestamo (2006, 2008) distinguishes two major different
approaches to complexity: absolute complexity, which views complexity
as an objective property of the system, and relative complexity, which
determines complexity by measuring cost/difﬁculty to language users. The
most common criterion for measuring absolute complexity is the length of
description principle. Dahl (2004: 21–4) argues that the complexity of
a linguistic phenomenon may be measured in terms of the length of the
description of that phenomenon; the longer a description a phenomenon
requires, the more complex it is. This view of complexity is an extension of
Chomsky’s (1965) markedness theory, which stipulates that markedness
of a relation increases with the increase of information required to deﬁne
that relation. Markedness is a graded phenomenon that reﬂects relative
centrality, naturalness, simplicity, and ease of learning.
Miestamo measures description length in terms of the following two
principles (Miestamo 2008: 34):
1. The fewer distinctions principle: Grammaticalization of fewer func-
tional distinctions within a given functional domain entails a shorter
description for that functional domain, hence less complexity.
2. The one-meaning–one-form principle: A one-to-one correspondence
between form and meaning entails shorter description and thus
reduced complexity.
McWhorter (2001) gives a more detailed metric for measuring absolute
complexity, summarized below:
a. An area of grammar is more complex than the same area in another
grammar to the extent that it encompasses more overt distinctions and/
or rules than another grammar. This principle was cast later as ‘over-
speciﬁcation’ in McWhorter (2007).
b. A syntax is more complex than another to the extent that it requires the
processing of more rules, such as asymmetries between matrix and
subordinate clauses. This principle corresponds to his (2007) ‘structural
elaboration’ principle.
c. A grammar is more complex than another to the extent that it gives
overt and grammaticalized expression to more ﬁne-grained semantic
and/or pragmatic distinctions than another.
1 5 6
S A M I R A F A R W A N E H

d. Inﬂectional morphology renders a grammar more complex than
another one that lacks inﬂectional morphology.
Thus, in McWhorter’s view, more overt markers and more transforma-
tion rules mediating between deep and surface structures entail more
complexity. Based on these criteria, a language with fewer distinctions in
a morphological category, e.g., singular/plural, is less complex than
another with more distinctions in that category, e.g., singular/dual/plural.
Likewise, a language with subordinate clauses requiring several deriva-
tional rules is more complex than a language with coordinate structures.
McWhorter (2001) thus argues that creoles are less complex than other
languages by virtue of having simpler descriptions.
On the other hand, proponents of Relative Complexity (such as Kusters
2003, 2008) deﬁne complexity in relation to adult learners of language;
therefore, those properties of languages that cause difﬁculties for L2 learn-
ers are deﬁned as complex. Kusters argues convincingly that there can be
no empirical test of the equicomplexity hypothesis, because there is no
limit on the possible components and sub-components that one might
deﬁne in order to measure complexity. It follows from the principle of
relative complexity that if fewer distinctions make a language less com-
plex from an absolute complexity perspective, these fewer distinctions
make the same language more complex if these fewer distinctions pose
difﬁculty to the language learner.
Fenk-Oczlon and Fenk (2008), while not defending the idea of equal
overall complexity in natural languages, argue that all languages enjoy
a degree of complexity. The cross-linguistic generalizations they have
uncovered indicate a balancing effect attributed to trade-offs between
subsystems of the language, where complexity in one grammatical com-
ponent is balanced by simplicity in another. For example, reduction of
form may lead to elaboration of derivation, and reduction of rules may
lead to an increase in exceptions.
7.3
Complexity in Arabic: Diglossia and Variation
Communities where CA/MSA is the ofﬁcial language are characterized as
diglossic speech communities (Bassiouney 2009), deﬁned by Ferguson
(1959a) as the stable coexistence of two varieties of the same language
distinguished by degree of prestige, complexity, function, heritage, and
standardization, as well as elements of grammar broadly deﬁned (e.g.,
phonology, morphology, syntax). Many works on language attitude focus-
ing on Arabic have demonstrated, quantitatively and qualitatively, native
speakers’ afﬁnity towards CA/MSA, which they consider superior and more
structurally complex (Ferguson 1959b; Bassiouney 2009; Walters 2006;
Haeri 2003; Albirini 2016, among many others). What perpetuates the
7 Diglossia, Variation, and Structural Complexity
157

ideology of CA’s structural complexity is the assumption that language
change favours economy and simpliﬁcation. While such ideas are intui-
tively plausible and psychologically appealing, they demand a deeper
understanding of what counts as more or less complex.
As a contribution to the ongoing debate on ‘linguistic complexity’, this
chapter examines the complexity status of regional Arabic varieties in
comparison to Classical Arabic employing the notions of overspeciﬁcation
(number of forms) and structural elaboration (number of processes).
McWhorter echoes Arabic native speakers’ underlying psychological
perception of linguistic values and beliefs by stating that ‘The difference
between any modern Arabic variety and Classical Arabic is overwhelm-
ingly one of subtraction rather than addition or elaboration’ (McWhorter
2007). To illustrate this reduction, McWhorter, using Ferguson’s descrip-
tion, enumerates the overt markings RA varieties have lost, which
I summarize in Table 7.1.
This reduction is interpreted by McWhorter as ‘conventionalized non-
native speakers’ renditions of Classical Arabic, rather than uninterrupted
continuations of a parent language’, and that ‘descriptions of modern
Arabic are uniform in their general theme of decadence’.
The problem with such analyses of complexity is that the method
employed in any work claiming complexity of CA compared to RA uni-
formly takes CA as basic and examines the retention or loss of CA features
in dialects (Ferguson 1959c; McWhorter 2007). McWhorter’s conclusion
that RA is a mere abbreviation of CA evoked by imperfect non-native
language acquisition agrees with Versteegh’s (2004) pidginization, creoli-
zation, and decreolization hypothesis. However, we echo here Holes’
important statement that ‘one should avoid the automatic “derivation”
Table 7.1 CA/RA comparison
Feature
CA
RA
Negation
lam; laˉ; lan; laysa, maˉ
maˉ . . . sˇ, misˇ
Duals
Dual nouns and dual agreement
Dual nouns but with plural
agreement
Feminine plural
ʔantunna 2pl; hunna 3pl
Both genders neutralized in humma
3m.pl
Mood markers
indicative: -u; subjunctive: -a;
jussive: -0
Lost with general loss of ﬁnal vowels
Case markers
Nominative: -u; accusative: -a;
genitive; -i
Lost with general loss of ﬁnal vowels
Relative markers
Inﬂected: ʔallaði m.sg; ʔallati f.sg;
ʔallaðıˉn m.pl; ʔallawaˉti f.pl
Uninﬂected: illi used throughout
Nominal com-
plementizers
ʔanna, ʔinna ‘that; ‘an ‘to’
Neutralized as ‘innu or 0
Interdentals
ð and θ
Replaced with t/s and d/z
Unstressed short
vowels
Retained
Deleted creating allomorphy and
new syllable types: kaˉtiba > kaˉtba
1 5 8
S A M I R A F A R W A N E H

of contemporary colloquial features from Classical ones, as if there were
always a direct line of development between the two’ (Holes 2004: 118). If
one were to reverse the situation and take the regional dialects as a base to
which CA is compared, the picture that emerges might be quite different;
this reverse comparison might reveal that regional varieties are indeed
equally as complex as, and sometimes more complex than, CA, as we will
show in the following pages.
In fact, Owens’ comprehensive study of modern Arabic varieties
spanning a vast geographic area demonstrates that some of these
‘modern’ linguistic features are indeed not modern, but can be traced
to a pre-diasporic, i.e., pre-seventh-century, Arabic, which coexisted
with the Arabic of the Qur’a¯n and pre-Islamic poetry. As Owens
asserts, this ancient variety is more diverse than interpretations of
the history of Arabic would give it credit for (Owens 2005, 2006 and
subsequent work).
Retention of ancient features since lost in CA, grammaticalization,
and language contact are three factors contributing to linguistic com-
plexity in RA; a fourth factor is what Fenk-Oczlon and Fenk (2008)
term the ‘Trade-off Principle’, which hypothesizes that simpliﬁcation
of one component of the grammar triggers complexity of another
component. Examining the structure of RA shows that this is indeed
the case: overt reduction in some component of the grammar does not
necessarily entail simpliﬁcation and is often balanced by complexiﬁca-
tion
of
another
component.
Culicover
conﬁrms
that
‘there
is
a paradox: while we can point to cases of grammars changing in the
direction of reduced complexity, complexity nevertheless continues to
exist, and in some cases might be argued to grow. We have to address
the question of where complexity comes from, even as there is pres-
sure to reduce it.’ The explanation he provides matches Fenk-Oczlon
and Fenk’s Trade-off Principle that the ‘familiar response to this para-
dox is that all languages are equally complex. In those cases where
certain aspects of a grammar are simpler, other aspects of the gram-
mar
are
more
complex
in
compensation’
(Culicover
2013:
178).
Comparing the structure of CA and RA convincingly conﬁrms this
Trade-off Principle, as the ensuing discussion will demonstrate.
Indeed, a close examination of Arabic varieties shows that the difference
between CA and RA is not always ‘overwhelmingly one of subtraction’ but
often one of ‘addition or elaboration’. In the following two sections, I will
address each of McWhorter’s criteria with examples from various dialects
showing the increased complexity of their linguistic structure, which
sometimes surpasses CA’s complexity. Section 7.4 focuses on overspeciﬁ-
cation, including tense and aspect discussed in 7.4.1, the -in- inﬁx in 7.4.2,
and the direct object marker la- in Levantine in 7.4.3. Section 7.5 focuses on
the structural elaboration criterion with section 7.5.1 focusing on negation
and 7.5.2 on syllable structure.
7 Diglossia, Variation, and Structural Complexity
159

7.4
Overspeciﬁcation
I will begin with a discussion of the overspeciﬁcation criterion, or length of
description principle, which refers to the number of grammatical formatives.
While Arabic varieties may have shed a number of the category markings of
CA, they have developed innovative grammatical distinctions. In this section,
I will focus on three overt markers whose usage is speciﬁc to the dialects and
not CA: tense and aspect, the -in- inﬁx, and the direct object marker la-.
7.4.1
Tense and Aspect
Arabic dialects have expanded their aspect systems compared to CA. Many
varieties have developed a number of aspect markers originating from
lexical verbs by a process of grammaticalization. Grammaticalization is
a slow process whereby lexical categories evolve into functional categories
(Haspelmath 1999). The grammaticalization of lexical items seems to
follow a universal irreversible pathway: Lexical word →grammatical
word →clitic →inﬂectional afﬁx. The aspect system in Arabic has been
enriched by the grammaticalization of lexical verbs into aspect markers.
Table 7.2 compares tense and aspect in CA and some regional varieties,
particularly Levantine and Egyptian.
The only marker in CA is the future marker sa- contracted from sawfa.
Aspect is expressed by the insertion of modals such as ka¯na, ka¯da, badaʔa,
jaʕala, ʔaxaða, and others. Regional Arabic varieties developed a number of
Table 7.2 Tense and aspect
CA
Form
Gloss
Aspect
katab ‘wrote-P F V’
yaktub ‘writes-I P F V.P R E S’
sa-yaktub ‘will write-I P F V. F U T’
RA (Levantine and Egyptian)
Form
Gloss
Aspect
Comments
katab
‘wrote’
0- perfective
Perfective aspect is marked with 0
morpheme
in most dialects
bi-yi-ktib
‘writes’
bi- present habi-
tual/progressive
Evolved from the verb baqi ‘remain’;
bi- mostly in Egyptian and Levantine;
da- in Iraqi and ka- in Moroccan
h
˙
a-yi-ktib
‘will write’
h
˙
a- future
Evolved from the verb raˉh
˙
‘go’
ʕam-yi-ktib
‘is writing’
ʕam- progressive
Evolved from the verb ʕamal ‘do’;
mostly in Levantine
ta-yi-ktib
‘in order to write’ ta- subjunctive
Evolved from h
˙
attaˉ ‘in order to/until’;
mostly in Levantine
1 6 0
S A M I R A F A R W A N E H

aspectual markers through the process of grammaticalizing some of these
lexemes or content words, as shown in Table 7.2.
While the origin of some aspect particles such as the future marker rah˙ /
h˙ a in Levantine, Iraqi, and Egyptian from the verb or active participle
raah˙ /raayih˙ ‘go’, or the future marker g˙a- in Moroccan, from g˙adi ‘go’, is
uncontroversial, investigation into the origin of the progressive marker
b- generated a number of interesting hypotheses, given the considerable
variation and complex multiple functions of this marker in various
regional varieties. Therefore, this section will focus on the origin
and function of the b-morpheme as evidence of dialectal structural
complexity.
The functional complexity of the b-morpheme led Owens to devote
a lengthy chapter on its origin and function in Holes (2018a). As Owens
states, ‘it is this aspect (semantic variation) of the morpheme in particular
whose historical linguistics is a challenge’ (Owens 2018). Holes (2004),
Owens (2018), and other studies on Arabic dialectology show that many
dialects employ the b-afﬁx to mark progressive or habitual aspect, as in the
following examples:
(1)
ba-drus
faransi
ﬁ-l-jāmʕa
P R OG-study
French
at-the-university
‘I am studying French at the university.’ (Progressive)
b-a-rūh˙
l-jāmʕa
maši
P R OG-1SG-go
the-university
walking
‘I walk to university’ (Habitual)
In Syrian Arabic, the functional scope of the b-preﬁx is more complex,
as it may indicate continuity, habituality, futurity, volition, intention,
modal future in conditional clauses, or as form of politeness in ques-
tions (Jarad 2013). Below are illustrations of the multiple functions of
the b-marker.
(2)
maryam w- h˙ asan
b-y-sa¯fr-o
ʕa-bayru¯t
bukra
Maryam and Hassan P R OG-3-travel-PL to- Beirut tomorrow
‘Maryam and Hassan will travel to Beirut tomorrow.’
insˇa¯llah
b-ti-njah˙
ha-s-sine?
God willing
P R O G-2 SG-succeed
this-the-year
‘I hope you will succeed this year?’
b-tə-jawwaz-ı¯-ni?
P R OG-2-marry-F.S G-1S G
‘Will you marry me?’
ʔiza b-te-dros
kwayyes,
bi-sˇtrı¯-l-ak
labtob
If P R O G-2 SG-study
well
P R OG-buy-for-2M. SG
laptop
‘If you study well, I’ll buy you a laptop.’
7 Diglossia, Variation, and Structural Complexity
161

However, the function of b- in Egyptian and my dialect of Palestinian1 is
more restricted to habitual, progressive, and conditionals, and less fre-
quently as a future-tense marker or politeness marker as in Syrian. Thus,
while in Syrian one might say: btisˇrab ʔahwi? ‘Would you like to drink
coffee?’, in Egyptian the verb appears in the subjunctive mood – without
the b-preﬁx: tisˇrab ʔahwa?
Gulf Arabic provides another dimension of complexity in the function
and distribution of the b-marker. According to Persson (2008), the b-preﬁx
is used more extensively in conditional clauses than as indicator of future
time reference as in Syrian Arabic. She then concludes that b- is better
categorized as a marker of irrealis mood, ‘stating a future that did not
occur, the conditional or an obligation’ (Palmer 2001). Persson interprets
the sentence in (3) as conditional, but it may also carry habitual interpreta-
tion, as in ‘They usually ﬁght today and reconcile tomorrow.’
(3)
al-yo¯m
ba-yi-tna¯zaʿ-u
ba¯kir
the-day
[1 SG] P R OG-3-recip-argue-3 M. PL
tomorrow
ba-yi-riddu
yi-so¯lif-u
maʿ
baʿd˙
[2S G] P RO G-3-return-3M.PL
3-chat-3M.PL
with
one.another
‘If they ﬁght today, they’ll chat with each other again tomorrow.’
Several content words have been hypothesized as sources for the b-mor-
pheme. Most discussed is the hypothesis that b- originated from a volitive
verb or verb-like element, notably yabg˙i/yabi ‘want’ in Gulf (Owens 2018) or
bidd-/badd in Levantine (Jarad 2013). Jarad (2013) further assumes that
Syrian has two separate yet identical b-markers deriving from distinct
sources – but see Owens (2018) for arguments against the double-source
hypothesis. He hypothesizes that the preﬁx signalling continuity, habi-
tuality, and indicative mood derives from the locative preposition bi- ‘in/
by’, in agreement with Brustad (2000). The future b-preﬁx, on the other
hand, derives from the volitive bound morpheme badd- ‘want’, which in
turn evolved from bi-wudd- ‘in the desire of’. Eksell (2006) proposes that the
b-morpheme derives from yet another source, namely, bada ‘begin’. Eksell
offers another source, namely, baqa¯ ‘remain’, and this is the source that
I advocate in this paper, for reasons discussed below.
In agreement with Eksell (2006), I propose that the b-preﬁx evolved from
the regional form of the CA continuous modal baqa¯ ‘stay/remain’. Eksell
states that this proposal ‘remains purely theoretical due to the lack of any
corroborating evidence’ (Eksell 2006: 85). The following discussion, how-
ever, provides some evidence for this hypothesis. As stated in all the
studies on the b-preﬁx, one of its functions is to mark progressive or
continuative aspect, which is compatible with the modal baqa¯. Moreover,
reduction of baqa¯ to b- is plausible phonologically, and is parallel to the
reduction of ʕamal to ʕam, the progressive marker in Levantine. My
1 My dialect is a hybrid combining features from the Gaza Strip and the West Bank.
1 6 2
S A M I R A F A R W A N E H

argument behind this proposal is that baqa¯ and b- may be used interchange-
ably in cases of non-evidentiality or ‘The b-marked proposition is distanced
from the speaker’s immediate experience’ (Owen 2018: 214). The follow-
ing two examples in (4) are semantically identical, and they entail non-
intentional or non-evidential. These examples are from my dialect of
Palestinian, but I assume that they can be heard in other dialects.
(4)
b-n-sˇu¯f-kum
insˇa¯lla
P R OG-1PL-see-2 PL
God.willing
ni-bʔa
n-sˇu¯f-kum
insˇa¯lla
1P L-stay
1 PL-see-2 PL
God.willing
‘We will see you, God willing.’
The use of baʔa¯ vs. b- is also attested in conditional clauses, as in the
following two semantically identical sentences:
(5)
lamma
t-ı¯zˇi,
bi-n-ʔull-ak
when
2 M. SG-come
P R O G-1 PL-say-2 M.S G
lamma
t-ı¯zˇi,
ni-bʔa
n-ʔull-ak
when
2 M. SG-come
1 PL-stay
1 PL-say-2 M.SG
‘When you arrive, we will tell you.’
Postulating baqa¯ as the source of b- seems more plausible than volitive
terms yabi in the Gulf, bidd- in Levantine, but ʕa¯wiz in Egyptian. Moreover,
in some dialects, the verb yabi did not develop into a progressive b-mor-
pheme (termed by Owens the b-less dialects such as Eastern Libyan,
Chadian, and Tihama Yemeni (Owens 2018: 211)). On the other hand,
dialects with the b-preﬁx share the continuative modal baqa¯, which
makes it a more plausible source.
The discussion of the function and origin of the progressive marker b- is by
no means a comprehensive, exhaustive one. In fact, it is the ‘tip of the
iceberg’, as Owen concludes. Many grammaticalized markers still await
their own treatment. The goal of this contribution is to state that grammati-
calization is one of the language-change processes that contributes to the
complexity of structure, as it results in expanding the inventory of gramma-
tical markers in the language. The previous paragraphs show how gramma-
ticalization contributed to expanding, and thus complexifying, the aspectual
system of different Arabic varieties. The evolution of the marker b- alone is
resounding evidence of the increasing complexity of modern Arabic dialects.
7.4.2
The -in- Inﬁx
Another distinctive marker speciﬁc to the dialects is the inﬁx -in- and its
various manifestations, some of which might be related to tanwı¯n, while
others presumably evolved from an ancient source. Tanwı¯n (nunation) is
the term traditionally used to refer to sufﬁx morphemes marking case
endings in CA. To be more precise, tanwı¯n is actually a cover term referring
7 Diglossia, Variation, and Structural Complexity
163

to the combination of the case markers -u for nominative, -a for accusative,
and -i for genitive, plus the indeﬁnite marker -n.
(6)
CA: indeﬁnite case markers
ha¯ða¯
mudarris-u-n
ʔamrı¯kiyy-u-n
this
teacher-N O M-index
American-N OM-I N D F
‘This is an American teacher.’
raʔay-tu
mudarris-a-n
ʔamrı¯kiyy -a-n
saw-I
teacher-AC C-I N DF
American-ACC-I N D F
‘I saw an American teacher.’
takallam-tu
maʕ
mudarris-i-n
ʾamrı¯kiyy -i-n
talked-I
with
teacher-G EN-I N D F
American-G EN- I N D F
‘I talked with an American teacher.’
These markers are lost in all dialects, a sign of reduction or ‘decadence’ in
the perception of many linguists and native speakers, and echoed by
McWhorter. However, the genitive /-in/ tanwı¯n marking has developed
interesting functions in Bedouin varieties. In some Gulf dialects, genitive
nunation was morphologized as what Holes terms ‘dialectal nunation’
(Holes 2018b), where the -in- inﬁx marks an indeﬁnite speciﬁc noun, that
is, an indeﬁnite noun followed by a complement.
(7)
Najdi (Gulf): indeﬁnite speciﬁc marker
ligee-na
sa¯yg-in
. . .
wlid-in h˙ arbi (Indeﬁnite Speciﬁc)
found-we
driver-S P E C
boy-S P E C H˙ arbi (from the H˙ arbi tribe)
‘we found a driver . . . a H˙ arbi boy.’
ru¯tin-in mʕayyan
‘a deﬁnite routine’
ʔazmit-in ma¯ lih t
˙
araf
‘an extreme crisis’
kalmit-in ga¯lo¯ha¯li
‘a word which they had said to me’
(Ingham 1982: 54–5)
Anotherhomophonousbutnotrelated-in-inﬁxappearsobligatorilyasalinker
between an active participle and a pronominal sufﬁx. This active participle
inﬁx is attested in Oman (Shaaban 1977; Holes 2018b) UAE, Bah˙ a¯rna (Shı¯ˁı¯)
dialects of Bahrain, and the dialects of South Yemen (Holes 2018b). This
morpheme is not related diachronically or synchronically to the dialectal
nunation in Najdi exempliﬁed above in (7). Below are examples of this inﬁx.
(8)
Abu Dhabi
ya¯y-in-ha
come.to.A P-in-it
‘(I) have been to it.’
South Yemen
ana ga¯y-inn-ak
ba¯kir
I come.to.AP-in-you
tomorrow
‘I’ll come to you tomorrow.’
1 6 4
S A M I R A F A R W A N E H

This verbal/participial -in- inﬁx is also attested in the isolated Arabic dia-
lects of Central Asia, which Holes takes as ‘evidence of the antiquity of the
-in(n)- inﬁx’ (Holes 2018b: 133). In the northern Iranian region of Khorasan,
bordering Turkmenistan, the -in- inﬁx is employed in a manner similar to
the Gulf dialects discussed above, where the inﬁx links the active partici-
ple to the direct object pronominal sufﬁx:
(9)
Khorasan
m-int-it-unn-ah
(Perfective)
A P-give-P F V-nn-him
‘She has given him’
(Seeger 2002, cited in Miller 2014: 97)
In Uzbeki and Afghani Arabic, on the other hand, the -in- morpheme is
inﬁxed between the participle and the pronominal subject, with the direct
object, if present, appended thereafter.
(10)
Uzbeki
esˇ mi-t-qu¯l
waqf-ı´n-ak?
(Present Continuative)
what
C O N T-you-say
stand.A P-n-you
‘What are you saying?’
(Tsereteli 1956, cited in Miller 2014: 101)
zorb-in-ak-a¯h
beat.A P-n-you.M-him
‘You (m) have beaten him’
(Zimmermann 2009, cited in Holes 2018b: 132)
Thus, the -in- inﬁx in regional varieties of Arabic assumes more com-
plex functions than the transparent indeﬁnite case marking of CA. It
functions as an indeﬁnite speciﬁc marker marking a head noun when
speciﬁed by a complement in some Gulf Bedouin dialects, and as
a participial inﬁx marking an inﬂected participle when assuming
a verbal function. Hence, it would be false to suppose that the regional
-in- is a simpliﬁed form of the same case marker in CA. On the con-
trary, surveying the distribution and function of this inﬁx, as shown in
Owens (2006) and Holes (2018b), attests to the increased degree of
complexity of Arabic dialect structure, measured in terms of the num-
ber of formatives in the language.
7.4.3
The Preﬁx la-
The preﬁx /l-/, whose function in CA is limited to dative/indirect object
marking, has developed two other functions in RA, as a direct object
marker and a coreferential dative marker. Beginning with the shared
dative feature, the examples in (11) compare the CA to the RA dative
construction.
7 Diglossia, Variation, and Structural Complexity
165

(11)
a. CA: dative marking indirect object
katab-tu
risa¯lat-an
li -nu¯r
write -I
letter-ACC
to-Nour
‘I wrote a letter to Nour.’
b. Most dialects: dative marking indirect object similar to CA
katab-t
maktu¯b
la-nu¯r
wrote-I
letter
to-Nour
‘I wrote a letter to Nour’
The morpheme la- serves another function, namely differential object mark-
ing (DOM). As discussed in Key (2009), the term ‘differential object marking’
is
due
to
Bossong
(1991),
who
observed
that
cross-linguistically,
a morpheme with non-differential dative function is sometimes used as
a differential accusative marker in some languages. This pattern is observed
in a large number of genealogically unrelated languages, including Spanish,
Persian, Hindi/Urdu, Levantine Arabic, and Aramaic. Fewer languages assign
a distinct marker to serve this function, as in Hebrew and Turkish.
Within modern varieties of Arabic, this type of differential object marking
is limited to the languages of the Fertile Crescent, Iraqi, Syrian, Lebanese, and
Palestinian, due to their contact with Aramaic, where the l-preﬁx serves as the
dative and differential object marker. The existence of DOM in Levantine and
Iraqi Arabic can then be attributed to a substratum effect from Aramaic.
The following sentences exemplify the function of the la-morpheme as
a direct object marker, whose occurrence is conditioned by the deﬁnite-
ness of the direct object and is obligatorily bound by a co-indexed ante-
cedent object clitic (Koutsoudas 1967). This usage is common in dialects of
Levantine Arabic, and has been recorded for Iraqi varieties, too, particu-
larly the non-Muslim varieties (Blanc 1964; Abu Haidar 1991). This usage is
optional; if la- is not used, the co-indexed pronoun must also be absent.
(12)
Lebanese
ʕali sˇa¯f-ha
la-l-bint
Ali saw-her
D O M-the-girl
‘Ali saw the girl.’
(Koutsoudas 1967: 512)
*ʕali sˇa¯f la-l-bint
*ʕali sˇa¯f-ha la-bint
According to Levin (1987), examples with direct object marking are usually
used when the speaker wishes to emphasize the parts of the content or
express some emotion towards it, such as wonder, disapproval, sorrow,
astonishment, or pity.
(13)
Palestinian
inti
fatah˙ -t-o
la-li-kta¯b?
you
opened-2 S G-it
D O M-the-book
‘Did you open the book?’
(Levin 1987: 35)
1 6 6
S A M I R A F A R W A N E H

ʔana
lli
laʔe-t-o
la-li-kta¯b,
misˇ
ʔinti
1 S G
who
found-1 S G-3 M. S G
D O M-the-book
not
2 F. S G
‘I am the one who found the book, not you’
(Levin 1987: 33)
ma-nti
sa¯miʕ-ha
la-l-ixba¯r,
lalesˇ
b-ti-sʔal?
ma-2 M S G
hear.A P-3 F. S G
D O M-the-news
why
P R O G-2 S G-ask
‘You have already heard the news. Why are you asking?’
(Levin 1987: 34)
The morpheme /l/ has also expanded its function in Levantine to serve as
a coreferential dative marker with attenuative modiﬁer (Al-Zahre and
Boneh 2010), a phenomenon attested in Hebrew as well.
(14)
Levantine: Coreferential dative with attenuative modiﬁer
nu¯r ʔakal-at-l-a sˇwayy
nu¯ r ate-she-C D-her little
‘Nour ate (for her) a little.’
The coreferential dative marker is obligatorily followed by a clitic co-
indexed with the subject. The coreferential dative construction in this
case serves a pragmatic function, expressing the insigniﬁcance of the
event. Therefore, an attenuative modiﬁer such as sˇwayy ‘little’ is required.
Al-Zahre and Boneh (2010) discuss other types of dative construction in
Levantine besides coreferential dative. The dative construction may be
used to trigger interest in the listener, in which case, the clitic refers to
the listener not the speaker. This construction type occurs in Egyptian and
some Gulf dialects.
(15)
Interested listener dative
mba¯reh˙
sˇuf-t-ill-ik
sˇabb
b-ya¯-xud
il-ʕaʔil!
yesterday
saw-1 SG-to-you.F. SG
guy
P R O G-take
the-mind
‘Yesterday I saw (for you) a great-looking guy.’
A dative construction may also express the speaker’s emotion towards
the event, in which case the clitic is coreferential with the speaker affected
by the event. This type is termed ‘ethical dative’ by Al-Zahre and Boneh,
and is attested in other dialects.
(16)
Ethical dative
ʕaml-et-l-i
mana¯h˙ a
ﬁ-l -bet
made-F-to-me
mourning
in-the-house
‘She screamed a lot in the house.’
Ethical dative serves a pragmatic function similar to direct object marking.
In both cases, the speaker expresses their often negative reaction towards
the event and its impact on them. Compare the two sentences in (17),
where the speaker’s frustration with the event is expressed by a direct
object marker in the ﬁrst and coreferential dative marker in the second.
7 Diglossia, Variation, and Structural Complexity
167

(17)
a. Direct object marking
yixrib
bet-hum,
saraʔ-u¯-ha
la-sˇ-sˇanta!
destroy
house-3 PL
steal-3 P L-3 F SG
D O M-the-suitcase
‘May their house be destroyed, they stole the suitcase!’
b. Coreferential dative
yixrib
bet-hum,
saraʔ-u¯-l-i
sˇ-sˇanta!
destroy
house-3 PL
steal-3 PL-D AT-1S G
the-suitcase
‘May their house be destroyed, they stole the suitcase on me’
Furthermore, if overspeciﬁcation/length of description is measured by
degree of agglutination, syntactic distinctions in CA expressed morphologi-
cally in RA render the RA verb more complex than its CA counterpart;
dative/negative constructions expressed syntactically in CA are synthesized
morphologically in RA, e.g., ma-katab-t-ha-l-ha¯-sˇ ‘I did not write it for her’.
The discussion of McWhorter’s ﬁrst criterion ‘overspeciﬁcation’ reveals
that RA has developed, or maintained from ancient sources, distinctions
not present in CA, while certain CA distinctions were lost in RA. Moreover,
while CA enjoys a number of overt markers, there seems to be a one-to-one
relationship between form and function. This is not the case in RA, where
the same form may serve more than one function, and the same function
may be expressed by more than one form. The progressive aspect in
Levantine, for example, is expressed by two markers, b- and ʕam-. On the
other hand, the la-preﬁx serves more than one function, dative, direct
object marker, coreferential dative with all its types.
I propose here that complexity in language be measured by the number
of one-to-many relationships which lead to opaque, therefore more com-
plex, interactions. Opacity will be discussed in the following section,
which takes up McWhorter’s second criterion, ‘structural elaboration’.
7.5
Structural Elaboration
The second dimension of the length principle, structural elaboration, or
length of derivation, measures complexity by the number of derivational
processes intervening between the deep or underlying and surface form or
structure. By this metric, structural elaboration seems to favour CA over RA
in the perception of native speakers and linguists alike. CA is often char-
acterized by its elaborate grammatical rules compared the perceived sim-
plicity or economy of RA grammar, if RA grammar is even recognized at all.
A different view of structural elaboration correlates complexity with
opacity and simplicity with transparency: the more opaque the rule is,
the more complex the grammar. Kager (2000) deﬁnes opacity as ‘referring
to situations in which a disparity exists between a surface form and the
context of application of a phonological process’. Opacity is measured by
1 6 8
S A M I R A F A R W A N E H

the number of environments in which a rule may unexpectedly be trig-
gered or blocked (Kiparsky 1973; Kenstowicz and Kisseberth 1979).
There are three situations that may render a rule opaque. First, a form
may undergo some phonological rule if it matches a rule’s structural
description, after which some subsequent rule destroys the former rule’s
context of application. The effect is an ‘over-application’ of the rule,
because in the surface representation, the form shows the effect of the
structural change but the environment or the structural description of the
rule is lost in the output. Second, a surface form may meet the structural
description of a rule, yet the rule fails to apply. This situation is an
example of ‘underapplication’. Third, an input other than the one speci-
ﬁed in the rule undergoes the change in the same environment; thus, two
distinct inputs undergo the same change in the same environment. These
three situations contribute to elevating the degree of opacity of processes
and ultimately the complexity of the grammar, regardless of the number
of rules in the derivation.
Reduction of overt grammatical distinctions in RA, be they syntactic or
morphological, render morphosyntactic and phonological rules increas-
ingly opaque, contributing to grammatical complexity.
Reduction is normally forced by the pressure to increase uniformity,
which consequently contributes to structural complexity, as it renders
rule environments or rule interaction more opaque. We discuss two exam-
ples of reduction causing complexity, negation, discussed in 7.5.1, and
syllable structure in 7.5.2.
7.5.1
Negation
One grammatical category where the effect of structural elaboration is
clearly evident is negation. The CA tense-marked free morphemes lam
‘past’, lan ‘future’, and la¯ ‘present’ are neutralized into the tense-
neutral negative circumﬁx ma¯-sˇ in RA, where one or both parts of the
circumﬁx are employed optionally or obligatorily. The CA non-verbal
marker laysa is replaced with misˇ. The reduction of ﬁve negative mor-
phemes in CA to two in RA is taken by McWhorter (2007) as evidence
of decreased complexity. The following examples compare verbal and
non-verbal (nominal, adjectival, and prepositional) negation in CA and
RA. For the time being, I use Levantine as the RA representative.
Negative markers are underlined.
(18)
Verbal negation
CA
Levantine
Gloss
la¯ yaktub
ma¯ b-yiktib
‘He does not write’
lan yaktub
ma¯ rah˙ yiktib
‘He will not write’
lam yaktub
ma¯ katab
‘He did not write’
ma¯ kataba
ma¯ katab
‘He did not write’
7 Diglossia, Variation, and Structural Complexity
169

Non-verbal negation
CA
Levantine
Gloss
laysa kabı¯r-an
misˇ kbı¯r
‘not big’
laysa huna¯
misˇ hina
‘not here’
Measuring the degree of complexity by the number of overt markers alone
gives CA the winning hand under the criterion of overspeciﬁcation, as the
four overt negative markers for negating verbal predicates are reduced to one
in RA, whereas both CA and RA employ one negative morpheme when
negating non-verbal predicates. Another measurement of complexity may
be deduced from Miestamo’s classiﬁcation of negation structures in the
world’s languages into symmetric and asymmetric (Miestamo 2007). This
classiﬁcation is based on structural similarities or differences between nega-
tive and afﬁrmative constructions. If a negative clause differs from its corre-
sponding afﬁrmative clause only by the presence of a negative morpheme,
then the clause is classiﬁed as symmetric. Negation of non-verbal predicates
and verbal predicates with modals in English exempliﬁes this type: This is good
→This is not good; I must go →I must not go. Asymmetric negation involves
changes beyond simple insertion of a negative marker. According to this
distinction, negation in RA is symmetric as it involves mere insertion of the
negative marker. With the exception of ma¯ kataba, negation in CA is asym-
metric, hence more complex, as negation involves loss of ﬁniteness of the
verb, in addition to negative marker insertion. Moreover, the negative mar-
kers themselves in CA are portmanteaus, with complex tense+aspect features,
while in RA, they are simplex afﬁxes with a single [+N E G] feature. Thus, the
asymmetric negative structure and multi-featured negative markers in CA
seem to signal a higher degree of complexity of CA over RA.
However, when considering the distribution of negative markers in the
dialects, we ﬁnd fewer operators but richer environments. Negative inser-
tion in RA is not as transparent as it is in CA. Thus, I contend that, despite
RA’s apparent symmetric negation, it compensates for CA overspeciﬁca-
tion by an increase in structural elaboration measured in terms of rule
opacity. The locus of negative insertion in CA is regular, inserting the
verbal negative markers before the VP (including auxiliaries and modals)
and the non-verbal negative marker before NP, AP, and PP. The environ-
ment of negative markers in RA is more complex, with, again, one-to-many
relationship between form and function.
Before discussing the distribution of the two negative morphemes, it is
important to note that dialects vary in their usage of the discontinuous
negative ma¯-sˇ which negates verbal predicates. In some dialects, e.g.,
Egyptian, both parts of the circumﬁx are obligatory, while in others either
or both parts may be used, e.g., Levantine. In other dialects like Syrian,
Lebanese, and Gulf, only the preﬁx’s part ma¯- is employed. In addition to
this variation, dialects that allow both parts optionally impose restrictions
controlled by the type of verb being negated. Consider the examples in (19)
from Levantine.
1 7 0
S A M I R A F A R W A N E H

(19)
Stative/progressive/habitual
ma¯ b-aʕraf
‘I do not know’
ma-b-aʕraf-isˇ
b-aʕraf-isˇ
Perfective
ma¯ katab
‘He did not write’
ma-katab-isˇ
*katab-isˇ
Future
ma¯ rah˙ yi-fham
‘He will not understand’
misˇ rah˙ yi-fham
*ma-rah˙ -yi-fham-isˇ
*rah˙ -yi-fhamisˇ
The examples above show a hierarchy where the indicative marked by the
preﬁx b- is the least restrictive, allowing all three negation possibilities.
The perfective form allows the circumﬁx or the preﬁx ma¯- but never the
sufﬁx -sˇ. The future is the most restrictive, allowing only the preﬁx ma¯-.
Another layer of complexity concerns the distribution of the two negative
markers misˇ and ma¯-sˇ. In the unmarked usage – to use Brustad (2000)’s term –
misˇ is relegated to non-verbal predicate negation while ma¯-sˇ applies to verbal
predicate negation. However, a survey of Arabic dialects shows that misˇ
sometimes appears before verbal predicates, while ma¯-sˇ may unexpectedly
negate non-verbal predicates. Thus, under- or over-application of negative
insertion shows that Kiparsky’s (1973) notion of opacity holds, since the
negative insertion rule sometimes fails to apply where it is expected, and
sometimes extends its scope to environments where it is not expected to
apply (marked negation in Brustad’s terms). This is not the case in CA, where
the environment for each complex negative marker is well deﬁned, and the
negative insertion process applies in a transparent manner.
Beginning with the particle misˇ, it is normally relegated in its unmarked
usage to non-verbal domains, including NPs, APs and PPs, as in Table 7.3.
We saw earlier that, as a marked usage, misˇ also negates future verbs misˇ
rah˙ yiktib, or the progressive marked by ʕam (Levantine), as in misˇ ʕam yiktib.
The motivation behind the use of misˇ with future and progressive predicates
Table 7.3 Negation of nouns, pronouns, adjectives, and prepositions
Form
Gloss
Negative
Gloss
nuˉr mudarrisa
‘Nour is a teacher’
nuˉr misˇ mudarrisa
‘Nour is not a teacher’
haˉda huwwa
‘This is he’
haˉda misˇ huwwa
‘This is not he/him’
saˉmi mabs
˙
uˉt
˙
‘Sami is happy’
saˉmi misˇ mabs
˙
uˉt
˙
‘Sami is not happy’
nuˉr ﬁ-l-beˉt
‘Nour is in the house’
nuˉr misˇ ﬁ-l-beˉt
‘Nour is not in the house’
l-ktaˉb ʕind-i
‘The book is with me’
l-ktaˉb misˇ ʕind-i
‘The book is not with me’
7 Diglossia, Variation, and Structural Complexity
171

is that the future and progressive markers rah˙ /h˙ a and ʕam are derived from
the corresponding participial sources raayih˙ and ʕamma¯l respectively, and
participles are normally negated by misˇ (Benmamoun 2000). In Egyptian, the
scope of misˇ is extended to progressive imperfect marked by the b-preﬁx, as
in misˇ bi-yi-ktib (Haºland 2011, citing various written sources). A parallel
extension is observed in Upper Egyptian Sa’idi Arabic, where the
discontinuous ma¯-sˇ, rather than misˇ, is used to negate future, as in ma-
h˙ a-y-gul-sˇi ‘He will not say’ (Brustad 2000). Thus, while Cairene Arabic is
extending the use of misˇ to all marked aspects except the unmarked perfect,
Sa’idi Arabic extends ma¯-sˇ to all verbal predicates, including pseudo-verbal
participles (to be discussed when non-verbal negation is addressed).
The discontinuous negatorma¯-sˇ likewisecompetes with misˇ over non-verbal
domains, as it is inserted in certain non-verbal predicates. As stated earlier, in
the unmarked usage, misˇ is used in non-verbal predicates, including active
participles. However, in Sa’idi, ma¯-sˇ is used in this environment. Example (20)
is a comparison between Cairene and Sa’idi participial predicates.
(20)
Cairene
Sa’idi
Gloss
misˇ ʕarf-u
ma–xa¯bir-hu¯-sˇ
‘I don’t know him’
misˇ s˙a¯yid
ma–s˙a¯yid-sˇ
‘I am not ﬁshing’
The distribution of the continuous and non-continuous negative mor-
phemes in Moroccan is somewhat similar to Sa’idi. Again, in the unmarked
usage, we ﬁnd the non-continuous ma-sˇ in verbal predicates and the con-
tinuous masˇi in non-verbal predicates. The data are from Benmamoun
(2000) and Benmamoun and Choueiri (2015).
(21)
a. ma-qra- sˇ
N E G-read.3-N E G
‘He didn’t read.’
b. d-dar masˇi kbir-a
D E T-house N E G big-F
‘The house is not big‘
Unlike many other dialects, Moroccan allows the circumﬁx ma-sˇ to negate
nominal and adjectival predicates, given that no overt copula is present.
(22)
d-dar
ma-kbir-a-sˇ
DE T-house
N E G-big-F-N E G
’The house is not big.’
ʕomar
ma-mrid-sˇ
Omar
N E G-sick-N E G
‘Omar is not sick.’
ʕomar
ma-muʕallim-sˇ
Omar
N E G-teacher-N EG
’Omar is not a teacher.’
1 7 2
S A M I R A F A R W A N E H

Likewise, some NPs assuming verbal function may trigger ma¯-sˇ insertion
instead of the expected misˇ; e.g., copula pronouns (Eid 1983), quasi-verbal
prepositional phrases as preposed predicates, such as l- and ʕind- ‘have’,
and possessive nouns functioning as modals, such as bidd- ‘want’, nifs-
‘desire’, or ʕumr- ‘life’, sˇakl- ‘shape’, among others.
Among the earliest works highlighting the copular use of the pronoun
was Eid (1983), who detected a behavioural difference between pronouns
in argument positions, negated by misˇ, and non-argument positions,
negated by ma¯-sˇ. The following examples are from Eid (1983).
(23)
Pronouns as copula
ʔinta
mudarris
ʔinta
ma-nta¯-sˇ
mudarris
2M. SG
teacher
2 M.S G
N E G-2 M. SG-N E G
teacher
‘You are a teacher.’
‘You are not a teacher’
ʔih˙ na
xarg-ı¯n
ʔih˙ na ma-h˙ na¯-sˇ xarg-ı¯n
1P L
leaving-PL
1 P L N E G-1 PL-N E G leaving-PL
‘We are leaving.’
‘We are not leaving.’
In the examples above, the participial predicate is negated by a copular
pronoun agreeing with the subject in number and gender. In all these
cases, the predicate may also be negated with misˇ.
Prepositional phrases with locative function are normally negated with
misˇ. When expressing existential or possessive relationships, the preposi-
tional phrase is preposed and is negated with the verbal negator ma¯-sˇ.
(24)
Prepositions as possessives and existentials
a. Possessive
ʕind-i kta¯b
ma-ʕind-ı¯-sˇ
kta¯b
with-me book
N EG-with-me-N E G
book
‘I have a book.’
‘I don’t have a book.’
(Compare il-kita¯b misˇ ʕindı¯ ‘The book is not with me.’)
b. Existential
fı¯ kta¯b
ʕa-t
˙
-t
˙
a¯wla
ma-f ı¯-sˇ
kta¯b
ʕa-t
˙
-t
˙
a¯wla
in-book
on-the-table
N E G-in-N E G
book
on-the-table
‘There is a book on the table.’ ‘There is not a book on the table.’
(Compare: il-kita¯b misˇ ﬁ-d-durg ‘The book is not in the drawer.’)
The examples in (25) show that non-verbal predicates may host the con-
tinuous or non-continuous negative, depending on their function in the
sentence. Pronominals negate with misˇ when in an argument position, and
with ma¯-sˇ in a non-argument position, assuming copular function.
Prepositional predicates are negated with misˇ when in situ, and with ma¯-sˇ
when preposed, and assume verbal function. This is not the case in CA,
7 Diglossia, Variation, and Structural Complexity
173

where the phrasal category is negated uniformly regardless of position or
function. Consider the negative possessive examples as rendered in CA.
(25)
ʕind-ı¯ kita¯b-un
laysa ʕind-ı¯ kita¯b-an
‘I have a book’
‘I do not have a book’
al-kita¯b-u ʕind-ı¯
al-kita¯b-u laysa ʕind-ı¯
‘The book is with me’ ‘The book is not with me.’
Thus, we ﬁnd that a one-to-one relationship stands between predicates and
operators in CA, with each predicate type being negated uniformly regard-
less of function or position. In modern varieties, in contrast, the relation-
ship is one-to-many, and hence more complex, as the same predicate may
host more than one negative marker determined by function. This com-
plex relationship adds an increased degree of opacity to the environment
of the negative formation process not found in CA.
Certain nominals may also assume copular or modal function, and as
such, negate with ma¯-sˇ.
(26)
Nouns as modals
nifs-i
ʔa-ru¯h˙
ma¯-nifs-ı¯-sˇ
ʔa-ru¯h˙
desire-my
I -go
N E G-desire-my-N EG
I-go
‘I wish to go’
‘I (don’t) wish to go’
ʔisma-ha
na¯dya
ma-sma-ha¯-sˇ
na¯dya
name-3F.S G
Nadia
N EG-name-3F.SG-N E G Nadia
‘Her name is
Nadia’
‘Her name is not Nadia’
The discussion of negation in this section demonstrates that while RA
may have shed all the negative morphemes of CA except ma¯ – which
developed into ma¯-sˇ and misˇ, the negative construction environment in
RA has been complexiﬁed by allowing multiple relationships between the
negative form and its host. The verbal predicate negative may be hosted by
a non-verbal predicate, and vice versa. We do not see this degree of opacity
in CA. Thus, we witness a trade-off between CA’s ‘opacity of form’ and RA’s
‘opacity of process’, rendering both varieties complex in some domain.
7.5.2
Morphology, Phonology, and Stress
The previous sections addressed issues in morphosyntax as evidence of
complex dialectal structure. I devote this last section to morphophonol-
ogy. Any learner of CA – if asked – will without hesitation admit to the ease
of learning sound verbs – derived from three or four consonant roots –
compared to non-sound verbs, e.g., hollow (glide-medial), weak (glide-
ﬁnal), or geminate (biconsonantal). This ease of sound-verb acquisition
stems from the fact that sound verbs in CA show no allomorphy in their
1 7 4
S A M I R A F A R W A N E H

conjugation. This is not the case in many regional varieties, where allo-
morphic variation exists in sound and non-sound verbs alike.
The allomorphic variation observed in the verbal system of RA is the
product of opaque rule interaction. One example of such phonologically
derived allomorphy is the interaction of stress and syncope and how this
interaction plays a role in deriving verb allomorphy. In many dialects,
unstressed high vowels are deleted word-medially, and in some, both
word-medially and word-initially. In dialects termed the Onset type, such
as Egyptian, Sudanese, and Saudi (Broselow 1992; Farwaneh 1995;
Kiparsky 2003), syncope operates word-medially only, while in Coda dia-
lects, e.g., Iraqi, Levantine, and some Gulf dialects, it operates in both
positions.
Taking Levantine as a representative of Coda dialects, the reduction of
medial and initial unstressed high-vowel verb inﬂection generates three
allomorphs of the verb, compared to the unitary allomorph in CA.
Consider the inﬂectional paradigm of the stem /nizil+/ in (27).
(27)
1p
2p
3p
M.S G
nzı´l-t
nzı´l-t
nı´zil
F.S G
nzı´l-ti
nı´zl-it
PL
nzı´l-na
nzı´l-tu
nı´zl-u
The interaction of stress and syncope derives the following allomorphs: (i)
nı´zil, when a 0-morpheme is added and no change ensues; (ii) nizl-, when
a vocalic afﬁx is added; and (iii) nzil- before a consonantal sufﬁx. In CA, the
shape of the stem is invariable, naza´l-tu, naza´l-ta, na´zal-a, na´zal-u, and so on.
Another environment where /i/ syncope applies in the dialects is the
feminine form of active participles of the shape Ca¯CiC-a, as in ka¯tib-a. The
syncope rule distinguishes between active participles targeted by the rule
vs. lexicalized nominals immune to it, thereby producing minimal pairs
exhibiting i/0 alternation, e.g., sˇa¯ʕira ‘poet-F’ vs. sˇa¯ʕra ‘feeling-F’; ka¯tiba
‘author-F’ and ka¯tba ‘writing-F’; t˙a¯liba ‘student-F’ and t˙a¯lba ‘seeking-F’;
ʕa¯lima ‘scholar-F’ vs. ʕalma ‘dancer’. Underapplication of syncope creates
two allomorphs of the fa¯ʕil form – Ca¯CiC for lexicalized nominal, and Ca¯CC
for participial forms. In CA, the fa¯ʕil form has one allomorph, regardless of
category, as syncope is much more restricted in CA.
As Fenk-Oczlon and Fenk (2008: 48) state, high syllable complexity in
a
certain
language
requires
a
rather
large
phonemic
inventory.
Furthermore, relatively high syllable complexity is a precondition for
a high number of syllable types. A distinct marker of syllable complexity
in the dialects compared to CA is the admission of syllables with large
initial and ﬁnal consonant clusters showing comparable degrees of free-
dom in their combinatorial possibilities. This yields an expansion of the
syllable inventory of the dialects by adding complex syllable types such as
CCVC, CVCC, and CCVVC, not attested in CA except in prepausal positions.
These new syllable types arise as a result of certain phonological
7 Diglossia, Variation, and Structural Complexity
175

operations, among which is high-vowel syncope in open syllables, which is
common in many dialects discussed earlier, as in CA kita¯b →Levantine kta¯b
‘book’, or /nizil-t/ →[nzı´lt] ‘I descended’. Thus, vowel syncope, considered
loss of complexity from the overspeciﬁcation point of view, increases
syllable structure complexity as it expands the syllable inventory with
innovative syllable types. Thus, high-vowel syncope contributes to linguis-
tic complexity in two ways: it creates stem allomorphy, and it expands the
syllable inventory. Moreover, vowel elision renders some dialects, such as
North African ones, more complex in the perception of native speakers
because of the effect of vowel reduction on stress timing (Ghazali et al.
2002).
As for phonemicization, language contact has enriched the phonemic
inventory of the dialects with new phonemes. The triangular vowel system
of CA with the three vowels /a/, /i/, and /u/ is enlarged with the additional
vowels /e/, /o/, and /ə/, while the consonantal inventory admitted the new
consonantal phonemes /p/, /g/, /v/, and /ch/, besides in addition to serving as
allophones of /b/, /k/, /f/, and /k/, respectively.
Opacity of metrical structure leads to instances of structural elabora-
tion, or length of derivation. Metrical opacity arises as a result of various
modiﬁcations of the syllable (Kager 2000). Interaction of stress and epenth-
esis, discussed extensively in the literature (Brame 1973; Broselow 1982;
Farwaneh 1996; Kiparsky 2003), is an example of metrical opacity.
Epenthetic /i/ does not receive stress when it meets the environment for
stress. Thus, while the stem vowel /i/ in /ﬁhim-na/ →[ﬁhı´mna] ‘he understood
us’ is stressed because it is the rightmost heavy syllable in the word, the
epenthetic vowel [i] in the same environment escapes stress, as in /ﬁhim-na/
→[ﬁhı´mna] ‘he understood us’ vs. /ﬁhm-na/ →[fı´himna] ‘our understanding’.
This is another example of rule underapplication, as the rule fails to apply
even though its environment is met. This type of metrical opacity is
accounted for by cyclic rule application in derivational theories and iden-
tity constraints in Optimality Theory (Kager 2000).
7.6
Conclusion
In his analysis of Hungarian, de Groot (2008) compares Standard Hungarian
(HH) spoken inside Hungary with Hungarian spoken outside Hungary (HO).
The most striking difference is that where HH uses synthetic expressions,
HO uses analytic expressions. In terms of linguistic complexity, the variants
of HO thus seem less complex than HH if measured by the overspeciﬁcation
principle, because they are morphologically less complex and they use
fewer patterns, which can be taken as a decrease in system complexity.
However, HO may be considered more complex than HH in certain
domains, including analytic expressions, considered a sign of decreased
complexity, which are restricted by linearity rules rendering the analytic
1 7 6
S A M I R A F A R W A N E H

structure formation process itself opaque and more complex. De Groot
concludes that while HH wins on system complexity, HO surpasses HH in
structural complexity. The same observation can be made about Arabic.
The data presented here, and more not included due to space limitation,
lead to the conclusion that, contrary to McWhorter’s assumption, the
difference between CA and any modern Arabic variety is not always ‘over-
whelmingly one of subtraction’, but often one of ‘addition or elaboration’.
It may be the case that CA outranks RA in terms of the number of overt
distinctions, although, as shown, RA grammar is enriched with overt
markers not found in CA. These markers derive from grammaticalization,
language contact, or retention of old Arabic forms. On the other hand, RA
is more complex than CA in terms of rule opacity, which derives one-to-
many connections between form and function. However, it remains to be
seen how diglossia and contact with other languages determine the degree
of complexity, and whether the subtractive or additive features hold more
weight on the complexity scale.
The aim of this contribution has been to objectively investigate and
measure the degree of complexity exhibited in the various dialects, in
the hope that discussion of complexity may become linguistically inclu-
sive and removed from ideological considerations.
References
Abu Haidar, F. (1991). Christian Arabic of Baghdad. Wiesbaden: Harrassowitz.
Albirini,
A.
(2016).
Modern
Arabic
Sociolinguistics:
Diglossia,
Variation,
Codeswitching, Attitudes and Identity. London: Routledge.
Al-Zahre, N. and Boneh, N. (2010). Coreferential dative constructions in
Syrian Arabic and modern Hebrew. Brill’s Journal of Afroasiatic Languages
and Linguistics, 2(1), 248–82.
Bassiouney, R. (2009). Arabic Sociolinguistics. Edinburgh: Edinburgh University
Press.
Benmamoun, E. (2000). The Feature Structure of Functional Categories:
A Comparative Study of Arabic Dialects. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Benmamoun, E. and Choueiri, L. (2015). The syntax of Arabic from
a generative perspective. In J. Owens, ed., The Oxford Handbook of Arabic
Linguistics. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 115–64.
Blanc, H. (1964). Communal Dialects in Baghdad. Harvard Middle Eastern
Monographs X. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Bossong, G. (1991). Differential object marking in Romance and beyond. In
D. Warner and D. A. Kibbee, eds., New Analyses in Romance Linguistics.
Amsterdam: Benjamins, 143–70.
Brame, M. (1973). On stress in two Arabic dialects. In S. Anderson
and P. Kiparsky, eds., A Festschrift for Morris Halle. New York: Holt,
14–25.
7 Diglossia, Variation, and Structural Complexity
177

Broselow, E. (1982). On predicting the interaction of stress and epenthesis.
Glossa: An International Journal of Linguistics, 16(2), 115–32.
Broselow, E. (1992). Parametric variation in Arabic dialect phonology. In
E. Broselow, M. Eid, and J. McCarthy, eds., Perspectives on Arabic Linguistics
IV. Amsterdam: John Benjamins, 7–46.
Brustad, K. E. (2000). The Syntax of Spoken Arabic: A Comparative Study of
Moroccan,
Egyptian,
Syrian,
and
Kuwaiti
Dialects.
Washington,
DC:
Georgetown University Press.
Chomsky, N. (1965). Aspects of the Theory of Syntax. Cambridge, MA: MIT
Press.
Culicover, P. (2013). Grammar and Complexity. Oxford: Oxford University
Press.
Dahl, O. (2004). The Growth and Maintenance of Linguistic Complexity.
Amsterdam: John Benjamins.
De Groot, C. (2008). Morphological complexity as a parameter of linguistic
typology
Hungarian
as
a
contact
language.
In
M.
Miestamo,
K. Sinnema¨ki, and F. Karlsson, eds., Language Complexity: Typology,
Contact, Change. Amsterdam: John Benjamins, 191–216.
Eid, M. (1983). Copula function of pronouns. Lingua, 59, 197–207.
Eksell, K. (2006). The origin and development of the cursive b-imperfect in
Syrian Arabic. In K. Eksell and T. Vinther, eds., Change in Verbal Systems:
Issues on Explanation. Frankfurt am Main : Peter Lang, 73–98.
Farwaneh, S. (1995). Directionality Effects in Arabic Dialect Syllable Structure.
PhD dissertation, University of Utah.
Farwaneh, S. (1996). The interaction of stress and epenthesis in Arabic: An
optimality-theoretic
approach.
In
L.
Grenoble,
L.
Whaley,
and
M. Przezdziecki, eds., Proceedings of the East State Conference on Linguistics.
Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press, 48–57.
Fenk-Oczlon, G. and Fenk, A. (2008). Complexity trade-offs between the
subsystems of language. In M. Miestamo, K. Sinnema¨ki, and F. Karlsson,
eds., Language Complexity: Typology, Contact, Change. Amsterdam: John
Benjamins, 43–66.
Ferguson, C. (1959a). Diglossia. Word, 15, 325–40.
Ferguson, C. (1959b). Myths about Arabic. In R. S. Harrell, ed., Georgetown
University Languages and Linguistics Monograph Series, XI. Washington, DC:
Georgetown University Press, 75–82.
Ferguson, C. (1959c). The Arabic koine. Language, 35(4), 616–30.
Ghazali, S., Hamdi, R., and Barkat, M. (2002). Speech rhythm variation in
Arabic dialects. In Proceedings of Speech Prosody 2002, Aix-en-Provence,
331–4.
Haeri, N. (2003). Sacred Language, Ordinary People. London: Palgrave
Macmillan.
Haºland, E. M. (2011). Misˇ yinfaʿ– a change in progress? A study of extended usage
of the negation marker misˇ in Cairene Arabic. MA thesis, University of Oslo.
1 7 8
S A M I R A F A R W A N E H

Haspelmath, M. (1999). Why is grammaticalization irreversible? Linguistics,
37(1), 43–68.
Holes,
C.
(2004).
Modern
Arabic:
Structures,
Functions,
and
Varieties.
Washington, DC: Georgetown University Press.
Holes, C. (2018a). Arabic Historical Dialectology: Linguistic and Sociolinguistic
Approaches. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Holes, C. (2018b). The Arabic dialects of the Gulf: Aspects of their historical
and sociolinguistics development. In C. Holes, ed., Arabic Historical
Dialectology: Linguistic and Sociolinguistic Approaches. Oxford: Oxford
University Press, 112–47.
Ingham, B. (1982). North East Arabian Dialects. London: Kegan Paul
International.
Jarad, N. I. (2013). The evolution of the b-future marker in Syrian Arabic.
Lingua Posnaniensis, LV(1), 69–85.
Kager, R. (2000). Surface opacity of metrical structure in optimality theory.
In B. Hermans and M. van Oostendorp, eds., The Derivational Residue in
Phonological Optimality Theory. Amsterdam: John Benjamins, 207–46.
Kenstowicz, M. and Kisseberth, C. (1979). Generative Phonology: Description
and Theory. New York: Academic Press.
Key, G. (2009). Differential Object Marking as an Areal Trait in Persian and Turkish.
MA thesis, University of Arizona.
Kiparsky, Paul. (1973). Abstractness, Opacity, and Global Rules. Bloomington,
IN: Indiana University Linguistics Club.
Kiparsky, P. (2003). Syllables and moras in Arabic In C. Fe´ry and R. van de
Vijver, eds., The Syllable in Optimality Theory. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press, 147–82.
Koutsoudas, A. (1967). Object particles in Lebanese. Journal of the American
Oriental Society, 87(4), 512–17.
Kusters, W. (2003). Linguistic Complexity: the Inﬂuence of Social Change on Verbal
Inﬂection. PhD dissertation, University of Leiden.
Kusters, W. (2008). Complexity in linguistic theory, language learning and
language change. In M. Miestamo, K. Sinnema¨ki, and F. Karlsson, eds.,
Language Complexity: Typology, Contact, Change, Studies in Language
Companion Series. Amsterdam: John Benjamins, 3–22.
Levin, A. (1987). The particle la as an object marker in some Arabic dialects
of the Galilee. Zeitschrift fu¨r Arabische Linguistik, 17, 31–40.
McWhorter, J. H. (2001). The world’s simplest grammars are creole gram-
mars. Linguistic Typology, 5, 125–66.
McWhorter, J. H. (2007). Language Interrupted: Signs of Non-Native Acquisition in
Standard Language Grammars. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Miestamo, M. (2006). On the feasibility of complexity metrics. In K. Kerge and
M.-M. Sepper, eds., FinEst Linguistics: Proceedings of the Annual Finnish and
Estonian Conference of Linguistics. Tallinn, 6– 7 May, 2004. Tallinn: TLU¨ , 11–26.
Miestamo, M. (2007). Symmetric and asymmetric encoding of functional
domains, with remarks on typological markedness. In M. Miestamo and
7 Diglossia, Variation, and Structural Complexity
179

B. Wa¨lchli, eds., New Challenges in Typology: Broadening the Horizons and
Redeﬁning the Foundations. Berlin: Mouton de Gruyter, 293–314.
Miestamo, M. (2008). Grammatical complexity in a cross-linguistic perspec-
tive. In M. Miestamo, M. K. Sinnema¨ki, and F. Karlsson, eds., Language
Complexity: Typology, Contact, Change. Amsterdam: John Benjamins,
23–41.
Miller, K. (2014). The morpheme /-in(n)-/ in Central Asian Arabic:
A comparative study. In S. Farwaneh and H. Ouali, eds., Perspectives on
Arabic Linguistics XXIV–XXV, Philadelphia, PA: John Benjamins, 91–118.
Owens, J. (2005). Pre-diaspora Arabic: Dialects, statistics and historical
reconstruction. Diachronica, 22(2), 271–308.
Owens, J. (2006). A Linguistic History of Arabic. Oxford: Oxford University
Press.
Owens, J. (2018). Dialects (speech communities), the apparent past, and
grammaticalization: Towards an understanding of the history of Arabic.
In C. Holes, ed., Arabic Historical Dialectology: Linguistic and Sociolinguistic
Approaches. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 206–56.
Palmer, F. R. (2001). Mood and Modality, 2nd ed. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.
Persson, M. (2008). The role of the ‘b’-preﬁx in Gulf Arabic dialects as
a marker of future, intent and/or irrealis. Journal of Arabic and Islamic
Studies, 8, 26–52.
Sampson, G. R. (2014). Complexity in language and in law. Poznan Studies in
Contemporary Linguistics, 50, 169–77. www.grsampson.net/ACil.htm; last
accessed 19 November 2020.
Sampson, G. (2017). The Linguistics Delusion. Shefﬁeld, UK: Equinox.
Sampson, G. R., Gil, D., and Trudgill, P. (eds.) (2009). Language Complexity as
an Evolving Variable. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Shaaban, K. A. (1977). The Phonology of Omani Arabic. PhD dissertation,
University of Texas, Austin.
Versteegh, K. (2004). Pidginization and creolization revisited: The case of
Arabic. In M. Haak, R. de Jong, and K. Versteegh, eds., Approaches to Arabic
Dialects: A Collection of Articles Presented to Manfred Woidich on the Occasion of
His Sixtieth Birthday. Leiden: Brill, 343–58.
Walters, K. (2006). Language attitudes. In K. Versteegh, M. Eid, A. Elgibali,
M. Woidich, and A. Zaborski, eds., Encyclopedia of Arabic Language and
Linguistics, vol. II, Leiden: Brill, 650–64.
1 8 0
S A M I R A F A R W A N E H

8
Sociolinguistic Variation
and Variation in
Sociolinguistics
Uri Horesh
8.1
Introduction: Sociolinguistics as a Branch of Linguistics
The question of what comprises sociolinguistics is controversial. There is
no one theory of sociolinguistics, but this chapter will be unequivocal on
one principle: sociolinguistics is part of the discipline of linguistics.
Sociolinguistic research is linguistic research. Enterprises that defy this
very notion may well be worthy of academic exploration, but if they do not
address issues that are at their core linguistic, they are not sociolinguistics.
In other words, if a research question and subsequent attempts to answer
and analyse it are language related but say nothing about the structure of
language and grammar, they probably belong to some other discipline in
the humanities or social sciences.
Having gotten this proviso out of the way, let us make an attempt at
describing what sociolinguistics is and how it relates to Arabic linguistics
more broadly. In the introduction to his book Sociolinguistic Patterns,
William Labov writes: ‘I have resisted the term sociolinguistics for many
years, since it implies that there can be a successful linguistic theory or
practice which is not social’ (Labov 1972: xiii). What Labov expresses here
has, in fact, coloured the work done over the years by him and his students
(myself included), and it formed what Eckert (2012) dubbed the ‘ﬁrst wave’
of sociolinguistics. Eckert begins her survey of the ‘three waves’ of socio-
linguistics with perhaps the formative empirical study of a speech com-
munity that considered social factors to be a salient predictor of language
variation and change, Labov’s (1963) study of diphthong centralizing in the
English spoken on the island of Martha’s Vineyard in Massachusetts.
Eckert argues that this study was not only the ﬁrst to take social factors
into account as part of a linguistic analysis, but also formed the basis of
what later would become the ‘third wave’ of sociolinguistics, the ‘wave’
which is interested in social meaning. Much of Labov’s other work (and

that of many others who have adopted the variationist paradigm over the
years) was more interested in revealing how ‘macrosociological categories’
(Eckert 2012: 88), such as age, sex, and social class, affect the very structure
of language and often lead to language change.
Through ethnographic studies, which signify the genesis of the ‘second
wave’ of sociolinguistics, exempliﬁed by the work of Lesley Milroy and
James Milroy in Belfast (e.g., Milroy 1980), a window was opened into more
reﬁned social categories, to the point that when the ‘third wave’ emerged,
some sociolinguists became interested not only in the effect social struc-
ture has on linguistic structure, but also, in turn, on the social meaning that
is manifest through linguistic variation (and potential subsequent change).
8.2
Variation in Arabic: Social Factors
Elsewhere, William Cotter and I have highlighted some of the most recent
work in Arabic sociolinguistics in general (Horesh and Cotter 2016) and in
Palestinian Arabic in particular (Cotter and Horesh 2015; Horesh and
Cotter 2015). Enam Al-Wer has published a detailed account of Arabic
sociolinguistics in her chapter for The Oxford Handbook of Arabic Linguistics
(Al-Wer 2013), and Jonathan Owens has written two essays on Arabic
sociolinguistics (Owens 2001, 2011). An important critical review encom-
passing Arabic sociolinguistics ‘and beyond’ was written by Niloofar Haeri
(2000; updated in Haeri and Cotter 2019: 243–58). What I wish to do in this
chapter is to critically review the very concept of language variation (and
change) as it applies to Arabic, and the various interpretations scholars
have had of this concept.
At the very core of variationist sociolinguistics is the supposition that
language – and grammar – are inherently variable, and that this variation
may, but doesn’t always, lead to long-term language change. What has
been for a long time the Achilles heel of works on Arabic, including works
in dialectology and sociolinguistics, is the constant assumption that the
trajectory of language change is from Classical Arabic – and its contem-
porary counterpart, Modern Standard Arabic (MSA) – to the very many
vernacular dialects spoken nowadays in North Africa, western Asia and the
Mediterranean, Malta, and several sub-Saharan African countries. It is now
known that variation existed in the region long before the language of the
Qur’a¯n had crystallized into the quasi-fossilized form that has become the
cornerstone of Classical Arabic. We know much more about the history of
Arabic (see Owens 2006; Al-Jallad 2015), including newly discovered
inscriptions from pre-Islamic times, many of which are in what today
would be considered non-standard varieties of Arabic, not only in the
Arabian Peninsula per se, but also as far north as current-day Jordan.
Almost inevitably attached to this partiality for analogies between
Classical Arabic and contemporary dialects is the notion of diglossia
1 8 2
U R I H O R E S H

(Ferguson 1959). Fresh views of diglossia (e.g., Sayahi 2014; Brustad 2017)
are much needed, not necessarily in order to eliminate discussion of the
apparent dichotomy – or, for some scholars, continuum (cf. Hary 1996) –
between Classical/Modern Standard Arabic on one end and any or all of the
currently spoken dialects on the other, but mostly in order to account for
Arabic as a natural language which exhibits, and always has exhibited, a
vast degree of variation.
What, then, do we mean by sociolinguistic variation in Arabic? As is
pertinent to virtually every language that has been studied within the
variationist paradigm, there are a number of dimensions that almost
always ought to be taken into account when exploring variation in
Arabic. Profound developments in the very notion of ‘gender’ notwith-
standing (e.g., Eckert 1989), speaker gender is one of the most salient social
predictors of language change, the directionality being more often than
not such that women lead men in the commencement of such changes by
as much as a generation (Al-Wer 2014: 403). Another such predictor has
traditionally been social (or socioeconomic) class (or status). This category,
perhaps even more than gender, has been scrutinized in the sociolinguis-
tic literature, because of nuanced interpretations that can differ dramati-
cally from community to community. The motto ‘think practically and
look locally’, coined by Eckert and McConnell-Ginet (1992) seems to have
arrived somewhat late in the game to Arabic sociolinguistics, and is still,
sadly, often ignored by some scholars in the ﬁeld.
Finally, let us address age. Age is not merely a potentially crucial social
factor in variationist studies, but it also opens a window into the determi-
nation – based on the apparent-time construct (Bailey et al. 1991; Eckert
1997) – of whether there is indeed a change in progress, as opposed to, for
instance, stable variation. Sayahi (2014) provides some interesting exam-
ples of age differences in varieties of Arabic spoken in North Africa that
illuminate the complexity of this overarching variable.
These three social variables, gender, social class, and age, are the three
classic social predictors of language change (which is always preceded by a
prolonged period of language variation). Each of them has its own complex-
ities, and while none of them is omitted outright from ‘third-wave’ socio-
linguistics,
various
combinations
of
these
factors,
often
including
additional local categories, are included in contemporary analysis. Some of
these analyses explicitly sample speakers along the lines of ‘communities of
practice’ (as per Eckert and McConnell-Ginet 1992); others merely detect
such localized factors in a post hoc fashion. For instance, Hachimi (2007)
explores the social meanings of being a native of Fez living in Casablanca,
enumerating various social practices that accompany such a status.
Regarding the appeal of this approach, Hachimi (2007: 98) says: ‘The use
of variation by speakers is seen as a symbolic resource in constructing social
categories and social meaning rather than merely reﬂecting membership in
predetermined social categories such as “class” and “sex”.’
8 Sociolinguistic Variation
183

In another recent work, Alghamdi (2014) analyses dialect contact as
manifest in the speech of members of the rural Ghamdi tribe who had
moved from Al-Baha to Mecca, a distance of about 300 kilometres to the
north. In this case, as the hypothesis was that contact between the incom-
ing rural dialect and the local urban one would be a catalyst of language
change, Alghamdi tried to establish a metric by which to evaluate the
effect of contact on these speakers’ linguistic behaviour. Borrowing from
the work of Chambers (2000), Alghamdi developed a scale of ‘regionality’,
by which a score of 1 to 6 (in fact, no speaker scored a ‘1’) reﬂected their
degree of attachment and geographical proximity to the main mosque of
Mecca. The categories she devised are on a continuum between ‘indigene’
to ‘interloper’, again using Chamber’s terminology. While Alghamdi’s
methodology was not explicitly that of dedicated community-of-practice
studies, the end result ﬁts the bill of ‘looking locally’ and devising cate-
gories that are germane to the particular circumstances of the community
under investigation.
8.3
Quantiﬁcation (not ‘Counting’)
This leads us to the issue of quantitative analysis of variation, one of the
tenets of variationist sociolinguistics, and a point of contention between
sociolinguists of this persuasion and others who object to ‘counting’ (e.g.,
Pennycook and Otsuji 2015 for general sociolinguistics; Suleiman 2011 for
Arabic). One can understand the aversion to the quantiﬁcation of linguistic
features. It requires additional (non-linguistic) training involving a certain
level of numeracy and mastery of at least one statistical software package,
and is often something of an arduous task. Yet numerous studies of varia-
tion in a good number of languages have shown time and time again that
in order to tease out complex causal relationships between dependent
linguistic variables and independent linguistic and social variables, one
needs to use a large enough data set to be representative of the speech
community one is attempting to analyse. At the same time, there is a need
to remain realistic about how much data can be collected in a given
amount of time. Guy (1993: 243) summarizes this as follows: ‘One must
arrive at a minimax solution balancing these two desiderata: do the most
comprehensive analysis that can be brought to completion with the
resources that are available.’
Rapid advances in technology have allowed students of language varia-
tion and change to increase their corpora and/or analyse much larger
samples in a fraction of the time. This, however, is most readily applied
to written data, which in Arabic limits us – mostly – to the study of highly
formal ‘standard’ language. It is also true for some instances of spoken
language, predominantly in English, where programmes like the FAVE
(Forced Alignment and Vowel Extraction) Suite (Rosenfelder et al. 2011:
1 8 4
U R I H O R E S H

fave.ling.upenn.edu) enable fast processing of large numbers of tokens,
especially for the purpose of measuring vowel formants. Labov et al. (2013:
35) report that such advancements have enabled their team at the
University of Pennsylvania ‘to increase the number of vowel measure-
ments obtained from a single interview by an order of magnitude (from
300–350 to 3,000–9,000)’ in the longitudinal study of Philadelphia English.
We are not quite there in Arabic. However, let us keep in mind that the vast
majority of informative, inﬂuential studies in variationist sociolinguistics
were accomplished using fairly simple tools (e.g., spectrographs, analogue
(!) and digital recordings, Excel spreadsheets), as well as boilerplate statis-
tical packages such as the Statistical Package for the Social Sciences (SPSS),
and, more often, Varbrul/GoldVarb (developed initially in the 1970s by
David Sankoff, speciﬁcally for the study of linguistic variation), and more
recently Rbrul (developed by Daniel Ezra Johnson in 2009 as a somewhat
more advanced version of Varbrul written in the statistical programming
language R). More recent quantitative studies of variation have used the
ﬂexibility of R to create rather complex computational models; this
requires an additional skill, namely the ability to write code. Most studies
in Arabic sociolinguistics have yet to take advantage of this newer tool, and
there is an ongoing debate in sociolinguistics surrounding the necessity of
using ‘fancy’ statistics rather than sticking to the basics.
What is generally agreed upon is that one should do as much statistics as
is necessary to make valid arguments about language, grammar, variabil-
ity, diachronic change, and social meaning derived from all of the above. I
believe this approach to be a healthy one.1 It also echoes Gregory Guy’s
sentiment from nearly a quarter of a century earlier, cited above. There is,
therefore, what I deem a happy coincidence. As sociolinguists of Arabic
dialects catch up with the rest of the ﬁeld, many of us lagging behind in
terms of our technical skills, we are, in fact, embodying in our analyses of
Arabic varieties the heyday of Anglocentric variationist studies of the
1990s and 2000s. This coincidence also enables us to remain in dialogue
with other linguists working on Arabic dialectology, for instance, while
still being relevant in the general community of sociolinguists.
8.4
Phonology and Sociolinguistic Theory
The study of variation in Arabic has typically focused on phonological
variation. In this, it is similar to long-standing trends in the variationist
study of English and other so-called Western languages. However, while
variationists doing research on English have been, for decades, mapping
1 Indeed, such an approach was articulated by the editors of the journal Language Variation and Change, William Labov
and Rena Torres Cacoullos, in a workshop at the NWAV (New Ways of Analyzing Variation) conference in Madison,
Wisconsin on 2 November 2017.
8 Sociolinguistic Variation
185

and measuring the many vocalic phonemes of English varieties, in Arabic
it is the consonants that are typically considered more salient as socio-
linguistic variables and more prone to vary across dialects and be suscep-
tible to change. Interestingly, consonants are also the primary class of
variables studied in the budding enterprise of Hebrew sociolinguistics
(e.g., Gafter 2016). This does not mean that vowels are of no interest to
sociolinguists of Arabic dialects, and indeed there are beginnings of stu-
dies of vocalic variation, e.g., Cotter (2016). Some morphophonemic vari-
ables have also been studied, e.g., Al-Wer (2003) for the pronominal sufﬁx
-kum in Jordanian Arabic, and Cotter and Horesh (2015), who investigated
two variants of the feminine ending in Palestinian Arabic: traditional
urban Palestinian (phonologically conditioned) -e versus the traditional
(categorical) non-raised -a in the dialect of Gaza.
One of the main aims of contemporary Arabic sociolinguistics is to feed
back into sociolinguistic theory. While all studies of Arabic sociolinguis-
tics (again, this only refers to studies within the variationist paradigm)
have derived their theoretical principles from the studies of such scholars
as William Labov, Peter Trudgill, Lesley Milroy, and Penelope Eckert – to
name but a few ‘big names’ – it is my impression that very little of the work
done on Arabic has been the subject of serious attention in the greater
community of sociolinguistic scholarship. The main exception to this is
Niloofar Haeri, who had worked closely with Labov on her earlier work
(e.g., her 1997 monograph The Sociolinguistic Market of Cairo, based in part on
her 1991 doctoral dissertation under his supervision at the University of
Pennsylvania). There is, however, an express intention on the part of
current-day scholars in the ﬁeld for our work to be recognized more
widely. This is manifest in participation in conferences devoted to general
linguistics or general sociolinguistics (e.g., NWAV, UKLVC, LSA, LAGB), as
well as the publication of articles in journals of general sociolinguistics,
e.g., Language Variation and Change and Journal of Sociolinguistics, and of
chapters in books devoted to general sociolinguistic theory, e.g., Al-Wer’s
(2014) chapter in Handbook of Language, Gender and Sexuality (2nd ed.), and
Al-Wer and de Jong (2017) in Handbook of Dialectology.
As mentioned above, in current-day sociolinguistics, a (somewhat artiﬁ-
cial) distinction is made between three ‘waves’ in this ﬁeld of inquiry.
When describing the ﬁrst wave of variation studies, Eckert reminds us
that ‘[c]entral to the theory of variation was the notion of the vernacular’
(Eckert 2012: 88). For a language like Arabic, this is both an obvious
statement and a contentious one. Contentious, because for many scholars
and intellectuals – though not necessarily modern linguists – the ‘real’
Arabic, i.e., the so-called Standard, or fus˙h˙a¯, is becoming an endangered
language (see, e.g., Brustad 2017: 42) due to the proliferation of the use of
local vernaculars in the public sphere. However, to linguists who work in
many traditions and frameworks – not only variationist sociolinguistics –
this transition is considered a natural trajectory in line with cross-
1 8 6
U R I H O R E S H

linguistic tendencies; and empirical studies based on naturally occurring
speech are now blissfully abundant.
The second and third waves of variation studies differ from the ﬁrst in
their methodology; ethnography, broadly deﬁned, is a cornerstone of data
collection in many newer studies of variation. Where the third wave
distinguishes itself from the former two is in its attention to the meaning,
particularly social meaning, of the variation attested in language use. This
depiction of the three ‘waves’ is, to a large degree, schematic, and different
studies through the years since the inception of variationist sociolinguis-
tics have incorporated different elements characteristic of the various
waves.
8.5
Studying Arabic-Speaking Speech Communities
Turning to existing studies of variation in Arabic, the approach often taken
has been to zoom in on speciﬁc speech communities (e.g., Abdel-Jawad
1981 on Amman, Haeri 1997 on Cairo). Some studies are even more
focused in scope, as they examine subsets of the communities in question
(e.g., Al-Wer 1991 on women in Salt, Karak, and Ajloun, AlEssa 2008 and
Alghamdi 2014 on migrant groups within Saudi Arabia, Hachimi 2007 on
Fessis in Casablanca). Also noteworthy is that studies of Arabic sociolin-
guistics often take into account a small number of linguistic variables,
something which is common practice in the study of other languages as
well; except that some studies of, e.g., English, do provide more overarch-
ing accounts of, say, the entire vowel system of the dialects that they
investigate. Such systemic explorations in Arabic varieties have yet to
enter the arena, to the best of my knowledge. What we do have, however,
is the beginning of collaborations between scholars of different dialects
and between sociolinguists and other scholars in the social sciences.
The Essex Arabic Sociolinguistics Research Group, for instance, has pro-
duced a number of papers (at the time of press most of these are conference
papers, though submission for publication is imminent) that tackle general
principles in Arabic sociolinguistics deriving data from multiple dialects. In
2016, Enam Al-Wer’s plenary address at the Arabic Linguistics Forum in
York was among the ﬁrst to do so, followed by a special double panel in the
2017 conference of the Association Internationale de Dialectologie Arabe
(AIDA) in Marseilles, as well as papers presented in two conferences in the
summer of 2017: the North American Research Network in Historical
Sociolinguistics (NARNiH) in Lexington, Kentucky (Al-Wer and Horesh,
focusing on the feminine ending in Jordanian and Palestinian dialects),
and the International Conference on Historical Linguistics (ICHL) in San
Antonio (Al-Wer, Herin and Horesh, on de-affrication in a number of eastern
Arabic dialects). At a recent NWAV in Madison, Wisconsin, Horesh, Al-Wer,
and Alghamdi presented a paper on the quantiﬁcation of contact (language
8 Sociolinguistic Variation
187

and dialect contact) in three speech communities in Palestine, Jordan, and
the Arabian Peninsula).
8.6
Can Arabic Data Contribute to General Theory?
There are instances in which we who study variation in Arabic believe that
novel studies of Arabic vernaculars such as these, whether they be of
speciﬁc dialects or of a number of dialects combined, can contribute to
sociolinguistic theory inasmuch as they rely on existing notions in the
ﬁeld. Take, for example, Labov’s principles of chain shifts (Labov 1994: Part
B). From the ﬁrst iteration of Labov’s formulation of these three principles
(p. 116), the only reference is to vowel shifts. This may be pertinent to
English, Yiddish, and the other, mostly Indo-European, languages that
Labov mentions in this section of the book (but cf. p. 122, which also
includes a sole, extinct, Semitic language, Syriac). Yet it just so happens
that Arabic dialects exhibit a large number of shifts, including what appear
to be chain shifts, involving consonants. As mentioned above, this is not to
say that vowel shifts do not occur in Arabic. Indeed, there is considerable
variation in such features as the maintenance or monopthongization of
historic diphthongs (e.g., in Beiruti Arabic bayt ‘house’ vs. Damascene
Arabic be¯t), the maintenance or raising of long /a¯/ (e.g., Beirut be¯b ‘door,
gate’ vs. Cairo ba¯b), and more complex features involving morphophon-
emic conditioning, such as the realization of the feminine ending, e.g.,
musˇkı´la ‘problem’ in Cairo vs. mu´sˇkile in Amman (but cf. also in Amman,
rh
˘
ı¯sׅa ‘cheap’ triggered by the ‘emphatic’ [pharyngealized] /s˙/ preceding the
feminine morpheme). Yet even these (morpho)phonological alternations
are usually such that a naked ear can hear, without much need for instru-
mental acoustic analysis – though arguably such an analysis can carry an
added value.
Let us return, then, to consonantal chain shifts in Arabic dialects. In
dialects such as the Palestinian variety spoken in Umm Al-Faḥm, we wit-
ness the following two shifts:
(1)
q →k
(2)
k →cˇ (IPA [t͡ ʃ])
This appears to satisfy Labov’s (1994: 119) deﬁnition for a minimal chain
shift, for which he offers the following linear representation:
(3)
/A/ →/B/ →
Based on this case, and others like it, we may be able to posit additional
principles of chain shifting, the novelty of which would be their reference
to consonants rather than vowels. One such principle may be formulated
in the following manner:
1 8 8
U R I H O R E S H

(4)
In consonantal chain shifts, consonants tend to move from
the back of the vocal tract forward.
If the principle in (4) can be substantiated, we may be able to couple it with
Labov’s (1994: 116) PR I N C I P L E III:
(5)
In [vocalic] chain shifts, back vowels move to the front.
As a result of this coupling of the consonantal and vocalic chain-shifting
principles, we could then substitute the two with the following, more
economical, principle:
(6)
In chain shifts, phonemes move from the back of the vocal
tract forward.
This can be a rather straightforward example of feeding back into, and
indeed enhancing and economizing, existing components of variationist
theory based on multiple observations of chain shifts in Arabic vernacu-
lars, which, as said above, tend to involve consonants more often than
vowels.
The chain shift illustrated by (1) and (2) above is a diachronic one. A
problem arises, however, when we observe what is happening synchroni-
cally in dialects where the diachronic chain shifts are ‘reversed’ in a manner
that contravenes the principle formulated in (4) and consequently in (6).
Umm Al-Faḥm, the Palestinian locale cited above, where this historic
chain shift had occurred (among other historically rural speech commu-
nities in central Palestine), has undergone considerable urbanization in
the last three to four decades. Its former status as a village, congruent with
its traditionally rural dialect, has changed to that of a city. This, of course,
does not mean that the dialect would have instantly changed into an urban
one. Yet when we consider the particular feature involving affrication of
/k/ to [cˇ], there is considerable evidence that there is a change in progress,
through which younger speakers tend to steer away from the socially
stigmatized affricate and ‘reverse’ the historical process of affrication,
reverting to the ‘urban’ velar realization of /k/. The reason I enclose
‘reverse’ and ‘urban’ in scare quotes is that it would be difﬁcult to ﬁnd
phonological justiﬁcation for violating our newly formulated principle in
(4), and because it is premature to establish that urbanization in and of
itself can lead to such rapid changes. It is more reasonable at this juncture
to view ‘urbanization’ as a proxy variable (see more on proxy variables in
Al-Wer 2002) for dialect contact, and ‘reversal’ may more accurately be
described as replacement. The point of these terminological distinctions is
that it seems inevitable in cases like this to resort to social, rather than
linguistic-internal, explanations for sound change.
Labov (2001: 23–4) addresses the notion of stigmatization in language,
following the insights of Gabriel Tarde (1873). In Labov’s words (p. 23): ‘Far
from regarding sound change as a blind, mechanical force, Tarde regarded
8 Sociolinguistic Variation
189

it as a positive, creative process.’ He later (p. 23) adds: ‘the fact that a
linguistic form has prestige would be shown by the fact that it was adopted
by others’. I believe that these insights have direct bearing on the data
analysed above. It is known, in the Umm Al-Faḥm case, that [k] carries some
degree of prestige in contrast with [cˇ], or in other words that [cˇ] is a
stigmatized variant, based on our empirical observation that the former
is replacing the latter, especially among younger speakers, despite it being
a case of phonetic fortition, whereas the opposite, lenition, is the more
natural process. Indeed, urban speakers in other parts of Palestine, be it
the more remote Jerusalem, or nearby Nazareth and Haifa, often frown
upon or ridicule the use of the affricate variant. In my own research, I have
even heard Faḥma¯wis say that [k] is ‘correct Arabic’ and that [cˇ] is simply
wrong, even though they were brought up in households where affricates
were the norm. In another case, a speaker I interviewed, a physician in his
thirties, spoke consistently with the velar variant, except when addressing
his grandmother, who was in the room. When addressing the grand-
mother, who was reported to be ‘at least 93’ years old and a consistent
producer of unconditioned affricates, our young doctor shifted to speak-
ing, albeit variably, with [cˇ], especially in 2S GF sufﬁxes – a context in which
studies of other dialects (e.g., AlEssa 2008 for Jeddah and Al-Hawamdeh
2016 for Su¯ f, Jordan) have shown that de-affrication is disfavoured.
Another instance in which contemporary sociolinguistic studies of
Arabic can enrich the sociolinguistic enterprise more broadly is in its
embracing of the ‘think practically and look locally’ (as in the title of
Eckert and McConnell-Ginet 1992) paradigm. Few sociolinguists have
fully adopted the communities-of-practice (CoP) approach to sampling
and analysing Arabic-speaking communities. A notable exception is
Atiqa Hachimi, whose 2005 doctoral dissertation (also see Hachimi 2007)
explicitly addresses the situation of Fessis (people from the Moroccan city
of Fez) living in Casablanca and their construction of identity via linguistic
means. However, even within less explicit methodological frameworks,
there is a growing body of doctoral theses and subsequent publications
that draw upon local elements that supplant or complement some of the
supposed universal social predictors of variation, such as gender, age, and
– probably most often – social class.
In contrast to the characterization of a handful of scholars who have
criticized the enterprise of variationist sociolinguistics, scholars in the
ﬁeld are far from concerned only with ‘counting’. As Clive Holes puts it
in his extremely critical review article discussing Suleiman (2011):
Quantiﬁcation and correlation, to which he [Suleiman] seems to have a
visceral aversion, have remained central to LVC [Language Variation and
Change] throughout, as in any serious social science, though the nature of
the non-linguistic variables has changed. Arabic sociolinguistic studies
which have explored the relationship between language variation and
1 9 0
U R I H O R E S H

psycho-social variables such as community afﬁliation, identity, and self-
presentation have been published since the late 1980s, and now exist in
profusion, whether correlational or not.
(Holes 2015: 100)
Holes’ classiﬁcation of sociolinguistics as a social science is a welcome one.
As such, it merits both quantitative and qualitative approaches, and the
two needn’t be mutually exclusive.
In her study of language variation and change in Cairo, Haeri (e.g., 1994,
1997) considers gender, class, and education as the main social factors in
play in what she dubs ‘the sociolinguistic market’ of the city. Figure 8.1
(using data extracted from Table 12, p. 107 in her 1994 article) compares
the percentage of weak and strong palatalization by private and public
schools for women and men.2
What emerges is a sophisticated representation of an interaction invol-
ving a host of variables, as follows:
• Dependent variable:
○palatalization (weak; strong; none)
• Independent variables:
○gender (women; men)
○education (public; private)
Yet the story does not end with these variables, as illustrated elsewhere in
Haeri’s study (1994: 88, 90). While the two independent variables above are
crucial to the understanding of the variation in palatalization in Cairene
Arabic, we must recall that sociolinguistics is a linguistic enterprise. As
such, social variables such as gender and education are augmented in this
study by linguistic variables, namely the nature of the consonant which is a
candidate for palatalization and the following phonological environment
0%
20%
40%
60%
80%
100%
Women
Men
Women
Men
Weak
Strong
Public
Private
Figure 8.1 Percentage of weak and strong palatalization by private and public schools for
women and men
2 Haeri (1994: 88) illustrates these two types of palatalization using the word, mamti ‘my mother,’ which ‘may be realized
as [mamtyi] or [mamcˇi]’ – the former representing ‘weak’ palatalization and the latter ‘strong’ palatalization.
8 Sociolinguistic Variation
191

in which it occurs. Using multivariate analysis (in Haeri’s case, aided by the
statistical program Varbrul), reveals that in addition to the social trends
seen in the graph presented above, several phonological constraints exist,
and certain phonological elements ‘favour’ palatalization more than
others. For example, /t/ and /t˙/ favour palatalization over other segments
(i.e., /d/, /d˙/ and the geminates /dd/ and /tt/), and the following environments
that trigger palatalization the most are the glide /y/, ﬁnal vowel /i/, and, to a
lesser extent, long /ı¯/. Thus, a word like be¯ti ‘my home’ is more likely to
include a palatalized segment t→ty (weak palatalization) or t→cˇ (strong
palatalization), whereas a word like be¯d˙a ‘egg’ is more likely to remain as
is, given these linguistic constraints.
Consider once again Alghamdi (2014). Alghamdi’s thesis meticulously
assigns numerical values to speakers resulting in the prototypes shown in
Table 8.1.
In Mecca, as in many urban centres in the Arabic-speaking world, the
historical interdentals have changed into dental stops. The Ghamdi dialect
traditionally maintains the distinction between interdental fricatives and
dental stops. What happens when members of the Ghamdi community
move to Mecca has been shown by Alghamdi to be related to ‘regionality’
as it is deﬁned in Table 8.1.
Quantifying the results, and in this case representing them graphically
as in Figure 8.2 (the graph is my rendition of Alghamdi’s data, originally
Table 8.1 Regionality index for palatalization based on Alghamdi (2014)
Status
Regionality index Proﬁle
Indigenous
1
(speakers and parents) born, raised in Mecca and
settled around the Mosque. (None of the speak-
ers scored this index)
Near-indigenous
2
(a) (speakers) born, raised in Mecca, settled
around the Mosque; (parents) born in Al-
Baha, settled around the Mosque
(b) (speakers) born, raised in Mecca, settled away
from the mosque; (parents) born in Mecca,
settled around the Mosque
Fairly indigenous
3
(speakers) born, raised in Mecca, settled around the
Mosque; (parents) born in Al-Baha, settled away
from the mosque
Fairly interloper
4
(speakers) born in Al-Baha, raised in Mecca, settled
around the Mosque; (parents) born in Al-Baha,
settled away from the mosque
Near-interloper
5
(speakers) born in Al-Baha, raised in Mecca, settled
away from the mosque; (parents) born in Al-
Baha, settled away from the mosque
Interloper
6
(speakers) born, raised in Al-Baha, settled away
from the mosque; (parents) born in Al-Baha,
settled away from the mosque
1 9 2
U R I H O R E S H

presented as numerical tables,) serves an explanatory purpose. First of all,
it shows that the Regionality Index interacts with the three variables in
similar patterns. Secondly, if we add the crucial bit of information that the
results in all three cases are statistically signiﬁcant (p < 0.05), we can say
with some degree of conﬁdence that this interaction is unlikely to be due
to chance. This is enhanced by the way the data were sampled to begin
with, to include similar numbers of speakers across various socially sig-
niﬁcant groups (e.g., age, gender, and – here – regionality).
Occasionally, quantiﬁcation can tell us about more than just the socio-
linguistic reality, but also about the quantiﬁcation process itself. Consider
the graph in Figure 8.3 from a work in progress by Roey Gafter and myself,
Sawsan
Bianca
TariqYazid
UmmYazid
Salem
Ali
Widad
Jamila
Jamil
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1.0
%Pharyngeal
Centred Factor Weight
Figure 8.3 Pharyngeal realization of /ʿ/ and /ḥ/ in Hebrew spoken by Jaffa Palestinians, by
speaker
0%
5%
10%
15%
20%
25%
1
2
3
4
5
6
Regionality Index
[t]%
[d]%
[d  ]%
Figure 8.2 Regionality and stopping of interdentals in Mecca
8 Sociolinguistic Variation
193

where we observed Palestinian bilingual speakers from Jaffa whose domi-
nant language was Palestinian Arabic and who also exhibit high proﬁ-
ciency in Modern Hebrew.
A tool often used in sociolinguistics is what’s known as variable rule
analysis (see above). The analysis in Figure 8.3 was done using this method,
with the aid of the dedicated program Rbrul (Johnson 2009). In addition to
simple percentages, there is a metric known as centred factor weight, which
predicts which factor (be it social, linguistic, or, as shown here, a random
intercept, to wit, individual speaker) would favour the application of the
variable rule under investigation. The grey triangles show us, for each of
the ten speakers sampled, what percentage of Hebrew tokens with historic
pharyngeal segments /ʿ/ or /ḥ/ were actually pronounced as pharyngeal [ʕ]
or [ħ], respectively. The black circles, however, show the factor weights for
this feature for each speaker. Since both the percentages and the factor
weights are essentially numbers ranging from 0 to 1, the two measures are
easily comparable.
On the one hand, there is a general pattern for both measures: the
speaker whose pseudonym is Sawsan has the highest values, whereas
Jamil is on the low end of the curve. But something interesting is revealed
when examining the actual numbers and the way that they pattern vis-a`-
vis the 0.5 line. Sawsan is the only speaker who pronounces these phar-
yngeal segments over 50 per cent of the time. The others range from 2.2
per cent (Jamil) to 45.5 per cent (Bianca). On the other hand, everyone from
Ali to Sawsan has centred factor weights above 0.5. It is clear from looking
at the circles in the graph that there is a dip for Widad, Jamila, and Jamil.
But the triangles reveal that this decline in pharyngeal rates also indicates
a statistical tendency. And it shows that when quantifying linguistic
results, it may not always sufﬁce to look at descriptive statistical results
alone, as one should also consider inferential statistical models, which treat
the data at hand as representative of a larger population (in this example,
the population of Arabic–Hebrew bilinguals in Jaffa) and allow us to inter-
pret these data and make broader predictions than when ‘counting’ alone.
8.7
Conclusion
There has been a surge in recent years in studies that purport to cover
‘Arabic sociolinguistics’. In fact, there is almost an obsession among a wide
portion of the scholarly community that views virtually every study of
Arabic to be sociolinguistic, because of the ‘diglossic’ nature of most
speech communities who use the language. The handful of studies pre-
sented above make use of principles and methods of ‘general sociolinguis-
tics’, the ﬁeld of study that attempts to unearth what drives variation (and
potential subsequent change) in language both across and within speech
communities. It is accepted, and indeed repeatedly proven, that a full
1 9 4
U R I H O R E S H

account of language variation and change must consider both linguistic
and social factors as possible predictors of these phenomena.
Both kinds of factors, language-internal and social, follow general prin-
ciples and can be theorized, but part of the evolving theorization of socio-
linguistics is that not all speech communities are created equally. While
gender, age, and social class (whatever we construe this to mean) are the
basic building blocks of the social dimensions of variation, localized fac-
tors speciﬁc to each community are often also taken into account. These
can include contact (both between languages and between dialects), edu-
cational settings, regionality, and many others. This principle of drawing
from both general and local aspects of variation also applies to the linguis-
tic considerations we make when studying variation. As argued earlier, it
often does not make much sense to compare every feature in every dialect
to Classical or Modern Standard Arabic. It is usually much more productive
to consider what similar Arabic vernaculars ‘do’; and by ‘similar’ I mean
neighbouring dialects, dialects that are in close contact with the dialect in
question, dialects that share linguistic features (e.g., qeltu vs. gilit dialects),
or macro-social ones (e.g., rural/Bedouin/urban).
A good study in Arabic sociolinguistics will strive to be data-driven,
accurate, insightful, and of interest to scholars of Arabic as well as to
linguists who study language variation and change more broadly or in
other languages.
References
Abdel-Jawad, H. (1981). Lexical and Phonological Variation in Spoken Arabic in
Amman. Doctoral dissertation, University of Pennsylvania.
Al-Hawamdeh, A. M. (2016). A Sociolinguistic Investigation of Two Ho¯ra¯ni
Features in Su¯f, Jordan. PhD thesis, University of Essex.
Al-Jallad, A. (2015). An Outline of the Grammar of Safaitic Inscriptions. Leiden:
Brill.
Al-Wer, E. (1991). Phonological Variation in the Speech of Women from Three
Urban Areas in Jordan. PhD thesis, University of Essex.
Al-Wer, E. (2002). Education as a speaker variable. In A. Rouchdy, ed.,
Language Contact and Language Conﬂict in Arabic. Florence: Taylor &
Francis, 41–53.
Al-Wer, E. (2003). New dialect formation: the focusing of -kum in Amman.
In D. Britain and J. Cheshire, eds., Social Dialectology: In Honour of Peter
Trudgill. Amsterdam: Benjamins, 59–67.
Al-Wer, E. (2013). Sociolinguistics. In J. Owens, ed., The Oxford Handbook of
Arabic Linguistics. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 241–63.
Al-Wer, E. (2014). Language and gender in the Middle East and North Africa.
In S. Ehrlich, M. Meyerhoff, and J. Holmes, eds., The Handbook of Language,
Gender and Sexuality, 2nd ed. Chichester: Wiley-Blackwell, 396–411.
8 Sociolinguistic Variation
195

Al-Wer, E. and De Jong, R. (2017). Dialects of Arabic. In C. Boberg, J.
Nerbonne, and D. Watt, eds., The Handbook of Dialectology. Hoboken, NJ:
Wiley-Blackwell, 523–34.
Al-Wer, E. and Horesh, U. (2019). The Routledge Handbook of Arabic
Sociolinguistics. London: Routledge.
AlEssa, A. (2008). Najdi Speakers in Hijaz: A Sociolinguistic Investigation of Dialect
Contact in Jeddah. PhD thesis, University of Essex.
Alghamdi, N. M. (2014). A Sociolinguistic Study of Dialect Contact in Arabia:
Ghamdi immigrants in Mecca. PhD thesis, University of Essex.
Bailey, G., Wikle, T., Tillery, J., and Sand, L. (1991). The apparent time
construct. Language Variation and Change, 3, 241–64.
Brustad, K. (2017). Diglossia as ideology. In J. Høigilt and G. Mejdell, eds.,
The Politics of Written Language in the Arab World: Writing Change. Leiden:
Brill, 41–67. DOI: 10.1163/9789004346178_004.
Chambers, J. K. (2000). Region and language variation. English World-Wide,
21, 169–99.
Cotter, W. M. (2016). A sociophonetic account of morphophonemic varia-
tion in Palestinian Arabic. Proceedings of Meetings on Acoustics, 26, 1–9. DOI:
10.1121/2.0000213.
Cotter, W. M. and Horesh, U. (2015). Social integration and dialect diver-
gence in coastal Palestine. Journal of Sociolinguistics, 19(4), 460–83. DOI:
10.1111/josl.12135.
Eckert, P. (1989). The whole woman: Sex and gender differences in varia-
tion. Language Variation and Change, 1, 245–67. DOI: 10.1146/annurev-
anthro-092611-145828.
Eckert, P. (1997). Age as a sociolinguistic variable. In F. Coulmas, ed., The
Handbook of Sociolinguistics. Oxford: Blackwell, 151–67.
Eckert, P. (2012). Three waves of variation study: The emergence of mean-
ing in the study of sociolinguistic variation. Annual Review of Anthropology,
41, 87–100.
Eckert, P. and McConnell-Ginet, S. (1992). Think practically and look
locally: Language and gender as community-based practice. Annual
Review of Anthropology, 21, 461–90.
Ferguson, C. A. (1959). Diglossia. Word, 15, 325–40.
Gafter, R. J. (2016). What’s a stigmatized variant doing in the word list?
Authenticity in reading styles and Hebrew pharyngeals. Journal of
Sociolinguistics, 20(1), 31–58.
Guy, G. R. (1993). The quantitative analysis of linguistic variation. In D. R.
Preston, ed., American Dialect Research. Amsterdam: John Benjamins,
223–49.
Hachimi, A. (2005). Dialect Leveling, Maintenance and Urban Identity in Morocco.
PhD dissertation, University of Hawai’i.
Hachimi, A. (2007). Becoming Casablancan: Fessis in Casablanca as a case
study. In C. Miller, E. AI-Wer, D. Caubet, and J. Watson, eds., Arabic in the
City: Issues in Language Variation and Change. London: Routledge, 97–122.
1 9 6
U R I H O R E S H

Haeri, N. (1994). A linguistic innovation of women in Cairo. Language
Variation and Change, 6, 87–112.
Haeri, N. (1997). The Sociolinguistic Market of Cairo: Gender, Class, and Education.
(Library of Arabic Linguistics; 13). London : Kegan Paul International.
Haeri, N. (2000). Form and ideology: Arabic sociolinguistics and beyond.
Annual Review of Anthropology, 29, 61–87.
Haeri, N. and Cotter, W. M. (2019). Form and ideology revisited. In E. Al-Wer
and U. Horesh, eds., Routledge Handbook of Arabic Sociolinguistics. London:
Routledge, 243–58.
Hary, B. (1996). The importance of the language continuum in Arabic
multiglossia.
In
A.
Elgibali,
ed.,
Understanding
Arabic:
Essays
in
Contemporary Arabic Linguistics in Honor of El-Said Badawi. Cairo: American
University of Cairo Press, 69–90.
Holes, C. (2015). Review article of Suleiman (2011). Language and
Communication, 42, 99–103.
Horesh, U. and Cotter, W. M. (2015). Sociolinguistics of Palestinian Arabic.
In L. Edzard and R. de Jong, eds., Encyclopedia of Arabic Language and
Linguistics Online. Leiden: Brill.
Horesh, U. and Cotter, W. M. (2016). Current research on linguistic varia-
tion in the Arabic-speaking world. Language and Linguistics Compass 10(8),
370–81. https://doi.org/10.1111/lnc3.12202.
Johnson, D. E. (2009). Getting off the GoldVarb standard: Introducing Rbrul
for mixed-effects variable rule analysis. Language and Linguistics Compass,
3, 359–83.
Labov, W. (1963). The social motivation of a sound change. Word, 19(3),
273–309. https://doi.org/10.1080/00437956.1963.11659799.
Labov, W. (1972). Sociolinguistic Patterns. Philadelphia, PA: University of
Pennsylvania Press.
Labov, W. (1994). Principles of Linguistic Change, vol. I: Internal Factors.
Oxford: Blackwell.
Labov, W. (2001). Principles of Linguistic Change, vol. II: Social Factors. Malden,
MA: Blackwell.
Labov, W., Rosenfelder, I., and Fruehwald, J. (2013). One hundred years of
sound change in Philadelphia: Linear incrementation, reversal, and
reanalysis, Language, 89(1), 30–65. DOI: 10.1353/lan.2013.0015.
Milroy, L. (1980). Language and Social Networks. Oxford: Blackwell.
Owens, J. (2001). Arabic sociolinguistics. Arabica, 48, 419–69.
Owens, J. (2006). A Linguistic History of Arabic. Oxford: Oxford University
Press.
Owens, J. (2011). Arabic sociolinguistics. In S. Weninger, G. Khan, M. P.
Streck, and J. C. E. Watson, eds., The Semitic Languages: An International
Handbook. Berlin: De Gruyter, 970–98.
Pennycook, A. and Otsuji, E. (2015). Metrolingualism: Language in the City.
London: Routledge.
8 Sociolinguistic Variation
197

Rosenfelder, I., Fruehwald, J., Evanini, K., and Yuan, J. (2011). FAVE (Forced
Alignment and Vowel Extraction) Suite. fave.ling.upenn.edu.
Sayahi, L. (2014). Diglossia and Language Contact: Language Variation and
Change in North Africa. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Suleiman, Y. (2011). Arabic, Self and Identity: A Study in Conﬂict and
Displacement. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
1 9 8
U R I H O R E S H

9
What Is Formal Spoken
Arabic?
Gunvor Mejdell
9.1
Introduction
Formal Spoken Arabic (FSA) refers to a kind of spoken language used by
educated Arabs in situations perceived to be more formal than relaxed
conversation with friends and family. Formal situations may, of course,
also call for the use of Standard Arabic (SA or MSA) in one of the many
styles of its oral representation, i.e., with or without inﬂectional endings,
use of pausal and contextual forms, phonetic realization of vernacular
reﬂexes, and so on – but this is not considered an extension of the term
Formal Spoken Arabic as it has become used in Anglophone academia.1
Used alongside FSA, and preferred by many Arabists, is the term
Educated Spoken Arabic (ESA) or simply Educated Arabic (for a range of
labels and uses, see Ryding in the Encyclopedia of Arabic Language and
Linguistics
(EALL,
2006).
Educated
Spoken
Arabic
was
coined
for
a comprehensive project by a team of scholars at Leeds University in the
1980s, headed by T. F. Mitchell, working on a recorded corpus of spoken
Arabic collected in different parts of the Arab world in the late 1970s.
‘Apart from this important project’, says Ryding, ‘there has been little or
no systematic effort on the part of academic institutions (Arab or Western)
to engage in long-term empirical investigation of spontaneous formalized
discourse of educated native speakers’ (Ryding 2006: 668). There have,
however, been several in-depth individual studies attempting to describe
various features of such discourse, such as the highly recommended
unpublished dissertations on variation by Schmidt (1974), Schulz (1981),
and Mehall (1999) on verbal morphology, and the published books of
Mazraani
(1997)
on
political
discourse,
Bassiouney
(2006)
with
a codeswitching approach to various formal genres, and Mejdell (2006)
1 Harrell (1960) and Skogseth (2000) analyse variation in Modern Standard Arabic as it appears in Egyptian radio news
broadcasts, forty years apart.

on the ‘mixed styles’ of the genre ‘panel presentations’. Most recently,
Hallberg (2016: v) investigates the use of case endings in what he calls
Spoken Standard Arabic (‘extemporaneous speech in formal situations
where Standard Arabic is the expected variety’) – his data thus represents
upper styles/registers of Formal Spoken Arabic, as deﬁned above.
9.2
Formal Spoken Arabic in the Diglossia Context
FSA has to be seen in the framework of ‘diglossia’: the sociolinguistic
situation where two varieties, H(igh) and L(ow), which are linguistically
related as well as distinct, are used in a speech community for different
situations or functions: written vs. spoken, formal vs. informal. Only
L varieties serve as ‘mother tongue’, while H has no ‘native speaker’ and
is acquired by formal education. In his 1959 foundational text on diglossia,
Charles A. Ferguson refers to ‘the use of relatively uncodiﬁed, unstable,
intermediate forms of the language’ to resolve ‘the communicative ten-
sions’ that arise in functionally overlapping situations, drawing on the
linguistic resources of both basic varieties (Ferguson 1959: 332).2
In Arabic, he says, ‘a kind of spoken Arabic much used in certain
semiformal or cross-dialectal situations has a highly classical vocabulary
with few or no inﬂectional endings, with certain features of classical
syntax, but with a fundamentally colloquial base in morphology and
syntax, and a generous admixture of colloquial vocabulary’ (ibid.).
The term used by native speakers for this kind of intermediate speech,
says Ferguson (ibid.), is lugha wust
˙
a¯. Mejdell (2011), investigating the uses of
lugha wust˙a¯ in various written sources as well as from native informants,
concludes that the term certainly is used by some to refer to a kind of
intermediate language between the standard and the vernacular (or ‘clas-
sical’ and ‘dialect’, fus˙h˙ a¯ and ʿa¯mmiyya), but just as often refers to a slightly
substandard style of written language (fas˙ı¯h˙ a, but not fus˙h˙ a¯).
Very inﬂuential as well, among Anglophone scholars, has been Haim
Blanc’s study of ‘interdialectal educated conversation’ (Blanc 1960):
a detailed analysis based on a recorded conversation among four students
from Syria, Palestine, and Iraq, which involved both dialect levelling and
‘classicizing’ devices, i.e., insertion of lexicon and certain features of
Standard [Classical] Arabic. Blanc proposed a model of spoken Arabic
ranging through ﬁve ‘levels’ which he labelled ‘plain colloquial’, ‘koi-
neized colloquial’, ‘semi-literary’ or ‘elevated colloquial’, ‘modiﬁed classi-
cal’, and ‘standard classical’. The ‘semi-literary’ or ‘elevated’ colloquial’ ‘is
essentially the variety of colloquial used by the educated, but also the
variety demanded by the unwritten accepted standards in certain “formal”
situations’, as Palva (1969: 3) renders it, and which is ‘often called by the
2 The deﬁning cases Ferguson refers to are Arabic, Greek, Haitian Creole, and Swiss German.
2 0 0
G U N V O R M E J D E L L

Arabs lughat el-mutaʿallimı¯n’. Palva himself based his analysis on recorded
excerpts of educated spoken Palestinian and the use of standard features
(‘classicization’) for elevated style. He ﬁnds ﬂuctuation in style from
‘relaxed’ to ‘more formal’ among speakers, and notes that ‘the interfer-
ence of the classical language is of a relatively superﬁcial nature’ (1969:
41). Palva also observes the differential treatment of lexical and gramma-
tical items with regard to the restoration of certain morphophonological
features, an observation I shall return to below.
9.3
Formal Spoken Arabic as Inter/Pan-Arabic
As is also reﬂected in the content of the conversation recorded by Blanc
(1960), there was in the late 1950s to the early 1970s, a predominant
political and ideological movement calling for uniﬁcation of the Arab
world, a call also expressed in terms of projects for linguistic uniﬁcation.
The common written, or literary, or standard, language (al-ʿarabiyya al-fus˙h˙ a¯)
was celebrated as the main cultural link and expression of Arab identity,
while the various spoken varieties were largely considered factors of disin-
tegration and division among the Arabs. The cultural establishment had
traditionally called for the spread of fus˙h˙ a¯ into the domains of spoken
language, and many shared the belief that with the spread of education,
the standard variety would indeed replace the vernaculars as the common
spoken language in the not too distant future (Blanc’s informants typically
reckoned another ﬁfty years).
Others seemed to realize that this goal was futile (or at least overly
optimistic), and that, rather than fus˙h˙ a¯ taking over spoken domains,
a development towards rapprochement between the two varieties in the
usage of educated Arabs was in fact under way. On the one hand, a relaxed
style of the standard, leaving out the inﬂectional endings, was becoming
acceptable in oral realization – in formal speech, and also, but less so, in
reading aloud. On the other hand, the vernacular would become ‘elevated’
through the use of standard lexical items and avoidance of certain ‘low’
colloquial features. Based in Beirut in the early 1930s, Jean Lecerf, report-
ing on language and education in Beirut and Damascus, observes that ‘[l]a
fusion de la langue classique et de la langue vulgaire est donc en train de se
faire sous forme d´une sorte de koine´’ (Lecerf 1932–34: 131).3
According to Altoma, in 1960 the prominent Egyptian linguist Ibra¯hı¯m
Anı¯s published Mustaqbal al-lugha al-ʿarabiyya al-mushtarak (The shared
future of the Arabic language), in which he promotes the language of
educated Egyptians as the possible future language for all Arab countries,
due to its prestige and wide usage in cultural productions (Altoma 1970:
692). Wilson B. Bishai refers to ‘the emergence in the Arab world of what
3 That is, an ongoing merger of the classical and colloquial language into a kind of koiné .
9 What Is Formal Spoken Arabic?
201

may be called “A Modern Inter-Arabic Language” . . . used in various inter-
Arab meetings’ (Bishai 1966: 320). Abdel-Massih similarly speaks of ‘the
emergence of a new linguistic phenomenon in the Arab World, namely
that of “Elevated Educated Arabic”, al-lahaja¯t al-ʿarabiyya al-ra¯qı¯ya’, also
referred to as ‘Educated Spoken Arabic’, ʿa¯mmiyyat al-muthaqqafı¯n’, ‘The
Middle Language’, ʿal-lugha al-wust
˙
a¯, which is the common language of
educated Arabs all over the Arab World.’ (Abdel-Massih 1975: ix). He then
introduces the term Pan-Arabic for the common language for communica-
tion and mutual understanding, which is a ‘mixture of “Modern Literary
Arabic” and the “Elevated Educated Dialect”’.
9.4
FSA/ESA as an Intermediate Register
Normally credited as the ﬁrst full-length study in Arabic on the Arabic
language continuum is El-Said M. Badawi’s Mustawaya¯t al-lugha al-ʿarabiyya
al-muʿa¯s˙ira fı¯ mis˙r (1973). Badawi has a reference to Blanc, but his study has
a national Egyptian focus, i.e., with no koineization involved. He rather
distinguishes more levels based on social and educational factors:
ʿa¯mmiyyat al-ʿummiyyı¯n is the spoken language of the illiterate, ʿa¯mmiyyat al-
mutanawwirı¯n
the
language
of
the
literate,
whereas
ʿa¯mmiyyat
al-
muthaqqafı¯n is a register used by the highly educated among themselves
and for intellectual purposes (and which Badawi himself apparently refers
to in English as ‘Educated Spoken Arabic’; Badawi 1985). In Badawi’s
representation, or model, the levels are deﬁned with reference to ‘more
or less’ of educated and standard variants, and the ESA level (ʿa¯mmiyyat al-
muthaqqafı¯n) as a middle level, the highest level before one gets into the two
fus˙h˙ a¯ levels (contemporary/modern and classical/heritage), is characterized
as a way of speaking where standard and vernacular features are rather
evenly distributed.4 Signiﬁcantly, Badawi emphasizes that the levels are
gradual, and not discrete – comparing them to the colours of the rainbow
gradually shading into the next.
As mentioned in the Introduction, the Educated Spoken Arabic project
was a comprehensive research project based on large recorded corpus (for
the time) by T. F. Mitchell and his colleagues at Leeds University in the late
1970s and 1980s (e.g., Mitchell 1978, 1986; El-Hassan 1978). ESA was con-
ceived as a cross-regional koineized form of language, with some regional
variation: ‘It is the interplay between written Arabic and vernacular
Arabic(s) that creates and maintains Educated Spoken Arabic’ (Mitchell
1986: 8).5 ‘Educated speech within and across borders feeds off the written
language
and
helps
toward
the
creation
and
maintenance
of
4 I have suggested that when Badawi calls the medium level ʿaˉmmiyya, verbal morphology appears to be crucial (Mejdell
2006: 53).
5 In an early paper, he has ‘the interplay in everyday speech’ (Mitchell 1975: 70–1, my italics).
2 0 2
G U N V O R M E J D E L L

a supraregional standard’ (ibid.). ESA is a ‘mixed’ variety, coexisting with
the written CA/MSA and the vernacular ‘within a particular Arab country,
and, what is more, not only the written CA/MSA but also the spoken mixed
ESA are in use across national boundaries, with speakers “modifying” their
speech in the interests of mutual intelligibility’ (ibid.: 9).
Obviously, Mitchell, writing thirty years ago, regards ESA as a spoken
standard variety in the making, to align with the written standard shared by
all Arab states. The Leeds project aims at deﬁning the ‘lexicogrammatical
regularities’ of ESA (Mitchell 1986: 9) while incorporating the regional
differences, which are, however, ‘readily intelligible to all’ (ibid.: 10).
Mitchell’s contributions are sophisticated attempts to make detailed sys-
tematic sense of the complicated stylistic ﬂuctuation found in ESA
speech.6
There are some apparent contradictions in Mitchell’s perception of ESA.
On the one hand, he programmatically states: ‘We do not see it [ESA] as one
of a series of separate varieties, on a par with MSA and the vernaculars, but
rather as created and maintained by the constant interplay of written and
vernacular Arabic’ (1986, 12–13). On the other hand, he categorically
states, rather decides, that certain items or features simply are not part of
ESA: they are either ‘stigmatized’ as too ‘low’ (dialectal) or they are too
‘high ﬂown’ to be included (such as standard variants of negative markers),
even though they are often found to occur in formal speech, typically with
other standard markers – used for pragmatic and/or stylistic functions.7
The problem here lies in deﬁning boundaries for spoken entities that do
not know discrete boundaries, only tendencies, frequencies of occurrence
of variants. Another obvious problem is that the data from which the
‘regularities’ are sought are often far from homogeneous. Thus, Gustav
Meiseles (1980: 119) points to inconsistency with regard to the standard
‘negative particles and formations’, which are reported as ESA in El-
Hassan’s article from the Leeds project, but rejected by Mitchell (as
above), and which Meiseles claims belong to different varieties (ibid.).
However, even a single speech act may represent a range of styles, even
in the space of a discursive situation, or speech act. As Blanc warned us:
It cannot be emphasized too strongly that, once one gets beyond home-
spun conversation in relaxed colloquial within a single dialect, it is the
exception rather than the rule to ﬁnd any sustained segment of discourse
in a single one of the style varieties alluded to. Speakers tend to pass from
one to the other, sometimes within a single sentence, so that over-all
stylistic characterization of a given segment of discourse is a complex
and delicate matter.
(Blanc 1960: 85)
6 The cross-dialectal analyses of restricted linguistic features across dialects are perhaps the most important lasting
contributions, such as on the use of participles (Mitchell 1978) and on modality, mood, and aspect (Mitchell and El-
Hassan 1994).
7 Such functions are not always readily explained, but typically laysa has been found in contrastive effect to mish (Mejdell
2006, 277–8).
9 What Is Formal Spoken Arabic?
203

9.5
Formal Spoken Arabic in the Maghreb
Among North African scholars, the issue of intermediate forms of the
language
have
also
long
been
noted.
Linguist
and
dialectologist
Abderrahim Youssi (1983, 1995) presents the Moroccan linguistic land-
scape in the 1990s as one of dynamic synchrony with ‘triglossia’ as well
as bi- or trilingualism. Youssi’s triglossia refers to three Arabic varieties:
1. the spoken, regionally quite well marked continua of vernacular
Moroccan Arabic (MA)
2. ‘educated’, exclusively spoken, Middle Moroccan Arabic (MMA) used
between strangers for formal, ofﬁcial purposes
3. basically written, Literary Arabic (LA).
‘Resulting basically from the “mixing” of aspects of the phonic and the
grammatical structures of both the literal variety and the vernacular, the
middle variety is by the same token distinct from both’ (Youssi 1995: 35, my
italics).
Youssi gives some clues to what characterizes MMA: the phonology ‘is
basically that of the vernacular’ (with some exceptions); for morphosyn-
tactic features ‘almost all the afﬁxed grammatical morphemes . . . are of
vernacular origin’, while ‘the free morphemes, as members of virtually all
the grammatical categories . . . tend to be of LA origin after undergoing the
necessary morphophonemic “nativization” transformations’ (1995: 36–7).
Youssi recognizes that ‘the kind of “gradation” in the continuum between
the maximally opposed positions of LA and MA can be relatively diversi-
ﬁed’ (ibid.), but maintains that MMA (the middle variety) ‘remains distinct
by opposition to both MA and LA’ (ibid.).
To Youssi, the educational and social needs of a largely illiterate popula-
tion, at a time when there is ‘signiﬁcant progress in the educational system’,
should promote a convergence of the low and middle varieties. ‘MMA
[Middle Moroccan Arabic] is now part of the repertoires of children and
adolescents who have been exposed to it as a component of oral practices in
the classroom. They have, more particularly, “grown up with it” in the
media, and they have been observed to shift to it with extraordinary ease
and spontaneity in the appropriate formal settings’ (1995: 40).
9.6
Formal Spoken Arabic as Codeswitching
In 2006, Naima Boussofara-Omar published an article in Zeitschrift fu¨r
arabische Linguistik, under the title: ‘Neither Third Language nor Middle
Varieties but Diglossic Switching’. Here, as well as in her EALL entry on
Diglossia (Boussofara-Omar 2006b), she confronts the ‘fuzziness and ﬂuid-
ity’ of the various descriptions of ESA and FSA and intermediate levels,
whatever their labels, and ‘their failure to articulate their description in
2 0 4
G U N V O R M E J D E L L

a coherent manner or to relate these sets of practices to a theoretical
linguistic model that can account for them’ (2006b: 631). She quotes
Dilworth Parkinson (2003: 29) as to ‘[e]veryone claims to believe that
Educated Spoken Arabic is rule-governed, but none seems to be able to
come up with the rules. Part of the reason for this may be, of course, that
Educated Spoken Arabic may not actually be anything’, that is, as an entity,
or variety in its own right and with its own rules, but rather an unstable
product of variety mixing.
Boussofara-Omar suggests that theories and methodology developed
for cases of codeswitching offer an adequate framework for handling
these intermediate forms of Arabic, that ‘the alternating use of fus˙h˙ a¯
and dialect falls within the scope of structural constraints on codeswitch-
ing’, and thus accounts for the non-randomness of mixing. Treating the
vernacular variety as the ‘matrix’ (basic) language which provides the
syntactic frame and the ‘system’ (grammatical) morphemes, while the
standard variety provides ‘content’ morphemes ‘embedded’ into the
matrix frame,8 very much lines up with the approach of the ‘Dominant
Language Hypothesis’ and its asymmetry of grammatical and lexical
items (see Section 9.7).
As the dominant codeswitching models were initially designed for
bilingual language contact, however, they do not ﬁt seamlessly with
the Arabic standard and vernacular variety-mixing data. The problem
encountered with applying such a model to intermediate forms of
Arabic is that in ‘diglossic switching’ data, system (grammatical) mor-
phemes from both varieties often are found to co-occur (Boussofara-
Omar 2006a, 2006b; Bassiouney 2006). Mejdell (2011–12) suggests that
the codeswitching category of ‘congruent lexicalization’ (as developed
by Muysken 2000) applies to cases with a high degree of structural
congruence and homophonous words between the language pairs
(including diglossia), and provides a bridge between code-mixing and
style shifting.
9.7
Constraints on Mixing: Asymmetry and Style Markers
Boussofara-Omar also follows up Parkinson’s call to seriously consider
native speakers’ and users’ ‘perceptions, judgment and rating of what
constitutes Classical Arabic, Modern Standard Arabic, the dialect, and
switching patterns’. For linguistic analysis one crucial issue is: ‘do the
phonological, morphological, syntactic, or lexical “ﬂags” play the same
or differential roles?’ (2006b: 633).
In my investigation of extemporaneous speech in the genre ‘panel pre-
sentations’ (Mejdell 2006), I compare inter-speaker usage levels of some
8 Terms and model associated largely with the work of Carolyn Myers-Scotton.
9 What Is Formal Spoken Arabic?
205

high-frequency grammatical variables with clearly distinctive Egyptian
Arabic (EA) and MSA variants: complementizers, demonstratives, negative
markers, relative markers, and pronoun sufﬁxation, and seek to uncover
patterns of distribution, such as constraints on mixing and collocational
constraints. The counts show that speakers have quite different ratios/
usage levels, among themselves as well as among the variables. I also
found that the distribution of variants varied to a large extent: some
alternated between sequences with (mostly) MSA variants and others
with (mostly) EA variants, demonstrating a codeswitching kind of pattern,
while other speakers had variants from both MSA and EA more evenly
sprinkled throughout their discourse. I had to conclude that there is no
evidence of a stabilized style for this genre. However, from comparing the
frequency counts, I found that the speakers had nearly the same hierarchy of
preference for MSA and EA features. The highest usage level of MSA variants
was for the attributive demonstrative, followed by the negative markers,
then the relative marker and/or the complementizer, whereas the lowest
usage level for MSA variants – and thus the highest usage level for EA
variants – was pronoun sufﬁxation. Signiﬁcantly, the same relative order-
ing of the variables has been found in other empirical studies of FSA
(monologues) (Bassiouney 2006; Schulz 1981). I attempt to account for
this patterning (Mejdell 2006: 388–9) with reference to factors such as
syntactic equivalence, relative complexity of constructions, perceptual
salience, and stylistic value; the processes, however, are complex and rather
elusive.
Constraints on the way MSA and vernacular features and items may
combine in natural, or at least extemporaneous, speech, have been noted
by Palva (1969), Schmidt (1974), Schulz (1981), Mitchell (1986), Eid (e.g.,
1988), Holes (1995), and, more recently, Bassiouney (2006) and myself
(Mejdell 2006). The constraints have been formulated in various ways
and frameworks, but all point to the psycholinguistic asymmetry in the
relation between the (superposed) standard and the vernacular mother
tongue.9 In short, the universal principle states that in word-internal
mixing, dominant-language (= ﬁrst language) grammatical items may
combine with both dominant-language and non-dominant-language lex-
ical items, while non-dominant-language grammatical items may only
combine with non-dominant-language lexical items.10
For Arabic, this principle means that SA lexical items may co-occur with
SA grammatical morphemes as well as dialectal grammatical morphemes,
while dialectal/vernacular lexical items will only have dialectal grammati-
cal morphemes, and will not occur with SA grammatical morphemes. As
Schmidt’s iconic example goes (his ‘stem’ = lexical item; ‘sufﬁx’ = gram-
matical morpheme; * = does not occur):
9 For a fuller treatment of this issue, see Mejdell (2006: 62–7, 390–3).
10 This has been formulated by J. Petersen as ‘The Dominant Language Hypothesis’ (1988).
2 0 6
G U N V O R M E J D E L L

Stem
+
sufﬁx
‘eye’
+
Dual
‘two eyes’
ʿayn
+
-ayn
ʿaynayn (SA + SA)
ʿin
+
-e¯n
ʿine¯n (EA + EA)
ʿayn
+
-e¯n
ʿayne¯n (SA + EA)
ʿin
+
-ayn
*ʿinayn (*EA + SA)
While this constraint seems to operate on word-internal mixing, the ques-
tion is: how well does it apply to mixing or shifting between word forms?
Mitchell made the assumption that ‘collocational constraints’ operate
between his stylistic variables, but in fact, collocational constraints seem
to operate only on some parts of the system; the data shows that ‘code
variants of different variable features often do not covary in a certain
stretch of speech, i.e. will often not belong to the same ‘stylistic’ category’
(Mejdell 2006: 50).
Mushira Eid (1982, 1988) examines switching between SA and EA in four
syntactic constructions: relative clause structures, subordinate clauses,
tense and verb constructions, and negative and verb constructions. She
ﬁnds that if the constituents that mark each structure (relative marker,
complementizer, future marker, and negative marker) are SA, ‘the element
immediately following that focal point must also be SA’ (1988: 61). If,
however, the focal point is EA, ‘switching was found to be permitted after
all focal points, except after the negative’ (ibid.). This exception is explained
by the incongruity of the tense + negative marking between the SA and the
EA grammars.11 The general pattern of asymmetric conditioning (in Eid’s
model ‘the directionality constraint’) ‘may be related to the manner of
acquisition . . . which variety was natively, and which was non-natively
learned’ (Eid 1988: 75). My data has similar distributional patterns: EA
grammatical words and markers combine easily with variants of both
varieties, while only SA verbal forms occur after SA relative markers,
demonstratives, complementizers, and negation markers (Mejdell 2006).
9.8
Formal Spoken Arabic as a Pedagogical Construct
Karin Ryding’s Formal Spoken Arabic: Basic Course (Ryding 1990) presents
a constructed, simpliﬁed, intermediate variety for pedagogical purposes.
As a textbook, it explicitly makes some empirically representative, but
intuitively based, ‘arbitrary choices’ between standard and vernacular
(Levantine and/or Cairene) variants of items and features. For instance,
while verbal morphology is mostly based on the standard system, pronoun
sufﬁxes follow the vernacular pattern. High-frequency lexical words and
function words such as adverbs and question words are taken from the
11 SA verbal forms combined with EA negation markers do occur, e.g., ma-yatakallam-shi (Bassiouney 2006: 90).
9 What Is Formal Spoken Arabic?
207

vernacular, and mish and illi are chosen as the negative and relative marker,
respectively. Of course, it represents a homogenized variety far from the
heterogeneity of real-life mixed spoken Arabic, but obviously serves its
practical educational target.
Several contributions concerned with deﬁning or describing Educated
Arabic or Educated Spoken Arabic similarly have explicit pedagogical
goals: how to teach non-Arab students proﬁciency in both speaking and
reading Arabic in a realistic way, i.e., the way native speakers do (e.g., Alosh
1997; Ferghaly 2005; Taha 2007). Ferghaly intends to establish elements of
a ‘core grammar’ for ‘Inter-Arabic’ by pointing out many of the well-known
typological similarities between standard and the vernaculars, claiming
that we are dealing with essentially one grammatical system, but he avoids
mention of important differences in e.g., the systems of negation and the
modal distinctions (‘the structural gap hard to cross’ Palva 1969). Alosh
maintains that ‘so-called Educated Spoken Arabic’ (1997: 109) is not so
much an entity in itself as a situational strategy used by Arabic speakers
‘inﬂuenced by contextual, experiential, and personal factors’ (1997: 110,
quoted by Ryding 2006: 669). Ferghaly refers to the same contribution:
‘Alosh (1997) conducted a very important analysis of 20 half-hour recorded
interviews in a formal situation with educated Arab speakers from differ-
ent Arab countries [who] were asked to speak in MSA. [The analysis]
showed a great deal of variability both among speakers and within the
speech of individual speakers’ (Ferghaly 2005: 46).
9.9
In Conclusion: What Is Formal Spoken Arabic?
In 1986, that is, more than thirty years ago, T. F. Mitchell published his
article ‘What Is Educated Spoken Arabic?’ Has Arabic (socio)linguistics
today arrived at a better understanding of and/or better descriptive
model for formal spoken Arabic than the early scholars who waded into
the sea of ‘intermediate forms of the language’ to explore it?
I think it is fair to say that with all the studies referred to in this
chapter (and dozens of other contributions as well), the exploration of
mixed and intermediate forms of the language from various angles
and approaches, the student of Arabic, native or non-native, is able to
grasp the essential properties of what is covered by this concept. There
are remarkable similarities in observed features and the way con-
straints on mixing operate across regional dialects, while precise deﬁ-
nitions of what is ‘in’ and what is not ‘in’ appear rather elusive:
Formal Spoken Arabic is and remains a diffuse register, style, or way
of speaking, with considerable variability and a wide range of accept-
ability – which soothes the pains of native speakers’ ‘language anxi-
ety’, the fear or horror of linguistic incorrectness associated with
trying to speak MSA.
2 0 8
G U N V O R M E J D E L L

Attempts to formalize FSA, however, appear less in focus today: the
current view of open, complex, contextually variable language systems
has probably made it less imperative to operate with distinctive classiﬁca-
tions and categories, and attention is increasingly turned towards lan-
guage as social practice, and styles and registers as ‘sets of practices’
(Walters 2003).
What about the present and future of FSA (however variable) as a Pan-
Arabic, or inter-Arabic, spoken koine´? Has FSA converged to become
a shared spoken variety for communication across the regional vernacu-
lars (such as MSA is for writing), as foreseen by several contributions thirty
or forty years ago? To Ibrahim (1986: 120) the ‘superdialectal variety’, an
‘inter-regional standard L’, could even be imagined to ‘eventually merge
with’ the superdialectal standard H ‘into one [Arabic] language’.
My impression is that what we are witnessing more recently in inter-Arab
spoken communication (such as discussion programmes on Al Jazeera and
other satellite media) is that speakers tend to maintain regional (but not
very localized) features in elevated registers of their vernacular, including
some vernacular/standard mixing – rather than converging towards some
common, cross-regional, Pan-Arabic norm. This trend (if correct) should be
seen in light of the emergence of regional (in some places, such as Egypt,
perhaps national) urban spoken standards. The uneven processes of (infor-
mal) standardization of Arabic urban vernaculars in both Mashreq and
Maghreb are carefully discussed by Miller (2007).12 Cairene appears to be
the most advanced and established case in the Arab world, while Walters
claims that ‘there is certainly a kind of national prestige variety of spoken
Arabic emerging in Tunisia, based on the dialect of Tunis, although the
extent of its scope is unstudied’ (Walters 2003: 102), while also pointing to
‘the range of varieties, practices, and uses associated with Arabic in
Tunisia’, including ‘new class-marked varieties of the dialect’ (ibid.: 101).
Time and global culture, however, also seem to work in favour of the
vernacular. The ‘High’ language is to some extent losing its grip on the new
generations. It continues to have status and prestige as the language of
religion, and invokes pride as the language of a great Arab culture and past
civilization. But more informality in social interaction – as part of a global
trend – ﬁnds its linguistic expression in the use of the vernacular as a non-
stigmatized norm. Young people today tend to valorize informal, ‘cool’
ways of speaking and interacting among themselves, but less formal styles
are also used and accepted in spoken domains of a public nature. The
audiovisual media seem to be a main scene for these practices. Popular
inter-Arabic media outlets, such as Arab Idol and other super-shows, where
national competition is part of the game, tend more and more to have
participants represent their regional speech in performance, although
some levelling devices may be put to work in order to facilitate
12 Palva (1982) remains the ‘classic’ introduction to the processes of koineization and dialect levelling in modern Arabic.
9 What Is Formal Spoken Arabic?
209

understanding. For instance, where artists from North Africa or the Gulf
formerly tended to shift to Lebanese or Egyptian Arabic in their songs,
there is now a trend to sing in Moroccan, Tunisian, and khalı¯ji varieties, or
to mix texts (and genres) from various regions – as a way of promoting and
playing on national identities in a Pan-Arab context. One case in point is
Samı¯ra Saʿı¯d from Rabat, who started her singing career in her mother
tongue, but became famous for songs in Egyptian, and who spoke ﬂuent
Egyptian in interviews; however, in the last few years she has gone back to
singing in Moroccan da¯rija, and Moroccan artists performing in da¯rija were
the most popular in the Arab world in 2015 and 2016.13
If this trend continues and young people are regularly exposed to spo-
ken varieties from all over the Arab world, it seems natural that it will
promote mutual understanding among speakers of various regional dia-
lects, and rather than converging towards a shared spoken variety, we may
witness a multiple and culturally rich diversity in expression, communica-
tion across regions (something like the situation in Scandinavia, where
speakers of Danish, Swedish, and Norwegian communicate using their
own national varieties which are [mostly] mutually understood).
Certainly, FSA as a formal spoken register will also persist as part of the
complex web of practices, of the total linguistic repertoire – regionally and
across regions. Vernacular, as well as mixed, styles are also increasingly
being committed to writing (see contributions in Høigilt and Mejdell 2017).
Madiha Doss noted more than a decade ago that the mixed variety ‘which
has usually been linked to oral rather than written production, now also
can be observed in writing (in magazines and in electronic media)’ (Doss
2004: 61). More recent studies on internet usage (blogs and comments), but
also other cultural products, conﬁrm the trend towards extensive linguis-
tic variation (‘heteroglossia’) in writing: unmonitored written language
production comes in fus˙h˙ a¯, in plain vernacular, and in mixed styles, all
according to the writer’s preference, goal, and intended readership (e.g.,
Pepe 2014 and Høigilt 2017 for Egypt; Miller 2017 and Caubet 2017 for
Morocco).
References
Abdel-Massih, E. T. (1975). A Sample Lexicon of Pan-Arabic. Ann Arbor, MI: Center
for Near Eastern and North African Studies, University of Michigan.
Al-Boukry, H. (2016). Moroccan Darija’s Status in Pan-Arab Pop Culture. Student
master term paper, Department of Culture Studies and Oriental
Languages, University of Oslo.
13 Hanan al-Boukry 2016, citing sources as Arabsounds and YouTube. Hanan, who is Moroccan, also writes: ‘When I was
younger, I didn´t believe my mother when she told me that Samira Said is from Morocco’. Cf. also Hachimi (2016), on
blacklisted Moroccan artists.
2 1 0
G U N V O R M E J D E L L

Alosh, M. (1997). Learner, Text and Context in Foreign Language Acquisition: An
Arabic Perspective. Columbus, OH: Foreign Language Publications Ofﬁce.
Altoma, S. J. (1970). Language education in Arab countries and the role of
the academies. In T. A. Sebeok, ed., Current Trends in Linguistics 6. The
Hague: Mouton, 690–720.
Badawi, E. M. (1973). Mustawaya¯t al-lugha al-muʿa¯s˙ira fı¯ mis˙r [Levels of con-
temporary language in Egypt]. Cairo: Da¯r al-maʿa¯rif.
Badawi, E. M. (1985). Educated Spoken Arabic: A problem in teaching
Arabic as a foreign language. In K. R. Jankowsky, ed., Scientiﬁc and
Humanistic
Dimensions
of
Language.
Washington,
DC:
Georgetown
University Press, 15–22.
Bassiouney, R. (2006). Functions of Code Switching in Egypt. Leiden: Brill.
Bishai, W. B. (1966). Modern Inter-Arabic. Journal of the American Oriental
Society, 86, 319–23.
Blanc, H. (1960). Style variations in spoken Arabic: A sample of interdia-
lectal educated conversation. In C. A. Ferguson, ed., Contributions to Arabic
Linguistics. Middle Eastern Monograph Series III. Cambridge, MA: Harvard
University Press, 79–161.
Boussofara-Omar, N. (2006a). Neither third language nor middle varieties
but diglossic switching. Zeitschrift fu¨r arabische Linguistik, 45, 55–80.
Boussofara-Omar, N. (2006b). Diglossia. In K. Versteegh et al. eds.,
Encyclopedia of Arabic Language and Linguistics, vol. I, 629–37.
Caubet, D. (2017). Morocco: An informal passage to L=literacy in da¯rija
(Moroccan Arabic). In J. Høigilt and G. Mejdell, eds., The Politics of
Written Language in the Arab World: Writing Change. Leiden: Brill (Open
Access), 116–41.
Doss, M. (2004). Cultural dynamics and linguistic practice in contemporary
Egypt. In A. Abdelrahim et al., eds., Cultural Dynamics in Contemporary
Egypt. Cairo Papers in Social Science 27, 1&2, 51–68.
Eid, M. (1982). The non-randomness of diglossic variation in Arabic. Glossa,
16(1), 54–84.
Eid, M. (1988). Principles for codeswitching between standard and
Egyptian Arabic. Al-ʿArabiyya, 21, 51–79.
El-Hassan, S. A. (1978). Educated Spoken Arabic in Egypt and the Levant:
A critical review of diglossia and related concepts. Archivum Linguisticum,
8, 112–32.
Ferghaly, A. (2005). A case for an inter-Arabic grammar. In A. Elgibali, ed.,
Investigating Arabic: Current Parameters in Analysis and Learning. Leiden:
Brill, 29–49.
Ferguson, C. A. (1959). Diglossia. Word, 15, 325–40.
Hachimi, A. (2016). Moroccan artists ‘blacklisted’: Dialect loyalty and gen-
dered national identity in an age of digital discourse. In S. Davies and
U. Soltan, eds., Perspectives on Arabic Linguistics XXVII. Papers from the Annual
Symposium on Arabic Linguistics, Bloomington, Indiana, (2013). Amsterdam:
John Benjamins, 123–50.
9 What Is Formal Spoken Arabic?
211

Hallberg, A. (2016). Case Endings in Spoken Standard Arabic. (Studia Orientalia
Lundensia. Nova Series.) Lund: Lund University Press. lup.lub.lu.se
/search/publication/8524489.
Harrell, R. (1960). A linguistic analysis of Egyptian Radio Arabic. In
C. A. Ferguson, ed., Contributions to Arabic Linguistics, Harvard Middle Eastern
monographs 3, Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 3–77.
Holes, C. (1995). Modern Arabic: Structures, Functions and Varieties. London:
Longman. [New edition, Georgetown University Press (2004).]
Høigilt, J. (2017). Dialect with an attitude: Language and criticism in new
Egyptian print media. In Høigilt, J. and Mejdell, G., eds., The Politics of
Written Language in the Arab World: Writing Change. Leiden: Brill (Open
Access), 166–89.
Høigilt, J. and Mejdell, G. (eds.) (2017). The Politics of Written Language in the
Arab World: Writing Change. Leiden/Boston: Brill (Open Access).
Ibrahim, M. H. (1986). Standard and prestige language: A problem in Arabic
sociolinguistics. Anthropological Linguistics, 28(1), 115–26.
Lecerf, J. (1932–34). Litte´rature dialectale et Renaissance arabe moderne. Paris:
Bulletin de l´Institut Franc¸ais de Damas.
Mazraani, N. (1997). Aspects of Language Variation in Arabic Political Speech-
Making. Surrey, UK: Curzon.
Mehall, D. (1999). The Verb Morphology of Unscripted Oral Media Arabic. PhD
dissertation, Georgetown University. (Thesis # 7597 at UMI Dissertation
Services.)
Meiseles, G. (1980). Educated Spoken Arabic and the Arabic language
continuum. Archivum Linguisticum, XI(2), 118–43.
Mejdell, G. (2006). Mixed Styles in Spoken Arabic in Egypt. Somewhere between
Order and Chaos. Leiden: Brill.
Mejdell, G. (2011). Lugha wust
˙
a¯. In E. Lutz and R. de Jon, eds., Encyclopedia of
Arabic Language and Linguistics. Online edition.
Mejdell, G. (2011–2012), Diglossia, code switching, style variation, and
congruence. Notions for analyzing mixed Arabic. Al-ʿArabiyya, 44/45,
29–39.
Miller, C. (2007). Arabic urban vernaculars. Development and change. In
C. Miller, E. Al-Wer, D. Caubet, and J. C. E. Watson, eds., Arabic in the City.
Issues in Dialect Contact and Language Variation. London: Routledge, 1–31.
Miller, C. (2017). Contemporary da¯rija writings in Morocco. In J. Høigilt and
G. Mejdell, eds., The Politics of Written Language in the Arab World. Writing
Change, Leiden: Brill (Open Access), 90–115.
Mitchell, T. F. (1975). Some preliminary observations on the Arabic koine.
British Society for Middle East Studies Bulletin, 2(2), 70–86.
Mitchell, T. F. (1978). Educated Spoken Arabic in Egypt and the Levant,
with special reference to participle and tense. Journal of Linguistics, 14(2),
227–58 .
Mitchell, T. F. (1986). What is educated spoken Arabic? International Journal
of the Sociology of Language, 61, 7–32.
2 1 2
G U N V O R M E J D E L L

Mitchell, T. F. and El-Hassan, S. A. (1994). Modality, Mood and Aspect in Spoken
Arabic – with Special Reference to Egypt and the Levant. London: Keagan Paul
International.
Muysken, P. (2000). Bilingual Speech: A Typology of Code-Mixing. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
Palva. H. (1969). Notes on Classicization in modern colloquial Arabic. Studia
Orientalia, XL:3, Helsinki.
Palva, H. (1982). Patterns of koineization in modern colloquial Arabic. Acta
Orientalia, 43, 13–32.
Parkinson, D. (2003). Verbal features in oral fus˙h˙ a¯ in Cairo. International
Journal of the Sociology of Language, 163, 126–66.
Pepe, T. (2014). Blogging from Egypt: Digital Literature, 2005–2016. Edinburgh:
Edinburgh University Press.
Petersen, J. (1988). Word-internal code-switching constraints in a bilingual
child’s grammar. Linguistics, 26, 479–93.
Ryding, K. C. (1990). Formal Spoken Arabic: Basic Course. Washington, DC:
Georgetown University Press.
Ryding, K. C. (2006). Educated Arabic. In K. Versteegh et al., eds.,
Encyclopedia of Arabic Language and Linguistics, vol. I. Leiden: Brill, 666–71.
Schmidt, R. W. (1974). Sociostylistic Variation in Spoken Egyptian Arabic: A Re-
examination of the Concept of Diglossia. PhD thesis, Brown University.
Schulz, D. E. (1981). Diglossia and Variation in Formal Spoken Arabic in Egypt.
PhD thesis, University of Wisconsin at Madison.
Skogseth, G. (2000). Egyptian Radio Arabic: A Phonological Analysis of the
Language in EBA News Broadcasts. Master’s thesis, Oslo: Department of
East European and Oriental Studies, University of Oslo.
Taha, Z. A. (2007). Educated Spoken Arabic: How could it help in redeﬁning
the ACTFL guidelines? Al-ʿArabiyya, 41/42, 104–14.
Walters, K. (2003). Fergie’s prescience: The changing nature of diglossia in
Tunisia. International Journal of the Sociology of Language, 163, 77–109.
Youssi, A. (1983). La triglossie dans la typologie linguistique. La Linguistique,
19(2), 71–83.
Youssi, A. (1995). The Moroccan triglossia: Facts and implications.
International Journal of the Sociology of Language, 112, 29–44.
9 What Is Formal Spoken Arabic?
213

10
Arabic Dialectology
Stephan Procházka
10.1
Introduction
The various Arabic dialects are the ﬁrst language (L1) of nearly 300 million
people,1 which makes Arabic by far the chief representative of the Afro-
Asiatic language family. Because the Arab world is dialectally fragmented
as few other speech areas are, Arabic dialectology is a fertile ﬁeld for
research in its own right. Moreover, because the spoken dialects play a
key role in understanding the diachronic development of Arabic, dialec-
tology is the basis for any serious research in Arabic historical linguistics.
Arabic dialectology also provides valuable data for many other disciplines,
particularly sociolinguistics, language contact, and social anthropology.
10.2
Scope and Aims
Because Modern Standard Arabic (MSA) is restricted to the formal register
and hardly ever used in everyday conversation, Arabic dialectology deals
with spoken varieties of Arabic in practically all domains – from intra-
familial conversation in a local village dialect to the elevated supra-regio-
nal prestige variety used in talk shows on satellite channels. Its research
covers practically every linguistic production in all varieties of the so-
called neo-Arabic language type (see Section 10.6), i.e., what is labelled by
Arabic speakers as ʿa¯mmiyya, da¯rigˇa, or, less frequently, lahgˇa. In a stricter
sense, Arabic dialectology focuses on diatopic and diachronic research ques-
tions. Thus, it deals with regional variation on both synchronic (dialect
geography) and diachronic (language change) levels. The latter considers
the development and spread of internal or contact-induced innovations.
Both synchronic and diachronic approaches have to take into account
1 Ethnologue www.ethnologue.com/language/ara.

extra-linguistic circumstances, particularly history, migration, and geogra-
phical, political, and religious boundaries. The diachronic ﬁndings of
Arabic dialectology are relevant for the study of universal tendencies in
general, and of comparative Semitics in particular. Other linguistic topics
only recently researched in Arabic are formality, politeness formulae, and
discourse markers, which all may apply to the study of pragmatic
universals.
The methods of Arabic dialectology draw upon those of general linguis-
tics: data is gathered by the recording of conversations and narratives, and
interpretation of the transcribed texts is enriched by information taken
from questionnaires and interviews.
10.3
Research History and the State of the Art
Paradoxically, Arabic dialectology is rarely studied at universities in the
Arab world. This is the consequence of the low prestige in which spoken
Arabic is held in most Arab states, the only exceptions to the academic
antagonism against the dialects being at a few universities in the Maghreb.
However, even there, dialect studies are conducted in departments of
linguistics, not in those otherwise dedicated to Arabic studies. In fact,
Arab authorities often actively oppose dialect ﬁeldwork on the grounds
that dialect studies are useless or are part of imperialistic attempts to
sabotage Arab unity. Thus, in Arab countries interest in dialects is mostly
restricted to what is called ‘folkloristic heritage’ (at-tura¯t¯ asˇ-sˇaˁbı¯), i.e.,
proverbs, songs, and oral poetry. Because of the ease of publishing on the
Internet, an increasing number of amateur websites are dedicated to local
linguistic peculiarities, particularly with regard to the lexicon.
The investigation of Arabic dialects has also been marginal in Arabic
studies in the West. For a long time, only Classical Arabic (CA) was taught
at European universities and it was treated like Latin or ancient Greek –
that is, as a dead language. Dialects were studied only when there became
an urgent need for actual communication with Arabic speakers. The ﬁrst
known book on an Arabic dialect is the Andalusi Arabic–Latin glossary
compiled by Pedro de Alcala´ in 1505. Apart from this special case, and
some word lists for Christian pilgrims to the Holy Land, there was little
European literature on spoken Arabic until the beginning of the colonial
era in the nineteenth century, when a couple of practical guidebooks were
published for tourists, military men, and European housewives with
domestic servants.
Few early scholars recognized that the dialects provide useful data for
comparative Semitic studies. The ﬁrst scholarly description of any Arabic
dialect was by the Hungaro-Austrian diplomat Franz von Dombay, who
published a sketch of the dialect of Tangiers in 1800. A comprehensive
grammar of Cairene Arabic was written by Wilhelm Spitta in 1880.
10 Arabic Dialectology
215

Outstanding ﬁgures in Arabic dialectology during the ﬁrst half of the
twentieth century included the Frenchmen William Marc¸ais and Jean
Cantineau, the authors of numerous works on the Maghrebian and
Levantine dialects. The Swedish aristocrat Carlo de Landberg wrote several
pioneering books on the dialects of Arabia, and the Austrians David H.
Mu¨ ller and Nikolaus Rhodokanakis published on Omani and Yemeni dia-
lects. The Swiss Albert Socin worked in northern Mesopotamia, and the
Germans Hans Stumme and Georg Kampffmeyer in Libya, Tunisia, and
Morocco. Italian scholars like Ettore Rossi and Ester Panetta wrote still-
valuable studies on Yemen and Libya, and the British J. Spencer
Trimingham on Sudan.
In the 1960s, 70s, and 80s several large dictionaries and numerous
monograph studies appeared that provided detailed descriptions of local
dialects, especially on phonology and morphology. In 1992, the increasing
development of Arabic dialectology and its establishment as a recognized
ﬁeld of Arabic studies led to the foundation of the Association Internationale
de Dialectologie Arabe (AIDA) by Dominique Caubet and Martine Vanhove in
collaboration with other leading scholars in the ﬁeld.2 The 1990s brought
further research in hitherto unknown regions and an increasing interest
in sociolinguistic issues.
Because many of its entries deal with spoken Arabic, the Encyclopedia of
Arabic Language and Linguistics (Leiden: Brill, 2006–2009) impressively
demonstrates that Arabic dialectology has succeeded in becoming a ser-
ious branch of Arabic studies. Nevertheless, in both European and North
American universities only a handful of chairs are yet dedicated speciﬁ-
cally to Arabic dialectology.
In fact, publications in Arabic dialectology have been widely ignored by
theory-driven general linguistics. This might be the result of the mainly
descriptive nature that still obtains in many studies in Arabic dialects. The
fact that many of the ﬁeld’s reference works are in French and German
may also have contributed to this ‘academic isolation’. But during the last
two decades the gap between Arabic studies and linguistics has been
narrowed by the adoption of general linguistic theories, terminology,
and standards (e.g., glossing of examples) by more of the scholars working
in Arabic dialectology.
10.3.1
Comparative Studies and General Overviews
Surveys that cover all aspects of all dialects including historical develop-
ments are scarce. Though in many details outdated, the seminal work of
Fischer and Jastrow (1980) is still often cited in dialect studies. More recent
comparative works are Corriente and Vicente (2008) and Durand (2009).
Chapter VI of Weninger (2011) provides excellent overviews of all dialect
2 For a concise history of this association, see Grigore (2016: 5–17).
2 1 6
S T E P H A N P R O C H Á Z K A

groups. Behnstedt and Woidich (2005) focus on dialect geography but
address many other relevant topics. Marc¸ais (1977) offers a comparative
view of all Maghrebian dialects. The ﬁrst attempt at a comprehensive and
historically grounded approach is Holes (2018). Selected diachronic topics
are dealt with in Owens (2006). Arabic dialects are also considered in some
general handbooks on Arabic, particularly Holes (2004) and Versteegh
(2014). Watson (2002) has much information on the phonology and mor-
phology of the dialects.
Several dialect studies deal with comparative syntax and morphology:
Brustad (2000) on selected syntactical issues, Cuvalay-Haak (2011) and
Czapkiewicz (1975) on verbs, Dahlgren (1998) on word order, Eksell
Harning (1980) on the analytic genitive, Fischer (1959) on demonstratives,
Mo¨rth (1997) on numerals, Procha´zka (1993) on prepositions, Retso¨ (1983)
on the ﬁnite passive voice, Retso¨ (2004) on relative clauses, Singer (1958)
and Versteegh (2004) on interrogatives, Taine-Cheikh (2004) on future
tense, Taine-Cheikh (2013) on discourse markers, and Wilmsen (2014) on
indeﬁnites, interrogatives, and negators.
10.3.2
Atlases
Unfortunately, there is much more white than coloured area on the linguis-
tic atlases of Arabic. Pioneer studies are Bergstra¨sser (1915) for Syria-
Palestine and Cantineau (1940–1946) for the Syrian Hawran. Atlases that
cover large areas exist only for North Yemen (Behnstedt 2016a), Syria
(Behnstedt 1997), and Egypt (Behnstedt and Woidich 1985). The latter two
provide information for hundreds of research points on several hundred
maps. Maps for smaller regions and fewer linguistic features are available
for the Hatay province of Turkey (Arnold 1998), Galilee (Behnstedt and Geva-
Kleinberger 2019) and for Sinai (de Jong 2000, 2011). A groundbreaking
publication is the Word Atlas of Arabic Dialects by Behnstedt and Woidich
(2011–2021), which considers all known dialects on about 500 coloured
maps. The topics range from body parts, material culture, and animal and
plant names to verbs, adjectives, adverbs, and numerals. Every map has a
detailed commentary including etymological information.
10.3.3
Dictionaries
The compilation of a comparative dictionary of Arabic dialects has not yet
begun, though the Word Atlas described above would provide the perfect
basis for such an enterprise. Comprehensive dictionaries (or glossaries)
exist for many regions, but they were frequently compiled for practical,
not linguistic, purposes. Few of the many dictionaries from Arabic into
Western languages provide etymological information. Among them is
Holes (2001) for Eastern Arabia, which is exemplary in arrangement and
for its inclusion of phraseology. Piamenta (1990) and Behnstedt (1992–
10 Arabic Dialectology
217

2006) cover the Yemeni dialects. Clarity et al. (2003) is a bidirectional
dictionary of Iraqi Arabic. Barthe´lemy (1935–1954) is still unmatched as
the dictionary for Syrian Arabic. Stowasser and Ani (1964) is useful for
English–Syrian Arabic. Although limited to the peripheral Arabic of
Cyprus, Borg (2004) is a valuable source of comparative data.
Seeger (2017) is a comprehensive dictionary of Palestinian Arabic freely
available as a pdf ﬁle and continuously updated. Halloun (2011) is useful
for English–Palestinian Arabic. The chief reference dictionary of Egyptian
Arabic is Hinds and Badawi (1986). Sudanese and Chadian dialects are
covered by Qa¯sim (2002) and Roth-Laly (1969–1972). The monumental
glossary by Marc¸ais and Guıˆga (1958–1961) provides detailed lexical infor-
mation on a speciﬁc Tunisian village dialect; for the capital Tunis an online
dictionary is available (see Section 10.8). Abundant lexicographical data is
on hand for Moroccan dialects: among the most important publications
are Colin (1993–1994), de Pre´mare (1993–1999),3 and Harrell and
Sobelman (2004). A large but incomplete (up to the letter ʿAyn) dictionary
exists for Mauritania (Taine-Cheikh 1988–1998). The vocabulary of former
Andalusi Arabic is presented in Corriente (1997), which includes valuable
etymological information.
10.3.4
Regional Studies
This section is only an overview of the most comprehensive and recent
studies that can be regarded as reference works for given dialects. Concise
sketches of the dialects for speciﬁc regions or countries, including addi-
tional bibliographical information, can be found in the relevant entries of
the Encyclopedia of Arabic Language and Linguistics (Versteegh et al. 2006–
2009). The only reliable source for many Saudi varieties is still Prochazka
(1988). Najdi Arabic is covered by Ingham (1994). The best study for Eastern
Arabia is Holes (2001). Yemeni dialects are treated in Watson (1993),
Werbeck (2001), and Naı¨m (2009), and Omani dialects in Holes (2008).
Detailed descriptions of the dialects spoken on Sinai are de Jong (2000
and 2011).
For obvious reasons there are few recent studies on Iraqi Arabic: Blanc
(1964), Erwin (1963), and Abu Haidar (1991) remain the most comprehen-
sive, particularly for Baghdadi Arabic. Anatolian Arabic is very well docu-
mented in Jastrow (1978, 1981), Grigore (2007), and Fink (2017).
Several good reference works in Levantine Arabic date back to the
twentieth century: Cowell (1964) and Ambros (1977) (both for Damascus),
Sabuni (1980) (for Aleppo), El-Hajje´ (1954) (Tripoli), Naı¨m-Sanbar (1985)
(Beirut). An indispensable source for the rural dialects of Lebanon is
Fleisch (1974). The Syrian dialects now spoken in Turkish territory are
described in Arnold (1998) and Procha´zka (2002), and Cypriot Arabic in
3 In twelve volumes which are also available as searchable pdf ﬁles.
2 1 8
S T E P H A N P R O C H Á Z K A

Borg (1985). Comprehensive studies of Palestinian Arabic are Durand
(1996), Seeger (2009–2013), Geva-Kleinberger (2004), Henkin (2010), and
Shawarbah (2012). The dynamics of Jordanian Arabic is described in Al-
Wer (2007).
The most detailed grammatical description of the dialect of Cairo is
Woidich
(2006);
Haeri
(1997)
analyses
the
sociolinguistic
setting.
Sudanese Arabic is still under-researched (Reichmuth 1983; Dickins
2007; Manfredi 2012), but much has been done in Chad and Nigeria,
particularly by Jullien de Pommerol (1999) and Owens (1993).
Most reference works concerning Maghrebian dialects focus on the
urban centres: Tripoli (Pereira 2010; Yoda 2005), Tunis (Singer 1984;
Cohen 1964, 1975), Algiers (Boucherit 2002; Cohen 1912), Tlemcen
(Marc¸ais 1902), Fes (Caubet 1993), and Casablanca (Aguade´ 2003; Hachimi
2007; Harrell 1962).4 Heath (2002) provides detailed linguistic information
on numerous Moroccan dialects, and Owens (1984) for Eastern Libya. Ritt-
Benmimoun
(2014)
is
the
most
comprehensive
grammar
of
any
Maghrebian Bedouin-type dialect (Southern Tunisia). The Mauritanian
Bedouin variety is described by Cohen (1963).
There are many studies on Maltese (e.g., Borg and Azzopardi-Alexander
1997; Vanhove 1993). The historical Arabic dialects of the Iberian
Peninsula and Sicily are thoroughly analysed in Corriente (1977, 2013),
and Agius (1996), respectively.
10.3.5
Bibliographies
A regularly updated bibliography on Arabic dialectology is still not avail-
able. Corriente and Vicente (2008: 440–526) and Behnstedt and Woidich
(2014: 695–711) provide comprehensive lists of relevant publications. An
important online (though not free) source is the Index Islamicus, which, in
the section ‘Arabic language: colloquial’, provides more the 4,000 titles
from 1901 to the present. Currently, an open-access database of publica-
tions is published online as part of the VICAV (Vienna Corpus of Arabic
Varieties) project. This bibliography is enriched with geo-information and
has a simple taxonomy to facilitate exploration of the data. Interactive
maps will offer new search possibilities.
10.4
Spread and Distribution of Arabic Dialects
To understand the linguistic history of Arabic it is important to know
when and under what circumstances each region became Arabicized.
Arabia is the heartland of the Arabic language, but large parts of the
Syrian Steppe, including the fertile lands along its edges, had been
4 Casablanca is the main centre of the emerging Moroccan koiné.
10 Arabic Dialectology
219

Arabic-speaking for hundreds of years before the Muslim armies arrived
there in the seventh century. On the peninsula itself many parts of what is
now Yemen and Oman were dominated by South Arabian languages long
after the introduction of Islam, and South Arabian inﬂuences are evident
in the dialects of those regions even today. The Arabicization of Syria and
Mesopotamia was a relatively slow process which included long periods of
Arabic–Aramaic bilingualism: therefore, Aramaic left considerable traces
in the local Arabic dialects, particularly in the lexicon. In Egypt, Coptic
seems to have lost ground rather quickly, leaving surprisingly few sub-
stratum inﬂuences. Arabic spread in North Africa in two waves: in the
wake of the conquests of the seventh/eighth centuries the larger cities and
their immediate environs became Arabic-speaking (Kairouan, Tlemcen,
and Fes), but most rural areas were Arabicized more than three centuries
later by the Banu¯ Hila¯l and other large Bedouin tribes. These two layers of
Arabic5 continue to be reﬂected in the linguistic landscape of North Africa,
which is also inﬂuenced by large Berber-speaking communities, particu-
larly in mountainous areas. The regions most recently Arabicized are
Sudan, Chad, and parts of northern Cameroon and Nigeria (Owens and
Hassan 2009), where the still ongoing process of Arabicization began in the
fourteenth century with the immigration of Arab tribes from Egypt and, at
a later period, Arabia itself. Arabic-based creole languages are spoken in
South Sudan (Juba), Uganda, and Kenya (Manfredi 2014).
Today Arabic dialects are spoken from Oman in the east to Mauritania in
the west, and from Lake Van (Turkey) in the north to Lake Chad in the
south. Though speakers of adjacent dialects can usually understand each
other, dialects situated far apart may be mutually unintelligible.
The areas in which Arabic is spoken do not always conform to the bound-
aries of the Arab states: there are, for example, large Kurdish-speaking areas
in Iraq and Berber-speaking regions in Libya, Algeria, and Morocco. On the
other hand, we ﬁnd Arabic-speaking minorities in Central Africa, Turkey,
Cyprus, Iran, Afghanistan, and Uzbekistan. Maltese is the only Arabic dialect
that has become an ofﬁcial language.
10.5
Classiﬁcation of Arabic Dialects
The traditional classiﬁcation of Arabic dialects, both geographically and
sociologically, largely rests on phonological and, to a lesser degree, mor-
phological criteria. Syntax and lexicon have so far only inadequately been
taken into consideration. Thus, with few exceptions, the boundaries are
still vague and not consistently based on isoglosses. Unfortunately, inno-
vative methods such as dialectometry have as yet been only marginally
applied to Arabic.
5 They are often labelled as pre-Hilaˉli and Hilaˉli-type dialects.
2 2 0
S T E P H A N P R O C H Á Z K A

The distribution of the dialects resembles that of other speech commu-
nities: mountainous areas are usually fragmented into dialects spoken in
adjacent valleys (e.g., in Yemen and Lebanon), whereas in plains or along
large rivers similar dialects often extend over large areas. Along trading routes
and especially in big cities, levelling and mixing of dialects often occurs.
10.5.1
Geographical
The Arabic dialects of the Maghreb, which historically included Muslim
Spain and Sicily, are very different from the dialects of the east, the so-
called Mashreq. The border that separates these two groups extends from
the western edge of the Nile Delta to Lake Chad (see map, Figure 10.1).
With the exception of a transitional zone in the Egyptian oases of the
Western Desert, this border is the sharpest linguistic division in the
Arabic-speaking world. Despite considerable regional and social differ-
ences, all Maghrebian dialects share one morphological feature: the
inﬂection of the 1st persons of the imperfect. The pattern SG n–Ø, PL n–u
is regarded as the shibboleth6 of western Arabic in contrast to the eastern
S G ˀ–Ø, PL n–Ø.7 Another typical Maghrebian feature is the pattern C1C2a¯C3
for verbs denoting colours, in contrast to eastern C1C2aC3C3 (e.g., Tunis
s˙ fa¯r
˙
; Damascus s˙ farr ‘he became pale’), and the widespread resyllabiﬁca-
tion of the noun pattern C1vC2C3 > C1C2vC3, e.g., bah˙ r > bh˙ ar˙ ‘sea’. The
Maghrebian dialects are also distinguished by some special lexical items
(see Section 10.5.3).
The dialects of the Mashreq are traditionally divided into four groups:
the (mostly) archaic dialects of the Arabian Peninsula, the dialects of
Mesopotamia (Iraq and SE Anatolia), the dialects of the Levant (Syria,
Lebanon, Palestine, Jordan), and the dialects of Egypt and the Sudan, the
latter extending west to Chad and Nigeria. These four groups do not have
sharp geographical boundaries because of overlapping and regions with
mixed dialects (e.g., Jordan). Due to Bedouin migration, dialects that actu-
ally
belong
to
the
Arabian
Peninsula
divide
the
Levantine
and
Mesopotamian groups like a wedge, stretching into southern Turkey (see
map, Figure 10.1). With the exception of a few regions for which dialectal
atlases have been published (see Section 10.3.2), the exact boundaries of
the numerous subgroups have yet to be drawn.8
10.5.2
Social
Besides geographical divisions, Arabic dialects display divisions based on
lifestyle, particularly between nomadic and sedentary populations. This
6 However, this feature is also found in some dialects of western and southern Egypt as well as in Chad. For a detailed
discussion of the origin of this prominent phenomenon, see Behnstedt (2016b).
7 E.g., Tunis naˉkul – naˉklu versus Cairo ˀaˉkul – naˉkul ‘I/we eat’.
8 More detailed overviews of the classiﬁcation of the dialects are in Palva (2006) and Vicente (2008).
10 Arabic Dialectology
221

Figure 10.1 Map of Arabic dialects

difference is the result of the large-scale long-distance migrations, which
were characteristic of the now-disappeared Bedouin way of life. The con-
trast and conﬂict between the Bedouins and the town and village dwellers
that was an ages-long feature of the history of the Middle East and North
Africa is also reﬂected in the dialects. Therefore, in addition to the distinc-
tion between east and west, there is an almost equally sharp distinction
between the (former) Bedouin and sedentary dialects, particularly outside
Arabia proper. Because of the Bedouins’ mobility, their dialects are often
quite homogeneous over large areas. Thus, the Arabic of the sheep- and
goat-breeding nomads of the Syrian Steppe is spoken virtually from the
gates of Aleppo to the gates of Baghdad. The hallmark of Bedouin Arabic is
the voiced pronunciation of Old Arabic /q/, e.g., gal˙b ‘heart’, yigt
˙
aʿ ‘he cuts’.
But there is also some typically Bedouin vocabulary and a bundle of con-
servative morphological features (see Rosenhouse 2006). Although the
term ‘Bedouin-type Arabic’ is today somewhat misleading, since many of
its speakers now live in large cities, it is nevertheless appropriate if under-
stood historically.9 Besides ‘pure’ Bedouin dialects that are usually spoken
by tribal communities who maintained semi-nomadic life until recently,
there are many examples of dialects that show intensive mutual inﬂuence.
There are several urban dialects that have become Bedouinized (e.g.,
Baghdad, Tripoli in Libya).
Another distinction sometimes made by Arabic dialectologists is
between rural and urban. Although this distinction is (or was) certainly a
fact in some regions, for instance Palestine, it was never valid everywhere.
In particular, there is no set of linguistic features that can distinguish a
dialect as ‘urban’ as opposed to ‘rural’. Thus, one can label a dialect as
‘urban’ in contrast to the ‘rural’ varieties in its vicinity, but it is impossible
to compile a list of features characteristic of all urban dialects. What
characterizes urban Arabic is usually typical of urban speech in general:
high prestige, linguistic levelling and mixing, linguistic dynamics (such as
youth speech and codeswitching), the juxtaposition of different socially
induced registers, and so on (see Miller et al. 2007: 20–2; Holes 2004:
344–8).
The segregation of religious communities in Arab towns has also
encouraged linguistic differences. In many cases these are not salient,
so there is, for instance, no discrete Coptic dialect in Egypt. The Jews,
however, particularly in the Maghreb and Iraq, use(d) dialects that sig-
niﬁcantly deviated from the speech of their Muslim compatriots, which
justiﬁes speaking, for example, of Judeo-Baghdadi or of the Jewish dialect
of Tunis (Blanc 1964; Cohen 1975). Another still existing ‘communal
dialect’ is found in Bahrain, where the Shiite population speaks an
9 Recently some scholars have disputed the usefulness of the Bedouin–sedentary dichotomy, among them Watson
(2011: 869), who states, ‘The Bedouin sedentary split has, however, been shown to be both an oversimpliﬁcation and
of diminishing sociological appropriacy.’
10 Arabic Dialectology
223

archaic sedentary dialect in contrast to the Bedouin-type dialect the
Sunnis brought with them when they migrated to the island in the late
eighteenth century (Holes 2016: 1–9).
10.5.3
Summary
On the whole, there are few if any features, phonological or morpholo-
gical, that by themselves determine a given dialect’s grouping. The pro-
nunciation of gˇı¯m as /g/, for instance, is commonly associated with Egypt,
but also found in some Yemeni dialects. The typically Maghrebian elision
of all unstressed short vowels in open syllables can be heard also in
Lebanon. Thus, it is always an aggregation of features that distinguishes
a dialect.
But more shibboleths are found in lexicon. The word ʾaku ‘there is’ is
everywhere recognized as typically Iraqi; sˇo¯b ‘hot’ is Syrian; ʾinnaharda
‘today’ is Egyptian; bar˙ sˇa ‘much’ is peculiar to Tunisia; məzya¯n ‘good’ is
Moroccan, and so on. And there are several dozen lexical items which
distinguish the Maghrebian dialects from those of the Mashreq, among
them h˙ u¯t vs. samak ‘ﬁsh’ (115)10, fakru¯n(a) vs. sulh˙ ufa ‘turtle’ (128), zˇr
˙
a¯na vs.
d˙ufdaʿa, ʿugrugga and others ‘frog’ (129), kar˙ mu¯s vs. tı¯n ‘ﬁgs’ (169), ku¯sˇı¯na vs.
mat
˙
bax ‘kitchen’ (200), h˙ a¯nu¯t vs. dukka¯n ‘shop’ (285), xdəm vs. isˇtag˙al ‘to
work’ (350), xallas˙ vs. dafaʿ ‘to pay’ (380), ʾakh˙ al vs. ʾaswad ‘black’ (404).
The dialect landscape of Arabic is still characterized by the juxtapo-
sition of numerous local dialects of villages or nomadic groups with
supra-regional urban prestige varieties. The latter either emerge from
the dialect of the capital (e.g., Damascus, Cairo, Tunis) or have devel-
oped through a process of koineization by a mixing of urban and/or
rural and Bedouin features. This is especially common in regions
where formerly relatively small and unimportant towns have grown
into major metropolitan areas through mass migration from the coun-
tryside. Good examples are Casablanca, Amman, and Muscat. Prestige
dialects are understood by most citizens and thus have become ‘infor-
mal standard varieties’11 that are used not only in conversations
among speakers of different dialects, but also in many public domains
that do not require the use of MSA, particularly radio and TV.
Therefore, both their speakers and scholars often label them ‘Syrian,
Egyptian, Moroccan etc. Arabic’, which from a linguistic point of view
is an overgeneralization because it neglects the other varieties spoken
in those countries.
10 The numbers in brackets refer to the maps in Behnstedt and Woidich (2011–2014), where further information and
etymologies are given.
11 The term ‘standardization’ has to be used with caution because it is not the result of a planned and conscious process
comparable to Modern Standard Arabic or the emergence of European standard languages (Miller et al. 2007:
18–20).
2 2 4
S T E P H A N P R O C H Á Z K A

10.6
Colloquial Arabic vs. Standard Arabic
According to a widespread classiﬁcation, all dialects belong to the neo-
Arabic language type as opposed to the old-Arabic type represented by the
pre-Islamic poetic koine´, the language of the Qur’a¯n, Classical Arabic,
and – in spite of its label – Modern Standard Arabic.12 This terminology
may lead to misunderstandings since the two types are chronologically not
sequential but have coexisted for much more than a millennium (see the
discussion in Wilmsen 2014: 22–5). It is commonly accepted, especially
among Arabic speakers themselves, that the main distinction between old-
and neo-Arabic is the presence or absence, respectively, of case and mood
endings (Arabic ʾiʿra¯b) because there are no traces of the ʾiʿra¯b in any
known dialect. This development is connected to a phonological feature
common to all dialects: the dropping of word-ﬁnal short vowels, including
the so-called nunation (tanwı¯n).13 Thus old-Arabic gˇabal-u/i/a and gˇabal-un/
in/an are all reﬂected as gˇabal ‘mountain’ in neo-Arabic. This development
is not a complete innovation but was already inherent in the oldest known
strata of Arabic, in which short vowels were regularly dropped at the end
of an utterance (Birkeland 1940). In all instances where case or mood is not
marked by short ﬁnal vowels, the dialects have preserved only one mor-
pheme: with nouns the oblique case -ı¯n (P L) and -ayn (D U AL)14; and with
verbs either -u¯n (PL) and -ı¯n (2F S G) or -u (PL) and -i (2F SG), the latter being
much more widespread.
Thus, if we assume that spoken Arabic originally had case and mood
endings, today’s dialects reﬂect a later stage of the language which indeed
would justify the term neo-Arabic, at least conceptually, but with the
caveat that it has not replaced, but only complemented, old-Arabic,
which itself has undergone signiﬁcant changes on its way from the poetic
koine´ to Classical and Modern Arabic.15
Further features distinguishing modern dialects from old-Arabic (OA)
are in morphology, including the absence of dual forms in pronouns,
verbs, and adjectives, the disappearance of the feminine elative (pattern
C1uC2C3a¯), and the loss of the so-called energicus mood – which is, however,
also extremely rare in MSA. Another common feature is the conjugation of
the doubled verbs (with identical 2nd and 3rd radical) in the perfect in
analogy with ﬁnal-weak verbs (i.e., in Damascus the 1 SG of h˙ at
˙
t
˙
‘he put’ is
h˙ at
˙
t
˙
-e¯t, which aligns with, e.g., rama ‘he threw’ and ram-e¯t).
12 The term ‘Middle Arabic’ does not denote an intermediate chronological stage but a form of written Arabic exhibiting
deviations from the standard norm due to the spoken varieties. It is therefore also called ‘Mixed Arabic’ (see, e.g., Zack
and Schippers 2012).
13 There are remnants of the tanwıˉn in many eastern Bedouin-type dialects (as well as in Central Asia, Sudan, and
Nigeria). It is primarily used to link an adjectival or participial attribute to its head noun if this is indeﬁnite, e.g., beˉt-in cˇibıˉr
‘a big house’. Because its function is different from the old-Arabic tanwıˉn, it is better to call it a ‘nominal linker’ (Owens
2006: 104) or ‘dialectal tanwıˉn’ (Holes 2004: 89).
14 Thus in the dialects the nominative endings -uˉna and -aˉni are not reﬂected.
15 The assumption that case is original to all varieties of spoken Arabic was recently challenged by Owens (2006).
10 Arabic Dialectology
225

Some features differentiating old- from neo-Arabic are true for most but
not all dialects, particularly dialects of the Arabian Peninsula (see the
detailed discussion in Behnstedt and Woidich 2005: 10–20 and Watson
2011: 859–62). Concerning phonology, the glottal stop /ˀ/ has been pre-
served as a full-featured phoneme only in a few Yemeni dialects: every-
where else /ˀ/ was replaced by /y/ (rarely /w/) or elided (usually causing the
lengthening of the preceding vowel) – a development already reﬂected in
Qur’a¯ nic orthography. Another striking feature found everywhere except
in some regions of SW Arabia (al-Azraqi 2010; Behnstedt 1987: 5–7) is the
merger of /d˙/ (ﺽ) and /d¯˙
/ (ﻅ) into one single phoneme /d¯˙
/. Also frequent is
the elision of the short vowels /i/ and /u/ in unstressed open syllables,
particularly in post-tonic position (e.g., Mecca kı´bir + u > kibru ‘they grew
old’, Cairo ʿa¯yiz + a > ʿayza ‘she wants’).
A morphological trait shared by most dialects (again with exceptions
in SW Arabia; see Watson 2011: 861) is that they possess only one
invariable relative particle (e.g., ʾilli, li) instead of OA allad¯ı¯, allatı¯ etc. In
the lexicon several very frequent lexemes are not reﬂected in the
majority of the dialects, among them gˇayyid ‘good’, d¯ahaba ‘to go’,
and ma¯d¯a¯ ‘what?’.
10.7
Common Tendencies
Generally speaking, the Arabic dialects exhibit a great deal of shared
retention compared to other living Semitic languages such as Aramaic
and Amharic. With the exception of some peripheral dialects, no radical
structural changes appear either in morphology or in syntax. The deriva-
tion by root and pattern has been slightly simpliﬁed, but remains fully
productive in both nouns and verbs. The two verbal classes represented by
the sufﬁx-stem (for perfect aspect and past time reference) and the preﬁx-
stem (for imperfect aspect and present/future time reference) have been
preserved in all varieties. Also, nominal morphology has proved to be
rather stable, maintaining the deﬁniteness marker (al-), productive inter-
nal plural formation, and all three numbers (with some restrictions con-
cerning the dual, see Section 10.7.4).
There are even traits in the dialects which preserve ancient features
substituted by innovations in Classical Arabic (Wilmsen 2014: 24–43; Pat-
El 2017). Among these is the vowel contrast /u/ versus /i/ in masculine and
feminine plural pronouns (2 PL -kum vs. -kin, 3 PL -hum vs. -hin), which
reﬂects the Proto-Arabic pattern, whereas CA shows the more innovative
harmonization of the vowels (Procha´zka 2014: 135). The same holds for
the 1st-person pronoun ʾa¯ni and 3rd-person pronouns containing a /t/
(Wilmsen 2014: 27, 38). For the use of the independent forms of the
personal pronouns to mark a second pronominalized object in some
Syrian and Iraqi dialects (e.g., Mosul: ma¯ nǝʿt˙ ı¯-ki hı¯yǝm ‘We do not give
2 2 6
S T E P H A N P R O C H Á Z K A

them to you (F).’), Retso¨ (1987: 235) argues that such constructions are
typologically very old, since in older layers of Semitic, independent
pronouns were used for subjects and objects alike. Another apparently
old syntactic feature in numerous dialects is in agreement patterns,
particularly plural agreement with non-human heads (Belnap 1999;
Holes 2016: 341–54; Ritt-Benmimoun 2017a).
The main reasons for the high degree of typological consistency of
spoken Arabic are intra-regional trade, extended political entities, the
levelling inﬂuence of CA as a vehicle for religious instruction, and the
pilgrimage to Mecca, which provided contact between speakers of differ-
ent varieties. Factors that favour divergence are geographical seclusion,
sectarian differences, and lack of contact with other Arabic-speaking com-
munities. Examples are the Alawis in the hill country of western Syria, the
Christians in the mountains of Lebanon, the Ibadis in the Algerian oasis of
Mza¯ b, and the Arabs of Uzbekistan.
Nevertheless, the dialects exhibit a large number of innovations in all
realms of the language, i.e., phonology, morphology, syntax, and lexicon.
Some innovations are shared by many varieties extending over large areas,
others remain restricted to certain regions or even to single towns or
communities. Morphological innovation mainly occurs due to reduction,
analogy and intra-paradigmatic convergence, and grammaticalization.
Some of the most striking tendencies will be illustrated in the following
sections.
Only in regions where Arabic is a minority language has lack of contact
with other Arabic speakers and large-scale bilingualism with non-Semitic
languages such as Tajik, Turkish, and Uzbek resulted in far-reaching
changes affecting all parts of grammar.
10.7.1
Phonological Changes
Besides lexicon, phonology is probably the ﬁeld with the most changes. Due
to the easy perception of phonological features, they are often the main way
the speech community itself differentiates between dialects. The majority
of sedentary dialects display the unconditioned shift of the three interden-
tal fricatives to post-dental plosives: /d¯/ →/d/, /t¯/ →/t/, /d¯˙
/ →/d˙/.
An OA phoneme often subject to change is /q/. In all Bedouin-type
dialects, and many of Arabia itself, /q/ became voiced and is usually
reﬂected as [g]. A typical phenomenon of the larger cities in Egypt and
the Levant (but also found in Maltese) is the shift from /q/ to /ʔ/, which is
associated with prestige and education and therefore increasingly spread-
ing into rural areas. During the past few decades in the villages of Lebanon,
for example, the glottal stop /ʔ/ has almost completely replaced the origi-
nal pronunciation /q/.
Affrication of /k/ and /g/ is widespread among the Bedouin dialects of the
east, usually conditioned by front vowel environment: cˇa¯nit ‘she was’ vs.
10 Arabic Dialectology
227

tku¯n ‘she will be’; gˇirı¯b ‘close, near’ vs. gar
˙
a¯yib ‘relatives’. In many Algerian
and Moroccan dialects /t/ is affricated and realized as [ts]: this has been
attributed to a Berber substratum.
The phoneme /gˇ / is reﬂected as /y/ in many Gulf dialects and has been de-
affricated to /zˇ/ [ʒ] in large parts of Syria, Lebanon, and Palestine as well as
in most dialects of the Maghreb. The typically Lower Egyptian pronuncia-
tion /g/ is most likely an old feature (Woidich and Zack 2009: 56–7).
Velarization has spread beyond the inherited triad /t
˙
/, /d¯˙
/~/d˙/, /s˙/ and par-
tially gained phonemic status, particularly with /r˙/ but sometimes also
with /l˙/ and /m˙ /. In some peripheral dialects (Malta, Chad) many of the
consonants that are typical for Arabic have disappeared, particularly the
pharyngeals and the emphatics.
The phonemic contrast between short and long vowels has been main-
tained except in Morocco (Maas and Procha´zka 2012: 345). The three long
vowel phonemes (/a¯ /, /ı¯/, /u¯ /) are complemented by /e¯/ and /o¯/ in many
eastern dialects due to monophthongization of /ay/ and /aw/. Long vowels
are phonetically robust,16 whereas short vowels are frequently elided in
unstressed open syllables – a phenomenon that increases signiﬁcantly
from east to west.
10.7.2
Reduction
In many Arabic dialects verbal inﬂection and the closely related personal
pronouns display morphological reduction. As Table 10.1 shows, Old
Arabic distinguishes thirteen forms in verbs (but only twelve in pronouns,
which lack gender distinction in 3 D U AL). Many dialects in Arabia, and most
Bedouin-type varieties, retain this large number except in the dual forms,
which probably were never a feature of spoken Arabic but restricted to the
poetic koine´ (Behnstedt and Woidich 2005: 16). However, the dialect of the
city of Tunis – like many sedentary dialects of the Maghreb – shows a
signiﬁcant reduction from thirteen to seven forms as gender distinction
has disappeared except for 3S G. It also illustrates the typical Maghrebian
alignment of the 1st-person preﬁxes and the emergence of the ﬁnal /u/ as a
consistent plural marker (see also Section 10.5.1).
As for syntax, one observes a drastic reduction of forms used for
verbal negation. Of the ﬁve OA forms ma¯, la¯, lan, lam, and laysa, only
the ﬁrst two continue to be used in contemporary dialects. Another
typical feature of the dialects is the preference of paratactic to hypo-
tactic structures: subordinate clauses dependent on verbs of speaking,
of belief (ex. 1), and the like are particularly often not introduced by a
conjunction. Paratactic constructions are also frequently used in con-
ditional clauses.
16 In several dialects, particularly Egyptian and Palestinian, long vowels that are unstressed or placed in closed syllables
are shortened, though never dropped.
2 2 8
S T E P H A N P R O C H Á Z K A

(1)
Mosul
ma¯
n-s˙addǝq
g˙ayyǝh˙
yǝ-zzawwagˇ-u¯n
N EG
IP F V.1.PL-believe
FU T
IPF V.3-marry-PL
‘We don’t believe that they will marry.’
10.7.3
Mood and Aspect
These ﬁelds of syntax illustrate two things very well. First, a large array of
different ways of innovation which sometimes led to systems more com-
plex than in Old Arabic. Second, the tendency of many dialects towards
developing linguistic devices for mood and aspect marking (see Bruweleit
2015; Hanitsch 2019). The latter are usually preﬁxed to the imperfect verb
and have mostly emerged from participles or prepositions via grammati-
calization (Rubin 2005: 129–52).
Marking of the indicative (including the general and habitual present) is
characteristic of Levantine, Egyptian, and Moroccan dialects, where the
unmarked verb is restricted to non-factitive usage, particularly in wishes
and in combination with modal expressions (Table 10.2).
Even more widespread are markers for the present progressive
(Table 10.3) – a mood that is not overtly expressed in Standard
Arabic.17
In some Maghrebian dialects, particularly Tunisian and Libyan, the
progressive present with transitive verbs is not marked on the verb but
on the direct object (cf. Ritt-Benmimoun 2017b for details).
Table 10.1 Old Arabic verb forms
Old Arabic
Sanaa
Tunisa
S G
1. C
ʾa-sˇrab-u
ʾa-sˇrab
nu-sˇr· ub
2. M
ta-sˇrab-u
ti-sˇrab
tu-sˇr· ub
2. F
ta-sˇrab-ıˉna
ti-sˇrab-ıˉ
3. M
ya-sˇrab-u
yi-sˇrab
yu-sˇr· ub
3. F
ta-sˇrab-u
ti-sˇrab
tu-sˇr· ub
P L
1. C
na-sˇrab-u
ni-sˇrab
nu-sˇr· b-u
2. M
ta-sˇrab-uˉna
ti-sˇrab-uˉ
tu-sˇr· b-u
2. F
ta-sˇrab-na
ti-sˇrab-ayn
3. M
ya-sˇrab-uˉna
yi-sˇrab-uˉ
yu-sˇr· b-u
3. F
ya-sˇrab-na
yi-sˇrab-ayn
D U A L
2. C
ta-sˇrab-aˉni
–
–
3. M
ya-sˇrab-aˉni
–
–
3. F
ta-sˇrab-aˉni
–
–
a For Sanaa, see Watson (2009: 114); for Tunis, Singer (1984: 338).
17 The details are complex, varying from dialect to dialect. For a good overview focusing on the eastern dialects, see
El-Hassan (2008).
10 Arabic Dialectology
229

(2)
South Tunisia
t¯amma
mar
˙
a¯
ət
˙
-t
˙
ayyib
ﬁ-l-maqr
˙
o¯na
there.is
woman
IPF.3 F S G-cook
in-D F-noodles
‘There’s a woman who is cooking noodles.’
The use of a preﬁxed verbal modiﬁer also occurs in Standard Arabic, where
sa- marks future tense reference. Reﬂexes of this form have disappeared
completely from the dialects, where the (near) future is often marked by
preﬁxes which emerged from verbs meaning ‘to go’ or ‘to want’ (Rubin
2005: 34–41; Taine-Cheikh 2004). Examples are: Yemen sˇa- (yasˇa¯ʾ ‘to want’),
Oman ba- (< bag˙a¯ ‘to want’), Damascus rah˙ - (< ra¯yih˙ ‘going’), Tunis ba¯sˇ
(< ma¯sˇi ‘going’), Morocco g˙a¯di (< g˙ada¯ ‘to go (away)’).
Probably the most conspicuous change in Arabic verbal syntax in the
dialects is the role of the active participle, which can be regarded as a full
third category besides the perfect and imperfect. Despite signiﬁcant differ-
ences among the dialects, the main function of the active participle is to
express the resultative or perfective aspect without any tense reference.
Thus in the majority of dialects, the active participle is used to express the
resultant state of an activity or a process which, at the moment of speech
or another reference point, is of ongoing relevance.18 The examples in (3)
illustrate the contrast between participle and perfect verb.
(3)
Damascus (participles in bold face)
sˇu¯
t˙a¯ bex
ǝl-yo¯m? ‘What have you cooked today?’(and is
now ready for eating)
sˇu¯
t
˙
abax-t
ǝl-yo¯m? ‘What did you cook today (for lunch)?’
Table 10.3 Present progressive
Sanaa
maˉ
bi-tsawway
dˉalh
˙
ıˉn?
‘What are you doing now?’
Baghdad
id-dinya
da-tumt˙ur.
‘It’s raining.’
Damascus
sˇuˉ
ʿam-ᵊtsaˉwi
hallaʾ?
‘What are you doing now?’
Table 10.2 Marked vs. unmarked imperfect
Jerusalem
ʾinti
b-tiʿraﬁ
weˉn
ʾana
saˉkin?
‘Do you know where I live?’
Cairo
zeˉnab
bi-tisˇrab
ʾahwa.
‘Zainab drinks coffee.’a
Casablanca
waˉsˇ
kaˉ-tsˇuˉf
əl-kəlb
lə-kbıˉr?
‘Do you see the big dog?’
Damascus
ʾal
˙
l
˙
a
Ø-yʿaˉfıˉk!
‘May God give you strength!’
Damascus
bə-trıˉd
Ø-təsˇrab
ʾahwe.
‘She wants to drink coffee.’
a In Cairo, unmarked forms are also used in polite questions: Ze¯nab, tisˇrabi ʾahwa?
‘Zainab, would you like to drink coffee?’.
18 For further details, see Brustad (2000: 225–30), Caubet (1991), Eades and Persson (2013), Henkin (1992), Holes
(2016: 224–61), and Procházka and Batan (2016).
2 3 0
S T E P H A N P R O C H Á Z K A

bǝnt-a
na¯ ym-e.
‘Her daughter is sleeping.’ (she has
fallen asleep and is still sleeping)
bǝnt-a
na¯m-et
bakkı¯r.
‘(Tonight) her daughter went to sleep
early.’ (but meanwhile may be awake
again)
10.7.4
Analytic Versus Synthetic Type of Language
Historical linguistics has proved that inﬂectional reduction in general and
the loss of case marking in particular necessarily triggers an increase in
analytic structures – which conspicuously occurred in the transition from
Latin to the Romance languages. The following discusses the extent to
which such a tendency can be observed in the Arabic dialects.
An inclination towards analytic structures is found with the dual num-
ber. Being a productive morphological category in the east, its use gradu-
ally decreases in North Africa the farther one goes west. In Algeria and
Morocco only petriﬁed dual forms are in use with nouns of time, distance,
weight, and currencies. As Table 10.4 illustrates, the eastern dialects have
preserved the dual ending, whereas in most Maghrebian varieties the
default case is an analytic construction consisting of the numeral ‘2’ and
a noun in the plural. Moroccan dialects go a step further by using a linking
morpheme between numeral and noun.
Another typical innovation of almost all Arabic dialects is the existence
of a particle to link two nouns or a noun and a pronominal sufﬁx. In Arabic
studies this linker is often called a ‘genitive exponent’. Though analytic
instead of synthetic attribution of nouns is certainly an old feature in
Arabic, the particles have developed independently in the different dia-
lects following a common linguistic tendency. In most cases these particles
Table 10.4 Arabic dialect renderings of the meaning ‘two
mountains’
Old Arabic
gˇabal-aˉn
gˇabal-ayn
mountain-D U A L
Sanaa
gˇabal-ayn
mountain-D U A L
Cairo
gabal-eˉn
mountain-D U A L
Tunis
zuˉz
žbaˉl
N U M.two
mountain.P L
Casablancaa
žuˉž
d
əž-žbaˉl
N U M.two
L I N K E R
mountain.P L
a The numeral ‘2’ used in Tunis and Casablanca does not reﬂect
OA it¯na¯n, but actually means ‘a pair’ (OA zawgˇ) and ultimately
goes back to the Greek word zeuˆgos ‘yoke’.
10 Arabic Dialectology
231

have emerged through grammaticalization from words meaning ‘prop-
erty, possession, belonging’, or from relative particles (Eksell 2006: 83).
There is great diversity on both the lexical and morphological level. Some
dialects exhibit invariable particles, others use forms which agree with the
head noun in gender and/or number. The frequency of the analytic con-
struction varies from dialect to dialect (Eksell Harning 1980). Generally it is
rarely used with inalienable possessions (e.g., kinship terms), but is very
common with loanwords – the latter particularly when pronominal suf-
ﬁxes are attached. Synthetic noun annexation (Arabic ʾid˙a¯fa) usually
remains the default case; only in Moroccan Arabic and some isolated
dialects of Anatolia has the use of the linker become the default procedure
with lexicalized remains of ʾid˙a¯fa constructions (Harrell 1962: 193–203;
Maas 2011: 162–5).
Prima facie surprising is that the loss of case marking did not result in
the marking of direct objects but only in a stricter word order compared to
Old Arabic. Thus nominal direct objects usually come after an S-V or V-S
sequence; if not, they are referred to by a resumptive pronoun on the verb.
Only Syrian and Iraqi dialects show marking of deﬁnite direct objects that
in most cases denote human beings. This construction consists of an antici-
patory pronoun attached to the verb and followed by the preposition li- ‘for’,
which marks the object. This construction is alien to Old Arabic, but has an
exact parallel in Aramaic. Therefore it is usually regarded as a remnant of
Aramaic substratum inﬂuence (see Rubin 2005: 94–104; Contini 1999: 106).
(4)
Damascus
əl-le¯le
sˇəf-t-a
la-fa¯t
˙
me
tonight
PF V.see-1 SG-P R O.3 F S G
for-Fatima
‘Tonight I saw Fatima.’
Other instances of object marking occur in Maltese and Andalusi Arabic,
where they most likely developed under Romance language inﬂuence. The
main reason why the loss of case has been only marginally substituted by
analytic constructions is its high degree of redundancy in Old and Classical
Arabic. V-O-S sequences that may be ambiguous without case marking are
rare in the old texts (Ambros 1970–1971).
Table 10.5 Analytic nominal annexation (linker in bold face)
Sanaa
al-bayt h
˙
agg al-marih
‘the house belonging to the woman’
Baghdad
il-pardaˉt maˉl g˙urfat il-xut˙t˙aˉr
il-meˉz maˉl-i
‘the curtains of the parlor’
‘my table’
Damascus
əl-veˉllaˉt tabaʿəl-wazıˉr
əl-moˉbaˉylaˉt tabʿaˉt-kon
‘the villas of the minister’
‘your (P L) mobile phones’
Cairo
il-ˁar· abiyya btaʿt il-mudıˉr
‘the car of the director’
Tunis
ir-reˉyaksyoˉ mtaˉʿleˉ žöˉn
‘the reaction of the young people’
Casablanca
t˙-t˙uˉmuˉbıˉl dyaˉl s
˙
aˉh
˙
bi
‘my friend’s car’
2 3 2
S T E P H A N P R O C H Á Z K A

Generally speaking, Arabic dialects do not incline towards an analytic
language type. This is also illustrated by their formation of the passive voice
(Table 10.6). In OA, the passive verbal stem is derived from the corresponding
active stem by a restructuring of the vowel pattern. In modern varieties, the
productive formation of an internal passive has been maintained in Arabia
proper and in some archaic Bedouin-type dialects. However, in other dialects
the formation of the passive voice was not replaced by analytic constructions
but by speciﬁc verbal stems using preﬁxes and inﬁxes (for details, see Retso¨
1983).
The only Arabic dialect showing analytic passive formation is Maltese
which uses – besides synthetic formation – a construction that is appar-
ently a copy of the Italian model.
Worth mentioning are not infrequent cases where the dialects use
structures that are more synthetic than their Old Arabic equivalents.
Among these is the attachment of pronominal sufﬁxes to interrogative
adverbs to mark the logical subject.
Salient developments towards compact synthetic structures are found in
many dialects in combination with indirect object pronouns and negation
with preﬁxed and sufﬁxed elements. The OA equivalent of Example (5)
consists of three separate word units, ma¯ qult-ı¯-ha¯ la-na¯.
(5)
Cairo
ma-ˀul-ti-ha-l-na¯-sˇ
N EG-PF V.say-2F.S G-P R O3 F.S G-to-P RO1 PL-N E G
‘You (F) did not tell it to us.’
Table 10.6 Arabic dialect renderings of ‘he
wrote’ – ‘it was written’
Old Arabic
katab-a
kutib-a
Najd
kitab
ktib
South Tunisia (Bedouin)
kitab
ktib ~ nkitab
Damascus
katab
ᵊn-katab
Cairo
katab
it-katab
Casablanca
ktəb
ttə-ktəb
Table 10.7 Analytic passive voice
Maltese
ir-rag˙el
g˙ie
maqtul
‘The man was killed.’
D E F-man
P F V.came
P P T.kill
Italian
l’uomo
venne
ucciso
Table 10.8 Interrogatives and pronominal sufﬁxes
Old Arabic
ʾayna
hiya?
‘Where is she?’
Baghdad
weˉn-ha?
Old Arabic
kayfa
ʾanta?
‘How are you?’
Damascus
kıˉf-ak?
10 Arabic Dialectology
233

10.7.5
Lexical Innovation
The lexicon is doubtless the ﬁeld that shows the most innovations in the
dialects. These are not restricted to neologisms for new ideas and concepts,
technical tools and machines, fruits and vegetables, dishes and beverages:
lexical innovation also appears in the core vocabulary of the dialects,
including words for ‘good’, ‘to go’, ‘to make’, ‘to see’, etc. Most dialects
also show variation in adverbs and interrogatives that are not reﬂexes of
the Old Arabic forms but newly coined, particularly by means of gramma-
ticalization. The Standard Arabic al-ʾa¯na ‘now’, for example, has comple-
tely disappeared and was replaced by a wide range of words originally
meaning ‘this moment, this time’: al-h˙ azz →alh˙ az; (ha¯d¯ihi) s-sa¯ʿa →hassa¯ʿ,
hassaʿ, hassa, issa; (ha¯)d¯a¯ l-h˙ ı¯n →d¯alh˙ ı¯n, d¯ah˙ h˙ ı¯n; ha¯d¯a l-waqt →halwaqt, hallaʾ,
dilwaʾti.
As for interrogatives, one observes the spreading of the ‘Q-marker’ sˇ, which
ultimately derives from ʾayyu sˇayʾin ‘which thing?’ that in many dialects
became the new word for ‘what?’ (ʾaysˇ, sˇu¯ etc.). It is used both preﬁxed and
sufﬁxed for coining compound interrogative adverbs: sˇqadd, qadde¯sˇ ‘how
many/much?’ (based on qadd ‘quantity’), sˇlo¯n, izza¯y (*isˇ-za¯y)19 ‘how?’, be¯sˇ ‘how
much?’, ʿale¯sˇ ‘why?’, sˇwakit, waqte¯sˇ ‘when?’ (see also Versteegh 2004).
The dialects are much more prone than CA and MSA to including
foreign loans in their lexicon. Historically they primarily borrowed
words from Aramaic, Greek, Persian (and Kurdish), Ottoman Turkish,
the lingua franca, Italian, and Spanish. Since the nineteenth century,
the ‘colonial’ languages English and French (the latter particularly west
of Libya) had and still have a strong impact on the lexicon of spoken
Arabic. There are lexical ﬁelds like car parts, cosmetics, and modern
kitchenware which in many dialects exhibit much more than 50 per
cent foreign vocabulary.
10.8
Recent Trends and Future Perspectives
During the past few years digital corpora of Arabic dialects upon which
especially syntactic and lexical studies can be based have been built; but
compared to Standard Arabic – let alone many European languages – they
are still scarce and often works in progress. The project Corpafroas, which is
exemplary regarding methodology and accuracy, contains one hour each of
Moroccan, Libyan, and Juba Arabic.20 Signiﬁcant data can be found at the
Linguistic Data Consortium,21 which offers transcriptions of telephone con-
versations in Egyptian, Mesopotamian, Iraqi, Gulf, and Levantine Arabic. Two
19 Originally meaning ‘what colour?’ (*ʾaysˇ lawn) and ‘what kind of dress? (*ʾaysˇ ziyy).
20 http://corpafroas.tge-adonis.fr/.
21 www.ldc.upenn.edu/.
2 3 4
S T E P H A N P R O C H Á Z K A

corpora exist for Tunisian Arabic: TUNICO22 with 100,000 words in transcrip-
tion, and Tunisiya23 with more than a million, though taken from written
sources and presented in Arabic script and therefore unusable for many
linguists. The Gumar Corpus contains several million words of spoken Gulf
Arabic24, but is also in Arabic script. Very interesting data is provided by a
large sociolinguistically informed corpus of Nigerian Arabic.25 A small corpus
of Jewish Iraqi is in the Endangered Languages Archive.26
Digital dictionary resources of spoken Arabic are few and limited in
scope (Mo¨rth 2017). An ongoing project is VICAV,27 which includes basic
data for Syria, Iraq, and Egypt and a dictionary of the dialect of Tunis with
almost 8,500 entries.28 The Muʿjam website is a user-generated monolin-
gual dictionary of colloquial Arabic that provides around 6,000 words from
many regions of the Arab world, particularly Saudi Arabia. The data are
presented throughout in Arabic script, but often supplemented by a
(rather inconsistent) transcription in Latin letters.29
Although Arabic dialectologists were long more interested in ‘pure’ and
‘unspoiled’ dialects, recent trends have emphasized linguistic dynamics,
phenomena like youth language, and the use of spoken varieties in social
media. The latter will probably have an immense inﬂuence on the future
development of Arabic since they encourage extensive written use of the
dialects, at least in informal contexts.
The investigation of traditional dialects will nevertheless remain an
important task of Arabic dialectology because there are still many
under-researched areas, particularly Sudan, western Tunisia, Algeria,
and even Arabia itself (Hijaz, Asir, Oman). But even the varieties of
such major cities as Mosul, Homs, Sfax, and Constantine have been
insufﬁciently described as of yet. The studies of the mid-twentieth
century must also be re-examined for evidence of language change.
Finally, the ﬁeld requires more linguistic atlases than those brieﬂy
described in Section 10.3.2. The ultimate aim should be a digital
atlas of the Arabic-speaking world that is fully searchable and can be
interpreted through dialectometry.
Many of the above-mentioned points can only be realized if Arabic
dialectology continues to align with innovative methods and becomes
established
as
a
full-ﬂedged
discipline
at
more
universities
and
research institutions, especially in the Arab world itself. Such devel-
opments could also help bridge the gap between Arabic Studies and
general linguistics.
22 https://tunico.acdh.oeaw.ac.at/.
23 www.tunisiya.org/.
24 https://camel.abudhabi.nyu.edu/gumar/.
25 www.neu.uni-bayreuth.de/de/Uni_Bayreuth/Fakultaeten/4_Sprach_und_Literaturwissenschaft/islamwissenschaft/
arabistik/en/Idiomaticity__lexical_realignment__and_semantic_change_in_spoken_arabic/Nigerian_Arabic/index
.html.
26 https://elar.soas.ac.uk/.
27 www.acdh.oeaw.ac.at/vicav.
28 https://basex.acdh-dev.oeaw.ac.at/tunico/index.html.
29 https://en.mo3jam.com/.
10 Arabic Dialectology
235

References
Abu Haidar, F. (1991). Christian Arabic of Baghdad. Wiesbaden: Harrassowitz
(Semitica Viva 7).
Agius, D. A. (1996). Siculo Arabic. London: Kegan Paul.
Aguade´, J. (2003). Notes on the Arabic dialect of Casablanca (Morocco). In I.
Ferrando and J. J. Sa´nchez Sandoval, eds., AIDA, 5th Conference Proceedings.
Ca´diz, September 2002. Cadiz: Universidad de Ca´diz, 301–8.
Al-Azraqi, M. (2010). The Ancient Da¯d in Southwest Saudi Arabia. Arabica:
Journal of Arabic and Islamic Studies, 57, 57–67.
Alcala´, P. de. (1505). Arte para ligerame˜te saber la le˜gua arauiga. Granada.
Al-Wer, E. (2007). The formation of the dialect of Amman: From chaos to
order. In C. Miller, E. Al-Wer, D. Caubet, and J. C. E. Watson, eds., Arabic in
the City. London: Routledge, 55–76.
Ambros, A. A. (1970–1971). Funktionalita¨t und Redundanz in der ara-
bischen
Kasusdeklination.
Wiener
Zeitschrift
fu¨r
die
Kunde
des
Morgenlandes, 63–64, 105–27.
Ambros, A. A. (1977). Damascus Arabic. Malibu: Undena Publications.
Arnold, W. (1998). Die arabischen Dialekte Antiochiens. Wiesbaden: Harrassowitz.
Barthe´lemy, A. (1935–1954). Dictionnaire Arabe-Franc¸ais: Dialectes de Syrie:
Alep, Damas, Liban, Je´rusalem. Paris: Geuthner.
Behnstedt, P. (1987). Die Dialekte der Gegend von S˙aʿdah (Nord-Jemen).
Wiesbaden: Harrassowitz.
Behnstedt,
P.
(1992–2006).
Die
nordjemenitischen
Dialekte.
II:
Glossar.
Wiesbaden: Reichert.
Behnstedt, P. (1997). Sprachatlas von Syrien: I: Kartenband. Wiesbaden:
Harrassowitz (Semitica Viva 17).
Behnstedt, P. (2016a).Dialect Atlas of North Yemen and Adjacent Areas. Leiden: Brill.
Behnstedt, P. (2016b). The niktib-niktibu issue revisited. Wiener Zeitschrift fu¨r
die Kunde des Morgenlandes, 106, 21–36.
Behnstedt, P. and Geva-Kleinberger, A. (2019). Atlas of the Arabic Dialects of
Galilee (Israel). Leiden: Brill.
Behnstedt, P. and Woidich, M. (1985). Die a¨gyptisch-arabischen Dialekte. I:
Einleitung und Anmerkungen zu den Karten. II: Dialektatlas von A¨ gypten.
Wiesbaden: Reichert.
Behnstedt, P. and Woidich, M. (2005). Arabische Dialektgeographie: Eine
Einfu¨hrung. Leiden: Brill.
Behnstedt, P. and Woidich, M. (2011–2021). Wortatlas der arabischen Dialekte.
I: Mensch, Natur, Fauna und Flora. II: Materielle Kultur. III: Verben, Adjektive,
Zeit und Zahlen. IV: Funktionswo¨rter, Adverbien, Phraseologisches: eine Auswahl.
Leiden: Brill.
Belnap, K. R. (1999). A new perspective on the history of Arabic variation in
marking agreement with plural heads. Folia Linguistica, 33, 169–85.
Bergstra¨sser, G. (1915). Sprachatlas von Syrien und Pala¨stina. Zeitschrift des
Deutschen Pala¨stina Vereins, 38, 169–222.
Birkeland, H. (1940). Altarabische Pausalformen. Oslo: Dybwad.
2 3 6
S T E P H A N P R O C H Á Z K A

Blanc, H. (1964). Communal Dialects in Baghdad. Cambridge, MA: Center for
Middle Eastern Studies of Harvard University.
Borg, A. (1985). Cypriot Arabic. Stuttgart: Steiner.
Borg, A. (2004). Comparative Glossary of Cypriot Maronite Arabic (Arabic–English):
With an Introductory Essay. Leiden: Brill.
Borg, A. and Azzopardi-Alexander, M. (1997). Maltese. London: Routledge.
Boucherit, A. (2002). L’arabe parle´ a` Alger: Aspects sociolinguistiques et e´noncia-
tifs. Paris: Peeters.
Brustad, K. E. (2000). The Syntax of Spoken Arabic: A Comparative Study of Moroccan,
Egyptian, Syrian, and Kuwaiti Dialects. Washington, DC: Georgetown
University Press.
Bruweleit, S. (2015). Aspect, Tense and Action in the Arabic Dialect of Beirut.
Leiden: Brill.
Cantineau, J. (1940–1946). Le parles arabes du Ho¯raˆn. Paris: Klincksieck.
Caubet, D. (1991). The active participle as a means to renew the aspectual
system: A comparative study in several dialects of Arabic. In A. S. Kaye,
ed., Semitic Studies in Honor of Wolf Leslau on the Occasion of His Eighty-Fifth
Birthday, November 14th, (1991). Wiesbaden: Harrassowitz, 209–24.
Caubet, D. (1993). L’arabe marocain. 2 vols. Paris-Louvain: Peeters.
Clarity, B. E., Stowasser, K., Wolfe, R. G. Woodhead, D. R., and Beene, W.
(2003). A Dictionary of Iraqi Arabic: English–Arabic, Arabic–English. Washington,
DC: Georgetown University Press.
Cohen, D. (1963). Le dialecte arabe ‘h˙ assa¯nı¯ya’ de Mauritanie (parler de la Gebla).
Paris: Klincksieck.
Cohen, D. (1964). Le parler arabe des Juifs de Tunis, vol. 1: Textes et documents
linguistiques et ethnographiques. The Hague: Mouton.
Cohen, D. (1975). Le parler arabe des juifs de Tunis, vol. 2: E´ tude linguistique.
The Hague: Mouton.
Cohen, M. (1912). Le parler arabe des Juifs d’Alger, Paris: H. Champion.
Colin, G. (1993–1994). Le Dictionnaire Colin d’arabe dialectal marocain, ed.
Zakia Iraqui Sinaceur. Rabat: Al Manahil.
Contini, R. (1999). Le substrat arame´en en ne´o-arabe libanais: Pre´liminaires a`
une enqueˆte syste´matique. In M. Lamberti and L. Tonelli, eds., Afroasiatica
Tergestina: Papers from the 9th Italian Meeting of Afro-Asiatic (Hamito-Semitic)
Linguistics. Trieste, April 23–24, (1998). Padua: Unipress, 101–22.
Corriente, F. (1977). A Grammatical Sketch of the Spanish Arabic Dialect Bundle.
Madrid: Inst. Hispano-A´ rabe de Cultura.
Corriente, F. (1997). A Dictionary of Andalusi Arabic. Leiden: Brill.
Corriente, F. (2013). A Descriptive and Comparative Grammar of Andalusi Arabic.
Ed. by Instituto de Estudios Isla´micos y del Oriente Pro´ximo, Zaragoza.
Leiden: Brill.
Corriente, F. and Vicente, A. (2008). Manual de dialectologı´a neoa´rabe.
Zaragoza: Instituto de Estudios Isla´micos y del Oriente Pro´ximo.
Cowell, M. W. (1964). A Reference Grammar of Syrian Arabic. Washington, DC:
Georgetown University Press.
10 Arabic Dialectology
237

Cuvalay-Haak, M. (2011). The Verb in Literary and Colloquial Arabic. Berlin: De
Gruyter Mouton.
Czapkiewicz, A. (1975). The Verb in Modern Arabic Dialects. Wrocław: Zaklad
Narodowy Imienia Ossolin˜ skich Wydawnictwo Polskiej Akademii
Nauk.
Dahlgren, S. (1998). Word Order in Arabic. Gothenburg: Acta Universitatis
Gothoburgensis.
Dickins, J. (2007). Sudanese Arabic: Phonematics and Syllable Structure.
Wiesbaden: Harrassowitz.
Dombay, F. von. (1800). Grammatica linguae mauro-arabicae: juxta vernaculi
idiomatis usum. Vienna: Camesina.
Durand, O. (1996). Grammatica di arabo palestinese: Il dialetto di Gerusalemme.
Rome: Universita` degli Studi La Sapienza.
Durand, O. (2009). Dialettologia araba. Rome: Carocci.
Eades, D. and Persson, M. (2013). Aktionsart, word form and context: On
the use of the active participle in Gulf Arabic dialects. Journal of Semitic
Studies, 58, 343–67.
Eksell, K. (2006). Analytic genitive. In K. Versteegh, M. Eid, A. Elgibali, M.
Woidich, and A. Zaborski, eds., Encyclopedia of Arabic Language and
Linguistics. Leiden: Brill, 82–5.
Eksell Harning, K. (1980). The Analytic Genitive in the Modern Arabic Dialects.
Gothenburg: Acta Universitatis Gothoburgensis.
El-Hajje´, H. (1954). Le parler arabe de Tripoli (Liban). Paris: Klincksieck.
El-Hassan, S. (2008). Mood (Arabic dialects). In K. Versteegh, M. Eid, A.
Elgibali, M. Woidich, and A. Zaborski, eds., Encyclopedia of Arabic Language
and Linguistics. Leiden: Brill, 262–9.
Erwin, W. M. (1963). A Short Reference Grammar of Iraqi Arabic. Washington,
DC: Georgetown University Press.
Fink, A. (2017). Der arabische Dialekt von Hasankeyf am Tigris (Osttu¨rkei):
Geschichte – Grammatik – Texte – Glossar. Wiesbaden: Harrassowitz.
Fischer, W. (1959). Die demonstrativen Bildungen der neuarabischen Dialekte: Ein
Beitrag zur historischen Grammatik des Arabischen. The Hague: Mouton.
Fischer, W. and Jastrow, O. (1980). Handbuch der arabischen Dialekte.
Wiesbaden: Harrassowitz.
Fleisch, H. (1974). E´tudes d’arabe dialectal. Beyrouth: Dar el-Machreq.
Geva-Kleinberger, A. (2004). Die arabischen Stadtdialekte von Haifa in der ersten
Ha¨lfte des 20. Jahrhunderts. Wiesbaden: Harrassowitz.
Grigore, G. (2007). L’arabe parle´ a` Mardin: Monographie d’un parler arabe
‘pe´riphe´rique’. Bucharest: Editura Universita˜t¸ii din Bucureti.
Grigore, G. (2016). A Bibliography of AIDA: Association Internationale de
Dialectologie Arabe (1992–2017). Ias¸i: Ars Longa.
Hachimi, A. (2007). Becoming Casablancan: Fessis in Casablanca as a case
study. In C. Miller, E. Al-Wer, D. Caubet, and J. C. E. Watson, eds., Arabic in
the City. London: Routledge, 97–122.
2 3 8
S T E P H A N P R O C H Á Z K A

Haeri, N. (1997). The Sociolinguistic Market of Cairo: Gender, Class, and Education.
London: Kegan Paul.
Halloun, M. (2011). A Practical Dictionary of the Standard Dialect Spoken in
Palestine: English–Arabic. Bethlehem: Bethlehem University.
Hanitsch,
M.
(2019).
Verbalmodiﬁkatoren
in
den
arabischen
Dialekten:
Untersuchungen
zur
Evolution
von
Aspektsystemen,
Porta
Linguarum
Orientalium 27. Wiesbaden: Harrassowitz.
Harrell, R. S. (1962). A Short Reference Grammar of Moroccan Arabic.
Washington DC: Georgetown University Press.
Harrell, R. S. and Sobelman, H. (2004). A Dictionary of Moroccan Arabic: Moroccan–
English/English–Moroccan. Washington DC: Georgetown University Press.
Heath, J. (2002). Jewish and Muslim Dialects of Moroccan Arabic. London:
Routledge Curzon.
Henkin, R. (1992). The three faces of the Arabic participle in Negev bedouin
dialects: Continuous, resultative, and evidential. Bulletin of the School of
Oriental and African Studies, 55, 433–44.
Henkin, R. (2010). Negev Arabic: Dialectal, Sociolinguistic, and Stylistic Variation.
Wiesbaden: Harrassowitz.
Hinds, M. and Badawi, E. (1986). A Dictionary of Egyptian Arabic: Arabic–
English. Beirut: Librairie du Liban.
Holes, C. (2001). Dialect, Culture, and Society in Eastern Arabia. I: Glossary.
Leiden: Brill.
Holes, C. (2004). Tanwı¯n in the Arabic dialects of Eastern and South Eastern
Arabia. Estudios de Dialectologı´a Norteafricana y Andalusı´, 8, 89–97.
Holes, C. (2008). Omani Arabic. In K. Versteegh, M. Eid, A. Elgibali, M.
Woidich, and A. Zaborski, eds., Encyclopedia of Arabic Language and
Linguistics. Leiden: Brill, 478–91.
Holes, C. (2016). Dialect, Culture, and Society in Eastern Arabia, vol. 3:
Phonology, Morphology, Syntax, Style. Leiden: Brill.
Holes, C. (2018). The Historical Dialectology of Arabic: Linguistic and Sociolinguistic
Approaches. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Ingham, B. (1994). Najdi Arabic: Central Arabian. Amsterdam: Benjamins.
Jastrow, O. (1978). Die mesopotamisch-arabischen qǝltu-Dialekte, vol. 1:
Phonologie und Morphologie. Wiesbaden: Steiner.
Jastrow, O. (1981). Die mesopotamisch-arabischen qǝltu-Dialekte, vol. 2:
Volkskundliche Texte in elf Dialekten. Wiesbaden: Steiner.
de Jong, R. (2000). A Grammar of the Bedouin Dialects of the Northern Sinai
Littoral: Bridging the Linguistic Gap Between the Eastern and Western Arab
World. Leiden: Brill.
de Jong, R. (2011). A Grammar of the Bedouin Dialects of Central and Southern
Sinai. Leiden: Brill.
Jullien de Pommerol, P. (1999). Grammaire pratique de l’arabe tchadien. Paris:
Karthala.
Maas, U. (2011). Marokkanisches Arabisch: Die Grundstrukturen. Munich:
Lincom.
10 Arabic Dialectology
239

Maas, U. and Procha´zka, S. (2012). Moroccan Arabic in its wider linguistic
and social contexts. Language Typology and Universals, 65(4), 327–55.
Manfredi, S. (2012). Dialect mixing and dialect levelling in Kordofanian
Baggara Arabic. In A. Barontini, C. Pereira, A. Vicente, and K. Ziamari,
eds., Dynamiques langagie`res en Arabophonies: variations, contacts, migrations
et cre´ations artistiques. Hommage offert a` Dominique Caubet par ses e´le`ves et
colle`gues. Zaragoza: Instituto de Estudios Isla´micos y del Oriente Pro´ximo,
141–62.
Manfredi, S. (2014). Arabic-based pidgins and creoles. Journal of Pidgin and
Creole Languages, 29(2), special issue.
Marc¸ais, P. (1977). Esquisse grammaticale de l’arabe maghre´bin. Paris:
Maisonneuve.
Marc¸ais, W. (1902). Le dialecte arabe parle´ a` Tlemcen. Paris: E. Leroux.
Marc¸ais, W. and Guıˆga, A. (1958–1961). Textes arabes de Takrouˆna. II: Glossaire.
Paris: Centre Nationale de la Recherche Scientiﬁque.
Miller, C., Al-Wer, E., Caubet, D., and Watson, J. C. E. (2007). Arabic in the
City: Issues in Dialect Contact and Language Variation. London: Routledge.
Mo¨rth, K. (1997). Die Kardinalzahlwo¨rter von Eins bis Zehn in den neuarabischen
Dialekten. Vienna: WUV-Univ.-Verlag.
Mo¨rth, K. (2017). Arabic lexicography in the era of the Internet. In P. A.
Fuertes-Olivera, ed., The Routledge Handbook of Lexicography. London:
Routledge.
Naı¨m, S. (2009). L’arabe ye´me´nite de Sanaa. Leuven: Peeters.
Naı¨m-Sanbar, S. (1985). Le parler arabe de Ras-Beyrouth. Paris: Geuthner.
Owens, J. (1984). A Short Reference Grammar of Eastern Libyan Arabic.
Wiesbaden: Harrassowitz.
Owens, J. (1993). A Grammar of Nigerian Arabic. Wiesbaden: Harrassowitz.
Owens, J. (2006). A Linguistic History of Arabic. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Owens, J. and Hassan, J. (2009). West Sudanic Arabic. In K. Versteegh, M.
Eid, A. Elgibali, M. Woidich, and A. Zaborski, eds., Encyclopedia of Arabic
Language and Linguistics. Leiden: Brill, 708–18.
Palva, H. (2006). Dialects: Classiﬁcation. In K. Versteegh, M. Eid, A. Elgibali,
M. Woidich, and A. Zaborski, eds., Encyclopaedia of Arabic Language and
Linguistics, vol. 1. Leiden: Brill, 604–13.
Pat-El, N. (2017). Digging up archaic features: ‘Neo-Arabic’ and comparative
Semitic in the quest for Proto-Arabic. In A. al-Jallad, ed., Arabic in Context:
Celebrating 400 Years of Arabic at Leiden University. Leiden: Brill, 441–75.
Pereira, C. (2010). Le parler arabe de Tripoli (Libye). Zaragoza: Instituto de
Estudios Isla´micos y del Oriente Pro´ximo.
Piamenta, M. (1990). Dictionary of Post-Classical Yemeni Arabic, 2 parts. Leiden:
Brill.
de Pre´mare, A.-L. (1993–1999). Dictionnaire arabe-franc¸ais. 12 vols. Paris:
L’Harmattan.
Procha´zka, S. (1993). Die Pra¨positionen in den neuarabischen Dialekten. Vienna:
VWGO¨ .
2 4 0
S T E P H A N P R O C H Á Z K A

Procha´zka, S. (2002). Die arabischen Dialekte der C¸ ukurova (Su¨dtu¨rkei).
Wiesbaden: Harrassowitz.
Procha´zka, S. (2014). Feminine and masculine plural pronouns in Modern
Arabic dialects. In T. Davidovich, A. Lahdo, and T. Lindquist, eds., From
Tur Abdin to Hadramawt: Semitic Studies Festschrift in Honour of Bo Isaksson on
the occasion of his retirement. Wiesbaden: Harrassowitz, 129–48.
Procha´zka, S. and Batan, I. (2016). The functions of active participles in
Sˇa¯ wi Bedouin dialects. In G. Grigore and G. Bit¸una˘, eds., Arabic Varieties:
Far and Wide. Proceedings of the 11th International Conference of AIDA –
Bucharest, (2015). Bucharest: Editura Universita˘t¸ii, 457–66.
Prochazka, T. (1988). Saudi Arabian Dialects. London: Kegan Paul.
Qa¯ sim, A. (2002). Qa¯mu¯s al-lahgˇa al-ʿammı¯ya fı¯ s-Su¯da¯n, 3rd ed. Khartoum: al-
Da¯ r as-Su¯ da¯ nı¯ya li-l-Kutub.
Reichmuth, S. (1983). Der arabische Dialekt der Sˇukriyya im Ostsudan.
Hildesheim: Olms.
Retso¨, J. (1983). The Finite Passive Voice in Modern Arabic Dialects. Gothenburg:
Universitatis Gothoburgensis.
Retso¨, J. (1987). Copula and double pronominal objects in some Semitic
languages. Zeitschrift der Deutschen Morgenla¨ndischen Gesellschaft, 137, 229–36.
Retso¨, J. (2004). Relative-clause marking in Arabic dialects: A preliminary
survey. In M. Haak, R. de Jong, and K. Versteegh, eds., Approaches to Arabic
Dialects. A Collection of Articles Presented to Manfred Woidich on the Occasion of
His Sixtieth Birthday, Studies in Semitic Languages and Linguistics 38.
Leiden: Brill, 263–73.
Ritt-Benmimoun, V. (2014). Grammatik des arabischen Beduinendialekts der
Region Douz (Su¨dtunesien). Wiesbaden: Harrassowitz.
Ritt-Benmimoun, V. (2017a). Agreement with plural heads in Tunisian
Arabic: The Bedouin South. In V. Ritt-Benmimoun, ed., Tunisian and
Libyan Arabic Dialects: Common Trends – Recent Developments – Diachronic
Aspects. Zaragoza: Prensas de la Universidad de Zaragoza, 261–87.
Ritt-Benmimoun, V. (2017b). The preposition ﬁ- as an object and aspect
marker in a South Tunisian Bedouin dialect. Journal of Semitic Studies, 62,
319–55.
Rosenhouse, J. (2006). Bedouin Arabic. In K. Versteegh, M. Eid, A. Elgibali,
M. Woidich, and A. Zaborski, eds., Encyclopedia of Arabic Language and
Linguistics. Leiden: Brill, 259–69.
Roth-Laly, A. (1969–1972). An Arabic–English–French Lexicon of the Dialects
Spoken in the Chad-Sudan Area. 4 vols. Paris: Centre Nationale de la
Recherche Scientiﬁque.
Rubin, A. D. (2005). Studies in Semitic Grammaticalization. Winona Lake, IN:
Eisenbrauns.
Sabuni, A. (1980). Laut- und Formenlehre des arabischen Dialekts von Aleppo.
Frankfurt am Main: Peter Lang.
Seeger, U. (2009–2013). Der arabische Dialekt der Do¨rfer um Ramallah. 1: Texte.
2: Glossar. 3: Grammatik. Wiesbaden: Harrassowitz.
10 Arabic Dialectology
241

Seeger, U. (2017). Wo¨rterbuch Pala¨stinensisch – Deutsch. In Zusammenarbeit
mit L. Abu l-ʿAsal, T. ʿAla¯ wnih, R. il-ʿArabi. Heidelberg: University of
Heidelberg. www.uni-heidelberg.de/md/semitistik/seeger-wb-pal-deu-
2017–08.pdf).
Shawarbah, M. (2012). A Grammar of Negev Arabic: Comparative Studies, Texts
and Glossary in the Bedouin Dialect of the ʿAza¯zmih Tribe. Wiesbaden:
Harrassowitz.
Singer, H. (1958). Neuarabische Fragewo¨rter: Ein Beitrag zur historischen und
vergleichenden Grammatik der arabischen Dialekte. PhD dissertation, Munich.
Singer, H. (1984). Grammatik der arabischen Mundart der Medina von Tunis.
Berlin: de Gruyter.
Spitta, W. (1880). Grammatik des arabischen Vulga¨rdialectes von Aegypten.
Leipzig: Hinrichs.
Stowasser, K. and Ani, M. (1964). A Dictionary of Syrian Arabic: English–Arabic.
Washington, DC: Georgetown University Press.
Taine-Cheikh, C. (1988–1998). Dictionnaire H˙ assa¯niyya Franc¸ais: Dialecte arabe
de Mauritanie. 8 vols. Paris: Geuthner.
Taine-Cheikh, C. (2004). Le(s) futur(s) en arabe. Re´ﬂexions pour une typo-
logie. Estudios de Dialectologı´a Norteafricana y Andalusı´, 8, 215–38.
Taine-Cheikh, C. (2013). Grammaticalized uses of the verb r˙ a(a) in Arabic: A
Maghribinian speciﬁty? In M. Lafkioui, ed., African Arabic: Approaches to
Dialectology. Berlin: De Gruyter Mouton, 121–59.
Vanhove, M. (1993). La langue maltaise: E´tudes syntaxiques d’un dialecte arabe
‘pe´riphe´rique’. Wiesbaden: Harrassowitz.
Versteegh, C. H. M. (2014). The Arabic Language, 2nd ed. Edinburgh:
Edinburgh University Press.
Versteegh, K. (2004). What’s where and how’s what? Interrogatives in
Arabic dialects. Estudios de Dialectologı´a Norteafricana y Andalusı´, 8,
239–51.
Versteegh, K., Eid, M., Elgibali, A., Woidich, M., and Zaborski, A. (eds.)
(2006–2009). Encyclopedia of Arabic Language and Linguistics. Leiden: Brill.
Vicente, A. (2008). Ge´nesis y clasiﬁcacio´n de los dialectos neoa´rabes. In F.
Corriente and A. Vicente, eds., Manual de dialectologı´a neoa´rabe. Zaragoza:
Instituto de Estudios Isla´micos y del Oriente Pro´ximo, 19–67.
Watson, J. C. E. (1993). A Syntax of S˙anʿa¯nı¯ Arabic. Wiesbaden: Harrassowitz.
Watson, J. C. E. (2002). The Phonology and Morphology of Arabic. Oxford: Oxford
University Press.
Watson, J. C. E. (2009). S˙anʿa¯ nı¯ Arabic. In K. Versteegh, M. Eid, A. Elgibali,
M. Woidich, and A. Zaborski, eds., Encyclopedia of Arabic Language and
Linguistics, vol. 4. Leiden: Brill, 106–15.
Watson, J. C. E. (2011). Arabic dialects (general article). In S. Weninger, G.
Khan, M. P. Streck, and J. C. E. Watson, eds., The Semitic Languages: An
International Handbook. Berlin: De Gruyter Mouton, 851–96.
Weninger, S. (ed.) (2011). The Semitic Languages: An International Handbook.
Berlin: De Gruyter Mouton.
2 4 2
S T E P H A N P R O C H Á Z K A

Werbeck, W. (2001). Laut-und Formenlehre des nordjemenitisch-arabischen
Dialekts von Mana¯ha. Mu¨ nster: Rhema.
Wilmsen, D. (2014). Arabic Indeﬁnites, Interrogatives, and Negators: A Linguistic
History of Western Dialects. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Woidich, M. (2006). Das Kairenisch-Arabische: Eine Grammatik. Wiesbaden:
Harrassowitz.
Woidich, M. and Zack, L. (2009). The g/gˇ -question in Egyptian Arabic revis-
ited. In E. Al-Wer and R. de Jong, eds., Arabic Dialectology: in Honour of Clive
Holes on the Occasion of His Sixtieth Birthday. Leiden: Brill, 41–60.
Yoda, S. (2005). The Arabic Dialect of the Jews of Tripoli (Libya): Grammar, Text and
Glossary. Wiesbaden: Harrassowitz.
Zack, L. and Schippers, A. (2012). Middle Arabic and Mixed Arabic: Diachrony
and Synchrony. Leiden: Brill.
10 Arabic Dialectology
243

11
Maltese
A Peripheral Dialect in the Historical Dialectology of Arabic
David Wilmsen
11.1
Introduction
Maltese is one of the so-called ‘peripheral’ dialects of Arabic, language
varieties that are descended from Arabic but that have for various reasons
become isolated from contact with its mainland. These are situated around
the edges of the Arab world in southern Turkey, along the Iraqi and Syrian
borders, in sub-Saharan Africa, Iran and central Asia, and in two
Mediterranean Sea islands: Cyprus, where a peripheral Arabic variety is
a minority language; and Malta, where it is the language of the majority of
the population (Grigore 2019). All of these are of importance to an under-
standing of the history of Arabic and to the reconstruction of its prehistory.
Yet, amongst them, Maltese offers a uniquely resource-rich ﬁeld for histor-
ical linguistic study, owing to its long-documented history and literary
tradition, with belletrists, historians, and language advocates promoting
the language since medieval times. It is the only peripheral dialect of
Arabic with a language academy, numerous published reference gram-
mars and dictionaries, an active mass media and press, a robust online
presence, an ever-increasing battery of digital tools, and an international
society dedicated to its linguistics, as well as several cohorts of trained
linguists who are native speakers of the language, whose work and that of
non-native-speaker linguists has found an outlet in dedicated journals and
other venues (Fabri 2010: 805–10 and 812).
In this chapter, after brieﬂy considering how Arabic came to be spoken
on Malta, with some conclusions about the source dialects that went into
the composition of the language, we shall examine Maltese in light of
current linguistic thinking about peripheral (or remnant, or enclave) dia-
lects, speciﬁcally with respect to their contact with other languages, their
independent internal changes, and their preservation of features imparted
to them by their donor populations. In so doing, we will mount
a reconstruction of a grammatical feature of the Arabic dialects that

contributed to Maltese – one that has been attracting some attention of
late – and discuss what its presence in the language tells us about the early
history of Arabic dialects.
11.2
Arabic on Malta
The Maltese archipelago, of which the island of Malta itself is the largest,
strategically situated at a narrow point in the Mediterranean Sea between
what is now Tunisia and Sicily (Figure 11.1) and endowed with two natural
deep-water harbours, has always been a strategic destination for visitors,
migrants, and conquerors (Brincat 2008). Not the last of those were Arabic
speakers from nearby North Africa in what is now Tunisia, when the
Tunisian Aghlabid dynasty (800–909) began to extend its domain into
Sicily (c.827), establishing an emirate there. After the Muslim Emirate of
Sicily was replaced by the Norman county of Sicily (c.1060), Arabic speak-
ers remained in place in Sicily for several centuries (Metcalfe 2009) and on
Malta until the present.
Nevertheless, the precise date(s) of entry of Arabic speakers onto Malta
are uncertain. Arab historical sources mentioning the island are rare, the
most detailed being a brief passage in the work of the fourteenth (or
ﬁfteenth)-century geographer al-H˙ imyarı¯, which describes the Muslim
rulers of Malta successfully repelling a Byzantine assault on the island in
the years 1053–54. By some readings of that account (Brincat 1995),
Arabophone Muslims had by that time been on Malta for only about ﬁve
years, the archipelago, according to Brincat‘s reading, having ‘remained an
uninhabited ruin (h˘irba)’ between 869 or 870, when the Aghlabids ﬁrst
seized the islands, and 1048, when, by Brincat’s reading of al-H˙ imyarı¯,
Arabic speakers began colonizing them. Cooperson (2015) suggests
a rereading, which could place them there earlier, and Fiorini and
Zammit (2016), marshalling much indirect historical evidence, contend
Figure 11.1 The Mediterranean Sea, showing Malta in relation to Sicily and Tunisia
11 Maltese
245

that Malta was ‘far from being a deserted island between 870 and 1040’
(2016: 198).
Brincat (2011: 37–47) revisits the matter, suggesting that after the
Aghlabids made their initial incursion onto Malta, they may have left
a small, permanent garrison to defend against attempts at retaking the
islands but that a large inﬂux of Arabic speakers probably did not occur
until around 1048–49. One of his reasons for concluding this is that in
869–70, the Muslim armies would have been composed primarily of
Berbers, who at that early date may not have become fully Arabized. An
earlier population of the islands coming from North Africa would, there-
fore, likely have left more of a Berber substratum in Maltese. To the
contrary, it happens that the Berber contribution to Maltese is vanish-
ingly small, amounting to about twenty-ﬁve identiﬁable Berber lexemes
(Souag 2018). On the other hand, later political upheavals in the Arab/
Islamic world from Muslim Iberia (Al-Andalus), across North Africa, as far
east as Iraq, and also in Sicily could have encouraged the migration of
Arabic-speaking populations to Malta in the mid eleventh century
(Brincat 2011: 46–7). It is likely that most settlers would have come
from Sicily. But ﬁrm Muslim control was not established in Sicily until
after the Fatimids had put an end to Aghlabid rule in North Africa and
Sicily combined in 909 (Nef 2018: 77 and 83–7). A cautious view of the
matter would thus be to regard the Maltese archipelago as having become
thoroughly Arabized by the eleventh century, with contacts with the
Arabophone mainland persisting until around 1250 with the expulsion
of Muslims from Sicily and from Malta.
With that, two questions remain: The ﬁrst relates to the variety or
varieties of Arabic that the Arabophone population of Malta of the mid
eleventh century spoke. The second relates to how subsequent contact
with European languages affected the Maltese variety of Arabic. As for the
ﬁrst, Brincat (2018) proposes that it must have been ‘a variety of Maghrebi
speech akin to, or derived from, the one that had developed in Sicily
around the year 1000 and was still spoken in its western areas under the
Normans’ (2018: 208), concluding also that an afﬁnity with the Arabic of
Al-Andalus is probable. This assessment also makes the tacit assumption
that the Maghrebi dialects of Arabic had also developed by the year 1000,
but it leaves unanswered the type or types of Arabic from which the
Maghrebi dialects had developed. The Aghlabids, who by Caliphal appoint-
ment in 800 gained dominion over western Libya, Tunis, and eastern
Algeria, were originally from northern Arabia by way of the Persian pro-
vince of Khorasan (Anderson et al. 2018: 2). For its part, the Fatimid move-
ment began in Syria, whence it moved to Morocco, before establishing
itself in Algeria (Metcalfe 2009: 45). What this suggests is that the Arabic
spoken in Sicily, and accordingly the Arabic spoken on Malta – whenever it
became established there – was and is a product of the dialects of more
than one donor population. Mifsud (2008) supposes that ‘successive waves
2 4 6
D A V I D W I L M S E N

of impact reached the Maltese shores from different Arab stations and at
different points in the island’s history’ (2008: 146), further remarking that
although ‘most linguists agree that typologically Maltese ﬁts well into the
general characteristics of Maghrebi dialects’, (ibid.) it also displays ‘simila-
rities with the Eastern dialects [and] . . . suggestive Levantine traits in the
language’ (ibid.; for some of those, see Wilmsen and Al-Sayyed 2019 and
references).
As for the second question, Hoberman and Aronoff (2003: 64) ﬁnd it
puzzling that successive foreign rule over Malta after Aghlabid and Fatimid
dominion of the islands, ‘have not seen that language supplanted by
Sicilian or Italian’. The answer to this must be sought in the immediate
aftermath of Europeans gaining control of the islands, the prevailing
conditions of which would have fostered the maintenance of Arabic.
Whereas
the
Normans
were
tolerant
multiculturalists,
somewhat
Arabized themselves, their successors in rule over Malta were not. As
Mifsud (1995) has observed:
The Normans were followed by the Angevins (1266–1282), the Aragonese
(1283–1410) and the Castilians (1412–1530). During the whole of this
period, Malta was governed from Sicily and was repeatedly given as a ﬁef
to feudal lords, who treated the indignant [sic] population very shabbily.
(Mifsud 1995: 23)
During this entire period, the Aragonese and Castilians were themselves at
grips with an entrenched Arab/Islamic culture in their own native domains
on the Iberian Peninsula, in an epic contest for political and cultural
dominion, in which they eventually prevailed, and after which, they
remained suspicious of their own Arabophone Christian population
(Harvey 1990). For that reason and others, they would likely have been in
no mood to show benevolence towards an Arabophone subject population
on Malta. For their part, the Maltese would have had little contact with
their rulers, who oftentimes were not even resident on the islands. Even
when they were, the European overlords remained an elite upper class in
the capital city of Valletta. The rural islanders living away from the capital
city, and especially those living on Gozo, the second of the two major
islands (Figure 11.2), would have had no reason to adopt their languages,
and the urbanite Maltese showed little inclination to do so.
This is consistent with thinking on peripheral dialects in general.
Working with what he calls remnant dialects of English in the southeast-
ern seaboard of the United States, Wolfram (2004) has outlined several
prevailing sociolinguistic principles obtaining in peripheral language vari-
eties. One of those, the principle of localized identity, pertains to Maltese:
‘Speakers of peripheral dialects often embrace dialect distinctiveness as an
emblematic token of local identity’ (2004: 103). This principle itself, along
with the prevailing political climate on the islands for at least 300 years
after the expulsion of Muslims, is sufﬁcient to explain the survival of
11 Maltese
247

Arabic: Arabic speakers remaining on Malta and Gozo would have had
little incentive to adopt the languages of their Romance-speaking over-
lords but ample motivation to preserve their own separate and distinctive
identities, the emblematic embodiment of which would have been their
own language.
11.3
Characteristics of Peripheral Dialects
It should be clear from this that although Malta became isolated, as such,
from the Arabophone mainland, it was not thoroughly isolated. Indeed,
the concept of dialect isolation has been a subject of discussion amongst
linguists working with peripheral dialects, mostly amongst rural and
island populations in the southern United States. Montgomery (2000)
questions it entirely as a construct of linguistics, used ‘uncritically in
analysing the language of geographically or economically peripheral com-
munities’ (2000: 50). Wolfram and Schilling-Estes (2003) and Wolfram
(2004) speak of a bias amongst dialectologists that they call ‘the relic
Figure 11.2 The Maltese archipelago
2 4 8
D A V I D W I L M S E N

assumption’, which supposes ‘that dialect forms in peripheral dialects will
remain relatively static and resistant to language innovation’ (Wolfram
and Schilling-Estes 2003: 208). This assumption does not seem to prevail
amongst Arabic dialectologists or amongst linguists interested in Maltese
as an Arabic dialect, for whom the changes that Maltese has undergone
and the effects of language contact are obvious.1 Indeed, the study of
Maltese as a peripheral language variety has taken great strides toward
‘sorting out the layers of founder effects and distinguishing instances of
conservatism from innovation’ (Wolfram 2004: 94), which Wolfram iden-
tiﬁes as a methodological and descriptive challenge. The challenges, as he
(2004) and he and his collaborator Schilling-Estes (2003) delineate them,
are three: (1) what they call ‘the donor issue’, also called the ‘founder
effect’; (2) the effects of independent language change; and (3) the effects
of language contact.
11.4
Contact: The Lexicon
Without apparent irony, Wolfram and Schilling-Estes observe, ‘no rem-
nant community . . . is a linguistic island, standing continually apart from
all contact’ (2003: 193).2 This is certainly true of Malta. An Arabist encoun-
tering Maltese for the ﬁrst time must surely be struck both by its kinship to
Arabic and by its European vocabulary. Consider the following:3
(1)
wasal il-waqt li nħallu warajna l-illuz˙ joni tal-progress bh-ala xi torta
kbira li dejjem tiz˙ died
wasal
il-waɁt
li
n-hall-u
waray-na
l-illuzyo´ni
arrive.PFV
D ET-time R EL 1-leave.IPF V-PL
PREP-PRO.1P L
D E T-illusion
ta-l-progress
b-hala
sˇi
torta kbira
li
deyyem
POSS-DE T-progress
P R E P-condition
D E T cake large
R E L always
ti-zde¯d
3F-increase.IP FV
‘The time has arrived that we leave behind us the illusion of
progress as a large cake that always increases.’
The utterance is Arabic in structure and vocabulary, with the exception of
three nouns that originated in European languages. Estimates are that
non-Arabic words make up from around 25 per cent to above 60 per cent
of the vocabulary of Maltese, with the percentages varying by genre and
1 A variant of it does persist amongst non-specialist speakers of Maltese, who prefer to imagine that the language is
a direct descendant of Punic, the while acknowledging the inﬂuence of European languages on their native tongue.
2 They work with the distinctive dialects spoken in island communities off the Atlantic coast of the southern United States.
They also use the term ‘enclave dialect community’ (Wolfram and Schilling-Estes 2003: 224).
3 The Maltese examples come from the Maltese Language Resource Server corpus tool called Korpus Malti (http://mlrs
.research.um.edu.mt/CQPweb/malti03/index.php). They will ﬁrst be rendered according to Maltese orthography, after
which they will appear in linguistic notation.
11 Maltese
249

discourse (see Lucas and Cˇ e´plo¨ 2020: 287–90). Notably, in Maltese litera-
ture and in spoken Maltese, the proportion of Arabic lexis is well above
80 per cent (Lucas and Cˇ e´plo¨ 2020: 288, Fig. 1 and references). This is
reﬂected in example (1), wherein words of non-Arabic origin account for
three of sixteen, or 18.75 per cent, of words in the utterance.4 Brincat
(2008) observes, ‘Arabic words prevail in any text because function words
are repeated many times and basic terms occur more often than specia-
lized terms’ (2008: 144). It happens that in example (1), all the verbs are of
Arabic origin, but a great many verbs have been borrowed from European
languages (Mifsud 1995). When they are, however, they are adapted to
Arabic morphology:
(2)
Pazjenti li jkunu qegh-din ric˙overati ﬂ-isptarijiet ﬁz˙ mien l-elezz-
joni gh-andu jkollhom id-dritt li jivvutaw
patsyenti li
yi-ku¯ n-u
Ɂe¯d-ı¯n
ricˇoverati
ﬁ-l-ispariye¯t
patients RE L
3-be.I PFV- PL
sitting- PL
recovering
P R E P-D E T-hospital
ﬁ
zme¯n l-eledzyo¯ni
a¯ndu
yi-koll-hom
id-dritt
P R E P
time
D E T-elections
M O D
3-possess.IPF V-P R O.3 P L
D ET-right
li
yi-vo¯ta-w
P R E P
3-vote.IPF V-PL
‘Patients who are recovering in hospital at the time of the elections
should have the right to vote.’
In example (2), all function words are of Arabic origin, but all content words
are of European. Regardless, the verb, ‘to vote’ – clearly not of Arabic origin –
adheres to Arabic verbal inﬂexional morphology. About this, Owens (2010:
116) comments: ‘Despite rather strong nominal loan incorporation from
Italian and English, the inherited Arabic morphological categories have
been
hardly
affected,
the
comparative
evidence
here
conﬁrming
a robustness of morphology over time and space.’ Noteworthy, however,
is the participial recˇoverati ‘recovering’, which is not of the characteristic
participle shape of Arabic. Mifsud (1995: 69–70, 248 and elsewhere) observes
that the active participle of Arabic form has become largely unproductive,
with only a small closed class of participles retaining Arabic morphology.
This is clearly an effect of contact with European languages.
11.5
Independent Language Change: Phonology
Wolfram (2004) afﬁrms that, ‘like any other language variety, isolated
dialect communities change from within’ (2004: 94). This is evident in
Maltese. If its Arabic origin is obvious from its morphology and lexicon,
it is just as obvious that its phonology is not characteristically Arabic.
4 This is counting the deﬁnite article, relative pronoun, and pronominal sufﬁx as individual lexical items, and counting
those that appear more than once only once.
2 5 0
D A V I D W I L M S E N

Indeed, Avram is wont to observe that ‘the domain in which modern
Maltese differs most signiﬁcantly from other modern dialects of Arabic is
phonology’ (2014: 19). This is well documented (Borg 1997; Cowan 1966).
For example, the so-called ‘emphatic’ consonants (s˙, d˙ , t˙, and ẓ) no longer
exist in standard Maltese, now being generally realized as their non-
emphatic counterparts (Cowan 1966; Puech 2006). A few examples should
sufﬁce for our purposes (from Cowan 1966: 28):
(3)
Egyptian Arabic
/
Maltese
s˙u¯ f
/
su¯ f
‘wool’
t˙awı¯l
/
twı¯l
‘long’
d˙ ufr
/
difer
‘ﬁngernail’
The effects of emphatic consonants on vowel quality, however, remain in
words whose etymons contained emphatic consonants (Cowan 1966:
28–32; Walter 2002).
The dorsal and laryngeal consonants h˘, γ, h- , ʕ, and h have all undergone
changes, too, suchthath˘ isusually pronouncedh- , and h- is usually pronounced
h. For their parts, γ and ʕ have merged such that both are usually realized by
a lengthening of the vowel and no more. These are reﬂected in the orthogra-
phy. Maltese has been written in Latin characters since the earliest known
document written in the language, a poem (cantilena) dating to the mid
ﬁfteenth century (Wilmsen 2014: 91–2 and references). A standard alphabet
was adopted in 1921, which reﬂects the sound changes that have occurred in
the language. The letter h- of the Maltese alphabet represents both etymologi-
cal h- (ﺡ) and etymological h˘ (ﺥ). An example of this is to be seen in example (1):
nh- allu ‘we leave’ (<ﺧﻠَّﻰh˘alla¯ ‘to let/allow/leave’) and h- ala (<ﺣﺎﻟﺔh- a¯la ‘state/
condition’). Likewise, etymological γ (ﻍ) and etymological ʕ (ﻉ) are represented
as gh- . This may be seen in (4), where the word ‘cattle/sheep/livestock’ gh- anem
(<ﻏﻨﻢġanam) and the preposition gh- al (<ﻋﻠﻰʕala¯) are both written with gh- ,
which, in both cases, is pronounced as a lengthened vowel:
(4)
ic˙-c˙aqliq ta’ l-gh-anem ta’ kull staġjun minn reġjun gh-all-ieh-or
icˇ-cˇaʔliʔ
ta-l-a¯nem
ta-kull
stagˇyun
movement
POSS-D E T-cattle/ﬂocks
P O S S-every
season
min
regˇyun
a¯l-l-e¯hor
P R E P
region
P R E P-D E T-other
‘The seasonal movement of ﬂocks from one region to another’
The orthography also indicates that a change has taken place with the sound
represented by the letter h which is nowadays unpronounced in standard
Maltese. Yet its very presence indicates that an unvoiced laryngeal fricative
must once have existed in the language. This is easily seen in the character-
istically Arabic 3rd-person pronouns, which are spelled hu or huwa ‘he’, hi or
hija ‘she’, and hum ‘they’, but which are pronounced as long vowels: u¯ and ı¯,
(cf. (11) and (12) below), u¯m, or a vowel, a glide, and a vowel: u¯wa and ı¯ya.
11 Maltese
251

A curious instance of the change is found in the existential particle hemm
(pronounced emm). This undoubtedly stems from the same existential
particle as the Tunisian, where it takes the form tamma or famma:5
(5)
Tunisian Arabic
a. tamma
h˙ a¯gˇa
ahamm
E X I S T
thing
E L A.important
‘There [is] something more important.’
b. famma
h˙ a¯gˇa
uh˘ra¯
E X I S T
thing
other
‘There [is] another thing.’
c. Maltese
U hemm h- aġa oh- ra wkoll
u¯
emm
hagˇa
o¯hra
wkoll
C O N J
E X I S T
thing
other
also
‘There [is] also another thing.’
A change from θ to f is unremarkable and is in fact attested early in Arabic
in Qur’a¯n 2:61, where the word for ‘garlic’, usually to¯m in written Arabic
(to¯m in most dialects of Arabic, including Maltese, where it is tewm), is
instead fo¯m. For its part, alternation between h and ʔ is also attested.6 For
example, the deﬁnite article ʔl- is assumed to have derived from or been
interchangeable with hl- or hn- in early attestations (Wilmsen 2014: 155
and references; Al-Jallad 2015: 16–17).7 What is more, some dialects of
Arabic continue to express the 1st and 2nd person pronouns as hana ‘I’ and
hint ‘you’, rather than the more common ʔana and ʔint (Behnstedt 1997:
500–3), and the relative pronoun halli ‘which’, instead of the usual ʔilli or
yalli (Behnstedt 1997: 496–7).8 On the other hand, a change from θ to h or
f to h is unusual.9
These are all independent changes that have not taken place in most
mainland Arabic dialects.10 They are, as such, examples of independent
language changes that have occurred since Maltese became isolated from
5 Tunisian examples are drawn from the Tunisian Arabic Corpus (www.tunisiya.org).
6 The Maltese emm would actually begin with a glottal stop, inasmuch as it is physically impossible to begin a word with
a vowel. The glottal stop is pronounced, but it is no longer phonemic.
7 This is likely preserved in Levantine and Gulf dialects of Arabic, in which the article hal- can be afﬁxed to a noun. This is
usually interpreted as a truncated demonstrative (cf. Al-Jallad 2015: 78), but this is not certain, for the reason that hal-
remains uninﬂected for gender or number: for example in Emirati Arabic the near demonstratives are haˉða (M S G ),
haˉði (F S G), haˉðeˉl(a)(P L ), as in haˉða l-yaˉhil ‘this boy’, haˉði l-yaˉhila ‘this girl’, haˉðeˉl li-yuhhaˉl ‘these children’ but hal-
yaˉhil ‘the/this boy’, hal-yaˉhila ‘the/this girl’, hal-yuhhaˉl ‘the/these children’.
8 I have heard halli for ʔilli in Omani dialects as well as haywa for the more common dialect Arabic ʔaywa ‘yes’. The
Emirati word for ‘yes’ is heˉ, as opposed to ʔy.
9 Behnstedt (2016: 12) documents the expression of tˉ as h in the numeral ‘two’ hintayn (< tˉintayn) in a few localities of
southern Yemen. The same is found in a dialect of Oman (Brockett 1985: 212). Holes (2016: 52, 136) notes it
(realized hinteˉn) in a dialect of Bahrain. I have found it in recordings archived at the Sharjah Museums Authority, in
which speakers of dialects of the northern United Arab Emirates relate their recollections of the old town of Sharjah.
10 Behnstedt (2016: 8–11) documents the realization of ʕ as ʔ, and the ġ as ʔ, ʕ, and even reﬂexes of q in some Yemeni
dialect areas.
2 5 2
D A V I D W I L M S E N

the mainland varieties of Arabic. Two changes that Maltese does, however,
share with some of its sister varieties of Arabic also shed light on changes
that appear to have occurred in those varieties, in that some of the sound
changes in Maltese can be dated. Among them are the realization of the
etymological unvoiced uvular stop q as a glottal stop ʔ and the loss of the
interdental fricatives, ð and θ, which are usually replaced by dental stops
d and t.11 The former is a sound change manifested in the urban Levantine
dialects and those of the Egyptian Delta, the latter in urban Levantine
dialects and all Egyptian dialects. On the other hand, littoral North
African dialects preserve the unvoiced uvular stop q, and θ remains in
place in Tunisian Arabic.
Writings from the fourteenth through the eighteenth century reﬂect the
interdentals in the orthography, such that Avram (2014, 2016), who is
conducting exhaustive philological research into the matter, can contest
‘recurrent claims in the literature regarding the dating of the loss of
fricative interdentals . . . widely believed to have occurred before the
separation of Maltese from the Arab world’ (Avram 2014: 29). Similarly,
from onomastic evidence, Avram (2016: 55) observes that ‘the various
spellings in surnames, nicknames, and place names show that earlier
Maltese still had the voiceless uvular stop q’. By the same token, he also
deduces that ‘the voiced velar fricative γ and the voiced pharyngeal frica-
tive h- survive to some extent in most dialects of Maltese, i.e. they are still
two different phonemes, at least until the end of the eighteenth century’
(2016: 71).
For its part, the change in the voiceless laryngeal fricative, represented
as h, can only be dated relatively. Avram is on less ﬁrm ground to suppose
that it remained in the Maltese of the ﬁfteenth through the seventeenth
centuries, citing a few lexemes, such as zahara ‘blossom’ from 1480 and Ta
Buha ‘of her father’ from 1647 (2016: 72–3), when analogous spellings
persist in modern Maltese writing, wherein what is spelled h is realized
in speech as a lengthened vowel: z˙ ahra and missierha, realized za¯ra and
misyera¯.12 The most that can be said is that the Arabic varieties from which
Maltese descended must have possessed an unvoiced laryngeal h otherwise
it would not have appeared in the orthography, medieval or modern.
Similarly, the Maltese existential particle emm must have assumed its
present form after Arabic speakers on Malta became isolated from the
Arabophone mainland, that is, it, too, is an independent development.
Without further corroboration, there is no way to determine whether it
derives from tamma or famma or both (as Vanhove 1993: 397, n. 4 suggests),
by one of these sequences:
11 In concepts entering the language later, these are often pronounced z and s. For example, the ordinal number ‘second’
in Egyptian and Levantine dialects is taˉni (m) and tanya (f), but the division of time ‘second’, a concept that must have
entered the language later, is sanya.
12 Compare the Lebanese bay-aˉ (father-her) ‘her father’.
11 Maltese
253

(6)
a. tamm(a) →famm(a) →hemm(a) →emm
b. tamm(a) →hemm(a) →emm
c. famm(a) →hemm(a) →emm
Nevertheless, it is certain that the Maltese existential particle does derive
from the same parent variety or varieties of Arabic that lent to Tunisian
Arabic its existential particles, they being unique in spoken varieties of
Arabic to Tunisian Arabic and Maltese.13 This, in turn, has implications for
the origins of some of the parent forms of Maltese, to which we shall
return in the discussion.
11.6
The Founder Effect: Morphosyntax
Although peripheral language varieties do, indeed, exhibit the effects of
contact with other languages and changes independent of their sister
varieties, they also exhibit shared features that they have inherited from
their parent variety or varieties. Wolfram and Schilling-Estes (2003) also
speak of ‘a set of structures that unite . . . remnant dialect communities . . .
with a relatively wide range of . . . dialects’ (2003: 182). As we have already
seen, Maltese shares its function words, such as pronouns, for example the
personal pronouns, such as u¯ wa and ı¯ya and their short forms, and pre-
positions, such as ﬁ‘in’, min ‘from’, and gh- al ‘on/about’ and others. So, too,
does it share other non-lexical features, such as typically Arabic verb
conjugation paradigms, even in borrowed verbs. These and innumerable
other morphological features betray the generic roots of Maltese. At the
same time, Maltese does provide reason for adopting some ‘relic assump-
tions’. Among those are a morphosyntactic feature of spoken Arabic that is
of continual interest in Arabic dialectology and has of late attracted
renewed attention (Wilmsen 2014, 2016a, 2017; Glanville 2018) and
debate (Lucas 2015, republished verbatim in Lucas 2018; Lucas 2020; and
Wilmsen 2020). In the course of the renewed discussion, it has come to be
named grammatical sˇi (Wilmsen 2014; Glanville 2018). The reason for the
name is that reﬂexes of sˇi appear in a broad range of grammatical functions
variably distributed across a wide geographical spread of spoken Arabic
varieties. It happens that all of these functions but one are present in
Maltese. These offer a rare opportunity for determining the latest possible
date for the development of grammatical sˇi. There follows, then, a listing of
those features, with examples, and a discussion of their interpretation and
treatment at the hands of various researchers, ending with a synthesis and
modiﬁed proposal for the derivations of various members of the class.
13 For a listing and discussion of Arabic existential particles of spoken Arabic, see Eid (2008: 84). Both tˉamm(a) and
famm(a) were present in the vernacular Arabic of Al-Andalus, too (Corriente 1977: 44 and 218–29; 1997: 86
and 406).
2 5 4
D A V I D W I L M S E N

11.6.1
Wh-Interrogative sˇ
The most widespread of functions of grammatical sˇi is its involvement in
wh- interrogatives, those meaning ‘what’ and ‘why’. A thoroughgoing list-
ing of all of these across all varieties of spoken Arabic, if such an ambitious
undertaking were even possible to achieve, is unnecessary here.14
Nevertheless, for illustrative purposes, a few examples reﬂecting their
geographical dispersion as well as their range of forms may be seen in
Table 11.1.
It must be emphasized that within any Arabic dialect area, a certain, or
even
extensive,
amount
of
variability
exists,
especially
in
what-
interrogatives, less so the why. For example, some Syrian Arabic varieties
use reﬂexes of what-interrogative sˇinu and why-interrogative ʕale¯sˇ (Behnstedt
1997: 570–1), among others, and Yemeni varieties display numerous varia-
tions upon the basic forms of the what-interrogatives shown in Table 11.1,
such as we¯sˇsˇu ða¯ʔ (fem: we¯sˇsˇı¯ ðı¯ʔ) and other unrelated forms such as ma¯ ha¯ða
(fem: ma¯ ha¯ði) among many others (Behnstedt 2016: 170–1).
Interrogative /sˇ/ in what-interrogatives is a shared feature of almost all
regional dialects of Arabic. Yet the Yemeni dialects are conspicuous in
their alternative forms of the ma¯ ha¯ða type, which they share with few
other extant varieties of Arabic save the Arabic of writing. For that matter,
the why-interrogatives, if they display less variability throughout the
Arabophone world, in the Yemeni dialects also exhibit wide variability.
Interrogative /sˇ / is present in a broad dialect area of the Yemen, but it is
absent in just as broad an area, some Yemeni dialects instead possessing
interrogatives of the lima¯ type, again a feature that those dialects share
with the Arabic of writing but few others.
Table 11.1 Wh-interrogatives in select Arabic varieties and
Maltese
Variety
what?
why?
Moroccan
ʔasˇ, sˇ nu, sˇ-
ʕlasˇ
Tunisian
ʔaˉsˇ , sˇnuwwa, sˇniyya, sˇ nuˉma
ʕlasˇ
Syrian
ʔasˇ, ʔaysˇ , ʔeˉsˇ, sˇuˉ
laysˇ, leˉsˇ
Iraqi
ʔeˉsˇ, weˉsˇ, sˇ inu, sˇ-
luwıˉsˇ, leˉ sˇ, ilweˉsˇ
Gulf
sˇu, weˉ sˇ, sˇ-
leˉsˇ
Yemeni
ʔaysˇ, waysˇ, ʔisˇu, maˉ
laysˇ, leˉsˇ, leˉ(h), lilmaˉ
Maltese
sˇi, sˇieˉsˇ, sˇinu (fem. sˇini) (pl. sˇinum), sˇ-
aˉleˉsˇ
14 For an extensive but non-exhaustive listing of them and the dialects in which they appear, see Versteegh (2004).
11 Maltese
255

11.6.2 Negation with -sˇ
It happens that the features by which most spoken varieties of Arabic and
the Arabic of writing diverge most sharply from each other are in inter-
rogation and negation. The wh-interrogatives of written Arabic are of
the ma¯(ða) type, and negation usually proceeds with reﬂexes of la¯. For its
EXCURSUS ON THE TYPES OF ARABIC
It behoves us to pause brieﬂy to discuss the matter alluded to here: the distinction,
sometimes sharp, between the Arabic of writing and spoken Arabic. This is not the
place for a thoroughgoing examination of the entire range of features that
distinguish the two broad language types that are normally subsumed under the
labels‘standard’(thatis,writtenand declaimed)Arabicand ‘dialect’Arabic (thatis,
the innumerable varieties of the spoken language). Nor is it necessary, because, as
one of the more frequently discussed dimensions of Arabic, with oceans of ink
spilled about it in the academic and popular presses, descriptions of the situation
abound.
The Arabic of writing was codiﬁed between the eighth and tenth
centuries AD after Arabic speakers had in the previous century spread across
the lands that were to become what is now known as the ‘Arab world’ in what
might conveniently be called the Arab diaspora (Owens 2005). This codiﬁcation
was necessary as Arabic came to be used as the language of statecraft. So, too,
did it become immediately important as the vehicle of religion, as the subject
peoples in the lands under Arab Muslim rule began to adopt the religion of the
ruling elites, whose speech was probably already distinct from the Arabic of
elegy, oracle, and oratory, which comprises the Muslim scriptures. The
scripture and the bases of the sacred law were transcribed in a language
closely similar in almost all respects to the newly codiﬁed Arabic.
The codiﬁed language, used mostly in writing or in formal pronouncements,
has changed somewhat since its early usage, but it still retains something of
a sense of antiquity or at least a stiff formality that the spoken varieties – which,
for their parts, have continued to develop – lack. Nevertheless, as the ever-present
language of the quotidian praxis of the Islamic faith, the formal language of
statecraft, and nowadays the mass media, it has exerted a powerful centripetal
force on the spoken varieties of Arabic in the mainland Arabophone world.
As to the place of the old codiﬁed form of the language in a historical
dialectology of Arabic, it was long thought that owing to its ‘archaic’ nature, it is
the progenitor of the Arabic dialects. Some continue to espouse this view, but an
alternative position holds that it and the spoken dialects of Arabic descend from
divergent sources and that the modern spoken dialects have their originin various
regional dialects of the Arabian Peninsula and the Fertile Crescent. Unfortunately,
with the dearth of historical evidence for the origins of Arabic before it began its
life as a medium of statecraft, religion, and literature with the advent of the
Islamic era, a deﬁnitive resolution to the matter has proven elusive.15
Nevertheless, Maltese, as a datable peripheral variety of Arabic, holds
invaluable potential for lending the matter some clarity. Largely unaffected by
the Arabic of formal writing, it shares features with its sister dialects that grant
insight into the state of the language in the early days of the Arab diaspora.
15 We do, however, have access to some tantalizing hints at the nature of spoken Arabic from the very day that the
codiﬁcation exercise began in the works of the early grammarians (see Owens 2019).
2 5 6
D A V I D W I L M S E N

part, the basic negation technique in spoken Arabic (and, under certain
contextually constrained circumstances, in the Arabic of writing, as well)
proceeds with the negator ma¯ alone:16
(7)
Levantine Arabic
ma¯
ʔazˇa¯/(ʔizˇa¯)
N EG
come. PFV
‘[He/it] came not.’
This manner of negation prevails in the Arabic dialects of central and the
eastern Arabian Peninsula, most of Mesopotamia, the Syrian Steppes, the
northern Levant, and inland North Africa. On the other hand, the dialects of
the North African littoral, throughout Egypt, the southern and highland
Levant, some Arabic dialects of southern Mesopotamia, and some of the
southern Arabian Peninsula sufﬁx a reﬂex of grammatical sˇi to the negated
verb:
(8)
Tunisian Arabic
ma¯-zˇa¯-sˇ
N E G-come.PF V-N E G
‘[He/it] came not.’
Negation in Maltese proceeds in the same manner:
(9)
Maltese
Illum G˙ anni ma ġiex
illu¯ m
gˇanni
ma-gˇe¯-sˇ
today
Name
N E G-come. PFV- N E G
‘Today, Johnny came not.’
This, then, is the next most prominent manifestation of grammatical sˇi in
the dialects of spoken Arabic. Less widespread than its near universal use in
wh-interrogatives but certainly prevalent and more widely discussed is the
use of grammatical sˇi in negation, often – perhaps most often – as a sufﬁxed
-sˇ, but also commonly as -sˇi in some of the dialects in which it appears. This
is an especially telling feature for its very lack of universality amongst
varieties of Arabic. Whereas almost all of them utilize grammatical sˇi in
their wh-interrogatives, only some of them display it in negation.
The use of -sˇ in wh-interrogatives and in negation are the most promi-
nent uses of grammatical sˇi that Maltese shares with other varieties of
Arabic, but they are not the only ones.
11.6.3
Polar Interrogative sˇi
Aside from its involvement in the formation of wh-interrogatives, grammati-
cal sˇi can, in some varieties of Arabic and in Maltese, serve to pose a polar
16 We are concerned only with the negation of verbal predications. Some Arabic dialects negate non-verbal predications
with maˉ, too; others with univerbations involving maˉ, such as misˇ or musˇ (muˉsˇ in Maltese), muˉ, or mub, among
others, all deriving from maˉ + huˉ/hıˉ (+ sˇ)/(+ b).
11 Maltese
257

question, the answer to which would usually be either an afﬁrmative or
a negative. Like negative sˇi, polar interrogative sˇi is also widespread amongst
Arabic varieties, appearing in almost as many as use grammatical sˇi in nega-
tion, and even in some that do not, the Arabic of Damascus being a notable
example of the latter (Cowell 2005: 378). Of those that do negate with -sˇ, it has
been noted in Moroccan (Harrell 2004: 147; Caubet 1983, 1984), Tunisian
(Stumme 1896: 148; Singer 1984: 722–3; Gibson 2008: 596), and Egyptian
Arabic (Woidich 2006: 358), among others. Never obligatory and often impart-
ing some kind of contingence to the question (Wilmsen 2014: 111–15;
Procha´zka and Dallaj 2020), it often appears at the end of the utterance, but
it can also appear immediately after the item in question. These are typical
conﬁgurations:17
(10)
a. Lebanese Arabic
intu
b-ta-ʕarf-u
baʕd˙
sˇi
P R O.2PL
HAB-2-know.IPFV-PL
one.another
Q
‘You know each other?’
b. b-t-ʕarf-u
sˇı¯
ayy
sa¯ʕa
badd-u
yi-rzˇaʕ
HAB-2-know.IPFV-PL
Q
which hour FUT-P R O.3 M SG 3-return.I PFV
‘You know what time he will return?’
Maltese differs from its Arabic dialect sisters in that polar interrogative -sˇ
does not usually appear utterance-ﬁnal, except when optionally sufﬁxed to
the 3rd-person pronoun hu as a tag question, meaning ‘is it?’ or ‘is it not?’
(cf. Borg and Azzopardi-Alexander 1997: 4–5):
(11)
Maltese
a. Mhux xi nasba din hux?
mu¯ sˇ
sˇi
nasba
dı¯n
u¯ sˇ
N EG
D E T
trap
D EM
Q
‘It [is] not a/some trap, this, [is] it?’
b. X’ lejla sabih-a, hux?
sˇ
leyla
sabı¯ha
u¯ sˇ
EX C L AM
night
beautiful
Q
‘What a beautiful evening, [is] it [not]?’
For that matter, polar interrogative /sˇ / can be afﬁxed to any independent
personal pronoun in Maltese (Wilmsen 2016a):
(12)
Maltese
a. Hix kbira din?
ı¯-sˇ
kbı¯ra
dı¯n
PRO.3F S G-Q
large
DE M
‘[Is] it large, that?’
17 Examples from Lebanese Arabic are drawn from my own observations.
2 5 8
D A V I D W I L M S E N

b. Hux vera ?
u¯ -sˇ
vera
P R O.3M S G- Q
True
‘[Is] it true?’
c. Intix tifhem?
intı¯-sˇ
ti-fhem
P R O.3S G- Q
2-understand.I PFV
‘You understand?’
Only a few Arabic varieties – one of them extinct – exhibit this construc-
tion with pronominal subjects, and those extant appear to possess it in
remnant form. Two attestations of it are found in a poem and a proverb
respectively in the Andalusi Arabic of the fourteenth and ﬁfteenth centu-
ries, one of a 1st-person ana¯ and one of the 3rd-person huwa (Wilmsen
2014: 69–81):
(13)
Andalusi Arabic
a. anı¯-sˇ
n-adri
P R O.1S G- Q
1 S-know.IPF V
‘[Do] I know?’
b. huwa¯-sˇ
y-ġat˙t˙i
rigˇl-ayy
P R O.3 M S G-Q
3-cover.IPFV
leg-P R O.1
‘[Does] it cover my legs?’
As for the extant varieties of Arabic, Stumme (1896: 148) documents the
masculine and feminine 3rd-person singular polar interrogative pronouns
huwa¯sˇi and hiya¯sˇi in the Tunisian Arabic of the nineteenth century, with-
out, however, giving any examples in context of usage. For its part, con-
temporary Moroccan Arabic possesses a truncated 3rd-person pronoun wa¯sˇ
(< huwa¯sˇ), meaning ‘is it?’ (also appearing in Andalusi Arabic), or, in
indirect questions, ‘whether’ (see discussion in Wilmsen 2014: 96–7 and
references therein):
(14)
Moroccan Arabic
a. wa¯sˇ
zˇa
h˙ mad
Q
come.PVF
N A M E
‘[Is] it that, Ahmad came’?
b. sewwel-ni
ʕali
wasˇ zˇa
s˙ah˙ b-u
ask.PF V-P R O.1 S G N A M E Q
come.PVF friend-PRO-3M S G
‘Ali asked me whether his friend came.’
Like Moroccan Arabic, in Maltese, the afﬁxing of grammatical sˇi to inde-
pendent personal pronouns occurs nowadays more often in indirect ques-
tions than it does in polar interrogation, usually following the conditional
jekk ‘if’ (Wilmsen 2016a; see also Sutcliffe 1936: 211–12):
11 Maltese
259

(15)
Maltese
Dan jiddependi minnkom jekk intomx Kattolic˙i tajba
dan yi-diddependi
min-kom
yekk
intom-sˇ
kattolı¯cˇi
tayba
D E M 3-depend.I PFV PR EP- P R O.3P L CO N J PR O.3PL-Q Catholics good
‘That depends on you, if you are good Catholics.’
Otherwise, polar interrogative /sˇ/ in Maltese is appended to the verb (or
pseudo-verb) after any associated object pronoun:
(16)
Maltese
a. Smajtux x’ qallek Pietru?
smay-t-u-sˇ
sˇ
ʔal-l-ek
pı¯tru
hear.PF V-2-P R O.3 M S G-Q
Q
tell.PFV-D AT-P R O.2 M S G
N A M E
‘Heard you it, what Peter said to you?’
b. Gh-andekx h-ila tinsieni ?
a¯nd-ek-sˇ
h- ı¯la
ti-nse¯-ni
P RE P-2M S G- Q
courage
2- forget.IP FV-P RO.1 S G
‘At [i.e., ‘Have’] you ability to forget me?’
Even then, it is not obligatory, tone of voice being adequate to express
polar questions in Maltese, as in other varieties of Arabic:
(17)
Maltese
a. smajtu biha?
smay-tu
bi-ha
hear.PF V-2 P L
P R E P-P RO.3 F S G
‘Heard you of it?’
b. Gh-andek sigarett?
a¯nd-ek
sı¯garet
P RE P-2M S G
N
‘Have you a cigarette?’
Afﬁxing sˇi to the verb and other items to be queried may have been more
common in older Maltese. Some of the earliest grammars of the language
state categorically that it was.
In his grammar Maltese Grammar for the Use of the English, Vella (1831)
describes the formation of polar interrogatives as such: ‘In our interroga-
tive phrases, we afﬁx x to the end of the verb’ (249–51), also demonstrating
the use of polar interrogative -sˇ afﬁxed to the personal pronouns (compare
also Vassalli 1827: 142, who treats personal pronouns, some verbs, and the
pseudo-verb gh- and, as well).
These nineteenth-century descriptions of polar interrogation in Maltese
are echoed nearly verbatim in contemporary descriptions of Tunisian
Arabic, for example Gibson (2008) makes almost the same statement:
‘Yes/no questions . . . can be expressed by the sufﬁx i˛sˇi, sometimes
2 6 0
D A V I D W I L M S E N

shortened to -sˇ attached to the verb or to a verb-like element, e.g. zˇı¯t-sˇi
wah˙ dik ‘did you come alone?’, ʿandik-sˇi s˙arf ‘do you have any change?’’
(2008: 570).
Examining the matter more closely with the aid of an electronically
searchable corpus of Tunisian Arabic, Procha´zka and Dallaj (2020: 236)
ﬁnd that the marking of polar questions with -sˇ or -sˇi is rare and that
‘it mainly expresses contingence or adds a dubitative nuance to the
question . . . [corresponding] roughly to English “by any chance” and
“perhaps”.’ Polar interrogative -sˇ in Maltese is also relatively rare, and
when it appears, it, too, introduces the same sort of hedging quality to
the question (Wilmsen 2016a: 95).
11.6.4
Quantiﬁer, Partitive, Determiner sˇi
Grammatical sˇi is also used to express unspeciﬁed or indeﬁnite quantities.
In the most detailed examination of it in Maltese speciﬁcally, Vanhove
(2009) calls it a ‘nominal quantiﬁer’ that ‘expresses several semantic
values: some, any, certain, about, roughly’ (2009: 18).18 It has been
remarked upon in some varieties of Arabic, too, notably the Syrian dialect
of Damascus, where it is called a ‘partitive’ (Cowell 2005: 467) and the
Moroccan dialect of Casablanca (Harrell 2004: 147).19 It functions in
a similar manner in other varieties as well:
(18)
a. Maltese
kien hemm xi artist tal-Medju Evu
ke¯n
emm
sˇi
artist
ta-l-medyu evu
be.P F V
EX IS T
Q N T
artist
POSS-D E T-middle.ages
‘There was some artist of the Middle Ages.’
b. Lebanese Arabic
fı¯
sˇi
fanna¯n misˇ
zˇama¯hı¯ri
EX I ST
QN T artist
N E G popular
‘There [is] some unpopular artist.’
Vanhove further speculates that it could be on the way to developing
from what she calls a third-degree determiner, roughly meaning
‘some’, to a second-degree determiner, which is to say, an indeﬁnite
article. Writing about Moroccan Arabic, Harrell (2004: 147) states
plainly that it is. In point of fact, it already is used as such in
Maltese:20
18 In their grammar of Maltese, Borg and Azzopardi-Alexander (1997: 73), calling it a ‘non-distributive quantiﬁer’, assign it
the meaning ‘some’ (also in their glossary of basic vocabulary, p. 356), without giving examples, except offhand in their
discussions of other features (1997: 100, example (506); 108 (537); and 151 (735): Xi pitturi, ‘Some painters . . . ’,
F’xi pajjiz˙i ‘In some countries . . . ’, and Xi aġġettivi ‘some adjectives . . .’.
19 Caubet (1983, 1984) also discusses it in her detailed examination of grammatical sˇi in Moroccan Arabic.
20 I have heard it as such in Emirati Arabic: ba-n-tarrisˇ sˇay risaˉla ‘We’ll send a letter’.
11 Maltese
261

(19)
a. Maltese
Qal xi kelma jew tnejn man-nies li kien hemm.
ʔal
sˇi
kelma yew
tneyn ma
n-ne¯s
say.P F V
D E T
word
C O N J two
P R E P
D ET-people
li
ke¯n
emm
RE L
be.P F V
D E M
‘He said a word or two to the people who were there.’
b. Lebanese Arabic
a-tmanna¯
minn-ak
sˇi
kilma
1SG-hope
P R E P-P RO.2M S G
D E T
word
ma¯
bi-t-samm
il-badan
N EG
F U T-3 FSG-poison.IPFV
DET-body
‘I hope for an agreeable word from you.’
As a quantiﬁer, meaning ‘about/roughly/some’, it often appears before
numbers:
(20)
a. Maltese
ﬂ-Alġerija kien hemm xi 4,500 Malti
f-l-aljeriya
ke¯n
emm
sˇi
4,500 malti
P RE P- DE T-country.name be.PFV
E XI ST
QNT digit
Maltese
‘In Algeria, there were about/roughly/some 4,500 Maltese.’
b. Lebanese Arabic
bi-yi-t˙laʕ-li
sˇi
alf
do¯lar
FUT-3-rise.IP FV-D A T- P R O.1 S
Q N T
thousand
dollar
‘About/some $1,000 will come to me (I’ll get about $1,000).’
Glanville (2018) attempts precise semantic distinctions between the parti-
tive, quantiﬁer, and determiner functions of sˇi. The reality is that in other
Arabic varieties and in Maltese alike, these functions overlap:
(21)
Maltese
gh-andhom xi bilanc˙ dwar xi sena bejn l-1998 u l-2010
a¯nd-hom
sˇi
bilans
dwar
sˇi
sena
beyn
l-1998
P R EP- P R O.PL
P TV
balance
P R E P
P T V
year
P RE P
D ET-1998
u
l-2010
C O N J
D E T-2010
‘They have a/any/some/a certain balance on a/any/some/a
certain year between 1998 and 2010.’
11.6.5
Sequential sˇi
Closely related and probably deriving from quantiﬁer sˇi is its function in
setting off items in a series. This has been noted as a phenomenon of
Egyptian Arabic:
2 6 2
D A V I D W I L M S E N

(22)
Egyptian Arabic
ʕand-u
mimma
gamı¯ ʕ-u
ʔisˇi
gibna
w
P R E P-P R O.3 M S G
P R E P
all-P R O.3 M S G S E Q
cheese C O N J
ʔisˇi
zatu¯n
wi
ʔsˇi
sardı¯n
ma¯-t-ʕidd-isˇ
S E Q olives
C O N J
S E Q
sardines
N E G-2-count.I P F V- N E G
‘He has something of everything: cheese, olives, sardines;
what have you.’
(Hinds and Badawi 1986: 25; Wilmsen 2017: 279–80, 289)
By no means restricted to Egyptian Arabic, where it is, in fact, a relict form,
sequential sˇi also occurs in Arabic varieties of the southern Arabian
Peninsula and the Gulf (Holes 2016: 113), in Levantine dialects (Wilmsen
2017: 289–91), and, tellingly, in the dialect of Tunis, where Singer (1984:
678) deﬁnes quantiﬁer sˇi (in Tunisian Arabic sˇay) as indicating alternatives
(Wilmsen 2017: 292). It functions in the same manner in Maltese (cf.
Wilmsen 2017: 293):
(23) Maltese
Biz˙ z˙ ejjed tara s-sriebet ta’ karozzi ﬁt- toroq tagh-na, kollha serjin lejn xi
nh-awi ta’ divertiment, xi mega-concert, xi mass meeting, xi logh-ob, xi
supermarket
koll-ha
se¯r-yı¯n
le¯yn sˇi
nha¯wi
ta
divertiment
D E T- P R O. F S G
going- P L
P R E P Q N T destinations P O S S
amusement
sˇi
mega-concert
sˇi
mass meeting sˇi
loo¯p
sˇi
supermarket
S EQ
mega-concert
SE Q mass meetingS E Q
game S E Q supermarket
‘It is enough to see the lanes of cars on our roads, all of them going to
some amusement destinations, a mega-concert, a mass meeting, a game,
a supermarket.’
11.6.6
Existential sˇi
Sequential sˇi exhibits quasi-copular qualities, likely deriving from its rela-
tionship to an existential particle sˇay(y)/sˇe¯/sˇı¯. This existential quality is the
only instantiation of Arabic grammatical sˇi not found in Maltese. Indeed, in
mainland Arabic dialects, it exists in that form only the southern Arabian
Peninsula:
(24)
Emirati Arabic
sˇay
sˇı¯
yidı¯d
EX IS T
thing
new
‘[Is] there anything new?’
It happens that sequential sˇı¯ especially is easily read as an existential
particle. From there it can be interpreted as a quasi-copula, as posing
a choice between alternatives, or even as a quantiﬁer. For example, the
11 Maltese
263

Egyptian Arabic example in (22) might be read in any of these manners
(Wilmsen 2017: 288–9):
(25)
a. ‘He has something of everything: there [is] cheese, there [are]
olives, there [are] sardines’
b. ‘He has something of everything, be [it] cheese, be [it] olives, be
[it] sardines’
c. ‘He has something of everything, either cheese, or olives, or
sardines’
d. ‘He has something of everything: some cheese, some olives,
some sardines’
It happens that an existential sˇi is shared between the southern penin-
sular dialects of Arabic and the modern south Arabian languages,
whose speakers live amongst and adjacent to Arabic speakers in the
southern Arabian Peninsula. In most modern south Arabian languages,
the existential particle is usually realized ɫi, but at least one of the
languages, Bat˙h˙ ari, possesses an existential sˇı¯ (Gaspari 2018: 117–18).
Some of them also appear to possess a partitive, polar interrogative,
and sequential ɫi (Wilmsen 2017: 299–300 and references). The possi-
bility, therefore, exists that existential sˇi entered into southern dia-
lects of Arabic through contact with modern south Arabian languages.
Nevertheless, the effects of contact between Arabic and the modern
south Arabian languages is more evident in borrowings from Arabic
than the other way round.
Regardless, these qualities of grammatical sˇi suggest a southern
Arabian origin, brought northwards by speakers of pre-diaspora south-
ern peninsular varieties of Arabic (Wilmsen 2017: 297–301).21 A clear
indication of a south Arabian origin of some of the Arabic dialects
contributing to the formation of Maltese is the Maltese existential
particle itself: emm. Its likely precursor is the Tunisian tamma, which
in turn likely originated in the southern peninsula in the demonstra-
tive
tamm(a)(t)
‘there’,
still
attested
in
some
Yemeni
dialects
(Behnstedt 2016: 164). Supporting this is that tamma and famma in
both Tunisian Arabic and Maltese also function as a far demonstrative
adjective ‘there’ (cf. example [19a] nies li kien hemm ‘the people who
were there’):
21 This is not the place for a thoroughgoing discussion of Van Putten (2017), but his statement about sˇi must be
acknowledged and addressed: ‘The semantic shift of “something” to “some” is cross-linguistically so common, that this
cannot possibly be used as evidence for a Yemeni . . . connection. Moreover, we ﬁnd examples of this use well outside
of the varieties of “South Arabian inﬂuence”, e.g. Damascene Arabic’ (2017: 33). This is contestable in its entirety. In the
ﬁrst place, typology can say little about individual languages. Regardless of how common a feature is cross-linguistically,
universal trends have yet to be found. In the second, a feature shared between Levantine and Yemeni Arabic varieties
may, indeed, be of southern peninsular origin. Arabic speakers had been migrating from the southern peninsula into
the hinterlands of the Fertile Crescent since c. A D 500 at the latest, perhaps – probably – since much earlier.
2 6 4
D A V I D W I L M S E N

(26)
a. Maltese
ngh-ix hemm
n-ı¯sˇ
emm
1S G-live.I P F V D E M
b. Tunisian Arabic
nu-skun
famma
1S G-live.I P F V D E M
‘I live there.’
Reﬂexes of demonstrative tamma exist in no other spoken varieties of Arabic
other than Yemeni, Tunisian, and Maltese. Writing speciﬁcally about
Maltese in the context of Arabic historical and contact linguistics, Owens
(2010) outlines the principle whereby such a similarity can be explained:
Fundamental similarities or identities between different varieties are due
to a shared historical relationship among an ancestral population of
speakers. A common origin ‘explains’ the observed similarities. In histor-
ical linguistics, the similarities may be due to a single genetic afﬁliation, or
to language contact with speakers of other languages or varieties.
(Owens 2010: 111)
An explanation of existential and demonstrative emm in Maltese can only
be that they share a common genetic afﬁliation.
11.7
Discussion
The problem in Arabic dialectology is not so much ‘sorting out the layers of
founder effects and distinguishing instances of conservatism from innova-
tion’ (Wolfram 2004: 94) as it is sorting out the layers of founder effects from
the effects of dialect contact. As to the former, on the authority of the ninth-
century grammarian al-Farra¯’ (d. 822), the derivation of the wh-interrogative
of the form ʔaysˇ is assumed to be as follows (Wilmsen 2014: 40–1 and
references):
(27)
ʔayy-u
sˇayʔ-i-n
→ʔaysˇ
Q-N O M
thing-GE N-I N D F
‘which thing?’
→‘what?’
From there, the prevailing assumption in Arabic linguistics seems to
be that the source of all derivations of grammatical sˇi is one of the
Arabic words for ‘thing’ sˇayʔ (reﬂexes sˇay(y), sˇe¯, and sˇı¯ or sˇi). Because
the grammatical manifestations of sˇi are so multifarious and not uni-
formly distributed across the dialects in which they appear, those
considering the matter, ﬁnding no other congenial explanation, are
obliged to posit a series of independent innovations in the dialects
possessing any form of grammatical sˇi (see Glanville 2018: 65 for the
11 Maltese
265

latest iteration of this). Wilmsen (2014) contests this, positing existen-
tial sˇi as the precursor of all functions of grammatical sˇi. In light of
information published subsequently, however, this view must be revis-
ited. In his grammar of Safaitic, a South Semitic script expressing
a language that bears afﬁnities to Arabic, Al-Jallad, (2015: 156, 225,
345) proposes three uses of the epigraphs s´ʔ and s´yʔ: ‘thing’, ‘want’,
and ‘to experience want’.22 A striking parallel with the Safaitic is
found in the common word for ‘thing’ in Arabic dialects all across
littoral North Africa, from Egypt to Morocco and also the Yemen: h- a¯gˇa.
It, too, derives from an original meaning of ‘want’.23 This is the very
word for ‘thing’ in Maltese, too, which, for its part, lacks a reﬂex of
sˇayʔ to mean ‘thing’. For that matter, other varieties of Arabic possess
synonyms for ‘thing’ derived from other roots (Wilmsen 2014: 167–8).
Yet many or most of them do also share reﬂexes of sˇayʔ with the
Arabic of writing, including the oldest example of lengthy Arabic
writing, the Qur’a¯n. This raises the possibility that Maltese never
possessed a reﬂex of sˇayʔ as its word for ‘thing’, and that speakers of
the varieties of Arabic that informed Maltese actually acquired the
word sˇayʔ from its Qur’a¯nic usage, it becoming ﬁrmly entrenched
only after Arabophone Muslims were expelled from Malta in the thir-
teenth century.
This view is complicated by the presence in Maltese of a few words
containing sˇ with an underlying meaning of ‘thing’, for example, kollox
(kollosˇ < kull ‘every’ + sˇ) ‘everything’ and xejn (sˇe¯yn) ‘nothing’. The latter
invites comparisons with the sˇayʔ-i-n of (27), with the n representing
a remnant of so-called tanwı¯n or ‘nunation’, the indeﬁnite marker of
written Arabic, effectuated by the afﬁxation of n to the end of nouns
and adjectives. Such an assumption is undermined by the presence of
n in other functions of sˇi, notably when the interrogative takes a 3rd-
person pronominal sufﬁx. Noteworthy, too, is that it occurs only with
afﬁxed 3rd-person pronouns and none other:
(28)
Maltese
a. U int xint eh iva nazzjonalist
u int
sˇ-int
eh
iva
natsyonalist
C O N G
P R O.2 SG
E X C L
E X C L
nationalist
‘And you, what are you? Ah, yes, a nationalist!’
b. Mela xinhu li trid minni ?
mela sˇi-n-u
li
t-rid
min-ni
C O N J Q-n-P R O.3 S G R E L 2-want.IPF V
‘So, what is it that you want from me?’
22 The ś is assumed to have been pronounced as a lateral alveolar or post alveolar sibilant [ƚ].
23 Glanville (2018: 52) also notices this, but his derivation is forced. It does not derive from the verb ih-taˉgˇa/ya-h-taˉgˇu ‘to
need’, as he supposes, but from a measure I verb of the same root, analogous to current Egyptian Arabic usage h- awag/
yi-h-wig ‘to expose to need’ and its associated verbal noun h-awga or h-aˉga (cf. Hinds and Badawi 1986: 230).
2 6 6
D A V I D W I L M S E N

The Maltese sˇinu is more or less identical in form to that of Iraqi Arabic
dialects, reminiscent of some dialects of the Lebanese highlands (where it
is asˇinhaw), and it shows clear afﬁnity with those of Tunisia and Morocco
(Table 11.1). The same effect is seen in another interrogative etymologi-
cally unrelated to the wh-interrogatives, one that is shared between
Maltese and most of its Arabic sisters: kif ‘how’:
(29)
Maltese
a. Kiﬁnt
kif-int
Q-P R O.2 SG
‘How are you?’
b. kiﬁnhu stipulat ﬁl-linji gwida
kif-in-u
stipulat
ﬁ-l-linyi
gwida
Q-n- P R O.3S G stipulated P R EP-D ET-lines guide
‘How is it stipulated in the guidelines?’
Such usage is so thoroughly uncharacteristic of classical nunation (there
can be nothing afﬁxed to the n of nunation) as to rule out any derivation
therefrom. The n must be from some other source.24
The wh-interrogatives of the shape ʔaysˇ and reﬂexes thereof may, indeed,
have originated in a phrase like ʔayy sˇayʔ ‘what thing’ and by extension, the
wh-interrogatives of the shape laysˇ may derive from a parent construction
li-ʔaysˇ ‘for what’, and those of the shape ʕalaysˇ, such as the Maltese gh- aliex,
derive from ʕala¯ ʔaysˇ, roughly, ‘about/for/of what’. Also likely is that ʔaysˇ
and reﬂexes had already shed an original meaning (‘what thing’) by the
time other derivations had formed such that secondary forms like sˇu¯ and,
in the case of Maltese, interrogative sˇi, would have derived from aysˇ hu¯
‘what [is] he/it’ and aysˇ hı¯ ‘what [is] she/it’.
This, however, does not go far in explaining the remaining functions of
grammatical sˇi. It is, indeed, simplistic to assume that all of the gramma-
tical functions of sˇi have derived from an Arabic word for ‘thing’. Many of
those functions are most un-thinglike in their construction and semantics,
the only consistent quality that they share with sˇayʔ ‘thing’ being sˇ. This is
insufﬁcient for establishing an etymological relationship. Gensler (2000)
makes precisely this point, disagreeing with prevalent derivations of the
relationship between adverbializers and existential particles in Semitic
languages: ‘[the] operating principle appears to be: if two elements look
alike, that in itself constitutes prima facie justiﬁcation for positing an
etymological connection if the linguist wishes to do so. Phonological
form is thus elevated over everything else’ (2000: 261). Instead, he advises
more semantic, morphosyntactic, and comparative analysis: ‘When deal-
ing with two look-alike grammatical morphemes whose semantic match is
24 Compare Lucas and Spagnol (Forthcoming), who argue that word ﬁnal -n in Maltese is an internal development except
in the word xejn, which they propose must be a borrowing from a dialect that possesses so-called dialect tanwıˉn.
11 Maltese
267

not transparent, or where a radical difference in grammatical categories is
involved, the burden of proof ought properly to be on the linguist to argue
explicitly and carefully against homonymy’ (ibid). It is precisely in their
semantics and in their morphosyntax that all functions of grammatical sˇi
other than wh-interrogatives that a semantic match with ‘thing’ is not
transparent, and a radical difference in grammatical categories is, indeed,
involved.
Using conceptual maps – a kind of semantic exercise, to be sure – and
basing his argument upon Qur’a¯nic usage in the phrase sˇayʔ-u-n min ‘some-
thing of’ (e.g., sˇayʔ-u-n min al-h˘awf ‘something of fear’), Glanville (2018: 54)
argues explicitly against homonymy, in the sense of multiple origins for
a polysemous morpheme. Irrespective of the merits of the approach, the
analysis is undercut by misapprehension both of the Arabic and of the
epigraphic record.25 Speciﬁcally, the appeal to Safaitic in expectation that
reﬂexes of an existential sˇi should have appeared there (2018: 52) betrays
an unwarranted optimism about the nature of those data and what can be
deduced from them. Most of the Safaitic inscriptions are formulaic and
uniform in structure, the majority of them exhibiting names and genealo-
gies only (Al-Jallad 2015: 3). Owens (2019: 40–1, n. 1) remarks ‘the consider-
able defectiveness in the Safaitic inscriptions of most domains of
grammar’. For example, it happens that no existential particles of any
kind appear in them (Al-Jallad 2015: 166–8). This does not mean, however,
that the inscribers had no existential particle (or particles) in their lan-
guage. It simply means that none appear in their grafﬁti. What is more, if
an existential sˇi was and is a southern feature, we should not necessarily
expect to ﬁnd a reﬂex of it in the Safaitic inscriptions, whose provenance is
the northern Arabian Peninsula (Al-Jallad 2015: 2). We cannot even be
certain of the relationship between the language of the inscriptions and
Arabic (cf. Owens’ (2019: 41, n. 1) comment on Al-Jallad’s forced assumption
of an Arabic afﬁliation). Be that as it may, although the Safaitic inscriptions
are undated and difﬁcult to date, they likely belong to an era that fell some
500–1,000 years before the diaspora, meaning that the root s´ʔ or s´yʔ is
relatively old.
Arguing against a direct derivation for quantiﬁer sˇi and partitive sˇi from
a word for ‘thing’, Wilmsen 2017 demonstrates from their semantics
a pathway by which they and a word for ‘thing’ can derive transparently
from existential sˇi. The same source can also give rise to interrogative sˇi
and the negative sufﬁx -sˇ. The latter is characteristically viewed as deriving
25 As for the Arabic, he misreads at least one of the three Qur’ aˉnic verses upon which he builds the crux of his argument
(Glanville 2018: 54). That verse is admittedly difﬁcult to interpret, and many an able translator has struggled with it
unsuccessfully. The meaning of Q 60:11, (ﻭَﺇِﻥﻓَﺎﺗَﻜُﻢْﺷَﻰْءٌۭﻣِّﻦْﺃَﺯْﻭَﺟِٰﻜُﻢْﺇِﻟَﻰﭐﻟْﻜُﻔَّﺎﺭِ
) wa ʔin faˉta-kum sˇayʔ-u-n min ʔazwaˉgˇ-i-kum
ʔilaˉ l-kuffaˉr, is ‘And if something [of the dowers] from your wives passes to the unbelievers’, not Glanville’s ‘And if any of
your wives leaves you for the unbelievers’. What is more, the construction sˇayʔ-u-n min appears only seven times in the
Qur’aˉn (out of 283 instances of sˇayʔ), each instance bearing subtle differences in meaning from its counterparts.
2 6 8
D A V I D W I L M S E N

from an underlying meaning ma¯ + V + sˇi ‘N EG + thing’, the stock example
being ma¯ katab sˇayʔ ‘He wrote not [a] thing’, but that becomes problematic
with intransitive verbs (cf. examples (8) and (9)). Wilmsen (2014: 123–4,
172; 2020) demonstrates that both can derive from a quasi-copular exten-
sion of existential sˇi, with polar interrogative sˇi serving as a tag, ‘is it’, and
negative ma¯ + sˇ originally involving an underlying ‘N EG + V + it is’. This
would be an argument against homonymy, too, but with a different ety-
mon. By Gensler’s lights, the analysis should argue against the derivation
of every grammatical function of sˇi from a single source. That suggestion is
entertained here: it may well be that the wh-interrogatives do have
a separate origin from the other functions of grammatical sˇi. Indeed, this
would explain the near universal presence of sˇ in wh-interrogatives
amongst Arabic dialects but its presence variably as a polar interrogative,
negator, and quantiﬁer in only some of them, presumably those descend-
ing from and retaining southern Arabian features or those having acquired
them. The implication is that wh-interrogatives built upon reﬂexes of sˇʔ or
sˇyʔ became established in Arabic dialects early, with other functions of
grammatical sˇi coming later.
This is not to say that existential sˇi is not old. It, too, enjoys an
ancient pedigree. In the ﬁrst dictionary of Arabic ever written, kita¯b al-
ʕayn (c.750), there is an attestation of an existential particle built upon
essentially the same consonants as sˇʔ and sˇyʔ but in reverse order ʔys
(< ʔysˇ) (Wilmsen 2016b: 329–31; Wilmsen 2017: 298–301). To be sure,
its earliest Arabic attestation is not as old as s´ʔ and s´yʔ in the Safaitic
inscriptions, which predate it by up to a millennium, but the diction-
ary identiﬁes it as being a relict form that is passing out of use,
implying that it, too, is – or rather, was – old.26 A plurality of opinion
holds that it is related to existential ʔı¯t and other forms (e.g., Hebrew
ye¯sˇ) found in other Semitic languages (discussed inter alia in Gensler
2000: 233–6 and Wilmsen 2017: 298–9).27
11.8
Conclusion
Without further documentary evidence that might settle the matter, there
are no better means of reconstructing the origins of grammatical sˇi than by
comparing its forms and functions in attested varieties. Those show diver-
gent meanings and developmental pathways, likely indicating separate
origins. None of the possible derivations is completely transparent.
Because they are not, the origins and complete derivational pathways of
grammatical sˇi may never be known with certainty.
26 Signiﬁcantly, the author of the dictionary, al-H˘alıˉl ibn Ah˙mad al-Faraˉhıˉdıˉ (d. A D 786), was from Oman.
27 For a contrary point of view, see Al-Jallad (2018).
11 Maltese
269

Fortunately, the goals of a historical dialectology of Arabic are more mod-
est. Among them is to reconstruct the state of Arabic dialects just before or at
the beginning of the diaspora. By Owens’ principle (2010: 111), the many
functions of grammatical sˇi constitute so fundamental a shared identity
amongst so many dispersed varieties of Arabic that it must arise from an
ancestral population of speakers. Only Maltese possesses all but one of them.
The many varieties of southern peninsular Arabic possess them all.
Another principle is that reconstruction must proceed ﬁrst with indivi-
dual linguistic features, which are subsequently interpreted as forming
larger units, that is, dialects (Owens 2005: 289). The full dimensions of the
dialects of Arabic that originally went into the formation of Maltese can
likely never be known in their entirety, but a fair guess may be made as to
features of the variety or varieties that went into its composition. It is
precisely because Maltese shares with so diverse a range of Arabic dialects
the many functions of grammatical sˇi, which, in their entirety, are not
shared by all of them together, that it is safe to assume that, regardless of
the origins of the wh-interrogatives and of the remainder of the features of
grammatical sˇi or the origins of the Arabic varieties that exhibit them, the
features themselves predate the arrival of Arabic speakers on Malta, either
in their initial ninth-century incursions or their later larger-scale arrivals
of the eleventh, and most of the dialects that went into the composition of
Maltese – or at least the dominant one(s) – must have possessed them. In
that respect, Maltese does exhibit the founder effect.
References
Al-Jallad, A. (2015). An Outline of the Grammar of the Safaitic Inscriptions. Leiden:
Brill.
Al-Jallad, A. (2018). The earliest attestation of laysa and the implications for
its etymology. In M. C. A. Macdonald, ed., Languages, Scripts And Their Uses
in Ancient North Arabia. (Supplement to volume 48 of the Proceedings of
the Seminar for Arabian Studies). Oxford: Archaeopress, 111–19.
Anderson, G., Fenwick, C., and Rosser-Owen, M. (2018). The Aghlabids and
their Neighbors: An Introduction. In G. Anderson, C. Fenwick, and
M. Rosser-Owen, eds., The Aghlabids and Their Neighbours: Art and Material
Culture in 9th-Century North Africa. Leiden: Brill, 1–32.
Avram, A. (2014). The fate of the interdental fricatives in Maltese. Romano-
Arabica, XIV, 19–32.
Avram, A. (2016). Phonological changes in Maltese: Evidence from ono-
mastics. In G. Puech and B. Saade, eds., Shifts and Patterns in Maltese. Berlin:
De Gruyter Mouton, 49–89.
Behnstedt, P. (1997).Sprachatlas von Syrien, 1 Kartenband. Wiesbaden:
Harrassowitz.
Behnstedt. P. (2016). Dialect Atlas of North Yemen and Adjacent Areas. Leiden:
Brill.
2 7 0
D A V I D W I L M S E N

Borg, A. (1997). Maltese phonology. In A. S. Kaye and P. T. Daniels, eds.,
Phonologies of Asia and Africa: Including the Caucasus, vol. 1. Mahwah, NJ:
Eisenbrauns, 245–85.
Borg, A. and Azzopardi-Alexander, M. (1997). Maltese. New York: Routledge.
Brincat, J. M. (1995). Malta 870–1054: al-Himyarı¯’s Account and Its Linguistic
Implications. Valletta, Malta: Said International.
Brincat, J. M. (2008). Malta. In K. Versteegh, M. Eid, A. Elgibali, M. Woidich,
and A. Zaborski, eds., Encyclopedia of Arabic Language and Linguistics, vol. III,
Leiden: Brill, 141–5.
Brincat, J. M. (2011). Maltese and Other Languages: A Linguistic History of Malta.
Santa Venera, Malta: Midsea Books.
Brincat,
J.
M.
(2018).
Maltese:
blending
Semitic,
Romance
and
Germanic
lexemes.
Lexicographica:
International
Annual
for
Lexicography, 33(1), 207–23.
Brockett, A. A. (1985). The Spoken Arabic of the Kha¯bu¯ ra on the Ba¯t
˙
ı¯na of
Oman. Journal of Semitic Studies Monograph, no. 7. Manchester.
Caubet, D. (1983). Quantiﬁcation, ne´gation, interrogation: les emplois de
la particule ‘sˇ i’ en arabe marocain. Arabica, 30(3), 227–45.
Caubet, D. (1984). A la recherche d’un invariant: les emplois de la particule
‘sˇi’ en arabe marocain. In Antoine Culioli, ed., Ope´ration de de´termination
II. Paris: Universite´ Paris VII, 33–56.
Cooperson,
M.
(2015).
Al-H˙ imyarı¯’s
Account
of
Medieval
Malta:
A Reconsideration. In H. Amstutz, A. Dorn, M. Mu¨ ller, M. Ronsdorf, and
S. Uljas, eds., Fuzzy Boundaries: Festschrift fu¨r Antonio Loprieno. Hamburg:
Widmaier Verlag, 347–51.
Corriente, F. (1977). A Grammatical Sketch of the Spanish Arabic Dialect Bundle.
Madrid: Instituto Hispano-Arabi de Cultura.
Corriente, F. (1997). A Dictionary of Andalusi Arabic. Leiden: Brill.
Cowan, W. (1966). Loss of emphasis in Maltese. Journal of Maltese Studies, 3,
27–32.
Cowell, M. (2005). A Reference Grammar of Syrian Arabic: Based on the Dialect of
Damascus. Washington, DC: Georgetown University Press.
Eid, M. (2008). Locatives. In K. Versteegh, M. Eid, A. Elgibali, M. Woidich,
and A. Zaborski, eds., Encyclopedia of Arabic Language and Linguistics. Leiden:
Brill, 80–8.
Fabri R. (2010). Maltese. Revue belge de philologie et d’histoire, 88(3) Langues et
litte´ratures modernes, 791–816.
Fiorini, S. and Zammit, M. (2016). ἱαῖδες γαρ θέου The Arabs in Malta:
870–1150. Melita Classica, 3, 179–208.
Gaspari, F. (2018). The Bat˙h˙ ari Language of Oman: Towards a Descriptive
Grammar. PhD dissertation, Universita` degli studi di Napoli ‘L’Orientale’.
Gensler, O. D. (2000). Why Semitic adverbializers (Akkadian -ISˇ, Syriac
-A¯ ’I¯T) should not be derived from existential *’IT. Journal of Semitic
Studies, XLV(2), 233–65.
11 Maltese
271

Gibson, M. (2008). Tunis Arabic. In K. Versteegh, M. Eid, A. Elgibali,
M. Woidich, and A. Zaborski, eds., Encyclopedia of Arabic Language and
Linguistics, vol. III. Leiden: Brill, 563–71.
Glanville, P. (2018). Part, whole, and a grammaticalization path for sˇi + NP.
Al-ʿArabiyya, 51, 49–68.
Grigore, G. (2019). Peripheral varieties. In E. Al-Wer and U. Horesh, eds., The
Routledge Handbook of Arabic Sociolinguistics. London: Routledge, 117–33.
Harrell, R. S. (2004). A Short Reference Grammar of Moroccan Arabic.
Washington, DC: Georgetown University Press.
Harvey, L. P. (1990). Islamic Spain, 1250 –1500. Chicago, IL: University of
Chicago Press.
Hinds, M. and Badawi, E. (1986). A Dictionary of Egyptian Arabic: Arabic. Beirut:
Librairie du Liban.
Hoberman, R. D. and Aronoff, M. (2003). The verbal morphology of
Maltese: From Semitic to Romance. In J. Shimron, ed., Language
Processing and Acquisition in Languages of Semitic, Root-Based, Morphology.
Amsterdam: John Benjamins, 61–78.
Holes, C. (2016). Dialect, Culture, and Society in Eastern Arabia, vol. 3
Phonology, Morphology, Syntax, Style. Leiden: Brill.
Lucas, C. (2015). On Wilmsen on the development of postverbal negation
in dialectal Arabic. SOAS Working Papers in Linguistics, 17, 77–95.
Lucas, C. (2018). On Wilmsen on the development of postverbal negation
in dialectal Arabic. Zeitschrift fu¨r arabische Linguistik, 67, 44–70.
Lucas, C. (2020). Contact and the expression of negation. In C. Lucas and
S. Manfredi, eds., Arabic and Contact-Induced Language Change: A Handbook.
Berlin: Language Science Press, 643–67.
Lucas, C. and Cˇ e´plo¨, S. (2020). Maltese. In C. Lucas and S. Manfredi, eds.,
Arabic and Contact-Induced Language Change: A Handbook. Berlin: Language
Science Press, 265–302.
Lucas, C. and Spagnol, M. (Forthcoming). Nunation from Arabic to Maltese.
In B. Saade and P. Turek, eds., Proceedings of Lingwistika Maltija (2019).
Berlin: Mouton de Gruyter.
Metcalfe, A. (2009). The Muslims of Medieval Italy. Edinburgh: Edinburgh
University Press.
Mifsud, M. (1995). Loan Verbs in Maltese: A Descriptive and Comparative Study.
Leiden. Brill.
Mifsud, M. (2008). Maltese. In K. Versteegh, M. Eid, A. Elgibali, M. Woidich,
and A. Zaborski, eds., Encyclopedia of Arabic Language and Linguistics, vol. II.
Leiden: Brill, 146–59.
Montgomery, M. (2000). Isolation as a linguistic construct. Southern Journal
of Linguistics, 24, 41–53.
Nef, A. (2018). Reinterpreting the Aghlabids’ Sicilian Policy (827–910). In
G. D. Anderson, C. Fenwick, and M. Rosser-Owen, eds., The Aghlabids and
Their Neighbours: Art and Material Culture in 9th-century North Africa. Leiden:
Brill, 76–87.
2 7 2
D A V I D W I L M S E N

Owens, J. (2005). Pre-diaspora Arabic: Dialects, statistics and historical
reconstruction. Diachronica, 22(2), 271–308.
Owens, J. (2010). What is a language? Review of Bernard Comrie, Ray Fabri,
Elizabeth Hume, Manwel Mifsud, Thomas Stolz and Martine Vanhove,
eds., ‘Introducing Maltese Linguistics: Selected papers from the 1st
International Conference on Maltese Linguistics, Bremen, 18–20 October.
2007. Journal of Language Contact, 3, 103–18.
Owens, J. (2019). Variation in Old Arabic. In E. Al-Wer and U. Horesh, eds.,
The Routledge Handbook of Arabic Sociolinguistics. London: Routledge, 30–43.
Procha´zka, S. and Dallaj, I. (2020). Polar questions in Tunis Arabic. In G.
Chikovani and Z. Tskhvediani, eds., Studies on Arabic Dialectology and
Sociolinguistics: Proceedings of the 13th International Conference of AIDA held in
Kutaisi, June 10–13, 2019. Kutaisi: Akaki Tserteli State University Press,
233–40.
Puech, G. (2006). Loss of emphatic and guttural consonants: From medieval
to contemporary Maltese. In P. Paggio and A. Gatt, eds., The Languages of
Malta. Berlin: Language Sciences Press, 7–53.
Singer, H. (1984). Grammatik der arabischen Mundart der Medina von Tunis.
Berlin: de Gruyter.
Souag, L. (2018). Berber etymologies in Maltese. International Journal of Arabic
Linguistics, 4(1), 190–223.
Stumme, H. (1896). Grammatik des tunesischen Arabisch nebst Glossar. Leipzig:
J. C. Heinrichs.
Sutcliffe, E. F. (1936). A Grammar of the Maltese Language with Chrestomathy and
Vocabulary. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Vanhove, M. (1993). La langue maltaise: E´tudes syntaxiques d’un dialecte arabe
‘pe´riphe´rique’ . Wiesbaden: Harrassowitz.
Vanhove, M. (2009). The nominal quantiﬁer xi in Maltese. In R. Fabri, ed.,
Maltese Linguistics: A Snapshot; in Memory of Joseph A. Cremona (1922–2003).
Bochum: Brockmeyer, 17–34.
Van Putten, M. (2017). The illusory Yemenite connection of Andalusi
Arabic. Zeitschrift fu¨r Arabische Linguistik, 66, 5–44.
Vassalli, M. (1827). Grammatica della Lingua Maltese. Malta.
Vella, F. (1831). Maltese Grammar for the Use of the English. Leghorn (Livorno):
Glaucus Masi.
Versteegh, K. (2004). What’s where and how’s what? Interrogatives in
Arabic dialects. Estudios de Dialectologı´a Norteafricana y Andalusı´, 8, 239–51.
Walter, M. (2002). Pharyngealization effects in Maltese Arabic. In
S. Boudelaa, ed., Perspectives on Arabic Linguistics: Papers from the Annual
Symposium on Arabic Linguistics XVI. Amsterdam: John Benjamins, 161–78.
Wilmsen, D. (2014). Arabic Indeﬁnites, Interrogatives, and Negators: A Linguistic
History of Western Dialects. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Wilmsen, D. (2016a). Polar interrogative -sˇ in Maltese: Developments and
antecedents. In G. Puech and B. Saade, eds., Shifts and Patterns in Maltese.
Berlin: de Gruyter, 175–98.
11 Maltese
273

Wilmsen, D. (2016b). Another Croft Cycle in Arabic: The laysa negative
existential cycle. Folia Orientalia, LIII, 327–67.
Wilmsen, D. (2017). Grammaticalization and degrammaticalization in an
Arabic existential particle sˇay. Folia Orientalia, LIV, 279–307.
Wilmsen. D. (2020). Croft’s Cycle in Arabic: The negative existential cycle
in a single language. Linguistics, 58(2), 493–535.
Wilmsen, D. and Al-Sayyed, A. (2019). On morpho-syntactic Levantisms in
Maltese. In C. Miller, A. Barontini, M. Germanos, J. Guerrero, and
P.
Pereira,
eds.,
Studies
on
Arabic
Dialectology
and
Sociolinguistics:
Proceedings of the 12th International Conference of AIDA held in Marseille from
30th May–2nd June (2017). Aix-en-Provence: Institut de recherches et
d’e´tudes sur les mondes arabes et musulmans.
Woidich, M. (2006). Das Kairenisch-Arabische: Eine Grammatik. Wiesbaden:
Harrassowitz.
Wolfram, W. (2004). The sociolinguistic construction of remnant dialects.
In C. Fought, ed., Sociolinguistic Variation: Critical Reﬂections. New York:
Oxford University Press, 84–106.
Wolfram, W. and Schilling-Estes. N. (2003). Language change in ‘conserva-
tive’ dialects: The case of past tense be in southern enclave communities.
American Speech, 78(2), 172–202.
Corpora
Corpora Korpus Malti: http://mlrs.research.um.edu.mt/CQPweb/malti03/
Tunisian Arabic Corpus: www.tunisiya.org
2 7 4
D A V I D W I L M S E N

Part III
Theoretical and
Descriptive Studies


12
Grammaticalization
in Arabic
Mohssen Esseesy
12.1
Introduction
Grammaticalization is commonly thought to be a gradual and typically
unidirectional process whereby selected autonomous members of the
major lexical categories, such as nouns and verbs, come to serve gramma-
tical functions.1 Since the coinage of the term by the Indo-Europeanist
Antoine Meillet in 1912, this framework has been further expanded, most
signiﬁcantly by Kuryrłowicz (1976), to include the change from a less to
a more grammatical process. The cumulative effect of this process is often
polyfunctionality of the grammatical morpheme, labelled gram – a term
coined by Bybee et al. in 1994.
Further reﬁnements of the grammaticalization framework, particularly
by Heine (1993), expanded the notion beyond changes to a single word to
include an entire construction, such as verb periphrasis. Additionally,
Lehmann (1995) proposed ‘parameters’ that measure the relative degree
of grammaticalization along syntagmatic and paradigmatic scales, focus-
ing on functional, morphosyntactic, and phonological aspects of grams.
Additional works, e.g., Heine et al. (1991), Hopper and Traugott (2003), and
Bybee et al. (1994), also focused on correlated changes through grammati-
calization and attempted to account for the mechanisms and pathways
(also
known
as
clines
or
chains)
for
grammatical
change
cross-
linguistically. Even though grammaticalization has achieved an autono-
mous status within linguistics, research in it frequently draws from other
ﬁelds of linguistics, among them cognitive, corpus, and typology, to name
just a few.
Givo´n’s work in the early 1970s is believed to mark the beginning of
‘modern’ grammaticalization-based research (Narrog and Heine 2011: 1);
however, references to grammaticalization seem to hark back to von
1 Baalbaki (1990: 219) gives an Arabic termﺍﻧﺘﺤﺎﺀ(intih
̣
. aˉʿ) for ‘grammaticalization’.

Humboldt (1825) and von der Gabelentz (1891), according to Rubin
(2005: 7). As will be discussed below, interest in grammaticalization in
Arabic is fairly recent, starting roughly three decades ago. Comparing the
scholarly productivity in grammaticalization in Arabic over three decades
(1991–2019), indicates a slow start punctuated by sparse scholarly interest,
even though references were made to grammaticalization in a limited
number of publications between 1991 and 2000. Fewer than a handful of
studies in Arabic were devoted to grammaticalization during that decade.
The second decade (2001–10), however, witnessed a recognition of gram-
maticalization as a subﬁeld of linguistics with the inclusion of a lemma
entitled ‘grammaticalization’, along with three interrelated ones, ‘reana-
lysis’, ‘semantic bleaching’, and ‘semantic extension’ in the edited
volumes of Versteegh et al.’s (2006–2009) Encyclopedia of Arabic Language
and Linguistics. The same decade saw the ﬁrst full monographic treatment
of Arabic prepositions and subordinators, Esseesy’s (2010) study within
a grammaticalization-based framework. However, the current decade
(2011–19) witnessed an unprecedented growth in grammaticalization-
related research, particularly with the publication of Wilmsen’s (2014)
monograph Arabic Indeﬁnites, Interrogatives, and Negators, as well as scholarly
contributions from a growing number of researchers, including Eades
(2012), (Ouhalla 2012a, 2012b, 2014), Wilmsen (2013a, 2013b, 2017),
Bakir (2014), Jarad (2013, 2014, 2015, 2017), Camilleri and Sadler (2017),
and Taine-Cheikh (2013), in addition to a doctoral dissertation by Medea-
Garcı´a (2017) and a Master’s thesis by Alsaeedi (2015).
This enthusiasm for grammaticalization research in Arabic, however,
should be viewed within a growing broader worldwide trend that trans-
cends the original limited domain of scholarly contribution to grammatica-
lization by a few Indo-Europeanist linguists. In a sense, this trend represents
a gradual diversiﬁcation and widening in the scope of research and
approach. In Arabic, this growing research trend represents a refreshing
departure from the primarily synchronic treatment of Arabic grammar by
early and late medieval Arabic grammarians and their followers in modern
times. Medieval Arabic grammarians seem to hold a static view of Arabic,
within which grammatical morphemes, for example, were often implicitly
viewed as being developed ex nihilo, i.e., essentially without (lexical) ances-
tors. Modern-day philologists, such as Brockelmann (1966 [1908–13]),
No¨ldeke (1899), and Fischer (2002), on the other hand, have largely incorpo-
rated historical comparative methods common to the philological tradition
at the time. Their approach, while valuable in examining the properties of
the grammatical item in its context of use, still falls short of identifying the
motivations for its selection from a particular conceptual source and
whether cross-linguistic parallels, particularly in genetically unrelated lan-
guages, are also attested. In short, the hypothesized change often does not
go beyond language-internal data. What further complicates the reliability
of philological work in the pre-technological advancement periods is
2 7 8
M O H S S E N E S S E E S Y

establishing strong empirical validity of the hypothesized diachronic trajec-
tory for a given grammatical item. In recent years, however, it has become
common practice in historical linguistics, particularly in grammaticaliza-
tion research, to incorporate diachronic and synchronic corpus data of
actual language use.
12.1.1
Scope of This Chapter
The following sections of this chapter take stock of the state of gramma-
ticalization research in Arabic. Due to space limitations, the central focus
of the sections below is on critically assessing the state of the ﬁeld through
key studies. In so doing, evaluation of the contribution grammaticaliza-
tion has offered Arabic is underscored. Furthermore, the challenges and
opportunities that lie ahead for Arabic grammaticalization research are
also addressed. Thus, the following sections are arranged as follows:
Section 12.2 State of Research in Grammaticalization in Arabic examines
a wide range of studies that capture the state of research in grammatica-
lization in Arabic, covering roughly three decades of publications chron-
ologically distinguished as follows: Section 12.2.1 Sparse Research and
Limited Awareness of Grammaticalization (1991–2000) reviews the ear-
liest
research
using
grammaticalization
in
Arabic;
Section
12.2.2
Recognition
and
Inclusion
of
Grammaticalization
within
Arabic
Linguistics (2001–2019) sheds light on recognition and inclusion of gram-
maticalization
within
Arabic
linguistics;
Section
12.2.3
Research
Proliferation and Expansion (2011–2019) addresses growth and diversity
in recent grammaticalization research in Arabic. Section 12.3 Concluding
Remarks reviews the gains obtained through grammaticalization as well
as challenges and future opportunities ahead.
12.2
State of Research in Grammaticalization in Arabic
In the following three subsections I examine the major works that have
been published thus far and highlight the contributions this strand of
linguistics research has made towards improving understanding of the
input, processes, mechanisms, directionality, and outcome of grammati-
cal change in Arabic.
12.2.1
Sparse Research and Limited Awareness
of Grammaticalization (1991–2000)
During this decade, the few studies mostly concerned themselves with
issues pertaining to the consequences of grammaticalization in terms of
the morphosyntactic and phonological changes that the lexical items or
periphrasis undergo. Most scholarly attention was directed towards an
12 Grammaticalization in Arabic
279

individual grammatical marker or construction in an Arabic dialect or
a grammatical set of similarly functioning forms in Modern Standard
Arabic (MSA). Overall, spoken dialects received much more scholarly atten-
tion in this decade than did MSA. Identifying the lexical origin of the
functioning gram and sketching some stages of development took central
stage, whereas the working of the change mechanisms received much less
attention. Measuring the degree of grammatical change of each examined
gram either diachronically or synchronically received very little attention,
and usage-based frequency of occurrence in a given (con)text received no
scholarly attention.
Beginning with Al-Najjar’s (1991) study of future and progressive aspect
markers in present-day Kuwaiti dialect, it draws on the grammaticaliza-
tion framework found in Givo´n (1973), Bybee (1985), and Bybee and
Pagliuca (1985). His synchronic analysis traces the evolution of the volative
verb abg˙ı¯ ‘I desire/want’, which gave rise to the future maker b(i)-. Another
grammaticalized verbal predicate he analyses is the active participle
denoting posture ga¯ʿid ‘sitting’, which evolved to serve as durative/progres-
sive marker ga- in the Kuwaiti spoken dialect. In so doing, he sketches the
likely path of functional and formal evolution, ﬁrst from a lexical (i.-
e., verbal) source to grammatical auxiliary, as it shifts its semantic content
desire →intention with ensuing formal changes in syntactic structure,
where substitution of a nominal complement for a verbal complement
(bag˙e¯t aru¯h˙ ‘I wanted to go’) takes place. Syntactic change of this type
evidences decategorialization. Furthermore, reduction of morphophono-
logical properties, such as inﬂection and vocalic as well as consonantal
root reductions, evidences erosion.
The evolutionary pathway capturing the formal changes that Al-Najjar
highlights is known in grammaticalization literature as a verb-to-afﬁx cline
(see Hopper and Traugott 2003: 111), whereby the erstwhile autonomous
lexical verb becomes an auxiliary and in subsequent grammaticalization
stages a bound particle (e.g., ʾabg˙i →abg˙i →ʾbi →b(i); for ga¯ʿid →ga (Al-
Najjar 1991: 673). Synchronically, a split/divergence is evident in the
coexistence of the autonomous fully inﬂected lexical source ga¯ʿid side by
side with its grammaticalized and reduced form ga.
Equipped with grammaticalization tools, Al-Najjar concludes his study
of ga¯ʿid with a supposition, also found in Erwin (1969) and Agius and
Harrak (1987), that in neighbouring Iraq, the progressive aspect da- is
likely the remnant of a phonologically eroded ga¯ʿid. Indeed, the cross-
dialect data in Agius and Harrak’s study provides fertile ground for
a typological study of the evolution and distribution of auxiliary particles,
including those arising from the posture verb ‘sitting’, across a number of
Arabic dialects and subdialects.
In another grammaticalization study of an Arabic dialect, Woidich
(1995) focuses on grammaticalization cases belonging to various sub-
domains of the grammar of spoken Egyptian varieties. Basing his analysis
2 8 0
M O H S S E N E S S E E S Y

on existing scholarship in grammaticalization between the mid 1980s and
the mid 1990s, such as that found in Lehmann (1995), Heine et al. (1991),
Hopper (1991), Hopper and Traugott (1993), and Rubba (1994), Woidich
summarizes the literature on operating mechanisms and processes of
change insofar as they produce identiﬁable cases of grammaticalization
in Egyptian Arabic. Occasional references to increased grammaticalization
of some selected items are included in the study but not treated in
any depth.
Woidich’s study astutely identiﬁes a number of grammaticalization
cases within various Egyptian (sub)dialects. Relying mostly on self-
collected data from Cairene as well as dialects of other regions within
Egypt, Woidich illustrates with some details the synchronic polyfunction-
ality of the grammaticalized active participle ra¯yih˙ ‘going’, which pertains
to the motion schema. Under ‘the h˙a-imperfect’ designation, he brieﬂy
remarks on a number of futurity-related functions in the Cairo dialect
but also in Upper Egypt (e.g., Bʿe¯ri). In this exposition, Woidich also
recognizes reanalysis as the mechanism which is responsible for the
change, and identiﬁes the outcome of change, such as syntactic decategor-
ialization, phonetic erosion, generalization of use in new context, layering
(coexistence of forms of the gram at various stages in grammaticalization),
and persistence of traces of the erstwhile sense in the gram.
Woidich also proceeds to examine increased grammaticalization of
members of selected functional classes. One such member is the rela-
tive pronoun illi ‘who’ becoming a comparative conjunction. In the
example drawn from his data, the relative pronoun illi ‘who’ is reana-
lysed to a comparative conjunction in zayy illi ‘as if’ (Woidich 1995:
262). Similarly, the change from comparative to conjunction is exem-
pliﬁed in the functional change the comparative adverb ʾah˙ san ‘better’
undergoes through reanalysis to a conjunction meaning ‘rather’ in
ikkallimu f-h˙ a¯ga tanya ʾah˙ san ‘you should rather speak of something
else’ (ibid.).
Under reanalysis, Woidich further examines reduction (i.e., erosion) of
autonomous forms, resulting in afﬁxes such as xa- ←xal- ←xalli ‘let’s’.
Another type of syntagmatic reduction of phrases involving a mature
preposition such as fı¯ ‘in, at’ or bi- ‘at, with’ and a grammaticalizing noun
with which they collocate results in gamb ←ﬁgamb ‘beside’ (1995: 264).
Reanalysis is also credited in Woidich for shifting the syntactic boundaries
of afﬁxes (e.g., ma- + imperfect) for reinforcement: tru¯h˙ ≈ma-tru¯h˙ ‘you go!’
→mat-ru¯h˙ (ibid.: 265). It should be noted that reanalysis is invisible and
affects the function of the underlying structure only. Its consequence,
such as the reassignment of boundaries in surface structure just men-
tioned, is actualization, as deﬁned and understood in Timberlake (1977),
Langacker (1977), and Antilla (1989). In Section 12.2.2 below, the relation-
ship between reanalysis and grammaticalization is further discussed, par-
ticularly with respect to its role in grammaticalization.
12 Grammaticalization in Arabic
281

Examination of the outcomes of grammaticalization in Woidich’s study
also includes a number of known features and patterns. Among these are:
decategorialization of bodily posture verb ʾa¯m ‘stand’ to ‘modal of launch-
ing an action’ as in laʾe¯t ilba¯b maftu¯h˙ ʾumt daxalt ‘I found the door open, so
I entered’ (Woidich 1995). Another feature, incorporation into a new para-
digm or sharing attributes of a new category, as in goz ‘pair’ →goz ‘two’, as
in aktar min goz saʿa¯t ‘more than two hours’, is found in a rural area near
Fayyu¯ m.
Within the domain of prepositions, Woidich further notes grammatica-
lization of fı¯ ‘in, at’ into an ‘obligatory automatic marker of the direct
object’ to mark intensiﬁcation and prolongation of action, such as in
biyibni ﬁbe¯t ‘he is busy building a house’ (cf. biyibni be¯t ‘he is building
a house’ (1995: 267). His study concludes with an acknowledgement of
the existence of ‘many important cases’ which have not been included in
his exposition. This statement subtly invites more grammaticalization-
based research in order to capture unanalysed changes that are awaiting
exploration.
Later in the decade, Anghelescu’s (1999) typological study of modalities
in MSA makes an important contribution to grammaticalization, since it
represents a tacit acknowledgement of grammatical change occurring in
fus˙h˙ a¯, however constrained or controlled it is by sociolinguistic and extra-
linguistic forces. Basing the analysis in this study on her prior research,
and on Hopper and Traugott (1993), Anghelescu examines the results of
the grammaticalization of modalities traditionally known in Arabic gram-
mar as nawa¯sih
˘
. The heterogeneous classes of predicates subsumed under
modality in the context of her study have to be understood as ones mark-
ing abstract grammatical concepts pertaining to the speaker’s perception
of the reality of the events/situations they describe. She readily admits
a notable shortcoming in her study, namely corroborating evidence from
historical texts and examination of frequency of use of the modals in order
to measure the effects of grammaticalization on the generalization of
their use.
Anghelescu’s study is built on Rescher’s (1968) and Perkins’ (1983) clas-
siﬁcations of modalities in her identiﬁcation of six major types in Arabic
(epistemic, alethic, deontic, evaluative, boulomaic, temporal), each of
which includes several sub-types. Among these modalities are periphrastic
members that are not highly grammaticalized constructions, including
such hypotactic ones as min al-AP/PP/ADJ ʾan/ʾanna ‘it is AP/PP/ADJ that’
(e.g., min al-muʾakkadi ʾanna ‘it is certain that’); ʾafʿa¯l al-muqa¯raba ‘verbs of
imminence’, such as inchoative ka¯da ‘to be on the verge of’; and epistemic
expressions denoting assertion, for example la¯ sˇakka ‘there is no doubt’ and
the more grammaticalized single form yajibu ‘(it is) necessary’.
Anghelescu presents two pieces of evidence of grammaticalization in
the system of modal expression in Arabic. The ﬁrst is the syntactic fronting
of modals within the sentence, citing Hopper and Traugott (1993: 50), who
2 8 2
M O H S S E N E S S E E S Y

in her view, hold that ‘change in word order is considered to be a type of
grammaticalization’ (Anghelescu (1999: 134). The other piece of evidence
of grammaticalization, under the heading ‘an asymmetry in the use of
person in conjugation’, is the tendency of certain modal verbs such as
z˙anna ‘suppose, presume’ to appear more frequently in the 1st person as
evidence of ‘subjectivity in language’.
Looking ﬁrst at word-order change, Anghelescu is partially correct inso-
far as changes in word order may evidence grammaticalization in speciﬁc,
limited instances for a functional class, but this is not applicable to the
entire language system. In the course of grammaticalization of a linguistic
item, its syntactic position may change. However, Sun and Traugott (2011)
clearly assert that ‘word order change understood as linearization of word
or constituent order alone is not grammaticalization’ (2011: 379).
Moreover, in the case of Arabic, a language with more than one possible
word order (e.g., VSO/SVO), one cannot arbitrarily claim that one of these
two possible word orders, however dominant, is more grammaticalized
than the other. Second, word order changes according to Croft (2003) tend
to be cyclical while grammaticalization is most often unidirectional, pro-
ceeding from lexical to grammatical and from less to more grammatical.
Secondly, the higher frequency of occurrence of verbs inﬂected for 1st
person, independent of grammaticalization, typiﬁes in certain verbs
a function of the speaker’s assertion of a certain belief or stance denoted
by the lexical meaning of the verb itself. In some other verbs, however, one
may ﬁnd inﬂection for the 3rd person to be more dominant. For example,
the MSA verb ja¯ʾa ‘he came’ in its 3rd-person masculine singular inﬂection
in corpora of the arabiCorpus shows textual frequencies surpassing all
other person inﬂections.2 Whether the 1st or 3rd person inﬂected verb
occurs more frequently than other person inﬂections within the verb
paradigm cannot on its own be indicative of increased subjectivity through
grammaticalization. Increased subjectivity in grammaticalization is con-
textually driven, as for example, in the expression of the epistemic mean-
ing that the typically deontic must denotes in she must be home by now.
Finally, there is no a priori reason that all forms of verb inﬂections need
be of comparable or equal frequency. So, one cannot establish on the
grounds of the high frequency tendency of stative verbs to occur in 1st-
person inﬂection per se as indicative of grammaticalization.
At the end of the decade, increased awareness of the potency of gram-
maticalization is evidenced in observable references to it within studies of
the syntax of Arabic dialects. In Syntax of Spoken Arabic, Brustad (2000), for
example, references grammaticalization a dozen times. The grammatica-
lization framework she notes accounts for syntactic change arising from
2 In the al-Ahrā m newspaper 1999 corpus, jā ʾa ‘he came’ occurred 6,731 times, and in the Modern Arabic corpus, it
occurred 603 times. However, the same verb in its 1st-person singular inﬂection jiʾtu ‘I came’ has a textual frequency in
these two corpora of 84 and 64, respectively.
12 Grammaticalization in Arabic
283

diachronic shifts in pragmatic meaning that led to changes in syntactic
relations and function (p. 9). In the discussion of aspect, for example,
Brustad mentions grammaticalization in the context of differentiating
between lexical aspect, semantic denotation of the verb, and formal
aspect, which are manifested morphologically in perfective, imperfective,
and participle (p. 201). Furthermore, Brustad cites grammaticalization in
the context of marking aspect on verbs (e.g., progressive ʿam in Syrian (p.
246). In the context of the syntactic position of independent personal
pronouns in preverbal and postverbal position, she also argues that pre-
verbal independent personal pronouns are grammaticalized in Arabic
whereas postverbal ones ‘suppl[y] contrastive or unexpected reference’
(p. 348).
Brustad’s study of the syntax of selected spoken Arabic dialects contains
invaluable data and analysis ripe for future grammaticalization studies.
For example, the list of verbs she labels ‘narrative contour’ are essentially
verbs that synchronically exhibit varying degrees of grammaticalization of
aspect in spoken Arabic across many dialects (Brustad 2000: 193). The
event schema to which these verbs belong is useful for identifying the
conceptual sources from which lexical verbs have been recruited (e.g.,
motion towards ra¯h˙ ‘go’, zˇa ‘return’, and body posture ʾam ‘stand’).
12.2.2
Recognition and Inclusion of Grammaticalization within
Arabic Linguistics (2001–2010)
The decade from 2001 to 2010 saw grammaticalization as a research tool
ripe for Arabic linguistics. In the ﬁrst comprehensive reference tool for
Arabic linguistics, Versteegh et al.’s (2006–2009), Encyclopedia of Arabic
Language and Linguistics, four lemmas are included in this multi-volume
publication: ‘grammaticalization’, ‘reanalysis’, ‘semantic bleaching,’ and
‘semantic extension.’ Through these lemmas, access to description of
grammaticalization and its relevance to Arabic widened for researchers
and students of Arabic beyond the hitherto sparse individual studies. In
these four lemmas, Esseesy (2006, 2009a, 2009b, 2009c) examined pro-
cesses, mechanisms, directionality, and results of change through gram-
maticalization, using illustrative cases of grammaticalization in standard
and spoken Arabic varieties. A dearth of research in grammaticalization in
Arabic at the time of their writing occasioned a focus on analysis and
commentary on existing linguistics research and ﬁndings from outside
Arabic and providing parallels for grammaticalization in Arabic varieties.
Towards the end of the 2000s, steady interest in grammaticalization in
Arabic occasioned the publication of the ﬁrst full-length monograph,
Esseesy’s 2010 Grammaticalization of Arabic Prepositions and Subordinators.
Within this corpus-based study of diachronic and synchronic dimensions,
Arabic prepositions are arranged on a continuum ranging from large
morphosyntactic units comprising preposition-noun-preposition (PNP) to
2 8 4
M O H S S E N E S S E E S Y

reduced afﬁxes, having an open syllable structure CV- requiring a host. On
this continuum, the diversity encountered in the functional, morphosyn-
tactic, and phonological distribution of Arabic prepositional forms, can be
split into at least ﬁve possible stages ranked on a gradational scale of
increasing grammaticalization from I to V, as shown in Table 12.1.
The grammaticalization approach adopted in Esseesy (2010) enables
identiﬁcation of the following attributes of Arabic prepositions. (1) They
do not form a closed class, as new members are still being added (e.g., min
qibali ‘by’3), and some archaic ones have fallen into disuse (e.g., ta-,
a preposition marking oath in Classical Arabic, as in ta-l-la¯hi ‘by God’). (2)
Strict categorical distinction between prepositions and the so-called ‘loca-
tive adverbs’ (i.e., z˙uru¯f) is improbable given the gradient nature of preposi-
tional function and an observable functional overlap between them in
some cases ʿala¯/fawqa t˙-t˙a¯wilati. ‘on/above the table’.
Extending the investigation of Arabic prepositions beyond the tradi-
tional phrasal and monoclausal limits, Esseesy 2010 uncovers their sub-
sequent development into subordinators connecting clauses to form
sentences. The focus in this domain is exclusively on prepositions marking
causal (e.g., li- ‘to, for, in order that’, h˙ atta¯ ‘in order that’), concessive-
conditional (h˙ atta¯ law ‘even if’), and concessive (ʿala¯/bi-r-rag˙mi min ʾanna
‘although, in spite of’; maʿa ʾanna ‘although’) relations. Following the path
for development into subordinators, the mechanisms facilitating their
functional extension are scrutinized along with morphosyntactic changes.
From the analysis, pragmatic strategies such as conversational implicata
and metonymy in particular emerge as the dominant factor motivating
functional change; other factors – such as metaphor – play varying roles
depending on a combination of textual factors and type of target function.
Source prepositions reveal that, for example, allatives (e.g., li- ‘to’; h˙ atta¯
‘until’) give rise to causal relations between clauses; the same allative
Table 12.1 Synchronic continuum of Arabic prepositional forms and
constructions
Stage Structure
Example
I
Linguistic expressions in an incipient stage of grammati-
calization arising from free collocations to form gram-
matical units of the form preposition-noun-preposition
(PNP)
ʿalaˉ /bi-r-rag˙mi min
‘in spite of, despite’
II
Bi-morphemic compound-like prepositions of the type
preposition-noun (PN)
bi-sababi ‘because of’
III
Single-stem prepositionals
xalfa ‘back, behind’
IV
Single-stem ‘primary’ prepositions
fıˉ ‘in, at’
V
Reduced-stem bound prepositions
bi- ‘at, with’
3 This prepositional phrase introduces the agent in passive constructions in MSA, likely under inﬂuence from European
languages.
12 Grammaticalization in Arabic
285

source, when augmented by the conditional particle, leads to concessive-
conditional readings (e.g., h˙ atta¯ law ‘even if’, h˙ atta¯ ʾida¯ ‘even if’, etc.). Based
on these and other semantic properties, the underlying conceptual ﬂuidity
between causal, concessive-conditional, and concessive relations is
exposed. Based on these presumed conceptual connections, comparisons
between the three semantic relations are possible within the grammatica-
lization
framework.
Also,
through
this
grammaticalization-based
approach, the existence of an iconic relation between the morphophono-
logical form of the preposition-based subordinator and the type of seman-
tic relation it marks is established.
Another area where grammaticalization has proven valuable is in unco-
vering an important subclass of Arabic prepositional forms which origi-
nate in body-part terms. Documented cross-linguistic cases of recruitment
of body-part nominals for prepositional functions abound (e.g., Svorou
1994; Rubba 1994; Heine et al. 1991; Heine 2011, 2014; Gebreyes 2014).
Table 12.2 contains several body-part terms and their derived grammati-
calized functions.
In Table 12.2, one notes that the changes associated with grammaticali-
zation typically entail: (1) coexistence of body-part terms as nominals
referring to the relevant body parts with their grammaticalized, polyse-
mous variant morpheme; (2) as their meaning becomes schematized and
Table 12.2 Selected body-part terms grammaticalized to prepositionals
Body-part source and form Lexical meaning
Prepositional
form
Grammatical
meaning
jaˉnib-un/in/an (janb-un
/in/an)a
‘ﬂank, side’
jaˉnib-a/janb-a
‘besides, next to’
wasat
˙
–un/in/an
‘waist, mid-section’
wast
˙
-a
‘in the middle, amid’
xalf-un/in/an
‘back, rear, buttocks,
anus’
xalf-a
‘behind’
wajh-un/in/an~jihat-un
/in/anb
‘face’
jihat-a
‘side, direction,
orientation’
jaw(w-u)c
‘abdomen, inner
part’
juww-aˉ/a(h)
‘inside, within’
(him/it)
a Parallel development of janb in Semitic is found in Rubba (1994) for Aramaic. He cites
Payne Smith (1957: 62) for genb in Syriac; and Drower and Macuch (1963: 76) for
Mandaic and Biblical Aramaic, which include Mandaic gamb. Both genb and gamb in
Cairene spoken Arabic are variants of janba/ja¯niba in MSA. Polysemic generalization of
the senses denoted by gawaa and gabaa beyond body-part designation was already
evident in Mandaic and Syriac, according to Rubba (1994: 89).
b Ibn Manz˙u¯ r Lisa¯n Al- ʿArab 6:4775 states: al-wajhu wa-l-jihatu bi-maʿna¯ ʿal-wajhu and
jihatun share the same meaning’. The same holds true according to Ibn Manz˙u¯ r for al-
wajhatu wa-l-jihatu ‘facade, direction’.
c Considered colloquial in modern Arabic, even though it has (formal) Classical Arabic
usages and traceable Semitic parallels in older Semitic origins: Syriac gaw ‘the inside,
inward parts’ (Payne Smith 1957: 62) and even in Biblical Aramaic (Rosenthal 1974: 80,
cited in Rubba 1994: 86).
2 8 6
M O H S S E N E S S E E S Y

generalized, the domain of their use widens to include contexts previously
not permitted to their lexical ancestors; (3) the grammaticalized mor-
pheme more often than not does not permit substitutions with members
of the erstwhile conceptual category; (4) (de)categorical changes as
reﬂected in the morphosyntax of the grammaticalizing elements often
appear in the form of reduction or loss in inﬂection, inability to take
modiﬁers, a deﬁnite article, and other prototypical nominal trappings;
(5) phonological reduction or erosion, while possible, occurs much later
in the grammaticalization process and is not inherently required, since the
grammaticalization process may be halted or concluded without such
stage ever taking place. Finally, (6) a grammaticalization framework
helps validate the assumed evolutionary path of a grammaticalizing
form or construction, particularly when documented evidence is either
insufﬁcient or lacking, through known cross-linguistic correspondences.
Heine and Kuteva (2002) catalogued some 400 grammaticalization pro-
cesses involving body-part terms. Among these are the following three,
which correspond to the changes in three of the ﬁve body parts in
Table 12.2:
a.
FLA N K, SI DE →S I D E, BESI DE
b.
BA CK, B U T T OC K S →B EH IN D
c.
B E L L Y, I N T E R I O R →IN (S P AT I A L, T E MP OR A L).
While body-part terms are not the only or major source for the develop-
ment of prepositions in Arabic, they nonetheless exemplify how lexical
terms come to serve grammatical functions by grammaticalization.
12.2.3
Research Proliferation and Expansion (2011–2019)
In this decade, a wide range of grammaticalization studies in Arabic
emerged, taking as their focus one or more functional elements (e.g.,
particle, auxiliary, tense/aspect marker) from various domains of grammar
of a single dialect or across dialects. More than a dozen studies appeared,
ranging from a full monograph, e.g., Wilmsen (2014), Arabic Indeﬁnites,
Interrogatives, and Negators, a doctoral dissertation by Medea-Garcı´a (2017),
‘Grammaticalizacio´n y cambio lingu¨ ı´stico en a´rabe: El caso de hatta` en
lengua clasica dialectal’, and an MA thesis by Alsaeedi (2015), ‘The rise of
new copula in Arabic’, to the more than tenfold journal articles already
mentioned in Section 12.1. Research data in this decade ranged from
purely synchronic examples drawn from present-day dialects to diachro-
nic samples, with historical depths reaching ancient Semitic languages.
Beginning with Eades’ (2012) study of the irrealis b-preﬁx in the Sˇarqiyya
dialect in north Oman, his focus is on the grammaticalization of two
genetically related forms, the b-preﬁx and yiba ‘to want’, sharing an ances-
tral lexical source, the volitional verb yabg˙ı¯. Lexical sources belonging to
volition schema are cross-linguistically known to be amongst those noted
12 Grammaticalization in Arabic
287

in Heine (1993: 31) to commonly give rise to tense and aspect, including
future marking. From the data Eades collected over a six-year period in
Sˇarqiyya, one immediately notices the somewhat higher frequency of
occurrence of the b-preﬁx tokens than those marked by the grammatica-
lized p-stem form yabi. Even though the overall frequency for both grams is
quite low, the b-preﬁx occurs 119 times whereas the p-stem form occurs
only 76 times out of all the 3,200 analysed predicate tokens in the corpus
data. The disparity in their relative frequency of use in the corpus may be
attributed in part to the polyfunctionality of the b-preﬁx compared to the
p-stem yabi, whose distribution seems somewhat constrained by its reten-
tion of its lexical volitional sense in certain contexts. As discussed below,
the stem’s volitional sense seems bleached in the b-preﬁx, given Eades’
observation that ‘the preﬁx in the Sˇarqiyya dialect never conveys a volitive
meaning’ (p. 56).
In his description of the functionality of these two forms, Eades seems to
be making contradictory remarks regarding the use of b-preﬁx and p-stem
yabi in contexts referring to the future. On the one hand he states ‘all
tokens of predicates in the Sˇarqiyya database referring to future events
or states are marked either by b- or yiba’ (p. 55). His statement on the
following page, ‘all verbs referring to future events in the corpus were
coded by verbs marked by the b-preﬁx’, on the other hand contradicts his
earlier description (p. 56). Moreover, the range of future-oriented contexts
that b-preﬁx appears in, according to his corpus, include the following:
future-tense marking, ‘future in the past’ (deﬁned in Eades as ‘future time
in relation to temporal reference point in the narrative’), specifying
a subsequent event in narrative, imminent, and intentive but not ‘purely’
intentive (ibid.). Additionally, Eades observes that the b-preﬁx in the dia-
lect under examination has lost the volitional meaning of its source verb.
This is signiﬁcant, for bleached volition constitutes a gain in generaliza-
tion of usage in non-volitional contexts and thereby could lead to
increased textual frequency. The p-stem yiba tokens, on the other hand,
even though they occurred in contexts denoting future events, just like the
b-preﬁx, mostly had volitive and no future sense (p. 57). A reﬂex of the
generalization of the b-preﬁx meaning is also observed in its occurrence in
contexts where yiba does not: in future contexts b-preﬁx occurs in the
complement clause whereas yiba does not.
In non-future contexts, b-preﬁx occurs in complement clauses, subordi-
nate clause of times, apodosis only (condition) whereas yiba does not.
Moreover, within the main clause in future and non-future contexts the
textual frequency disparity between the b-preﬁx and the p-stem yiba is
quite striking: In future contexts, the b-preﬁx occurs thirty-eight times
compared to only three with yiba. Similarly, in non-future contexts, the
b-preﬁx occurs ﬁfty-ﬁve times compared to nineteen with yiba.
An additional semantic function observed in Eades’ data denotes what
he calls ‘pseudo-movement and pseudo-intention in circumstantial
2 8 8
M O H S S E N E S S E E S Y

clauses’ (p. 64). Again, frequency of occurrence for marking futurity shows
an imbalance between the b-preﬁx and the p-stem yabi, such that the preﬁx
has greater textual frequency compared to the p-stem. The b-preﬁx token
occurred in the various future-oriented contexts forty-four times whereas
the p-stem form yabi occurred only ﬁve times. This perhaps can be
explained in light of the synchronic variability in the relative degree of
grammaticalization between them.
Another notable distinction between the b-preﬁx and the yiba p-stem is
also found in non-future-oriented contexts. The b-preﬁx is found on pre-
dicates in conditional clauses (protasis and/or apodosis), whether or not
a conditional particle is present in the clause, particularly in hypothetical,
irrealis modality – a function previously observed in Persson (2008) and
cited in Eades. As for the p-stem yiba, it retains its lexical volitional sense in
some contexts. Yet, with the loss of [g˙], Eades notes, its inﬂectional range is
severely diminished. These reductions in morphophonological properties
strongly suggest decategorialization and erosion.
Through a grammaticalization analysis of the b-preﬁx and the p-stem
yiba, Eades was able to establish in general terms a typology for future
marking in Arabia. In a conservative dialect such as found in Najd, there is
no innovation from Classical Arabic in the marking of progressive, future,
or habitual on predicates. In the urban Gulf dialects, innovation took place
in Bedouin dialects through contact with non-Arabs, such that the coastal
areas in various Gulf states developed preﬁxes (e.g., b-preﬁx) marking
futurity on p-stem verbs. In the Sˇarqiyya region of North Oman, he
observes all predicates in future contexts are marked by either a b-preﬁx
or p-stem for futurity. Furthermore, he observes that the b-preﬁx and the
p-stem have independent, divergent grammaticalization paths. It seems
that yiba is still closer semantically and functionally to its erstwhile source
verb, whereas b-stem has progressed much further along the cline of its
grammaticalization and has developed additional functions not shared by
the p-stem yiba. As a result, the reduced, and bound, b-preﬁx demonstrates
a wider frequency distribution than the bulkier yiba p-stem.
In the domain of verb grammaticalization to particles, Taine-Cheikh’s
(2013) study analyses various forms (a)(ra)(a) having the lexical verb raʾa¯
‘see’ as their source. Her analysis relies on synchronic data drawn from
across the Arabic-speaking regions of the Middle East and North Africa.
The areal distribution of these forms is primarily North Africa. Taine-
Cheikh establishes that reﬂexes of ra- are distributed as follows: ra¯- in
Morocco, ra/ra¯ in Algeria, raˆ- in Tunisia, ra¯- in Libya, and (a)raˆ- in
Mauritania. The range of functions ascribed to these grams include pre-
sentative, contestation of a claim, localizing particle, logical consequence
particle, discourse marker, simultaneity. From the same verb source, in
Syrian Arabic, she also attributes the marker of doubt (ya) tara as in ‘do you
think . . . ?’, which when it occurs without ya, denotes ‘just you wait’. The
same form, realized as yatara in Egyptian Arabic, serves a discourse
12 Grammaticalization in Arabic
289

function associated with doubt as well. Despite the synchronic diversity of
these grams in form and function, they clearly highlight the result of
grammaticalization, where the verb stem lost many verbal properties,
such as the ability to form active/passive participles, passive, and inﬂection
for tense/aspect. Syntactically, these grams co-occur with lexical verbs
(e.g., ra¯-ni nah˙ ki mʿa¯k ‘here I am, talking to you’ (2013: 8).
Verbs of perception, such as raʾa¯ ‘see’, have been shown to grammatica-
lize to allative relation markers in a number of languages. Heine and
Kuteva (2002: 269) provide examples of this grammaticalization in Bihari
tak ‘to see’ > taka ‘up to, by, for (they cite from Svorou 1994: 116). Another
known grammaticalization direction for the verb to see, cited in Heine and
Kuteva, is marking passive, such as JIAN ‘to see’ →JIAN passive marker in
Archaic Chinese (Heine and Kuteva 2002: 270). However, the functions
Taine-Cheikh (2013) associates with the grams arising from raʾa¯ represent
a hitherto unattested case – a potential contribution to enriching the study
of grammaticalization.
In a study taking already grammaticalized item(s) as the focus of analy-
sis, Wilmsen (2013a) examines the widespread dialectal enclitic post-
positional negator -sˇ, which is found in a vast number of Arabic dialects,
including Egyptian, Moroccan, and Maltese. Applying the historical com-
parative method on diachronic data from Andalusi and Maltese Arabic and
synchronic data from present-day Moroccan and Egyptian dialects,
Wilmsen explores the process that occasioned the negation function that
-sˇi came to serve. His choice of diachronic data drawn from Andalusian and
Maltese Arabic is well-founded, given that these two dialects have not
always adhered to the superimposed codiﬁed writing restrictions of
Classical Arabic, a fact he notes. Therefore, the extant historical data
closely reﬂects the actual vernacular forms in use at the time. His analysis
of examples drawn from these sets of data enabled him to conclude that
the widespread negator -sˇi is a reanalysed interrogative that continued to
retain some of its interrogative sense (2013a: 17).
In Wilmsen’s (2014) monographic treatment of reﬂexes of -sˇi, rich sets of
historical and present-day data were consulted in order to account for the
grammatical functions the morpheme -sˇi and its reﬂexes evolved to serve.
These functions include indeﬁnite determiner, interrogative, and nega-
tive. Most previous studies of reﬂexes of this morpheme have assumed its
ultimate origin the lexical nominal -sˇayʾ ‘thing’. Notwithstanding the
shared consonant [sˇ] between the presumed diachronic nominal source
and the reﬂexes of -sˇi, which Wilmsen acknowledges, he refutes the
claimed lexical origin. Instead, he assumes the Proto-Semitic 3rd-person
pronouns sˇV and sˇVnu, which are a much older source and separate from
Classical Arabic. Wilmsen bases this diachronic reconstruction of sˇi on
resemblance not only in form but also in shared functions, such as ‘pre-
sentative and demonstrative qualities, from which derive their existential,
interrogative, indeﬁnite, and ultimately negative functions.’ (2014: 169).
2 9 0
M O H S S E N E S S E E S Y

The diachronic derivation sequence from this pronominal source to other
grammatical functions culminating in the lexical noun sˇayʾun ‘thing’ is
presented in Wilmsen (2014: 171) as follows:
Protosemitic West Semitic (MSA/Mehri)4
Central Semitic (Arabic)
3rd pron
→existential particle
→partitive→
substantive
sˇV
s´i
s´i/sˇ
sˇı¯/sˇayʾun
‘he/it’
‘it is’
‘something’/’a’ ‘thing’
In both 2013a and 2014, Wilmsen assumes reanalysis to be the (sole)
mechanism responsible for the grammaticalizaton of the various reﬂexes
of -sˇ and -sˇi. On the working of reanalysis in Arabic he posits:
[Re]analysis must work amongst speakers of a language, either while they
are acquiring it as their native tongue or later in their adult usage. There is
no native speaker of FA [fus˙h˙ a¯ Arabic] to impart to their children any aspect
of the language for reanalysis while they are acquiring it; meanwhile, the
many gatekeepers to FA militate against adult speakers’ initiating any
such dramatic innovations in their writing.
(Wilmsen 2014: 45)
In a subsequent (2017) article related to the reﬂexes of sˇi (e.g., sˇay)
in Arabic dialects, Wilmsen uses examples drawn from a number of
dialects (e.g., Egyptian, Sudanese, Yemeni, Omani, Emirati, Bahraini,
Lebanese, Syrian, Tunisian, Maltese, Moroccan) to describe the parti-
cle’s
multi-grammatical
functions.
He
formulates
the
functional
development of the existential particle sˇay and proceeds to propose
‘it is either a borrowing from Modern South Arabian or it is an
inherited Semitic feature, ultimately deriving from an attention-
focusing demonstrative’ (2017: 279). Reafﬁrming his earlier refutation
of a lexical source (i.e., sˇayʾun ‘thing’), Wilmsen asserts that ‘to the
contrary, the word sˇay‚ meaning ‘thing’ can easily derive from an
indeﬁnite quantiﬁer or partitive sˇay, in the process of degrammatica-
lization’ (ibid.).
Due to space limitations, I restrict my remarks to two grammaticaliza-
tion-related issues in consideration of Wilmsen’s (1) characterization of
reanalysis in grammaticalization and child language acquisition; (2)
degrammaticalization of the reﬂexes of sˇi, sˇay to the lexical target sˇayʾun
‘thing’.
Beginning with reanalysis, since Langacker’s identiﬁcation of reanalysis
as ‘change in the structure of an expression or class of expression that does
not involve any immediate or intrinsic modiﬁcation of its surface struc-
ture’ (Langacker 1977: 58), this change mechanism has been subjected to
scrutiny with respect to its connection to grammaticalization by a number
of scholars. In Traugott’s (2011: 22–4) summary of the prevailing views on
the relationship between reanalysis and grammaticalization there appears
4 MSA in this diagram refers to Modern South Arabian.
12 Grammaticalization in Arabic
291

to be no consensus. Traugott cites Lehmann (2004) seeing a fundamental
difference between grammaticalization and reanalysis particularly in the
gradualness of the former and its absence in the latter. Similarly,
Haspelmath seems to go a step further in his (1998) study entitled ‘Does
Grammaticalization Need Reanalysis?’ and denies its role in grammatica-
lization, claiming unequivocally that the two are ‘disjoint classes of phe-
nomena’ (p. 315). Citing examples from French and German, Haspelmath
demonstrates the occurrence of reanalysis without grammaticalization,
and demonstrates that reanalysis is ‘potentially reversible, whereas gram-
maticalization is essentially irreversible.’ (p. 325).5 The latter point echoes
a similar stance in Heine and Reh (1984), which Haspelmath cites.
Considering an example from Arabic where reanalysis occurs without
grammaticalization, the compound raʾsma¯l ‘capital.’ It is formed transpar-
ently from two independent nouns, raʾs ‘head’ and ma¯l ‘money’, where the
outcome is not a grammaticalized construction but a lexicalized one. The
resulting compound is accessed and processed by both speaker and hearer
as a single unit whose reanalysed meaning is not the sum of its two lexical
sub-constituents but rather a new distinct concept that supplants the
meaning of the two autonomous forms.
Even accepting reanalysis as a possible mechanism for grammaticaliza-
tion, it is by no means the only one. Metaphor, metonymy (which are
ubiquitous across all Arabic varieties), and pragmatic-semantic inferen-
cing (and increased subjectiﬁcation) also have been noted as mechanisms
facilitating grammaticalization, for example, in prepositions and subordi-
nators in fus˙h˙ a¯ Arabic (Esseesy 2010).
As for the link between child language acquisition and grammaticaliza-
tion, in his examination of this relationship, Diessel (2011) observes that
children’s language development shows that ‘phonological and morpho-
logical changes of grammaticalization do not have parallels in child lan-
guage, suggesting that the two developments are in principle independent
of each other’ (p. 131). Later in his study he rephrases the separation
between them differently ‘[t]he formal differences between child language
and diachronic change suggest that the two developments are in principle
independent of each other; there is no direct link between them.’ (ibid.:
138). Finally, in his conclusion, Diessel reiterates absence of a connection
unequivocally, thus stating ‘[t]here is no evidence that grammaticalization
and language acquisition are directly related. However, the two develop-
ments often proceed along similar conceptual paths because they involve
the same mechanisms of categorization’ (p. 141).
In consideration of degrammaticalization of a functional particle to
a lexical source, the properties of sˇay ‘thing,’ the lexical outcome of
degrammaticalization proposed in Wilmsen (2017) are assessed according
5 In a number of studies, Norde (e.g., 2006a, 2006b, 2009) uncovers some cases of degrammaticalization, which is
thought to be the reverse of grammaticalization.
2 9 2
M O H S S E N E S S E E S Y

to the (reverse) of Lehmann’s grammaticalization parameters, which
Norde (2011: 478) uses for measuring degrammaticalization/degramma-
tion. As shown below, they all seem to ﬁt unequivocally. The change from
the bound -sˇi to autonomous sˇay ‘thing’ involves the following changes:
Parameter
-š
šay ‘thing’
integrity
Desemanticized, phonologically
eroded, decategorialized
Resemanticized, phonologically
strengthened, recategorialized as
a member of an open class
Paradigmaticity Paradigmatized as a member of
interrogative, negative, pre-
sentative class
De-paradigmatized, debonded (i.e.,
becoming a free morpheme)
Paradigmatic
variability
Obligatory
De-obligatoriﬁed, becoming optional
Structural
scope
Reduced scope
Scope expanded
Bondedness
Attachment to a host
Severance/non-bound
Syntactic
variability
Invariability/rigidity
More ﬂexible, increased syntactic
freedom
However, none of the degrammaticalization parameters above singly or
collectively provide motivation for this type of infrequent change. Fischer
(2011: 35), draws a parallel applicable for the impetus for grammaticaliza-
tion and degrammaticalization ‘[i]f indeed an important driving force in
the grammaticalization of a particular construction is the availability of
a grammatical category or pattern that it could ﬁt into, then in a similar
way, but with opposite effect, the non-availability of a pattern may derive
degrammaticalization’ (emphasis is in original text). Citing Plank’s (1995)
study of the degrammaticalization of English genitive inﬂection to a clitic,
Fischer remarks that it was the result of erosion in the system of noun
inﬂection, which occasioned the isolation of the genitive ending and con-
sequently its presence in ‘inﬂectionless noun patterns’ have rendered it
obsolete. Another case Fischer cites is the degrammaticalization of Irish
1st plural verbal afﬁx -mid to the unbound personal pronoun muid, where
‘the pronoun pattern was available in the rest of the verbal paradigm’
(ibid.: 36). Without any known contributing systemic changes in spoken
Arabic varieties that could have set in motion the degrammaticalization of
the sˇ/sˇi particles to lexical sˇay ‘thing’, and the continued full functionality
of sˇi/sˇay in a number of Arabic dialects, the impetus for their degrammati-
calization to lexical sˇay remains unclear. If a triggering factor similar to the
ones described by Fischer is identiﬁed within the Arabic grammar system,
degrammaticalization of sˇ/sˇi to lexical sˇay ‘thing’ would enrich existing
literature on the uncommon degrammaticalization phenomenon.
On marking futurity, the three studies by Ouhalla (2012a, 2012b, 2014)
examine the grammaticalization of two motion participles g˙adi ‘going’ and
masˇi ‘going’, marking future in the Moroccan dialect. His research data is
12 Grammaticalization in Arabic
293

strictly synchronic, drawn from present-day Moroccan dialect. The
approach he follows is Chomskyan Minimalism – even though not expli-
citly stated – combined with selected grammaticalization principles.
A signiﬁcant value in these studies is Ouhalla’s attempt to reconcile the
structural and grammaticalization approaches. For example, in his 2014
study, Ouhalla describes the grammaticalization process of the two
motion-denoting active participles in Moroccan Arabic in light of the
morphological processes Feature Copying (i.e., ‘word-extraction out of
a sentence-context’) and Feature Deletion (i.e., fashioning ‘the copy into
a new functional vocabulary item by removing the semantic component
responsible for the motion meaning G O’). Moreover, he describes morpho-
phonological erosion of a grammaticalizing form as Feature Deletion
which, inter alia, removes its argument selection and ‘can reduce the
copy to a shorter form by removing phonological features corresponding
to prosodic units such as syllables as in the case of g˙a(di)’ (2014: 25). Ouhalla
identiﬁes three major evolutionary stages from a motion-denoting parti-
cipial form, to future-maker participle, to an optionally morphologically
reduced tense marker. Ouhalla’s 2012a and 2012b studies suggest that
participial masˇi ‘going’ is shown to grammaticalize in the northwestern
region of Morocco in a two-step development from motion participle
directly to future tense without the participial future-marker intermediate
stage. His analysis is premised on a typological property for Semitic, which
was captured in Talmy (1985, 2000) and cited in his study. Namely, in
Semitic (a verb-frame language), verb root expresses path (Ouhalla
2012b: 3). Hence, the two participles alone, not the entire construction,
undergo grammaticalization. This is in contradistinction to the gramma-
ticalization of the oft-cited verb-plus-particle going to when used to mark
futurity in English (a satellite-frame language). The grammaticalization
process of g˙adi and masˇi according to Ouhalla (2014: 13) is shown to have
resulted only in losses as follows:
a. loss of the motion meaning component GO
b. loss of the arguments selected by GO
To these he further adds:
c. loss of number-gender feature
d. loss of participle features (category change)
e. loss of structure (biclausal →monoclausal)
f. loss of phonological features.
From the perspective of grammaticalization, there are complications in
Ouhalla’s description. First, the morphosyntactic and phonological losses
he identiﬁes represent an incomplete picture of the grammaticalization
processes. Changes through grammaticalization also bring about gains to
the functional item. Among the known gains, becoming a tense marker,
semantically polysemous, generalized in meaning, polyfunctional, more
2 9 4
M O H S S E N E S S E E S Y

abstract, having membership in the auxiliary category, and increased
token frequency. Recognizing a fuller range of changes, Heine et al.
(1991: 110) and Heine (1993: 93–5) situates changes in grammaticalization
within a ‘loss-and-gain-model’.
Second, grammaticalization proceeds gradually with intermediate stages
of overlapping properties of older lexical/newer grammatical, for example.
Therefore, a grammaticalizing item often exhibits semantic and functional
ambiguity and thus the purported presence or deletion of a particular feature
cannot always be determined with the precision expected within the binary
feature framework. This framework is difﬁcult to reconcile with the gradual-
ness of change which is key in grammaticalization. The linguistic form
undergoing grammaticalization is typically viewed not in terms of a bundle
of discrete binary features it possesses, as Ouhalla seems to suggest, but
rather as a form open to reinterpretation in context, not out of context (i.e.,
extraction). In many cases of grammaticalization, traces of its erstwhile
semantic qualities may still persist and constrain the functional range the
item assumes (see ‘persistence’ in Hopper and Traugott 2003). Finally, in
grammaticalization, new attributes are gained (e.g., becoming abstract, syn-
semantic), which often lead to polysemy of forms, where the earlier meaning
coexists side by side with the acquired grammatical function.
Another study of grammaticalization of a motion predicate to a future
marker is found in Jarad (2014), where he examines rah˙ in Syrian Arabic,
with additional reference to its existence in other Arabic dialects. He holds
the view that the source verb for this aspect marker is the Classical/MSA
ra¯h˙ . If the diachronic reconstruction Jarad postulates is accepted, in the
fourteenth-century thesaurus of Classical Arabic Lisa¯n Al-ʿArab, the motion
sense of the polysemous verb ra¯h˙ meant ‘to walk during night time’ (3:
1769). The temporal restriction on walking must have been bleached out
before it grammaticalized to a prospective marker. Jarad’s assumption of
a Classical/MSA lexical source for prospective marker ﬁts the view that
Classical Arabic is the source for the evolution of Arabic dialects. Such
supposition is contentious within Arabic linguistics.
Jarad acknowledges a frequently encountered challenge in the study of
Arabic dialects, namely that historical written records frequently do not
reﬂect actual usage. Therefore, accurate data of spoken Arabic are some-
what difﬁcult to obtain. In this study Jarad relies on known pathways for
grammaticalization of motion predicates to prospective (future) markers,
particularly in English, and applies them to data from present-day Syrian
Arabic. The common mechanisms for change, such as metaphor and
metonymy, and reanalysis, received attention in Jarad’s study along the
same lines of analysis as are found in the works of Traugott and Dasher
(2002), Heine et al. (1991), and Wischer (2006). The cross-linguistic cline
Jarad postulates for the evolution is consistent with the standard practice
in grammaticalization research for the description of the change M O TI O N
(lexical verb/participle →(prospective)
F U T U R E
(particle). Measuring
12 Grammaticalization in Arabic
295

advanced stages in the grammaticalization of rah˙ , Jarad illustrates the
semantic change where the restriction on the subject/agent to a willful
sentient being is lifted, as shown in (1):
(1) rah˙
tuʿa
l-kasse
F U T
fall
the-glass
‘The glass is going to fall.’
(Jarad 2014: 109)
In (2) below, three important changes are illustrated: (1) the general-
ization of rah˙ for use with non-human subjects. (2) decategorialization to
an auxiliary in verb periphrasis, and (3) sufﬁcient bleaching of lexical
content to permit co-occurrence with its erstwhile lexical source without
ensuing ungrammaticality.
(2)
Maryam
w-h˙ assan
rah˙
yǝ-ru¯h˙ -o
ʿa-l-mo¯l
Maryam
and-Hassan
FUT
I PFV-go-they
to-the-mall
‘Maryam and Hassan are going to go to the mall.’
In another contribution on futurity marking, Jarad examines the verb
denoting desire ʾabg˙i →b-preﬁx marking futurity on the imperfect verb in
spoken Syrian Arabic. Once again, grammaticalization theory has enabled
Jarad to analyse the likely evolutionary path from lexical verb to afﬁx.
A distinction is made in this case between the shared futurity sense of this
marker with rah˙ just discussed above. Whereas this marker denotes ‘volition,
willingness, and intention’, rah˙ , according to Jarad, denotes certainty regard-
ing imminence of an impending future event (p. 71). What is possibly
overlooked in this analysis is the cross-linguistic tendency in the grammati-
calization of markers of future, whether arising from motion or volitional
schema, to have intention in common as the ﬁrst step in the process. Bybee
(2015: 123) considers this step as important in the path towards
grammaticalization.
Another contribution by Jarad is his 2017 study of grammaticalization in
Emirati spoken Arabic. He examines two b-preﬁxes, one arising from the
(quasi-) verb badd ←bi-wudd = lit ‘with desire’ denoting volition, the other
a locative functioning as a preposition as well as marking progressive and
habitual aspects on imperfect verbs. With data drawn from present-day
Syrian Arabic, Jarad reconstructs the stages of grammaticalization of b-
from the reanalysis of the verb of desire badd, which in its verbal noun
form collocates with the preﬁx bi-, to form bi-wud-i →badd →b-. As for the
progressive marker b(i) in Egyptian and Syrian Arabic, he assumes
a locative preposition bi- origin. (p. 752). Regarding the volitional bi-, he
lists parallel developments of derivatives of the Standard Arabic verb of
desire into a future marker in a number of spoken dialects: yabg˙a →bg˙a in
Moroccan; ya¯ba, yibbi in Gulf dialects; ba- ‘want’ in Libyan (ibid.). Again, this
reconstruction takes Classical Arabic as its starting point, on which no
agreement exists within Arabic linguistics.
2 9 6
M O H S S E N E S S E E S Y

Grammaticalization of posture verbs to progressive aspect markers,
particularly in spoken Arabic dialects, received some scholarly atten-
tion during the 2010s. In Jarad’s (2015) study, the grammaticalization
of active participle ya¯lis ‘sitting’ and imperfect verb yilas ‘sit’ as mar-
kers of progressive in Emirati Arabic were examined. In his analysis,
he notes the functional constraint on the use of this auxiliary with
inanimate subjects. For example, in stark contrast with the gramma-
tical English sentence there is a book sitting/lying on the table, the Arabic
equivalent *ﬁkta¯b ya¯lis/minsidih˙
ʿat˙-t˙awli (p. 93) is ungrammatical.
(Example (4) below from Camilleri and Sadler (2017) contradicts this
claim.). Using examples denoting simultaneity of sitting with activities
that are generally compatible with the sitting posture (e.g., watching
TV, peeling potatoes, drawing), Jarad shows the semantic and func-
tional shifts from an active participle to marker of progressive aspect.
However, the example below illustrates a semantically incompatible
dynamic activity co-occurring with sitting:
(3) l-sibu¯ʿ
il-ya¯y
mitil
hal
wagt
real
madrı¯d
the-week
the-coming
similar
this
time
Real
Madrid
bi-ku¯n
ya¯lis
yilʿab
al-ﬁnal
F U T-be
sitting
play
the-ﬁnal
‘Next week this time Real Madrid will be playing in the ﬁnal.’
(Jarad 2015: 104).
In (3) the sitting sense seems bleached out, since the concomitant dynamic
activity (soccer play) is semantically at odds with the lexical ‘sitting’ sense
denoted by ya¯lis. Also in (3), the active participle takes a matrix verb as its
complement rather than a locative nominal argument, which evidences its
decategorialization to an auxiliary.
Another study of posture-verb grammaticalization is Camilleri and
Sadler 2017, which also examines the active participial forms ga¯ʿid/qa¯ʿid
and gˇa¯lis/ya¯lis denoting ‘sitting’ in a number of Arabic dialects, including
Maltese, from a synchronic perspective. These posture predicates have the
core lexical meaning ‘sitting’ in common, and in their grammaticalization
they undergo change from a locative to a temporal marking aspect such as
progressive, durative, habitual and continuative, across Arabic dialects
(p. 168). Besides the shared progressive aspect across Arabic dialects, the
authors claim that they demonstrate the use of the active participles as
copula. Furthermore, the grammaticalized
posture participles
also
undergo loss of phonetic material, as found in the case of ga¯ʿid: this is
realized in Kuwaiti as gaʿ, in Maltese as qed, in Tunisian as qa¯t, and in Iraqi
(Baghdadi) as da- (p. 173).
The authors also present examples drawn from several dialects, such as
Kuwaiti, Hassa¯wi, Libyan, and Maltese. One of these examples, (4) below,
clearly contradicts Jarad’s claim just discussed earlier that grammatica-
lized ‘sitting’ in Arabic does not occur with non-humans.
12 Grammaticalization in Arabic
297

(4)
il-bass
ga¯ʿid
y-o¯s˙al
is-sa¯ʿa
xams
D E T-bus. S G M
sit.A C T. P T C P. S G M
3 S G M-arrive. I F P V
D E T-hour
ﬁve
min
isnı¯n
from
years.P L
‘The bus has been arriving at ﬁve o’clock for years.’
(Al-Najjar 1991 for Kuwaiti dialect; cited in
Camilleri and Sadler 2017: 172)
This example not only highlights semantic expansion of the posture verb
into use with inanimate objects but also the incompatibility of the gram-
maticalized sense of ga¯ʾid with the inherent dynamism expressed by y-o¯s˙al
‘arriving’ with the sitting sense of the source verb. Furthermore, the
authors demonstrate that ga¯ʾid has undergone phonological reduction in
its substance across dialects, thus appearing as preﬁx da- in Iraqi, a reduced
autonomous preverbal form qa‚ in Kuwaiti, qed in Maltese, and qa¯ in
Tunisian, respectively.
Syntactically, Camilleri and Sadler’s examples of the grammaticalized
active participle ga¯ʾid show variation in negation across dialects. It permits
preverbal negation similar to non-ﬁnite predicates in Maltese (5):
(5)
Pawlu
mhux
qieghed/qed
i-kellim-hom
Paul
not
sitting
talk-them
‘Paul is not talking to them.’
(Camilleri and Sadler 2017: 174)
The phonetically eroded grammaticalizaed participle is also negated
within the context of the matrix verb, as shown in example (6) from
Baghdadi Arabic:
(6)
ʾiskut
ma-da-sˇ-sˇu¯f
igˇ-gˇa¯hil
na¯yim
Quiet
not-sitting-N E G-see
the-child
asleep
‘Quiet! Aren’t you seeing that the child is sleeping!’
(Camilleri and Sadler 2017: 174)
According to the authors, syntactic grammaticalization emerged in cir-
cumstantial clauses, i.e., h˙ a¯l (XAdj), where the AP ‘is concurrent to the
event denoted by the main verb’ (p. 182). However, they argue that the
process of auxiliation is responsible for the creation of a construction
whereby the auxiliary S I T is further integrated into the clause than is the
case if such construction is treated as a complex predicate.
Finally, the copula use of qa¯ʿid appears in Camilleri and Sadler’s data in
restricted contexts (termed ‘temporary locations’ by the authors), in
Kuwait, but more widely in Libyan:
(7)
ga¯ʿid-in
f-ǝl-h˙ osˇ
ǝl-yo¯m
Sit-A C T. P T C P- P L
in-the-house
the-day
‘Are you in the house today?’
(Camilleri and Sadler 2017: 178)
2 9 8
M O H S S E N E S S E E S Y

While this last example suggests a copula interpretation of the active
participle, the evidence appears inconclusive. The participle ga¯ʿid-in in
this declarative clause can be substituted by other non-grammaticalized
participles, such as nazl-in ‘descending’, naym-in ‘sleeping’, that also gen-
erate a copula interpretation (e.g., are you sleeping in the house today?). The
interrogative interpretation is most likely triggered by the raised intona-
tion on the fronted active participle. It is therefore doubtful that such use
of ga¯ʿid-in indicates grammaticalization to copula.
12.3
Concluding Remarks: Gains, Challenges, and Future
Opportunities
12.3.1
Gains
The foregoing summary and analysis of grammaticalization research in
Arabic reveals that in a few short years in the 2010s, interest in gram-
maticalization, as evidenced by the number of publications, has consid-
erably increased. This rise in the publication rate represents a reversal of
the slow early beginnings approximately thirty years before that.
Through this strand of research, scholars have been able to analyse
a number of important grammatical structures within a single variety
and across several Arabic varieties with more conﬁdence. The gramma-
ticalization framework has therefore proven valuable for Arabic. It has
permitted the examination of a wide range of grammatical structures,
the identiﬁcation of their functional extent, pattern, and directionality
of the change, and in some cases, the operating mechanisms for their
evolution. As a research programme implemented cross-linguistically,
grammaticalization enables researchers in Arabic to take a fresh look
at language-internal structures and grammar from broader synchronic
and diachronic perspectives, where Arabic data are also compared and
contrasted for parallels with known cross-linguistically attested patterns
and directions of change. Grammaticalization research has also raised
awareness of the subtle, gradual changes that seem previously to have
escaped scholarly attention.
The gradational nature of grammaticalization also challenges the time-
honoured tradition of treating linguistic categories in Arabic as discrete.
Open-class categories like nouns and verbs previously, and in some cases
are still, treated in isolation from functional categories such as preposi-
tions, particles, determiners. The change from a lexical category to gram-
matical and from less to more grammatical within grammaticalization
replaces these superimposed rigid categorical boundaries with continua
linking categories such as nouns, adverbs and prepositions, and subordi-
nators on the one hand, and verbs, auxiliaries, and tense and aspect
markers, independent personal pronouns and bound person inﬂections
on verbs, on the other. Even more signiﬁcant is the underlying
12 Grammaticalization in Arabic
299

impermanence of membership of an item in a given category, since dec-
ategorialization often takes place in the course of grammaticalization. The
beneﬁt of this approach is thus far-reaching. It advances understanding of
diversity in the synchronic distribution of functional forms in light of the
stage they have reached in their diachronic development. More impor-
tantly, it enables informed predictions to be made regarding the possible
path or directionality of change, even though there is no requisite in
grammaticalization that a particular item must reach an advanced mature
stage on the evolutionary cline.
Most of the studies here seem to utilize grammaticalization as a research
tool to account for the emergence and evolution of grams, which is an
acceptable research practice. However, from a broader perspective, con-
tribution to the theory of grammaticalization is yet to be realized by
Arabists, following the footsteps of grammaticalizationists working in
African languages, such as Heine and Reh (1982, 1984), who have produced
textbooks that are now standard in the study of grammaticalization
worldwide.
12.3.2
Challenges
Diachronic reconstruction. Research in grammaticalization most
often necessitates historical reconstruction ultimately leading to the
source of the gram or construction in question. In the absence of
a consensus amongst Arabists on intensely disputed issues such as
whether a historical relationship exists between Classical Arabic and mod-
ern Arabic dialects, and the inﬂuence ancient Semitic languages (may)
have had on spoken Arabic dialects, attempted historical reconstruction
emanating from whichever scholarly standpoint is often fraught with the
risk of being met with vehement refutation from proponents of
a contrasting perspective.6 The deleterious consequence of this situation
is either avoidance of delving to the furthest historical depth in the life of
a gram or limiting scholarly attention to synchronic studies of present-day
dialect to be on surer and much safer ground.
Corpus availability, reliability, and size. Within grammaticalization,
authentic diachronic or synchronic data is indispensable for validating the
otherwise hypothesized change paths and direction that a gram is pre-
sumed to have taken.7 Since change usually starts in context, corpus data
can, through authentic contexts of use, help identify subtle, semantic and
pragmatic, morphosyntactic, and phonological change. Such data can also
help identify categorical shifts, token and type frequency changes,
6 See chapter 8 in Versteegh (2014), particularly section 8.2 for a brief commentary on the various views regarding
Classical Arabic and modern Arabic dialects, labelled New Arabic in his book.
7 See Mair (2014) ‘Corpus linguistics and grammaticalisation theory: Statistics, frequencies, and beyond’ for shared
common ground between corpus linguistics and insights beyond statistical ﬁndings.
3 0 0
M O H S S E N E S S E E S Y

collocations with other items, genre-speciﬁc usages, and merely frequency
statistics, etc.
A serious challenge facing research in Arabic dialects in particular is the
dearth of (reliable) historical data. By their very nature, Arabic dialects are
primarily spoken varieties and therefore historical records are under-
standably difﬁcult to obtain. Even working with data from present-day
Arabic dialects in the age of advanced technology still represents
a signiﬁcant challenge. In her exposition on the state of spoken Arabic
dialect corpora, McNeil (2019: 37) observes that heterogeneity amongst
spoken Arabic dialects inhibits successful retrieval of language forms
bearing similar meaning. She notes, for instance, that the Egyptian novel
ʿayza tgawwiz ‘I want to get married’, when its sequel misˇ ʿayza tgawwiz ‘I
don’t want to get married’ was being discussed on Tunisian radio, the
announcer converted the Egyptian title of the novel to the Tunisian
equivalent ma nh˙ ibbsˇ nʿarris. Also, the corpora from the Linguistic Data
Consortium, the largest pool of spoken Arabic data, are based on a very
limited domain of use, namely, recorded telephone conversations, with
uneven dialectal representation. For instance, according to McNeil,
whereas
Egyptian
(e.g.,
CALLHOME
Egyptian
Arabic
corpus)
and
Levantine Arabic (Levantine Arabic QT Training Data Set 5) are well repre-
sented, North African dialects are absent from the corpus.
Electronic media platforms such as blogs have been a source of
substantial data for spoken dialects and mixed varieties. But even in
these forums, in the absence of codiﬁcation of dialect writing, words
exhibit signiﬁcant orthographical variation. McNeil (2019) notes that
in only a limited number of genres, for instance folklore, popular song
lyrics, TV shows and plays in present-day Tunisian, is it possible to
ﬁnd written forms representing actual speech. Orthographic heteroge-
neity frustrates corpus-based research, and as a result, researchers
tend to collect their own data, which by itself represents a challenge
of a different nature.
The situation for Classical/MSA grammaticalization while somewhat
better, still represents observable challenges too. The widely used
Brigham Young University arabiCorpus for MSA data is described by its
creator Dilworth Parkinson as ‘medium-sized (i.e., 100 million words)’ of
MSA (Parkinson 2019: 18). Parkinson notes some of the inadequacies of the
corpus composition and features: (1) balance between MSA and spoken
dialect was not considered in the set-up structure of the corpus, a fact that
led to a size differential in the corpus whereby MSA is far more well
represented than spoken dialects; (2) that corpora are not-lemmatized or
tagged for parts of speech is also a challenge. This inadequacy, Parkinson
notes, is signiﬁcant, for search in the corpus often yields ‘hundreds of
word forms, and these forms alphabetize all over the map’ (p. 18); and (3)
genre imbalance is another inadequacy. The newspapers corpus is the
largest in arabiCorpus, with more than 137 million combined word tokens.
12 Grammaticalization in Arabic
301

Other genres, for instance, Arabic literature, has but one million words,
and medieval Arabic has two million (ibid.).
Corpus sizes for Arabic in general are substantially smaller than those
available for other languages such as English. For appreciation of the effect
of corpus size on grammaticalization research, Narrog and Heine’s stated
motto sufﬁces here: ‘the larger the corpus is, the more likely that it will
allow for a comprehensive analysis of the dynamic linguistic change’
(2011: 15).
Fragmentation of effort. In spite of the rising interest in grammatica-
lization research in Arabic by a growing number of scholars, there has
not been a single conference or symposium organized for grammaticali-
zation research devotees. Absence of a forum for discussion and debate in
this ﬁeld certainly affects its potential for growth and advancement.
Furthermore, there has not yet been any effort made to publish an edited
volume containing contributions from Arabic grammaticalizationists.
12.3.3
Future Opportunities
Arabic varieties have a rich, well-documented, and uninterrupted history
which spans millennia. The range of research opportunities these varieties
offer is virtually limitless. Spoken dialects, mixed varieties, MSA, and
Classical Arabic, each represents a fertile ground for grammaticalization
research, particularly within the realm of typological studies.
The root-and-pattern system in Arabic offers a unique opportunity
for examination of lexicalization and grammaticalization. As seen in
Ouhalla (2012a, 2012b, 2014), the process of word-formation in Arabic
operates on roots, whereas grammaticalization operates on words (i.e.,
root and pattern). Furthermore, from a typological perspective, Talmy
(cited in the Ouhalla studies) designates Arabic as a root-frame lan-
guage, whose verbs include path. This property has been shown by
Ouhalla to obviate the need for periphrastic structures in the gramma-
ticalization of motion verbs such as ra¯yih˙ , ma¯sˇı¯, g˙a¯dı¯. This typological
feature is signiﬁcant since it permits only the motion verb to undergo
grammaticalization, instead of the entire construction as in English
going to as future marker.
Lexical items recruited for grammaticalization in Arabic do not always ﬁt
the criteria commonly cited in major grammaticalization textbooks (e.g.,
Heine et al. 1991; Heine 1993; Heine and Kuteva 2002; Hopper and Traugott
2003). For example, verbs from the motion schema that are selected for
grammaticalization are thought to be of generic semantic quality, where
speciﬁc detail on manner of motion is absent. Hence, go is often cited as
a prime example of a verb lacking speciﬁc details of motion. The selection
of ma¯sˇı¯/masˇa¯ ‘walk’ seems to contradict this assumption, since the manner
of motion, i.e., use of feet, is strongly implied in the lexical form.
3 0 2
M O H S S E N E S S E E S Y

Contact-induced grammaticalization is also an area awaiting explora-
tion in Arabic. Throughout its documented histories, speakers of a number
of Arabic varieties have come into prolonged contact with several lan-
guages, such as Berber, Kurdish, Nubi, Turkish, Persian, Spanish, and
Greek (in Cyprus). Historical and present-day data from the regions
where these languages are spoken may yield interesting cases of gramma-
ticalization yet to be discovered.
References
Agius, D. A. and Harrak, A. (1987). Auxiliary preceding the imperfective
aspect in Arabic dialects. Arabica, 34(2), 164–80.
Al-Najjar, B. (1991). Grammaticalization of lexical markers in Kuwaiti
Arabic. Folia Linguistica, 25(3–4), 665–75.
Alsaeedi, M. O. M. (2015). The rise of new couplas in Arabic. Unpublished MA
thesis, Arizona State University.
Anghelescu, N. (1999). Modalities and grammaticalization in Arabic. In
Y. Suleiman, ed., Arabic Grammar and Linguistics. London: Routledge,
130–42.
Antilla, R. (1989). Historical and Comparative Linguistics, 2nd revised ed.
Amsterdam: John Benjamins.
Baalbaki, R. M. (1990). Dictionary of Linguistic Terms: English–Arabic. Beirut:
Dar El-Ilm Lil-Malayen.
Bakir, M. J. (2014). The multifunctionality of ﬁi in Gulf Pidgin Arabic. Journal
of Pidgin and Creole Language, 29(2), 410–36.
Brockelmann, C. (1966 [1908–13]). Syntax, vol. 2: Grundriss der vergleichen-
den
Grammatik
der
semitischen
Sprachen.
Berlin:
Georg
Olms
Verlagbuchhandlung Hildesheim.
Brustad, K. E. (2000). The Syntax of Spoken Arabic: A Comprehensive Study of
Moroccan,
Egyptian,
Syrian,
and
Kuwaiti
Dialects.
Washington,
DC:
Georgetown University Press.
Bybee, J. (1985). Morphology: A Study of the Relations Between Meaning and Form.
Amsterdam: John Benjamins.
Bybee, J. (2015). Language Change. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Bybee, J. and Pagliuca, W. (1985). Cross linguistic comparison and the
development of grammatical meaning. In J. Fisiak, ed., Historical
Semantics: Historical Word Formation. Berlin: Mouton, 59–83.
Bybee, J., Perkins, R., and Pagliuca, W. (1994). The Evolution of Grammar:
Tense, Aspect, and Modality in the Languages of the World. Chicago: University
of Chicago Press.
Camilleri, M. and Sadler, L. (2017). Posture verbs and aspect: A view from
vernacular Arabic. In M. Butt and T. H. King, eds., Proceedings of the
LFG’17Conference, University of Konstanz. California, CA: CSLI Publications,
168–87.
12 Grammaticalization in Arabic
303

Croft, W. (2003). Typology and Universals, 2nd ed. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.
Diessel, H. (2011). Grammaticalization and language acquisition. In
H. Narrog and B. Heine, eds., The Oxford Handbook of Grammaticalization.
Oxford: Oxford University Press, 130–41.
Drower, E. S. and Macuch, R. (1963). A Mandaic Dictionary. Oxford:
Clarendon Press.
Eades, D. (2012). Grammaticalization and the irrealis b- preﬁx in an
Arabic dialect of Oman. In D. Eades, ed., Grammaticalization in Semitic
(Journal of Semitic Studies Supplement). Oxford: Oxford University
Press, 49–66.
Erwin, W. (1969). A Basic Course in Iraqi Arabic. Washington, DC: Georgetown
University Press.
Esseesy, M. (2006). Grammaticalization. In K. Versteegh, M, Eid, A. Elgibali,
M. Woidich, and A. Zaborski, eds., Encyclopedia of Arabic Language and
Linguistics, vol. II. Leiden: Brill, 191–8.
Esseesy, M. (2009a). Reanalysis. In K. Versteegh, M, Eid, A. Elgibali,
M. Woidich, and A. Zaborski, eds., Encyclopedia of Arabic Language and
Linguistics, vol. IV. Leiden: Brill, 37–43.
Esseesy, M. (2009b). Semantic bleaching. In K. Versteegh, M, Eid,
A. Elgibali, M. Woidich, and A. Zaborski, eds., Encyclopedia of Arabic
Language and Linguistics, vol. IV. Leiden: Brill, 160–4.
Esseesy, M. (2009c). Semantic extension. In K. Versteegh, M, Eid, A. Elgibali,
M. Woidich, and A. Zaborski, eds., Encyclopedia of Arabic Language and
Linguistics, vol. IV. Leiden: Brill, 164–9.
Esseesy, M. (2010). Grammaticalization of Arabic Prepositions and Subordinators:
A Corpus-Based Study. Leiden: Brill.
Fischer, O. (2011). Grammaticalization as analogically driven change? In
H. Narrog and B. Heine, eds., The Oxford Handbook of Grammaticalization.
Oxford: Oxford University Press, 31–42.
Fischer, W. (2002). A Grammar of Classical Arabic. Jonathan Rodgers (trans.).
New Haven, NY: Yale University Press.
von der Gabelentz, G. (1891). Die Sprachwissenschaft: Ihre Aufgaben, Methoden,
und bisherigen Ergebnisse. Leipzig: Weigel.
Gebreyes, A. S. (2014). Grammaticalization of body-part terms in
Ethiosemitic. In M. Brenzinger and I. Kraska-Szlenk, eds., The Body in
Language. Leiden: Brill, 33–51.
Givo´n, T. (1973). The time axis phenomenon. Language, 49, 890–925.
Haspelmath, M. (1998). Does grammaticalization need reanalysis? Studies in
Language, 22, 315–51.
Heine, B. (1993). Auxiliaries: Cognitive Forces and Grammaticalization. Oxford:
Oxford University Press.
Heine, B. (2011). Grammaticalization in African languages. In H. Narrog
and B. Heine, eds., The Oxford Handbook of Grammaticalization. Oxford:
Oxford University Press, 696–707.
3 0 4
M O H S S E N E S S E E S Y

Heine, B. (2014). The body in language: Observations from grammaticaliza-
tion. In M. Brenzinger and I. Kraska-Szlenk, eds., The Body in Language:
Comparative Studies of Linguistic Embodiment. Leiden: Brill, 13–32.
Heine, B. and Kuteva, T. (2002). World Lexicon of Grammaticalization.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Heine, B. and Reh, R. (1982). Patterns of Grammaticalization in African
Languages. Arbeiten des Ko¨lner Universalien-Projekts 47. Cologne:
Universita¨t zu Ko¨ln, Institut fu¨ r Sprachwissenschaft.
Heine, B. and Reh, R. (1984). Grammaticalization and Reanalysis in African
Languages. Hamburg: Helmut Buske.
Heine, B., Claudi, U., and Hu¨ nnemeyer, F. (1991). Grammaticalization:
A Conceptual Framework. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Hopper, P. J. (1991). On some principles of grammaticalization. In
E. C. Traugott and B. Heine, Approaches to Grammaticalization, vol. 1.
Amsterdam: John Benjamins, 17–35.
Hopper, P. J. and Traugott, E. C. (1993). Grammaticalization, 1st ed.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Hopper, P. J. and Traugott, E. C. (2003). Grammaticalization, 2nd ed.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
von Humboldt, W. (1825). U¨ ber das Einstehen grammatikalischen Formen
und
ihren
Einﬂuss
auf
die
Ideenentwicklung.
Abhandlungen
der
Ko¨niglichen Akademie der Wissenschaften zu Berlin, 401–30.
Ibn Manz˙u¯ r, Muh˙ ammad Ibn Mukarram. (n.d.). Lisa¯n Al- ʿArab. 6 vols. Cairo:
Dar Al-Maʿarif.
Jarad, N. I. (2013). The evolution of the b-future marker in Syrian Arabic.
Lingua Posnaniensis, 55(1), 69–85.
Jarad, N. I. (2014). The grammaticalization of the motion verb ‘rah˙ ’ as
a prospective aspect marker in Syrian Arabic. Al-ʿArabiyya, 47, 101–18.
Jarad, N. I. (2015). From bodily posture to progressive aspect marker. Lingua
Posnaniensis, 57(1), 89–111.
Jarad, N. I. (2017). Grammaticalization in Emirati Arabic. Arabica, 64,
742–60.
Kuryrłowicz, J. ([1965] 1976). The evolution of grammatical categories.
Reprinted in J. Kuryrłowicz in Esquisses Linguistques, vol. 2. Munich:
Fink, 38–54.
Langacker, R. W. (1977). Syntactic reanalysis. In C. Li, ed., Mechanisms of
Syntactic Change. Austin, TX: University of Texas Press, 57–139.
Lehmann, C. (1995). Thoughts on Grammaticalization. Munich: Lincom Europa.
Lehmann, C. (2004). Theory and method in grammaticalization, Zeitschrift
fu¨r Germanistische Linguistik, 32(2), 152–87.
McNeil, K. (2019). Tunisian Arabic corpus: Creating a written corpus of an
‘unwritten’ language. In T. McEnery, A. Hardie, and N. Younis, eds.,
Arabic Corpus Linguistics. Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press, 30–55.
Mair, C. (2014). Corpus linguistics and grammaticalization theory:
Statistics, frequencies, and beyond. In H. Lindquist and C. Mair, eds.,
12 Grammaticalization in Arabic
305

Corpus Approaches to Grammaticalization in English. Amsterdam: John
Benjamins, 121–50.
Medea-Garcı´a, L. (2017). Grammaticalizacio´n y cambio lingu¨ı´stico en a´rabe: El
caso de hatta`
en lengua clasica dialectal. Unpublished dissertation,
Universitat Auto`noma de Barcelona.
Meillet, A. ([1912]1958). L’e´volution des Formes Grammaticales. Scientia
(Revista di Scienza), 6(12), 130–48.
Narrog, H. and Heine, B. (2011). Introduction. In H. Narrog and B. Heine,
eds., The Oxford Handbook of Grammaticalization. Oxford: Oxford University
Press, 1–16.
No¨ldeke, T. (1899). Die semitischen Sprachen. Leipzig: Tauchnitz.
Norde, M. (2006a). Demarcating degrammaticalization: The Swedish
s-genitive revisited. Nordic Journal of Linguistics, 29(2), 201–38.
Norde,M.(2006b).Vansufﬁxtottelwoordtotbijwoord:Degrammaticalisering
en (re)grammaticalisering van tig. TABU, 351(2), 33–60.
Norde, M. (2009). Degrammaticalization. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Norde, M. (2011). Degrammaticalization. In H. Narrog and B. Heine, eds.,
The Oxford Handbook of Grammaticalization. Oxford: Oxford University
Press, 475–87.
Ouhalla, J. (2012a). Lexical change and the architect of the lexicon. In
E. Torrego, ed., Of Grammar, Word and Verses. Amsterdam: John
Benjamins, 41–66.
Ouhalla, J. (2012b). The development of future markers in root-frames and
satellite-frames: Arabic and French GO(ING) versus English and Berber
GO(ING)+TO. In D. Eades, ed., On Grammaticalization in Semitic (Journal of
Semitic Studies Supplement). Oxford: Oxford University Press, 3–29.
Ouhalla, J. (2014). The development of future participles and future tense
markers from motion predicates. In R. Khamis-Dakwar and K. Froud, eds.,
Perspectives on Arabic Linguistics, XXVI. Amsterdam: John Benjamins, 9–27.
Parkinson, D. (2019). Under the hood of arabiCorpus. In T. McEnery,
A. Hardie, and N. Younis, eds., Arabic Corpus Linguistics. Edinburgh:
Edinburgh University Press, 17–29.
Payne Smith, R. (1957). A Compendious Syriac Dictionary, Founded Upon the
Thesaurus Syriacus of R. Payne Smith. Oxford: Clarendon Press.
Perkins, M. R. (1983). Modal Expressions in English. New Jersey: Ablex.
Persson, M. (2008). The role of the ‘b’-preﬁx in Gulf Arabic dialects:
A marker of future, intent and/or irrealis. Journal of Arabic and Islamic
Studies, 8, 26–52.
Plank, F. (1995). Entgrammatisierung: Spiegelbild der Grammatisierung?
In N. Boretzky et al. eds., Natu¨rlichkeitstheorie und Sprachwandel. Bochum:
Brockmeyer, 199–219.
Rescher, N. (1968). Topics in Philosophical Logic. Dordrecht: Reidel (Synthese
Library).
Rosenthal,
F.
(1974).
A
Grammar
of
Biblical
Aramaic.
Wiesbaden:
Harrassowitz.
3 0 6
M O H S S E N E S S E E S Y

Rubba, J. (1994). Grammaticalization as semantic change: A case study of
prepositions
development.
In
W.
Pagliuca,
ed.,
Perspectives
on
Grammaticalization. Amsterdam: John Benjamins, 81–101.
Rubin, A. D. (2005). Studies in Grammaticalization. Winona Lake, IN:
Eisenbrauns.
Sun, C. and Traugott, E. C. (2011). Grammaticalization and word order
change. In H. Narrog and B. Heine, eds., The Oxford Handbook of
Grammaticalization. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 378–88.
Svorou, S. (1994). The Grammar of Space. Amsterdam: John Benjamins.
Taine-Cheikh, C. (2013). Grammaticalization of the verb ṛa(a) in Arabic:
A Meghrebian speciﬁcity. In M. Lafkioui, ed., African Arabic: Approaches to
Dialectology. (Trends in Linguistics, no. 258). Berlin: Mouton de Gruyter,
121–59.
Talmy, L. (1985). Lexicalization patterns: Semantic structure and lexical
forms. In T. Shopen, ed., Language Typology and Syntactic Description, vol. 3:
Grammatical Categories and the Lexicon. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press, 57–149.
Talmy, L. (2000). Toward a Cognitive Semantics: Typology and Process in Concept
Structuring. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Timberlake, A. (1977). Reanalysis and actualization in syntactic change. In
C. Li. , ed., Mechanisms of Syntactic Change. Austin, TX: University of Texas
Press, 141–77.
Traugott, E. C. (2011). Grammaticalization and mechanisms of change. In
H. Narrog and B. Heine, eds., The Oxford Handbook of Grammaticalization.
Oxford: Oxford University Press, 19–30.
Traugott, E. C. and Dasher, R. (2002). Regularity in Semantic Change.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Versteegh, K. (2014). The Arabic Language, 2nd ed. Edinburgh: Edinburgh
University Press.
Versteegh, K., Eid, M., Elgibali, A., Woidich, M., and Zaborski, A. (eds.)
(2006–2009). Encyclopedia of Arabic Language and Linguistics. Leiden:
Brill.
Wilmsen, D. (2013a). The interrogative origin of the Arabic negator -sˇ:
Evidence from copular interrogation in Andalusi Arabic, Maltese, and
modern spoken Egyptian and Moroccan Arabic. Zeitschrift fu¨r Arabische
Linguistik, 58, 5–31.
Wilmsen, D. (2013b). Grammaticalization of the demonstrative iyya¯- as
a pronominal object marker in ditransitive verbs: an answer to
Bravmann. Journal of Semitic Studies, 58(1), 149–67.
Wilmsen, D. (2014). Arabic Indeﬁnites, Interrogatives, and Negators: A Linguistic
History of Western Dialects. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Wilmsen, D. (2017). Grammaticalization and degrammaticalization in an
Arabic existential particle sˇay. Folia Orientalia, 54, 279–307.
Wischer, I. (2006). Grammaticalization. In K. Brown, ed., Encyclopedia of
Language and Linguistics, 2nd ed., vol. 5. Boston, MA: Elsevier, 129–35.
12 Grammaticalization in Arabic
307

Woidich, M. (1995). Some cases of grammaticalization in Egyptian Arabic.
In J. Cremona, C. Holes, and G. Khan, eds., Proceedings of the 2nd
International Conference of L’Association Internationale Pour La Dialectologie
Arabe. Cambridge: Faculty of Oriental Studies, 259–68.
Corpora
arabiCorpus: http://arabicorpus.byu.edu
Tunisian Arabic Corpus: www.tunisiya.org
3 0 8
M O H S S E N E S S E E S Y

13
Arabic and Onomastics
Terrence Potter
13.1
Introduction
13.1.1
History of Arabic and Names
The history of names in Arabic begins in the obscure past well before the
codiﬁcation of al-ʿarabiyya as a written language in the seventh century
CE.1 ‘Old Arabic’ names are the oldest and include names from the pre-
Islamic period into the classical era. The epigraphic and palaeographic
evidence for these names continues to grow. Classical Arabic names are
those names that the Islamic scholars recorded from the late pre-Islamic
years and are extant through the Middle Ages. These names are seen to be
written in al-ʿarabiyya al-fus˙h˙ a¯ and have religious and historical signiﬁ-
cance. Scholars recorded them in genealogies, ʾansa¯b (singular nasab).
Modern Arabic names are written in modern fus˙h˙ a¯ or Modern Standard
Arabic and include names from the spoken varieties of Arabic. Semitic
onomastics includes Arabic onomastics, and offers linguistic insights that
European onomastics does not. This survey starts when names are not well
documented and continues through the time when Muslim scholars estab-
lished the celebrated paradigm for name-study into the modern era.
13.1.2
Arabic or Arab
The word Arabic is in English a proper name given to the Central Semitic
language Arabic and its varieties, used typically by those living in the Near
East and Arabian Peninsula. The proper name and noun Arabic also func-
tions as an adjective in English, e.g., Arabic culture. The corresponding
proper noun in Arabic is ʿarabiyya or al-ʿarabiyya. Unlike Arabic in English,
1 For pre-Islamic historical background, see Fisher (2015) and Hoyland (2002). For the history of the Arabs in antiquity,
see Retsö (2003) and Shahid (2012). Hoyland (2009) provides names for the putative Arab kings and tribes of
antiquity. For the history of Arabic, see Owens (2006) and Versteegh (2014).

the proper noun ʿarabiyya is not spelled with a capital letter, the marker of
a proper noun or name in English. The word ʿarabiyy or ʿarabiyya is an
adjective inﬂected for masculine or feminine gender depending upon the
noun it modiﬁes. Also the word ʿarabiyy or ʿarabiyya can function as an
ethnonym meaning respectively (an) Arab (m.) or (an) Arab (f.) The meaning
of ʿarabiyy or ʿarabiyya – similarly the meaning of al-ʿarabiyy or al-ʿarabiyya,
with preﬁxed deﬁnite article – can usually be determined from context.
That meaning in English could be ‘Arabic’ (adjective m. or f.) or ‘Arab’
(noun m. or f.). There are no capital letters in Arabic, hence Arabic proper
nouns, including ethnonyms, personal, place, and tribal names are not
marked. The status of a word as name must be determined from context,
just as the meaning of ʿarabiyy as ‘Arab’ or ‘Arabic’.
13.2
Old Arabic Names
Old Arabic or Proto-Arabic names are a feature of the ancient language(s)
used by sedentary and nomadic peoples living in the Arabian Peninsula
and the Levant.2 The evidence of epigraphic personal names of pre-
classical, pre-Islamic Arabia may be the best evidence of Arabic varieties
in use among the Nabataeans and other populations in the area. The
earliest
known
evidence
for
Arabic-speaking
people
comes
from
Akkadian (cuneiform) texts containing names of people referred to as
Arabs.3 Old Arabic is thought to have been in use at the same time as
Ancient North Arabian dialects were (see Macdonald 2000, 2004). There is
abundant evidence of literacy in the Near East and the Peninsula in the
thousands of inscriptions, especially grafﬁti,4 but little paleographical
evidence of an Arabic alphabet or script prior to the ﬁrst century CE. It
remains appropriate to speak of Arabian rather than Arabic names in the
earliest times.5 At the same time, it is understood that ‘Arabian names’
must have included a kind of Arabic or Arabic-inﬂuenced names, as well as
names based in other languages in contact. Epigraphic studies have
yielded an onomasticon of pre-Islamic Semitic names and a considerable
body of literature. Mainly anthroponyms, but also toponyms, have been
compared and analysed in efforts to discover their etymology, linguistic
2 See Macdonald (2005) for a description of Old Arabic (Epigraphic). See Owens (1998, 2006) for a discussion of
reconstructed Proto-Arabic.
3 See Retsö (2003: 125–7) for the account of ‘Gindibu [‘grasshopper’] belonging to the ʕarab.’ This ﬁrst mention of
a people called Arabs in 853 BCE is found in the cuneiform Monolith Inscription and refers to the military campaign by
the Assyrian King Shalmaneser III to Qarqar. It is understood that he engaged in battle there with the assistance of
people called ‘arab led by Gindibu.
4 See Macdonald (2015). Over 65,000 inscriptions and grafﬁti on stone, metal, and pottery have been discovered in the
Arabian Peninsula and many more are yet to be discovered. Macdonald (2004: 528–9) indicated at that time that 98%
of inscriptions were grafﬁti. The recorded onomasticon is huge, perhaps the largest collection of personal names in any
group of Ancient Near Eastern texts.
5 See Macdonald (2004) for an understanding of Ancient North Arabian and Macdonald (2005) for Old Arabic
(Epigraphic).
3 1 0
T E R R E N C E P O T T E R

features, and cultural-historical revelations.6 Researchers have long relied
upon Classical Arabic for linguistic comparison. As a Semitic language that
remains in widespread use, Arabic offers helpful linguistic insights, e.g.,
morphological, syntactical, semantic. Comparative studies note similari-
ties and dissimilarities among ancient and modern scripts.7
Research and study of the epigraphical and palaeographical record has
yielded information about ancient languages and Old Arabic into the early
Islamic era.8 Before the codiﬁcation of Classical Arabic, other languages
and scripts were used to inscribe Old Arabic names.9 Factors that could
have determined the language and script used by the inscriber include the
purpose of the inscription (formal or informal), language proﬁciency
(mono- or multilingual), and the ability to write or inscribe one or more
scripts. Aside from the presumed Old Arabic that was transcribed into
other language scripts, there is little to no record of an actual written
Arabic in the archaeological record before 600 CE.10 Putative dialects of
Arabic spoken during this period can often be labelled Old Arabic (see
Macdonald 2000, 2005, 2008: 180). Epigraphical studies typically include
a corpus of names or onomasticon for that inscription or collection of
inscriptions. The earliest Orientalist compendia offer a baseline of infor-
mation for continuing epigraphic research. Relying upon that record,
renowned Orientalists compiled and published compendia of North and
South Arabian names, e.g., Cantineau (1930–1932) (Le Nabate´en, two
volumes), Littmann (1913–1943) (‘Nabataean Inscriptions’ in Semitic
Inscriptions), Ryckmans (1934–1935) (Les noms propres sud-se´mitiques).11 The
onomastic content of Nabataean inscriptions offers the best evidence that
the Nabataeans spoke a variety or dialect of Arabic.12 Onomastic analysis
of inscriptions by Stark (1971) was credited with showing a signiﬁcant
presence of Arabic names in the multi-ethnic city of Palmyra. In his
6 See Al-Jallad (2015: 56–61) for a discussion of the onomastica in the Safaitic inscriptions and what names can show
about nominal morphology.
7 For instance, a similar use of these consonant patterns ʾ-f ʿ-l and y-f ʿ-l but especially ʿ-bd- l and -l (deﬁnite article) has
been noted in personal names.
8 The media for inscriptions include stone, pottery, metal, and wood. Inscriptions have been found in grafﬁti, on stellae,
coins, amulets, papyri, and wooden sticks.
9 These ‘languages’ provided scripts in which Arabic names could be transcribed: Ancient North Arabian dialects, South
Arabian dialects, Greek, Latin, Aramaic, and Nabataean Aramaic.
10 Macdonald (2005) describes thirteen Old Arabic texts that were written in different ancient scripts. Each of these
contains recognizably Arabic names based upon the analysis of their transliterations.
11 An important resource for these researchers was the Corpus Inscriptionum Semiticarum (CIS) (1881–1909). See the
DASI (2013) online archive and OCIANA (2014) online corpus for current research projects, digital databases of
inscriptions and other epigraphic information. Other noteworthy lists of period names include Abbadi (1983 –
Aramaic), Al-Said (1995 – Minaean), Arbach (2002 – South Arabian/CIS), Al-Khraysheh (1986 – Nabataean/CIS),
and Stark (1971 – Palmyrene).
12 Cantineau (1930–1932, 1935), Littmann (1913–1943) and Ryckmans (1934–1935) believed that personal and
theophoric names showed that Nabataeans spoke a variety of Arabic. Healey (1989: 43) concluded, ‘Indeed, the
linguistic evidence of Arabic inﬂuences on Nabataean Aramaic suggests that the Nabataeans normally spoke a form of
Arabic, while, like the Persians, etc., they used Aramaic for formal purposes and especially for inscriptions. It should not
be forgotten that Arabic was not yet a written language at this stage: Aramaic was the language of civilization from the
nomad point of view. And the classical Arabic script developed from [sic] the Nabataean script.’
13 Arabic and Onomastics
311

reference work An Index and Concordance of Pre-Islamic Arabian Names and
Inscriptions Harding (1971) catalogues the known North and South Arabian
names from epigraphic sources to 1967.13 Each romanized consonantal
entry in the index is listed in Arabic alphabetic order along with detailed
information about type of name (e.g., personal, theophoric), location in
a string, inscription number(s) in which it occurs, and the language
(dialect) variety or varieties it was written in.14 Related roots are written
in Arabic script. Harding includes an appendix for theophoric names
(907–27) and another entitled ‘Distribution of Names by Dialects’
(928–34).15 Harding (1971) continues to be cited by researchers of pre-
Islamic inscriptions and names despite its date of publication.16 In general,
studies from this period share similar research interests in personal,
family, tribal, place, divine, and theophoric names, and form the reference
base referred to by contemporary researchers.
Some scholars have asserted that the Nabataeans were Arabs.17 The
Nabataeans used Aramaic for writing and inscribing but likely spoke one
or more forms of Arabic. Although there is exceedingly limited documen-
tary evidence for a written Old Arabic, a variety of Arabic writing using
a recognizable Arabic script, one or more varieties of spoken Arabic must
have been used in the Peninsula and the Near East.18 In 1991 Negev
published Personal Names in the Nabataean Realm, a comprehensive effort to
update the onomastic list found in le Lexique of Cantineau’s second volume.
Macdonald (1999) challenges Negev’s cultural and linguistic assertions
based on personal names, and he warns others against making similar
claims, especially regarding ethnicity (Macdonald 1998: 198–9; 1999:
254–8). Recent linguistic studies of Nabataean inscriptions and their ono-
mastica offer more information about the substrate Arabic variety thought
to have been in use.19
13 Harding relies upon G. Ryckman’s Les noms propres sud-sémitiques (1934) and other sources for content in the index
and for the format of the concordance.
14 The Ancient North Arabian dialects are Lihyanite, Safaitic, and Thamudic, and the South Arabian dialects are Hadrami,
Minaean, Qatabanian, and Sabaean (Harding 1971: 5).
15 Theophoric names in Nabataean times are redolent of divine names in Classical and Modern Arabic.
16 For example, see Al-Jallad (2015), Alzoubi (2013), Hayajneh (2009), and Mascitelli (2006). I am not aware of
a digitized version of Harding (1971).
17 Healey (1989) refers to Cantineau (1932: 164–71), Cantineau (1935: 79–81, 84–91), and others for this claim.
While Arabic names are routinely assumed to be names of ‘Arabs’, personal names should not be deﬁned ethnically.
Arabic names are those personal names and place names that reﬂect the structures and patterns of use in
communities where Arabic language varieties have historically held sway. While some Arabic-speaking communities
today see themselves as ‘Arab’, others do not. This must have been true in the ancient Near East and Arabia just as it is
today where numerous Arabic varieties and dialects are used in diverse communities.
18 In Macdonald (2005) the author assigns a Roman numeral to and then describes thirteen Old Arabic texts that were
inscribed in different scripts, i.e., Sabaic, Dadanitic, Safaitic, Hismaic, Nabataean, or partially Old Arabic. Each of these
Old Arabic texts contains transliterated Arabic names. He emphasizes, ‘It is virtually certain that Arabic was a purely
spoken, rather than a habitually written, language for most of its pre-Islamic history.’
19 See Al-Jallad (2017) for results of a recent examination of anthroponyms in Nabataean inscriptions. Through his
linguistic analysis of names he suggests the underlying language in the Greek inscriptions was Arabic.
3 1 2
T E R R E N C E P O T T E R

13.3
Classical Arabic Names
The classical category of names is characterized by personal names asso-
ciated with the Islamic period, but includes names that predate Islam.
Classical names were in use prior to, during, and subsequent to the
Islamic expansion and continue in use up to the present day. Classical
studies (treatises, monographs) completed by medieval scholars recorded
compendia of personal names and their stemma as part of ʿilm al-nasab ‘the
science of genealogy’.20 As polymaths, these scholars typify the Islamic
scholarly tradition in that they wrote on many subjects, were active during
the early period of the Islamic empire (600 CE to 1400 CE), and helped to
codify Arabic as Classical Arabic.21 The ʿilm al-ʾansa¯b ‘the science of
genealogy(ies)’ and ayya¯m al-ʿarab (the history of famous battles and tribal
wars) were components of ʿulu¯m al-ʿarabiyya ‘the sciences of Arabity’ that
focused on the poetic heritage of ancient Arabia and were necessary ‘to
understand the recondite allusions to tribal feuds and alliances found in
the most characteristic kind of ancient poetry’ (Bohas et al. 2006: 3). The
golden age of Islam brought genealogy to the fore, and attached the great-
est signiﬁcance to personal names.22 It became essential to establish the
lineage of leading ﬁgures in Islam and in the Empire. Its origin was
attributed to the oral tradition among the ancient Bedouin that required
that the genealogies of tribal ancestors be memorized and recited.
Although a great many medieval scholars devoted attention to geneal-
ogy and the etymology of names, some are central to onomastic and
genealogical research today. While many are recognized for their roles as
grammarians in the Arabic linguistic tradition (see Versteegh 1997), some
are iconic for the scope and inﬂuence of their genealogical and onomastic
work, e.g., Ibn al-Kalbı¯, Ibn Durayd and Ibn H˙ azm. Caskel’s (1966) edition
of Al-Kalbı¯’s G˘ amharat an-nasab is a monumental redaction of a model
genealogical treatise. The comprehensive two-volume reference contains
the genealogical tables for the major tribal families of the eastern Islamic
empire and the register of some 35,000 personal names.23 In the preface
Caskel elaborates on the science of genealogy. This includes a history of
genealogy before Islam and Al-Kalbı¯. Caskel explains how the system of
names for men, women, and tribes works and provides copious notes that
make Al-Kalbı¯’s iconic compendium more accessible and usable.
20 Rosenthal’s deﬁnition: ‘Nasab: “connection, pedigree, genealogy” designates the most fundamental organizing
principle of Arab society’ (2012). See nasab in the Encyclopedia of Islam, 2nd edition. Each patrilineal descent line or
name string is a nasab, plural ansaˉb.
21 See Versteegh (2014), 2nd edition, on the history of the Arabic language.
22 See Szombathy (2003) for the historical signiﬁcance of genealogy to Arabo-Muslim society. Szombathy sees
genealogy as folklore and not an accurate record of Bedouin ancestry, the elaborate genealogy of ʿilm al-nasab as
a fantasy.
23 The Gˇamhara was completed by Muh˙ammad bin al-Saˉ’ib bin Bašar bin ʿAmruˉ bin al-H˙aˉritˉ bin ʿAbdu al-H˙aˉritˉ al-Kalbıˉ
with the assistance of his son Hišaˉm.
13 Arabic and Onomastics
313

Ibn Durayd, preeminent lexicographer and poet, is well known for his
genealogical compendium al-Isˇtiqa¯q (1958) in which he records the names
of the ancestors of the Prophet, the Prophet’s relatives as well as those of
great families.24 In addition to the formal patrilineal descent line, an entry
can include a grammatical analysis that identiﬁes derived words or words
related to the mas˙dar along with meanings.25 Also the author of the three-
volume Jamharat al-lug˙a, a comprehensive dictionary, Ibn Durayd was con-
sciously educating his reader about Arabic.26 Indexes help the reader to
cross-reference selected terms in the work, e.g., su¯ra ‘chapter’, h˙ adı¯t¯ ‘nar-
rative’, ʿasˇı¯ra ‘clan’, ʿalam ‘ﬁrst name’ (569–718).
Ibn H˙ azm was a proliﬁc scholar. Poet, genealogist, and historian of Islamic
Spain, he is famous for his celebrated book Jamharat ansa¯b al-ʿarab.27 The
volume documents Arab tribes and prominent persons including some
from al-Andulus. The preface offers useful contextual information, includ-
ing a discussion of the beneﬁts of the science of genealogy to the Muslim
community, e.g., the legal and political legitimacy it can extend. Vilchez
(2012: 752) cites the reputation of the Jamhara as ‘the most extensive, rich
and accurate book of Arabic genealogies’.28 Among the other works by Ibn
H˙ azm, he describes treatises on: the names of the companions of the
Prophet; lists of names and information for selected caliphs; ʾasma¯ʾ alla¯h
‘the names of God’; and even ancestries of the Berbers.29
The importance of names to Arabo-Islamic society, the structure of the
patrilineal (and patriarchal) naming system as well as the signiﬁcance
Islamic scholars and biographers attached to ancestry took the attention
of scholars in the nineteenth and twentieth centuries. These scholars
sought to identify pertinent Islamic biographical texts, research and cata-
logue known Arabic and Arabo-Muslim names, and support research. The
Onomasticon Arabicum (OA) (Caetani and Gabrieli 1915) brought scholars of
philology and onomastics together to address the evolving interest in
building an onomastic record of the Arabs. The objective was to identify
medieval Arabic personal and place names in their appropriate historical
and social context (see Sublet 2001 for a detailed chronology). Although
only one volume of the OA was actually published, its international colla-
borators continued to participate in the project under the auspices of the
24 Ibn Durayd or Ibn Duraid. See Ibn Durayd, Muh
˙
ammad ibn al-H
˙
asan and ʻAbd al-Salaˉm Muh
˙
ammad Haˉruˉn (ed.) (1958).
al-ishtiqaˉq. Also Kitaˉb al-Ištiqaˉq in the literature. Varisco (1995: 140) states that the Prophet’s genealogy is important
because ‘it became the paradigm of Arab tribal structure in medieval Arabic text’. He provides a table ‘Genealogical Descent
of Muhammad’ that details the Prophet’s Signiﬁcant Ancestors (144–6). Many names of Arab tribes are eponymous and
take the name of an ancestor. Varisco identiﬁes the divisions within the tribal framework and explains that these terms are
metaphors corresponding to body parts (142), i.e., šaʿb, qabıˉla, ʿimaˉra, bat
˙
n, fah˘d
ˉ
, and fas
˙
ıˉla.
25 See Larcher (2005) for an understanding of how Arabic grammarians understood ‘derivation’ and mas
˙
dar.
26 Suleiman (2003: 60) says, ‘The main thesis in al-Ištiqaˉq is that Arabic proper names are embedded in an etymology
which deﬁnes what may be called linguistic genealogies by means of derivational networks (ištiqaˉq) whose roots lie in
the lexical stock of the language.’
27 See Ibn H˙azm, ʻAlıˉ ibn Ah˙mad, 994–1064 and ʻAbd al-Salaˉm Muh˙ammad Haˉruˉn (ed.) (1962). Jamharat ansaˉb al-ʻarab.
28 See Vilchez for his detailed accounting of Ibn H˙azm’s works.
29 Wasserstein (1993) compares three lists of throne names for caliphs that appear in Ibn H
˙
azm’s Naqt al-ʿAruˉs.
3 1 4
T E R R E N C E P O T T E R

Centre Nationale de la Recherche Scientiﬁque (CNRS). With the advent of
data processing in 1966 (383) and renewed support, the activities of the OA
resulted in numerous publications, including ﬁve editions of Cahiers d’ono-
mastique arabe.30 The articles that appear in the Cahiers treat medieval
onomastics, relate to Arabo-Muslim prosopography and developments in
the progress of the OA, e.g., development of an automated database (see
Sublet 2001: 387–90).31 Today an online version of the OA offers research-
ers access to a database of medieval biographical and genealogical
sources.32
The structure of the Arabic personal name is described in detail by
Fischer (1995: 873–5), Schimmel (Islamic Names) (1995: 1–13), Sublet
(1991: 9–11), and Wild (1982: 154–60).33 Each scholar offers information
about the nature of each component. The traditional name system is based
on the formal patrilineal descent line or name string and comprises spe-
ciﬁc components – ism ʿalam, kunya (agnomen), nasab, nisba, and laqab – and
has been operative since pre-Islamic times for both male and female name
bearers. Using Wild’s example (154): 34
Al-Mubarrad
Abu¯ l-ʿAbba¯s
Muh˙ ammad
ibn Yazı¯d
al-Azdı¯
1
2
3
4
5
This is a man’s name where (1) is the laqab (nickname), (2) the kunya
(progeny or hoped-for progeny), (3) the ism ʿalam (given name) or ism, (4)
the nasab (father or mother), and (5) the nisba (origin). Use of the component
names is socially governed, but components are readily identiﬁed. The ism,
the proper name given at birth or shortly thereafter, is the most intimate
and speciﬁc of the identifying components, and has limited informal use.
The laqab is an acquired nickname of respect or title and can be heard in
social interaction. The kunya conveys high respect to the person named and
has been interpreted in many ways.35 If the names of successive fore-
fathers are known, a person’s name can be made more complete with
additional nasabs, e.g., ibn/bin ‘son’ or bint ‘daughter’ of father X, who is ibn/
30 See Sublet (1977) for a description of early progress on the Onomasticon Arabicum. See Sublet (2001) for the list of
articles published from 1979 to 1993 in the Cahiers d’onomastique arabe.
31 See note 29 and Wasserstein (1993) for such an article.
32 See http://onomasticon.irht.cnrs.fr/.
33 Fischer’s (1995) (German) entry emphasizes the historical record through his examples. His category Familiennamen
‘family names’ includes the nisba. Schimmel’s (1989, 1995) (English translation) comprehensive survey Islamic
Names encompasses Arabic and Arabic-derived names whose use and form stems from Islam, Arabic, and history.
Sublet’s (1991) (French) book-length essay stresses the role of kinship and history and incorporates many examples
from the OA biographical literature.
34 Wild (1982) (German), along with linguistic deﬁnitions for each name component accompanied by examples, states,
‘The order of the person’s naming was not ﬁxed, however, the order laqab, kunya, ism, nasab, nisba is one of the most
common’ (155; my translation).
35 Schimmel (4): ‘More studies have been devoted to the kunya in its different forms than to any other part of Muslim
names.’ The kunya is a teknonym that conveys respect to the bearer and connotes virtue. It consists of either abuˉ
‘father of’ X or ummu ‘mother of’ X. Over time a kunya may come to be an ism. See Schimmel (6–7) for its numerous
metaphorical uses. The kunya abuˉ, abıˉ, abaˉ can be shortened to buˉ as in many North African names. See Ryding
(2005: 96–9) for Arabic proper nouns including personal names, teknonyms, matronyms, and patronyms.
13 Arabic and Onomastics
315

bin ‘son’ or bint ‘daughter’ of father Y and so on.36 ‘The nisba is normally an
adjective that refers to the place of birth, residence or origin’ (Schimmel
1995: 10). It often refers to the actual tribe or a tribal afﬁliation from the
past. Continuing to follow Wild’s example above, the full name of an
assumed sister to Muh˙ ammad named Fa¯t˙ima could read:
Al-H˙ a¯jja
Ummu Layla¯
Fa¯t
˙
ima
bint Yazı¯d
al-Azdı¯
1
2
3
4
5
This is a woman’s name where (1) is the laqab, al-H˙ a¯jja ‘the pilgrim
(fem.)’, (2) the kunya, ‘the mother of Layla’, (3) the ism, Fat˙ima, (4) the
nasab, ‘daughter of Yazı¯d’, and (5) the nisba, ‘of the Azd tribe’. Of these
names the most important is the ism (ﬁrst name) because it most
centrally conveys the identity of the person. While the ism is typically
recognized by community members for a male or a female, some
isms may be used for either.37
Naming according to societal and linguistic norms in the classical
period reﬂects patterns that echo past history, classical and Muslim
values, formality, and the sacredness of the classical Arabic language.
These patterns prevailed during the medieval period but many have
continued into the modern Arabic period. Religious, tribal, and other
conservative forces tend to preserve the naming conventions of early
Islam. For name-givers the ism should be beautiful, follow the faith tradi-
tion and bind the child to the family unit (Schimmel 1995: 14). In the
Islamic tradition good names include (1) the Divine names for men where
ʿabd- ‘servant’ is preposed to one of the asma¯’ al-h˙ usna¯ ‘beautiful names of
God’, e.g., ʿAbdu l-Karı¯m,ʿAbdu l-Qa¯dir, ʿAbdu l-H˙ amı¯d; (2) the names of
prophets and other men and women mentioned in the Qur’a¯n and/or
Bible, e.g., Ibra¯hı¯m, Sulaima¯n, Mu¯sa¯, Isma¯’ı¯l, Sa¯ra, Maryam, H˘ adı¯ja; (3) the
name and derived names of the last Prophet, e.g., Muh˙ ammad, Ah˙ mad,
Mah˙ mu¯d, Mah˙ mu¯da, H˙ amı¯da; (4) the name of ʿAlı¯, the ﬁrst Ima¯m; and (5) the
names of Islamic heroes, e.g., Shı¯ʿı¯: ʿAbba¯s, H˙ aidar, Sunnı¯: ʿUmar,ʿUt¯ma¯n.38
The names of al-H˙ usain and al-H˙ asan, the sons of ʿAlı¯ and Fa¯t¯ima, are well
known in both Muslim communities (25–41).
Many other names – isms and laqab derivatives – are appropriate for men
and women. Adjectives, nouns, participles, and verbs, inﬂected for gender,
populate the name space for men and women (Schimmel 1995: 42–9;
Ryding 2005: 98). These can be inspired by beauty, e.g., wası¯m, wası¯ma
‘handsome’; colours, e.g., asmar, samra¯’ ‘brown-skinned’; nature, e.g.,
36 It is common today to delete the ibn/bin or bint of the nasab. This can result in a series of ﬁrst names following the ism
ʿalam, each understood to be the name of the father, grandfather, and so on. Normal practice today is three names.
37 Eid (2002: 124) reports that about 13.6 per cent of names in The Dictionary of Arab Names (1991), a dictionary
covering much of the Arabic-speaking world, referred to both males and females. That is, 12,253 out of 90,133 names
are not sex-exclusive (313).
38 See Dagorn (1981) (French) for a non-traditional answer to the question of who Ismaˉʿıˉl was and what his rightful
place in the Islamic tradition is.
3 1 6
T E R R E N C E P O T T E R

rand, randa ‘laurel, aloe, myrtle’; animals, e.g., lait¯, lait¯a ‘lion’ and other
categories with positive attributes.39
The laqab ‘nickname’ is an additional name or byname and should conven-
tionally be positive but realistically is often pejorative. It can neutrally allow
distinguishing two persons who have the same ism, e.g., al-kabı¯r ‘the elder’, al-
s˙ag˙ı¯r ‘the younger’ (Schimmel 1995: 50). But the laqab can also describe body
characteristics or defects, commonly a negative appellation, e.g., al-aʿrag˘ ‘the
lame’, al-aʿma¯ ‘the blind’.40 Similarly animal and plant names (e.g., h˙ ima¯r
‘donkey’, al-g˘a¯mu¯s ‘water buffalo’, al-ward ‘the rose’, bas˙l ‘onion’), can serve
to mark satirical distinctions (Schimmel 1995: 50–3). Many honorary titles or
h˘it˙a¯b that began as ʾalqa¯b in the Middle Ages have acquired name status today.
Examples of these include compound names with al-dı¯n, e.g., sˇamsu al-dı¯n ‘sun
of the religion’, saifu al-dı¯n ‘sword of the religion’, muh˙ ya al-dı¯n ‘face of the
religion’, and with alla¯h, e.g., Asad Alla¯h ‘God’s lion’, Alı¯’s surname, H˙ izbu Alla¯h
‘the Party of God’, the Lebanese political party, ʿAbdu Alla¯ah = ʿAbdullah.41 Many
ʾalqa¯b became permanent family names in use today (60–4).
Studies of names in the prophetic tradition are rich in the literature. The
names of God and the Prophet can be seen in the earliest Arabic inscrip-
tions (grafﬁti) (Hoyland 1997: 83–4). Muslim theologians and scholars have
written many commentaries about them. Ibn H˙ azm lists and discusses the
names of the family and descendants of the Prophet, the names of the
companions of the Prophet and the Divine names (Vilchez 2012).42 The
Prophet’s name and genealogy continue to be studied today, e.g., Borg
(2001), Reynolds (2011), Tabrı¯ziya¯n and Kha¯tamı¯ (2002), Varisco (1995).
This traditional system and its effects are still apparent in the Arabo-
Muslim world today. During the Islamic period the inﬂuence of the nam-
ing system extended to all communities in contact with Islam.43 Thus
Arabic-based names and naming practices can be seen in much of the
Muslim world. European inﬂuence, information processing, and other
factors have signiﬁcantly inﬂuenced naming in the era of modern
Arabic. National laws often specify the components of an ofﬁcial name,
with some limiting the number to three.44 At the same time, the
39 See Geoffroy and Geoffroy (2009) (French) for more examples. They organize their list of over 5,500 personal names
into fourteen categories with positive attributes. Of these, eleven are without religious reference, i.e., wisdom,
excellence, qualities of the heart, power, happiness, beauty, the light, the water, the earth (plants, fruits, plains,
mountains and deserts), and the animal kingdom (my translation).
40 Schimmel (1995: 54) provides the laudatory sobriquet qaˉtil al-juˉʿ ‘he who kills hunger’ given to generous people.
41 Schimmel (60–1) offers other examples of ʾalqaˉb compounds, e.g., noun + al-daula ‘of the state’, noun + al-Islaˉm ‘of
Islam’.
42 Vilchez lists three treatises by Ibn H
˙
azm that cover these topics. They are in addition to the onomastic content of the
Jamhara. See discussion above.
43 See Sublet (1998: 116–17) for a discussion of the Mamluk sultan Baybars who had a formal Arabic name although he
had no Muslim genealogy.
44 See Samin (2015: 185–7) for the effects of Saudi Arabia’s 1969 rule of genealogical governance and required taˉbiʿıˉya
or identiﬁcation card. The legal requirement for a four-part name and ID card had signiﬁcant effects that included
discouragement of the use of al-šuhra – whether originally ism, kunya, nisba, or laqab – that commonly refers to the
person or family.
13 Arabic and Onomastics
317

traditional name in Arabo-Islamic society continues to be central to the
collective conscience and signiﬁes a person’s identity in socially, politi-
cally, and ethnically desirable ways. Arab identity stems in large measure
from its tribal and ancestral heritage (Varisco 1995: 141). The number and
popularity of published tribal genealogies attests to the abiding interest in
ancestral identiﬁcation and tribal afﬁliation. Among these, Sayyid (2009),
a history of select Arab tribes in Egypt and the Sudan, Shurra¯b (2002),
a dictionary of Palestinian clans, and Wa¯’ilı¯ (2002), a six-volume encyclo-
pedia of the names and history of the Arab tribes, are examples that
respond to and promote interest in tribal history and their genealogies.45
13.4
Modern Arabic Names
Modern Arabic names include those that became extant during the period
of time following the Islamic medieval era when Arabic has been labelled
Middle Arabic.46 This period is marked by greater variation in the use of
the Arabic language and effects of localized dialects. It includes trends
away from Classical Arabic that were primarily text-based to other forms
of Arabic that reﬂect language contact, diffusion, and diversiﬁcation.
While Arabic names remain essentially the same linguistically, changes
in name-giving practices reﬂect changes from customs of the past and new
social inﬂuences, as well as changes in societal roles, needs, and style.
Classical Arabic differs from Modern Standard Arabic primarily in style
and vocabulary (Ryding 2005: 4). While the inﬂuence of written language
upon naming may be negligible linguistically, sociocultural and psycholo-
gical factors play important roles in name choice. Traditional and histor-
ical names are associated with the formality of Classical Arabic, while less
formal, novel pronunciations of names tend to the dialectal.47 Choice of
name is still bound by societal conventions, but taste in names, or shifts in
popularity, play a role in modern, technologically based societies.48 While
Arab or Muslim governments may take decisions to standardize naming
practices other internal mechanisms are also at work to inﬂuence the
choices name-givers make.49
With the publication of Sultan Qaboos Encyclopedia of Arab Names (Zubayr
and Badawi 1991), a number of resources became available to researchers.
The Encylopedia (in Arabic) consists of four parts: (1) a two-volume,
45 See Bosworth (1996) for a contemporary manual on the Islamic dynasties. See Almuhanna and Prunet (2015) for
recent research on the afﬁnity for genealogy among young Kuwaitis.
46 See Versteegh (2014: 152–7) for an authoritative deﬁnition of Middle Arabic.
47 See Schimmel (30) for variation in the pronunciation of Muh˙ammad. See Gardner (1994) for patterns of change in
Sudan, especially for women. These suggest a shift in values, to more traditional names for males and more new
names for females, away from prophetic names to names that signal a better future.
48 Lieberson (2000: 173) discusses name choice in terms of taste. For him the symbolic meaning of the name and the
effects of previous tastes in social groups can account for name choice.
49 See Samin (2015) and note 39 above.
3 1 8
T E R R E N C E P O T T E R

Dictionary of Arab Names, (2) a four-volume Treasury of Arab Names, (3)
Personalities in the History of Oman, and (4) Research Guide to the Study of Arab
Names. An entry in the Dictionary typically provides data about its use as
ﬁrst, second or last name,50 its consonantal root, local pronunciation
variation, and national distribution in the Arab world. Additional informa-
tion is provided about ancestors who are known to have borne the name.
This is the current standard reference for modern Arabic proper names
although it does not yet have an internet presence.
Sociolinguistic and ethnographic studies of Arabic names and naming
are numerous in the literature. These studies describe naming in different
Arabic-speaking communities, e.g., Antoun (1968) (Jordanian village),
Laredo (1978) (Judeo-Arabic in Morocco), Abd-el-Jawad (1986) (Jordanian),
Borg and Kressel (2001) (Negev Bedouin), Atawneh (2005) (Palestinian), Al-
Aghbari (2010) (Omani women), Al-Qawasmi and Al-Haq (2016) (Jordanian
newborns), Yassin (1986) (Arabian names). Some address gender differ-
ences, e.g., Eid (1994, 2002) (women in Egyptian obituaries), Bassiouney
(2009: 148) (a woman’s name in Egypt), Gardner (1994) (name-giving
changes for women). Some studies assess names as address forms, e.g.,
Yassin (1978) (Kuwaiti), Potter (1999) (Moroccan); describe changes in
name-giving, e.g., Gardner (1994) (Sudanese); compare names, e.g.,
Rosenhouse
(2002)
(Hebrew
and
Arabic),
Salih
and
Bader
(1999)
(Jordanian Arab Christian). Others report on the onomastic evidence for
the historic presence of Arabic, e.g., Metcalfe (2003) (Norman Sicily).
Guides offer the name-giver a choice of appropriate Arabic names in the
Muslim tradition of naming.51 Some guides introduce their compilation with
advice to the name-giver, including information about the names of
Muh˙ ammad, the prophets and the tradition of naming in Islam. One recent
trade-book compilation includes more than 10,000 names (see Hawramani
2017). Geoffroy and Geoffroy (2009) and Ahmed (1999), both paper, offer
preliminary information about the naming system, religious, cultural, and
historical practices. This information is followed by comprehensive lists of
given names for girls and boys where each entry includes information spe-
ciﬁc to the name. These guides serve different communities of Arabic name-
givers, e.g., Ahmed (1999) (English); El Khayat (2007) (French, Moroccan
Arabic, Arabic, and Berber); Geoffroy and Geoffroy (2009) (French).
13.5
Toponomy and Arabic
Arabic toponyms have been treated within the same linguistic framework
as personal names historically. Most place names began as personal
50 The last or family name can be derived from a kunya, a laqab or an ism. See Samin (2015) for discussion of the family
name known as al-šuhra, or popular name.
51 These guides are customarily trade books that offer good names for newborns. They often include Muslim in the title.
Arabic names are searchable online at: babynameguide.com and behindthename.com.
13 Arabic and Onomastics
319

names. Place names are among those found in the earliest inscriptions and
texts (e.g., Al-Jallad et al. 2013). Names inscribed on buildings or temples
are assumed to be eponymous. This adds to the difﬁculty in interpreting
ancient inscriptions. Toponymy for the region is deﬁned by Wild (2011).
Recent toponymic studies have been completed for a variety of places
where Arabic is or has been in use, e.g., Lebanon (Wild 1973; Wardini
2002); Algeria (Merbouh 2012); Yemen (Behnstedt 2007); Egypt (Hobbs
2014); Jordan (Al-Maʿa¯nı¯ 2003; Al-Jallad et al. 2013; Shaddel 2017); Syria
(Sartre 2002); Muslim Spain (Vargas 2007); Palestine (Thompson et al.
1988); Sicily (Caracausi 1993). A standard reference for Arabic toponymy
is Groom (1983). Suleiman (2011) discusses toponyms at length and their
key role in the linguistic landscape of Palestine.
Suleiman (2004, 2011) stresses the role and importance of personal and
place names in Palestine. They are markers of national identity and can
authenticate a claim to the land (Suleiman 2004: 179). Family names bear
symbolic meaning having been derived from toponyms, the names of
villages and towns, some of which no longer exist. Symbolic meaning in
names is stronger in places of conﬂict (181–2). The linguistic struggle
between Arabic and Hebrew – especially in street signs – plays out with
onomastic resources. Later Suleiman (2011: 142–230) explores further the
relationship among names, identity, and conﬂict as he applies the litera-
ture of Arabic names to analyse the roles personal and place names play in
Palestine and in other areas of conﬂict, e.g., Iraq. Relying upon the litera-
ture, he describes modernization in terms of names, especially changes in
female names (153–8).
13.6
Technology and Arabic Names
The
technological
developments
in
information
processing
have
improved the capacity to index and sort Arabic proper names. Early efforts
to catalogue, process, and form a database of Arabic medieval names were
taken in the Onomasticon Arabicum project (see Malti-Douglas and Fourcade
1976, Müller, ‘The Project’ for the record of this progress).52 Scholars have
contributed to this effort in order to automate Arabic language processing.
Beeston (1971) provided early background information on the structure,
grammar, and use of Arabic names. The Indexer periodically reported the
progress and developments for Arabic, e.g., (identifying) ‘Islamic names’
(Searight 1966), ‘Alphabetization of Islamic names’ (1971), ‘Islamic ﬁling’
(Behn and Greig 1974), and ‘Indexing Asian Names’ (Akhtar 1989).
The development of standard practices for the transliteration (romani-
zation) of Arabic names resulted in tables for general use (see Roochnik
52 See detailed information about ‘The Project’ at onomasticon.irht.cnrs.fr/bundles/irhtoafront/pdf/The_Project.pdf and
the discussion above.
3 2 0
T E R R E N C E P O T T E R

1993, ALA-LC Romanization Tables [. . .] 1997, UNGEGN Working Group
[. . .] 2003, and Pederson 2004). Hedden (2007) offered a detailed guide for
processing Arabic names that cited problems and included advice taking
into account the latest developments in processing. By 2012, machine
transliteration of Arabic names was deemed available for general use (see
Abu Obied et al. 2012), and in 2013, the need to match identities based
upon language and names was addressed (see Lisbach and Meyer 2013).
A recent study (see Oudah and Shaalan 2016) reports on progress and
constraints in identifying ‘Arabic person names’ as part of the ‘Named
Entity Recognition for Arabic’ project (351). Almuhanna and Prunet (2015)
explain the inventive practice of Kuwaitis’ naming their tribes with
a three-digit code and then using those codes to identify themselves and
others. This practice may lead to novel ‘ethnonymic nicknames’ or ‘logo-
graphic ethnonyms’ (314).
13.7
Conclusion
The record of research for Arabic proper names extends from the medieval
period to the present and continues at a moderate pace. This review high-
lights the major scholarly treatments over time and reveals the impor-
tance of the linguistic study of names to our understanding of human
language, culture, and interaction. This interdisciplinary study focuses
on identity, and from the outset helps to reveal who the users of Arabic
may have been and who they are today in the complexity of their commu-
nities of use. The recurring formal aspects of naming reﬂect a shared
language-based identity among users over time. The same basic patrilineal
descent structure, the recurring theophoric and religious names, and the
persistent metaphorical allusion to shared communal (tribal) values point
to a remarkable unity of practice among name-givers. Consistent with the
development of approaches in linguistics, studies of Arabic names have
gradually moved from an emphasis on formal structure to greater socio-
pragmatic and functional perspectives. While studies continue today that
yield more information about Old Arabic, Classical Arabic and Modern
Arabic names, greater investigation is needed.
This review raises a number of key issues. While important ﬁndings in
Arabic onomastics often parallel those in other naming systems, its studies
usually follow a trajectory outside that of Western onomastics.53 While
important documentation and analysis have been completed, more stu-
dies of Arabic names should be published in the wider world of onomas-
tics. Moreover, women’s names are poorly documented in the literature.
Perhaps this is due to the lasting inﬂuence of the patriarchal and tribal
practices whereby women’s names have had little visibility. Greater efforts
53 For example, Felecan and Felecan (2014) do not report unconventional Arabic or Arab anthroponyms.
13 Arabic and Onomastics
321

to identify and analyse women’s names throughout history, and to publish
that research, are necessary so as to expand the body of literature about
women’s roles and identities (see Eid 2002).54 Similarly, a great variety of
names in the Arabic-speaking world may be overlooked if attention is only
given to traditional patterns of naming and the patrilineal descent line.
Accordingly, a new emphasis is needed on the study of the diverse ethnic,
religious, and mixed-identity groups for which historic, novel, or emerging
name-giving practices may have been overlooked or forgotten. Given that
the greatest attention of late to Arabic names has proceeded from real
domestic and international concerns for security, a renewed effort to
promote the humane study of identity and its societal conventions, e.g.,
names and name-giving practices, should be broadly supported by
national and international organizations.
References
Abbadi, S. (1983). Die Personennamen der Inschriften aus Hatra. Texte und
Studien zur Orientalistik. Hildesheim, Zurich. New York: Georg
Olms Verlag.
Abd-el-Jawad, H. (1986). A linguistic and sociocultural study of personal
names in Jordan. Anthropological Linguistics, 28(1), 80–94.
Abu Obied, H. N., Nuser, M. S., and Al-Kabi, M. N. (2012). A comparison
between rule and dictionary based romanization of Arabic names.
International Journal of Computer Processing of Languages, 24(2), 167–88.
Ahmed, S. (1999). The Dictionary of Muslim Names. New York: New York
University Press.
Akhtar, N. (1989). Indexing Asian names. The Indexer, 16(3), 156–8.
Al-Aghbari, A. (2010). Derogatory forms of personal names in Omani
Arabic. Anthropological Linguistics, 52, 344–57.
ALA-LC. (1997). ALA-LC Romanization Tables: Transliteration Schemes for Non-
Roman Scripts. www.loc.gov/catdir/cpso/roman.html; last accessed
27 November 2020.
Al-Jallad, A. (2015). An Outline of the Grammar of the Safaitic Inscriptions, vol. 80.
Leiden: Brill.
Al-Jallad, A. (2017). Graeco-Arabica I: The Southern Levant. In Arabic in Context:
400 Years of Arabic at Leiden University. Leiden: Leiden University, 99–186.
Al-Jallad, A., Daniel, R., and Al-Ghul, O. (2013). The Arabic toponyms and
oikonyms in 17. In L. Koenen, M. Kaimo, J. Kaimio, and R. Daniel, eds.,
The Petra Papyri II. Amman: American Center of Oriental Research,
23–48.
54 See Eid (2002: 119–55) for research and comparison of obituaries and names in three cultures. She ﬁnds Egyptian
obituaries to be a gendered space where basic identity has been denied women over time because the ism has been
absent from the obituary. She discusses this historical fact as the ‘obliteration’ of women’s identities.
3 2 2
T E R R E N C E P O T T E R

Almuhanna, A. and Prunet., J.-F. (2015). Numeric codes in the Arabian
Peninsula: An onomastic device for the digital age. Anthropological
Linguistics, 57(3), 314–39.
Al-Khraysheh, F. (1986). Die Personennamen in den Nabata¨ischen Inschriften des
Corpus Inscriptionum Semiticarum. Unpublished dissertation, University
of Marburg, Germany.
Al-Maʿa¯nı¯, S. (2003). Einige südjordanische Ortsnamen. Die Welt Des Orients,
33, 128–40.
Al-Qawasmi, A. and Al-Haq, F. (2016). A sociolinguistic study of choosing
names for newborn children in Jordan. International Journal of English
Linguistics, 6(1), 177–86.
Al-Said, S. F. (1995). Die Personennamen in den mina¨ischen Inschriften: Eine
etymologische und lexikalische Studie im Bereich der semitischen Sprachen.
Vero¨ffentlichungen der Orientalischen Kommission der Akademie
der
Wissenschaften
und
Literatur
in
Mainz.
41.
Wiesbaden:
Harrassowitz.
Alzoubi, M. (2013). New Safaitic inscriptions from ghadir abu¯-t
˙
arfa/Jordan.
Acta Orientalia Academiae Scientiarum Hungaricae, 66(4), 417–25.
Antoun, R. T. (1968). On the signiﬁcance of names in an Arab village.
Ethnology, 7, 158–70.
Arbach, M. (2002). Inventaire des Inscriptions sudarabiques: Les noms Propres du
Corpus Inscriptionum Semiticarum Pars quarta Inscriptiones himyariticas et
sabaas continens. tome 7. Paris: Acade´mie des Inscriptions et Belles-
Lettres.
Atawneh, A. (2005). Family names in Palestine: A reﬂection of culture and
life. Names, 53(3), 147–67.
Bassiouney,
R.
(2009).
Arabic
Sociolinguistics.
Edinburgh:
Edinburgh
University Press.
Beeston, A. F. L. (1971). Arabic Nomenclature: A Summary Guide for Beginners.
Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Behn, W. and Greig, P. (1974). Islamic ﬁling. The Indexer, 9(1), 13–5.
Behnstedt, P. (2007). Yemen revisited 1: Zum bestimmten Artikel und zur
Ortsnamenkunde im Jemen. Zeitschrift Fu¨r Arabische Linguistik, (47), 50–9.
Bohas, G., Guillaume, J., and Kouloughli, D. (2006).The Arabic Linguistic
Tradition. Washington, DC: Georgetown University Press.
Borg, A. (2001). Encoding the boundary between the secular and the sacred:
A phonological note on the Prophet’s name in the dialect of the Negev
and Sinai Bedouin. In J. Rosenhouse and A. Elad-Bouskila, eds.,
Linguistic and Cultural Studies on Arabic and Hebrew: Essays Presented to
Moshe Piamenta for His Eightieth Birthday. Wiesbaden: Harrassowitz.
49–59.
Borg, A. and Kressel, G. M. (2001). Bedouin personal names in the Negev
and Sinai. Zeitschrift fu¨r Arabische Linguistik, 40, 32–70.
Bosworth, C. E. (1996). The New Islamic Dynasties: A Chronological and
Genealogical Manual. Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press.
13 Arabic and Onomastics
323

Caetani, L. and Gabrieli, G. (1915). Onomasticon arabicum: Ossia repertorio
alfabetico dei nomi di persona e di luogo contenuti nelle principali opere
storiche, biograﬁche e geograﬁche, stampate e manoscritte, relative all’Isla¯m,
Italian edition. Rome: Casa.
Cantineau, J. (1930–1932). Le Nabate´en I and II. Paris: Librairie Ernest Leroux.
Cantineau, J. (1935). Nabate´en et Arabe. In Annales de l’institut d’e´tudes
orientales, 1, 79–81. Algiers: Universite´ d’Alger.
Caracausi, G. (1993). Onomastica Araba in Sicilia. Zeitschrift fu¨r Romanische
Philologie, 109(3–4), 349–80.
Caskel, W. (1966). G˘ amharat an-Nasab: Das genealogische Werk des Hisˇa¯m ibn
Muh˙ ammad al-Kalby. Bd. II. Leiden: Brill.
Corpus Inscriptionum Semiticarum ab Academia Inscriptionum et Litterarum
Humaniorum conditum atque digestum (1881–). Parisiis: e Reipublicae
Typographeo.
Dagorn, R. (1981). La Geste d’ismae¨l d’apre`s l’onomastique et la tradition arabes,
vol. 16. Geneva: Librairie Droz.
DASI Digital Archive for the Study of Pre-Islamic Arabian Inscriptions. (2013).
Universita` degli studi di Pisa. Pisa: Scuola Normale superioredi Pisa.
http://dasi.cnr.it/; last accessed 27 November 2020.
Eid, M. (1994). Hidden women: Gender inequality in 1938 Egyptian obitu-
aries. In R. Rammuny and D. Parkinson, eds., Investigating Arabic:
Linguistic, Pedagogical, and Literary Studies in Honor of Ernest N. McCarus.
Columbus, OH: Greyden Press, 113–36.
Eid, M. (2002).The World of Obituaries: Gender across Cultures and over Time.
Detroit, MI: Wayne State University Press.
El Khayat, R. (2007). Le livre des pre´noms du monde arabe et musulman et les
pre´noms du livre. 6th ed. Saint-Julien-Molin-Molette: Jean-Pierre Huguet.
Felecan, O. and Felecan, D. (2014). Unconventional Anthroponyms: Formation
Patterns and Discursive Function. Newcastle upon Tyne, UK: Cambridge
Scholars Publishing.
Fischer, W. (1995). Arabische Personennamen. In E. Eichler, G. Hilty,
H. Lo¨fﬂer, H. Steger, and L. Zgusta, eds., Namenforschung: Ein internatio-
nales Handbuch zur Onomastik, vol. I. Berlin: Walter de Gruyter, 873–5.
Fisher, G. (2015). Arabs and Empires before Islam. Oxford: Oxford University
Press.
Gardner, S. (1994). Generations of change in name-giving. In Y. Suleiman,
ed., Arabic Sociolinguistics: Issues and Perspectives. Richmond, UK: Curzon
Press, 101–26.
Geoffroy, Y. and Geoffroy, N. (2009). Le Grand livre des pre´noms arabes. Paris:
Vivre l’Islam en Occident.
Groom, N. St J. (1983). A Dictionary of Arabic Topography and Placenames:
A Transliterated Arabic–English Dictionary with an Arabic Glossary of
Topographical Words and Placenames. Beirut: Librairie du Liban.
Harding, G. L. (1971). An Index and Concordance of Pre-Islamic Arabian Names
and Inscriptions, vol. 8. Toronto: University of Toronto Press.
3 2 4
T E R R E N C E P O T T E R

Hawramani, I. (2017). 10,000 Names for Muslim Babies. Middletown, DE:
Hawramani.com.
Hayajneh, H. (2009). Ancient North Arabian–Nabataean bilingual inscrip-
tions from southern Jordan. Proceedings of the Seminar for Arabian Studies,
39, 203–22.
Healey, J. (1989). Were the Nabataeans Arabs? Aram, 1–2, 38–44.
Hedden, H. (2007). Arabic names. The Indexer, 25(3), 9–15.
Hobbs, J. J. (2014). Bedouin place names in the Eastern Desert of Egypt.
Nomadic Peoples, 18(2), 123–46.
Hoyland, R. (1997). The content and context of early Arabic inscriptions.
Jerusalem Studies in Arabic and Islam, 21, 77–102.
Hoyland, R. G. (2002). Arabia and the Arabs: From the Bronze Age to the Coming of
Islam. London: Routledge.
Hoyland, R. G. (2009). Arab kings, Arab tribes and the beginnings of Arab
historical memory. In H. M. Cotton, R. G. Hoyland, J. J. Price, and
D. J. Wasserstein. From Hellenism to Islam: Cultural and Linguistic Change
in the Roman Near East. New York: Cambridge University Press, 374–400.
Ibn Durayd, Muh˙ ammad ibn al-H˙ asan and ‘Abd al-Sala¯m Muh˙ ammad Ha¯ru¯n
(ed.) (1958). Al-ishtiqa¯q. Al-Qa¯hira: Mu’assasat al-Kha¯njı¯.
Ibn H˙ azm, ‘Alı¯ ibn Ah˙ mad, 994–1064 and ‘Abd al-Sala¯m Muh˙ ammad Ha¯ru¯ n
(ed.) (1962). Jamharat ansa¯b al-‘arab. Mis˙r: Da¯r al-Ma‘a¯rif.
Larcher, P. (2005). Que signiﬁe ‘de´river’ en arabe classique? In L. Edzard
and J. Retso¨, eds., Current Issues in the Analysis of Semitic Grammar and
Lexicon. Oslo-Go¨teborg Cooperation 3rd–5th June 2004, vol. 56.
Wiesbaden: Harrassowitz, 106–24.
Laredo, A. I. (1978). Les Noms des Juifs du Maroc: Essai d’onomastique
Jude´o-Marocaine, vol. 3. Madrid: Consejo Superior de Investigaciones
Cientı´ﬁcas, Instituto ‘B. Arias Montano’.
Lieberson, S. (2000). A Matter of Taste: How Names, Fashions, and Culture Change.
New Haven, CT: Yale University Press.
Lisbach, B. and Meyer, V. N. (2013). Linguistic Identity Matching, 1st ed.
Wiesbaden: Springer Vieweg.
Littmann, E. (1913–1943). Nabataean Semitic Inscriptions: Syria. Publications
of the Princeton Archaeological Expeditions to Syria in 1904–1905 and
1909. Div. IV. Sect. A. Leiden: Brill.
Macdonald, M. (1998). Some reﬂections on epigraphy and ethnicity in the
Roman Near East. Mediterranean Archaeology, 11, 177–90.
Macdonald, M. C. A. (1999). Review of Negev 1991. Personal names in the
Nabataean realm: A review article. Journal of Semitic Studies, 44(2),
251–89.
Macdonald, M. C. A. (2000). Reﬂections on the linguistic map of pre-Islamic
Arabia. Arabian Archaeology and Epigraphy, 11, 28–79.
Macdonald, M. C. A. (2004). Ancient North Arabian. In Cambridge
Encyclopedia of the World’s Ancient Languages. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.
13 Arabic and Onomastics
325

Macdonald, M. C. A. (2005). Old Arabic (Epigraphic). In K. Versteegh, M. Eid,
A. Elgibali, M. Woidich, and A. Zaborski, eds., Encyclopedia of Arabic
Language and Linguistics, vol. III. Leiden: Brill.
Macdonald, M. C. A. (2008). Ancient North Arabian. In R. Woodard, ed., The
Ancient Languages of Syria-Palestine and Arabia. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.
Macdonald, M. C. A. (2015). On the uses of writing in ancient Arabia.
Arabian Epigraphic Notes, 2015-1. Leiden University Repository http://
hdl.handle.net/1887/32745; last accessed 24 December 2020.
Malti-Douglas, F. and Fourcade, G. (1976). The Treatment by Computer of
Medieval Arabic Biographical Data: An Introduction and Guide to the
Onomasticum [i.e., Onomasticon] Arabicum, vol. 6. Paris: E´ ditions du
Centre National de la Recherche Scientiﬁque.
Mascitelli. D. (2006). L’arabo in epoca preislamica: Formazione di una lingua.
Rome: L’Erma di Bretschneider.
Merbouh, H. (2012). Toponymes urbains a` Sidi Bel Abbe`s-ville: Usages,
repre´sentations et identite´s sociolinguistiques. Nouvelle revue d’onomas-
tique, 53, 127–41.
Metcalfe, A. (2003). At the margins of the Arabic-speaking communities. In
Muslims and Christians in Norman Sicily: Arabic Speakers and the End of Islam,
London: Routledge Curzon, 71–98.
Negev, A. (1991). Personal Names in the Nabatean Realm, vol. 32. Jerusalem:
Institute of Archaeology, Hebrew University of Jerusalem.
OCIANA Online Corpus of the Inscriptions of North Arabia. (2014). Epigraphic
Arabic. Khalili Research Centre. Oxford: University of Oxford. https://krc
.web.ox.ac.uk/article/ociana; last accessed 27 November 2020.
Oudah,
M.
and
Shaalan,
K.
(2016).
Studying
the
impact
of
language-independent and language-speciﬁc features on hybrid
Arabic person name recognition. Language Resources and Evaluation,
51(2), 351.
Owens, J. (1998). Case and proto-Arabic, part I. Bulletin of the School of Oriental
and African Studies, 61(1), 51–73. doi:10.1017/S0041977X00015755.
Owens, J. (2006). A Linguistic History of Arabic. Oxford: Oxford University
Press.
Owens, J. (2013). A house of sound structure, of marvelous form and
proportion: An introduction. In J. Owens, ed., The Oxford Handbook of
Arabic Linguistics, 5. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Pederson, T. T. (2004). Transliteration of Non-Roman Scripts: Arabic. Tallinn,
Finland: Eesti Keele Instituut.
Potter, T. (1999). Si Mohammed: Names as address forms in Moroccan
Arabic. Names, 47, 157–72.
The Project, Onomasticum Arabicum. Centre National de la Recherche
Scientiﬁque (CNRS) Institut de Recherche et d’Histoire des Textes.
Section arabe 52, rue du Cardinal Lemoine, 75005 Paris. http://onomasti
con.irht.cnrs.fr/bundles/irhtoafront/pdf/The_Project.pdf.
3 2 6
T E R R E N C E P O T T E R

Retso¨, J. (2003). The Arabs in Antiquity: Their History from the Assyrians to the
Umayyads. London: Routledge.
Retso¨, J. (2013). What is Arabic? In J. Owens, ed., The Oxford Handbook of
Arabic Linguistics. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 433.
Reynolds, G. S. (2011). Remembering Muh˙ ammad. Numen, 58(2/3), 188–206.
Roochnik, P. (1993). Computer-Based Solutions to Certain Linguistic Problems
Arising from the Romanization of Arabic Names. Unpublished dissertation,
Georgetown University.
Rosenhouse, J. (2002). Personal names in Hebrew and Arabic: Modern
trends compared to the past. Journal of Semitic Studies, 47(1), 97–114.
Rosenthal, F. (2012). Nasab. In P. Bearman, Th. Bianquis, C. E. Bosworth,
E. van Donzel, and W. P. Heinrichs, eds., Encyclopaedia of Islam, 2nd ed.
Leiden: Brill.
Ryckmans, G. (1934–1935). Les noms propres sud-se´mitiques, 3 vols. Louvain:
Bureaux du Muse´on.
Ryding, K. C. (2005). A Reference Grammar of Modern Standard Arabic.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Salih, M. H. and Bader, Y. T. (1999). Personal names of Jordanian Arab
Christians: A sociocultural study. International Journal of the Sociology of
Language, 140, 29–43.
Samin, N. (2015). Of Sand or Soil: Genealogy and Tribal Belonging in Saudi Arabia.
Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Sartre, M. (2002). Les IGLS et la toponymie du H˙ aura¯n, Syria, 79,
217–29.
Sayyid, A. L. (2009). Qaba¯’il al-ʿarab fı¯ mis˙r wa-al-su¯da¯n: Al-‘Ulayqa¯t wa-al-
ja‘a¯ﬁrah wa-qaba¯’il uh
˘
ra¯. al-T˙ ab‘a 1. Dimashq: Al-Da¯r al-Wat
˙
anı¯yah al-
G˘ adidah li-l-Nashr wa-l-Tawzı¯ʿ.
Schimmel, A. (1989, 1995). Islamic Names. Edinburgh: Edinburgh University
Press.
Searight, E. E. G. L. (1966). Islamic names. The Indexer, 5(1), 37–8.
Shaddel,
M.
(2017).
Studia
Onomastica
Coranica
Al-Raqı¯m,
Caput
Nabataeae. Journal of Semitic Studies 62(2), 303–18.
Shahid, I. (2012). Byzantium and the Arabs. Washington, DC: Dumbarton
Oaks Research Library and Collection.
Shurra¯b, M. M. H˙ . (2002). Mu‘jam al-ʿasha¯’ir al-ﬁlast
˙
ı¯nı¯yah: Al-h˙ ama¯yil wa-al
-ʿasha¯’ir wa-al-ʿa¯’ila¯t wa-al-qaba¯’il al-ﬁlast˙ı¯nı¯yah wa-aʿla¯m rija¯la¯tiha¯ fı¯ al-
adab wa-al-jiha¯d wa-al-siya¯sah. al-T˙ ab‘ah al-ʿArabı¯yah 1 ed. ʿAmma¯n, al-
Urdun: al-Ahlı¯yah.
Stark, J. (1971). Personal Names in Palmyrene Inscriptions. Oxford: Clarendon
Press.
Sublet, J. (1977). Initiation a` l’onomastique arabe. In Proceedings of Annuaire
de l’E´cole pratique des hautes e´tudes, 4th section, Sciences historiques et philo-
logiques. 1976–1977, 245–8.
Sublet, J. (1991). Le voile du nom: Essai sur le nom propre arabe. Paris: Presses
universitaires de France.
13 Arabic and Onomastics
327

Sublet, J. (1998). The Sultan Baybars, trans. Beatrice McGeoch. Diogenes, 46
(181), 115–28.
Sublet, J. (2001). L’entreprise internationale de l’Onomasticon Arabicum en
avril (2000). Notes et Documents, Arabica, 48(3), 383–91.
Suleiman, Y. (2003). The Arabic Language and National Identity. Washington,
DC: Georgetown University Press.
Suleiman, Y. (2004). War of Words: Language and Conﬂict in the Middle East.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Suleiman, Y. (2011). Names, identity and conﬂict. In Arabic, Self and Identity:
A Study in Conﬂict and Displacement. New York: Oxford University Press.
Szombathy, Z. (2003). The Roots of Arabic Genealogy: A Study in Historical
Anthropology. Piliscsaba: The Avicenna Institute of Middle Eastern
Studies.
Tabrı¯ziya¯n, A. and Kha¯tamı¯, H. (2002). Asma¯’ al-rasu¯l al-mus˙t
˙
afa¯ wa-alqa¯buhu
wa-kuna¯hu wa-s˙ifa¯tuh. al-T˙ abʿah 1. vol. 1–2. Bayru¯ t: Da¯r al-Athar.
Thompson, T. L., Gonc¸alves, F. J., and van Cangh J. (1988). Toponymie
Palestinienne: Plaine de St. Jean d’Acre et Corridor de Je´rusalem, vol. 37. Louvain-
la-Neuve: Universite´ Catholique de Louvain, Institut Orientaliste.
UNGEGN (United Nations Group of Experts on Geographical Names)
Working Group on Romanization Systems. (2003). Report of the
Current Status of United Nations Romanization Systems for Geographical
Names. Version 2.2 January (2003). www.eki.ee/wgrs/; last accessed
27 November 2020.
Vargas, J. A. C. (2007). Onoma´stica a´rabo-bere´ber en la toponimia de
Castilla-la Mancha: Guadalajara/Arabic and Berber onomastic in the
toponymy of Castilla-la Mancha: Guadalajara. Anaquel De Estudios
A´ rabes, 18, 93–106.
Varisco, D. (1995). Metaphors and sacred history: The genealogy of
Muhammad and the Arab ‘Tribe’. Anthropological Quarterly, 68(3),
139–56.
Versteegh, K. (1997). Landmarks in Linguistic Thought III: The Arabic Linguistic
Tradition. London: Routledge.
Versteegh, K. (2014). The Arabic Language, 2nd ed. Edinburgh: Edinburgh
University Press.
Vilchez, J. M. P. (2012). Inventory of Ibn H˙ azm’s works. In C. Adang,
M. I. Fierro, and S. Schmidtke, eds., Ibn H˙ azm of Cordoba: The Life and
Works of a Controversial Thinker. Leiden: Brill.
Wa¯’ilı¯, ʿAbd al-H˙ akı¯m. (2002). Maws˙u¯‘at qaba¯’il al-ʿarab. ʿAmma¯n: Da¯r Usa¯mah.
Wardini, E. (2002). Lebanese Place-names: Mount Lebanon and North Lebanon,
A Typology of Regional Variation and Continuity. Leuven/Dudley, MA:
Peeters and Departement Oosterse Studies.
Wasserstein, D. (1993). Ibn H˙ azm on names meet for caliphs: The textual
history of a medieval Arabic onomastic catalogue and the transmis-
sion of knowledge in classical Islam. In D. Aigle and J. Sublet, eds.,
Cahiers d’onomastique arabe, 1988–1992. Paris: CNRS, 61–88.
3 2 8
T E R R E N C E P O T T E R

Wild, S. (1973). Libanesische Ortsnamen: Typologie und Deutung, vol. 9. Beirut:
F. Steiner.
Wild, S. (1982). Arabische Eigennamen. In W. Fischer, ed., Grundriss der
arabischen Philologie, vol. I.Wiesbaden: Ludwig Reichert Verlag, 154–64.
Wild, S. (2011). Toponyms. In L. Edzard and R. de Jong, Managing
Editors Online Edition, Encyclopedia of Arabic Language and Linguistics.
Brill Online, https://referenceworks.brillonline.com/entries/encyclope
dia-of-arabic-language-and-linguistics/toponyms-EALL_COM_0347; last
accessed 27 November 2020.
Yassin,
M.
(1978).
Personal
names
of
address
in
Kuwaiti
Arabic.
Anthropological Linguistics, 20(2), 53–63.
Yassin, M. (1986). The Arabian way with names. Linguist, 25, 77–85.
Zubayr, M. and Badawi, E. M. (1991). Mu‘jam asma¯’ al-‘arab. = Dictionary of
Arab Names. Bayru¯ t, Lubna¯n; Masqat
˙
, Salt
˙
anat ‘Uma¯n: Ja¯mi‘at al-Sult
˙
a¯n
Qa¯bu¯ s.
13 Arabic and Onomastics
329

14
The Intonation of Arabic
Review and Hypotheses
Khaled Rifaat
14.1
Introduction
The literature on Arabic shows the paucity of research on intonation and
prosody in general (for an outline, see Hellmuth 2014). This is due to several
reasons, one of which is the neglect of prosodic features in the monumental
works of old Arab grammarians, a tradition that has lasted for a long time
and has maintained its strength from the dominance of traditional lan-
guage studies in Arabic. I am not aware of any study of ‘traditional gram-
mar’ of Arabic that, implicitly or explicitly, describes any of its prosodic
features. Birkeland (1952) ascribes this neglect to the fact that the prosodic
system of Classical Arabic depends entirely on syllabic oppositions, and for
a similar conclusion, see Angoujard (1990). Birkeland’s evidence is perhaps
drawn from the classical description of Arabic metre, which is based pri-
marily on syllabic sequences rather than stress patterns (Golston and Riad
1997; Maling 1973). Ziadeh (1986) hypothesizes that the initial morphologi-
cal formation of Classical Arabic as a super-tribal variety, a koine´, was
shaped by the prosodic characteristics of poetry and rhymed prose.
The
dominance
of
syllabic
oppositions
in
Arabic
prosody
has
extended even to Qur’a¯n recitation. In his study of Qur’a¯nic recitation,
Al Faruqi (1978) states that the metrical stress pattern is not important
to Qur’a¯nic accentuation and that the opposition between long and
short syllables forms the base of Qur’a¯nic accentuation and Arabic
prosody in general. Further evidence of the dominance of syllabic
oppositions derives from the studies
of Classical
and colloquial
Arabic stress, which describe stress as predictable in terms of the
syllabic structure of the word (for a review, see Watson 2011).
The prosodic system of Arabic can be described as simple. Simplicity
being deﬁned here formally in terms of the high degree of redundancy in
the system. It seems that this simplicity is very characteristic and deeply
rooted in Arabic, to the extent that it is conveyed to Nubi, a creole spoken

in Uganda and Kenya that developed from Arabic in the nineteenth cen-
tury. Gussenhoven (2006) describes the intonation of Nubi as character-
ized by invariant intonation contours; this is rephrased rather strongly by
Nakao (2013) as devoid of an intonational system. The invariant pattern of
contours is characterized by High (H) tones that are always associated with
accented syllables and described by Gussenhoven as non-intonational
tones, and variable boundary tones; see similar notes on Juba Arabic by
Nakao (2013). This pattern is typical of Arabic, as will be detailed later in
the coming sections. This intonational transfer seems to have taken place
not only in creoles but also to fully ﬂedged languages that came into
contact with Arabic. Modern Farsi has an intonational system which is
very similar to Arabic (Mahjani 2003; Sadat-Tehrani 2008).
El-Dalee (1999) attributes the absence of intonation in the work of old
Arab grammarians to the fact that Arabic is a particle language and that
particles fulﬁl many of the functions of intonation. Segmental morphemes
have been reported in many languages to convey the same meanings
indicated by intonation (Ladd 2008).
There is evidence that both standard and colloquial varieties have simi-
lar intonational systems (El Zarka and Hellmuth 2009; Hellmuth and El
Zarka 2007; Rifaat 2010). This evidence strengthens the characteristics of
Arabic intonation and provides insights into the nature of the relation
between the two varieties. Rifaat (2010) concludes from this similarity
between the two systems that the diglossic situation does not hold as far
as intonation is concerned.
Arabic intonation has long been studied from a purely descriptive view
without an attempt to verify the previous claims about its minor role in the
prosodic system and how it formally inﬂuences its characteristics. It was not
until recently that the repercussions of the previous claims about the
marginality of Arabic intonation in the prosodic system were related to
formal statements about the Arabic intonational system. Hellmuth (2006a),
Rastegar-El Zarka (1997), and Rifaat (2005) propose the simplicity of Arabic
intonation. Rifaat (2005) considers this simplicity as the main reason for the
neglect of intonation in traditional Arabic studies. He differentiates
between structural and functional simplicity. The former refers to the
formal structure of intonation phrases (IP), i.e., complete intonational
units, and functional refers to its uses to signal different linguistic and
pragmatic meanings. Rifaat (2010) adds that Egyptian Arabic (EA) intonation
is not only structurally simple, but also functionally simple. He goes further
to hypothesize that the iconic side of intonation, i.e., the biological codes in
terms of Gussenhoven (2002), or its gestural nature in terms of Bolinger
(1985), prevails in EA intonation (see also El Zarka 2011, 2013a, 2013b).
In the following sections I will review Arabic intonation in terms of
its phonological components: theoretical framework, phrasing and con-
stituents, accent types and distribution, and declination and trendlines.
Additionally, I shall review Arabic intonation functions, i.e., its relation to
14 The Intonation of Arabic
331

grammatical structure, information structure, and the speaker’s attitude
and state. Finally, some hypotheses concerning a proposed theory of
Arabic intonation are introduced.
14.2
The Phonology of Arabic Intonation
14.2.1
Theoretical Framework
Arabic intonation has been studied within the American structuralist
(Abdalla 1960), the British (Ahmad 1987; Ahmed 1979; Alharbi 1991;
Badawi 1965; di Corvetto 1982;1 Kharrat 1994; Nawwaf and Mohamed-
Basil 2013; Soraya 1966), and the Autosegmental-Metrical (AM) frameworks
(Al Ghamdi 2006; Alzaidi 2014; Blodgett et al. 2007; Chahal 1999; Rastegar-El
Zarka 1997, 2013a; Hellmuth 2006b; Kalaldeh 2009; Mahaden and Jardat
2011; Rifaat 1991, 2005, 2010). The theoretical issues underlying the differ-
ences between these theories lie in the view of intonation as levels or
conﬁgurations, the relative functional load of different parts of the intona-
tional pattern, the amount of grammaticality of intonational analysis, and
the terms associated with these theoretical differences.
Abdalla’s (1960) investigation of EA intonation is unclear about its char-
acteristic features, possibly due to the theoretical problems of the model
adopted and the technological difﬁculties associated with extracting intona-
tion from spectrograms. I shall not discuss this work further in this chapter.
The studies based on the British model do not suffer from representa-
tional inconsistences since pitch accents (henceforth, accents) are viewed
as movements: rise, fall, rise-fall, fall-rise, and so on, which are very much
related to the surface phonetic manifestations. The case is different with
respect to AM studies. Discrepancies in representing such a conﬁguration
in the AM approaches arise from the problems of the original AM model
and the different interpretations of the phonetic nature of the somewhat
abstract nature of high and low (H and L) tones, the domains of accents,
together of course with differences in experimental procedures; see Ladd
(2008) for a discussion of these problems.
Figure 14.1 shows accents of Arabic: rise-fall, fall, rise, and level. Each
accent can vary in level or span, except for the level accent in panel d, which
varies only in level.2 The ﬁrst accent in Figure 14.1a, for example, has been
represented as LH*, H*, and LHL. Because of this representational inconsis-
tency, pitch conﬁguration has been represented as movements whenever
comparison between dialects or studies are called for (Chahal 2006; Chahal
and Hellmuth 2014; Ghazali et al. 2007; El Zarka 2011; Yeou et al. 2007).
Furthermore, the simplicity of Arabic intonation is complicated by the
direct application of the AM model that was originally intended to describe
English intonation, which has a more complex system than Arabic.
1 As cited in Chahal (2001).
2 See Ladd (2008: 197) for deﬁnitions of level and span.
3 3 2
K H A L E D R I F A A T

The hypothesis of the relative importance of some parts of the IP is
addressed in the different models of intonation: as the terminal contour
in the American structuralist model, as the nuclear tone in the British
model, or as the last accent and the boundary tone in the AM model. This
shows clearly in Arabic, where the main variation in tonal conﬁguration is
associated with boundaries, especially with the ﬁnal boundary, as will be
shown in more detail below.
The assumption of the iconic nature of Arabic intonation is put strongly
by El Zarka (2011, 2013a, 2013b) and Rifaat (2010). The standpoint of El
Zarka is that EA intonation is iconic and that intonation contours can be
viewed holistically as meaningful units without further analysing them into
smaller units. The AM atomistic model of analysis is emptied of its theore-
tical assumptions about the grammaticality, i.e., the linguistic nature, of
intonation and adopted only to adequately describe the contours. Rifaat
(2010) views EA intonation as composed of two components: structural
(grammatical) and gestural (iconic) and states that the iconic component
prevails. The structural or grammatical aspect of EA intonation lies in the
accent types and their distribution. The gestural or iconic component
appears in that EA intonation is limited to the basic function of intonation,
i.e., to indicate ﬁnality vs. continuation (Ladd 2008). Intonational variations
Figure 14.1 Major accents in Arabic
The rectangles delimit the minimum conﬁguration associated with the stressed syllable,
while the whole conﬁguration spans a prosodic word. In panels a, b, and c, the accent may
vary with respect to level or span, respectively. The level accent in panel d varies only in level.
14 The Intonation of Arabic
333

seem to be manifestations of this basic function. For example, ﬁnality is
indicated collaboratively or interchangeably by a falling accent (H*L),
a lowered accent in level or span, and a declining trendline. Additionally,
accents are always associated with salient parts of the IP, i.e., stressed
syllables of content words. EA seems to consider every word as focal, and
in doing this it accords with the iconicity principle posited by Lambrecht
(1994) for associating accent with focal parts of the utterance.
The gathering information about the characteristics of Arabic intona-
tion suggests the need for a new theoretical framework adequate to reveal
these characteristics. This framework should reveal the apparent simpli-
city of Arabic intonation and the prevalence of its iconic nature. In addi-
tion to the previously stated hypotheses, a more detailed account of this
framework will be presented below.
14.2.2
Intonational Phrasing and Constituents
In search for units or constituents of Arabic intonation, the maximum
number of levels reported is two (Ahmed 1987; Badawi 1965; Chahal 1999,
2001; Chahal and Hellmuth 2014; Rifaat 2005, 2010). Blodgett et al. (2007)
identify only one level of phrasing. The complete intonational unit is
termed differently according to the model adopted. It is the IP in AM
models (Blodgett et al. 2007; Chahal 1999, 2001; Chahal and Hellmuth
2014; Rifaat 2005, 2010), and the tone group, the intonational group, and
the contour in the British and American structuralist models (Ahmed 1987;
Alharbi 1991; Badawi 1965; Abdalla 1960). The second largest unit that
represents the second level of phrasing is the intermediate phrase (iP) or
the prosodic phrase (El Zarka 2013a) in the AM models, and the simple tone
group or the contour in the British models (Ahmed 1987; Badawi 1965).
Variant smaller units are identiﬁed, such as syllable, foot, pitch phoneme,
contour, stress group, and the prosodic word (PWd).3 Among these small
constituents, the syllable seems to be the most evident domain of the
major intonational events since they are usually associated with it.
Hellmuth (2007a) proposes the foot as the domain of alignment of accents
to account for the variability in peak alignment. Hellmuth (2007b) suggests
the PWd as the main domain of accent assignment. In trying to provide
a simpler analysis adequate for the simplicity of Arabic intonation, Rifaat
(2005) proposes the stress group, i.e., PWd, rather than the syllable as both
the domain of accent and its alignment unit.
Evidence for the existence of many of these units in the intonational
hierarchy is qualitative in nature and not based on systematic experiments
to provide solid empirical evidence. I do not know of any study devoted to
3 The concept of a unit consisting of a group of unstressed syllables plus a stressed one that bears one accent and
constitutes one intonational unit is termed differently in the literature. I shall use prosodic word (PWd) here to deal with
the current dominant AM-based studies on Arabic intonation.
3 3 4
K H A L E D R I F A A T

investigating intonational phrasing in an experimental setting. Hellmuth
(2004, 2011b, 2011c) investigated intonational phrasing in the broad con-
text of phonological phrasing and the phonology–syntax interface on
small speech samples and in limited experimental contexts. Variable
cues with high inter-speaker variation are identiﬁed. These cues are local
pitch reset, phrase-ﬁnal accent lowering, pre-boundary lengthening, fail-
ure of epenthesis, pause, and phrase tone. Boundaries of the IP, the largest
unit, are based primarily on communicative bases that are relatively easy
to specify in the simple type of speech samples mostly used: read sen-
tences, narrative monologues, and dialogues. In true spontaneous multi-
logues, deﬁning boundaries becomes very elusive.
Pure intonational cues for IPs are variably reported in the literature to be
the local pitch reset, global reset, or change of declination trendline, local
upstep, and occurrence of certain types of accents associated with the ﬁnal
boundary. Though not stated explicitly, Rifaat’s (2010) observations on the
variability of intonational cues to the same intonational function suggest
that formal deﬁnition of intonational constituents and boundaries is ade-
quately put in terms of the iconic component rather than the grammatical
component of Arabic intonation. This will be detailed below in the hypoth-
eses section.
14.2.3
Accent Types and Distribution
It is now established that Arabic intonation is characterized by a peak
associated with the stressed syllable. Deaccenting is very infrequent.
Hellmuth (2006b) reported only 2–4 per cent deaccented syllables in her
corpus.4 El-Isa (1982) noted that level tones, i.e., deaccented tones in the
British model, occurred in 13.2 per cent of his data. Level tones or L accents
have been recounted in several studies (Alharbi 1991; Badawi 1965; di
Corvetto 1982; Kharrat 1994; Rammuny 1989). Deaccenting occurs before
or after accented syllables, i.e., pre-or post-focal, in different varieties of
Arabic (Alzaidi 2014; Benkirane 1998; Chahal and Hellmuth 2014; El Zarka
2013a; Rifaat 2005; Yeou et al. 2007). Function words, i.e., particles, are
usually deaccented and cliticized to the following content words to form
PWds, which constitute the basic units of accentuation (Chahal 2001; El
Zarka 2013a; Hellmuth 2006b; Rifaat 2005).5
The non-boundary accents are mostly associated with a peak which is
always aligned with the stressed syllable (Figure 14.1a). The conﬁguration
4 The words ‘deaccenting’ or ‘deaccentuation’ are usually used interchangeably. They refer to the loss of a peak in the
accent resulting in a level tone (L). In other words, a word is accented when it contains an H accent. I see in this meaning
of deaccenting a theoretical inconsistency since level tone or L accent is phonologically distinctive. Rifaat (2005)
represented the level accent associated with a stressed syllable as L*, implying that it is still accented. Deaccenting is
better used for any part of the IP that is not assigned to any accent, e.g., function words.
5 An alternative analysis would assign an L* to function words. This alternative is motivated by the density of the accentual
system of Arabic and the fact that in many cases the particles are associated with an H accent. However, deciding on this
depends on inspecting the tonal conﬁguration of function words in larger corpora of different discourse types.
14 The Intonation of Arabic
335

associated with the stress is represented as a sustained pitch phoneme,
rise-fall, and H or L+H, depending on the theoretical model or the domain
of the conﬁguration adopted, i.e., the stressed syllable or the PWd.
The boundary tones of either the IP or the iP in Arabic are basically a fall
or a rise (Figure 14.1b and Figure 14.1c). Hellmuth (2006b) reports the rare
occurrence of a fall-rise in EA. Chahal (2006) recounts a fall-rise and a rise-
fall in different Arabic dialects. However, our review of the studies
reported by Chahal (2006) and the rest of the literature consulted here
(see Section 14.2.2) casts doubt on the existence of such complex tones in
Arabic. Complex tones such as fall-rise and rise-fall seem to be artefacts of
theoretical or analytical limitations of these studies.
14.2.4
Declination and Trendlines
Arabic intonation exhibits a widespread tendency for fundamental fre-
quency (F0) values to decline over the sequence of an utterance. This
decay may be in accent level or span or both. This tendency has been
extensively studied in many languages and from different viewpoints (for
a review, see Ladd 1984). Declination is included in different studies on
Arabic intonation as a separate global component (Alharbi 1991; Alzaidi
2014; Hellmuth 2006b; Ibrahim et al. 2001; Manfredi and Tosco 2014;
Norlin 1989; Rifaat 2005). Chahal (1999) and El Zarka (2013a) differentiate
between declination and downstep (downdrift); the former is purely
phonetic and the second is a phonological process.6 The existence of
downstep in Arabic is not adequately evidenced and seems to be intro-
duced directly from the AM model. Local lowering of accents, especially
the ﬁnal accent, provides the only evidence for the existence of a two-
component account of the decay of accents (Hellmuth 2006b; Rastegar-El
Zarka 1997; Rifaat 2005).
There are a few phonetic models of F0 declination, and more generally
upper and lower trendlines in Arabic. Ibrahim et al. (2001) correlate the
direction of the trendline with the type of sentence. Afﬁrmative sentences
have declining upper and lower trendlines, with the upper trendline hav-
ing a steeper rate of declination than the lower one. Similar results are
introduced by Benabbou et al. (2002), El-Imam (2008), Rifaat (1991), and
Zaki et al. (2002) for declarative sentences. Wh-questions have declining
upper trendlines and rising lower trendlines, while Yes–No questions have
rising trendlines; see also Ramsay and Mansour (2008).7 Ramsay and
Mansour (2008) report an inverse relation between amount of change in
6 Downtrend, in Connell and Ladd (1990), is a cover term for several terms used in this respect like declination,
downdrift, and downstep.
7 This pattern can be characterized as rising and gives the same perceptual impression as the one with rising top and
bottom lines. Rifaat (2005, ﬁgure 9b) reports this pattern as rising trendlines for an iP that represents the dependent
clause of a conditional sentence. The perceptual impression of this pattern seems consistent with the declining pattern
in which the topline is declining more steeply than the bottom line and also with the fact that it represents a question.
3 3 6
K H A L E D R I F A A T

the trendlines’ slopes and utterance length. Ghazali et al. (2007) associate
declination with Eastern dialects of Arabic rather than Western ones.
The evidence presented so far shows that declination is better treated
as a global phenomenon that correlates with grammatical and discourse
intonational functions. In long stretches of speech, the reset of
a declining trendline to the initial accent value usually indicates an
intonational unit. Changing the direction of the trendlines within one
IP indicates its complexity and may correspond to certain types of
grammatical structure. For example, statements are always associated
with declining trendlines, questions with level or rising trendlines, and
wh-questions with a declining top line and a rising bottom line. The
dependent clause of a conditional sentence has rising trendlines, while
the independent clause has falling trendlines (Alharbi 1991; Alzaidi
2014; Chahal 1999; El Zarka 2013a; Hellmuth 2006b; Ibrahim et al.
2001; Manfredi and Tosco 2014; Norlin 1989; Rifaat 2005, 2010).
Changing the level of the trendlines or resetting the declining trend-
lines is correlated with parentheses (Rosenhouse 1995). Figure 14.2
shows different patterns of trendlines. The perceptual impression of
the rightmost pattern in panel b, i.e., declining top line and rising
bottom line, equates perceptually with the other obviously rising trend-
lines in panel b, see footnote 7.
Figure 14.2 Intonational trendlines in Arabic
Panel a represents declining trendlines, panel b represents rising trendlines, while panel
c represents level trendlines.
14 The Intonation of Arabic
337

The apparent characteristic of declination or trendlines generally in
Arabic is that they do not consistently correlate with any intonational
function. For example, Rifaat (2010) views declination as only one tool
that acts interchangeably with other intonational tools to denote the
iconic function of ﬁnality vs. continuation. For example, continuation
within an IP or between IPs is indicated by a local H accent, a ﬁnal LH
accent or even by an HL accent – with a raised level or a wide span or both –
and rising trendlines.
14.3
Intonational Functions
The functions of Arabic intonation with respect to grammar, information
and discourse structure, and speaker’s attitude and state are sketchily
accounted for in the previous studies. The lack of extensive studies on
these issues seems justiﬁed given the scarcity of basic studies on the
phonology of Arabic intonation and the well-known theoretical problems
of deﬁning and separating intonational functions (Cruttenden 1970;
Fo´nagy 1989).
14.3.1
Arabic Intonation and Grammar
Statements on the relation between Arabic intonation and grammar, i.e.,
its role as a parser of continuous speech into grammatical units or as
a differentiator between different types of sentences, reveal the indepen-
dence of intonation from grammar, i.e., syntax (Ahmad 1987; El Zarka
2013a). Ahmad (1987) reports statistical correspondence between tone
groups, IP in the AM model, and some grammatical structures, mostly
simple sentences (48.73 per cent). However, this relation is non-
monotonic, i.e., it has many exceptions, similar to the well-attested uni-
versal tendency of the relation between intonation and grammar (Kohler
2013). This non-monotonic relation is expressed in El Zarka’s words as:
With Bolinger (1986, et passim) I assume that syntactic and other linguis-
tic functions of prosody cannot be captured by arbitrary phonological
rules. Prosodic phenomena such as phrasing, accentuation or melody in
most cases only help encoding such functions, frequently obeying the
prosodic processes at work . . . Hence, I do not believe that prosodic
domains or entities are deﬁned in terms of syntactic or semantic cate-
gories, as has frequently been assumed in generative accounts of intona-
tion.
(2013a: 31)
Although an association of syntactic structure types with the direction
of the trendlines (see Section 14.2.4 on declination and trendlines), or with
accent type, level, or span (see Section 14.2.2 on intonational phrasing and
constituents) are noted in several studies, it is still a non-monotonic
3 3 8
K H A L E D R I F A A T

relation subject to high variation and seems to be initially set up by pure
intonational functions of a rather iconic nature.
14.3.2
Arabic Intonation and Information Structure
Most statements about intonation as an indicator of information structure
are broad descriptions of intonational focus and information status, i.e.,
givenness and newness (Alzaidi 2014; Chahal 2001, 2003; Hellmuth 2006a,
2006b, 2009, 2011a; Nagwa 2010; Norlin 1989; Yeou 2004).
Generally, focus correlates with intonation in causing an increase to the
span of the accent. However, intonation is not the exclusive correlate of
focus in Arabic. In addition to syntactic correlates, intensity and duration
are also correlates of focus (Chahal 2001, 2003; Rifaat 2005). Pre- and post-
focal accents are inconsistently compressed. This compression is described
as gradient. However, Rifaat (2005) notes some totally levelled, i.e., L*, pre-
and post-focal accents. In addition to accent span or level, peak alignment
is also described as a correlate of focus. Yeou et al. (2007) depict dialectal
differences with respect to peak alignment and vowel lengthening asso-
ciated with contrastive stress in three Arabic dialects, Kuwaiti, Yemeni,
and Moroccan, with Moroccan being the most distinct.
El Zarka (2013b) differentiates between pragmatic relations and prag-
matic properties. The former designates topic and rhematic focus while
the latter designates focus of interest. Pragmatic relations correlate with
speciﬁc tonal conﬁgurations while pragmatic properties correlate with the
span of the accent.
A distinction between narrow and broad focus, i.e., focus on one PWd or
several PWds, is recognized in several studies (Alzaidi 2014; Cangemi et al.
2016; Chahal 2003; Chahal and Hellmuth 2014; Hellmuth 2005, 2010). The
difference between the two types of focus is insigniﬁcant to Alzaidi (2014),
unclearly concluded in (Chahal and Hellmuth 2014; Hellmuth 2004, 2010),
and signiﬁcant to (Cangemi et al. 2016; Chahal 2003). For those who found
a signiﬁcant difference, narrow focus is more projected, i.e., greater in
span, than broad focus, in addition to having higher values of intensity and
duration. However, this difference should be understood in the context of
pre- and post- focal deaccentuation. As pre- and post-focal deaccentuation
is a frequent process, the projection of the focused accent seems greater
than in the broad focus. Broadly focused IPs or iPs are characterized by
a wide span of every accent, i.e., successive H accents. The spread of focus
may eliminate or at least lessen the effect of pre- and post-focal deaccen-
tuation. In addition to the signiﬁcant difference in span, Cangemi et al.
(2016) delineate a difference between narrow and broad focus with respect
to alignment of high and low points with the stressed syllable. Broad focus
delays the alignment of both high and low points.
As for information status, new vs. given information is found not to
correlate with any intonational correlate (Hellmuth 2005, 2009).
14 The Intonation of Arabic
339

Conclusively, focus has a quantitative and a gradient effect rather than
a qualitative one on intonation. It primarily increases the span of the
accent but not its type, except for El Zarka’s (2013b) assumption.
A positive effect of focus on peak alignment is reported but requires
more studies in more rigid experimental settings to validate it. Still,
change of peak alignment due to focus does not result in a change in
accent type. There are no intonational indicators of information status in
Arabic.
14.3.3
Arabic Intonation and Speaker’s Attitude and State
I know of only one study on Arabic that investigated the correlation
between intonation and emotions. Al-Watban (1998) investigated the into-
national correlates of anger, fear, happiness, sadness, and neutral in
Arabic and English. In this study, ‘intonation’ is used with a rather differ-
ent meaning from what is currently standard in the ﬁeld to additionally
cover intensity and duration. This study investigated only the global level
of the utterance. The conclusion was that anger and happiness in both
languages show higher levels of pitch while sadness and fear show low
levels compared with the neutral state.
14.4
Hypotheses
Arabic intonation is textual.8 Textual intonation resembles reading
aloud a punctuated text with little intonational variation with respect
to grammatical, informational, and discourse structures. As such,
Arabic intonation is conﬁned to the basic intonational function, that
is, to indicate ﬁnality vs. continuation. In this type of system, each
word has a peak, in Hellmuth’s (2006b: 11) terms ‘accent on every
word’, and variation in level and span is gradient rather than discrete.
In this accentually dense system, the meaning of accentuation should
be conﬁned not only to accents with peaks, i.e., H, but also to low
tone accents, i.e., L* accents. Given the high prosodic load given to
every PWd in Arabic, this analysis seems more adequate both theore-
tically and perceptually. Furthermore, a system of this type is full of
redundancies with respect to accent type and distribution. Textuality,
in this sense, may be proposed as a typological parameter of prosodic
systems.
The Arabic intonational system is composed of two parameters:
grammatical and iconic. The iconic parameter is dominant. The iconic
8 Textual intonation is used here with a different meaning from that used in several studies (for a review, see Hirst and Di
Cristo 1998: 145). In its original meaning, textual intonation refers to the intonational characteristics of long stretches of
text.
3 4 0
K H A L E D R I F A A T

parameter correlates with the basic intonational function, to indicate
ﬁnality vs. continuation, and represents it with different features. For
example, continuation is freely represented by a rising accent,
a rising level or span, a rising trendline, or an H accent, which does
not usually occur at ﬁnal boundaries. Finality is indicated freely by
a falling accent, a lowered accent (in level or span), and a declining
trendline. Furthermore, I see the consistent association of peaked
accents, i.e., H accents, with stressed syllables as one of the manifes-
tations of iconicity. It is natural enough to place pitch peaks on the
prominent parts of the utterance, and departure from this principle
shows an inclination towards the grammatical parameter of intona-
tion. In fulﬁlling basic intonation functions, the iconic parameter
sometimes
causes
the
breaking
of
intonational
domains.
Rifaat
(2010) reports the occurrence of what he calls the multi-accent
domain, i.e., a PWd with several accents (Figure 14.6). This case
occurs at the boundary to indicate continuation (Figure 14.6c) or in
highly focused speech (Figure 14.6a, 14.6b).9 The grammatical para-
meter manifests in accent types, their alignment with text, and their
distribution.
Description of the system of Arabic intonation should reveal its nature
as a simple and basically iconic one. This is achieved by several modiﬁca-
tions to the current AM descriptions.
First, the concepts of unit and domain, as the smallest constituents
of intonation, should be combined in one. Considering the PWd as the
smallest constituent of Arabic intonation, the accent is represented as
the tonal conﬁguration associated with it. This is different from separ-
ating the two concepts into the syllable as the smallest unit of intona-
tion and the PWd as the smallest domain, which would result in
inadequate and misleading details. For example, the representation
of non-boundary accents as LH*, based on considering the syllable as
the domain of accent, is misleading since it equates with the ﬁnal LH*,
which is perceptually very different. The two are differentiated by the
ﬁnal boundary tone H%, with the former represented as LH* and the
latter as LH*H%. This necessitates the inclusion of a redundant bound-
ary tone in Arabic intonation when the ﬁnal stressed syllable is fol-
lowed by unstressed syllable(s) or the assumption of an abstract H%
when it is ﬁnal. The assumption of an abstract H% is one of the
problems of current AM models since it confuses deep and surface
representations. Adopting the PWd as both the smallest unit and
domain of Arabic intonation can account for the reported variability
of peak alignment with stressed syllable, which is correlated with
9 I have found a multi-accent domain in a speech corpus collected for future work in which a highly focused PWd contains
a peak on every syllable: double and triple accents (Figure 14.6). El Zarka (2013c) mentions the same phenomenon
and calls it focus by double accentuation.
14 The Intonation of Arabic
341

dialectal variation, speech style (careful vs. spontaneous), and speaker-
speciﬁc features of narrow focus (El Zarka 2011; Yeou et al. 2007;
Cangemi el al. 2016).
Second, an adequate intonational system for Arabic should contain
the dichotomy of representation: underlying and surface. The predict-
able features of Arabic intonation should not be represented in the
underlying structure, e.g., boundary tones, ﬂoating tones, and phrase
accents. Downstepped tones should also not be underlyingly repre-
sented since declination is a global rather than a local feature trig-
gered by context. Differentiation between the non-boundary accent
LH* and the ﬁnal one is adequately achieved by the assumption of
an underlying representation, together with the PWd as the smallest
unit and domain. Accordingly, the non-boundary LH* is represented as
H*, thereby viewing it as a trajectory of a simple projectile that is
assumed to be the neutral underlying accent, leaving out the starting
and
ending
low
points,
i.e.,
[LHL]
→
/H/.
Preferring
the
H representation over the LH one is perhaps best evidenced by the
‘accent preservation’ process that is detailed later in this section.
Third, the accent is better viewed as the tonal conﬁguration of the
PWd. This conﬁguration is deﬁned constantly and is not affected by
a change in level or span. For example, a raised L accent, i.e., level, is
considered an L even if its actual value is higher than an H accent. An
accented PWd is not necessarily associated with an H, i.e., a peak, but
may be associated with an L. In an accentually dense system like
Arabic where every PWd has a peak, an L accent is perhaps percep-
tually more prominent than an H.
This analysis empties the concept of the atomistic tone composition
of accents, H and L, in the original AM model of its power as a simple
and partly abstract descriptive tool of intonation and makes the tonal
conﬁguration closer to the British model. However, it remedies the
problem of the vagueness of the H and L which gives different repre-
sentations of an IP.
According to the previous assumptions, the grammar of Arabic intona-
tion is underlyingly represented as:10
ðHÞn
ðHÞn
HL
LH
H
8
<
:
9
=
; 
0
@
1
A
n
L
LH
HL
8
<
:
9
=
;%
Where n denotes number of accents, () denotes optionality, {} denotes
alternation, – denotes iP boundary, and % denotes IP boundary.
Explicitly, the previous notational statement says that the IP is optionally
composed of any number of H accents and intermediate phrases. The
10 In addition, of course, to my previous analyses of EA intonation and my interpretation of other analyses.
3 4 2
K H A L E D R I F A A T

intermediate phrase consists of any number of optional H accents and ends
with HL or LH or H, ordered from least to most frequent.11 Final accents are
alternatively L, LH, and HL, ordered from least to most frequent.
Redundancy rules that predict many of the intonational features are the
following:
1. Initial boundary tone is always L.
2. H is always aligned with the stressed syllable.
3. Boundary tones are predictable from the preceding accents.12
The previous redundancy rules can be written in formal notation as:
1. /T/ →[−H] / %______
2. /+H/ →[+H*]
3. /T/ →[βH] / [(±H) βH___
%



where /±H/ manifests as H or L, T stands for tone, β is a feature-coefﬁcient
variable that denotes tone assimilation.
The previous system produces intonational phrases of different types as in
Figure 14.3.13 The actual surface representations are governed by the inter-
actions of the syllabic structure of the PWd, variations in accent level and
span, and sequences of accent types. Because intonation is autonomous from
the text, the realization of the basic tonal conﬁgurations may be fulﬁlled
completely on the whole PWd or may extend to the transition to the follow-
ing accent to give the same perceptual impression. This is especially evident
with respect to the H accent (Figure 14.1a). In this type of accent, the rise-fall
pattern is realized completely over a PWd, while it may be realized as only
a rising accent without even a turning point on a PWd. In the latter case, the
falling part is taken over by the following PWd (Figure 14.4). To borrow the
term from tone analysis, this process by which stability is maintained can be
called ‘accent preservation’. Additionally, a change to the levels and spans of
a sequence of accents has an inﬂuence on the actual conﬁguration of the
phrase. However, details of the dynamic relation between accents and sylla-
bic structures and the interactive effects of changes in levels and spans
between neighbouring accents require more investigation. Figure 14.5
shows an example of the effect of change in the level of an accent on the
conﬁguration of a previous accent, while Figure 14.6 represents cases where
fully ﬂedged H accents were realized on every syllable in a highly focused
PWd in EA.
11 Statements about the frequency of occurrence of accents are not based on any statistical analyses but rather on my
observational impressions of EA corpora.
12 Boundary tones here include both IP and iP boundaries. The place of the phrase accent in intonational phonology is
controversial and many consider it unnecessary (Grice el al. 2000).
13 The intonational phrases in Figure 14.3 are based on my observations of EA intonation. The surface representations of
intonation do not substantially differ from those reported in other studies. However, some doubtful accent types and
declination trendlines are excluded.
14 The Intonation of Arabic
343

a
b
PWd 1
PWd 1
PWd 2
PWd 2
Figure 14.4 Variation in PWd tonal conﬁguration
The ﬁgure shows variation in the tonal conﬁguration of the PWd vs. the invariance of tonal
phrase conﬁguration. Panel a represents two PWds with fully ﬂedged H accents. Panel
b shows two PWds, of which the ﬁrst has only the rising part of the H accent while the falling
part is exhausted in the following accent.
Figure 14.3 Arabic intonational phrases
Panel a represents mono-accent phrases. Panel b represents simple multi-accent IPs, while
Panel c represents iPs. Standard notation of AM model is used: (%) indicates IP boundary,
while (–) represents iP boundary. Multiple periods denote potential multiplicity of accents
and curly brackets denote alternation.
3 4 4
K H A L E D R I F A A T

14.5
Conclusions
Statements on Arabic intonation remain solid as far as general features are
concerned. Arabic intonation can be positively described as an accentually
dense system. It is also characterized by little variation of accent types and
distribution. The structural and functional simplicity of Arabic intonation
is a corollary of the previous characteristics and can be encapsulated in the
feature of textuality. I have proposed textuality as a typological parameter
of prosodic systems that Arabic extensively utilizes.
Statements on types of accents and their distribution require investiga-
tion of larger corpora of different discourse types. For example, H*L is
reported to occur only ﬁnally (Rifaat 2005), but investigation of a larger
corpus spotted this accent at an iP boundary (Rifaat 2010). Adoption of
similar frameworks of analysis is especially necessary to typify accent
types and prosodic units as well as concepts and terms. Many discrepancies
exist at different levels of analysis which constrain reliable details of
Arabic intonation. The phonetic details of Arabic intonation are under-
Figure 14.5 The effect of changing accent level on a previous accent
Panel a represents a stylized typical sequence of two accents declining in level and span. The
dependent accent is delimited in a square of which the width is the limits of a PWd. Panel
b shows an increase in the level of the second accent, while Panel c shows a decrease in the
level of the second accent.
14 The Intonation of Arabic
345

Figure 14.6 Multi-accent PWds in EA and the accent-preservation process
Pitch traces are superimposed on waveforms. In Panel a, two double-accent PWds are
delimited with rectangles. The ﬁrst, /ʾjiwʕum/ ‘They take care’, bears fully ﬂedged H accents,
while the second, /lilʾtari:Ɂ/ ‘for the path’ (t denotes emphatic t), bears two H accents with
incomplete conﬁgurations on the vowels. Interpolating the two incomplete accents would
clearly show the accent-preservation process. In Panel b, rectangles delimit two PWds that
represent /sallimʾna:hum/ repeated. The ﬁrst is highly focused with three H accents, while
the second normally bears one accent. In Panel c, the delimited PWd /ʾdʒidan/ ‘very’ (/dʒ/ is
colloquial here as the subject represents one of the delta dialects that contains this
phoneme), has an H and an LH. The ﬁrst H is normally associated with the stressed syllable
while the second LH denotes continuation.
3 4 6
K H A L E D R I F A A T

researched and many of the previous studies suffer from limitations in
their experimental design, such as drawing quantitative conclusions from
very small sets of data or lack of proper preparation, i.e., stylization, of
intonational traces, among others. The basic problem with respect to
speech sampling in experimental intonational studies is perhaps the eli-
citation of spontaneous speech adequate for the aim of the study, e.g.,
study of focus or emotional states. Intonation and prosodic features in
general are sensitive to spontaneity and cannot be tolerated as they are in
the case of segmental experiments.
The adequacy of the analysis of intonation is ultimately bound to the
perceptual domain. This is perhaps more characteristic of intonation than
any other linguistic entity because of its melodic nature. In this respect,
much work has yet to be done on the stylization and analysis-by-synthesis
of Arabic intonation.
References
Abdalla, A. (1960). An Instrumental Study of the Intonation of Egyptian Colloquial
Arabic. Doctoral dissertation, University of Michigan.
Ahmad, K. (1987). Intonation of a Gulf Arabic Dialect: Zubairi. Doctoral disserta-
tion, University of Reading.
Ahmed, Y. A. (1979). A Study of Focus in the Arabic Dialect of Kuwait. Doctoral
dissertation, School of Oriental and African Studies University of
London.
Al Faruqi, L. I. (1978). Accentuation in Qur’a¯nic chant: A study in musical
Tawa¯zun. Yearbook of the International Folk Music Council, 10, 53–68.
Al Ghamdi, A. (2006). Preliminary Analysis of the Intonation of Riyadh
Saudi Arabic. Paper, Rutgers University. http://roa.rutgers.edu/ﬁles/812-
0306/812-AL_GHAMDI-0-0.PDF; last accessed 30 November 2020.
Alharbi, L. M. (1991). Formal Analysis of Intonation: The Case of the Kuwaiti
Dialect of Arabic. Doctoral dissertation, Heriot-Watt University.
Al-Watban, A. (1998). Psychoacoustic Analysis of Intonation as a Carrier of
Emotion in Arabic and English. Dissertation, APA Psychinfo. https://psycnet
.apa.org/record/1998-95023-155; last accessed 30 November 2020.
Alzaidi, M. (2014). Information Structure and Intonation in Hijazi Arabic.
Doctoral dissertation, University of Essex.
Angoujard, J. (1990). Metrical Structure of Arabic. Dordrecht: Foris.
Badawi, M. M. (1965). An Intonational Study of Riyadhi Arabic. Doctoral dis-
sertation, London University.
Benabbou, A., Chenfour, N., and Mouradi, A. (2002). Study and quantiﬁca-
tion of the declination for the Arabic speech synthesis system PARADIS.
In Proceedings of International Conference on Language Resources and
Evaluation, https://pdfs.semanticscholar.org/2990/972dcd999be2f2fb9
d997ee67798f2ff8bc5.pdf; last accesssed 30 November 2020.
14 The Intonation of Arabic
347

Benkirane, T. (1998). Intonation in Western Arabic (Morocco). In D. Hirst
and A. Di Cristo, eds., Intonation Systems: A Survey of Twenty Languages.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 345–59.
Birkeland, H. (1952). Growth and Structure of the Egyptian Arabic Dialect. Oslo:
I Kommisjon hos Jacob Dybwad.
Blodgett, A., Owens, J., and Rockwood, T. (2007). An initial account of the
intonation of Emirati Arabic. In Proceedings of the 16th International
Congress of Phonetic Sciences, Saarland University, Saarbru¨ cken, Germany,
vol. 10, 1137–40.
Bolinger, D. (1985). The inherent iconism of intonation. In J. Haiman, ed.,
Iconicity in Syntax. Amsterdam: John Benjamins, 97–108.
Cangemi, F., El Zarka, D., Wehrle, S., Baumann, S., and Grice, M. (2016).
Speaker-speciﬁc intonational marking of narrow focus in Egyptian
Arabic. In Proceedings of Speech Prosody 2016, 335–39.
Chahal, D. (1999). A preliminary analysis of Lebanese Arabic intonation. In
Proceedings of the Conference of the Australian Linguistic Society, 1–17.
Chahal, D. (2001). Modeling the Intonation of Lebanese Arabic Using the
Autosegmental-Metrical Framework: A Comparison with English. Doctoral dis-
sertation, University of Melbourne.
Chahal, D. (2003). Phonetic cues to prominence levels in Lebanese Arabic.
In Proceedings of the Fifteenth International Congress of Phonetic Sciences,
Barcelona, 2067–70.
Chahal, D. (2006). Intonation. In K. Versteegh, M. Eid, A. Elgibali,
M. Woidich, and A. Zaborski, eds., Encyclopedia of Arabic Language and
Linguistics, vol. 2. The Netherlands: Brill Academic, 395–401.
Chahal, D. and Hellmuth, S. (2014). The intonation of Lebanese and
Egyptian Arabic. In S.-A. Jun, ed., Prosodic Typology, vol. II. Oxford:
Oxford University Press, 365–404.
Connell, B. and Ladd, D. R. (1990). Aspects of pitch realization in Yoruba.
Phonology, 7(1), 1–29.
di Corvetto, I. L. (1982). L’intonazione nell’arabo siriano [The Intonation of
Syrian Arabic]. Lingua E Stile, 17, 371–93.
Cruttenden,
A.
(1970).
On
the
so-called
grammatical
function
of
intonation. Phonetica, 21(3), 182–92.
El Zarka, D. (2011). Leading, linking, and closing tones and tunes in
Egyptian Arabic – what a simple intonation system tells us about
the nature of intonation. Amsterdam Studies in the Theory and History
of Linguistic Science. Series Iv, Current Issues in Linguistic Theory, 317,
57–76.
El Zarka, D. (2013a). On the Interaction of Information Structure and Prosody: the
Case of Egyptian Arabic. Doctoral dissertation, habilitation thesis, Dept. of
Linguistics, Karl-Franzens-Universita¨t Graz.
El Zarka, D. (2013b). Pragmatic functions and the biological codes:
Evidence from the prosody of sentence topic. In S. Hancil and D. Hirst,
eds., Prosody and Iconicity. Amsterdam: John Benjamins, 109–26.
3 4 8
K H A L E D R I F A A T

El Zarka, D. (2013c). The myth of nuclei and focus exponents. A paper
presented at the Workshop on Information Structure in Spoken Language
Corpora (ISSLaC), Universta¨t Bielefeld. www.uni-bielefeld.de/lili/tagung/
ISSLaC/ﬁles/ElZarka_ISSLaC_pres.pdf; last accessed 18 October 2017.
El Zarka, D. and Hellmuth, S. (2009). Variation in the intonation of
Egyptian Formal and Colloquial Arabic. Langues et Linguistique, 22,
73–92.
El-Dalee, M. (1999). Fundamental problems of Intonation in Arabic (in
Arabic). Arab Journal for the Humanities, 67, 9–32.
El-Imam, Y. A. (2008). Synthesis of the intonation of neutrally spoken
Modern Standard Arabic speech. Signal Processing, 88(9), 2206–21.
El-Isa, S. (1982). A Study of Dynamic Features in Irta:hi Spoken Arabic with
Particular Reference to Stress, Rhythm and Intonation. Doctoral dissertation,
University of Glasgow.
Fo´nagy, I. (1989). On status and functions of intonation. Acta Linguistica
Hungarica, 39(1–4), 53–92.
Ghazali, S., Hamidi, R., and Knis, K. (2007). Intonation and rhythmic pat-
terns across the Arabic dialects continuum. In E. Benmamoun, ed., PAL:
Papers from the Annual Symposium on Arabic Linguistics, vol. XIX. Amsterdam:
John Benjamins, 97–122.
Golston, C. and Riad, T. (1997). The phonology of Classical Arabic meter.
Linguistics, 35(1), 111–32.
Grice, M., Ladd, D. R., and Arvaniti, A. (2000). On the place of phrase accents
in intonational phonology. Phonology, 17(2), 143–85.
Gussenhoven, C. (2002). Intonation and interpretation: Phonetics and pho-
nology. In Proceedings of Speech Prosody 2002, Aix-en-Provence, 47–57.
Gussenhoven, C. (2006). Between stress and tone in Nubi word prosody.
Phonology, 23(02), 192–223.
Hellmuth, S. (2004). Prosodic weight and phonological phrasing in Cairene
Arabic. In Proceedings from the Annual Meeting of the Chicago Linguistic Society,
vol. 40, No. 1. Chicago, IL: Chicago Linguistic Society, 97–111.
Hellmuth, S. (2005). No de-accenting in (or of) phrases: Evidence from
Arabic for cross-linguistic and cross-dialectal prosodic variation. In
S. Frota, M. Vigario, and M. J. Freitas, eds., Prosodies (with special reference
to Iberian languages). Berlin: Mouton de Gruyter, 99–121.
Hellmuth, S. (2006a). Focus-related pitch range manipulation (and peak
alignment effects) in Egyptian Arabic. In Proceedings of Speech Prosody 2006,
Dresden, Germany, PS4-12–164.
Hellmuth, S. (2006b). Intonational Pitch Accent Distribution in Egyptian Arabic.
Doctoral dissertation, School of Oriental and African Studies University
of London.
Hellmuth, S. (2007a). The foot as the domain of tonal alignment of
intonational pitch accents. In Proceedings of the XVIth International
Conference
on
Phonetic
Sciences,
August
6–10,
2007,
Saarbru¨ cken,
Germany, 969–72.
14 The Intonation of Arabic
349

Hellmuth, S. (2007b). The relationship between prosodic structure and
pitch accent distribution: evidence from Egyptian Arabic. The Linguistic
Review, 24, 291–316.
Hellmuth, S. (2009). The (absence of) prosodic reﬂexes of given /new infor-
mation status in Egyptian Arabic. In J. Owens and A. Elgibali, eds.,
Information Structure in Spoken Arabic. Oxford: Routledge, 165–88.
Hellmuth, S. (2010). Functional complementarity is only skin deep:
Evidence from Egyptian Arabic for the autonomy of syntax and phonol-
ogy in the expression of focus. In N. Erteschik-Shir and L. Rochman, eds.,
The Sound Patterns of Syntax. Cambridge, MA: Oxford University Press,
247–70.
Hellmuth, S. (2011a). Acoustic cues to focus and givenness in Egyptian
Arabic. In Z. M. Hassan and B. Heselwood, eds., Instrumental Studies in
Arabic Phonetics [CILT319]. Amsterdam: John Benjamins, 301–23.
Hellmuth, S. (2011b). How many levels of phrasing? Empirical ques-
tions and typological implications. In M. B. Washburn, ed., West
Coast Conference on Formal Linguistics. Somerville, MA: Cascadilla
Press, 258–66.
Hellmuth, S. (2011c). Variable cues to phrasing: Finding edges in Egyptian
Arabic. In T. Borowsky, S. Kawahara, and M. Sugahara, eds., Prosody
Matters: Essays in Honor of Lisa Selkirk. London: Equinox Publications,
237–79.
Hellmuth, S. J. (2014). Investigating variation in Arabic intonation. In
S. Farwaneh and H. Ouali, eds., Perspectives on Arabic Linguistics XXIV–
XXV: Papers from the Annual Symposia on Arabic Linguistics. Texas, 2010 and
Arizona, 2011, vol. 1. Amsterdam: John Benjamins, 63–90.
Hellmuth, S. and El Zarka, D. (2007). Variation in phonetic realization or in
phonological
categories?
Intonational
pitch
accents
in
Egyptian
Colloquial Arabic and Egyptian Formal Arabic. In Proceedings of the 16th
International Congress of Phonetic Sciences. Saarbru¨cken, 147–53.
Hirst, D. and Di Cristo, A. (eds.) (1998). Intonation Systems: A Survey of Twenty
Languages. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Ibrahim, O. A. G., El-Ramly, S. H., and Abdel-Kader, N. S. (2001). A model of
F0 contour for Arabic afﬁrmative and interrogative sentences. In
Proceedings of the 18th National Radio Science Conference. Mansoura
University, Egypt, 517–25.
Kalaldeh, R. (2009). Peak alignment in Jordanian Formal and Colloquial
Arabic.
Paper
presented
at
the
Intonation
Variation
in
Arabic
Conference held at the University of York, UK. www-users.york.ac.uk
/~sh581/kalaldeh_talk.pdf; last accessed 30 November 2020.
Kharrat, M. Y. (1994). A Descriptive Analysis of Standard Arabic Intonation with
Implications for Teaching English as a Second Language. Doctoral dissertation,
University of Kansas, Curriculum and Instruction.
Kohler, K. J. (2013). From communicative functions to prosodic forms.
Phonetica, 70(1–2), 24–65.
3 5 0
K H A L E D R I F A A T

Ladd, D. R. (1984). Declination: A review and some hypotheses. Phonology, 1,
53–74.
Ladd, D. R. (2008). Intonational Phonology. Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press.
Lambrecht, K. (1994). Information Structure and Sentence Form: Topic, Focus, and
the Mental Representations of Discourse Referents. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.
Mahaden, R. and Jardat, A. (2011). The pragmatic function of intonation in
Irbid dialect: Acoustic analysis of some speech acts. International Journal of
Humanities and Social Science, 9(1), 243–51.
Mahjani, B. (2003). An Instrumental Study of Prosodic Features and Intonation
in Modern Farsi (Persian). Master’s thesis, University of Edinburgh. www
.timasearch.com/bm/edinburgh/behzad_mahjani.pdf; last accessed 30
November 2020.
Maling, J. M. (1973). The Theory of Classical Arabic Metrics. Doctoral disserta-
tion, Massachusetts Institute of Technology.
Manfredi, S. and Tosco, M. (2014). The morphosyntax and prosody of topic
and focus in Juba Arabic. Journal of Pidgin and Creole Languages, 29(2),
319–51.
Nagwa, I. Y. (2010). The role of intonation in the information structure of
Arabic declarative sentence (in Arabic). https://search.mandumah.com
/Record/664289; last accessed 20 November 2020.
Nakao, S. (2013). The prosody of Juba Arabic: Split prosody, morpho-
phonology and slang. In M. Lafkioui, ed., African Arabic: Approaches to
Dialectology. Berlin: De Gruyter, 95–120.
Nawwaf, M. and Mohamed-Basil, K. (2013). The intonation of negation in
Modern Standard Arabic with reference to English. Journal of Tikrit
University for the Humanities, 20(9), 571–97.
Norlin, K. (1989). A preliminary description of Cairo Arabic intonation of
statements and questions. Speech Transmission Quarterly Progress and Status
Report, 1, 47–9.
Rammuny, R. M. (1989). Instrumental and auditory analysis of colloquial
Jordanian Arabic: An update. Zeitschrift fu¨r Arabische Linguistik, (20),
23–42.
Ramsay, A. and Mansour, H. (2008). Towards including prosody in a text-to-
speech system for modern standard Arabic. Computer Speech and Language,
22(1), 84–103.
Rastegar-El Zarka, D. (1997). Prosodische Phonologie des Arabischen. PhD dis-
sertation, University of Graz.
Rifaat, K. (1991). The Intonation of Arabic: An Experimental Study. Doctoral
dissertation, University of Alexandria.
Rifaat, K. (2005). The structure of Arabic intonation: a preliminary
investigation. In Perspectives on Arabic Linguistics XVII–XVIII: Papers
from the seventeenth and eighteenth annual symposia on Arabic linguistics,
49–67.
14 The Intonation of Arabic
351

Rifaat, K. (2010). Towards a theory of Egyptian Arabic intonation. Paper
presented at the 4th International Symposium on Arabic Linguistics
held at the University of Alexandria, Egypt from 11–12 December.
Rosenhouse, J. (1995). Features of intonation in Bedouin Arabic narratives
of the Galile´e (northern Israel). Dialectologia Arabica, a Collection of Articles in
Honor of Professor Heikki Palva, 75, 193–215.
Sadat-Tehrani, N. (2008). Persian prosodic structure. In Proceedings of the
2008 Annual Conference of the Canadian Linguistic Association, 1–15.
Soraya, H. A. I. (1966). An Intonational Study of Egyptian Colloquial Arabic. PhD
dissertation, University of London.
Watson, J. (2011). Word stress in Arabic. In The Blackwell Companion to
Phonology. Oxford: Wiley-Blackwell, 2990–3019.
Yeou, M. (2004). Effects of focus, position and syllable structure on F0
alignment patterns in Arabic. In B. Bel and I. Marlien, eds., Actes des
XXVes Journe´es d’E´tude sur la Parole, Arabic Language Processing, Fez, 360–74.
Yeou, M., Embarki, M., and Al-Maqtari, S. (2007). Contrastive focus and F0
patterns in three Arabic dialects. Nouveaux cahiers de linguistique Franc¸aise,
28, 317–26.
Zaki, A., Rajouani, A., Luxey, Z., and Najim, M. (2002). Rules based model
for automatic synthesis of F0 variation for declarative Arabic sentences.
In B. Bel and I. Marlien, eds., Proceedings of the First International Conference
on Speech Prosody, Aix-en-Provence, France.
Ziadeh, F. (1986). Prosody and the initial formation of Classical Arabic.
Journal of the American Oriental Society, 106(2), 333–8. doi:10.2307/601598.
3 5 2
K H A L E D R I F A A T

15
Case in Arabic
Karin Christina Ryding
15.1
Introduction and Background
Few topics in Arabic have been as contested as the status and history of
case marking. Whether the case-marking system ever existed in full form
as a component of ordinary discourse or whether it was deliberately
cultivated to be part of a trans-Arab poetic standard in pre-Islamic
times remains an issue of interest and debate in the Arabic grammatical
tradition.1 In terms of its distant history, however, researchers have
found that case in Arabic reﬂects the case system of Proto-Semitic, and
historical linguistic research indicates that a case system ‘predates Proto
Semitic . . . [and] goes back to Archaic Proto Semitic’ (Hasselbach 2013:
14).2 Adding to the complexity of this topic is the considerable gap
between the standard written language (Modern Standard Arabic, MSA)
and contemporary spoken variants of Arabic. Case marking is not used in
Arabic vernacular discourse and must be learned through formal study
as a component of literacy education.3 Moreover, because case inﬂection
is often composed only of a short-vowel sufﬁx, it is usually invisible
in standard Arabic orthography. Thus, even for native speakers of
Arabic, the single-vowel case inﬂections are rarely seen in reading and
rarely heard in everyday language. This lack of reinforcement exerts
a destabilizing inﬂuence over the robustness of the case-marking system
in Arabic. Despite a widespread belief that case endings used during the
1 For example, see Fück (1955), Owens (2006), and Zwettler (1978: Ch. 3). See also Versteegh’s commentary on
Owens (2006) (Versteegh 2010).
2 ‘It can be considered certain that all Semitic languages originally shared a common case system. This shared system
must have consisted of the triptotic system attested in all major branches of Semitic’ (Hasselbach 2013: 88).‘It is this
triptote system, as fully preserved in Akkadian and Classical Arabic, that typiﬁes Semitic declension’ (Goldenberg 2012:
142). And ‘Operative both in Akkadian and in Classical Arabic, the ternary case-marking system can be established as
inherited from Common Semitic’ (Goldenberg 2012: 143). On the evolution of case-marking vowels in Semitic, see
Moscati (1958). On case and Proto-Arabic, see Owens (2006), especially Chapter 3.
3 ‘In fact, no modern colloquial Semitic language preserves inﬂectional case’ (Hasselbach 2013: 332).

classical period have been eroded and subsequently lost in the vernacu-
lars, Owens argues that a non-case-marked variety is of long standing: ‘A
good argument can be made for there having been two varieties of proto-
Arabic, one with short case vowels, one without. It is suggested that the
variety without is older’ (Owens 2006: 31). Thus Owens sees a binary
evolution that progressed along parallel paths, rather than a split that
eventually separated everyday discourse from the written standard.
Whatever the origin of the case/caseless difference, it has remained to
this day.
Arabic case marking is a topic of considerable interest to linguists,
psycholinguists, sociolinguists, and language specialists because ﬁrst, it
alone preserves the old triptotic case system of Semitic, and second,
although case persists in modern literary or standard Arabic, it is neither
salient nor semantically distinctive. In order to read and understand mod-
ern written Arabic it is not necessary to be able to inﬂect correctly every
noun or noun phrase for its case. Case therefore has largely lost the
semantic load that it might once have had; word order has stabilized so
that most sentences are comprehensible without nouns or noun phrases
being overtly marked for case. Case marking has become largely
redundant.
The Arabic case-marking system consists of three cases generally
labelled nominative, accusative, and genitive in English and raf‘, nas˙b,
and jarr (or khafd˙) in Arabic, respectively. Additionally, a vocative sufﬁx is
used to mark nouns that denote addressees, but it is not generally included
in Arabic paradigmatic schemata as a separate case (see Section 15.5.1.1).
A vestigial locative case can also be noted on some adverbial expressions
but is not paradigmatic (see Section 15.5.1.2).
15.2
Contemporary Case Theory and Grammatical
Relations
Many theories of case have emerged over the past forty years or so,
especially since the work of Charles Fillmore (1968, 1977) opened up
speculation on the nature of case relations and semantic functions.
Fillmore introduced the idea of thematic roles, identifying semantic rela-
tions within a sentence according to function by using labels such as
Agent, Object, and Beneﬁciary. This has been helpful for analysing surface
case forms, and in discussing case it has now become standard to distin-
guish semantic or thematic roles from syntactic relations, that is, to dis-
tinguish, for example an ‘Agent’ noun (doer of an action) from a subject of
a verbal sentence. Although these two roles often overlap (the subject of
the sentence is typically the doer of an action), sometimes they do not. For
example, in the passive construction, the doer of the action is either
omitted or is mentioned as the object of a preposition or prepositional
3 5 4
K A R I N C H R I S T I N A R Y D I N G

phrase (typically ‘by’ in English, or min ja¯nib in Arabic). The subject of
a passive sentence is in the nominative case, but is the thematic Object.4
15.2.1
Arabic Verb Valency
Case roles are also recognized by valency theorists, who see the verb as the
central component of a clause and calculate the number of ‘actants’
involved with the predication as part of the semantic identity of the verb.5
The number of actants that a verb takes . . . is stated as the verb’s
valency . . . The ﬁrst actant is generally the subject, the second the object,
and the third the indirect object. In inﬂected languages . . . the association
is with Nominative, Accusative and Dative [caps in original]. Furthermore
each of the actants has its own typical semantic function: the ﬁrst actant is
the one which performs the action, the second undergoes the action, and
the third is the one to whose beneﬁt or detriment the action takes place.
(Somers 1987: 5–6)
Arabic is particularly illustrative in this regard because it exhibits deriva-
tional morphology that systematically alters the valency of verbs, creating
causative, reﬂexive, associative, reciprocal, resultative, passive, estimative,
and other modiﬁcations of the root meaning which involve different num-
bers of actants or arguments in differing case roles. In fact, the semantic
modiﬁcations used in Arabic verb derivation are so explicit that verb deriva-
tional morphology is considered by some to be not only evidence of Arabic’s
distinctive symmetrical structure and organization, but even evidence of its
‘superiority’, which Ferguson notes (in his 1970 article, ‘Myths about
Arabic’) is thought to be characterized by ‘its grammatical symmetry and
“logical” structure . . . especially in the derived forms of the verb with the
semantic ramiﬁcations of their formal differences’ (Ferguson 1970: 377).6
15.2.2
The Lexicalist Hypothesis
A key point in discussions of morphological theory has been what is called
‘The Lexicalist Hypothesis’ (starting with Chomsky 1970). It is deﬁned by
Anderson as follows:
4 These semantic distinctions and their relationship to morphological marking have led to a substantive body of work. In
particular, theories of lexical decomposition and lexical semantics can be used to clarify the intersection of root
meanings and derivational morphology (e.g., see Rappaport-Hovav and Levin 1998; Sadler and Spencer 1998; Lieber
2004; Butt 2006: 91–152). The concept of semantic relations penetrated into generative syntactic theory and is
incorporated in the concept of ‘theta’ (thematic) roles. For lexical semantics and Arabic, see Glanville (2018).
5 Valency is also referred to as ‘predicate calculus’, where ‘arguments’ related to a particular predicate map onto the case
relations of a clause or sentence. Butt notes that ‘most theories of case today assume that predicates (verbs, nouns,
prepositions, and also adjectives) come with some kind of underlying speciﬁcation as to their argument structure, that is,
a speciﬁcation as to the number and semantic type of participant roles involved’ (Butt 2009: 33). For a succinct analysis
of valency in Arabic, see Maalej (2009).
6 For recent works in English on Arabic verb derivational morphology and its semantic implications see Danks (2011) and
Glanville (2018).
15 Case in Arabic
355

The syntax neither manipulates nor has access to the internal form of
words.
(Anderson 1992: 84)
That is, rules of grammar cannot reach inside of words; they can only apply
to the structure and organization of a clause or sentence. While this is true
to a great extent for English, it is evident that in an inﬂecting language
(such as Latin or Standard Arabic) where case endings are applied to words
in compliance with grammatical rules of governance, then the word is
indeed affected by the syntax. This ‘interface through which morphology
and syntax interact’ (Anderson 1992: 3) is a central issue in Arabic gram-
mar and foundational to indigenous Arabic grammatical theory as early as
the eighth century CE. The study of Arabic case marking (iʿra¯b) in Arabic
grammatical theory is traditionally considered an aspect of syntax (nah˙ w)
rather than an aspect of morphology (s˙arf).
Contemporary discussions of the Lexicalist Hypothesis usually deal with
compound words and stem morphology, especially as concerns verbal nouns
and gerunds. In his deﬁnition, Anderson refers to the ‘internal form of words’,
which I take to mean ‘excluding inﬂectional sufﬁxes’. In other words, what is
unaffected by syntax is not the entire word, but the word stem. The stem
consists of a bare lexical item or lexeme devoid of markings determined by
syntactic governance. In conformation with a ‘relaxed’ (or ‘weaker’) version of
the Lexicalist Hypothesis, case is the part of an Arabic word which is affected
by the rules of grammatical relations, or syntax.7 As Anderson goes on to say,
‘inﬂectional morphology is the area in which principles of syntactic structure
and of word formation interact with one another, and a theory of inﬂection is
in some sense a theory of the ways in which the maximally strong form of the
Lexicalist Hypothesis must be relaxed’ (1992: 101).
Thus, the base nominal consists of a stem onto which a case marker is
sufﬁxed, determined by the role of the word in context. The nature of the
base word (semantic, morphological, or phonological) determines its
inﬂectional class, or the paradigm it belongs to, and the paradigm deter-
mines the phonological form of the case marker. Noun case paradigms are
traditionally referred to as declensions.
15.2.3
Case as a Complex Notion
Despite a general interest in case roles, case semantics, and syntactic govern-
ance, the essential nature of case remains complex.8 ‘We do not have a well-
7 ‘The weak lexicalist position is that derivation is morphological, but inﬂection is syntactic’ (Gisborne 2015: 198). Stated
another way, ‘inﬂection, unlike word-formation, is syntactically determined’ (Stump 2005: 55 ff). And also ‘some
interaction between morphology and syntax must be allowed’ (Scalise and Guevara 2005: 179). For more on the
‘weaker’ or ‘relaxed’ version of the Lexicalist Hypothesis, see Anderson (1992: 84; 101).
8 Key publications on the nature of case include Anderson (2006), Butt (2006), Blake (1994), Baker (2015), and The
Oxford Handbook of Case, eds. Malchukov and Spencer (2009a). Little has been published in English about how
contemporary theories of case apply to Arabic morphology and syntax. However, see Abdul-Raof (2006) and
LeTourneau (2006) for concise discussion of case roles and case theory in Arabic. Rebecca Hasselbach’s Case in
Semitic (2013) is an in-depth study of case in Semitic languages.
3 5 6
K A R I N C H R I S T I N A R Y D I N G

deﬁned understanding of the notion of case’ remarks a leading scholar (Butt
2006: 3).9 And ‘the question of exactly what is the function of case marking
has been subject to a considerable amount of debate’ (Naess 2006: 309).
Moreover, there is little agreement on the terminology for discussing case.
As another researcher notes, ‘It is unlikely that terminological consensus will
emerge soon, primarily because there is no consensus about the concepts
that we need, and terminological polysemy will continue to be rampant
because there are many more concepts than handy terms’ (Haspelmath
2009: 505). In yet another approach, Mark Baker examines the goals of case
theory from a formal-generative perspective and whether researchers should
focus on the ‘disparate-seeming uses’ of each case, or a ‘uniﬁed account’ of
‘each of the structural cases’ (2015: 10–11). He favours the latter.
Arabic is considered to have what Lieber refers to as a ‘nominative/
accusative’ case system. ‘In this sort of case system, subjects of verbs are
nominative, whether the verbs are transitive . . . or intransitive’ (Lieber
2010: 93). Compared with languages such as Latin, Russian, or Finnish,
Arabic has a limited number of cases and this means that each case func-
tion extends to cover a range of abstract grammatical relations. As
Hjelmslev notes in his discussion of the Greek case inventory, ‘Each case
must cover a rather extensive range of the signiﬁcation carried by the case
category.’10 For Arabic, this applies particularly to the accusative case,
which is used to mark most types of adverbials as well as speciﬁc syntacti-
cally governed items (e.g., noun phrases that are objects of transitive verbs,
or subjects of subordinate clauses after ʾinna [‘that’] and her ‘sisters’.11
15.2.4
Case Hierarchy
In languages that use case systems, the number of cases can vary. According
to a widely accepted statement by Blake (1994: 157), case systems ‘tend to be
built up in a particular order, i.e., a hierarchy emerges’. In an earlier publica-
tion, Charles Fillmore also noted that ‘something like a Saliency Hierarchy
determines what gets foregrounded and something like a Case Hierarchy
determines how the foregrounded nominals are assigned grammatical func-
tions’ (Fillmore 1977: 80). Blake’s hierarchy is expressed as follows:
Nominative/Accusative/Ergative/Genitive/Dative/Locative/Ablative/Instrumental
That is, the cases at the left end of the spectrum tend to be most common,
and those at the right end the least frequent. ‘This is an implicational
hierarchy: the presence of a case to the right entails availability of case(s)
9 Furthermore, according to Butt (2009: 27), ‘Very few modern approaches to case are currently able to present
a coherent analysis of the wide and varied spectrum of functions associated with case.’
10 ‘C’est dire que chacun des cas doit recouvrir une étendue assez grand de l’espace de signiﬁcation dévolue à la
catégorie casuelle’ (Hjelmslev 1972: 2).
11 The Arabic grammatical term ‘sisters’ (akhawaˉt) is used to refer to lexical items that exercise governance of the same
case. It is usually applied to particles and verbs that govern the accusative.
15 Case in Arabic
357

to the left’ (Malchukov and Spencer 2009b: 652). Arabic seems to exemplify
this arrangement, having nominative, accusative, and genitive cases but
little or no evidence of the rest of the spectrum. As Blake explains, ‘In
a three-case system there is usually a nominative, an accusative and
a genitive/oblique. The Semitic languages have systems like this.
Classical Arabic provides an example, though there is accusative-genitive
syncretism in the plural’ (Blake 1994: 158).12
15.3
Arabic Case Morphology
Although Arabic is well known for its templatic (or root/pattern) derivational
systems of word-formation, inﬂectional morphology is largely accomplished
through afﬁxation, or desinential inﬂection.13 Desinential inﬂection is so
called because of the fact that it occurs at the end of words (desinence =
termination, sufﬁx) and reﬂects the status or role of a word in a syntactic
context.‘Theserolesareaffectedbygoverningwords,or‘operators’–ʿawa¯mil–
which can be in the form of particular lexical items (such as ʾan + subjunctive
or lam + jussive) or through application of abstract rules (such as “The subject
of a sentence is in the nominative case”)’ (Ryding 2014: 97). Both nouns and
verbs are affected by rules of government; traditional Arabic grammar makes
no distinction between form-class membership and rules that apply through
governance. Thus case and mood markers fall into a single category, iʿra¯b, or
inﬂected sufﬁxes, and the Arabic grammatical tradition designates two of the
mood markers on verbs with the same terms as the case markers (rafʾ‘
‘nominative/indicative’ and nas˙b ‘accusative/subjunctive’). This is an area
where Arabic has furnished a syncretic category of desinence that covers
both noun-marking and verb-marking.14 For example:
al-kita¯b-u (nominative, deﬁnite)
‘the book’
ya-ktub-u (imperfect, indicative)
‘he writes’
al-kita¯b-a (accusative, deﬁnite)
‘the book’
ya-ktub-a (imperfect, subjunctive)
‘(that) he write’
Other forms of nominal inﬂection (for deﬁniteness, for the dual, and for
the sound plurals) are also primarily shown through afﬁxes.15 As noted
12 Although this observation is largely valid, the ﬁnal statement needs clariﬁcation because it is not true of all Arabic
plurals; see section 15.5.2.1.
13 Templatic morphology is used for inﬂectional purposes in certain instances: for example, in the ‘broken’ or internal
plural of nouns, adjectives, and (some) participles (e.g., kitaˉb-kutub ‘book/books’; kabıˉr/kibaˉr ‘large (sing./pl.)’; qaˉʾid/
quwwaˉd ‘leader/leaders’).
14 See Ryding (2014: 97). Moreover, both case and mood are realized by almost identical formatives, that is,
combinations of vowels plus nuˉn: ﬁnal -u, -a, -uˉ, -ıˉ, -aˉni, -ıˉna, and -uˉna. The short /-i/ sound, kasra, is only used as an
inﬂectional vowel on substantives, whereas the zero-ending, the jussive, is used only on verbs. The formative
inventories for case and mood balance but also overlap. See also Ryding (1993).
15 Sufﬁx inﬂection is not solely used for marking case. For example, it is used in the conjugation of the past-tense verb
(e.g., daras-tu ‘I studied’, daras-ti ‘you (f.) studied’). It is also used in gender-marking for feminine adjectives and
3 5 8
K A R I N C H R I S T I N A R Y D I N G

above, contextual desinence is determined through ʿamal, the concept of
governance.16 Further case-inﬂection morphology is determined by rules
for agreement, or mut˙a¯baqa, which require case concord between noun
heads and their modiﬁers.17 Case inﬂection reﬂects the interface between
morphology and syntax, between word stems (or lexemes) and the role
they play in a sentence. The word stems themselves are lexemes theoreti-
cally located in the lexicon; case inﬂection is sufﬁxed to the noun stem and
its form is determined by two factors: the noun’s membership in a speciﬁc
paradigm or inﬂectional class (the form that the case will take) and the
rules of syntactic governance (which determine the case itself).18
In traditional Arabic grammar, the case endings are considered
zawa¯ʾid, afﬁxes that are not a part of the noun stem, and it is clear
that they are determined by rules of syntactic relations. Classical
Arabic grammarian Sı¯bawayhi (d. c. 796 CE) states explicitly that case-
marking vowels are to be distinguished from non-inﬂectional ﬁxed
short-vowel
sufﬁxes
(such
as
sawf-a
[future
marker]
and
thumm-
a ‘then’) because they are imposed by a governing element, an ʿa¯mil
(Sı¯bawayhi 1991: 13).
15.4
The Arabic Case System
According to Semitics scholar Gideon Goldenberg, ‘The Arabic linguistic
tradition is one of the thoroughest, profoundest, most elaborated and
sophisticated of its type’ (Goldenberg 2012: 58). Traditional Arabic gram-
marians as early as the eighth century CE took case to be a central compo-
nent of grammatical theory. Case was seen as the key to formal
dependency relations, which they went to considerable lengths to
describe, even developing a theory of abstract, virtual, or underlying case
(taqdı¯r) in instances where surface structure case marking seemed to
violate rules of syntactic governance.19 The examination, documentation,
and taxonomy of case/mood-inﬂections (iʿra¯b) formed the core of the study
of nah˙ w (‘grammar’, ‘syntax’) and the heart of the Arabic grammatical
tradition.20
participles (inﬂecting with a sufﬁxed taˉʾ marbuˉt
˙
a, e.g., mudarrisa(t) ‘teacher (f.)’), and for indication of indeﬁniteness
(sufﬁx nunation or tanwıˉn, added to the case marker, e.g., kitaˉb-u-n, ‘a book’ nominative, indeﬁnite).
16 ‘In a relation of government, the governing member imposes speciﬁc restrictions on the morphosyntactic properties of
the governed member’ (Stump 1998: 24).
17 For an introduction to government and agreement relations in Arabic, see Ryding (2005: 57–8). For governed and
agreement properties in general, see Stump (1998: 22–5).
18 Zwicky adds a third factor which he refers to as ‘mapping rules’ or ‘allomorphy rules’ that ‘can be viewed as a set of
conditions on the association between input and output’ (Zwicky 1990: 219). That is, how the phonology realizes the
combination of a particular paradigm slot and a syntactic rule.
19 For more on underlying (or ‘deep’) morphophonology in traditional Arabic grammatical theory, see Guillaume (1981).
20 ‘There has never been any question, from the earliest Muslim era (if not before as well) to the present day, that the
single most essential and distinctive feature of the poetic ʿarabıˉya is its capacity for synthetic expression through
desinential inﬂection – i.e., the iʿraˉb’ (Zwettler 1978: 116).
15 Case in Arabic
359

Case is marked on nominals, including nouns, adjectives, participles,
and some pronouns. In noun phrases, rules of agreement or concord
require that modiﬁers of the noun head agree in gender, number, and
deﬁniteness as well as case. For example, madı¯nat-u-n kabı¯rat-u-n ‘a big city’
(f.sg. nom., indef.), or al-madı¯nat-u l-kabı¯rat-u ‘the big city’ (f.sg. nom. def.).
This agreement marking is not always straightforward, as a modiﬁer may
belong to a declension different from the noun head, and therefore take
a different form of the required case inﬂection (1):
(1)
qaraʾ-tu
l-maqa¯la¯t-i
l-qas˙ı¯rat-a
read-I
the-articles (DE F- PL-A CC)
the-short (D E F-F. SG-AC C)
‘I read the short articles’
fı¯
jara¯ʾid-a
yawmiyyat-in
in
newspapers (I N DF-PL- GE N)
daily (IN DF-F.S G- GE N)
‘in daily newspapers’21
15.4.1
Declensions
There are eight declensions or nominal inﬂectional classes in standard
Arabic.22 The most basic declension (triptote, or muʿrab) consists of three
cases, each with its own distinctive case-marking exponent consisting of
a short vowel (for deﬁnite words), or a short vowel plus nunation (tanwı¯n),
indicating indeﬁniteness, e.g., al-jaras-u ‘the bell’ (D E F.N O M), and jaras-
u-n ‘a bell’ (I N D F.N O M). The triptote declension represents Arabic canonical
case inﬂection. ‘In canonical inﬂection, the stems of individual words
remain unchanged between cells of a paradigm, while inﬂectional expo-
nents are encoded consistently, and uniquely, from one cell to the next’
(Workshop on Non-Canonicity in Inﬂection 2019: 2). Membership in
a particular declension (other than those that are based on external num-
ber marking) can usually be determined on the basis of stem morphology
(a particular pattern or template), by root morphophonology (e.g., defec-
tive roots), by nature (e.g., feminine proper names), or by origin (e.g.,
foreign proper names).
The other seven declensions consist of two variants or even just one
invariant form. A distinctive feature of the Arabic declensional system is
that a noun may shift its declensional status when inﬂected for dual or
plural. The declensions are:
21 The adjectives ‘short’ and ‘daily’ in these examples are feminine singular because they modify non-human plural
nouns.
22 I refer to Arabic inﬂectional classes as numbered declensions for ease of reference even though this is not standard
practice in Arabic descriptive grammars. For pedagogical purposes, identifying declensions by number circumvents the
practice of teaching diptotes and all other inﬂectional classes as exceptions to the triptote base. See Ryding (2005:
182ff) for further discussion. For more on Arabic declensions, see Fleisch (1961: 269–82) and Edzard (2006).
3 6 0
K A R I N C H R I S T I N A R Y D I N G

1.
Three-way inﬂection (‘triptote’; in Arabic muʿrab)
Deﬁnite
Indeﬁnite
miftaˉh
˙
‘key’
Nominative
al-miftaˉh
˙
-u
miftaˉh
˙
-u-n
Genitive
al-miftaˉh
˙
-i
miftaˉh
˙
-i-n
Accusative
al-miftaˉh
˙
-a
miftaˉh
˙
-a-n
2.
Dual
Deﬁnite
Indeﬁnite
miftaˉh
˙
-aˉni ‘two keys’
Nominative
al-miftaˉh
˙
-aˉni
miftaˉh
˙
-aˉni
Genitive
al-miftaˉh
˙
-ayni
miftaˉh
˙
-ayni
Accusative
al-miftaˉh
˙
-ayni
miftaˉh
˙
-ayni
3.
Sound feminine plural
Deﬁnite
Indeﬁnite
qaˉrr-aˉt ‘continents’
Nominative
al-qaˉrr-aˉt-u
qaˉrr-aˉt-u-n
Genitive
al-qaˉrr-aˉt-i
qaˉrr-aˉt-i-n
Accusative
al-qaˉrr-aˉt-i
qaˉrr-aˉt-i-n
4.
Sound masculine plural
Deﬁnite
Indeﬁnite
muwaˉt
˙
in-uˉna ‘citizens’
Nominative
al-muwaˉt
˙
in-uˉna
muwaˉt
˙
in-uˉna
Genitive
al-muwaˉt
˙
in-ıˉna
muwaˉt
˙
in-ıˉna
Accusative
al-muwaˉt
˙
in-ıˉna
muwaˉt
˙
in-ıˉna
5.
Diptote
Deﬁnite
Indeﬁnite
makaˉtib ‘ofﬁces’
Nominative
al-makaˉtib-u
makaˉtib-u
Genitive
al-makaˉtib-i
makaˉtib-a
Accusative
al-makaˉtib-a
makaˉtib-a
6.
Defective
Deﬁnite
Indeﬁnite
muh
˙
aˉm-in ‘lawyer’
Nominative
al-muh
˙
aˉm-ıˉ
muh
˙
aˉm-in
Genitive
al-muh
˙
aˉm-ıˉ
muh
˙
aˉm-in
Accusative
al-muh
˙
aˉmiy-a
muh
˙
aˉmiy-an
7.
Indeclinable (for case, but inﬂecting for deﬁniteness)
Deﬁnite
Indeﬁnite
maʿnan ‘meaning’
Nominative
al-maʿnaˉ
maʿnan
Genitive
al-maʿnaˉ
maʿnan
Accusative
al-maʿnaˉ
maʿnan
8.
Invariable (identical form for all cases and for deﬁnite and indeﬁnite)
Deﬁnite
Indeﬁnite
fawd
˙
aˉ ‘chaos’
Nominative
al-fawd˙aˉ
fawd˙aˉ
Genitive
al-fawd˙aˉ
fawd˙aˉ
Accusative
al-fawd˙aˉ
fawd˙aˉ
15 Case in Arabic
361

15.4.2
Summary of Declension Features
Declension 1, triptote, is considered canonical because it allows each cell
in the paradigm a distinctive form. Declensions 2 through 4 exhibit only
two case form distinctions, with accusative/genitive syncretism. These
declensions are based on external number marking, and the sufﬁxes
show multiple or cumulative exponence, i.e., encoding more than one
morphological category. In the dual, for example, the sufﬁx indicates
number as well as case; in the sound feminine plural, the sufﬁx indicates
number followed by case and deﬁniteness marking; and in the sound
masculine plural, the sufﬁx indicates the inﬂectional categories of case,
number, and humanness.23 Declension 5, the diptote, shows all three case
markers when deﬁnite but only two when indeﬁnite, and no nunation in
the indeﬁnite.24 Declension 6, defective, shows two case forms, with
nominative/genitive syncretism. In defective nouns there is partial fusion
of the stem with the case marker in the nominative and genitive because
defective nouns are based on roots where the ﬁnal phoneme is a semi-
vowel, wa¯w or ya¯ʾ. Declensions 7 and 8 show no case differentiations.
15.5
The Cases Themselves
Each case in Arabic appears in a range of syntactic contexts. The accusative
is the widest in extent of occurrence, then the nominative, and then the
genitive. In one of the most extensive taxonomies of case usage in classical
Arabic, a medieval grammatical treatise titled Al-jumal fı¯ l-nah˙w, desinential
inﬂections were listed by their frequency of occurrence: ‘The accusative/
subjunctive (al-nas˙b) has 51 types’ (Al-Khalı¯l 1987: 34–5). ‘The nominative/
indicative (al-raf‘) has 22 types’ (Al-Khalı¯l 1987: 117). ‘The types of genitive
(al-khafd˙) are nine’ (Al-Khalı¯l 1987: 172).25 A chapter is dedicated to every
use of case/mood inﬂection, and this ﬁne-grained inventory of usages is
considered a ‘striking aspect’ of the text by Owens, who comments on ‘the
plethora of grammatical functions invoked to catalogue inﬂectional func-
tions’ (Owens 1990: 189). For modern standard Arabic the range of case
inﬂections is more limited but still reﬂects the essential categories of
Arabic desinence (for a listing of contemporary case usages, see Ryding
2005: 169–82). A key issue in discussing case systems in general is that non-
nominative cases differ in a basic way from the nominative. ‘The
23 The grammatical property of ‘humanness’ is a key one in Arabic grammar. It is often what Fillmore (1968: 3) would
consider a ‘covert’ morphological category in that it lacks an overall morphemic realization, but nonetheless entails
certain selectional constraints in agreement structures. The sound masculine plural inﬂection is one indicator of
humanness in nouns. Humanness is only morphologically relevant in the plural, where agreement features also need
to be plural. Non-human-referent nouns in the plural take feminine singular agreement.
24 For a detailed examination of the diptote declension and its history, see Rabin (1965).
25 Grammarian and lexicographer Al-Khalıˉl ibn Ah
̣
mad (d. c.793 CE) is considered by many scholars to be the author of
this text, but the attribution is not undisputed. One manuscript is attributed by its editor to Ibn Shuqayr (d. c.929 CE).
See the discussion in Ryding (1998: 97–103).
3 6 2
K A R I N C H R I S T I N A R Y D I N G

important point is that the conception of non-nominative cases as differ-
ing from the nominative in expressing a semantic relation is maintained
by many scholars’ (Anderson 2009: 12). That is, the nominative may stand
alone (in a word list or dictionary, for example) as well as within a syntactic
relation, but the accusative and genitive must stand in relation to
a syntactic structure.26
15.5.1
Nominative (al-raf ʿ, marfuˉʿ)
In general, the nominative case is, as noted above, a case that often stands
outside the system of syntactic governance. Blake notes that ‘the nomina-
tive is the case used outside constructions, the case used in isolation, the
case used in naming’ (Blake 1994: 31). And also, ‘the subject is a purely
syntactic relation characteristically associated with presenting given and
topical information. In a language with a case system the subject is in the
nominative case’ (Blake 1994: 44). ‘In traditional dependency syntax . . . the
nominative is the support of the predicate, the element about which
the predicate makes a statement . . . ; it is the basis, the support, of the
whole sentence, on which the whole of the rest of the sentence depends’
(Hewson and Bubenik 2006: 18). The nominative is the keystone of the
syntactic structure.
These general observations hold true of the Arabic nominative as well,
where it marks the subject (the fa¯ʿil, or ‘doer’) of the verb, and it also marks
the subject (the mubtadaʾ) and the predicate (khabar) of equational (verb-
less) sentences. In addition, it is the citation form of words listed out of
context, as in a lexicon, word list, or dictionary. The typical case marker for
nominative is the d˙amma, but as shown in the declension paradigms
above, it takes other forms as well.
15.5.1.1
Vocative (al-nidaˉʾ)
The vocative is used ‘where someone or some entity is addressed directly
by the speaker’ (Ryding 2005: 170), or as Blake puts it, ‘the vocative is set
off from all the other cases by the feature [+addressee]’ (Blake 1994: 44).
The vocative is rarely given case status of its own due to its independence
from rules of governance and its similarity in marking to the nominative.
The Arabic vocative is usually considered a subcategory of nominative,
rather than an autonomous case.
‘Vocatives do not appear as dependents in constructions, but rather they
stand outside constructions or are inserted parenthetically. They are
unlike other cases in that they do not mark the relation of dependents to
heads. For these reasons vocatives have not always been considered cases’
(Blake 1994: 9). The Arabic vocative is clearly related to the nominative in
26 This may be a reason for the relative ‘neglect’ of the nominative in traditional grammatical analysis. On this, see Fillmore
(1968, esp. p. 6).
15 Case in Arabic
363

form: d˙amma without nunation (ya¯ salı¯m-u! ‘O Salim!’), unless the name of
the addressee is the ﬁrst term of an id˙a¯fa construction, where it takes fath˙ a:
(ya¯ ʿabd-a lla¯h-i! ‘O Abdallah!’). Interestingly, this vocative/nominative rela-
tion has been noted in other languages as well. ‘Many languages have no
dedicated case marker [for the vocative] and the nominative is used as
a form of address’ (Daniel and Spencer 2009: 627).27
15.5.1.2
The Vestigial Locative
A non-nunated d˙amma also marks certain adverbial expressions, especially
(but not only) those that identify a spatial location, such as tah˙ t-u ‘below,
under’ and fawq-u ‘above’. These items, if not in construct with a noun, do
not inﬂect for genitive after prepositions, e.g., min tah˙ t-u ‘from below’, min
fawq-u ‘from above’. Wright describes these as ‘indeclinable nouns ending
in -u’ (Wright [1859] 1997: I, 282). Like the vocative marking, when con-
strued with a following noun, these nominals inﬂect as follows:
tah˙ t-a l-shajarat-i ‘under the tree’, or min tah˙ t-i l-shajarat-i ‘from under the
tree’. The /-u / ending is not considered a case-marked nominative, but
appears rather to be a relic of older Semitic origin: ‘Some adverbial forms
in Classical Arabic, with a non-nominative ending -u, seem to be traces of
a formal category like the Akkadian “locative-adverbial”’ (Goldenberg
2012: 147).28
15.5.1.3
Indeclinable Adverbials
Aside from locative expressions, an indeclinable /-u/ sufﬁx appears on a
limited number of adverbial expressions, such as mundh-u ‘since’, h˙ ayth-u
‘where’, ‘whereas’, and h˙ asb-u or fa-h˙ asb-u ‘only’, ‘no more’).
15.5.2
Genitive (al-jarr, al-khafd˙ )
The genitive is a case specialized for adnominal relations. In Arabic the
genitive is used primarily in two functions: to mark the noun object of
a preposition and to mark the second term in a noun construct phrase
(id˙a¯fa).29 Thus, f ı¯ l-bayt-i ‘in the house’ and ba¯b-u l-bayt-i ‘the door of
the house’. Genitive structures in Semitic are extensive in terms of occur-
rence and meaning. Cohen (2019: 1) states that ‘in addition to its central
role in the domain of the noun phrase, it is the preferred syntactic mechan-
ism behind many phrase and clause types’, and ‘is the most important
27 ‘The vocative and the nominative are treated similarly. The fact that the nominative may be substituted for the vocative
suggests that the nominative is the unmarked member of the pair’ (Blake 1994: 44).
28 See also Ryding (2005: 291 ft, and 389), as well as Fleisch (1961: 280) (‘Restes d’ancienne ﬂexion’).
29 ‘The adnominal case normally covers the sense of possessor, and the label possessive case is a common alternative’
(Blake 1994: 151 [emphasis in original]). However, according to Cohen (2019: 5) ‘the [Semitic] genitive does not
exclusively mark the possessive function, and in view of the plethora of semantic nuances it covers, it is better regarded
as having an attributive function.’ Similarly, Bravmann has noted that ‘the syntactical relationship which obtains
between the noun governing the genitive and the genitive must be described as that of a noun and an attribute which
qualiﬁes it’ (Bravmann 1961: 387). For a discussion of ‘genitive subjects’ in Arabic and Berber, see Ouhalla (1997).
3 6 4
K A R I N C H R I S T I N A R Y D I N G

mechanism at the phrase level’. For example, when counting using num-
bers three to ten, the counted noun is genitive plural (thala¯that-u ʾayya¯m-in
‘three days’). For counting using numbers 100 or 1,000, the genitive sin-
gular is used on the counted noun (miʾat-u yawm-in ‘100 days’). Other
construct-like genitive structures include the adjective or ‘false’ construct
(id˙a¯fa ghayr h˙ aqı¯qiyya), where the ﬁrst term is an adjective or a participle with
adjectival meaning, e.g., t˙awı¯l-u l-qa¯mat-i ‘tall of height’ or mutaʿaddid-u
l-ʾat˙ra¯f-i ‘multi-lateral’ (lit. ‘multiple of sides’).
The Arabic genitive also marks the object of a locative adverb such as
qabl-a ‘before’, e.g., qabl-a l-h˙ arb-i ‘before the war’. Note that although
Arabic locative adverbs seem similar in meaning to English prepositions,
their derivation and morphology mark them as locative nouns (of time or
space) rather than (true) prepositions. They are derived from three-
consonant roots and can themselves be objects of true prepositions, e.g.,
min qabl-i l-h˙ arb-i ‘from before the war’.30
Unlike the Arabic nominative and accusative, the genitive does not
share its case marker (typically /-i/) with an imperfective verb mood. The
kasra or /i/ is therefore considered a deﬁnitive marker of noun status, along
with nunation.
15.5.2.1
Genitive/Accusative Syncretism
In four declensions, the diptote, the dual, and the sound feminine and
sound masculine plurals, the genitive case merges in form with the accu-
sative, yielding a two-way case distinction (nominative/oblique) rather
than a three-way one. In fact, the triptote declension (declension 1) is the
only one in which the genitive has an independent marker, the kasra (-i or -
in). This large-scale syncretism or fusion of genitive and accusative forms
has led to some lack of clarity about the nature of the Arabic plural, as
when Hasselbach notes that ‘several Semitic languages have a fully pro-
ductive case system with three cases in the singular . . . and two in the
plural . . . These include Akkadian, Classical Arabic, Ugaritic, Early
Canaanite, and probably Old South Semitic’ (Hasselbach 2013: 16). Many
plural Arabic nouns and noun templates fall into the triptote declension,
however, such as mudun-un ‘cities’, buyu¯t-un ‘houses’, or rija¯l-un ‘men’.31
15.5.3
Accusative (al-nas.b, mans.uˉb)
As noted above, the accusative is the most frequently occurring case in
Arabic.32 Because of the variety of its functions and its frequency com-
pared to the nominative and genitive, it has been termed a ‘residual’ case,
30 See Ryding (2005: 172, 386 ff.) for more extensive discussion of locative adverbs.
31 See Kouloughli (2001: 24), where he states with regard to nunation, ‘ce type de structuration n’est pas propre au
singulier puisque tous les pluriels triptotes s’y conforment’.
32 For an extensive analysis of the accusative as well as other cases, see Hasan (1987, Vol. 2). Al-Balushi (2015)
examines Arabic accusative case morphology and its history.
15 Case in Arabic
365

‘which can serve any purely caselike function not preempted by the other
cases’ (Fillmore 1968: 10).
There are several features to observe about the Arabic accusative: ﬁrst of
all, as noted above, in many declensions it fuses with the genitive to yield
a single non-nominative or oblique case form. Secondly, aside from its
marking the object of a transitive verb, it also functions to mark adverbials
of all sorts, e.g., adverbial expressions of manner, circumstance, location,
direction, and time.33 It marks all the teen numbers; it marks all counted
nouns between the numbers eleven and ninety-nine (the counted noun
being both singular and accusative). The cognate accusative, the circum-
stantial accusative, the accusative of purpose, the accusative of speciﬁca-
tion, and the accusative of absolute negation are just some of its syntactic
constructions. An entire category of ‘accusative-izing’ function words and
verbs (nawa¯sikh) also exists.34 For an extended list of accusative structures
in modern written Arabic, see Ryding (2005: 172–82) and especially Hasan
(1987: 1–430).
A distinctive feature of the Arabic accusative is that its marking of
adverbial status is so strong that it has persisted in vernacular Arabic in
some expressions of time, place, and manner, such as shukr-an ‘thanks’,
’ahl-an ‘welcome’, ’abad-an ‘never’. This is apparently not exclusive to
Arabic. As Blake notes about cases in general, ‘it is common for nouns in
oblique cases to be reinterpreted as adverbs, particularly adverbs of place,
time, and manner’ and ‘when a case system disappears these fossilized
case markers may remain’ (Blake 1994: 182). Interestingly, one of the
deﬁning features of inﬂectional markers is that they do not change the
lexical meaning of a word or its form class, but the accusative /-an/ sufﬁx in
Arabic comes close to functioning as a derivational morpheme by convert-
ing an adjective (for example) to an adverbial function, e.g., kathı¯r ‘much’,
‘many’ to kathı¯r-an ‘greatly’, ‘very’, ‘a lot’.
Another feature of the Arabic accusative is that it takes the place of
a dative marker in double object constructions, e.g., aʿt˙ay-tu l-bint-
a kita¯b-an ‘I gave the girl a book’ where both ‘girl’ and ‘book’ are
marked for accusative. Again, this not an unusual occurrence in case-
marking languages, and it has been observed that in ‘the alignment
strategies in ditransitive clauses as compared to monotransitive . . .
either theme (T) or recipient (R) of a ditransitive construction can
pattern like the object-patient (P) of monotransitives’ (Kittila¨
and
Malchukov 2009: 557).
The accusative is thus pervasive in its written Arabic functions and
unique in its persistence in vernacular Arabic today; no other case can
claim to survive so clearly in contemporary spoken Arabic.
33 In fact, Rabin notes that some researchers believe that ‘Arabic declension, and Semitic declension in general, arose
gradually from a single case, the adverbial accusative’ (Rabin 1965: 550).
34 See Anghelescu (1999) for discussion of nawaˉsikh.
3 6 6
K A R I N C H R I S T I N A R Y D I N G

15.6
Final Remarks
This brief discussion cannot do justice to the extensive literature in Arabic or
in European languages on Arabic case, or to the sophistication, depth, and
subtlety of traditional Arabic grammarians’ analysis of case functions and
structures. Although limited to three formal cases, Arabic case theory covers
a wide range of functions that illustrate the many complex semantic and
syntactic uses of case marking and case assignment. Arabic also provides
a unique model of diglossic evolution because of the long, continued coex-
istence of case marking in the written language as opposed to its almost total
absence in vernacular speech. The juxtaposition of case-marked and non-case
-marked language in contemporary Arabic contributes to the complexity of
Arabic discourse analysis and to key psychological and practical issues in
language learning. Modern theoretical studies of case rarely cite Arabic (Blake
and Butt notwithstanding), but there is a need for further examination of
case, its role in the intellectual history of Arabic, its relevance to contempor-
ary case theory, and its interesting sociolinguistic dimensions.
References
Abdul-Raof, H. (2006). Case roles. In K. Versteegh, M. Eid, A. Elgibali,
M. Woidich, and A. Zaborski, eds., Encyclopedia of Arabic Language and
Linguistics, vol. I. Leiden: Brill, 343–7.
Al-Balushi, R. (2015). The accusative case sufﬁxes in standard Arabic:
Where from? International Journal of Arabic Linguistics, 1(1), 28–66.
Al-Khalı¯l ibn Ah˙ mad Al-Fara¯hı¯dı¯. (1987). Kita¯b al-jumal fı¯ l-nah˙ w, Fakhr Al-Dı¯n
Qaba¯wa, ed. Beirut: Mu’assasat al-Risa¯la.
Anderson, J. (2006). Modern Grammars of Case: A Retrospective. Oxford: Oxford
University Press.
Anderson, J. (2009). Case in localist case grammar. In A. Malchukov and
A. Spencer, eds., The Oxford Handbook of Case. Oxford: Oxford University
Press, 121–35.
Anderson, S. R. (1992). A-Morphous Morphology. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.
Anghelescu, N. (1999). Modalities and grammaticalization in Arabic. In
Y. Suleiman, ed., Arabic Grammar and Linguistics. Oxford: Routledge, 130–42.
Baker, M. (2015). Case: Its Principles and Its Parameters. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
Blake, B. J. (1994). Case. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Bravmann, M. M. (1961). Genetic aspects of the genitive in the Semitic
languages. Journal of the American Oriental Society, 81(4), 386–94.
Butt, M. (2006). Theories of Case. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
15 Case in Arabic
367

Butt, M. (2009). Modern approaches to case: An overview. In A. Malchukov
and A. Spencer, eds., The Oxford Handbook of Case. Oxford: Oxford
University Press, 27–43.
Chomsky, N. (1970). Remarks on nominalization. In R. Jacobs and
P. Rosenbaum, eds., Readings in English Transformational Grammar.
Waltham, MA: Ginn and Company, 184–221.
Cohen, E. (2019). Semitic genitive constructions: An expanded view. Journal
of Semitic Studies, 64(1), 1–50.
Daniel, M. and Spencer, A. (2009). The vocative: An outlier case. In
A. Malchukov and A. Spencer, eds., The Oxford Handbook of Case. Oxford:
Oxford University Press, 626–34.
Danks, W. (2011). The Arabic Verb: Form and Meaning in the Vowel-Lengthening
Patterns. Amsterdam. John Benjamins.
Edzard, L. (2006). Declension. In K. Versteegh, M. Eid, A. Elgibali,
M. Woidich, and A. Zaborski, eds., Encyclopedia of Arabic Language and
Linguistics, vol. I. Leiden: Brill, 559–64.
Ferguson, C. (1970). Myths about Arabic. In J. A. Fishman, ed., Readings in the
Sociology of Language. The Hague: Mouton, 375–81.
Fillmore, C. (1968). The case for case. In E. Bach and R. T. Harms, eds.,
Universals in Linguistic Theory. New York: Holt, Rinehart and Winston, 1–88.
Fillmore, C. (1977). The case for case reopened. In P. Cole and J. M. Saddock,
eds., Syntax and Semantics, vol. 8: Grammatical Relations. New York:
Academic Press, 59–81.
Fleisch, H. (1961). Traite´ de Philologie Arabe, vol. 1. Beyrouth: Imprimerie
Catholique.
Fu¨ ck, J. (1955). ʿArabiyya. Paris: Marcel Didier.
Gisborne, N. (2015). The word and syntax. In J. W. Taylor, ed., The Oxford
Handbook of the Word. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 196–220.
Glanville, P. J. (2018). The Lexical Semantics of the Arabic Verb. Oxford: Oxford
University Press.
Goldenberg, G. (2012). Semitic Languages: Features, Structures, Relations,
Processes. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Guillaume, J. (1981). Le statut des repre´sentations sous-jacentes en mor-
phophonologie d’apre`s Ibn G˘ inni. Arabica, 28 (2–3), 222–41.
H˙ asan, A. (1987). Al-nah˙ w al-wa¯fı¯ [The Complete Grammar], vol. II. Cairo: Da¯r al-
Ma‘a¯rif.
Haspelmath, M. (2009). Terminology of case. In A. Malchukov and
A. Spencer, eds., The Oxford Handbook of Case. Oxford: Oxford University
Press, 505–17.
Hasselbach, R. (2013). Case in Semitic: Roles, Relations, and Reconstruction.
Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Hewson, J. and Bubenik, V. (2006). From Case to Adposition: The Development of
Conﬁgurational Syntax in Indo-European Languages. Amsterdam: John
Benjamins.
3 6 8
K A R I N C H R I S T I N A R Y D I N G

Hjelmslev, L. (1972). La cate´gorie des cas: E´tude de grammaire ge´ne´rale. Munich:
Wilhelm Fink Verlag.
Kittila¨, S. and Malchukov, A. (2009). Varieties of the accusative. In
A. Malchukov and A. Spencer, eds., The Oxford Handbook of Case. Oxford:
Oxford University Press, 549–61.
Kouloughli, D. E. (2001). Sur le statut linguistique du tanwı¯n. Arabica, 48,
20–50.
LeTourneau, M. S. (2006). Case theory. In K. Versteegh, M. Eid, A. Elgibali,
M. Woidich, and A. Zaborski, eds., Encyclopedia of Arabic Language and
Linguistics, vol. I. Leiden: Brill, 347–53.
Lieber, R. (2004). Morphology and Lexical Semantics. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.
Lieber, R. (2010). Introducing Morphology. Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press.
Maalej, Z. (2009). Valency. In K. Versteegh, M. Eid, A. Elgibali, M. Woidich,
and A. Zaborski, eds., Encyclopedia of Arabic Language and Linguistics, vol. IV.
Leiden: Brill, 624–7.
Malchukov, A. and Spencer, A. (2009a). The Oxford Handbook of Case. Oxford:
Oxford University Press.
Malchukov, A. and Spencer, A. (2009b). Typology of case systems:
Parameters of variation. In A. Malchukov and A. Spencer, eds., The
Oxford Handbook of Case. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 651–67.
Moscati, S. (1958). On Semitic case-endings. Journal of Near Eastern Studies,
17, 142–4.
Naess, A. (2006). Case semantics and the agent-patient opposition. In
L. Kulikov, A. Malchukov, and P. de Swart, eds., Case, Valency and
Transitivity. Amsterdam: John Benjamins, 309–27.
Ouhalla, J. (1997). Genitive subjects and the VSO order. In T. Hall and
A. Alexiadou, eds., Studies on Universal Grammar and Typological Variation.
Amsterdam: John Benjamins, 197–218.
Owens, J. (1990). Early Arabic Grammatical Theory: Heterogeneity and
Standardization. Philadelphia, PA: John Benjamins.
Owens, J. (2006). A Linguistic History of Arabic. Oxford: Oxford University
Press.
Rabin, C. (1965). The diptote declension. In G. Makdisi, ed., Arabic and
Islamic Studies in Honor of Hamilton A. R. Gibb. Cambridge, MA: Harvard
University Press, 547–62.
Rappaport-Hovav, M. and Levin, B. (1998). Building verb meanings. In
M. Butt and W. Geuder, eds., The Projection of Arguments: Lexical and
Compositional Factors. Stanford, CA: CSLI Publications, 97–134
Ryding, K. C. (1993). Case/mood syncretism in Arabic grammatical theory:
Evidence for the split morphology hypothesis and the continuum
hypothesis. In R. M. Rammuny and D. B. Parkinson, eds., Investigating
Arabic: Linguistic, Pedagogical and Literary Studies in Honor of Ernest
N. McCarus. Columbus, OH: Greyden Press, 173–9.
15 Case in Arabic
369

Ryding, K. C. (1998). Early Medieval Arabic: Studies on Al-Khalı¯l ibn Ah˙ mad.
Washington, DC: Georgetown University Press.
Ryding, K. C. (2005). A Reference Grammar of Modern Standard Arabic.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Ryding, K. C. (2014). Arabic: A Linguistic Introduction. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.
Sadler, L. and Spencer, A. (1998). Morphology and argument structure. In
A. Spencer and A. Zwicky, eds., The Handbook of Morphology. Oxford:
Blackwell, 206–36.
Scalise, S. and Guevara, E. (2005). The lexicalist approach to word-
formation and the notion of the lexicon. In P. Sˇtekauer and R. Lieber,
eds., Handbook of Word-Formation. Dordrecht: Springer, 147–87.
Sı¯bawayhi, ‘Amr ibn ‘Uthma¯n. (1991). Kita¯b Sı¯bawayhi, ed. ‘Abd al-Sala¯m
Muh˙ ammad Ha¯ru¯ n. 5 vols. Beirut: Da¯r al-Jı¯l.
Somers, H. L. (1987). Valency and Case in Computational Linguistics. Edinburgh:
Edinburgh University Press.
Spencer, A. and Zwicky, A. (1998). The Handbook of Morphology. Oxford:
Blackwell.
Sˇtekauer, P. and Lieber, R. (2005). Handbook of Word-Formation. Dordrecht:
Springer.
Stump, G. T. (1998). Inﬂection. In A. Spencer and A. Zwicky, eds., The
Handbook of Morphology. Oxford: Blackwell, 13–43.
Stump, G. T. (2005). Word-formation and inﬂectional morphology. In
P. Sˇtekauer and R. Lieber, eds., Handbook of Word-Formation. Dordrecht:
Springer, 49–71.
Versteegh, K., Eid, M. Elgibali, A., Woidich, M., and Zaborski, A. (2006–
2009). Encyclopedia of Arabic Language and Linguistics. 4 vols. Leiden: Brill.
Versteegh, K. (2010). Review of A Linguistic History of Arabic (Owens 2006).
Language, 86(1), 241–4.
Workshop on Non-Canonicity in Inﬂection. (2019). Linguist List announce-
ment 30.960. University of Surrey, Guilford, United Kingdom.
Wright, W. [1859] (1997). A Grammar of the Arabic Language, 3rd ed., rev. by
W. R. Smith and M. J. de Goeje. Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press.
Zwettler, M. (1978). The Oral Tradition of Classical Arabic Poetry: Its Character
and Implications. Columbus, OH: Ohio State University Press.
Zwicky, A. M. (1990). Inﬂectional morphology as a (sub)component of
grammar. In W. U. Dressler, H. C. Luschutzky, O. E. Pfeiffer, and
J. R. Rennison, eds., Contemporary Morphology. Berlin: Mouton de
Gruyter, 217–36.
3 7 0
K A R I N C H R I S T I N A R Y D I N G

16
On Arabic Morphosyntax
and Its Implications for
the Theory of Generative
Grammar
Usama Soltan
16.1
Introduction
A fundamental claim of the theory of generative grammar since the late
1970s is that the syntactic properties of human languages can be
accounted for in terms of the interaction between two main components
of the grammar: a ﬁnite set of overarching general principles shared by all
languages, and a ﬁnite number of (typically binary) options that languages
choose from, called parameters (Chomsky 1981, 1982, 1995).1 This principles
and parameters (P&P) approach is, by deﬁnition, empirically testable: for
a given language L, we need to ﬁnd out if the general principles hold in L.
For that same language L, we need to ﬁnd out what parametric options
hold in L such that L is different from other languages. The goal of this
chapter is to highlight some aspects of the morphosyntax of Arabic dia-
lects that have already contributed or can potentially contribute to our
understanding of cross-linguistic variation under the P&P approach. More
speciﬁcally, I discuss phenomena from both Standard Arabic (SA) and
today’s
Arabic
dialects
in
three
morphosyntactic
domains:
verbal
* I am very thankful to Karin Ryding and David Wilmsen for the opportunity to contribute this chapter to the Cambridge
Handbook of Arabic Linguistics, for their editorial assistance, and for their generous patience as the manuscript was
initially written, revised, and ﬁnally resubmitted. Special thanks are due to David Wilmsen for insightful questions and
comments on the ﬁrst version of the manuscript. I am especially indebted to Middlebury College for supporting my
2017–18 academic leave, during which I was able to write the ﬁrst draft of this chapter. Needless to say, any errors
herein remain solely my responsibility.
1 The term generative grammar is used here to refer to the approach to the study of human language initiated by
Chomsky (1957, 1965), whose main goal is to characterize the nature of native speakers’ linguistic knowledge and how
that knowledge arises in the human mind. While the goals and the philosophical underpinnings of the theory have
generally remained the same, the theoretical models have changed over the decades for conceptual and empirical
reasons. The P&P approach discussed in this chapter refers to the phase in generative grammar from Chomsky (1981)
until today. The P&P approach thus covers both the Government-Binding Theory (Chomsky 1981, 1982, 1986a, and
Chomsky and Lasnik 1993) and the Minimalist Program (Chomsky 1993 and after), including the various theoretical
developments within each of these two frameworks.

agreement, case marking, and clausal negation.2 For each one of these
phenomena, I introduce the relevant Arabic facts and highlight their
implications for syntactic analysis, presenting the main analyses in the
relevant literature, though in most cases without going into details of
technical implementations, given the goal and scope of this chapter.
I
will
also
keep
argumentation
over
these
different
analyses
to
a minimum, referring the reader instead to the cited literature.
Furthermore, due to space limitations, it is not the goal of this chapter to
provide a comprehensive discussion of all the existing literature on the
Arabic phenomena discussed here. In several places (either in the main
text or in footnotes), I therefore choose to refer the reader to some of the
literature for more detailed discussions of these morphosyntactic
phenomena.
The chapter is organized as follows. In Section 16.2, I discuss agreement
phenomena in Arabic dialects, with particular focus on the subject-verb
agreement asymmetry and ﬁrst conjunct agreement, highlighting the
main analyses in the generative literature of these two phenomena, and
their implications for the analysis of agreement in syntactic theory.
Section 16.3 introduces the basic facts of case marking of nominals in SA
and discusses their implications for the analysis of case within different
models of the P&P approach. In Section 16.4, I discuss facts of negation in
both SA and the modern Arabic dialects, pointing out how they bear on
issues related to word-formation and the operation referred to as head
movement in syntactic theory. Section 16.5 concludes the chapter.
16.2
The Morphosyntax of Agreement in Arabic Dialects
All Arabic dialects, including SA, exhibit a rich verbal morphology, where
verbs inﬂect not just for tense/aspect, but also for agreement in person,
number, and gender.3 SA verbs also inﬂect for what is sometimes referred
to as mood marking (a rather inaccurate term, as I discuss in Section
2 I choose to focus on these three areas of morphosyntax because they bring to light important questions relevant to our
current theory of grammar with regard to the syntax–morphology interface. In particular, they raise questions regarding
the role played by formal (i.e., semantically empty) features such as case and agreement in syntactic derivations and
representations, and illustrate the ways in which categories such as tense and negation interact with each other and with
other categories in sentence structures. For an earlier article on the importance of Arabic for linguistic theory, see Comrie
(1991), who addresses issues related to tense and aspect, word classes, and grammatical functions in Arabic dialects.
For a more recent article on issues of Arabic syntax within the generative tradition, see Benmamoun and Choueiri
(2013), who discuss verbless sentences, the structure of noun phrases, subjects and subject agreement, negation, wh-
questions, and resumptive pronouns.
3 Agreement in person, number, and gender is frequently referred to in syntactic analysis with the shorthand term phi-
agreement (often written φ-agreement). In this chapter, I will simply use the general term agreement to refer to the
cases of verbal agreement under discussion. I will also assume throughout that the grammatical categories of tense and
aspect are both active in Arabic dialects, which is the standard assumption in Arabic generative syntax, putting aside the
debate about this issue in other traditions. The discussion in the chapter is, however, largely neutral when it comes to
this debate, hence the occasional use of ‘tense/aspect’ in the text.
3 7 2
U S A M A S O LT A N

16.4.1), a morphological property that is absent in the modern Arabic
dialects. In this section, I discuss two main verbal agreement phenomena
that have attracted the attention of generative grammarians over the
years, highlighting the main analyses and their implications for general
syntactic analysis. The ﬁrst is what has come to be known as the subject-verb
agreement asymmetry in SA, and the second is the so-called ﬁrst conjunct
agreement phenomenon, attested in both SA and the modern dialects.
16.2.1
The Subject-Verb Agreement Asymmetry in Standard Arabic
Perhaps the most discussed topic in the generative literature on Arabic
syntax has been the puzzle of the subject-verb agreement asymmetry
(SVAA) in SA, where agreement on the verb varies with word order alter-
nation, as illustrated in (1) below:4
(1)
a. zˇa¯Ɂa-t
al-bana¯t-u
came-3S GF
the-girls-N O M
‘The girls came.’
b. Ɂal-bana¯t-u
zˇiɁ-na
the-girls-N O M
came-3PL F
‘The girls came.’
c. *zˇiɁ-na
al-bana¯t-u
came-3P L F
the-girls-N O M
d. *Ɂal-bana¯t-u
zˇa¯Ɂa-t
the-girls-N O M
came-3S GF
As (1a) shows, when the subject is in postverbal position (often referred to
as the VS order), verbal agreement is impoverished, being restricted to only
person and gender.5 By contrast, when a noun phrase (NP) occurs in
preverbal position (often referred to as the SV order), as in (1b), the verb
appears fully inﬂected for person, number, and gender.6 The reverse pat-
terns of agreement are not allowed, as the ungrammaticality of (1c, d)
shows.
4 The following abbreviations are used in the glosses of data: 1, 2, 3 for ﬁrst, second, and third person, respectively; S G =
singular; D U = dual; P L = plural; M = masculine; F = feminine; N E G = negation; F U T = future; I P F V = imperfective; N O M =
nominative; A C C = accusative; O B L = oblique case; I N D = indicative; S B J V = subjunctive; J U S = jussive; C O M P =
complementizer; E V = epenthetic vowel. Notice that I do not use an abbreviation for perfective/past tense verb forms,
choosing instead togloss them with their English past tense equivalents. Acronyms for Arabic dialects fromwhich data iscited
multiple times in the chapter are as follows: CEA = Cairene Egyptian Arabic; LA = Lebanese Arabic; MA = Moroccan Arabic;
SA = Standard Arabic. Arabic emphatic consonants are marked by symbols with dots underneath them in the transcription of
the data. Finally, I generally represent the SA deﬁnite articleinthe citation form al orɁal- (andthe same forits equivalent in the
modern dialects), even in contexts where it is not pronounced as such due to assimilation and/or elision.
5 It is also common in the literature to refer to impoverished agreement in the VS order as ‘partial’ and to rich agreement
in the SV order as ‘full’ agreement.
6 While there is uniform agreement that the NP in the VS order is indeed a subject, this is not the case with the preverbal
NP in the SV order. As we discuss later in this section, preverbal NPs are treated as subjects by some syntacticians and
as topics by others. To avoid introducing any new terms or acronyms, I will continue to use ‘SV’ as a descriptive label,
noting that the ‘S’ can stand for subject or topic, depending on one’s analysis.
16 Arabic Morphosyntax and Generative Grammar
373

These SVAA facts have garnered interest among syntacticians given the
important role that agreement has come to play in syntactic analysis,
particularly within the P&P framework.7 As one should expect, the key
question regarding the data in (1) has been the following: why does the
verb show rich morphology in the SV order, but impoverished morphology
in the VS order? Working within the Government-Binding (GB) frame-
work, Mohammad (1990) proposes to account for the SVAA by positing
a difference in the agreement relation that takes place in the VS and SV
orders. In particular, Mohammad argues that in the VS order, the postver-
bal subject is merged inside the verb phrase (VP) of the sentence, and that
impoverished agreement is the result of an agreement relation holding
between the inﬂectional head of the clause (henceforth referred to as ‘Inﬂ’)8
and a null expletive pronoun in the Speciﬁer position of the Inﬂection
Phrase (SpecIP).9 Since this null expletive carries third-person singular
features, the verb in the VS order is always singular. Crucially, however,
the null expletive is unspeciﬁed for gender, and, as a result, it acquires the
gender feature of the postverbal subject (via some mechanism of associa-
tion, e.g., feature percolation). Under the assumption that V obligatorily
raises out of VP to Inﬂin SA, the surface VS order obtains, with impover-
ished agreement, as schematized in (2):10
7 Formal (i.e., semantically null) features such as agreement on verbs and case on nominals have fascinated and
challenged grammarians over the centuries. Within the P&P framework, a standard assumption has been that such
features have to be licensed in order for syntactic structures to meet the conditions imposed on them by the
interpretive component of the grammar. The grammar, therefore, has to have mechanisms in place to license such
uninterpretable features before the structural representations are handed over to the semantic component. As we will
see in this chapter, the various models of the P&P approach proposed from the 1980s to the 2000s have often
correlated with the development of different licensing mechanisms for formal features, as shown, for example, by the
theoretical contrasts between Government-Binding Theory (Chomsky 1981, 1982, 1986a, Chomsky and Lasnik
1993), earlier Minimalism (Chomsky 1993, 1995), and later Minimalism (Chomsky 2000, 2001).
8 The inﬂectional category that is assumed to head a clause has been referred to with various labels over the years,
sometimes reﬂecting the different stages in how the P&P approach has treated inﬂectional categories in syntactic
analysis. In earlier versions of the theory of generative grammar, the label Aux (for auxiliary) is typically used; within GB,
Inﬂis the one more commonly used. In late GB and early Minimalism, the Inﬂhead is split into two: T (for Tense) and
Agr (for Agreement). In later Minimalist approaches, T has become the standard label, with Agr falling out of favour for
theoretical reasons. For the purposes of this chapter, I will use Inﬂand T, depending on the type of analysis under
discussion.
9 In support of positing a null expletive pronoun in VS orders, Mohammad cites examples from SA where an overt
expletive actually occurs before a VS order that is introduced by the complementizer Ɂinna/Ɂanna, as in (i) below:
(i)
Ɂinna-hu qad
hˉ ad˙ara
al-awlaˉd-u
C O M P -it
P A R T I C L E
arrived.3 S G M
the-boys-N O M
Roughly: ‘It is the case that the boys arrived.’
See Mohammad (2000) for a discussion of issues related to agreement, word order, and pronominalization in
Standard and Palestinian Arabic.
10 Movement of phrases and heads is assumed to leave behind a trace co-indexed with the moved element, hence the ti
notation in the syntactic representation in (2) and elsewhere in the chapter. Given that the goal of this chapter is to
provide an overview of the syntactic analyses of the phenomena under discussion, I will leave out some details from
the given syntactic representations that do not directly bear on the issues under discussion (e.g., the complementizer
phrase (CP) layer is not included in these representations).
3 7 4
U S A M A S O LT A N

Gender feature association 
(2)
[IP proEXPLETIVE [Infl+Vi] [VP Subj ti …]]
Spec-head agreement
In the SV order, under Mohammad’s analysis, V still raises to Inﬂ, but the
subject NP also moves from its VP-internal position to SpecIP, and agreement
obtains as a result of the Spec-head relation between Inﬂand the subject NP
now in its Spec, as in (3) below.11 Under this proposal, the Spec-head relation
is assumed to give rise to ‘richer’ agreement in person, number, and gender,
thereby resulting in the observed full agreement on the verb:
(3)
[IP Subjj [Infl+Vi] [VP tj ti …]]
Spec-head agreement
An alternative analysis of the agreement asymmetry is proposed by
Demirdache (1989), where the agreement markers on the verb are treated
as incorporated pronominals, along the lines of the Arabic grammatical
tradition, and the pronominal argument hypothesis of Jelinek (1984). Under
this approach, in the SV order, the subject pronoun incorporates into the
[Inﬂ+V] complex, giving rise to what surfaces as rich agreement, as shown
in (4):
(4)
[IP Topic [Infl+Vi+Subject_Pronounj] [VP tj ti …]]
Notice that, under this analysis, the preverbal NP is a topic, not a subject.
This has come to be known as the incorporation analysis, and a version of it is
proposed in Fassi Fehri (1993), though with some differences that I will not
address here, referring the reader instead to this work for a detailed
discussion.
Another variation on the traditional grammarians’ analysis is proposed in
Soltan (2006, 2007a), where the SV order is similarly treated as a dislocation
structure with the preverbal NP serving as a topic (mubtadaɁ in the tradi-
tional grammarians’ terminology), associated with a resumptive null sub-
ject (labelled pro in the P&P framework) within the VP, as illustrated in (5):
(5)
[IP Topici [Inﬂ+Vi] [VP proi ti . . .]]
Rich agreement, under this analysis, is a reﬂex of the condition on pro
identiﬁcation (Rizzi 1982). In the VS order, by contrast, pro identiﬁcation is
irrelevant, and the verb surfaces with default agreement as third-person
singular, with gender agreement taking place with the postverbal subject
under the operation Agree of Chomsky (2000), as shown in (6):
11 In this chapter, I use NP (= noun phrase) rather than the now standard DP (= determiner phrase) term. Nothing
substantive hinges on this decision.
16 Arabic Morphosyntax and Generative Grammar
375

(6)
[IP [Infldefault/Gender +Vi] [VP Subj ti …]]
Agree
Benmamoun (2000) proposes an alternative analysis to the agreement
asymmetry puzzle by appealing to operations at the syntax–morphol-
ogy interface. For him, rich agreement is the result of a Spec-head
relation, as originally proposed in Mohammad (1990). Impoverished
agreement, by contrast, is the result of post-syntactic merger between
subject and verb. In other words, agreement does not show up on the
verb for the simple reason that both verb and subject combine
together in the post-syntactic component, thereby obviating the need
for spelling-out the number agreement feature on the verb. Notice that
the assumed post-syntactic merger does not prevent the person feature
from being realized on the verb, since, according to Benmamoun,
person is a categorial feature. It is not clear, however, if gender can
also be treated in the same way. Notice also that a main challenge to
this post-syntactic merger analysis, as Benmamoun himself points out,
comes from the fact that intervening materials (such as an object NP)
can occur between the verb and its subject in the VS order. To address
this problem, Benmamoun proposes a solution in terms of the notion
of ‘copies’ of moved elements. I refer the reader to Benmamoun (2000)
for the details of this proposal.12
It is clear from the discussion in this section so far that the SVAA has
given rise to a variety of analyses that bear on different theoretical assump-
tions regarding agreement in human language and how to account for it
(see fn. 7). It is no wonder that this phenomenon has attracted the atten-
tion of grammarians both in the Arabic grammatical tradition as well as in
modern syntactic theory, and it will most likely continue to do so in the
future. In the rest of this section, I highlight three further agreement facts
related to the SVAA and their potential implications for how to account for
agreement within syntactic theory.
One fact that has not received enough attention in the relevant litera-
ture is that gender agreement is rendered optional in VS orders when the
verb and postverbal subject are separated by intervening material. The
following example, cited by Ibn Hisha¯m (1306–1360), illustrates this fact:
(7)
hˉ ad˙ara/hˉ ad˙ara-t
al-qa¯d˙iy-a
ɁimraɁat-un
visited.3 S G M/visited-3 S G F
the-judge-A C C
woman-N O M
‘A woman visited the judge.’
(Ibn Hisha¯m 1306–1360: 92)
12 As stated earlier in this section, the SVAA has been intensively discussed in the generative literature, and it is not
feasible to discuss all these accounts in this chapter. For example, one analysis not discussed here is proposed in Aoun
et al. (1994), whereby full agreement is assumed to take place in both SV and VS word orders, but it is in the latter
order that agreement in number gets ‘lost’ when the verb raises to a position higher in the structure. Gender and
person, Aoun et al. argue, are inherent features, and, as such, they remain on the verb. Another more recent account of
the SVAA is offered by Wurmbrand and Haddad (2016) in the context of raising predicates in SA.
3 7 6
U S A M A S O LT A N

This indicates that linear adjacency between verb and subject is required for
agreement to be obligatory. Notice that we cannot attribute absence of
agreement on hˉ ad˙ara in (7) to the presence of the intervening object (say,
as an instance of intervention effects in the sense of Chomsky 2001), given that
the agreeing form hˉ ad˙ara-t in (7) is still fully grammatical. One speculative
suggestion, made in Soltan (2007a), is that agreement between the verb and
the postverbal subject does indeed take place in (7), but an optional post-
syntactic rule in the morphological component allows such agreement not
to be spelled-out when the verb and postverbal subject are not adjacent.
Another similar agreement fact in SA that is yet to receive attention in
the generative literature has to do with cases where some postverbal
subjects (typically of the broken plural type) do not manifest gender
agreement in the VS order, even when they are adjacent to the verb.
Consider (8), for instance, a commonly cited example in Arabic traditional
grammars (cf. Ibn Hisha¯m 1306–1360, for instance):
(8)
qa¯la/qa¯la-t
niswat-un
said.3S GM/said-3 S GF
women-N O M
‘Some women said . . . ’
What seems like optionality of agreement in (7) and (8) raises questions for
the general analysis of agreement in syntactic theory, and it should bear on
the ongoing debate as to the component of the grammar in which agree-
ment takes place: in the syntax (as in Chomsky 2000, 2001), or post-
syntactically (as proposed by Bobaljik 2008).13 Whatever the answer
turns out to be, it is clear that such agreement facts in SA (and in other
Arabic dialects as well) should be relevant to current proposals regarding
the status of agreement in syntactic analysis.14
Finally, it is important to mention that not all Arabic dialects behave like
SA when it comes to the SVAA. As Aoun et al. (1994) point out, many of
today’s Arabic dialects do not observe the agreement asymmetry, as shown
by the following examples from Moroccan Arabic, where full agreement
obtains in both SV and VS orders:
(9)
a.
lә-wla¯d
nʕas-u
the-children
slept-3 PL
b.
nʕas-u
lә-wla¯d
slept-3 PL
the-children
c.
*nʕas
lә-wla¯d
slept.3 S GM
the-children
(Aoun et al. 1994: 196)
13 In this regard, see the discussion earlier in this section of Benmamoun’s (2000) account of the SVAA in terms of post-
syntactic merger.
14 Another interesting agreement phenomenon that holds across all Arabic dialects arises in compound tense
constructions, where both the auxiliary verb and the main verb show agreement. For a recent analysis of these multiple
agreement conﬁgurations, see Ouali (2014) and references cited there.
16 Arabic Morphosyntax and Generative Grammar
377

Most of the analyses cited in this section posit some parametric difference
to explain the contrast in behaviour between SA and the modern dialects
with regard to the SVAA. Given space constraints, I refer the reader to these
works for the details, simply pointing out here that the rich variation
attested across Arabic dialects provides an area where micro-comparative
analysis can shed light on the similarities and differences between closely
related linguistic systems.15
In sum, the SVAA in SA has continued to provide a fascinating puzzle for
our general assumptions about how agreement obtains in human language.
The variety of analyses discussed in this section (as well as those not discussed
here due to space constraints; see fn. 12) reﬂects the development of the
theory of generative grammar over the last few decades when it comes to the
issue of agreement and the mechanisms that have been put forth for its
licensing in syntactic derivations and representations (e.g., Spec-head agree-
ment vs. Agree). The analyses discussed here also provide an example of how
a P&P approach can explain why Arabic is different: Mohammad’s null
expletive option; Demirdache’s and Fassi Fehri’s incorporated pronominals,
as in the Arabic grammatical tradition; Soltan’s invocation of the null subject
parameter; and Benmamoun’s post-syntactic parameter for subject-verb mer-
ger. Agreement, as any other linguistic phenomenon, thus presents a rich
ground to test our hypotheses regarding the interaction between general
principles of grammar and the parametric options of a given language. The
discussion in this section has shown how a language with rich agreement
such as SA (and other Arabic dialects for that matter) can help us better
understand the variety of ways in which agreement manifests itself in
human languages and ways to account for it in a principled manner.
16.2.2
First Conjunct Agreement
Another interesting agreement phenomenon that has received a good
amount of attention in Arabic syntax is what is commonly known as ﬁrst
conjunct agreement (FCA), where the verb in VS orders agrees with the ﬁrst
conjunct NP rather than with the whole conjoined subject, as illustrated
by the SA examples in (10) below:
(10)
a. zˇa¯Ɂa
zayd-un
wa
hind-u
came.3S GM
Zayd-N O M
and
Hind-N O M
‘Zayd and Hind came.’
b. zˇa¯Ɂa-t
hind-u
wa
zayd-un
came-3 SG F
Hind-N O M
and
Zayd-N OM
‘Hind and Zayd came.’
15 The term ‘micro-comparative analysis’ has come to refer to comparative studies of closely related languages or dialects,
as opposed to ‘macro-comparative analysis’, where the languages are not typologically related.
3 7 8
U S A M A S O LT A N

One of the earliest accounts of FCA in generative grammar is given
in Aoun et al. (1994) with illustrating data from Lebanese Arabic (LA)
and Moroccan Arabic (MA). Aoun et al. argue that what looks like FCA
in
LA
and
MA
is
actually
derived
from
clausal
agreement
in
a biclausal coordinate structure, which is rendered invisible due to
a process of clausal reduction. Under such an analysis, the MA exam-
ple in (11a) is assumed to be derived from the coordinate structure
in (11b):
(11)
a. nʕas
karı¯m
w
marwan
fә-l-bı¯t
slept.3S G M
Kareem
and
Marwan
in-the-house
‘Kareem and Marwan slept in the house.’
(Aoun et al. 1994: 217)
b. karı¯m
nʕas
fә-l-bı¯t
w
marwan
Kareem
slept.3S GM
in-the-house
and
Marwan
nʕas
fә-l-bı¯t
slept.3S G M
in-the-house
The surface structure in (11a) is derived from the underlying biclausal
structure in (11b) via raising the verb from both clauses to the front of
the sentence and moving the PP fә-l-bı¯t from both clauses to the right,
as shown in the syntactic representation in (12), where e in the second
clause is assumed to be a silent verb anaphoric with the verb in the
ﬁrst clause:16
(12)
[nʕasj [IP Karı¯m . . . ti . . .]] w [ej [IP Marwan . . . ti . . .]] [fә-l-bı¯t]i
(Aoun et al. 1994: 217)
One piece of empirical evidence provided by Aoun et al. in support of
this biclausal analysis comes from the fact that in LA and MA, FCA is
incompatible with items of semantic plurality such as the adverbial sawa
(= ‘together’) and plural reﬂexives or reciprocals, as shown by the LA
examples in (13–14):17
(13)
a.
karı¯m
w
marwan
ra¯hˉ -o
sawa
Kareem
and
Marwan
left-PL
together
b.
*ra¯hˉ
karı¯m
w
marwan
sawa
left.3 SG M
Kareem
and
Marwan
together
c.
ra¯hˉ -o
karı¯m
w
marwan
sawa
left-PL
Kareem
and
Marwan
together
(Aoun et al. 1994: 211)
16 The derivation of Aoun et al.’s (1994) syntactic analysis in (12) requires more assumptions than presented here; I refer
the reader to their article for a detailed discussion.
17 Since the meaning of each example is transparent from its word-by-word gloss line, I do not give English translations for
these examples.
16 Arabic Morphosyntax and Generative Grammar
379

(14)
a.
karı¯m
w
marwan
bihˉ ibb-o
hˉ a¯lun/baʕd˙un
Kareem
and
Marwan
love-PL
themselves/each other
b.
*bihˉ ibb
karı¯m
w
marwan
hˉ a¯lun/baʕd˙un
love.SG M
Kareem
and
Marwan
themselves/each other
c.
bihˉ ibb-o
karı¯m
w
marwan
hˉ a¯lun/baʕd˙un
love-PL
Kareem
and
Marwan
themselves/each other
(Aoun et al. 1994: 214)
Munn (1999), by contrast, argues against Aoun et al.’s biclausal analysis,
invoking the distinction between semantic plurality and syntactic plural-
ity (e.g., contrast the semantically plural but syntactically singular English
noun group with the syntactically plural but semantically singular English
noun scissors). Under Munn’s alternative analysis, FCA structures are mono-
clausal, where the conjoined subject is semantically plural but syntacti-
cally singular, hence the singular agreement on the verb, which, according
to Munn, is licensed via the GB syntactic relation of government (but see
Aoun et al. 1999 for a reply to Munn’s analysis).
It has also been pointed out that the biclausal analysis of FCA cannot be
extended to all cases of FCA, including in some other Arabic dialects. For
example, Harbert and Bahloul (2002) and Soltan (2007a, 2007b) argue that
items of semantic plurality are actually compatible with FCA in SA, as the
examples in (15) show:18
(15)
a.
zˇa¯Ɂa-t
hind-u
wa
zayd-un
maʕ-an
came-3S GF
Hind-N O M
and
Zayd-N O M
together-A CC
‘Hind and Zayd came together.’
b.
tuhˉ ibb-u
hind-u
wa
Ɂaxaw-a¯-ha¯
love.SG F-I N D Hind-N O M and brothers-DU.N O M-her
baʕd˙-a-hum
Ɂal-baʕd˙
some-ACC-them the-some
‘Hind and her two brothers love each other.’
(Soltan 2007b: 202)
Harbert and Bahloul (2002) and Soltan (2007a, 2007b) thus conclude that
a clausal reduction analysis is not possible for FCA in SA. Working within
a GB framework, Harbert and Bahloul propose that FCA in SA takes place
under the syntactic relation of government (where Inﬂgoverns the ﬁrst
conjunct and agrees with it). Adopting a Minimalist approach, Soltan
(2007a, 2007b) proposes that FCA is the result of an Agree syntactic relation
between Tense (Inﬂin GB theory) and the ﬁrst conjunct taking place prior
to the adjunction of the second conjunct.
18 Harbert and Bahloul (2002) further point out that items of semantic plurality are also compatible with FCA in Welsh.
Johannessen (1996) similarly provides examples from Czech where FCA does occur in the presence of semantic
plurality items.
3 8 0
U S A M A S O LT A N

More recently, Larson (2013), adopting Hornstein’s (2009) concept of
decomposed Merge, argues that FCA is the result of the conjoined subject
not receiving a syntactic label; hence, the only possible agreement is with
the ﬁrst conjunct. Larson discusses some further FCA data from Arabic
dialects that poses a challenge to previous analyses. One empirical fact,
discussed by Aoun et al. (1999) in their reply to Munn (1999), has to do with
the ambiguity of LA examples such as (16) below, where both a collective
and a distributive reading is possible:
(16)
Ɂәry-o
ʕalya
w
marwa¯n
Ɂәs˙s˙a
read-P L
Alya
and
Marwan
story
‘Alya and Marwan read a story.’
(Larson 2013: 615)
The sentence in (16) could mean that Alya and Marwan read a single story
(collective reading), or that each one of them read a separate story (dis-
tributive reading). Interestingly, when the conjoined subject consists of
a quantiﬁer coordinated with a noun phrase containing a bound pronoun,
as in (17), the ambiguity is not available any more, since only the collective
reading in which each woman–child pair read one story (not two) is
possible:
(17)
Ɂәry-o
kәll
mara
w
Ɂәbn-a
Ɂәs˙s˙a
read-P L
every
woman
and
son-her
story
‘Every woman and her child read a story.’
(Larson 2013: 615)
I refer the reader to Larson (2013) and the references cited above for more
data and discussion of FCA in Arabic dialects.19
It should be clear from the discussion in this subsection how the empiri-
cal facts of FCA in Arabic dialects have given rise to a variety of analyses
with theoretical implications for syntactic analysis over the last thirty
years or so, whether within the GB framework, early Minimalism, or late
Minimalism.20 It is not surprising, therefore, that work on FCA in Arabic
has sparked interest in FCA and similar phenomena in other languages as
well. For example, van Koppen (2005) discusses complementizer FCA in
Dutch; Marusˇicˇ et al. (2007) discuss last conjunct agreement in Slovenian;
Benmamoun et al. (2009) analyse closest conjunct agreement in head-ﬁnal
languages; Bosˇkovic´ (2009) proposes a uniﬁed analysis of both ﬁrst and last
conjunct agreement, and Bhatt and Walkow (2013) offer an analysis of
closest conjunct agreement in Hindi-Urdu.21
19 Another recent analysis of FCA in Arabic is proposed in Crone (2017).
20 Interest in FCA has also extended beyond the formal study of its grammatical properties. For example, Lorimor (2005,
2007) investigates FCA in Arabic with regard to its implications for models of sentence production.
21 A note on the terminology in this paragraph: FCA, as discussed in this section, refers to agreement between a verb and
the ﬁrst conjunct of a postverbal conjoined subject. In some languages (e.g., Slovenian), agreement can take place
between a verb and the second conjunct in the SV order, hence the term last conjunct agreement. Both phenomena
are sometimes grouped together under the term closest conjunct agreement.
16 Arabic Morphosyntax and Generative Grammar
381

16.2.3
Summary
Arabic dialects exhibit a variety of (often puzzling) agreement patterns
that provide relevant data to bear on our theory of grammar regarding
agreement and the mechanism(s) whereby it is licensed. It is expected that
these facts, along with several others, will continue to deepen our under-
standing of variation in agreement patterns cross-linguistically and allow
us to sharpen our theoretical tools of analysis when it comes to investigat-
ing linguistic phenomena at the syntax–morphology interface.
16.3
Case in Standard Arabic
Like agreement, case has been another intensively discussed topic within
the P&P approach, going back to Jean-Roger Vergnaud’s original observa-
tion in the late 1970s on the need for nominals to carry case, whether that
case is morphologically realized or not. The observation led to the inclu-
sion of the Case Filter into GB theory, which states that every NP has to be
case-marked (Chomsky 1981). As we should expect, this has sparked waves
of research on languages with rich case-marking systems, and SA is no
exception. Given the vast literature on case and the narrow scope of this
section, I will focus here on introducing the main facts of case assignment
to subjects and objects in SA, highlighting some of their implications for
the analysis of case within syntactic theory.22
SA, but not the modern Arabic dialects, exhibits a rich case-marking
system, whereby every noun, adjective, and adverb inﬂect for case.23 In
this section, we focus on the basic facts of case assignment to subject and
object NPs in SA, as illustrated in the two examples in (18):24
(18)
a. qaraɁa
al-t˙a¯lib-u
al-kita¯b-a
read.3 SG M
the-student-N O M
the-book-A CC
‘The student read the book.’
b. qaraɁa
t˙a¯lib-un
kita¯b-an
read.3 S GM
student-N O M
book-ACC
‘A student read a book.’
22 For data and discussion of a wide range of case-related facts in SA within a feature-based Minimalist account, see Al-
Balushi (2011).
23 I will not say much in this chapter about case marking of adjectives or adverbs, given that adjectives simply copy the
case of the noun they modify, and adverbs uniformly receive a (presumably non-structural) accusative case. I should
point out that case matching between a noun and its modifying adjectives in SA is part of a general agreement pattern
internal to NPs in Arabic dialects, where an adjective agrees in number, gender, and (in)deﬁniteness with the noun it
modiﬁes. This ‘concord’ phenomenon in itself raises interesting questions for any analysis of agreement and case
internal to NP structures and represents yet another domain of enquiry where data from Arabic dialects can
considerably contribute to general syntactic analysis.
24 Even when phonological constraints prevent a case ending from being pronounced, it is assumed that case is assigned
but is not phonologically spelled-out, an assumption that has been held by Arabic traditional grammarians since the
eighth century AD, and that mirrors the Case Filter currently assumed by modern syntacticians.
3 8 2
U S A M A S O LT A N

As (18) shows, subject NPs appear in nominative case, which is marked by
-u on deﬁnite nominals and -un on indeﬁnites.25 Object NPs carry accusa-
tive case, which is marked by -a on deﬁnite nominals and -an on
indeﬁnites.
Much of the discussion on case in syntactic theory has focused on
nominative and accusative as the two ‘structural’ cases.26 Since each case
is assumed to be conﬁgurationally assigned, the main question has been to
determine the case assigner for each and the structural conﬁguration and
mechanism whereby each case is assigned. With regard to case assigners,
in the Arabic grammatical tradition, the verb is assumed to be the case
assigner of both nominative and accusative cases to subjects and objects.
In generative syntactic analysis, the same assumption more or less still
holds: accusative is assigned by a verbal head (either the lexical verb itself
or some functional head that encodes an agentivity feature), whereas
nominative is assumed to be assigned by the inﬂectional head of the
clause, also a verb-related element since it carries tense/agreement fea-
tures. With regard to the conﬁguration and mechanism whereby case is
assigned, there have been different implementations over the years, dri-
ven by both theoretical and empirical considerations. In GB theory, for
example, there is an asymmetry in the way nominative and accusative
cases are assigned: accusative case assignment is assumed to take place
under a government relation between the verb and its object, while nomi-
native is assigned in a Spec-head relation between Inﬂand the subject in its
Speciﬁer. Both conﬁgurations are represented in (19):
(19)
[IP NPSUBJ Infl  [VP V NPOBJ]]
Spec-head
government
The ﬁrst challenge posed by SA to case theory has to do with the fact that
the subject can appear post-verbally, as shown by the examples in (18),
raising a question as to how postverbal subjects get assigned nominative
case. One proposal in this regard has been to assume that in SA (as well as
in other verb-initial languages) the subject is assigned case by Inﬂunder
government, as in the schematic structure in (20):
(20)
[IP Infl [VP NPSUBJ
[V NPOBJ]]]
government
government
25 There is a small set of noun categories in the language (e.g., broken plurals in a given morphological template such as
masaˉžid ‘mosques’) that do not take the [n] when indeﬁnite. These nouns are described as mamnuˉʕ min as˙ -s˙arf in
the Arabic grammatical tradition, a term that is often translated as ‘diptote’ in reference grammars of SA.
26 In addition to structural cases, SA also has an oblique case that appears on genitive and dative arguments, and is
marked by -i on deﬁnite nominals, and -in on indeﬁnites.‘Non-structural’ cases are often referred to as inherent cases
and are generally assumed to be assigned on the basis of an NP’s thematic role in the sentence (e.g., the possessor
role of an NP, or the recipient role of an indirect object); cf. Chomsky (1981, 1986b). I will not discuss oblique case
here, but, as we should expect, SA has a rich system of inherent cases that is also worthy of full investigation.
16 Arabic Morphosyntax and Generative Grammar
383

Structural case assignment in SA can thus be accounted for if we assume
that it is the syntactic relation of government that licenses case for both
subjects and objects. While the GB notion of ‘government’ as a theoretical
construct is generally no longer assumed within current syntactic analysis
(since the advent of the Minimalist Program), a similar account for the case
facts has been to tie case licensing to the operation Agree, introduced in
the previous section in the discussion of agreement. Under this approach,
case is assumed to be a reﬂex of object–verb agreement and subject–verb
agreement (Chomsky 2001). More technically, accusative case is assigned
to an object as a result of an Agree relation between a verbal head (called
little v) and the object. Nominative case is assigned to a subject as a result of
an Agree relation between an inﬂectional head (referred to as T (for Tense)
in this model) and the subject. The two relations are illustrated in (21):
(21)
[TP T [vP NPSUBJ
v [VP V NPOBJ]]]
Agree
Agree
This Agree-based approach can thus readily account for case assignment to
postverbal subjects in SA.
In addition to accounting for the assignment of nominative case to
postverbal subjects in SA, an Agree-based analysis also allows us to account
for other empirical facts that have not generally received enough atten-
tion. I highlight two here. Consider ﬁrst the case assigned to the Theme
argument of a passivized verb in SA:27
(22)
kutiba-t
al-risa¯lat-u
wrote.PA SS-3S GF
the-message-N O M
‘The message was written.’
As (22) shows, the Theme argument of the passivized verb carries nomina-
tive case. This follows under the standard assumption that passivization
takes away a verb’s ability to assign accusative case; syntactically, this is
reﬂected in the absence of the light v syntactic head that encodes agentiv-
ity in the structure. As a result, the only head available to Agree with and
assign case to the Theme NP is T, hence the resulting nominative case on
that NP.28 A partial syntactic representation is given in (23):29
(23)
[TP T [VP V [NP al-risālat-u]]]
Agree
27 To form passives in SA, the verb appears in a morphological form characterized by a speciﬁc vocalic melody depending
on the tense/aspect of the verb, e.g., the passive verb form of kataba (= ‘wrote’) is kutiba (= ‘was written’), and of
yaktub-u (= ‘write’) is yuktab-u (= ‘is written’).
28 Another interesting fact about passives in SA is that the agent argument has to be implicit; the equivalent to an English
by-phrase is not allowed to surface in SA passive structures.
29 The passive facts in SA show that movement and case marking are not necessarily intertwined, contra assumptions of
early Minimalist syntax, where movement of the Theme NP argument in passives, for example, is assumed to be
triggered by the need to license the case feature of that NP. This is clearly not the case in SA passives, since the Theme
argument of a passive verb can be assigned nominative case in situ.
3 8 4
U S A M A S O LT A N

Nominative case appearing on postverbal subjects of passivized verbs
in SA is what we expect under an Agree-based approach to agreement
and case.
Similar conclusions can be drawn from case and agreement facts in
sentences with deontic modality verbs that subcategorize for a PP that
contains the Experiencer argument, as noted in Soltan (2007a).30 Consider
the following example:
(24)
tazˇib-u
ʕala¯
al-muɁminı¯na
al-s˙ala¯t-u
must-3SG F-IND
on
the-believers.O B L
the-praying-N O M
Closest literal translation: ‘Praying is mandatory for the believers.’
‘The believers are required to pray.’
In (24), the verb agrees in gender with the Theme argument, which, in
turn, surfaces with nominative case.31 This follows under the assumption
that the Experiencer NP Ɂal-muɁminı¯na (‘the believers’) is not available for
agreement or case assignment (since that NP is already assigned oblique
case by the preposition ʕala¯), which results in Agree taking place between
T and the Theme NP, as shown in (25):
(25)
[TP T [vP [PP P NPEXPERIENCER] v [VP V NPTHEME]]]
Agree blocked
Agree possible
The representation in (25) thus simultaneously accounts for the presence
of gender agreement on the modality verb and the appearance of nomina-
tive case on the Theme argument.
SV orders in SA also raise interesting questions for case theory. As shown
by the example in (26), preverbal NPs in the SV order also surface with
nominative case:
(26)
zayd-un
zˇa¯Ɂa
Zayd-N O M
came.3S GM
‘Zayd came.’
This can be construed as evidence that such preverbal NPs are subjects that
arrive at their surface preverbal position via movement from their VP-
internal position, and receive nominative case under Spec-head agreement
with the inﬂectional head T, as has been assumed in Mohammad (1990)
and Benmamoun (2000), among several others:
(27)
[TP NPi
T 
[VP ti V …]]
Agreement and nominative case
30 For a recent thesis on the syntax of modality and control structures in Arabic, see Albaty (2019).
31 Agreement on the verb is not obligatory in (24) due to lack of adjacency between the verb and the Theme NP; cf. the
discussion on adjacency and agreement in Section 16.2.
16 Arabic Morphosyntax and Generative Grammar
385

Notice, however, that topic NPs in SA also surface with nominative case, as
in so-called verbless sentences for instance, which are typically interpreted as
topic-comment structures:32
(28)
a. zayd-un
ʕa¯lim-un
Zayd-N O M
scholar-N OM
‘Zayd is a scholar.’
b. zayd-un
marı¯d˙-un
Zayd-N O M
sick-N O M
‘Zayd is sick.’
As (28) shows, the topic NP ‘Zayd’ appears with nominative case. In addi-
tion, the nominal and adjectival predicates in the sentence also surface
with nominative case, thus supporting the assumption that nominative is
a default case in SA. This assumption is further strengthened by structures
where an overt case-assigning head precedes a preverbal NP. For example,
in matrix or embedded clauses introduced by the complementizer Ɂinna/
Ɂanna, which is an accusative case assigner, the preverbal NP actually
surfaces with the accusative case it receives from that complementizer;
nominative case in this context is strictly disallowed:
(29)
Ɂinna
zayd-an/*zayd-un
zˇa¯Ɂa
C O M P
Zayd-AC C/Zayd-N OM
came.3 SG M
Roughly: ‘Indeed, Zayd came.’
If the preverbal NP were indeed a subject-assigned nominative case, then
we would have to assume that in sentences such as (29) a process of case-
overriding takes place, resulting in accusative replacing nominative on the
NP, an undesirable complication. Under an analysis whereby the preverbal
NP is a topic, the preverbal NP is assigned accusative by the complementi-
zer, thereby obviating the need for a default nominative case.
It should be pointed out that modern Arabic dialects do not display overt
case marking and most of these dialects, not surprisingly, tend to have
stricter constraints on word order. The link between overt case marking
and freedom of word order has been a long-standing observation in both
traditional grammar and modern syntactic analysis. It is another area
where micro-comparative research on the similarities and differences
between SA and the modern dialects in word order and related facts can
contribute further to our understanding of case and the role it plays in
sentence structures in human languages.
To sum up, the case facts discussed in this section represent a small
subset of a large set of facts related to case assignment in SA, a language
32 It is worth pointing out that the syntax of verbless sentences in Arabic is another topic that has received considerable
attention from generative grammar scholars over the years. In this regard, see Bakir (1980), Jelinek (1981), Eid (1983,
1991), Heggie (1988), Fassi Fehri (1993), Benmamoun (2000), and more recently Choueiri (2016), among a few
others.
3 8 6
U S A M A S O LT A N

that is rich in its case morphology and whose grammatical tradition for the
most part centred on the explication of case marking in sentence struc-
tures. As we have seen above, these case facts have implications for case
theory within modern linguistic analysis with regard to the role played by
case features in syntactic derivations and representations, the type of case
assigners involved, the conﬁguration in which case is assigned, and/or the
mechanism(s) via which case is licensed in sentence structures.33
16.4
The Morphosyntax of Negation in Arabic Dialects
The negation patterns exhibited by Arabic dialects have garnered the
interest of syntacticians over the past three decades, given their implica-
tions for grammatical operations such as head movement (the process
whereby two or more syntactic heads combine to form one prosodic
word), and the ways in which morphosyntactic heads encoding tense-
hood, aspect, and modality interact with negation in a given structure;
see Ouhalla (1993), Shlonsky (1997), Benmamoun (2000), Hoyt (2007),
Soltan (2007a, 2014b), Aoun et al. (2010), Alqassas (2012, 2019), and
Benmamoun et al. (2014), among a few others. In this section, I discuss
the different paradigms of negation in SA, as well as the negation pat-
terns manifest in the modern Arabic dialects (with data primarily drawn
from Egyptian Arabic), highlighting in each case their implications for
syntactic analysis.
16.4.1
Negation in Standard Arabic
SA has an intricate negation system. In particular, there are three para-
digms of negation, which can be referred to as tensed negation, agreeing
negation, and non-tensed-non-agreeing negation. I discuss each in turn
below.
Tensed negation refers to structures where the negation particle itself
expresses not only the negative import of the clause, but marks its tense
property as well. In such contexts, the verb appears in the non-tensed
imperfective form and cannot be separated from the negation particle by
any intervening material. There are three particles in this negation para-
digm: lan indicates negation of a future event; lam is for negation of a past
event; and la¯ appears otherwise (e.g., for negation of the present).
Illustrating data is given in (30):
(30)
a. lan
na-qraɁ-a
N E G.FUT
IP FV-read.1 PL-S B J V
‘We will not read.’
33 SA case facts should also bear on further issues related to the structural vs. non-structural cases (see fn. 26), as well as
the recent debate on whether case is agreement-dependent (cf. Bobaljik 2008; Preminger 2014; Baker 2015).
16 Arabic Morphosyntax and Generative Grammar
387

b. lam
na-qraɁ-Ø
N E G.PA ST
I PFV-read.1 PL-JUS
‘We did not read.’
c. la¯
na-qraɁ-u
N EG.P RE S
IPF V-read.1 PL-I N D
‘We do not read.’
The distinctive morphosyntactic property of this paradigm is that tense is
marked on the negative head rather than on the verb. A common analysis
of this fact is to assume that the process known in syntactic analysis as head
movement combines the two heads T and Neg(ation) together (Ouhalla 1991,
1993; Shlonsky 1997; Benmamoun 2000),34 forming a tensed negative
head, as in the schematic representation in (31), irrelevant details aside:35
(31)
[TP [T+Negi]
[NegP ti [VP V …]]]
This Neg-to-T head movement explains why the verb has to appear in the
(default) non-tensed imperfective form with all three particles, despite the
different temporal denotation associated with each. Another interesting
morphosyntactic fact about this negation paradigm is that each particle
requires a different ending on the verb, often called subjunctive, jussive, and
indicative markers. These endings have often been referred to as ‘mood
markers’, but they clearly have no semantic mood import, as the inter-
pretations of the examples in (30) show. Rather, they are purely formal
features.36 As such, they raise interesting questions for syntactic theory,
since, like case and agreement, they represent the type of features that
a syntactic analysis has to account for. I will not discuss this issue here,
however, referring the reader to Fassi Fehri (1993) and Soltan (2007a) for
further discussion and some possible accounts.
The second type of negation in SA is marked by the particle laysa and is
typically used to negate so-called nominal sentences (those without an overt
copula verb, frequently referred to as ‘verbless sentences’ in the generative
literature).37 A key characteristic of laysa is that it inﬂects for person,
number, and gender agreement, as the examples in (32) show:38
34 An example of head movement is the process whereby a verb moves to the head that carries the tense and agreement
features (Inﬂ/T), giving rise to a fully inﬂected verb form.
35 Notice that the structure in (31) assumes that NegP is lower than TP in Arabic clause structure. An alternative structure
(assumed in Diesing and Jelinek 1995 and in Soltan 2007a, 2014b) is that NegP is higher than TP in Arabic dialects.
This has been a point of debate in the literature on negation; I refer the reader to these works and references therein for
further discussion.
36 In the Arabic grammatical tradition, these verbal endings are treated as ‘cases’ for verbs. Fassi Fehri (1993)
incorporates this intuition by referring to these inﬂectional markers as ‘temporal cases’.
37 The marker laysa can also negate verbal sentences in SA, though less frequently; see Fassi Fehri (1993) and
Benmamoun (2000), among several others.
38 In fact, laysa carries the same inﬂectional endings of past tense/perfective verbs (hence its treatment as a ‘verb’ in the
Arabic grammatical tradition), even though the temporal interpretation of sentences negated by laysa is that of the
present tense, as the glosses of the examples in (32) show.
3 8 8
U S A M A S O LT A N

(32)
a. las-tu
maʕs˙u¯m-an
N E G-1S G
infallible-A CC
‘I am not infallible.’
b. laysa-t
t˙abı¯bat-an
N E G-3 S GF
physician-A CC
‘She is not a physician.’
This type of negation raises interesting questions for syntactic analysis,
similar to those discussed in Section 16.2 with regard to verbal agree-
ment. It provides evidence that functional heads such as Neg can carry
agreement features. Because of its inﬂectional properties, Arabic tradi-
tional grammarians treated laysa as a verb and not a particle (see fn. 38).
This is probably plausible if we assume that laysa is actually a compound
head formed from the negative particle la¯ and an (extinct) copular form
Ɂaysa, as has been suggested by some (see Wright 1898).39 If this is the
case, then the laysa paradigm provides further data bearing on issues of
agreement and head movement in syntactic theory. For example, one
can assume that laysa results from Neg being allowed to have agreement
features in some languages, or it may be due to a syntactic process
whereby Neg inherits these features from another head (e.g., the form
Ɂaysa); cf. Benmamoun (2000) and references cited there. Both analyses
are in principle viable, and show that the laysa paradigm has implica-
tions for agreement and the interaction between negation and other
morphosyntactic heads in clausal structure.40
The ﬁnal type of negation in SA is marked by the particle ma¯,
which shows neither tense nor agreement inﬂection. As a result,
this particle is compatible with all tensed verb forms, as shown in
the data in (33):
(33)
a. ma¯
qaraɁa
zayd-un
al-kita¯b-a
N E G
read.3 S GM
Zayd-N O M
the-book-A CC
‘Zayd did not read the book.’
b. ma¯
ya-qraɁ-u
zayd-un
al-kita¯b-a
N E G
IP F V-read.3S GM-IND
Zayd-N O M
the-book-A CC
‘Zayd is not reading the book.’
39 According to David Wilmsen (personal communication), there probably was an Ɂays, but it was an existential particle,
not a verb, analogous to other existential particles in sister languages. As a fusion of laˉ and Ɂays, laysa would originally
have been lays and only later reanalysed as a verb, as proposed in Wilmsen (2016). An alternative analysis is that laˉ
Ɂays was borrowed from some sister language and reanalysed as a verb (see Al-Jallad 2018). A discussion of the
history of laysa is obviously beyond the scope of the present chapter, but no matter what the historical source of laysa
turns out to be, this negation marker raises interesting questions for the analysis of negative structures, particularly
when it comes to issues of agreement and head movement, as pointed out in the text.
40 David Wilmsen (personal communication) points out that reﬂexes of both laysa and lam are attested in Abha, Saudi
Arabia, as discussed in Al-Azraqi (1998). Wilmsen (2016) also lists a number of references for a few other peninsular
dialects with attested reﬂexes of laysa. Similarly, in today’s Arabic dialects, there are some grammatical contexts where
the particle laˉ can be used to express clausal negation (e.g., in disjunction contexts, as will be discussed later in this
section, and in negative imperatives in some dialects).
16 Arabic Morphosyntax and Generative Grammar
389

c. ma¯
sa-ya-qraɁ-u
zayd-un
al-kita¯b-a
N EG
FU T-IPFV-read.3S GM-IND
Zayd-N O M
the-book-A CC
‘Zayd will not read the book.’
This negation paradigm represents a structure where Neg does not com-
bine with any other heads in the clause. Interestingly, it is this ma¯-
paradigm that is now used to express negation in today’s Arabic dialects,
though with some morphosyntactic changes, as we will discuss in the next
subsection.
In sum, the morphosyntax of negation in SA provides rich data for
the investigation of the properties of the head carrying the negative
import of the clause and how it interacts with other syntactic heads in
the structure. As such, it bears on theoretical and empirical issues
related to the study of agreement, tensehood, and head-to-head
merger.
16.4.2
Negation in the Modern Arabic Dialects
As with negation patterns in SA, negation in today’s Arabic dialects has
raised interesting questions for general syntactic analysis; see, for exam-
ple, Eid (1993), Benmamoun (2000), Ouhalla (2002), Hoyt (2007), Aoun et al.
(2010), Alqassas (2012, 2019), and Soltan (2014b), among several others.
Given the limitations of space, I will focus on the negation patterns in
Cairene Egyptian Arabic (CEA), with illustrating data mostly from Soltan
(2014b), but also point out some aspects of cross-dialectal variation in
modern Arabic negation and relevant work in the literature where such
variation is discussed.
16.4.2.1
Negation Patterns in Cairene Egyptian Arabic
There are two main markers for the expression of negation in CEA: the
circumﬁxal marker ma¯ . . . sˇ, and the independent marker misˇ.41 The cir-
cumﬁxal marker is used with perfective verb forms (34a), the imperfective
(34b), pronominals (34c), the existential expletive fı¯(h) (34d), and PPs whose
complement is a pronominal clitic (34e):42
(34)
a.
ma¯-nim-t-i-sˇ
N E G-slept-1 SG-E V-N E G
‘I did not sleep.’
(Soltan 2014b: 92)
41 The negation patterns described here are those in the dialects spoken in Cairo and in most of the northern parts of Egypt.
Negation patterns are different in the dialects spoken in the southern parts of Egypt, known collectively as Saʕıˉdıˉ Arabic,
which exhibits similar patterns to those in North African dialects such as Moroccan Arabic (see Khalafallah 1969 for
Saʕıˉdıˉ Arabic, and Benmamoun 2000 and Ouhalla 2002 for Moroccan Arabic). I should also point out that the
independent negation marker can be pronounced either as miš or muš by CEA speakers. For convenience, I use miš
throughout.
42 Other terms frequently used to refer to circumﬁxal negation are discontinuous negation and bipartite negation.
3 9 0
U S A M A S O LT A N

b. ma¯-bi-y-ruћ-sˇ
il-gamʕa
N E G-A SP-I PFV-go.3S GM- N EG
the-university
‘He doesn’t go to the university.’
c.
ma¯-hu¯-sˇ/ma¯-huwwa-a-sˇ
muhandis
N E G-he-N E G/N E G-he-E V-N EG
engineer
‘He is not an engineer.’
d. ma¯-fı¯-sˇ
ћadd
hina¯
N E G-in.it-N EG
someone
here
‘There is nobody here.’
e.
ma¯-ʕand-u¯-sˇ
ʕarabiyya
N E G-at-him-N E G
car
‘He doesn’t have a car.’
(Soltan 2014b: 95)
The misˇ marker occurs in copular verbless sentences (35a), with the imper-
fective (35b), with future verb forms (35c), and rather marginally with
copular structures with predicate PPs (35d):
(35)
a.
ʔana¯
misˇ
muhandis
I
N E G
engineer
‘I am not an engineer.’
(Soltan 2014b: 92)
b.
misˇ
bi-y-ru¯ћ
il-gamʕa
N E G
A S P-I PFV-go.3S GM
the-university
‘He doesn’t go to the university.
c.
misˇ
ћa-sa¯ﬁr
ʔit˙a¯lya
ta¯nı¯
N E G
F U T-I PFV.travel.1 S G
Italy
again
‘I will not travel to Italy again.’
d.
??misˇ
ʕand-u
ʕarabiyya
N E G
at-him
car
‘He doesn’t have a car.’
(Soltan 2014b: 95–6)
Cross-dialectally, there are negation patterns that are not possible in CEA
but are allowed in other dialects. For instance, Benmamoun (2000) and
Aoun et al. (2010) point out that MA allows adjectival and nominal pre-
dicates to host circumﬁxal negation, as in (36), a pattern shared by S˙aʕı¯di
Egyptian Arabic, as in the examples in (37) from Khalafallah (1969):
(36)
a.
huwa
ma¯-t˙wil-sˇ
he
N E G-tall- N E G
‘He is not tall.’
b.
huwa
ma¯-fəllaћ-sˇ
he
N E G-farmer- N EG
‘He is not a farmer.’
(Aoun et al. 2010: 101)
16 Arabic Morphosyntax and Generative Grammar
391

(37)
a.
li-kta¯b
ma¯-zˇadı¯d-sˇi
the-book
N E G-new-N E G
‘The book is not new.’
b.
ʔir-ra¯zˇil
ma¯-na¯zir-sˇi
l-midrasi
the-man
N E G-principal-N E G
the-school
‘The man is not the school’s principal.’
(Khalafallah 1969: 128)
Similarly, a rare pattern of negation, in which the independent marker misˇ
is used to negate past-tense verb forms, as in (38), is attested in certain
areas of the Sharqiyya Governorate in Egypt, as pointed out in Soltan
(2007a, 2014b):
(38)
ʔana¯
misˇ
liʕib-t
I
N E G
played-1 S G
‘I did not play.’
(Soltan 2014b: 98)
Negation patterns such as (38), where the independent negation marker
occurs with past-tense verb forms indicate that the syntactic projection
hosting Neg has to be higher than the one hosting T, which has been
a topic of debate in the generative literature on Arabic negation (see fn. 35).
As with the case of SA negation, analyses of negation patterns in Arabic
dialects have typically relied on head movement to explain the distribution of
both markers of negation. For example, Benmamoun (2000) argues that the
verb raises to Neg and then to T in past-tense contexts, giving rise to the [ma¯
+V+sˇ] pattern, as in (34a) from CEA, for instance. In verbless copular struc-
tures, by contrast, there is no verbal host, and the independent negation
marker misˇ appears instead, as in (35a) from CEA. This analysis can account
for negation patterns in Moroccan Arabic, where there seems to be a division
of labour between circumﬁxal ma¯ ... sˇ and the independent marker ma¯sˇi, but
the distribution of negation markers in other Arabic dialects does not lend
itself easily to a clear-cut dichotomy between the two patterns. As illustrated
in this section, in CEA, the distribution of the two patterns does not seem to
follow a categorial distinction; for example, both markers can negate verbs.
Even more puzzling are cases of free alternation in usage, where in some
contexts either marker may be used, as in the case of the bi-imperfective
(compare 34b and 35b). This variation in negation strategies raises
a theoretical question as to the level of syntactic representation at which
negation word-formation takes place: does it take place in the syntax proper,
or does it happen post-syntactically in the mapping to the morphological
component? In this regard, the status of head movement as a syntactic versus
post-syntactic operation has been subject to debate (Chomsky 2001; Boeckx
and Stjepanovic´ 2001; Roberts 2010), and data from negation morphosyntax
in Arabic dialects should bear on this debate.
3 9 2
U S A M A S O LT A N

Another interesting fact from negation in Arabic dialects that is yet to be
elaborately discussed in the literature has to do with the fact that the host
of the negation circumﬁx can be a full verbal complex that contains not
just the verb but its cliticized arguments as well. Consider (39) from CEA,
for example, where circumﬁxal negation follows the [verb + object clitic]
complex:
(39)
ma¯-sˇuf-t-u-hum-sˇ
N EG-saw-1S G-E V-them-N EG
‘I did not see them.’
The negative verbal complex can also contain two cliticized arguments in
the case of dative verbs, as in (40):
(40)
ma¯-dda-ha¯-l-na¯-sˇ
N EG-gave.3 S GM-it-to-us-N E G
‘He did not give it to us.’
Negation patterns that involve verbal complexes provide further data
pertaining to the debate regarding the level at which operations such as
cliticization and head movement take place.
There are other negation patterns in Arabic dialects that have not
received as much attention in the generative literature, but they also
have implications for any analysis of negation. Staying mostly with CEA,
I illustrate some of these patterns in the rest of this section.
16.4.2.2
Clausal Negation Patterns with laˉ and walaˉ
The ﬁrst pattern involves the use of la¯ or wala¯ as a clausal negation
marker. This typically occurs in disjunction structures equivalent to
‘neither . . . nor’ in English. Consider the following examples from
CEA:43
(41)
a.
ahmad
la¯
sˇirib
ʔahwa
wa-la¯
sˇa¯y
Ahmad
N E G
drank.3SG M
coffee
and-no
tea
‘Ahmad drank neither coffee nor tea.’
b.
ahmad
wala¯
sˇirib
ʔahwa
wa-la¯
sˇa¯y
Ahmad
N E G
drank.3SG M
coffee
and-no
tea
‘Ahmad drank neither coffee nor tea.’
(Soltan 2014b: 115)
While this particular type of clausal negation has yet to receive a full study
in the literature (but see Soltan 2014b for a sketchy discussion), the use of
wala¯ in so-called negative concord structures has been a topic of analysis in
a number of Arabic dialects (see Hoyt 2010 for Levantine Arabic, Ouali and
43 Notice that maˉ . . . š can also be used for negation in such contexts. The morphosyntactic and semantic/pragmatic
differences between maˉ . . . š on the one hand and laˉ or walaˉ on the other are yet to be fully investigated.
16 Arabic Morphosyntax and Generative Grammar
393

Soltan 2014 for Moroccan and Egyptian Arabic, and Alqassas 2015 for
Jordanian Arabic).
16.4.2.3
The Negative Complex maˉ-hˉ add-i-š
Another interesting negation pattern in CEA that is worth pointing out is
the use of circumﬁxal negation with the indeﬁnite noun hˉ add (= ‘some-
one’) to form ma¯-hˉ add-i-sˇ (= ‘no one’), which may look like a negative
quantiﬁer:
(42)
ma¯-hˉ add-i-sˇ
gih
N EG-someone-EV-N E G
came.3S GM
‘Nobody came.’
Notice, however, that the compound form ma¯-hˉ add-i-sˇ cannot occur in
object position, as the ungrammaticality of (43) shows:
(43)
*Ɂana¯
sˇuf-t
ma¯-hˉ add-i-sˇ
I
saw.1 S G
N E G-someone-E V-N E G
Intended: ‘I saw nobody.’
Instead, when the object is hˉ add, circumﬁxal negation has to be hosted by
the verb:
(44)
Ɂana¯
ma¯-sˇuf-t-i-sˇ
hˉ add
I
N E G-saw-1S G-E V-N E G
someone
Intended: ‘I saw nobody.’
The behaviour of ma¯-hˉ add-i-sˇ indicates that it is not a lexical compound
functioning as a negative quantiﬁer; rather, it has to be formed via head
movement in the syntax or post-syntax. In (44), since the verb is a closer
head to Neg than the object hˉ add, the verb always serves as a host for the
negation morpheme ma¯ . . . sˇ. When hˉ add is in subject position, it is actually
closer to Neg than the verb, and the result is ma¯-hˉ add-isˇ, as in (42). If correct,
this shows that the locality conditions generally assumed to constrain
head
movement
in
generative
grammar
(e.g.,
the
Head
Movement
Constraint of Travis 1984) are at work here.
16.4.2.4
Negation Morphosyntax and Negative Polarity Items
Another negation-related pattern arises in contexts where so-called
negative polarity items (NPIs) occur in a negative sentence.44 Depending
on the dialect, in such contexts the -sˇ sufﬁx is not allowed to surface
when the NPI occurs in preverbal position. This is the case in sen-
tences with the NPI ʕumr (= ‘ever’) in CEA, as illustrated by the gram-
maticality contrast in (45):
44 NPIs are lexical items whose occurrence in the sentence requires negation (or some similar operator). In English, the
words ‘any’ and ‘ever’, for example, are NPIs. Examples of NPIs in CEA are Ɂayy (= ‘any’) and ʕumr (= ‘ever’); see
Soltan (2014a) for extensive data and analysis of polarity-sensitive items in CEA.
3 9 4
U S A M A S O LT A N

(45)
a. ʕumr-ı¯
ma¯-zur-t
masr
ever-my
N EG-visited-1 SG
Egypt
‘I have never visited Egypt.’
b. *ʕumr-ı¯
ma¯-zur-t-i-sˇ
masr
ever-my
N E G-visited-1 SG-EV-N E G
Egypt
Intended reading: ‘I have never visited Egypt.’
This phenomenon of -sˇ deletion in CEA also occurs in syntactic contexts
where expressions such as ʕannak and Ɂinsˇallah are used idiomatically to
mean ‘I don’t give a damn’, as in the following examples from Soltan
(2014b). Notice again the impossibility of -sˇ in such contexts:
(46)
a.
ʕann-ak
ma¯-ge¯t(*-sˇ)
about-you
N EG-came.2S GM-(*N E G)
‘I don’t give a damn if you don’t come.’
b.
Ɂinsˇallah
ma¯-ge¯t(*-sˇ)
God’s willing
N E G-came.2S GM-(*N E G)
‘I don’t give a damn if you don’t come.’
(Soltan 2014b: 110)
In MA, the -sˇ enclitic is in complementary distribution, not just with
ʕummɔr (= ‘ever’), but with all other NPIs (Benmamoun 1997, 2006;
Bahloul 1996), as shown by the examples in (47) from Benmamoun (2006):
(47)
a.
ma-qrit(*-sˇ)
ћətta
kitab
N E G-came.1S G
even
book
‘I didn’t read any book.’
b.
ma-zˇa(*-sˇ)
ћətta
waћəd
N E G-came.3S GM
even
one
‘No one came.’
c.
ћətta
waћəd
ma-zˇa(*-sˇ)
even
one
N E G-came.3S GM
‘No one came.’
d.
nadya
ʕummɔr-ha
ma-zˇat(*-sˇ)
Nadya
ever-her
N E G-came.3 SG F
‘Nadya never came.’
e.
omar
baqi
ma-zˇa(*-sˇ)
Omar
yet
N EG-came.3S GM
‘Omar hasn’t come yet.’
(Benmamoun 2006: 143–4)
The interaction between the morphosyntax of negation and the occur-
rence of NPIs and other lexical elements continues to raise interesting
questions regarding the syntactic structure of negative sentences as well as
their semantics, and Arabic data like those mentioned above can help
deepen our empirical investigation of such issues. For some previous
16 Arabic Morphosyntax and Generative Grammar
395

work in this regard, see Bahloul (1996), Benmamoun (1996, 1997, 2006),
Ouhalla (2002), Hoyt (2010), Soltan (2012, 2014b), Ouali and Soltan (2014),
and Alqassas (2015).
16.4.2.5
Negation and Jespersen’s Cycle
One other aspect of syntactic interest from negation in the Arabic dialects
has to do with its historical development along different lines in the
various Arabic dialects. Under the assumption that the negation patterns
of CEA and MA discussed in this section evolved from the ma¯-paradigm in
some varieties of Classical Arabic, one can conclude that they exhibit
a case of what is generally referred to as Jespersen’s Cycle (Jespersen 1917).
As such, they provide a case study of syntactic change, given that some
dialects like CEA and MA exhibit the stage in the cycle where circumﬁxal
negation evolved, whereas other dialects such as Syrian and Kuwaiti
Arabic do not have a bipartite negation pattern, as shown by the examples
in (48–49) from Syrian Arabic and Kuwaiti Arabic, respectively:
(48)
a.
ma¯
b-tu-fruq
maʕ-u
N E G
AS P-I PFV-differ.3S GF
with-him
‘It doesn’t make any difference to him.’
b.
mu¯
muʕallme
N E G
educated
‘(She’s) not educated.’
(Brustad 2000: 220)
(49)
a.
ma¯
yi-ћibb-ha
N E G
IP F V-love.3S GM-her
‘He doesn’t love her.’
b.
mu¯
ћilwa
N E G
pretty
‘(She’s) not pretty.’
(Brustad 2000: 220)
Some of today’s Arabic dialects seem to be in the process of completing
Jespersen’s Cycle by using the -sˇ enclitic as the clausal negation marker, and
dropping the ma¯- preﬁx altogether.45 This has been reported for the Lebanese
dialect of Baskinta (Abu Haidar 1979), and in one Jordanian dialect reported in
Palva (1972), as shown by the two examples in (50a, b) respectively:
(50)
a.
bi-t-ћibb-sˇ
sˇuɣl
il-bayt
AS P-IPF V-like.3S GF-N E G
work
the-house
‘She doesn’t like housework.’
(Abu Haidar 1979, cited in Benmamoun 2000: 70)
45 Dropping of the -š enclitic has been argued to be phonologically conditioned in some of these dialects (see Hoyt 2007
and Lucas 2010 for data, analysis, and references cited there).
3 9 6
U S A M A S O LT A N

b.
bədd-ı¯-sˇ
want-my-N E G
‘I don’t want.’
(Palva 1972, cited in Benmamoun 2000: 70)
Khalafallah (1969) points out that negation with -sˇ only is an option in
some grammatical contexts in S˙aʕı¯di Egyptian Arabic. Similarly, Hoyt
(2007) and Lucas (2010) cite data from some speakers of Palestinian
Arabic showing that a transition may be underway from discontinuous
negation to a pattern where the enclitic -sˇ is exclusively used to mark
clausal negation. For some recent work on the topic of Jespersen’s Cycle
in Arabic dialects within and outside the generative tradition, including
divergent views on the matter, see Ouhalla (2002), Hoyt (2010), Alqassas
(2012), Lucas (2013), Wilmsen (2013, 2014), Soltan (2014b), and Diem
(2014).46
16.4.2.6
Negation and Imperatives
One ﬁnal morphosyntactic pattern that is worth pointing out arises when
negation interacts with imperatives. It has been noted in the relevant
literature that languages differ in whether or not they allow negation to
occur with imperative verbal morphology. In this regard, Arabic dialects
pattern with those languages where negative imperatives are strictly dis-
allowed. I illustrate here with data from CEA. In (51a), positive imperative
forms are given. As (51b) shows, negation is not compatible with the
imperative verb form. To express prohibition, CEA uses the imperfective
verb form instead, as shown in (51c):
(51)
a. Ɂuktub
write.I M P.2S G M
‘Write.’
b. *ma¯-Ɂuktub-sˇ
N EG-write.I M P.2S GM-N E G
c. ma¯-tu-ktub-sˇ
N EG-I PFV-write.I M P.2S GM-N EG
‘Don’t write.’
The incompatibility between negation and imperative verb forms has been
noted in several languages in the literature; see, for example, Joseph and
Philippaki-Warburton (1987) for Modern Greek, Zanuttini (1991, 1994,
1997) for Romance languages, Rivero (1994a, 1994b) and Rivero and Terzi
(1995), for Slavic/Balkan, and Han (1999) on cross-linguistic variation in
this domain. This incompatibility has been accounted for either in syntac-
tic terms, by relating it to a parametric difference between languages with
preverbal negation such as Arabic and Spanish and those with postverbal
46 For a detailed study of linguistic cycles, including the negative cycle, see van Gelderen (2008, 2011).
16 Arabic Morphosyntax and Generative Grammar
397

negation such as German (cf. Zanuttini 1991), or in semantic terms, by
arguing that having the imperative operator in the scope of negation leads
to an incoherent interpretative representation (cf. Han 2001). Arabic dia-
lects provide further data to explore the adequacy of these existing ana-
lyses as well as other related proposals. In this regard, an interesting
morphosyntactic feature of imperative verb forms in Arabic dialects is
that they lack the person feature, as they are derived from imperfective
verb forms by simply dropping the person preﬁx. For data and
discussion of Arabic imperative morphology, including the puzzle of
negative imperatives, see Benmamoun (2000) and Soltan (2009).
16.4.3
Summary
To sum up this section, negation patterns within a given Arabic dialect as
well as cross-dialectally provide a rich ground for the analysis of clausal
negation and its implications for operations such as head movement,
word-formation, interaction with NPIs, negative concord, disjunction,
and negative imperatives, among several other topics. Continued research
on all these phenomena should help deepen our understanding of the
range of cross-linguistic variation attested in the domain of negation and
should bear on a variety of general topics related to our theory of grammar.
16.5
Conclusion
In this chapter, I have presented a set of empirical facts from Arabic
dialects that have contributed or can potentially contribute to the investi-
gation of human language within the theory of generative grammar,
particularly the P&P model. Arabic varieties offer a rich set of facts related
to agreement, including the subject-verb agreement asymmetry, ﬁrst con-
junct agreement, and the relationship between agreement and linear
order, all of which should shed light on how agreement is to be accounted
for in our theory of grammar. Standard Arabic, with its elaborate case-
marking system, provides rich data to investigate how case is licensed in
the grammar, an issue that has been at the forefront of modern syntactic
analysis over the last four decades. The morphosyntactic properties of
negation patterns in Arabic dialects raise questions for the operation of
head movement, and particularly the grammatical level at which it takes
place. Further negation facts raise questions that bear on NPI-licensing and
disjunction, as well as the incompatibility between negation and impera-
tive verb morphology in some languages. Needless to say, there are many
more domains of syntactic enquiry where Arabic dialects have contributed
(or will eventually contribute) to linguistic analysis, such as the syntax of
interrogative structures, ellipsis, dislocation structures, resumption, the
internal structure of nominals, and possessive structures, to name just
3 9 8
U S A M A S O LT A N

a few. It is my hope that the formal study of syntactic phenomena in Arabic
dialects will continue to reveal intricate empirical facts and raise impor-
tant theoretical questions, all of which should help us in our pursuit of the
investigation of native speakers’ linguistic knowledge, the explanation of
cross-linguistic diversity, and the characterization of language as one of
our most human attributes.
References
Abu Haidar, F. (1979). A Study of the Spoken Arabic of Baskinta. Leiden: Brill.
Al-Azraqi, M. A. (1998). Aspects of the Syntax of the Dialect of Abha (South West
Saudi Arabia). PhD dissertation, Durham University, UK.
Al-Balushi, R. (2011). Case in Standard Arabic: The Untraveled Paths. PhD dis-
sertation, University of Toronto.
Albaty, Y. (2019). Modality, Control and Restructuring in Arabic. PhD disserta-
tion, University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee.
Al-Jallad, A. (2018). The earliest attestation of laysa and the implications for
its etymology. In M. C. A. Macdonald, ed., Languages, Scripts, and Their Uses
in Ancient North Arabia: Papers from the Special Session of the Seminar for
Arabian Studies held on 5 August (2017). Oxford: Archaeopress, 111–19.
Alqassas, A. (2012). The Morpho-Syntax and Pragmatics of Levantine Arabic
Negation: A Synchronic and Diachronic Analysis. PhD dissertation, Indiana
University, Bloomington.
Alqassas, A. (2015). Negation, tense and NPIs in Jordanian Arabic. Lingua,
156, 101–28.
Alqassas, A. (2019). A Multi-Locus Analysis of Arabic Negation: Micro-Variation in
Southern Levantine, Gulf and Standard Arabic. Edinburgh: Edinburgh
University Press.
Aoun, J., Benmamoun, E., and Sportiche, D. (1994). Agreement, word order,
and conjunction in some varieties of Arabic. Linguistic Inquiry, 25, 195–220.
Aoun, J., Benmamoun, E., and Sportiche D. (1999). Further remarks on ﬁrst
conjunct agreement. Linguistic Inquiry, 30, 669–81.
Aoun, J., Benmamoun, E., and Choueiri, L. (2010). The Syntax of Arabic.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Bahloul, R. M. (1996). Negation in French and Tunisian Arabic. In M. Eid,
ed., Perspectives on Arabic Linguistics, VIII. Amsterdam: John Benjamins,
67–83.
Baker, M. (2015). Case: Its Principles and Parameters. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.
Bakir, M. (1980). Aspects of Clause Structure in Arabic. Bloomington, IN:
Indiana University Linguistics Club.
Benmamoun, E. (1996). Negative polarity and presupposition in Arabic. In
M. Eid, ed., Perspectives on Arabic Linguistics, VIII. Amsterdam: John
Benjamins, 47–65.
16 Arabic Morphosyntax and Generative Grammar
399

Benmamoun, E. (1997). Licensing of negative polarity items in Moroccan
Arabic. Natural Language and Linguistic Theory, 15, 263–87.
Benmamoun, E. (2000). The Feature Structure of Functional Categories:
A Comparative Study of Arabic Dialects. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Benmamoun, E. (2006). Licensing conﬁgurations: The puzzle of head nega-
tive polarity items. Linguistic Inquiry, 37, 141–9.
Benmamoun, E. and Choueiri, L. (2013). The syntax of Arabic from
a generative perspective. In J. Owens, ed., The Oxford Handbook of Arabic
Linguistics. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 115–64.
Benmamoun, E., Bhatia, A., and Polinsky, M. (2009). Closest conjunct
agreement in head-ﬁnal languages. Linguistic Variation Yearbook, 9,
67–88.
Benmamoun, E., Abunasser, M., Al-Sabbagh, R., Bidaoui, A., and Shalash, D.
(2014). Sentential negation and the negative copula in Arabic. In
S. Farwaneh and H. Ouali, eds., Perspectives on Arabic Linguistics, XXIV–XXV.
Amsterdam: John Benjamins, 121–38.
Bhatt, R. and Walkow, M. (2013). Locating agreement in grammar: An
argument from agreement in conjunctions. Natural Language and
Linguistic Theory, 31, 951–1013.
Bobaljik, J. (2008). Where’s Phi? Agreement as a post-syntactic operation.
In D. Harbour, D. Adger, and S. Be´jar, eds., Phi-Theory: Phi Features across
Interfaces and Modules. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 295–328.
Boeckx, C. and Stjepanovic´, S. (2001). Head-ing toward PF. Linguistic Inquiry,
32, 345–55.
Bosˇkovic´, Ž. (2009). Unifying ﬁrst and last conjunct agreement. Natural
Language and Linguistic Theory, 27, 455–96.
Brustad, K. (2000). The Syntax of Spoken Arabic: A Comparative Study of Moroccan,
Egyptian, Syrian, and Kuwaiti Dialects. Washington, DC: Georgetown
University Press.
Chomsky, N. (1957). Syntactic Structures. The Hague: Mouton.
Chomsky, N. (1965). Aspects of the Theory of Syntax. Cambridge, MA: MIT
Press.
Chomsky, N. (1981). Lectures on Government and Binding. Dordrecht: Foris.
Chomsky, N. (1982). Some Concepts and Consequences of the Theory of
Government and Binding. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Chomsky, N. (1986a). Barriers. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Chomsky, N. (1986b). Knowledge of Language. New York: Praeger.
Chomsky, N. (1993). A minimalist program for linguistic theory. In K. Hale
and S. J. Keyser, eds., The View from Building 20: Essays in Honor of Sylvain
Bromberger. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1–52.
Chomsky, N. (1995). The Minimalist Program. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Chomsky,
N.
(2000).
Minimalist
inquiries:
The
framework.
In
M. Roger, D. Michaels, and J. Uriagereka, eds., Step by Step: Essays
on Minimalist Syntax in Honor of Howard Lasnik. Cambridge, MA: MIT
Press, 89–156.
4 0 0
U S A M A S O LT A N

Chomsky, N. (2001). Derivation by phase. In M. Kenstowicz, ed., Ken Hale:
A Life in Language. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1–52.
Chomsky, N. and Lasnik, H. (1993). The theory of principles and para-
meters. In J. Jacobs, A. Stechow, W. Sternefeld, and T. Vennemann,
eds., Syntax: An International Handbook of Contemporary Research, vol. 1.
Berlin: Walter de Gruyter, 506–69.
Choueiri, L. (2016). The pronominal copula in Arabic. Brill’s Journal of
Afroasiatic Languages and Linguistics, 8, 101–35.
Comrie, B. (1991). On the importance of Arabic to general linguistic theory.
In M. Eid and B. Comrie, eds., Perspectives on Arabic Linguistics, III.
Amsterdam: John Benjamins, 3–30.
Crone, P. (2017). Arabic ﬁrst conjunct agreement and the interaction
between
constraints
on
agree
and
movement.
In
H.
Ouali,
Perspectives on Arabic Linguistics, XXIX. Amsterdam: John Benjamins,
181–204.
Demirdache, H. (1989). Nominative Subjects in Arabic. Unpublished manu-
script, MIT/ University of Nantes.
Diem, W. (2014). Negation in Arabic. A Study in Linguistic History. Wiesbaden:
Harrassowitz.
Diesing, M. and Jelinek, E. (1995). Distributing arguments. Natural Language
Semantics, 3(2), 123–76.
Eid, M. (1983). The copula function of pronouns. Lingua, 59, 197–207.
Eid, M. (1991). Verbless sentences in Arabic and Hebrew. In B. Comrie and
M. Eid, eds., Perspectives in Arabic Linguistics, III. Amsterdam: John
Benjamins, 31–61.
Eid, M. (1993). Negation and predicate heads. In M. Eid and G. Iverson, eds.,
Principles and Prediction: The Analysis of Natural Language. Amsterdam: John
Benjamins, 135–51.
Fassi Fehri, A. (1993). Issues in the Structure of Arabic Clauses and Words.
Dordrecht: Kluwer.
Han, C.-H. (1999). Cross-linguistic variation in the compatibility of nega-
tion and imperatives. In Proceedings of the 17th West Coast Conference on
Formal Linguistics (WCCFL 17). Stanford: CSLI, 265–79.
Han, C.-H. (2001). Force, negation, and imperatives. The Linguistic Review, 18,
289–325
Harbert, W. and Bahloul, M. (2002). Postverbal subjects in Arabic and the
theory of agreement. In J. Ouhalla and U. Shlonsky, eds., Themes in Arabic
and Hebrew Syntax. Dordrecht: Kluwer, 45–70.
Heggie, L. (1988). The Syntax of Copular Structures. PhD dissertation,
University of Southern California.
Hornstein, N. (2009). A Theory of Syntax: Minimal Operations and Universal
Grammar. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Hoyt, F. (2007). An Arabic Wackernagel clitic? The morphosyntax of nega-
tion in Palestinian Arabic. In M. Mughazy, ed., Perspectives on Arabic
Linguistics, XX. Amsterdam: John Benjamins, 105–34.
16 Arabic Morphosyntax and Generative Grammar
401

Hoyt, F. (2010). Negative Concord in Levantine Arabic. PhD dissertation,
University of Texas at Austin.
Ibn Hisha¯m (1309–1360). Sharhˉ Shudhu¯r Al-dhahab (a 2001 edition). Beirut,
Lebanon: Da¯r Ihya¯ʔ Al-Tura¯th Al-ʿarabiyy.
Jelinek, E. (1981). On Deﬁning Categories: Aux and Predicate in Egyptian
Colloquial Arabic. PhD dissertation, University of Arizona, Tuscon.
Jelinek, E. (1984). Empty categories, case, and conﬁgurationality. Natural
Language and Linguistic Theory, 2, 39–76.
Jespersen, O. (1917). Negation in English and other languages. Reprinted
in Selected Writings of Otto Jespersen (1962). George Allen and Unwin,
3–151.
Johannessen, J. B. (1996). Partial agreement and coordination. Linguistic
Inquiry, 27, 661–76.
Joseph, B. and Philippaki-Warburton, I. (1987). Modern Greek. London:
Croom Helm.
Khalafallah, A. (1969). A Descriptive Grammar of Saeidi Egyptian Colloquial
Arabic. The Hague: Mouton.
Larson, B. (2013). Arabic conjunct-sensitive agreement and primitive
operations. Linguistic Inquiry, 44, 611–31.
Lorimor, H. (2005). Agreement alternations: How optional patterns of agree-
ment arise. In E. Benmamoun and M. T. Alhawary, eds., Perspectives in
Arabic Linguistics, XVII–XVIII. Amsterdam: John Benjamins, 225–42.
Lorimor, H. (2007). Conjunctions and Grammatical Agreement. PhD disserta-
tion, University of Illinois.
Lucas, C. (2010). Negative -sˇ in Palestinian (and Cairene) Arabic: Present and
possible past. Brill’s Annual of Afroasiatic Languages and Linguistics, 2,
165–201.
Lucas, C. (2013). Negation in the history of Arabic and Afro-Asiatic. In
D. Willis, C. Lucas, and A. Breitbarth, eds., The History of Negation in the
Languages of Europe and the Mediterranean, vol. 1: Case Studies. Oxford:
Oxford University Press, 399–452.
Marusˇicˇ, F, Nevins, A., and Saksida, A. (2007). Last-conjunct agreement in
Slovenian. In R. Compton, M. Goledzinowska, and U. Savchenko, eds.,
Proceedings of Formal Approaches to Slavic Linguistics: The Toronto Meeting
(2006). Ann Arbor, MI: Michigan Slavic Publications, 210–27.
Mohammad, M. (1990). The problem of subject-verb agreement in Arabic:
Towards a solution. In M. Eid, ed., Perspectives in Arabic Linguistics, I.
Amsterdam: John Benjamins, 95–125.
Mohammad, M. (2000). Word Order, Agreement and Pronominalization in
Standard and Palestinian Arabic. Amsterdam: John Benjamins.
Munn, Alan. (1999). First conjunct agreement: Against a clausal analysis.
Linguistic Inquiry, 30, 643–86.
Ouali, H. (2014). Multiple agreement in Arabic. In K. Froud and R. Khamis-
Dakwar, eds., Perspectives on Arabic Linguistics, XXVI. Amsterdam: John
Benjamins, 121–34.
4 0 2
U S A M A S O LT A N

Ouali, H. and Soltan, U. (2014). On negative concord in Egyptian and
Moroccan Arabic. In S. Farwaneh and H. Ouali, eds., Perspectives on
Arabic Linguistics, XXIV–XXV. Amsterdam: John Benjamins, 159–80.
Ouhalla, J. (1991). Functional Categories and Parametric Variation. London:
Routledge.
Ouhalla, J. (1993). Negation, focus and tense: The Arabic maa and laa.
Revisita di Linguistica, 5, 275–300.
Ouhalla, J. (2002). The structure and logical form of negative sentences in
Arabic. In J. Ouhalla and U. Shlonsky, eds., Themes in Arabic and Hebrew
Syntax. Dordrecht: Kluwer Academic Publishers, 299–320.
Palva. H. (1972). Studies in the Arabic Dialect of the Semi-Nomadic l-aarma Tribe.
Gothenburg: Acta Universitatis Gothoburgensis.
Preminger, O. (2014). Agreement and Its Failures. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Rivero, M.-L. (1994a). Clause structure and V-movement in the languages of
the Balkans. Natural Language and Linguistic Theory, 12, 63–120.
Rivero, M.-L. (1994b). Negation, imperatives and Wackernagel effects.
Rivista di Linguistica, 6, 39–66.
Rivero, M.-L. and Terzi, A. (1995). Imperatives, V-movement and logical
mood. Journal of Linguistics, 31, 301–32.
Rizzi, L. (1982). Issues in Italian Syntax. Dordrecht: Foris.
Roberts, I. (2010). Agreement and Head Movement: Clitics, Incorporation, and
Defective Goals. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Shlonsky, U. (1997). Clause Structure and Word Order in Hebrew and Arabic: An
Essay in Comparative Semitic Syntax. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Soltan, U. (2006). Standard Arabic agreement asymmetry revisited in an
agree-based minimalist syntax. In C. Boeckx, ed., Agreement Systems.
Amsterdam: John Benjamins, 239–65.
Soltan, U. (2007a). On Formal Feature Licensing in Minimalism: Aspects of
Standard Arabic Morphosyntax. PhD dissertation, University of Maryland,
College Park.
Soltan, U. (2007b). On Agree and postcyclic Merge in syntactic derivations:
First conjunct agreement in Standard Arabic revisited. In E. Benmamoun,
ed., Perspectives on Arabic Linguistics, XIX. Amsterdam: John Benjamins,
175–89.
Soltan. U. (2009). Agree in the functional domain: Evidence from the
morphosyntax of positive and negative imperatives in Standard Arabic.
In A. Ojo and L. Moshi, eds., Selected Proceedings of ACAL 39 (Annual
Conference on African Linguistics). Somerville, MA: Cascadilla Proceedings
Project, 86–99.
Soltan, U. (2012). Morphosyntactic effects of NPI-licensing in Cairene
Egyptian Arabic: The puzzle of -sˇ disappearance resolved. In C. Jaehoon,
E. A. Hogue, J. Punske, D. Tat, J. Schertz, and A. Trueman, eds., Proceedings
of the 29th West Coast Conference on Formal Linguistics. Somerville, MA:
Cascadilla Proceedings Project, 241–9.
16 Arabic Morphosyntax and Generative Grammar
403

Soltan, U. (2014a). On the distribution and licensing of polarity-sensitive
items in Egyptian Arabic: The cases of ʔayy and walaa. In S. Farwaneh and
H. Ouali, eds., Perspectives on Arabic Linguistics, XXIV–XXV. Amsterdam:
John Benjamins, 181–206.
Soltan, U. (2014b). Splitting Neg: The morphosyntax of sentential negation
in Cairene Egyptian Arabic revisited. In K. Froud and R. Khamis-Dakwar,
eds., Perspectives on Arabic Linguistics, XXVI. Amsterdam: John Benjamins,
91–119.
Travis, L. (1984). Parameters and Effects of Word Order Variation. PhD disserta-
tion, MIT.
van Gelderen, E. (2008). Negative cycles. Linguistic Typology, 12, 195–243.
van Gelderen, E. (2011). The Linguistic Cycle: Language Change and the Language
Faculty. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
vanKoppen,M.(2005).OneProbe–TwoGoals:AspectsofAgreementinDutchDialects.
PhD dissertation, Leiden University, LOT–Publications Number 105.
Wilmsen, D. (2013). The interrogative origin of the Arabic negator -sˇ:
Evidence from copular interrogation in Andalusi Arabic, Maltese, and
modern spoken Moroccan and Egyptian Arabic. Zeitschrift fu¨r Arabische
Linguistik, 58, 5–31.
Wilmsen, D. (2014). Arabic Indeﬁnites, Interrogatives and Negators: A Linguistic
History of Western Dialects. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Wilmsen D. (2016). Another Croft cycle in Arabic: The laysa negative exis-
tential cycle. Folia Orientalia, 53, 327–67.
Wright, W. (1898). A Grammar of the Arabic Language. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.
Wurmbrand, S. and Haddad, Y. (2016). Cyclic spell-out derived agreement in
Arabic raising constructions. In Y. Haddad and E. Potsdam, eds.,
Perspectives on Arabic Linguistics, XXVIII. Amsterdam: John Benjamins,
193–226.
Zanuttini, R. (1991). Syntactic Properties of Sentential Negation: A Comparative
Study of Romance Languages. PhD dissertation, University of Pennsylvania.
Zanuttini, R. (1994). Speculations on negative imperatives. Rivista di
Linguistica, 6, 67–89.
Zanuttini, R. (1997). Negation and Clausal Structure: A Comparative Study of
Romance Languages. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
4 0 4
U S A M A S O LT A N

17
Arabic Morphology
Inﬂectional and Derivational
Janet C. E. Watson
17.1
Introduction
In examining inﬂectional and derivational morphology in Arabic, this
chapter begins by discussing the concept of the morpheme, and then
outlining the general distinctions between inﬂectional and derivational
morphology; in Section 17.3, it discusses the basis of derivation in Arabic
and examines derivation in terms of change in meaning and in terms of
change in morphological category. In Section 17.4, it discusses the key
morphological inﬂectional categories in Arabic. The chapter refers to
Classical Arabic where relevant; however, the primary focus is on modern
spoken dialects of Arabic, with data taken predominantly from dialects of
Yemeni Arabic, Saudi Arabic, and Egyptian Arabic.
17.2
Key Concepts
17.2.1
The Morpheme
Words constitute one or more morphemes, where the term ‘morpheme’
is deﬁned as a meaningful unit that cannot be further divided. Thus, an
English word such as ‘house’ comprises a single morpheme, and an
English word such as ‘impossibility’ comprises three morphemes: the
negative morpheme im-, the root -possible- and the nominal sufﬁx -ity.
Languages differ in their exponence of morphemes: English typically
exhibits concatenative morphemes, which can be neatly divided,
although many common words exhibit umlaut, zero morpheme, or
a change in the root in their morphology: thus ‘sing’ plus past tense is
realized as [sang], with the past-tense morpheme expressed as the vowel
[a]; the plural of ‘sheep’ is likewise [sheep] with zero sufﬁx; and the
plural of several words ending in /f/ voice /f/ > /v/, as in: ‘wolf’ > ‘wolves’,
‘hoof’ > ‘hooves’, etc.

In the neatest case, a single morpheme is expressed wholly and only
by a single concrete primitive form, or morph (Spencer 1991;
Haspelmath and Sims 2010: 334): thus, in the word ‘oxen’ ox realizes
the morpheme OX, and the sufﬁx -en realizes the morpheme PLURAL. In
other cases, one morph expresses more than one morpheme or a single
morpheme is realized in more than one morph. An example of the
former is English ‘saw’ which expresses both the morpheme see and
PAST. This is referred to as a portmanteau, cumulative, or multiple-
exponence morpheme. An example of where a morpheme is realized
in more than one morph is ‘children’ where the PLURAL morpheme is
realized both in the sufﬁx -ren and in the change of vowel quality in the
stem child. In other cases, one morph may correspond to more than one
morphosyntactic description, such that there is systematic homonymy
of words within a paradigm (Haspelmath and Sims 2010: 343). In the
Modern South Arabian language Mehri, the form for the third-person
masculine singular verb in the perfect aspect is identical to that of the
third-person feminine plural, while there is a distinction in the imper-
fect. Thus, ktu¯b means both ‘he wrote’ and ‘they f. wrote’, but ‘he writes’
is realized as yəku¯tab and ‘they f. write’ as tkətbən.
Arabic is typically described as a non-concatenative language, where
morphemes cannot be linearly divided: thus, the Classical Arabic verb
labisa ‘he wore’ expresses the lexical sense of ‘wear’, through the root
consonants l-b-s, the active mood, through the vowels a-i, the perfect
aspect, through the prosodic template CvCvC, and the cumulative expo-
nence of third-person, masculine gender, singular number through -a.
Many morphemes in Arabic, however, take the form of afﬁxes, as in -tu
in the verb labis-tu ‘I wore/put on’, -iyy in the adjectival sufﬁx in words such
as yaman-iyy [Yemen-adj] ‘Yemeni’, and the object pronoun -kum in the
word baytu-kum ‘your m.pl. house’.
17.2.2
The Inﬂectional–Derivational Distinction
Morphology is typically divided into inﬂectional and derivational mor-
phology. This is not an undisputed division, as we will see in our examina-
tion of Arabic; however, we will accept the terms inﬂectional and
derivational in the sense of Aronoff (1994: 126), where inﬂection is ‘the
morphological realization of syntax, while derivation is the morphological
realization of lexeme formation’. Thus, derivation has lexicosemantic
properties, while inﬂection has morphosyntactic properties with agree-
ment and government phrase-level properties and relations.
17.2.2.1
Derivational Morphology
Derivation refers to the creation of new lexemes from a root or from more
basic lexemes. The relationship between the base lexeme or root and the
derived lexeme may be one or both of:
4 0 6
J A N E T C . E . W A T S O N

change in morphological category: verb derived from noun; adjective
derived from noun; noun derived from verb; adverb derived from
noun, etc.
change in meaning: negative derived from positive; causative derived from
transitive; intransitive derived from transitive, etc.
In some cases, there is neither a change in category nor a (signiﬁcant)
change in meaning, but we know that the derived lexeme differs from the
base. An example from English is ‘cyclic’ and ‘cyclical’ – both are adjectives
and have the same basic meaning; however, ‘cyclic’ means to move in
circles or happen at regular intervals while ‘cyclical’ means recurring at
regular intervals. The fact that these are different lexemes and both are
listed in the lexicon means that -al in this case is a derivational morph. We
can then follow Beard (2001: 55) and say that ‘Derivation refers to any
process that results in creation of a new word.’
Derivational morphology is typically less productive than inﬂectional
morphology and may reﬂect historical stages in a language: in English,
certain derivational sufﬁxes have shown periodic rises or drops in popu-
larity; the nominal sufﬁx -dom, for example, which afﬁxes to nouns to
produce a noun of place, dropped in popularity of use from the twelfth
century to a low in the eighteenth century and rose again in the nineteenth
century (Lieber 2010: 68). Derivational morphology also tends to exhibit
more exceptions than inﬂectional morphology: in English, the negative
sufﬁx depends on the type of word and, in cases, on the phonology: thus,
de- can only be used in verbs, as in ‘debug’, ‘delouse’, un- can be used in
verbs and adjectives, and i(N)- can be used in adjectives and in nouns
derived from negated adjectives.
17.2.2.2
Inﬂectional Morphology
Inﬂection refers to word-formation that neither changes the category of
the word nor creates new lexemes; rather it serves to provide the correct
grammatical form of a lexeme within a particular context. Inﬂectional
morphology is also characterized by being typically more productive
than derivational morphology and having fewer exceptions. Thus, if we
take an English verb such as ‘to sew’, the form of the lexeme differs
according to the tense and aspect, and number and person of the subject
required by the syntax, as in: ‘he sew-s’, ‘I sew’, ‘they are sew-ing’, ‘you sew-
ed’. However, in many languages, common verbs exhibit irregular forms.
We see this in English ‘to be’, for example, and German sein. Afﬁxational
inﬂectional morphemes are also afﬁxed to a derived lexeme and thus form
edge morphemes in languages that exhibit morpheme concatenation. In
English, from the adjective ‘responsible’ we can derive the noun ‘respon-
sibility’ and then in a syntactic context such as ‘he has many. . .’ add the
plural inﬂectional morpheme -s to give ‘responsibilities’. In Arabic, which
exhibits
both
concatenative
and
non-concatenative
morphology,
17 Arabic Morphology
407

derivational morphology more commonly uses non-concatenative expo-
nence, whereas inﬂectional morphology more commonly uses concatena-
tive exponence. For a summary of the differences between derivation and
inﬂection, see Plag (2003: 17). For discussions of the problems with apply-
ing these categories to inﬂectional and derivational morphology, see Bauer
(2003: 91ff), Stump (2001: 13ff.), and Beard (2001: 44ff.).
Since word-formation essentially occurs before phrase-level inﬂection,
I discuss derivation in Section 17.3 and look at inﬂection in Section 17.4.1
17.3
Derivational Morphology
In this section, I examine the basis of derivation in Arabic. I then examine
derivation involving change in meaning within a morphological category,
and derivation involving change in morphological category.
17.3.1
The Basis of Derivation in Arabic
In discussing word-formation, we ﬁrstly have to determine the basis of
derivation. In Arabic, the most basic of content words comprise more than
one element of meaning. Thus, Form I verbs in the citation form (perfect,
3 ms) express the lexical information of the verb, the perfect aspect, and
person, number, and gender. Nouns of the template CvCC, such as samn
‘ghee’ and bint ‘girl’ express the lexical information of the noun, the
nominal template CvCC, and inherent gender. In derived, and some inﬂec-
tional, forms, the prosodic template is a key feature. What is it, though,
that maps onto the template? The templatic nature of Arabic has drawn
many researchers to establish the consonantal root as a morpheme that
maps onto templates (cf. McCarthy 1981; Watson 2002: 126; Davis and
Zawaydeh 1999a, 1999b): according to this view, Cairene and San’ani libis
‘he wore’ comprises three morphemes: the consonantal root /l-b-s/, the
template CvCvC, and the vocalic melody /i/, and the noun samn ‘ghee’
comprises the consonantal root /s-m-n/, the template CvCC, and the vocalic
melody /a/.
More recent work has argued that Arabic word-formation is based either
on a fully vocalized stem, or on whole words (e.g., Ussishkin 1999).
Importantly,
McOmber
(1995),
Ratcliffe
(1997,
1998,
2013),
and
Benmamoun (1999, 2003) have shown that Form I verb formation is
based on a vocalized CCvC stem rather than on a consonantal root.
McOmber (1995), reiterated by Ratcliffe (2013), shows that there is an
implicational relationship between the vowel of the perfect and the
vowel of the imperfect: if the vowel of the imperfect is /u/, the rightmost
vowel of the perfect will be /u/; if the vowel of the imperfect is otherwise
1 For further details of Arabic derivational and inﬂectional morphology, see Ryding (2005, 2014).
4 0 8
J A N E T C . E . W A T S O N

[+high], the vowel of the perfect will be [+low], and if the vowel of the
imperfect is [+low], the vowel of the perfect will be [+high]. This counters
McCarthy’s (1981) view, and one that is reﬂected in Arabic dictionaries and
lexicons, that the perfect is primary in the Arabic verb. Ratcliffe (1997)
argues further that there is no evidence for the vowel of the CCvC having
independent morphological status, such that the basic morpheme behind
‘to write’ is ktub. The imperfect stem is homophonous with the imperative,
and in many languages the imperative is identical to the bare verb stem,
even in cases of irregular verbs. Thus, the irregular English verb ‘to be’ has
the imperative ‘be!’, and the German verb sein has the imperative forms
based on sei-, in contrast to all present forms of the verb.
These authors also point to the phonological similarity between the
imperfect stem and a variety of derived nominals: the stem of the noun
of place frequently shares a vowel with that of the imperative, as in: (ʔi)
jlis ‘sit!’ and ma-jlis ‘council; sitting room’, sbah˙ ‘swim!’ and ma-sbah˙
‘swimming pool’. There are, however, several counterexamples, where
the stem of the derived nominal is not identical to the imperfect stem, as
in: (ʔu)dxul ‘enter!’ and ma-dxal ‘entrance’, (ʔu)xruj ‘go out!’ and ma-xraj
‘exit’.
There is, however, still signiﬁcant evidence for the primacy of the con-
sonantal root in certain derivations. Watson (2006), Idrissi et al. (2008),
Benmamoun (2016), and Davis (2016) argue that either the consonantal
root or the stem can be involved in word-formation processes, and that the
choice of consonantal root or fully vocalized stem depends on the parti-
cular word-formation process. Idrissi et al. (2008) propose the following
mappings: root > Word1 > Word2, whereby some processes involve root >
Word1, and other processes involve Word1 > Word2. In this chapter, I will
accept that the basis of the verb is the imperfect stem, and that this stem is
involved in various other word-formation processes; I also accept that the
stem is involved in many other derivational processes; however, I also
follow Watson (2006), Idrissi et al. (2008), Benmamoun (2016), and Davis
(2016) in arguing that certain types of derivation do make reference to the
consonantal root.
In the subsections below, I examine examples of derivation in terms of
change in meaning and then change in morphological category.
17.3.2
Change in Meaning
Change in meaning in the Arabic verb system includes increase and
decrease in valency in relation to the basic verb. Increase in valency gives
verbs that express, for example, causative, transitive, conative, intensive,
associative, and reciprocal; decrease in valency gives verbs that express,
for example, intransitive, passive, medio-passive, and reﬂexive. Change in
meaning in the Arabic nominal system includes the diminutive and the
augmentative (in very few dialects).
17 Arabic Morphology
409

17.3.2.1
Verbs
I assume that in the unmarked case, the non-basic verbal forms are
derived from the perfect stem of the basic Form I verb. Thus, Forms II,
III, and IV, which typically add valency to the basic Form I, can be said
to be derived through afﬁxation of a mora to the Form I perfect stem.
In the causative/transitive (Form II), the mora associates with the
medial consonant; in the conative/reciprocal (Form III), the afﬁxed
mora associates with a vowel. If we accept that the perfect stem of
the basic Form I verb is derived from the imperfect stem, then the
following mapping takes place to derive Form II and Form III stems
(modiﬁed from Davis 2016):
Imperfect Form I stem > perfect Form I stem > Form II / Form III
Causative/transitive (perfect): xruj > xaraj > /μc + xaraj/ > [xarraj] ‘to remove’
Conative/associative (perfect): ktub > katab > /μv + katab/ > [ka¯tab] ‘to
correspond’
The Form IV perfect stem is derived by the preﬁxed mora associating with
the initial root consonant, with /a/ of the preﬁx ʔa- associating with the
original mora, as in:
Causative/transitive (perfect): xruj > xaraj > /μcr + xaraj/ > [ʔaxraj] ‘to dislodge’
The verbal forms which typically show reduction in valency in relation to
the base of derivation are Forms V, VI, VII, VIII, and X. These verbs are
derived not by mora afﬁxation, but rather by afﬁxation of a preﬁxal
detransitivizing consonant. Forms VII and VIII are derived from the
basic Form I, through preﬁxation of n- and t- respectively. Examples of
Form VII include: (i)nsˇag˙al ‘to be preoccupied‘ and (i)nsˇall ‘to be paralysed’.
In Classical Arabic and dialects such as San’ani, the t- of Form VIII was
historically subject to metathesis with the initial root consonant, to give
(i)CtaCaC, as in: isˇtag˙al ‘to work’, ih˙ tabas ‘to be imprisoned’. Forms V, VI,
and X are derived from already derived verbs. Thus in Classical Arabic,
Forms V and VI are derived from Forms II and III respectively through
preﬁxation of ta-. This is realized in the dialects as it- or ti- ~ ta-, as in
Cairene itʕallim ‘to learn’ and itʕa¯win ‘to help e.o.’ and San’ani tah˙ a¯ka ‘to
talk’ and talat¯t¯am ‘to put on a face veil’. Form X was originally the passive
or reﬂexive of Form IV (McCarthy and Prince 1990: 38), derived through
t-preﬁxation and metathesis with the consonant of the causative preﬁx.
This was at a time when Form IV took not initial hamza as it does in
Classical Arabic and the vast majority of modern Arabic dialects now, but
the causative preﬁx sa- (Zaborski 1999). The safʕal form is still attested in
Hassaniya (Taine-Chaikh 2008), and occurs in the verb sadʕa in the Ibbi
variety of Yemeni Arabic (Watson 2007). Historically, Form X was derived
as follows:
faʕal > safʕal > tsafʕal > stafʕal
4 1 0
J A N E T C . E . W A T S O N

17.3.2.2
Nominals
Change in meaning in the nominal system gives diminutives, and in
rare cases, augmentatives. In the non-concatenative literature, diminu-
tives have received much attention mainly because they take the same
templatic pattern as broken plurals (cf. Section 17.4.3.1) in the
unmarked case. In Classical Arabic and many dialects, a trochaic foot
is extracted from the noun or adjective base and mapped onto an iamb
(CvCvv). The ﬁnal element of the base is added, and the vocalic melody
is overwritten by the diminutive vocalic melody /u-ay-(i)/. Consider the
following:
kalb ‘dog’ [kal] > [kalxx] > [kalxxb] > vocalic overwriting [kulayb] ‘little dog’
maktab ‘ofﬁce’ [mak] > [makxx] > [makxxtab] > vocalic overwriting
[mukaytib] ‘small ofﬁce’
mifta¯h˙ ‘key’ [mif] > [mifxx] > [mxfxxta¯h˙ ] > vocalic overwriting
[mufaytı¯h˙ ] ‘small key’
s˙ag˙ı¯r ‘small’ [s˙ag˙i] > [s˙ag˙ii] > [s˙ag˙iir] > vocalic overwriting [s˙ug˙ayyir]
‘very small’
The dialects vary in the productivity of diminutives. Cairene has several
nouns and adjectives formed on the diminutive pattern above, as in
ʔurayyib < ʔarı¯b ‘near’, rufayyiʕ < rafı¯ʕ ‘thin’, ʔut
˙
e¯t
˙
a < ʔit
˙
t
˙
a ‘cat’, but produc-
tive diminutives are formed today using the sufﬁx -a¯ya (Woidich 2006).
San’ani appears to have non-concatenatively formed diminutive nominals
only in the case of zug˙ayyir, zug˙ayrı¯, and zug˙ayyirı¯ ‘small’, in set children’s
games, and in a few ﬁxed expressions (Watson 2006). The -ı¯ ending in
San’ani afﬁxed to a non-count noun of a plural pattern can function as
a diminutive to indicate small amount, as in: sah˙ a¯wig ‘spices’ > sah˙ a¯wigı¯
‘small amount of spices’ (Naïm 2009: 107).
17.3.3
Change in Category
Nouns derived from verbs include the agentive noun, noun of place, noun
of instrument, and noun of profession. For reasons of space, I will restrict
the discussion here to the derivation of agentive nouns and nouns of
profession.
The agentive noun involves mora preﬁxation to the perfect stem of the
basic Form I verb with overriding of the vocalic melody, or preﬁxation of
mv- to the imperfect stem of a derived verb. The derivation of the nouns
da¯ﬁʕ ‘motive; incentive’ and musa¯ﬁr ‘traveller’ are given below:
dafaʕ > /μv + dafaʕ/ > /da¯faʕ/ > active vocalic melody > [da¯ﬁʕ] ‘motive;
incentive’
sa¯ﬁr > /mu- + sa¯ﬁr/ > [musa¯ﬁr] ‘traveller’
The noun of profession is derived from the Form I perfect stem through
mora preﬁxation, which induces lengthening of the medial consonant,
17 Arabic Morphology
411

and mora sufﬁxation, which induces lengthening of the rightmost vowel,
as mapped below:
xabaz > /μc + xabaz + μv/ > [xabba¯z] ‘baker’
The faʕla¯n ~ ﬁʕla¯n adjective in, for example, Cairene and Omani is an
instance of an adjective derived from a Form I intransitive verb. This is
derived through mapping of the root consonants of the intransitive verb
onto the template CvCC and sufﬁxation of the adjectival ending -a¯n, as in:
kisil > /kasl + a¯n/ > [kasla¯n] ‘lazy’
nisi > /nisi + a¯n/ > [nisya¯n] ‘having forgotten’
Adjectives derived from nouns include the relational or nisba adjective,
which is derived through sufﬁxation of the adjectival ending -ı¯ ~-i to the
nominal stem. Where the base noun ends in the feminine ending -ah, or -ih
or in i˛a¯, sufﬁxation ignores the vocalic ending of the base:
mas˙r + i > mas˙ri ‘Egyptian’
yaman + i > yamani ‘Yemeni’
burtaga¯l + ı¯ > burtaga¯lı¯ ‘orange’ (San’ani)
gabı¯lih > gabı¯lı¯ ‘tribesman’ (San’ani)
Verbs derived from nominals include denominal verbs which are com-
monly formed from loanwords, and the derived Form IX. Form IX, which is
rare in most dialects of Arabic today, takes the template (ʔ)aCCaCC, with
a ﬁnal geminate. This form expresses involuntarily adopting a colour or
a defect and is most probably derived through mora sufﬁxation from the
corresponding adjective, which takes the template (ʔ)aCCaC. In the dia-
lects today, the initial hamza in both the adjective and the verb is realized
only in utterance-initial position. The derivation of Form IX can be mapped
as follows:
ʔaswad > /ʔaswad + μc/ > [(ʔ)aswadd] ‘to become black’
Verbs derived from nouns almost invariably take the Form II template, but
in some cases take the Form III template, as in ʕa¯yad below. In this case, the
root consonants of the noun are mapped onto the template of the Form II
or Form III verb:
s˙a¯bu¯n > s˙abban ‘to soap’
bawdar > baddar [realized as battar] ‘to powder’ (San’ani, Watson 1993)
sˇita > sˇatta ‘to ﬂower in winter’, ʕı¯d > ʕa¯yad ‘to go Eid visiting’ (Omani, Holes
2008: 488)
In some cases, verbs are derived from prepositional phrases or grammati-
calized adverbs, as in San’ani:
ba-h˙ ı¯n ‘early’ > bah˙ h˙ an ‘to be early’
bi-xayr ‘well’ > baxxar ‘to cure’ (Watson 2006: 194)
4 1 2
J A N E T C . E . W A T S O N

17.4
Inﬂection
17.4.1
Parts of Speech Affected by Inﬂection
The parts of speech which exhibit inﬂectional categories in Arabic are
nouns, pronouns, verbs, and adjectives. In Classical Arabic, adverbs also
exhibit accusative case explicitly. In spoken Arabic, case is not marked.
17.4.2
Inherent Inﬂection and Contextual Inﬂection
In discussing inﬂection, we have to acknowledge a distinction between
inherent inﬂection and contextual inﬂection: contextual inﬂection depends
on the syntactic context in which a word ﬁnds itself, whereas inherent
inﬂection is not determined by the syntax, but is relevant to syntax and
may affect the inﬂectional categories of agreeing or governed elements.
Case is a typical example of contextual inﬂection, where the case assigned
depends on the governing head. In Arabic, gender and number are inherent
in pronouns and nouns, but contextual in verbal subject pronouns, in verb-
subject-verb phrases, and in adjectives in noun phrases.
17.4.3
Inﬂectional Morphological Categories
The main inﬂectional categories for Arabic are number, gender, person,
mood, voice, aspect, tense, deﬁniteness, case, and degree. Of these, number,
gender, and, in some cases, voice are inherent features of nouns and contex-
tual features of adjectives. Deﬁniteness is an inherent feature in pronouns,
including demonstrative pronouns, and in proper nouns, and a contextual
feature in adjectives and common nouns. The categories number, gender, and
person are inherent in personal pronouns, and are also marked on verbs. The
categories mood, voice, aspect, and tense relate to verbs, and voice and aspect
relate to participial adjectives. Case in Classical Arabic relates to nouns,
adjectives, and adverbs. The category degree relates to adjectives.
17.4.3.1
Number
Number in Arabic has three subcategories applicable to count nouns: sin-
gular, dual, and plural, and two categories applicable to collective nouns:
collective and singulative. Of these, dual is restricted to nouns in spoken
Arabic, and in many dialects occurs only with a small closed set of nouns. In
San’ani, for example, the dual is restricted to nouns of measurement and
time, as in: sa¯ʕatayn ‘two hours’, yawmayn ‘two days’, girsˇayn ‘two riyals’
(Watson 2009: 113). Dual nouns in Classical Arabic take dual subject pro-
nouns in verb phrases, and dual adjectival endings in noun phrases. In
modern Arabic dialects, agreement with dual animate (human) nouns is
through plural subject pronouns in verb phrases and plural adjectival forms
in noun phrases. Agreement with dual inanimate nouns is commonly
through feminine singular pronouns in verb phrases and feminine singular
17 Arabic Morphology
413

adjectival forms in noun phrases, as in San’ani: as-sanatayn as-sa¯bigah ‘the
last two years’. The singulative is formed from collective nouns through
sufﬁxation of the feminine -ah ending in Classical Arabic and many dialects,
and in San’ani by -ı¯, as in mawz ‘bananas’ > mawzı¯ ‘a banana’, du¯d ‘worms’ >
du¯dı¯ ‘a worm’, g˙urra¯b ‘crows’ > g˙urra¯bı¯ ‘a crow’ (Naïm 2009: 107).
Plural number in nouns has received much attention in work on Arabic
morphology, due to the fact that formation of the unmarked plural
involves non-concatenative morphology. Singular nouns take a sound
plural ending in a subcategory of nouns, and a broken plural pattern in
the default case. Sound masculine plural endings are attached to derived
nouns indicating masculine human, and agentive adjectives, as in San’ani:
xabba¯z > xabba¯zı¯n ‘bakers m.’
na¯yim > na¯yimı¯n ‘sleeping m.pl.’
musa¯ﬁr > musa¯ﬁrı¯n ‘travellers m.’
There is a large number of broken plural patterns, as shown in Ratcliffe
(1998) and McCarthy and Prince (1990). Due to space restrictions and to the
fact that the broken plural has been researched extensively, I will only
mention here the formation of the unmarked broken plural. Here the pro-
sodic template of the broken plural of nouns is identical or similar (depend-
ing on the dialect) to the diminutive pattern, seen above. Thus the broken
plural is formed from the singular base by extracting the initial trochaic foot,
mapping that onto an iamb, adding the rest of the base, and overwriting the
vocalic melody of the singular with that of the plural /a-i/, as in:
maktab [mak] > [maka¯] > [maka¯tab] > vocalic overwriting [maka¯tib] ‘ofﬁces’
mifta¯h˙ [mif] > [mifa¯] > [mifa¯tı¯h˙ ] > vocalic overwriting [mafa¯tı¯h˙ ] ‘keys’
Where the initial trochaic foot consists of a long vowel, /w/ is inserted to
provide an onset for the second syllable of the iamb, as in:
s˙a¯bu¯ n [sa¯] > [s˙awa¯] > [s˙awa¯bu¯ n] > vocalic overwriting [s˙awa¯bı¯n] ‘soaps’
17.4.3.2
Gender
Gender in Arabic has two subcategories: masculine and feminine. Nouns
typically show inherent gender, though derived nouns may take an expli-
cit morphological sufﬁx -ah, -eh, or -ih, depending on the dialect, to express
feminine, as in San’ani Arabic: mudı¯r ‘manager m.’, mudı¯r-ih ‘manager f.’.
With the exception of nouns denoting animate beings of feminine sex,
gender in many unmarked nouns is frequently arbitrary across the dia-
lects, and often differs from the gender classiﬁcation of unmarked noun
cognates in Classical Arabic (Procha´zka 2004; Kherbache 2013). Thus, ba¯b
‘door’, malh˙ ‘salt’, and xubz ‘bread’, grammatically masculine in Classical
Arabic, are feminine in the Algerian dialect of Beni Hammou (Kherbache
2013), and many paired body parts, grammatically feminine in Classical
Arabic, are masculine in various modern dialects (Procha´zka 2004).
4 1 4
J A N E T C . E . W A T S O N

Pronouns express gender in all but the ﬁrst person in most varieties of
Arabic. In some Yemeni dialects spoken in the western highlands, how-
ever, the independent ﬁrst-person singular pronoun exhibits a distinction
between masculine and feminine: ana ‘I m.’, anı¯ ‘I f.’ (Behnstedt 1985: xxx).
Within pronouns and verbal inﬂections, many urban Arabic dialects
restrict gender distinction to the singular second- and third-person pro-
nouns only. Bedouin dialects and Yemeni dialects as a whole show gender
distinction for second- and third-person plural pronouns as well.
Demonstratives typically express gender distinction in the singular
demonstratives, but less commonly in the plural demonstratives. Najdi
Arabic shows masculine/feminine distinction in all demonstratives (exam-
ples from Ingham 2008: 329), as in Table 17.1.
In Rija¯l Almaʕ, a dialect of Arabic spoken in south-west Saudi Arabia, the
gender category includes animacy, which is shown in the plural clausal
deﬁnite articles (in the literature commonly referred to as the relative pro-
noun, Vicente 2009; Watson 2011: 860–1). In this dialect, the clausal deﬁnite
article is d¯ a¯ for masculine singular, ta¯ for feminine singular, wula for human
plural, and ma¯ for non-human plural (Asiri 2007, 2009). Examples from Asiri
(2007, 2009) include: antah rayta m-walad d¯ a¯ sˇarad ‘have you m.s. seen the boy
who ran away?’, antah rayta m-brat ta¯ sˇarad ‘have you f.s. seen the girl who ran
away?’ ga¯balt im-ʕuwa¯l wula¯ sarag/u m-mah˙ all ‘I met the boys who stole from the
shop’, im-mah˙ a¯ll ma¯ bana/ha ‘the houses that he built’.
The gender category is affected by attrition across Arabic dialects (cf.
Corbett 1991: 315 for attrition in gender systems). The youth of today in
Rija¯l Almaʕ are no longer aware of the animacy category in the clausal
deﬁnite article, and reduce all gender/number clausal deﬁnite articles to
a pan-Arabic illi (Asiri 2007, 2009). In San’ani Arabic, which maintains the
feminine–masculine distinction in plural second- and third-person pro-
nouns, a series of verbs with a feminine plural subject often begin with
a feminine plural verb form, but take following unmarked masculine
plural verb forms (Watson 1993: 124), as in:
an-nisa¯ʔ yudxulayn yith˙ ammamayn kullahin u-yuxrujayn u-yiksiru¯ bayd¯˙
ah
‘the women all come in and bathe, then they go out and break an egg’
(Rossi 1939: 96)
Table 17.1 Demonstrative pronouns in
Najdi Arabic
Masculine
Feminine
Near s.
haˉdˉa, dˉa
h
˙
aˉdˉi, dˉi
Near pl.
haˉdˉoˉla, dˉoˉla, dˉoˉl
haˉdˉoˉli
Far s.
haˉdˉaˉk, dˉaˉk
haˉdˉ ıˉć , dˉ ıˉć
Far pl.
haˉdˉoˉlaˉk, dˉoˉlaˉk
haˉdˉoˉlıˉć , dˉoˉlıˉć
17 Arabic Morphology
415

17.4.3.3
Person
Classical Arabic and spoken Arabic dialects show a three-way person dis-
tinction: ﬁrst, second, and third. The person category is relevant in inde-
pendent and dependent personal pronouns and in verbal inﬂections. The
independent pronoun pattern for San’ani Arabic is given in Table 17.2.
17.4.3.4
Aspect
Arabic shows two aspects in the verb: the perfect and the imperfect. Of these,
the perfect is conjugated by pronoun sufﬁxes only, while the imperfect takes
person/gender preﬁxes and plural person(/gender) sufﬁxes for the second and
third persons. The perfect is frequently described as the sufﬁx conjugation,
and the imperfect as the preﬁx conjugation. Dialects spoken in north-west
Africa, and some western Egyptian dialects, distinguish the ﬁrst-person plural
in the imperfect from the singular through a plural sufﬁx, as in niktib ‘I write’
versus niktibu ‘we write’ (cf. Behnstedt undated).
The inﬂected verbs provide examples of different types of morphologi-
cal exponence. I take as example here the perfect and imperfect paradigms
of gambar ‘to sit’ in San’ani Arabic.
In the perfect paradigm (Table 17.3), the morpheme PERFECT is expressed
across two elements: in the template of the stem, CvCCvC, and in the sufﬁx.
In the case of the third-person masculine singular form, 3 ms is expressed by
absence of a sufﬁx, thus by a zero morph. The -t sufﬁx is an instance of
syncretism, expressing both ﬁrst-person singular and second-person mascu-
line singular. All sufﬁxes are instances of multiple exponence, expressing
both person and number. The second- and third-person sufﬁxes express
person, number, and gender.
Table 17.2 Independent pronouns in San’ani
Arabic
Person
Gender
Singular
Plural
1
m/f
anaˉ
ih
˙
na
2
m
ant
antuˉ
f
antıˉ
antayn
3
m
huˉ
hum
f
hıˉ
hin
Table 17.3 Perfect paradigm of gambar ‘to sit’
in San’ani Arabic
Person
Gender
Singular
Plural
1
m/f
gambar-t
gambar-naˉ
2
m
gambar-t
gambar-tuˉ
f
gambar-tıˉ
gambar-tayn
3
m
gambar
gambar-uˉ
f
gambar-at
gambar-ayn
4 1 6
J A N E T C . E . W A T S O N

In the imperfect paradigm (Table 17.4), the preﬁx ti- is an instance of
syncretism, expressing both second-person and third-person feminine singu-
lar;thesufﬁxes-aynand-u¯ areinstancesofmultipleexponence,expressingthe
combination of gender (feminine and masculine, respectively) and plural; the
preﬁxes a- and ni- express both person (ﬁrst) and number (singular and plural,
respectively); yi- expresses masculine for the singular, but the gender of the
verb depends on the sufﬁx in the plural: -u¯ masculine, -ayn feminine.
17.4.3.5
Tense
Tense interplays with aspect in Arabic. The perfect aspect, described by the
Arab grammarians as ma¯d¯˙
ı¯ ‘past’, typically expresses the past, but also
expresses the conditional, and can also be used to express the optative.
The imperfect aspect in the unmarked case expresses non-past, but when
preceded by a perfect matrix verb (Elsadek 2016) or in a phrase involving an
adverb relating to the past, it expresses relational past. The only true tense
in Arabic is the future, which is expressed by a future particle sawfa or
a future preﬁx, sa- in Classical Arabic. Arabic dialects express the future
through a future preﬁx: for example, h˙ a- in Cairene Arabic, ba- in Omani
Arabic, sˇa- or ʕad- for ﬁrst-person singular and ʕa- for all other persons in
San’ani Arabic (Watson 2009: 114). Thus, in San’ani Arabic, the morph sˇa-
expresses FUTURE and, together with the ﬁrst singular inﬂectional form of
the imperfect, FIRST-person, SINGULAR number.
17.4.3.6
Mood
Mood is expressed on the imperfect verb. The perfect is not subject to modal
inﬂection. The moods expressed in Classical Arabic are indicative, subjunc-
tive, jussive, imperative, and energetic, with mood expressed through ﬁnal
vowel endings in the unmarked case -u indicative, -a subjunctive, -∅jussive/
imperative, -an(na) energetic. The indicative is used in declarative clauses to
produce statements of fact and is used in questions; the subjunctive is used
for non-fact, in clauses of suggestion, exhortation, wish; the imperative
expresses commands and prohibitions; and the energetic is used to add
force to the indicative, subjunctive, or jussive. The Arabic dialects distin-
guish the indicative, imperative, and subjunctive, although in some dia-
lects, such as those in the Arabian Gulf, the distinction between indicative
Table 17.4 Imperfect paradigm of gambar
‘to sit’ in San’ani Arabic
Person
Gender
Singular
Plural
1
m/f
a-gambir
ni-gambir
2
m
ti-gambir
ti-gambir-uˉ
f
ti-gambir-ıˉ
ti-gambir-ayn
3
m
yi-gambir
yi-gambir-uˉ
f
ti-gambir
yi-gambir-ayn
17 Arabic Morphology
417

and subjunctive is not expressed explicitly (El-Hassan 2008: 264). In dialects
which do make an explicit morphological distinction, such as non-Bedouin
Syrian, Palestinian, Jordanian, and Cairene, the indicative is expressed by
a verbal preﬁx bi-, and the subjunctive by absence of bi-, as in Palestinian/
Jordanian bilʕab ‘he plays/is playing’ versus il-walad bih˙ ibb yilʕab ‘the boy likes
to play’ (El-Hassan 2008: 263). Some dialects allow the absence of bi- in
indicative clauses, as in Cairene il-milh˙ (bi)ydu¯b ﬁl-mayya ‘salt dissolves in
water’ (El-Hassan 2008: 264). San’ani is one dialect in which the bi- preﬁx
indicates not indicative, but continuous/habitual: thus, ‘he plays’ is yilʕab,
but ‘he is playing’ is bi-yilʕab. The positive imperative in Classical Arabic is
expressed through subtraction of the person preﬁx of the jussive verb, and
in the dialects through subtraction of the person preﬁx from the imperfect.
Where loss of the person preﬁx results in a consonant cluster in a dialect
which does not allow initial clusters, a prosthetic vowel and glottal stop is
added, as in Cairene ʔiktib ‘write m.s.!’. The negative imperative is expressed
syntactically, through preposing the negator la¯ to an imperfect verb in
the second person, as in San’ani la¯ tisı¯r ‘don’t go m.s.!’
17.4.3.7
Voice
Verbs and verbal participles express voice: active or passive. In Bedouin
dialects, the passive voice is expressed non-concatenatively, through vowel
umlaut (cf. Retso¨ 1983; Ingham 2008: 332 for Najdi Arabic; Eades 2009 for
aBedouindialectinnorthernOman;Watson2011:869).Thus, inNajdiArabic,
samm ‘he poisoned’ contrasts with simm ‘he was poisoned’, ysamm ‘he is
poisoned’ (Ingham 2008: 332). In conservative sedentary dialects, such as
those of northern Oman, verbs belonging to a restricted set of syntactic and
lexicosemantic categories may take the internal passive (Holes 1998), while
others take a different verbal derivational pattern to express the passive. In
San’ani Arabic, the internal passive is used for a few verbs only, as in: gutil ‘he
was killed’, kumil ‘it m. was ﬁnished’, wulid ‘he was born’, xulug ‘he was born’,
surig ‘he was robbed’, summı¯ ‘he was called’ (Watson 1993, 2009; Naïm 2009:
99). In many dialects, particularly those outside the Peninsula, the passive is
expressed wholly through a derived verbal form: either a form with preﬁxed
or inﬁxed t- or a form with preﬁxed n- (Retso¨ 1983). The expression of the
passive through a different verbal form is an instance where a typically
inﬂectional category may be realized through derivation.
Participles of the Form I verbs take different templates and vocalic
melodies to express voice, as in: ra¯g˙ib ‘desiring’ versus marg˙u¯b ‘desired’.
Participles of derived verbs express voice through umlaut of the stem-ﬁnal
vowel: -i- expresses active and -a- expresses passive, as in: musa¯ﬁr ‘travel-
ling; traveller’ versus murakkab ‘mounted, ﬁxed’.
17.4.3.8
Degree
Adjectives show degree in terms of the comparative and the superlative. The
typical expression of the comparative is through a distinct templatic pattern,
4 1 8
J A N E T C . E . W A T S O N

where the root consonants of a triliteral adjectival base are mapped onto the
consonantal slots of the template aCCaC (Davis 2017), as in the examples in
Table 17.5 from Cairene Arabic.
Where the consonantal root of the adjective is biliteral, the comparative
is formed by mapping onto the template aCaCC, as in: muhimm ‘important’
> ahamm ‘more important’, qalı¯l ‘little’ > aqall ‘less, fewer’. Where the last
consonant of the consonantal root is /w/ or /y/, the comparative is mapped
onto the template aCCa, as in: h˙ ilw ‘sweet’ > ah˙ la (Davis 2017). In the case of
adjectives of colour or defect, which take the same basic templatic pattern
as the elative, many dialects, including San’ani Arabic, form the compara-
tive syntactically, by adding min ‘from; than’ to the colour or defect
adjective:
al-wald asˇgar min al-bint ‘the boy is blonder than the girl’
In some dialects, the elative can be derived from certain nouns, as in the
following examples from Omani Arabic (Holes 2008: 486):
ragil ‘man’ > argal ‘more manly’
usta¯d ‘master; expert’ > astad ‘more expert’
The distinction between the comparative and superlative is realized syntacti-
cally (cf. Hallman (undated) for Syrian Arabic). Where the elative takes the
deﬁnite article or forms the ﬁrst element of a genitive construction, it func-
tions as a superlative, as in the following examples from Cairene Arabic:
akbar bint ‘the oldest girl’
aʔdam madı¯na ‘the oldest city’
hu¯ at˙wal wa¯h˙ id ‘he is the tallest one’
hu¯ il-at˙wal ‘he is the tallest’
The comparative does not inﬂect for gender or number in any variety of
Arabic. The superlative inﬂects for gender and number in Classical Arabic
and some Arabic dialects if it occurs independently, or if it post-modiﬁes
a noun, as in the following examples from Wehr (1976):
su¯riya¯ al-kubra¯ ‘Greater Syria’
aka¯biru l-qawm ‘the leaders of the people’
Table 17.5 The comparative in Cairene Arabic
Adjective
Comparative
Gloss
wih
˙
iš
awh
˙
aš
bad/worse
šaˉt˙ir
ašt˙ar
clever/cleverer
kibıˉr
akbar
big/bigger
sahl
ashal
easy/easier
munaˉsib
ansab
appropriate/more appropriate
kaslaˉn
aksal
lazy/lazier
17 Arabic Morphology
419

17.4.3.9
Deﬁniteness
Deﬁniteness is expressed morphologically in Arabic: proper nouns (even
though some may be marked with nunation), pronouns, and demonstrative
pronouns are inherently deﬁnite. Common nouns and adjectives are indeﬁ-
nite in the unmarked case, and deﬁned by preﬁxation of the deﬁnite article,
which is most commonly il- or al- in the dialects, with the allomorph iC- or aC-
where the initial C of the noun is a coronal consonant (Watson 2002; cf.
Heselwood and Watson 2015). Cairene also has the optional allomorph iC-
beforeanounoradjectivewithaninitialvelar,asin:ik-kursi~il-kursi ‘thechair’.
A number of dialects spoken in the Yemeni and Saudi Tihamah, in the far
north of Yemen and in Saudi Asir take nasal deﬁnite articles: vn- or, more
commonly, vm- (Behnstedt 1985, 1987; Asiri 2009). Several Yemeni dialects,
such as Ra¯zih˙ ı¯t, realize the deﬁnite article by a prosthetic vowel followed by
gemination of the initial nominal consonant, irrespective of its quality, e.g., iʔ-
ʔid¯n ‘the ear’.
17.5
Conclusion
There is not always a clear demarcation between inﬂectional and derivational
morphology in Arabic. For example, we have seen that for Omani Arabic the
elative, a typically inﬂectional category for adjectives, can be derived from
a noun. Since this creates a change in morphological category, this provides
an example of an inﬂectional category being used to create a newly derived
form. In terms of morphological exponence, many derivational categories are
realized concatenatively or through a blend of concatenative and non-
concatenative morphology, as in nouns of place, time, and instrument,
while several typically inﬂectional categories are expressed purely non-
concatenatively, as in the elative and broken plural nominal forms.
Acknowlegements
Thanks are due to Stuart Davis for commenting on a draft of this chapter.
References
Aronoff, M. (1994). Morphology by Itself: Stems and Inﬂectional Classes.
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Asiri, Y. M. (2007). Relative clauses in Rija¯l Almaʕ dialect (south-west Saudi
Arabia). Paper presented at the Seminar for Arabian Studies, July (2007).
Asiri, Y. M. (2009). Aspects of the Phonology and Morphology of Rija¯l Almaʕ Dialect
(South-West Saudi Arabia). PhD thesis, University of Salford, UK.
4 2 0
J A N E T C . E . W A T S O N

Bauer, L. (2003). Introducing Linguistic Morphology. Edinburgh: Edinburgh
University Press.
Beard, R. (2001). Derivation. In A. Spencer and A. M. Zwicky, eds., The
Handbook of Morphology. Oxford: Wiley, 44–65.
Behnstedt, P. (1985). Die nordjemenitischen Dialekte. Teil I. Atlas. Wiesbaden:
Dr Ludwig Reichart.
Behnstedt, P. (1987). Die Dialekte der Gegend von Saʕdah (Nord-Jemen).
Wiesbaden: Harrassowitz.
Behnstedt, P. (undated). The niktib-niktibu Issue Revisited. www.academia.edu/
35056026/The_niktib-niktibu_Issue_Revisited; last accessed 20 December
2020.
Benmamoun, E. (1999). Arabic morphology: The central role of the
imperfective. Lingua, 108, 175–201.
Benmamoun, E. (2003). The role
of the imperfective template in
Arabic morphology. In J. Shimron, ed., Language Processing and Acquisition
in Languages of Semitic, Root-Based, Morphology. Amsterdam: John Benjamins,
99–114.
Benmamoun, E. (2016). Verbal and nominal plurals and the syntax-
morphology interface. In S. Davis and U. Soltan, eds., Perspectives on
Arabic Linguistics XXVII. Amsterdam: John Benjamins, 59–74.
Corbett, G. (1991). Gender. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Davis, S. (2016). The Arabic comparative and the nature of templatic map-
ping in Arabic. In L. Ko¨rtve´lyessy, P. Sˇtekauer, and S. Valera, eds., Word-
Formation across Languages. Newcastle upon Tyne: Cambridge Scholars
Publishing, 73–90.
Davis, S. (2017). Some issues for an analysis of the templatic comparative in
Arabic with a focus on the Egyptian dialect. In H. Ouali, ed., Perspectives on
Arabic Linguistics XXIX. Amsterdam: John Benjamins, 129–50.
Davis, S. and Zawaydeh, B. A. (1999a). A descriptive analysis of hypocor-
istics in Colloquial Arabic. Language and Linguistics 3, 83–98.
Davis, S. and Zawaydeh, B. A. (1999b). Hypocoristic formation in Ammani-
Jordanian Arabic. In E. Benmamoun, ed., Perspectives on Arabic Linguistics
XII. Amsterdam: John Benjamins, 113–39.
Eades, D. (2009). Retention of the passive verb in a Bedouin dialect of
northern Oman. Zeitschrift fu¨r Arabische Linguistik, 51, 5–21.
El-Hassan, S. (2008). Mood (Arabic dialects). In K. Versteegh, M. Eid,
A. Elgibali, M. Woidich, and A. Zaborski, eds., Encyclopedia of Arabic
Language and Linguistics, vol. III. Leiden: Brill, 262–9.
Elsadek, S. (2016). Verbal Complementation in Egyptian Colloquial Arabic: an LFG
Account. PhD thesis, University of Essex, UK.
Hallman, P. (undated). Syntactic Asymmetries Between the Comparative and
Superlative in Arabic. Ms, University of Vienna. http://peterhallman.com
/asymmetries.pdf; last accessed 8 December 2020.
Haspelmath, M. and Sims, A. D. (2010). Understanding Morphology. London:
Hodder.
17 Arabic Morphology
421

Heselwood, B. and Watson, J. C. E. (2015). The Arabic deﬁnite article:
A synchronic and historical perspective. In L. Edzard, ed., Arabic and
Semitic Linguistics Contextualized: A Festschrift for Jan Retso¨. Wiesbaden:
Harrassowitz, 157–76.
Holes, C. (1998). Retention and loss of the passive in the Arabic dialects of
Oman and Northern Arabia. Journal of Semitic Studies, 43, 347–62.
Holes, C. (2008). Omani Arabic. In K. Versteegh, M. Eid, A. Elgibali,
M. Woidich, and A. Zaborski, eds., Encyclopedia of Arabic Language and
Linguistics, vol. III. Leiden: Brill, 478–91.
Idrissi, A., Prunet, J.-F., and Be´land, R. (2008). On the mental representation
of Arabic roots. Linguistic Inquiry, 39, 221–59.
Ingham, B. (2008). Najdi Arabic. In K. Versteegh, M. Eid, A. Elgibali,
M. Woidich, and A. Zaborski, eds., Encyclopedia of Arabic Language and
Linguistics, vol. III. Leiden: Brill, 326–34.
Kherbache, F. (2013). Gender of unmarked nouns in Beni Hemmou.
International Journal of Linguistics and Literature, 2, 11–16.
Lieber, R. (2010). Introducing Morphology. Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press.
McCarthy, J. (1981). A prosodic theory of non-concatenative morphology.
Linguistic Inquiry, 12, 373–48.
McCarthy, J. and Prince, A. (1990). Foot and word in prosodic morphology:
The Arabic broken plural. Natural Language and Linguistic Theory, 8,
209–82.
McOmber, M. (1995). Morpheme edges and Arabic inﬁxation. In M. Eid, ed.,
Perspectives on Arabic Linguistics X. Amsterdam: John Benjamins, 173–89.
Naïm, S. (2009). L’arabe ye´me´nite de Sanaa. Leuven-Paris: Peeters.
Plag, I. (2003). Word Formation in English. Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press.
Procha´zka, S. (2004). Unmarked feminine nouns in modern Arabic dia-
lects. In M. Haak, R. de Jong, and K. Versteegh, eds., Approaches to Arabic
Dialects. A Collection of Articles Presented To Manfred Woidich on the Occasion of
His Sixtieth Birthday. Leiden: Brill, 237–62.
Ratcliffe, R. (1997). Prosodic morphemes in a word-based morphological
analysis of Arabic. In M. Eid and R. Ratcliffe, eds., Perspectives on Arabic
Linguistics X. Amsterdam: John Benjamins, 147–72.
Ratcliffe, R. (1998). The ‘Broken’ Plural Problem in Arabic and Comparative Semitic:
Allomorphy and Analogy in Non-Concatenative Morphology. Amsterdam: John
Benjamins.
Ratcliffe, R. (2013). Morphology. In J. Owens, ed., The Oxford Handbook of
Arabic Linguistics. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 71–91.
Retso¨, J. (1983). The Finite Passive Voice in Modern Arabic Dialects. Gothenburg:
Universitatis Gothoburgensis.
Rossi, E. (1939). L’arabo parlato a San’aˆ’. Rome: Istituto Per L’Oriente.
Ryding, K. (2005). A Reference Grammar of Modern Standard Arabic. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
4 2 2
J A N E T C . E . W A T S O N

Ryding, K. (2014). Arabic: A Linguistic Introduction. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.
Spencer, A. (1991). Morphological Theory. Oxford: Blackwell.
Stump, G. T. (2001). Inﬂection. In A. Spencer and A. Zwicky, eds., The
Handbook of Morphology. Oxford: Blackwell, 13–43.
Taine-Cheikh, C. (2008). De l’expression de la cause et de la causalite´ dans
l’arabe de Mauritanie. In S. Procha´zka and V. Ritt-Benmimoun, eds.,
Between the Atlantic and Indian Oceans: Studies on Contemporary Arabic
Dialects. Proceedings of the 7th AIDA Conference, held in Vienna from
5–9 September (2006). Vienna: LIT Verlag, 423–36.
Ussishkin, A. (1999). The inadequacy of the consonantal root: Modern
Hebrew
denominal
verbs
and
output-to-output
correspondence.
Phonology, 16, 401–42.
Vicente, A. (2009). Relative pronoun (Arabic dialects). In K. Versteegh,
M. Eid, A. Elgibali, M. Woidich, and A. Zaborski, eds., Encyclopedia of
Arabic Language and Linguistics, vol. IV. Leiden: Brill, 70–2.
Watson, J. C. E. (1993). A Syntax of San’ani Arabic. Wiesbaden: Harrassowitz.
Watson, J. C. E. (2002). The Phonology and Morphology of Arabic. Oxford: Oxford
University Press.
Watson, J. C. E. (2006). The morphology of Arabic: Diminutive verbs
and diminutive nouns in San’ani Arabic. Morphology, 16, 189–204.
Watson, J. C. E. (2007). Ein Ma¨rchen im arabischen Dialekt von Ibb.
Zeitschrift fu¨r Arabische Linguistik, 47, 1–31.
Watson, J. C. E. (2009). San’ani Arabic. In K. Versteegh, M. Eid, A. Elgibali,
M. Woidich, and A. Zaborski, eds., Encyclopedia of Arabic Language and
Linguistics, vol. IV. Leiden: Brill, 106–15.
Watson, J. C. E. (2011). Arabic dialects (general article). In S. Weniger,
G. Khan, M. P. Streck, and J. C. E. Watson, eds., The Semitic Languages: An
International Handbook. Berlin: Walter de Gruyter, 851–95.
Wehr, H. (1976). A Dictionary of Modern Written Arabic, edited by J. M. Cowan.
Wiesbaden: Harrassowitz.
Woidich, M. (2006). Das Kairenisch-Arabische: Eine Grammatik. Wiesbaden:
Harrassowitz.
Zaborski, A. (1999). Remarks on derived verbs in Hamitosemitic. In L. Edzard
and M. Nekroumi, eds., Tradition and Innovation: Norm and Derivation in
Arabic and Semitic Linguistics. Wiesbaden: Harrassowitz, 44–51.
17 Arabic Morphology
423


Part IV
Arabic
Computational and
Corpus Linguistics


18
Arabic Computational
Linguistics
Nizar Habash
18.1
Introduction
Computational linguistics, or, as it is often referred to interchangeably,
natural language processing or human language technologies (henceforth
CL/NLP), is a large and growing highly interdisciplinary ﬁeld of research
that lies at the intersection of linguistics, computer science, electrical
engineering, cognitive science, psychology, pedagogy, and mathematics,
among other ﬁelds. The goal of CL/NLP is to develop applications that
model human linguistic processes, such as speech recognition, transla-
tion, etc. These applications can serve as interfaces between humans and
machines, or between humans and other humans in cross-lingual settings.
In the ﬁrst two decades of the twenty-ﬁrst century, research in CL/NLP
led to impressive applications that have changed how humans expect
machines to process language, from fast and reliable search, to almost
human-quality machine translation in certain genres and languages, to
speech-based personal assistants. These successes are most seen in
resource-rich languages such as English, but are behind for other lan-
guages, including Arabic.
This chapter presents a brief introduction to Arabic CL/NLP, primarily
targeting linguistics readers. It is organized in six sections. Section 18.2
presents a general overview of the ﬁeld of CL/NLP. Section 18.3 presents
the unique challenges facing Arabic CL/NLP. Section 18.4 discusses some of
the common themes of CL/NLP research, and Arabic-speciﬁc solutions.
Section 18.5 lists some introductory notes and resources for linguists
interested in CL/NLP, and Section 18.6 offers some thoughts on the future
of the ﬁeld of Arabic CL/NLP.
* I would like to thank Go Inoue, Alexander Erdmann, and Nasser Zalmout for helpful discussions and feedback.

18.2
Computational Linguistics
In this section, I present CL/NLP in terms of the types of systems
it builds as well as the types of approaches it takes in building them.
18.2.1
Applications and Enabling Technologies
When discussing CL/NLP systems and research, we can distinguish
between applications and enabling technologies.
Application refers to research on end-to-end systems that interface
with human users. Examples include the following.
• Information retrieval returns documents relevant to a given query
(word or a phrase).
• Machine translation automatically translates a document from one
language to another.
• Automatic speech recognition automatically transcribes as text the
words in an audio signal.
• Speech synthesis produces speech from text.
• Optical character recognition automatically transcribes images of
words into machine-readable text.
Other prominent examples include dialogue systems, sentiment analysis,
and automatic summarization.
Enabling technology refers to system components that focus on
enriching or transforming text in speciﬁc ways relevant to speciﬁc CL/
NLP applications, but that are not intended for the human end user.
Examples include the following.
• Tokenization converts input words into smaller tokens that down-
stream components expect to work on.
• Part-of-speech (POS) tagging assigns each token a POS.
• Syntactic parsing creates a syntactic analysis of the tokens in
a sentence.
• Language/dialect identiﬁcation identiﬁes the language or dialect of
the text.
Other prominent examples include lemmatization, base-phrase chunking
and named-entity recognition.
Some applications can also be enabling to other applications,
e.g., speech-to-speech machine translation systems often employ
speech recognition on the source language, text-to-text machine
translation, and speech synthesis for the target language. Other
enabling technologies can be considered end-user consumable in lim-
ited
contexts,
e.g.,
language
identiﬁcation
or
Arabic
automatic
diacritization.
4 2 8
N I Z A R H A B A S H

18.2.2
Approaches
Within CL/NLP, we often talk of modelling language. Here, modelling refers to
designing and building computational systems (i.e., models) that can pre-
dict or imitate speciﬁc human linguistic competencies. In general,
there are two different paradigms in CL/NLP: rule-based approaches and
machine-learning approaches.
Rule-based approaches rely on human-created rules that are applied
by machines to model a linguistic behaviour. These approaches, in their
pure form, depend on the linguistic intuitions and competency of the rule
writers. Rules can consist of large collections of lexical entries, e.g., Arabic
broken plurals paired with their lemmas. Rules can also be for very speciﬁc
non-lexical conditions, e.g., word diacritization reﬂecting the Arabic deﬁ-
nite article’s Sun/Moon letter assimilation. As with all grammars, rules are
leaky and can be tedious to create.
Machine-learning (ML) approaches use algorithms to learn the
‘rules’ from data. Other names for these approaches include corpus-based
approaches, in reference to the corpora of data used to train the models, as
well as statistical, neural, or deep-learning approaches in speciﬁc refer-
ence to the types of algorithms used. ML approaches can be subclassiﬁed
into supervised and unsupervised varieties.
Supervised approaches require data annotated with the target infor-
mation to model. For instance, to train a POS-tagger, we need training
sentences with the target POS sequences; to train a machine translation
system, we need sentences in the source and target languages, also known
as parallel corpora. And similarly, to train models of speech recognition,
we need audio recordings paired with their transcripts.
Unsupervised approaches require data without additional annota-
tion. The data can be used to model the distributional or co-occurrence
properties of language, as in n-gram sequence language models (Jurafsky
and Martin 2008), or word-to-vector (word2vec) models that capture the
semantics of words given their contexts (Mikolov et al. 2013).
ML approaches dominate the research in CL/NLP, but they have some
limitations. For ML, the size of the data set is extremely important – the
more the better. The sizes of training instances range from tens of thousands
into millions of tokens for reasonable performance. For many languages and
tasks, this is often a challenge. In comparison with the ofﬁcial languages of
the European Union (Koehn 2005) or the United Nations (Rafalovitch et al.
2009), most of the world’s 7,000 languages and dialects are extremely poor
resource-wise. ML approaches are also sensitive to the domain and genre of
the training data. This is why machine translations systems that do well on
news text (a very rich genre) do not fare as well in poetry or colloquial speech.
When modelling resource-poor languages, rule-based approaches are a good
start until enough annotations are created with real data that can beneﬁt
from ML approaches. In practice, the combination of human-created rules
and machine learning is quite common, and can be seen in different parts of
18 Arabic Computational Linguistics
429

the same system. For instance, the state-of-the-art system for Arabic morphol-
ogy disambiguation, MADAMIRA (Pasha et al. 2014), uses a rule-based mor-
phological analyser and ML-based disambiguation classiﬁers.
A common misconception about ML approaches is that there is no
human input into the modelling beyond algorithmic design. But
obviously, humans are essential in creating the examples and annotations
that are necessary for training the models. The quality and robustness of
these models are highly dependent on the quality of the human annota-
tions. Furthermore, all CL/NLP approaches need so-called gold references
that can be used to evaluate their quality. CL/NLP evaluation is a huge area
of research that is extremely important, not just for judging the quality of
the ﬁnal models, but also for their development.
18.3
Arabic Computational Challenges
When compared with English, Arabic poses a number of CL/NLP modelling
challenges: morphological richness, orthographic ambiguity, dialectal var-
iations, orthographic noise, and resource poverty. These issues are not
necessarily unique to Arabic, but their combination makes Arabic proces-
sing particularly challenging. We will not discuss technological support
challenges, such as the proper display of Arabic fonts, as these are solved
problems that may not be implemented in certain frameworks for reasons
varying from incompetence to lack of interest in the Arab world as
a market.
18.3.1
Morphological Richness and Complexity
Arabic words have a large number of forms. This results from its rich
inﬂectional morphology that models gender, number, person, aspect,
mood, case, state, and voice, in addition to the cliticization of a number
of pronouns and particles (conjunctions, prepositions, the deﬁnite article,
the future particle, etc). For example, a Modern Standard Arabic (MSA) verb
lemma has about 5,400 inﬂected forms, e.g.,ﻗﺎﻝqa¯l ‘to say’ may realize as
ﻳﻘﻮﻝyaqu¯lu ‘he says [indicative]’,ﻓﺴﻴﻘﻮﻟﻮﻧﻬﺎfasayqu¯lu¯naha¯ ‘so they [masc.pl] will
say it’, andﻭﻗﻴﻞwaqı¯la ‘and it was said’, among many other forms. In
comparison, English has about six or so verb forms, e.g., say/VB, says/VBZ,
say/VBP, said/VBD, said/VBN, saying/VBG. Arabic morphology is also complex,
not just from using templatic and afﬁxational morphological techniques,
but also from (a) numerous complex morphotactics such as the hollow and
hamzated verb conjugation rules and (b) the high percentage of broken
plural forms, among other phenomena. These phenomena do not just
make modelling more involved, but also lead to sparsity issues, since
without proper abstraction features, the ML approaches cannot relate
different forms of the word to each other.
4 3 0
N I Z A R H A B A S H

18.3.2
Ambiguity
Arabic orthography using the Arabic script employs optional diacritical
marks for short vowels and consonantal gemination. The missing diacritics
are not a major challenge to literate native adults. However, their absence is
the main source of ambiguity in Arabic CL/NLP. In MSA, the average ambi-
guity is twelve analyses per word, corresponding to 2.7 lemmas (dictionary
lexical entries) per word. For example, the MSA wordﻋﻘﺪcan be analysed as
the following lemmas:ﻋَﻘْﺪʿaqd ‘contract’,ﻋُﻘْﺪʿuqd ‘necklace’,ﻋُﻘَﺪʿuqad ‘com-
plexes’ (lemmaﻋُﻘْﺪَﺓʿuqda),ﻋَﻘَﺪَ
ʿaqada ‘to tie’, orﻋَﻘَّﺪَ
ʿaqqada ‘to complicate’.
Some lemmas have additional analyses that vary in diacritization and
features, e.g., the word for ‘contract’ has forms that vary in deﬁniteness
and case, as inﻋَﻘْﺪٌ
ʿaqdun, andﻋَﻘْﺪِ
ʿaqdi. The ambiguity can also result from
different interpretation of clitic letters: e.g.,ﻭﺟﺪcan be analysed asﻭَﺟَﺪَ
wagˇada ‘he found’ orﻭَﺟَﺪُّ
wagˇaddu ‘and the grandfather of’. This is a big
challenge that necessitates models for contextual ambiguity resolution.
18.3.3
Dialects
While MSA is the main language of culture and education in the Arab
world, it is no one’s native tongue. Arab children grow up learning local
dialects such as Egyptian, Levantine, and Gulf. Arabic dialects differ sig-
niﬁcantly from one another and from MSA in terms of their phonology,
morphology, and lexicon (Watson 2007). This difference is rather severe,
to the point that using MSA tools and resources for processing dialects is
not sufﬁcient. For instance, Khalifa et al. (2016) report that using a state-of-
the-art tool for MSA morphological disambiguation on Gulf Arabic returns
POS-tag and lemma accuracy at about 72 and 64 per cent respectively,
compared to the performance on MSA, which is 96 per cent for both
(Pasha et al. 2014). Dialectal morphology is particularly problematic, as
despite being simpler than MSA’s in certain respects (no case, reduced
paradigms), it is far more complex in other respects (many more clitics).
For example, the word used in the previous section has at least one addi-
tional Levantine and Egyptian dialectal reading:ﻋَﻘَﺪّ
ʿa+ʾadd ‘on the size of’.
Add to the above that there is no standard orthography, an issue that leads
to rampant spelling inconsistency, which we will discuss more in the next
section. Finally, since the dialects and MSA coexist in a diglossic situation,
developing CL/NLP systems is more challenging as multiple forms of
Arabic need to be modelled together (Elfardy and Diab 2013).
18.3.4
Orthographic Inconsistency
Arabic and its dialects, as encountered online, show a huge amount of
spelling inconsistency. Noise in written text is a common problem for CL/
NLP when working in social media and non-edited text in any language, of
course. For MSA, Zaghouani et al. (2014) report that 32 per cent of words in
18 Arabic Computational Linguistics
431

MSA comments online have spelling errors. These errors lead not only to
words that are unknown by the CL/NLP systems, but also introduce unfore-
seen ambiguities. For example, the MSA wordﺑﺎﺩﻟﺘﻬﺎcan beﺑَﺎﺩَﻟَﺘْﻬَﺎba¯dalatha¯
‘she exchanged it’, or it can be corrected asﺑِﺄَﺩِﻟَّﺘِﻬَﺎbiʾadillatiha¯ ‘with her
pieces of evidence’. Dialectal Arabic is more problematic since it has no
standard orthography. For instance, the Egyptian Arabic word mabiʾ ulha¯sˇ
‘he does not say it’ has twenty-seven Arabic script spellings found with
Google Search, includingﻣﺒﻴﻘﻮﻟﻬﺎﺵ(≈26,000 times),ﻣﺎﺑﻴﻘﻮﻟﻬﺎﺵ(≈13,000),ﻣﺒﻴﻘﻠﻬﺎﺵ
(≈1,000), andﻣﺒﺆﻟﻬﺎﺵ(less than 10). Habash et al. (2012b) proposed a con-
ventional orthography for dialectal Arabic (CODA), a set of guidelines for
consistent spelling of Arabic dialects for CL/NLP purposes. Based on this
CODA anchor, Eskander et al. (2013) reported that close to 24 per cent of
Egyptian Arabic words have non-CODA-compliant spelling. In addition to
the variety in Arabic script spelling, dialectal Arabic text in particular is
also known to appear on social media in a non-standard romanization,
often called Arabizi (Al-Badrashiny et al. 2014).
18.3.5
Resource Poverty
The existence of resources such as corpora, annotated corpora, and lex-
icons, is a bottleneck for research in CL/NLP . For Arabic, speciﬁc MSA
genres have the lion’s share of resources (Jinxi 2002; Munteanu and Marcu
2007). Most of the parallel corpora and annotated treebanks (Maamouri
et al. 2004) are in the news genre, where parallel data is created ‘naturally’
as part of the process of news creation and dissemination across the globe.
MSA has additional large sets of UN resolutions paired with other UN
languages. Some commissioned MSA translations are used to benchmark
performance against other language pairs (Habash et al. 2017). And
a sizable effort went into Qur’a¯nic Arabic annotation (Dukes et al. 2013).
Of course, the rich MSA news genre is important and relevant for a large
number of news-oriented applications. However, applications for other
genres, domains, and dialects must make do with impoverished resources,
which leads to low-quality performance. A commonly encountered exam-
ple is the low quality of online machine translation of tweets and social
media posts. Most of the parallel data for dialect-English (Zbib et al. 2012)
and dialect-MSA (Bouamor et al. 2014) is commissioned and limited.
18.4
Arabic Computational Processing Approaches
and Solutions
In this section, we discuss some common themes in CL/NLP research, not
necessarily speciﬁc to Arabic, but with reference to Arabic CL/NLP efforts.
Then we present some details particularly in the areas of computational
processing of Arabic orthography, morphology, syntax, and semantics.
4 3 2
N I Z A R H A B A S H

18.4.1
Common Themes in CL/NLP Research
Application-Oriented Evaluation Evaluation is central in CL/NLP
research, with common references to intrinsic evaluations (focused on
evaluating a component out of its context of use) and extrinsic evaluations
(typically as part of an application’s end-to-end use). The CL/NLP commu-
nity runs many shared tasks and evaluation campaigns, usually around
a speciﬁc task and with predeﬁned training data and evaluation metrics.
Metrics are themselves a big area of research; there are occasionally work-
shops dedicated to evaluating evaluation metrics, particularly for complex
applications such as machine translation. The focus on evaluation also
requires extensive quality control on the reference (gold) annotations using
techniques such as inter-annotator agreement measurement.
Representation and Featurization Representation of linguistic
information (words, analyses, features, etc.) is an important area of CL/
NLP research, interacting heavily with questions of evaluation and appli-
cation readiness. Obviously, input and output of applications must be
human produceable and consumable, respectively. However, what is
acceptable to humans may not be optimal for modelling. This is often
handled with preprocessing and post-processing programs that manipu-
late the input and reformat the output. For example, when translating
from English to Arabic, it may be desirable to build models on lower-case
English, Alif-Hamza normalized and morphologically tokenized Arabic,
and with punctuation separated from words. The English input must
then be lower-cased and punctuation separated in a preprocessing step;
and the Arabic output must then be detokenized, Alif-Hamza enriched and
punctuation adjusted (El Kholy and Habash 2012). All of this serves to
reduce data sparsity without the loss of highly informative nuances of
the language. This example of text transformation is a type of featuriza-
tion, where we use features to represent an input word. The term feature
has two uses, one as in linguistics to refer to a linguistic aspect of a word,
e.g., gender, number, or tense. The other use is as an ML feature used by an
ML algorithm. All linguistic features can be used as ML features. But ML
features can include information other than what is typically thought of as
linguistic features, e.g., not so abstract lexical representations, as in spel-
ling variants of words, or statistical information such as word probabil-
ities. Furthermore, feature selection includes considering different
granularities, e.g., the POS for a word likeﻣُﻬِﻤَّﺔً
muhimmatan ‘important’
can be NOM (nominal), ADJ (adjective), ADJ.FS (feminine singular adjec-
tive), or ADJ.FS.IA (indeﬁnite accusative feminine singular adjective). ML
features can also be combinations of different features and even mathe-
matical operations on them when applicable.
Language-Independence and Cross-Lingual Adaptation Many CL/
NLP techniques are language independent, and can be applied to different
18 Arabic Computational Linguistics
433

languages. Different languages may still need some different considera-
tions, but the core algorithms tend to be the same. Additionally, many
efforts consider the use of cross-lingual adaptation and information shar-
ing to address resource poverty. Examples in Arabic include techniques to
maximize the use of MSA treebanks to parse Arabic dialects (Chiang et al.
2006) or MSA–English parallel data to translate dialectal Arabic to English
(Salloum and Habash 2011), and MSA–English parallel data to translate
between Arabic and Hebrew (El Kholy and Habash 2015).
18.4.2
Orthographic Processing
Given the focus on applications, CL/NLP efforts often start and end with the
orthographic form of words (exceptions include speech recognition and
speech synthesis). For Arabic, this means dealing with noise and ambiguity
not just in Arabic script, but potentially in other scripts such as the Arabizi
romanizations common in social media (Al-Badrashiny et al. 2014). To
address Arabic orthographic noise, many CL/NLP researchers often nor-
malize the various forms of Hamzated Alif, mappingٲandٳtoﺍand con-
verting the Alif-Maqsuraﻯtoﻱ. The Qatar Arabic Language Bank (QALB)
project created a 2-million-word resource for training MSA spelling-
correction systems, and set up a shared task around it (Zaghouani et al.
2014; Mohit et al. 2014). For dialectal Arabic, CODA (Habash et al. 2012b)
has gained a lot of support since its inception: it has been used as part of
annotation projects for Egyptian Arabic (Maamouri et al. 2014) and
Palestinian Arabic (Jarrar et al. 2017); it was also used as part of efforts on
spelling correction (Eskander et al. 2013) and automatic transliteration
from Arabizi to Arabic script (Al-Badrashiny et al. 2014).1
We should note that many Arabic CL/NLP resources and papers use one-
to-one orthographic transliterations such as the Buckwalter translitera-
tion (a romanization) when discussing Arabic script orthographic phenom-
ena, such as the various forms of Hamza (Habash et al. 2007). These
mappings were originally developed when support for Arabic script was
lacking, but they continue to be used today because they are easier to
debug, e.g., to detect visually if some diacritic is missing or doubled. These
transliteration schemes are only used system-internally. Since there are
multiple variants, users are cautioned not to mix them up (Habash 2010).
18.4.3
Morphological Analysis and Disambiguation
Morphological analysis and disambiguation is an area that has received
a lot of attention in Arabic CL/NLP. This is understandable given the com-
plexity of Arabic morphology and its interaction with orthographic noise.
1 Most recently, the Palestinian CODA conventions have been adopted by a website for teaching Colloquial Arabic: www
.learnpalestinianarabic.com.
4 3 4
N I Z A R H A B A S H

Once Arabic text has been analysed and disambiguated, its complexity
becomes comparable to other other languages for syntactic and semantic
analysis. Morphological analysis refers speciﬁcally to models that identify
for a given word all of its analyses out of context. Disambiguation refers to
identifying a speciﬁc analysis in context. There are many types of analysis
of Arabic words with varying degree of depth. Ideally, an analysis should
specify the lemma (lexical or dictionary entry), the diacritization, part-of-
speech and all the linguistic features. Morphological processing typically
also includes tokenization into a number of possible schemes (Habash and
Sadat 2006). Morphological ML features in Arabic include a large space that
has been explored by many researchers in different applications (Habash
and Sadat 2006; Marton et al. 2013; Guzma´n et al. 2016).
For MSA, the most commonly used morphological analyser is SAMA
(Graff et al. 2009), which is used as part of the Penn Arabic Treebank
(Maamouri et al. 2004), and the MADAMIRA system for analysis and disam-
biguation Pasha et al. (2014). The MADAMIRA results have been recently
surpassed by extending its approach with neural models (Zalmout and
Habash 2017). Other Arabic morphology systems include Smrzˇ (2007),
Boudchiche et al. (2017), and Abdelali et al. (2016). For dialectal Arabic,
there is relatively less work on morphology. Habash et al. (2012a) and
Khalifa et al. (2017) have developed analysers for Egyptian Arabic and Gulf
Arabic, respectively. Eskander et al. (2016) described and implemented
a paradigm-completion approach to build dialectal morphological analysers
from annotated data.
18.4.4
Syntactic Parsing
Syntactic parsing is an enabling technology that assigns a syntactic structure
to a sequence of words, e.g., identifying the span and relationship of a noun
phrase to a verb. Syntactic parsing is used for a variety of higher-order CL/NLP
applications such as machine translation and automatic summarization.
The dominant approaches to syntactic parsing rely on machine learning
of parsing models from treebanks, or collections of sentences paired with
their syntactic analyses. For Arabic, there are a number of such treebanks:
the Penn Arabic Treebank (PATB), which uses a phrase-structure representa-
tion (Maamouri et al. 2004), the Prague Arabic Dependency Treebank (PADT)
(Smrzˇ et al. 2008), and the Columbia Arabic Treebank (CATiB) (Habash and
Roth 2009), both of which use different dependency representations. The
Quran Corpus Treebank (Dukes and Buckwalter 2010) uses a hybrid repre-
sentation inspired by traditional Arabic grammar. The PATB representation
has been mapped into a lexical functional grammar (LFG) representation
(Tounsi et al. 2009) as well as into the universal dependency (UD) project
representation (Nivre et al. 2016; Taji et al. 2017). Other than the Quran
Corpus, MSA treebanks focus on the news genre, although there are some
recent efforts in treebanking Arabic dialects (Maamouri et al. 2014).
18 Arabic Computational Linguistics
435

There are several state-of-the-art Arabic parsers, including the Stanford
Arabic Parser (PATB phrase structure) (Green and Manning 2010) and the
CAMeL Parser (CATiB dependency) (Shahrour et al. 2016). A shallower
version of syntactic parsing is base-phrase chunking (BPC), where
sequences of adjacent words are grouped together to form syntactic
phrases such as NPs and VPs (Diab 2007). The Arabic analysis tool
MADAMIRA (Pasha et al. 2014) includes BPC among its outputs. Chiang
et al. (2006) explored a number of techniques to optimize the use of MSA
treebanks for Arabic dialect parsing.
18.4.5
Semantic Modelling
We describe three efforts that fall under semantic modelling.
First is the development of the Arabic WordNet (Elkateb et al. 2006).
WordNets are machine-readable lexical databases that group words into
clusters of synonyms called synsets, each of which is thought of as represent-
ing a unique word sense. After the ﬁrst WordNet (in English) (Fellbaum 1998),
many wordNets were created and linked to the English WordNet. This is the
same for Arabic. Although the size of Arabic WordNet is much smaller than
the English WordNet, it has been used to bootstrap resources by exploiting
existing annotations linked to the English WordNet (Badaro et al. 2014).
Second is the development of the Arabic proposition bank (propbank).
A propbank is a semantically annotated corpus, where propositions and
their arguments are marked in the form of predicate-argument informa-
tion and semantic-role labels on top of an existing syntactic treebank
(Zaghouani et al. 2010).
Finally, there has been a lot of work on sentiment analysis in Arabic, where
the target is typically to assign a sentence a label indicating whether it is
positive, negative, or neutral. This work includes the development of various
resources and lexicons mapping words or lemmas to their sentiment (Abdul-
Mageed and Diab 2012; Badaro et al. 2014), as well as developing systems for
sentiment detection (Abdul-Mageed et al. 2012; Al Sallab et al. 2015).
18.5
Initiation Resources for Arabic Computational
Linguistics
In this section, we present a number of resources that are good starting
points for linguists interested in expanding into CL/NLP, in general, and
Arabic CL/NLP speciﬁcally.
18.5.1
Where to Start
CL/NLP is an interdisciplinary ﬁeld where collaborations among linguists and
computer scientists are common and very productive. Researchers from both
4 3 6
N I Z A R H A B A S H

sides coming together beneﬁt greatly from learning as much as possible about
eachother’sﬁelds.Forlinguists,learningtoprogramisextremelyhelpful,and
a necessity for pursuing deeper research efforts in CL/NLP . There are many
online resources for learning how to program. For a gentle introduction for
linguists, see (Hovy 2012). That said, the best route for a linguist interested in
CL/NLP is to take courses, preferably as part of a graduate degree, in one of the
many Computational Linguistics graduate programmes. There are also many
online courses, e.g., Coursera’s Natural Language Processing course.2
18.5.2
Resources
Books Popular CL/NLP textbooks include Manning and Schutze (1999)
and Jurafsky and Martin (2008). The Synthesis Lectures on Human
Language Technologies (Hirst 2008–2017) include a number of publica-
tions on CL/NLP focusing on speciﬁc topics. In that series, there is a book
on Arabic natural language processing (Habash 2010). A number of tutor-
ials on Arabic NLP are available online.3
Tools and Data The top repositories for CL/NLP research resources, spe-
ciﬁcally data, are the Linguistic Data Consortium (LDC)4 and the European
Language Resources Association (ELRA).5 The LDC has over 190 Arabic
resources in its catalogue, including the highly used Penn Arabic
Treebank (Maamouri et al. 2004) and Standard Arabic Morphological
Analyzer (Graff et al. 2009). ELRA has over a hundred Arabic resources in
its catalogue. For lists of commonly used corpora, lexicons, and tools,
including freely available resources, see Habash (2010); Zaghouani
(2014); Shoufan and Alameri (2015).
Publication Venues and Archives Conferences are the primary venues
of publication in CL/NLP, where the top peer-reviewed conferences are
very competitive (≈25 per cent acceptance rate). Conferences typically
expect four- to eight-page anonymous paper submissions. The proceedings
of the conferences of the Association for Computational Linguistics (ACL)
and its various chapters6 are publicly archived as part of the ACL
anthology,7 which also hosts some non-ACL conferences. Most notable
among the non-ACL conferences are COLING (International Conference
on Computational Linguistics) and LREC (Language Resources and
Evaluation Conference).8 Workshops (as part of conferences) and shared
task competitions are common, and typically publish their proceedings.
There are a number of journals in the ﬁeld, e.g., Computational Linguistics,9
Transactions of the ACL,10, Computer Speech and Language,11 and Language
2 https://www.coursera.org/learn/language-processing.
3 www.nizarhabash.com/teaching.
4 www.ldc.upenn.edu/.
5 http://catalog.elra.info/.
6 www.aclweb.org/.
7 http://aclweb.org/anthology/.
8 www.lrec-conf.org/.
9 www.mitpressjournals.org/loi/coli.
10 www.transacl.org/ojs/index.php/tacl.
11 www.journals.elsevier.com/computer-speech-and-language.
18 Arabic Computational Linguistics
437

Resources and Evaluation.12 As with other areas in the sciences, arXiv.org has
become the place to pre-publish the latest works in CL/NLP.13
Arabic CL/NLP papers are often published in the international venues
mentioned above; however, a number of Arabic CL/NLP workshops and
conferences took place in the early twenty-ﬁrst century, both in the Arab
world and in association with international conferences. Examples
include the Arabic Natural Language Processing Workshop, typically co-
located with an ACL event (2014, 2015, and 2017), the Workshop on Arabic
Corpora and Processing Tools, typically co-located with LREC (2014, 2016,
2018), and the International Conference on Arabic Computational
Linguistics (2015, 2016, 2017).
18.6
The Future of Arabic Computational Linguistics
The ﬁeld of CL/NLP as a whole saw some great growth in the ﬁrst two
decades of the twenty-ﬁrst century (Table 18.1). This progress is a result of
a growing competitive community that has a strong collaborative culture
around sharing resources (data and tools) and aiming for language-
independent solutions. Today the results of this progress can be seen in
terms of robust speech recognition technology, machine translation, and
dialogue systems making it into products such as Siri and Google
Translate. With this market growth comes increased customer expecta-
tions, which fuel competition and encourage innovation. This suggests
more jobs in CL/NLP will be created, not only to develop speciﬁc applica-
tions, but also to create data annotations to train and evaluate said
applications.
The ﬁeld of Arabic CL/NLP naturally beneﬁts from general progress in CL/
NLP since most of the developed techniques are language independent.
Furthermore, the commercial growth around English-language technolo-
gies only helps raise demand for support for other languages, as large
companies are continuously trying to get access into more regions around
the world. Arabic is currently not as present among the various languages
with ready-to-use technologies, but this is coming and it is not an issue of if
but rather when.
Research and work on Arabic CL/NLP speciﬁcally has always lagged behind
English and other languages. If we consider the data in Table 18.1,14 we see
12 https://link.springer.com/journal/10579.
13 https://arxiv.org/list/cs.CL/recent.
14 The results in Table 18.1 are based on Google Scholar counts for the query ‘natural language processing’ and the name
of a language (unquoted) such as English or Arabic dialect. The counts are collected for each year separately and then
aggregated. The search was conducted on 1 December 2017, and did not include patents or citations. Next to all
languages except English, a ratio of the number of publications compared to that of English (en) or Arabic (ar) is
speciﬁed. Since these numbers are counts of Google Scholar search results, they are rough estimates, capturing only
when these languages are mentioned, even if no work was actually done on them as part of the publication. Finally, we
acknowledge the self-imposed limitation of only considering documents written in English. We justiﬁed this choice by
the fact that English is the primary publishing language in the ﬁeld of CL/NLP.
4 3 8
N I Z A R H A B A S H

Table 18.1 A summary of the number of publications in ‘natural language processing’ for a number of languages between 1997 and 2016
Year
English
Chinese
German
Hindi
Arabic
Arabic Dialects
1997–2001
8,380
2,413
(29%)en
4,261
(51%)en
142
(2%)en
523
(6%)en
101
(19%)ar
2002–2006
18,530
7,850
(42%)en
9,770
(53%)en
554
(3%)en
1,842
(10%)en
336
(18%)ar
2007–2011
34,110
19,690
(58%)en
17,470
(51%)en
1,889
(6%)en
5,118
(15%)en
822
(16%)ar
2012–2016
58,540
35,650
(61%)en
27,900
(48%)en
3,992
(7%)en
9,250
(16%)en
1,801
(19%)ar

some patterns that can give some insights into where Arabic CL/NLP is and
where it is heading.
First, Arabic and Arabic dialect CL/NLP have grown a lot, with the total
number of publications in 2012–16 being ~18 times the number in
1997–2001, compared to English and German (~7 times).
Second, Arabic CL/NLP grew particularly fast between 2002 and 2012.
When considering relative publication growth as the ratio to English
publication (to offer a normalizing reference), we see that Arabic CL/NLP
publications were about 6 per cent of English CL/NLP publications in
1997–2001. However this ratio rose to 10 per cent for 2002–2006 and
again to 15 per cent in 2007–2011. But this relative growth slowed down
in the period 2012–2016. The historical rise in work on and interest in
Arabic CL/NLP is probably due to major funding for Arabic-related
research, speciﬁcally machine translation in the USA after the events
of 11 September 2001. This includes almost a decade of sustained fund-
ing
under
the
DARPA
programmes
(2002~2013):
GALE
(Global
Autonomous
Language
Exploitation),
BOLT
(Broad
Operational
Language Translation), and others. These projects involved a large num-
ber of researchers from industry and academia, and created a large
number of resources, many of which were made available for research
purposes through the LDC. With the end of such large projects, smaller
projects such as those funded by the Qatar National Research Fund
became more the norm, e.g., QALB (Qatar Arabic Language Bank)15 and
OMA (Opinion Mining for Arabic).16 Also, after that period came the
creation of institutionally funded Arabic-focused publication-targeting
research labs such as the Qatar Computing Research Institute’s Arabic
Language Technology group and New York University Abu Dhabi’s
Computational Approaches to Modeling Language (CAMeL) lab. For com-
parison purposes, German CL/NLP, e.g., remained at about 50 per cent of
the size of English CL/NLP from 1997 to 2016. Chinese CL/NLP by com-
parison leaped the fastest from 24 per cent to 62 per cent, while Hindi
CL/NLP is the slowest among the languages we compared.
Third, Arabic dialects have become a more prominent part of Arabic CL/
NLP. The percentage of Arabic dialect publications in 1997 was only
11 per cent of all Arabic CL/NLP; but it had risen to 22 per cent in 2016.
This is partly due to a sense that work on certain aspects of MSA has little
space for progress, particularly in the area of morphology. Additionally,
a big motivation for dialect CL/NLP is the growing interest in language
technologies for opinion mining and translation in social media, which
features dialectal Arabic more than MSA.
Overall, Arabic CL/NLP has made big leaps in relative growth. But it can be
said to be ﬁfteen years behind English, since in 2016 the Arabic CL/NLP
publication count was comparable to that for English in 2001. And today,
15 http://nlp.qatar.cmu.edu/qalb/.
16 http://oma-project.azurewebsites.net/.
4 4 0
N I Z A R H A B A S H

Arabic CL/NLP seems to be plateauing at 15 per cent relative to English. For
Arabic CL/NLP to push forward (following Chinese CL/NLP’s example), more
has to be done: more training of CL/NLP people (computer scientists and
linguists), and more tools and data, not just created, but also made publicly
available to other researchers. All of these issues depend on funding for
research and development. The possible sources of funding may have to be
governmental programmes and, eventually, industry-led initiatives. As
things stand today, the market for Arabic CL/NLP in the Arab world is
nowhere near its full potential, but its growth is inevitable. It will be very
interesting to see how Arabic CL/NLP will shape up over the next decade. We
predict the growth in commercialization for English CL/NLP technologies will
be contagious and spread to the Arab world; and it will most likely change
how Arabs think of their language and its relationship to technology. For
example, we predict that Arabic speakers will develop higher expectations of
being able to use their dialect (‘normal speech’) to directly communicate with
their machines. We also predict that the attitude of expecting the use of MSA
in personal technological contexts will fall by the wayside as different com-
panies will compete for wider market share by accommodating users’ needs
and capturing their interest.
18.7
Summary
In summary, we have introduced Arabic computational linguistics and
situated it within the ﬁeld of Computational Linguistics / Natural
Language Processing. Arabic brings to CL/NLP a combination of many
interesting and tough challenges. Although a lot of progress has taken
place in the ﬁeld, there is still much more work to do. The future of the
ﬁeld promises a lot of possibilities for, and opportunities in, language
technology development.
References
Abdelali, A., Darwish, K., Durrani, N., and Mubarak, H. (2016). Farasa: A fast
and furious segmenter for Arabic. In Proceedings of the Meeting of the North
America Association for Computational Linguistics (NAACL). San Diego,
California.
Abdul-Mageed, M. and Diab, M. (2012). Toward building a large-scale Arabic
sentiment lexicon. In Proceedings of The International Global WordNet
Conference. Matsue, Japan.
Abdul-Mageed, M., Kuebler, S., and Diab, M. (2012). SAMAR: A system for
subjectivity and sentiment analysis of Arabic social media. In Proceedings
of the Workshop in Computational Approaches to Subjectivity and Sentiment
Analysis. Jeju, Korea.
18 Arabic Computational Linguistics
441

Al-Badrashiny, M., Eskander, R., Habash, N., and Rambow, O. (2014).
Automatic transliteration of Romanized dialectal Arabic. In Proceedings
of the Conference on Computational Natural Language Learning. Ann Arbor,
Michigan.
Al Sallab, A. A., Baly, R., Badaro, G., Hajj, H., El Hajj, W., and Shaban, K. B.
(2015). Deep learning models for sentiment analysis in Arabic. In
Proceedings of the Arabic Natural Language Processing Workshop (WANLP).
Beijing, China.
Badaro, G., Baly, R., Hajj, H., Habash, N., and El Hajj, W. (2014). A large scale
Arabic sentiment lexicon for Arabic opinion mining. In Proceedings of the
EMNLP 2014 Workshop on Arabic Natural Language Processing (ANLP). Doha,
Qatar, 165–73.
Bouamor, H., Habash, N., and Oﬂazer, K. (2014). A multidialectal parallel
corpus of Arabic. In Proceedings of the International Conference on Language
Resources and Evaluation (LREC). Reykjavik, Iceland.
Boudchiche, M., Mazroui, A., Bebah, M. O. A. O., Lakhouaja, A., and
Boudlal,
A.
(2017).
AlKhalil
Morpho
Sys
2:
A
robust
Arabic
morpho-syntactic analyzer. Journal of King Saud University – Computer and
Information Sciences, 29(2), 141–6.
Chiang, D., Diab, M., Habash, N., Rambow, O., and Shareef, S. (2006).
Parsing Arabic dialects. In Proceedings of the Meeting of the European
Association for Computational Linguistics (EACL). Trento, Italy.
Diab, M. (2007). Improved Arabic base phrase chunking with a new
enriched POS tag set. In Proceedings of the Workshop on Computational
Approaches to Semitic Languages (CASL). Prague, Czech Republic.
Dukes, K., and Buckwalter, T. (2010). A dependency treebank of the Quran
using traditional Arabic grammar. In Proceedings of the International
Conference on Informatics and Systems (INFOS). Cairo, Egypt.
Dukes, K., Atwell, E., and Habash, N. (2013). Supervised collaboration for
syntactic annotation of Quranic Arabic. In Language Resources and
Evaluation, 47(1), 33–62.
El Kholy, A. and Habash, N. (2012). Orthographic and morphological pro-
cessing for English–Arabic statistical machine translation. Machine
Translation, 26(1–2), 25–45.
El Kholy, A. and Habash, N. (2015). Morphological constraints for phrase
pivot statistical machine translation. In Proceedings of the Machine
Translation Summit (MTSummit). Miami, Florida.
Elfardy, H. and Diab, M. (2013). Sentence-level dialect identiﬁcation in
Arabic. In Proceedings of the Association for Computational Linguistics. Soﬁa,
Bulgaria.
Elkateb, S., Black, W., Rodriguez, H., Alkhalifa, M., Vossen, P., Pease, A.,
et al. (2006). Building a WordNet for Arabic. In Proceedings of the
International Conference on Language Resources and Evaluation. Genoa, Italy.
Eskander, R., Habash, N., Rambow, O., and Tomeh, N. (2013). Processing
spontaneous orthography. In Proceedings of the North American Chapter of
the Association for Computational Linguistics. Atlanta, Georgia.
4 4 2
N I Z A R H A B A S H

Eskander, R., Habash, N., Rambow, O., and Pasha, A. (2016). Creating
resources for dialectal Arabic from a single annotation: A case study on
Egyptian and Levantine. In Proceedings of the International Conference on
Computational Linguistic (COLING). Osaka, Japan.
Fellbaum, C. (ed.) (1998). WordNet: An Electronic Lexical Database. Cambridge,
MA: MIT Press.
Graff,
D.,
Maamouri,
M.,
Bouziri,
B.,
Krouna,
S.,
Kulick,
S.,
and
Buckwalter, T. (2009). Standard Arabic Morphological Analyzer – Version 3.1
Catalog No.: LDC2009E73. Linguistic Data Consortium, University of
Pennsylvania.
Green, S. and Manning, C. D. (2010). Better Arabic parsing: Baselines,
evaluations,
and
analysis.
In
Proceedings
of
the
23rd
International
Conference on Computational Linguistics. Beijing, China, 394–402.
Guzma´n, F., Bouamor, H., Baly, R., and Habash, N. (2016). Machine transla-
tion evaluation for Arabic using morphologically-enriched embeddings.
In Proceedings of COLING 2106. Osaka, Japan.
Habash, N. (2010). Introduction to Arabic Natural Language Processing, vol. 3.
Morgan & Claypool.
Habash, N. and Roth, R. (2009). CATiB: The Columbia Arabic Treebank. In
Proceedings of the ACL-JNLP Conference. Suntec, Singapore, 221–4.
Habash, N. and Sadat, F. (2006). Arabic preprocessing schemes for statisti-
cal machine translation. In Proceedings of the North American Chapter of the
Association for Computational Linguistics (NAACL). New York.
Habash, N., Soudi, A., and Buckwalter, T. (2007). On Arabic transliteration.
In A. Soudi, G. Neumann, and A. van den Bosch, eds., Arabic Computational
Morphology: Text, Speech and Language Technology, vol. 38. Dordrecht:
Springer, 15–22.
Habash, N., Eskander, R., and Hawwari, A. (2012a). A morphological analy-
zer for Egyptian Arabic. In Proceedings of the Workshop on Computational
Morphology and Phonology. Montre´al, Canada.
Habash, N., Diab, M., and Rambow, O. (2012b). Conventional orthography
for dialectal Arabic. In Proceedings of the International Conference on Language
Resources and Evaluation. Istanbul, Turkey.
Habash, N., Zalmout, N., Taji, D., Hoang, H., and Alzate, M. (2017).
A parallel corpus for evaluating machine translation between Arabic
and European languages. In Proceedings of the European Chapter of the
Association for Computational Linguistics. Valencia, Spain.
Hirst, G. (ed.) (2008–2017). Synthesis Lectures on Human Language Technologies.
Morgan & Claypool.
Hovy, D. (2012). Programming in Python for Linguists: A Gentle Introduction.
www.dirkhovy.com/portfolio/papers/download/pﬂ_handout.pdf;
last
accessed 10 December 2020.
Jarrar, M., Habash, N., Alrimawi, F., Akra, D., and Zalmout, N. (2017).
Curras: An annotated corpus for the Palestinian Arabic dialect.
Language Resources and Evaluation, 51, 745–75.
18 Arabic Computational Linguistics
443

Jinxi, X. (2002). UN Parallel Text (Arabic-English), LDC Catalog No.: LDC2002E15.
Linguistic Data Consortium, University of Pennsylvania.
Jurafsky, D. and Martin, J. H. (2008). Speech and Language Processing. Upper
Saddle River, NJ: Prentice Hall.
Khalifa, S., Habash, N., Abdulrahim, D., and Hassan, S. (2016). A large scale
corpus of Gulf Arabic. In Proceedings of the Language Resources and Evaluation
Conference 2016. Portorozˇ, Slovenia.
Khalifa, S., Hassan, S., and Habash, N. (2017). A morphological analyzer for
Gulf Arabic verbs. In Proceedings of the Third Arabic Natural Language
Processing Workshop (WANLP). Valencia, Spain, 35–45.
Koehn, P. (2005). Europarl: A parallel corpus for statistical machine trans-
lation. In Proceedings of the 10th Machine Translation Summit. Phuket,
Thailand. 79–86.
Maamouri, M., Bies, A., Buckwalter, T., and Mekki, W. (2004). The Penn
Arabic Treebank: Building a large-scale annotated Arabic corpus. In
Proceedings of the NEMLAR Conference on Arabic Language Resources and Tools.
Cairo, Egypt.
Maamouri, M., Bies, A., Kulick, S., Ciul, M., Habash, N., and Eskander, R. (2014).
Developing an Egyptian Arabic Treebank: Impact of dialectal morphology
on annotation and tool development. In Proceedings of the International
Conference on Language Resources and Evaluation (LREC). Reykjavik, Iceland.
Manning, C. and Schutze, H. (1999). Foundations of Statistical Natural Language
Processing. Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press.
Marton, Y., Habash, N., and Rambow, O. (2013). Dependency parsing of
Modern
Standard
Arabic
with
lexical
and
inﬂectional
features.
Computational Linguistics, 39(1), 161–94.
Mikolov, T., Chen, K., Corrado, G., and Dean, J. (2013). Efﬁcient estimation of
word representations in vector space. arXiv preprint arXiv:1301.3781.
Mohit, B., Rozovskaya, A., Habash, N., Zaghouani, W., and Obeid, O. (2014).
The ﬁrst QALB shared task on automatic text correction for Arabic. In
Proceedings of the Arabic Natural Language Processing Workshop (WANLP).
Doha, Qatar.
Munteanu, D. S. and Marcu, D. (2007). ISI Arabic–English Automatically Extracted
Parallel
Tex.
Catalog
No.:
LDC2007T08.
Linguistic
Data
Consortium,
University of Pennsylvania.
Nivre, J., de Marneffe, M.-C., Ginter, F., Goldberg, Y., Hajic, J., Manning, C. D.,
et al. (2016). Universal Dependencies v1: A Multilingual Treebank
Collection. In Proceedings of International Conference on Language Resources
and Evaluation. Portorozˇ, Slovenia.
Pasha, A., Al-Badrashiny, M., El Kholy, A., Eskander, R., Diab, M., Habash, N.,
et al. (2014). MADAMIRA: A fast, comprehensive tool for morphological
analysis and disambiguation of Arabic. In Proceedings of the International
Conference on Language Resources and Evaluation. Reykjavik, Iceland.
Rafalovitch, A. and Dale, R. (2009). United Nations General Assembly
Resolutions: A six-language parallel corpus. In Proceedings of the 12th
Machine Translation Summit. Ottawa, Canada.
4 4 4
N I Z A R H A B A S H

Salloum, W. and Habash, N. (2011). Dialectal to Standard Arabic paraphras-
ing to improve Arabic–English statistical machine translation. In
Proceedings of the Workshop on Algorithms and Resources for Modelling of
Dialects and Language Varieties. Edinburgh, UK.
Shahrour, A., Khalifa, S., Taji, D., and Habash, N. (2016). CamelParser:
A system for Arabic syntactic analysis and morphological disambigua-
tion. In Proceedings of COLING 2016, the 26th International Conference on
Computational Linguistics. Osaka, Japan, 228–32.
Shoufan, A. and Alameri, S. (2015). Natural language processing for dialec-
tical Arabic: A survey. In Proceedings of the Second Workshop on Arabic
Natural Language Processing. Beijing, China, 36–48.
Smrzˇ, O. (2007). ElixirFM: Implementation of functional Arabic morphol-
ogy. In Proceedings of the 2007 Workshop on Computational Approaches to Semitic
Languages: Common Issues and Resources. Prague, Czech Republic, 1–8.
Smrzˇ, O., Bielicky´, V., Kourˇilova´, I., Kra´cˇmar, J., Hajicˇ, J., and Zema´nek, P.
(2008). Prague Arabic Dependency Treebank: A word on the million
words. In Proceedings of the International Conference on Language Resources
and Evaluation. Marrakech, Morocco.
Taji, D., Habash, N., and Zeman, D. (2017). Universal dependencies for
Arabic. In Proceedings of the Third Arabic Natural Language Processing
Workshop. Valencia, Spain, 166–76.
Tounsi, L., Attia, M., and van Genabith, J. (2009). Automatic treebank-based
acquisition of Arabic LFG dependency structures. In Proceedings of the
EACL 2009 Workshop on Computational Approaches to Semitic Languages.
Athens, Greece, 45–52.
Watson, J. C. E. (2007). The Phonology and Morphology of Arabic. Oxford: Oxford
University Press.
Zaghouani, W. (2014). Critical survey of the freely available Arabic corpora.
In Proceedings of the Workshop on Free/Open-Source Arabic Corpora and Corpora
Processing Tools. Reykjavik, Iceland.
Zaghouani, W., Diab, M., Mansouri, A., Pradhan, S., and Palmer, M. (2010).
The Revised Arabic Propbank. In Proceedings of the Linguistic Annotation
Workshop. Uppsala, Sweden.
Zaghouani, W., Mohit, B., Habash, N., Obeid, O., Tomeh, N., Rozovskaya, A.,
et al. (2014). Large-scale Arabic error annotation: Guidelines and frame-
work. In Proceedings of the International Conference on Language Resources and
Evaluation . Reykjavik, Iceland.
Zalmout, N. and Habash, N. (2017). Don’t throw those morphological
analyzers away just yet: Neural morphological disambiguation for
Arabic. In Proceedings of the Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural
Language Processing. Copenhagen, Denmark.
Zbib, R., Malchiodi, E., Devlin, J., Stallard, D., Matsoukas, S., Schwartz, R.,
et al. (2012). Machine translation of Arabic dialects. In Proceedings of the
North American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics.
Montre´al, Canada.
18 Arabic Computational Linguistics
445

19
Arabic Corpus Linguistics
and Related Tools
An Overview and Some Critical Observations
Mark Van Mol
19.1
Introduction
This chapter offers a critical review on the state of the art of Arabic corpus
linguistics and some of the tools developed to analyse these corpora, with
speciﬁc attention to their possibilities and limitations.1 We ﬁrst examine
the available Arabic resources in Section 19.2. An important issue treated
concerns the sizes of Arabic corpora and their appropriateness (Section
19.3), and the element of representativeness (Section 19.4). In Section 19.6
on natural language processing, the annotation of Arabic corpora, mor-
phological analysers and POS-taggers are discussed. At the end of this
chapter we touch on the issue of Classical versus Standard Arabic
(Section 19.7) and question some results in corpus investigations
(Section 19.8).
19.2
Available Arabic Resources
Following McEnery et al. (2006: 5) as cited by Koplenig (2017: 7).
a (synchronic) corpus can be deﬁned as ‘a collection of (1) machine-
readable (2) authentic texts (including transcripts of spoken data) which is
“sampled” to be “representative” of a particular language or language
variety’, with the comment that a corpus can also be diachronic. As far as
the available Arabic corpora are concerned, a distinction can be made
between the so-called open-source corpora and corpora that are available
for a (sometimes high) price. Based on a survey of the freely available Arabic
corpora, Zaghouani (2014) distinguishes between raw text corpora, anno-
tated corpora, lexicons, speech corpora, handwriting recognition and
1 For a good inventory of Arabic terminology on Arabic corpus linguistics, see Saleh (2012: 59–74). For a good analysis on
the role of corpora for the treatment of the Arabic language, see Eddakrouri (2018).

miscellaneous, monolingual, dialectal, and web-based corpora.2 Bougrine
et al. (2017: 139–40) give good information on Arabic speech corpora for
dialects. The few websites that list known corpora are often not exhaustive
and do not always contain Arabic corpora of high quality.3 Yassen (2017:
106) has observed that a free publicly available grammatically tagged corpus
of Arabic still does not exist.
In the following, the quality of Arabic corpora that are not freely avail-
able is assessed. The most important resources are to be found at ELRA
(European Language Resources Association) for Europe,4 and LDC
(Linguistic Data Consortium) for the United States.5 The disadvantage of
the ELRA catalogue is that no samples of the language resources are given.
This makes it difﬁcult to evaluate these resources. For a few resources,
a detailed validation report is given. The LDC catalogue contains samples,
which makes it much easier to gain an idea of the quality, the detail, and
the format in which the data are available.
19.2.1
The ELRA Arabic Corpora
In the following, a critical overview of most of the Arabic language
resources available at ELRA is provided. The ﬁrst resource on their web-
site is DixaF, a bilingual French–Arabic, Arabic–French dictionary of
35,000 Arabic entries. As no samples are given, the question can be raised
as to what extent this work is original. According to its metadata, this
dictionary was not based on corpus analysis, which is nowadays
a prerequisite for the compilation of state-of-the-art dictionaries. In the
following, it will also become clear that claims about word counts are not
always reliable.
Another resource, for example, that should be handled critically is
the ‘Arabic dictionary of inﬂected words’ which contains 6 million
inﬂected forms fully vowelized.6 These forms were generated in com-
pliance with the grammatical rules of Arabic, and a dictionary of
65,000 lemmas is provided, which seems quite high. Comparing
these data to well-known good-quality dictionaries, it can be observed
that the Hoogland (2003: 7) dictionary contains 24,000 words (lemmas),
Wehr (1994) 35,000, Abdelnour (1983) 36,032, Kazimirski (1860) 53,835
lemmas, and Van Mol (2001) 27,394 lemmas.7 The compilers claim that
their resource covers 98 per cent of the forms found in any source of
literature, newspaper articles, etc. The remaining 2 per cent include
2 For further details see: arxiv.org/abs/1702.07835. See also: El-Kah et al. (2017: 2) and Saleh (2012).
3 See, for example, Eddakrouri (2016) sites.google.com/a/aucegypt.edu/infoguistics/directory/Corpus-Linguistics/ara
bic-corpora.
4 www.elra.info/en/catalogues/catalogue-language-resources/.
5 https://catalog.ldc.upenn.edu/search.
6 https://catalog.elra.info/en-us/repository/browse/ELRA-L0099/.
7 We also ﬁnd high numbers for Arabic dialects. Jarrar et al. (2017: 751) refer to Diab et al. (2014), whose lexicon contains
over 73,000 Egyptian Arabic entries, whereas the Dictionary of Egyptian Arabic of Hinds and Badawi (2009: xii) contains
over 22,500 headword entries.
19 Arabic Corpus Linguistics and Related Tools
447

proper names.8 All these claims are questionable. First, it is not clear what is
meant by inﬂected forms. Are these really infected forms, such as, for
example, the ﬁrst-person singular present of the verbﺃﻗﻮﻝُ
a-qu¯l-u ‘I say’, or
do they also mean the concatenated forms, such asﻓﺴﺄﻗﻮﻟﻬﺎfa-sa-a-qu¯l-u-la-ha¯
‘Thus, I shall say it’, which is not an inﬂected form, but a concatenation of
an inﬂected form with afﬁxes?9 Presumably that what is meant by inﬂected
forms is concatenated word forms. In the second place, their claim that the
dictionary covers all kinds of texts at 100 per cent is doubtful. From a glance
at the scientiﬁc books from which the MARC-2000 corpus was compiled (see
below), it is clear that a 100 per cent coverage for scientiﬁc books is not yet
possible. In scientiﬁc books, the English translations of terms often appear
alongside the Arabic terminology, precisely for the reason that Arabic
terms for these imported concepts are not common. It is also generally
known that scientiﬁc terms in Arabic tend to differ from country to
country.10
Most of the Arabic corpora offered by ELRA constitute raw corpora.
Two exceptions are the Dependency Treebank for Arabic and English, based
on the Prague Arabic Dependency Treebank (2007), for which no informa-
tion on the size of the corpus is given.11 The other one is Le Monde
Diplomatique Arabic Tagged Corpus, which contains, according to the site,
102,960 vowelized, lemmatized, and tagged words. The corpus is avail-
able as a raw text, a vowelized text, and an xml ﬁle containing the
morphological annotation of the text with grammatical categories.
Details on the grammatical categories and the corresponding tags are
not given.
ELRA also offers the Nemlar Broadcast News Speech Corpus (40 hours of
Standard Arabic news broadcasts), without an indication about the num-
ber of words.12 A lexicon of 62,000 words with transliterations, frequency,
and SAMPA (Speech Assessment Methods Phonetic Alphabet) for Arabic is
8 This claim is disputable. In our corpus, for example, we often ﬁnd poetry. It is highly unlikely that a lexicon will cover all
words in poetry. Dialectal elements may also occur in literature. For a more detailed study on this issue, see Van Mol
(2017b).
9 On the basis of the lemmas of Van Mol’s (2001) dictionary, all inﬂected forms in the database were generated, and a total
of 594,943 inﬂected forms were obtained. For a noun such as baˉb, for example, we generated four inﬂected forms, viz.
dual nominative and genitive, dual nominative and genitive in the construct state (baˉbaˉ), and the plural. We did not
generate the tanwīn for the singular forms. If we had also generated the tanwīn, wewould have obtained for nouns sixextra
forms, which brings the total to eleven forms. If we applied this to all forms, we would obtain 1,308,874 forms.
10 In all samples of the LDC corpora investigated, we often ﬁnd the comment ‘not in dictionary’. For variety in scientiﬁc
terms, see Lelubre (2017).
11 In linguistics, a treebank is a parsed text corpus that annotates syntactic or semantic sentence structure. A very well-known
treebank for Arabic is Kais Dukes’ Quranic Arabic Corpus, see: https://corpus.quran.com/documentation/. Treebanks have
two main different syntactic representations. On one hand, there are phrase structure treebanks (constituency) treebanks,
such as the Penn Arabic Treebank (Maamouri et al. 2004 and Bies and Maamouri 2009). On the other hand, there are
dependency treebanks, such as the Columbia Arabic Treebank (CATiB) (Habash and Roth 2009) and the Prague
Dependency Treebank (Hajič et al. 2001). For a survey of Arabic treebanks, see Taji et al. (2017: 167–8).
12 The word count (according to our deﬁnition of an Arabic word) (see below) for our news broadcast corpus gives an average
of 158 words per minute (see for details: Van Mol 2003: 136, note 6), which might mean that the Nemlar corpus contains
approximately 380,000 ‘words’ roughly the same size as our radio broadcast corpus (320,000 words).
4 4 8
M A R K V A N M O L

included.13 For the vocabulary of news broadcasts, this number seems very
high, because when reaching the saturation level in this language ﬁeld, the
Van Mol’s dictionary counted approximately 8,500 lemmas.14
Soudi (2007: 8) refers to DIINAR.1 of Dichy (2002), which is said to be
a comprehensive lexical resource of 121,000 lemma-entries. In the
Merriam-Webster dictionary a lemma is deﬁned as ‘a glossed word or
phrase’. But according to the ELRA Catalogue, DIINAR.1 contained 29,534
nouns, including adjectives,
19,457 verbs,
and a
total of
70,702
deverbals.15 Moreover, the ELRA website states that this resource includes
a total number of 119,693 fully vowelled lemmas. The concept of ‘lemma’
leaves no doubt that dictionary entries are meant.
But there seem to be even larger questionable resources. The Arabic
Morphological Dictionary, for example, contains: 4,912,749 entries, including
3,374,852
nouns,1,537,699
verbs,
and
198
grammatical
words.16
Presumably what is meant is inﬂected nouns and conjugated verbs. But even
then, these numbers seem very high.17 It seems that higher amounts are
achieved because programmers generate word forms without checking
whether these word forms are realistic.
This might also be due to the adage ‘more data is better data’, which,
according to Bougrine et al. (2017: 138), came about due to the success of
modelling based on machine learning and statistical methods.18
Other ELRA Arabic resources include the GlobalPhone pronunciation dic-
tionary of Arabic (29,230 entries/27,059 words).19 This provides an Arabic
speech corpus of 1,813 utterances encompassing a time span of 3.7 hours.20
13 By ‘frequency’ is probably meant frequency of types and of not words. In general, there seems to be quite a confusion
in the deﬁnition and application of the terms ‘type’, ‘token’, ‘word’, and ‘lemma’. In principle, the term ‘token’ refers to
the total number of strings of characters between spaces in a corpus, regardless of how often they are repeated. The
term ‘type’ refers to the number of distinct strings of characters between spaces in a corpus. For example, the
sentence A Belgian beer is a good beer is composed of seven tokens and ﬁve types. In Dutch, types often match with
words, whereas this is not the case in Arabic because of the clitics. The string of characters between spaces
fasayasʾaluhu ‘so, he will ask him’ is one token that contains four words fa-sa-yasʾalu-hu. A lemma, on the other hand
is a word, such as it occurs as entry in a dictionary. Be is the lemma for the words am, is, and was.
14 For more details, see Van Mol (2000: 437).
15 This resource is no longer available from ELRA.
16 For more information, see https://catalog.elra.info/en-us/repository/browse/ELRA-L0088/.
17 Dichy and Farghaly (2007: 115) claim even higher numbers. They state: ‘In the DIINAR.1 resource, the effective
number of inﬂected word-forms is 7,774,938 (about nine times less than one would obtain through “blind’
generation).’ They base themselves on McCarthy (1981: 381 – also cited by Cahill (2007: 49), who gives as an
example all possible forms for the root ktb, some of which are extremely rare, whereas others are simply non-existent.
McCarthy, for example, gives also Forms XI to XV for the root ktb that absolutely do not exist. A rough estimate then
would be that at least 60 per cent of the created forms are non-existent forms, at least of those based on the root ktb.
As Soudi et al. (2007: 8) stated: ‘As a consequence, the ultimate goal is to implement a linguistic knowledge base – in
our case, a morphological system – that covers all possible allowable structures and only these’ (our italics).
18 Doubtful numbers are also found in Mdhaffar (2017: 56), who refers to Al-Ayyoub et al., where authors build a sentiment
lexicon (a lexicon that is annotated for sentiments, apparently limited to the tags positive, negative, and neutral), of about
120,000 Arabic words, which is four times the size of Van Mol’s (2001) learner’s dictionary. Aside from that, the word count
(ortokencount?)inAl-ThubaityandAlmujaiwel(2017:3)isnotclear. Theygive24,776,906for thesizebutwhenthesumis
calculated, the result is 22,952,422. The sum of his word count is 239,153 whereas his table 1 shows 573,547 words.
19 See Schultz and Schlippe (2014). The basis of how a distinction is made between entries and words is not speciﬁed.
20 This means an average of 7.3 seconds for each utterance (13,320 seconds/1813 utterances).
19 Arabic Corpus Linguistics and Related Tools
449

Other interesting corpora are the OrienTel corpora.21 According to the infor-
mation on the website, these corpora were recorded over Tunisian,
Jordanian, Egyptian, and other Arabic countries ﬁxed and mobile telephone
networks. This information might lead to the conclusion that these corpora
contain spontaneous speech from telephone recordings. However, the
description of the OrienTel corpora raises doubts that these corpora contain
spontaneous speech for two reasons: ﬁrst, all recordings contain practically
the same information.22 Second, there are two kinds of telephone corpora,
recordings in dialectal Arabic and in Modern Standard Arabic (MSA). It is
highly unlikely to ﬁnd people speaking MSA on the telephone.23 A sample
might shed more light on this issue. Furthermore, ELRA offers small parallel
corpora of 10,000 words each, comprising newspapers, mailing lists, web
blogs, and broadcast news speech, all of which can be presumed to be raw
corpora as no further information is provided.24
19.2.2
The LDC Arabic Resources
As for the LDC Arabic resources, we shall consider the resources made
available between 2008 and 2017. The LDC website offers for the year 2017
an Arabic Speech Recognition Pronunciation Dictionary that contains approximately
two million pronunciation entries for 526,000 MSA words. The BOLT Egyptian
Arabic SMS/Chat and Transliteration Corpus, which contains 5,691 conversations
totalling 1,029,248 words across 262,026 messages.25 Of these, a total of 1,856
Arabizi conversations (287,022 words) were transliterated from the original
Romanized Arabizi script into standard Arabic orthography, available in xml
ﬁles.26 Also, but spread over several years, there is the GALE Phases Arabic
Broadcast News Speech, the 2017 sample for which dates from the year 2007,
amounting to a total of 128 hours. The transcripts contain 721,846 tokens.27
21 http://www.elra.info/en/projects/archived-projects/orientel/.
22 They contain, among other things, the following linguistic information with a slight difference in number: two currency
amounts, one natural number, four dates: one spontaneous (date or year of birth), one prompted date, one relative or
general date expression, one prompted date phrase (Islamic calendar). That certain elements arise from prompting
means that the conversations were most likely predetermined.
23 Even if prompted, it is highly unlikely that the responses would be pure MSA.
24 Information on these corpora can be found on the ELRA website: http://www.elra.info/en/.
25 The Broad Operational Language Translation program. See: https://catalog.ldc.upenn.edu/LDC2017T07.
26 In the sample shown, the dialectal preﬁx is not separated from the verb, nor in Arabizi, nor in Arabic script, for example:
‘Btetfaragy 3ala eih?’ on https://catalog.ldc.upenn.edu/desc/addenda/LDC2017T07.conv.xml. For a better
understanding of Arabizi, the new phonetic transcription of Arabic, see Yaghan (2008) and Muhammed et al. (2011).
A good description is also available on the following site: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Arabic_chat_alphabet.
According to Holes (2013), the word Arabizi refers to a mixed Arabic–English language used in the Middle East by
young educated Arabs. It seems that there was a ﬁlm produced about this subject in 2006. On YouTube, only an
excerpt of the ﬁlm can be found at www.youtube.com/watch?v=FDPnGGoBofw. The conversations in that excerpt
seem to be more or less artiﬁcial. Other results found on YouTube refer to the phonetic script, many of which are for
educational purposes. See, for example: www.youtube.com/watch?v=-SotOp07Fig.
27 When calculating the number of hours with the average number of words per minute (see note 12), I arrive at a total of
1,213,440 words (not tokens), which is 40 per cent more. This probably means that the tapes also contain other materials,
such as music. Therefore, it is more precise to express the size of an oral corpus in terms of tokens than in terms of hours
recorded.
4 5 0
M A R K V A N M O L

The other GALE Phase 4 Arabic Broadcast Conversation Transcripts are raw texts
available in a txt ﬁle which are treatable with a text editor. The same kind of
corpus is also available for the previous years.
For 2016, LDC offers an Arabic Treebank – Weblog, which contains 243,117
source tokens before clitics were split off, and 308,996 tree tokens after
clitics were separated for treebank annotation, which is an increase of
21 per cent. No reason is given for this difference in tokens. But an examina-
tion of the ARL (Army Research Laboratory) Arabic Dependency Treebank makes it
clear that LDC also gives a separate tag for case endings. This might explain
the difference in number between the source tokens and the tree tokens.
However,caseendings can hardly beconsidered words, sothe designationof
all elements as ‘tokens’seemstobeappropriateinthis case.28 These textsare
also in txt format, and good documentation is available. The GALE Phase 3 and
4 Arabic Web Parallel Text contains peculiar texts. The sentences are ordered
according to certain collocations. In the (Arabic and) English translation
sentences are grouped, for example, by the subject–verb combination we
want. This is probably due to the fact that these sentences were translated on
the basis of KWIC (Key Word in Context) sentences. In the Arabic version,
some particles such as the negative particle mā are not separated from the
verb, for example:ﻣﺎﺗﺮﻭﺣﺸﻲﺍﻟﺸﻐﻞ.
For the year 2015, LDC offers a corpus based on the well-known Prague
Arabic Dependency Treebank (PADT) 1.0 and The Prague Dependency Treebank 1.0.
Another well-known corpus, the Arabic Learner Corpus is also available. As
far as can be seen from the sample of this corpus, the xml ﬁle contains raw
text and some metadata.29 They also offer KHATT: Handwritten Arabic Text.
The sample of the GALE Arabic–English Parallel Aligned Treebank – Broadcast
News Part 2 (2014) is quite confusing. In it, a distinction is made between
words (110,690) and tokens, (141,058) – also a difference of 21 per cent – but
apparently the deﬁnite article is not seen as a separate word, whereas other
preﬁxed particles (bi- and li-) are, as are sufﬁxed personal pronouns. On the
other hand, in the GALE Arabic–English Word Alignment – Broadcast Training
Part 1, the compilers, contrary to what we have seen before, consider words
as a string of characters between spaces, while they seem to deﬁne tokens as
word forms.30 The difference between both numbers is 23.5 per cent (79,485
words and 103,816 tokens for the newswire) and 19 per cent (131,789 words
and 163,441 tokens for the web).31 To conclude about LDC resources, they
also offer the King Saud University Arabic Speech Database with 590 hours of
28 The deﬁnition of ‘token’ by LDC is correct, as they consider it as a string of characters between spaces (see note 13).
29 See https://catalog.ldc.upenn.edu/LDC2015S10.
30 See https://catalog.ldc.upenn.edu/desc/addenda/LDC2014T19.arb.tkn.jpg. The compilers of the above-mentioned
corpus consider a string of characters between spaces, for example biyadihi ‘in his hand’, a word, whereas the different
components of that string (which they separate by + →ﺏ+ﻳﺪ+ﻩ) as tokens. The different components of that string can
also be considered as words (cf. note 13). Compare this to the Arabic Treebank – Weblog above where the term ‘token’
is used in both cases.
31 The critical question raised here is whether one really can considerﻭﻛﻴﻔﻴﺔ‘and methodology’ to be a word. The same goes for
ﻟﻠﻘﻀﺎﻳﺎ,ﻟﺘﻮﻓﻴﺮ,ﻟﻸﻣﻢandﻭﺳﻴﻠﺘﻘﻲ. In this corpus the three words wa and sa and yaltaqi are considered to be tokens (See link in
note 32). However, the particle sa can be considered a word, because it is in Arabic a particle of the future.
19 Arabic Corpus Linguistics and Related Tools
451

recorded Arabic speech from 269 male and female speakers. The voice quality
in the sample, however, is not very clear, especially not for learners of
Arabic.32 The last two resources, the 2012 Arabic-Dialect/English Parallel Text
and 2011 Arabic Gigaword Fifth Edition Newswire and the 2008 Blog Parallel Texts are
also raw corpora.
19.2.3
The Leuven Arabic Corpora
Whitcomb and Alansary (2018: 224) are not quite accurate and up to date in
their survey of Arabic corpora and cite no references to the Leuven Arabic
Corpora. Hence a brief description about size and method of compilation is
provided here. The Arabic recordings in the corpus date as far back as the
1970s. At ﬁrst all these recordings were of Moroccan Arabic spoken by
migrant workers and miscellaneous programmes recorded from the
Egyptian radio dated to 1979–80. All have been transcribed into Arabic
script. For a 2003 study, recordings of news programmes were made at
random in Saudi Arabia, Egypt, and Algeria (1990–91). These were tran-
scribed according to speciﬁc Arabic transcription conventions. 33 The year
2000 witnessed the start of the compilation of the Modern Arabic
Representative Corpus – 2000 (MARC-2000), which is a balanced corpus com-
posed of language-instruction books for schools, literature, and media
language (both spoken and written – formal and informal).34 At this
moment (2020) the MARC Corpus contains 13,958,000 words, and it con-
tinues to be gradually enlarged. Meanwhile, new recordings have been
made from news programmes on satellite television in 2015–16 in order to
compile LoRANC (the Longitudinal Representative Oral Arabic News Corpus).
A new project aims to compare elements of LoRANC with real language
use in the past (the 1990–91 corpus) a generation (twenty-ﬁve years) later.
The transcription of LoRANC and the segmentation of the video fragments
into units, as we have described in detail in Van Mol (2010), was completed
in 2020. As in the 2003 (Van Mol) study, among other topics, the further
development of the complementary particles can now be examined. Finally,
there is an encoded corpus of the entire Qur’a¯n and a small learner corpus of
Arabic.35 All corpora, except the learner corpus, are pre-POS-tagged in
context.36
32 For a try-out see: catalog.ldc.upenn.edu/LDC2014S02. The female sample (20 secs) contains a very religious text
read at a super-high speed, viz. 72 words or 216 words per minute following our word count scheme. Compared to the
highest average speed found on radio (Algeria: average of 185 words per minute, see note 12) the speed of this
sample lies 14 per cent higher. 5 of the 10 words in the male sample are extremely rare words.
33 For more information on the Leuven Arabic resources, see Van Mol (2014) and Van Mol (2017b).
34 The MARC-2000 corpus is representative for all of its subcorpora. We do not claim representativeness for other
subcorpora, such as Arabic tweets, for example, because at that time these were not yet used.
35 For a detailed grammatical annotation of the Qur’aˉn on the web, see Kais Dukes’ site: http://corpus.quran.com/contact.jsp
36 The pre POS-tagging (part-of-speech-tagging) of Arabic words in a corpus is executed by means of adding diacritical
signs to the words according to the convention developed by Van Mol (2003, 2005). For example, the Arabic word for
responsible as an adjective does not bear any diacritic (. . .ﻫﻮﻣﺴﺆﻭﻝﻋﻦ‘he is responsible for’), whereas the ﬁrst letter of
a noun is given a diacritic short vowel fath
˙
a (ﻫﻮﺍﻟﻤَﺴﺆﻭﻝ‘he is the responsible [one]’). The computer then generates for
4 5 2
M A R K V A N M O L

19.3
The Sizes of Arabic Corpora
Different qualiﬁcations are used to describe the size of corpora, which
makes it difﬁcult to compare them. Sizes of corpora are expressed in:
number of articles,37 hours,38 tokens,39 in k or kb (kilobytes),40 mb
(megabytes),41 words,42 sentences,43 and recently also paragraphs, which
is a very unclear measure (Soliman et al. 2017).
19.3.1
How to Calculate the Size of a Corpus Without Ambiguity?
As stated above (note 13) there exists great confusion in the use of termi-
nology. This subsection is limited to the designations that seem appropri-
ate to deﬁne or describe the size of an Arabic corpus. Only the concepts
‘token’, ‘type’, (which has not been used often), and ‘word’ are retained.44
A language sample is, of course, composed of words. The question is, how
to deﬁne the concept ‘word’ in Arabic, a language characterized by agglu-
tination? Is a word the same as a token or a type? For some it is.45 In his
the adjective the detailed tag ‘Adjective-General-Masculine-Participle-singular-standard language’, whereas the noun is
given the tag: ‘Noun-Common-Masculine-Participle-singular-standard language’.
37 For example: An-Nahar Newspaper Text Corpus, Tratz (2016: 1).
38 For example: The NEMLAR Broadcast News Speech Corpus (40 hours), the King Saud University Arabic Speech
Database (590 hours) and the ELRA Broadcast News Speech Corpus (22.5 hours).
39 For example: Buckwalter (2002), Diab et al. (2007: 164).
40 For example: Zaghouani (2014: 5), Alshutayri and Atwell (2017: 37), Darwish et al. (2017a: 11), Jarrar et al. (2017:
745), Mdhaffar (2017: 56), Al-Marwani and Diab (2017: 186), and the treebank of Taji et al. (2017: 172) that
contains 19k sentences and 738k tokens. It is, however, doubtful whether the size of 19k sentences corresponds to
the size of 738k tokens. Comparing the corpus sample’s word size of Van Mol with the k size, 18k is estimated,
comprising between 1,099 and 1,242 words.
41 For example: An-Nahar Newspaper Text Corpus (118mb for the year 2000), Al-Hayat Arabic Corpus (268mb and the
Arabic Morphological Dictionary (154mb of data). Alshutayri and Atwell (2017: 39) collected 175 million Arabic
tweets.
42 For example: The Al Hayat Newspaper Corpus (144,199), NEMLAR (460,000) Tashkeela (780,000). See also
Menacer et al. (2017: 159), who refers to 1,000 million word occurrences, and Al-Badrashiny (2017: 179): 340,281
words
43 For example: Bouamor et al. (2014) (2,000) and also Diab et al. (2007: 164).
44 It is clear that the misuse of concepts feeds the confusion. The data set of the Al-Hayat Arabic Corpus (ELRA) is said to
contain 18,639,264 distinct tokens, but distinct tokens are types. The characteristic of a token is precisely that it can
occur more than once in a corpus. The adjective ‘distinct’ should apply only to types. Another example is Darwish
(2007: 246), who gives his personal deﬁnitions for the following concepts: a word is any Arabic surface form, a stem is
a word without any preﬁxes or sufﬁxes, and a root is a linguistic unit of meaning, which has no preﬁx, sufﬁx, or inﬁx. Or
Van den Bosch (2007: 205), who refers to ‘words’ when he means word tokens, and ‘word types’ when he means
word types, at white space or punctuation, without any morphological analysis. See also Adouane (2017: 2), who
states: ‘We use token to refer to lexical words (sic), sounds and digits (excluding punctuation and emoticons) and word
to refer only to lexical words.’ And Alkhazi (2017: 421), who conceives words as tokens.
45 There is a difference with European languages where, in most cases, a word and a token overlap. In the online Oxford
English Dictionary the following deﬁnition of a word is provided: ‘A single distinct meaningful element of speech or
writing, used with others (or sometimes alone) to form a sentence and typically shown with a space on either side
when written or printed’. That is probably also why Larkey et al. (2007: 222) use the term word (for English) in simple
sense of text segment. The ﬁrst element of the Oxford deﬁnition ‘A single distinct meaningful element of speech or
writing’ is applicable for Arabic, but not the last element ‘and typically shown with a space on either side when written or
printed’, as is the case in written Arabic.
19 Arabic Corpus Linguistics and Related Tools
453

Qamus, Buckwalter explicitly deﬁnes words as tokens. That is why his
2001 top thirty word list contains the agglutinated wordsﺍﻟﻌﺎﻡ‘the year’
andﻭﻓﻲ‘and in’ andﻭﻗﺎﻝ‘and he said’.46
Some (Eddakrouri 2016; Zeroual et al. 2017) refer to Sı¯bawayhi, who
stated that a word is a noun, a verb, or a particle.47 As such, the string of
characters between spacesﻭَﺑِﻴَﺪٍ
wa-yad-in ‘and in a hand’ contains three
words: two z˙uru¯f ‘particles’, and one ism ‘noun’ (< name). But is this deﬁni-
tion of Sı¯bawayhi useful for contemporary research? What to say about the
sufﬁxﻫﺎ, which is a d˙ amı¯r muttas˙il (sufﬁxed pronoun)? Is that not a word
(kalima)? And what to say about the deﬁnite articleﺍﻝ, which is an ada¯t taʕrı¯f
‘deﬁnite article’? According to Ad-Dahdah (1990: 61) the sufﬁxﻫﺎis indeed
an ism, and the deﬁnite article is a particle. So, can these indeed be
considered separate words?48 That is why, in calculating the Van Mol
corpus, these agglutinated words are taken into consideration. In the old
4D database and program (see Van Mol 2003: 169) the d˙ama¯ʾir muttas˙ila
‘sufﬁxed pronouns’ were not included in the count. In the new database
they will be. The database makes a distinction between minimal basic
(word) forms and maximal basic forms.49 To the group of minimal basic
word forms belong all the word forms that can be generated on the basis of
the word itself. These forms are always counted as one word; for example,
the minimal basic form yaktub ‘he writes’ or bintaani ‘two daughters’.
Maximal basic forms are the forms that contain elements extrinsic to the
word, such as the d˙ama¯ʾir muttas˙ila and the deﬁnite article. All the elements
that can be added to words, but that do not form an essential part of it, can
be identiﬁed in the corpus, because of the pre-POS-tagging methodology.50
46 See the frequency list of Buckwalter on www.qamus.org/wordlist.htm. This view is held, of course, because of
the technical limitations for tokenizing words in an efﬁcient way. The simplest way to compile frequency lists of
Arabic ‘words’ is to make a list of all strings of characters between spaces. Although it is clear that this
procedure might be acceptable for programmers, for Arabic linguists it is unacceptable to considerﻭﻗﺎﻝ‘and he
said’ to be one word. But as Buckwalter correctly states, it is not a lemmatized list. Moreover, Buckwalter also
attempts to reduce types to words by means of regular expressions (regex). That follows in his later publication
with Parkinson (2011). On the other hand, Diab et al. (2007: 166) consider the particlesﻭandﺏto be
preﬁxes and not words. Theﺡ(we presume the dialectal future preﬁx), however, is considered to be a word,
like the MSA preﬁx of the futureﺱ. Why she considers theـﺎand theﺕto be words is not clear. Theﻩand theﻡ
are considered to be sufﬁxes. Theﻡexists indeed (see Ad-Dahdah 1990: 17) to intensify, for example:ﺯﺭﻗﻢ
‘very blue’ (Yaʾqub 1988: 424), but we never encountered this form in MSA.
47 For a good introduction on the grammarian Sībawayhi, see Carter (2004).
48 Presumably, the confusion in Arabic is due to the polysemic character of the word h
˙
arf, which means both letter and
particle. The difference between the two lies in the fact that a letter does not take a vowel (ﺏ), whereas the particle (ﺏِ )
does.
49 For details, see Van Mol 2005: https://ilt.kuleuven.be/arabic/pdf/Mark%20Van%20Mol%20A031.pdf.
50 The classiﬁcation of Arabic tokens this way leaves no doubt. Darwish (2007: 247), on the contrary, mixes these two
possibilities, which complicates matters. When he mentions some words that can be derived from the root ktb he
refers to kitaˉb ‘book’, wakitaˉbuhu ‘and his book’, yaktub ‘he writes’, kitaˉbuhum ‘their book’, maktabat ‘library/
bookstore’, and al-kaˉtib ‘the book’.
4 5 4
M A R K V A N M O L

Some of the confusion in terminology may be caused by the way
Microsoft Word counts ‘words’ in documents. Microsoft Word always
counts ‘words’ as tokens, i.e., strings of characters between spaces
(punctuation marks, etc.). But this makes quite a difference in count. In
Table 19.1 we show the frequency of words in the same documents calcu-
lated by Word and Van Mol’s program (see Van Mol 2003: 169–76). Ten
samples were taken from each text genre.
Table 19.1 shows that the number of additional Arabic words, such as
the count of particles that are directly afﬁxed to a word, varies between
text genres. Why the difference between ﬁction and the two other genres
is so great is a matter that has to be investigated, considering other vari-
ables, such as country of origin.
19.3.2
The Appropriate Size of a Corpus
There is substantial variation between the sizes of Arabic corpora. They
vary from very small to huge. The data of Jarrar et al. (2017: 765), for
example, are very limited, as he writes: ‘Two annotators annotated three
documents from the corpus independently. The three selected documents
consist of 1529 tokens (883 types)’. Samih et al. (2017: 47) refer to
a relatively small corpus of Egyptian Arabic from Mohamed et al. (2012)
containing 320 comments with a total of 20,022 words, but also to a huge
one (p. 49) of 383,261,475 tokens.51,52 Nagoudi and Schwab (2017: 19) refer
to Zahran et al. (2015), who used a large collection from different sources
counting more than 5.8 billion words, from Arabic Wikipedia, from news
corpora, to raw Qur’a¯nic text. Another well-known large Arabic corpus is
ArabiCorpus of Brigham Young University (BYU)53 and the 100 million-word
corpus that is being compiled at the library of Alexandria.54
This leads to the question of the representativeness of corpora and the
accuracy of the data. Who can check the accuracy of such large corpora,
and are they necessary for all kinds of linguistic investigations? This
Table 19.1 Frequency of words in the same documents calculated by Word
and Van Mol’s (2003) program
Text genre
Country
Count in
Microsoft Word
Van Mol
%Word/
Van Mol
Literature Fiction
Morocco
77,542
89,061
87%
Newspaper
International
18,888
24,739
76%
Literature
Non-ﬁction
Egypt
105,592
141,592
74%
51 www.masrawy.com.
52 Which is an average of 62 words per comment.
53 For more information, see http://arabicorpus.byu.edu/.
54 For details, see www.bibalex.org/ica/en/About.aspx or www.bibalex.org/ica/ar/.
19 Arabic Corpus Linguistics and Related Tools
455

concern is related to the question of whether corpus composers strive for
quantity or for quality. Most large available corpora are news corpora. This
language segment is overrepresented, whereas literature, both ﬁction and
non-ﬁction, and radio or television corpora that treat media other than
news programmes are underrepresented. The problem is that many want
to speed up not only the process of sampling but also that of annotation
(see Jarrar et al. 2017: 756). This leads to another dichotomy, between
speed and precision.
19.4
Representativeness of Arabic Corpora and Statistical
Signiﬁcance
The matter
of
representativeness is
hardly
mentioned in
related
publications.55 Representativeness in corpus linguistics has long been
questioned. Let us consider some of the arguments that state that repre-
sentativeness is an unreachable goal. Biber (1993: 243) in Koplenig (2017:
14) tries to answer the question of how a corpus can represent a language:
‘Representativeness refers to the extent to which a sample includes the full
range of variability in a population.’ Koplenig (2017: 17) refers to the rather
pessimistic view of McEnery et al. (2006: 21), who state:56
Claims of corpus representativeness and balance . . . should be interpreted
in relative terms and considered a statement of faith rather than as fact, as
presently there is no objective way to balance a corpus or to measure its
representativeness
They also quote Leech (2007: 135) who states: ‘Without representativeness,
whatever is found to be true of a corpus, is simply true of that corpus – and
cannot be extended to anything else.’ Koplenig (2017: 18) draws the con-
clusion that:
Corpora (especially balanced ones) are samples of convenience that do not
allow the extrapolation from the sample to the population, since no
statistical model can compensate for this. Hence, null hypothesis signiﬁ-
cance testing is mathematically not justiﬁed in corpus linguistics.
On the other hand Koplenig (2017: 18) states: ‘If we ﬁnd an interesting
result in one (sub)corpus, we can use this information to make predictions
about another (sub)corpus or other types of linguistic data.’ And further
(2017: 19): ‘If a result holds true across different corpora and – even better –
for different types of linguistic data, we can use this form of converging
55 As far as we could see, the only reference to representativeness is Al-Sayed et al. (2017: 3), who states: ‘The data
should be representative of MSA in general or of a particular MSA genre.’ Ironically, his corpus is not widely
representative as he only uses language samples from the King of Jordan. Likewise, the Arabic Learner Corpus (Alfaiﬁ
2015) can hardly be considered to be representative of the whole Arabic region as it contains only material from Saudi
Arabia, where not only language instruction but also social life is pervaded by religious language.
56 For all arguments, see Koplenig (2017).
4 5 6
M A R K V A N M O L

evidence to cautiously postulate a general relationship – maybe even for
the language as a whole.’
Language is omnipresent, and random samples can indeed be collected
from it.57 As far as our experience goes, two elements are crucial in this
matter: namely the element of saturation and the law of diminishing
returns. These two elements are not only linked to the language genre,
but also to the elements to be investigated. If we have a lexicographical
project and want to investigate, for example, the vocabulary of news, then
a varied corpus of c.300,000 words as a news corpus may sufﬁce (see above).
However, if one wants to examine speciﬁcally the use of the conjunction
(particle) wa¯w ‘and’ (for example), a signiﬁcantly smaller corpus might
sufﬁce, simply because the saturation point where no new phenomena
are found is reached much faster, following the law of diminishing
returns. In order to ﬁnd idiomatic expressions, a much larger corpus is
needed.
As far as statistical signiﬁcance is concerned, it remains relevant because
ﬁgures are meaningless unless one can demonstrate that differences
between ﬁgures are statistically relevant. On the other hand, one can
agree with Bernardi et al. (2017) that the demonstration of statistical
signiﬁcance should not be the only goal, and neither does it sufﬁce in
itself, as it often reduces empirical research into simple yes/no dichotomi-
zations without providing deeper understandings as to why certain pat-
terns occur. Van Mol (2003) demonstrated statistically not only that there
is development in the use of some particles in Arabic radio news broad-
casts, but also that the pace of this development varied between the three
investigated countries. An explanation may be that this development is
due to the fact that the investigated particles are complementary.
However, other variables could be considered. Is there a difference
between the speech of men and women? Is this development due to time
pressures, in other words, does it also occur in ﬁction where writers take
their time to compose literature? In this sense one can conclude that
statistical signiﬁcance remains essential in corpus linguistics, but that it
is not the ﬁnal answer. In order to determine the cause(s), further investi-
gations are recommended.58 Representativeness is a key element in corpus
linguistics in order to obtain precise descriptions of the language, but
researchers clearly have to indicate to which subpopulation their ﬁndings
apply.
57 It is not self-evident that one needs to take representative samples. See, for example, the critique on the sample of
Blanc (1960) in Van Mol (2017a: 337).
58 The reproducibility of data is very important. That is why the availability of different Arabic corpora is a must. For an
example of a reproduction of an investigation, see Parkinson (2001), who repeated part of Van Mol’s (1998, 2001)
study on future particles in newspapers. Such investigations can be repeated because ‘probability theory . . . gives us
an idea of what is likely to happen when the study is repeated, without actually having to repeat it’ (Koplenig 2017: 18).
19 Arabic Corpus Linguistics and Related Tools
457

19.5
Treatment of Arabic Corpora and Their Accuracy
We start this section with some critical remarks about tools for the treat-
ment of Arabic corpora which were recently put forward in peer-reviewed
scholarly literature. The ﬁrst remark comes from Ditters (2013: 217) as well
as Ko¨pru¨ and Miller (2009), who stated that ‘Very few of the available
systems are evaluated using scientiﬁc and systematic procedures.’
Indeed, researchers do make inventories of corpora (Zaghouani 2014) or
annotation tools (Alosaimy and Atwell 2017), but they do not always
evaluate these critically. Yet each new publication appears to claim that
its newly developed system for corpus analysis ‘outperforms’ other
systems.59
Many works also stress the speciﬁc challenge that the complicated
nature of the Arabic language poses to corpus analysis.60 As the intention
is for Arabic corpora to be used for several purposes, and as most corpora
are raw, a ﬁrst problem in corpus linguistics is noise.61 This means that
when looking for a speciﬁc element, one obtains a great many elements
that have nothing to do with what one is looking for. This, of course, is
frustrating, because it takes considerable time to ﬁlter out exactly what
one needs.62 In this respect one sometimes encounters an oversimpliﬁca-
tion of matters or an overcomplication of matters.
19.5.1
Oversimpliﬁcation
Very often investigations treat only basic Arabic sentences. Yassen et al.
(2017: 110) treats the expressionﺑﺎﺳﻢﺍﻟﻠﻪﺍﻟﺮﺣﻤﺎﻥﺍﻟﺮﺣﻴﻢ‘In the name of God, the
Gracious, the Merciful’ and Nagoudi sentences, such as: Yousef goes to the
faculty (2017: 22). Also, the treated grammar is often elementary (Sforza and
Soudi 2007: 91–3). Basic information about the Arabic language tends to be
repeated (e.g., Menacer et al. 2017: 158; Boudchiche et al. 2017: 141–2).
59 See, among many others, Al-Badrashiny (2017: 177).
60 See, for example, Cahill (2007: 45), Diab et al. (2007: 177), and Habash et al. (2017: 235), who presents Arab-
Acquis, a large publicly available data set for evaluating machine translation between twenty-two languages and Arabic.
For corpora, see also https://corpora.uni-leipzig.de/de?corpusId=ara_news_2005-2009, who sampled raw corpora
for more than 200 languages.
61 In order to have an idea of what purposes corpora are used for, here is a brief survey of the contents of two latest
workshops in the ﬁeld, the 2014 Arabic Natural Language Processing Workshop (Valencia) and the 2017 third Arabic
Natural Language Processing Workshop (Doha). In decreasing order, 12 presentations on text correction, 6 on
annotation and tagging, 6 miscellaneous, 5 on corpus collection, 5 on information retrieval, 4 on sentiment analysis, 2
on diacritic restoration, and 2 each for speech recognition, machine translation, and morphological analysis. Note that
77 per cent of the authors of the (co-authored) papers are native speakers of Arabic.
62 It is notable that many researchers try to avoid noise by examining elements that are not affected by noise. An example
would be the masdars of Form III of the characteristic shapeﻣﻔﺎﻋﻠﺔmufaˉʿalat. Others include: Abouenour et al. (2013:
907):ﺃﺳﻠﺤﺔ, ‘weapons’ Pinon (2017: 107):ﺟﺪﺍ, ‘very’, Almujaiwel (2017: 441), who examines in an interesting study
the use ofﺍﻟﻤﺮﺃﺓ‘the woman’ andﺍﻟﻨﺴﺎﺀ‘the women’ (he writes: ‘This topic was chosen because it occurs at low
frequency in the texts and can therefore be manually analyzed’ (p. 442)), and Fasha et al. (2017: 96), who explore the
wordﺗﻜﻔﻴﺮﻱ(an adjective pertaining to those who denounce as heretics others who do not agree with their particular
interpretations of Islam).
4 5 8
M A R K V A N M O L

Some (Van den Bosch 2007: 203–4) stick to very limited vocabulary (e.g.,
words related to the root ktb).
19.5.2
Overcomplication
On the other hand, there are researchers who overcomplicate matters. In
normalizing the text (which includes procedures such as removing punc-
tuation, and so on) some go too far by transforming the orthography of
some words. Larkey et al. (2007: 238) reinterpret the Arabic language by
replacing essential discriminating elements with uniform elements,
which increases the ambiguity of the words. They replaceﺁ,ﺇ, andﺃwithﺍ
(228).63 A good example of the additional complication such a normalization
creates can be found in Darwish (2007: 247), who tries to deﬁne the possible
roots for the wordﺍﻳﻤﺎﻥ, which he transcribes as AymAn.64 These roots can be:
ﻳﻤﻦ,ﻣﺄﻥ,ﺃﻳﻢ,ﺃﻣﻦ, andﻳﻤﺄ. According to his translation, it can be (our vocalization)
ﺇِﻳﻤَﺎﻥ‘peace or faith’,ﺃَﻳِّﻤَﺎﻥ‘two poor people’,ﺃَﻳَﻤْﺄَﻥُ
‘will he give support’,ﺃَﻳْﻤَﺎﻥ
‘covenants’, andﺃَﻳَﺄَﻣْﻦَ
‘will they (fem.) point to’. From an Arabic corpus linguis-
tics point of view, this can be considered an overcomplication for the follow-
ing reasons. There is no doubt that the ﬁrst form is very frequent.65 The
second is very likely never to occur in his dual form. The third and ﬁfth are
both exceptional because of the low frequency in use of the interrogative
particle. The feminine third plural forms of the verb are also very rare, and
certainly in combination with the particle . The fourth one, the plural ofﻳَﻤِﻴﻦ
(oath), is also a very low-frequency word.
Another example is Alkhazi (2017: 423), who in order to distinguish
Classical Arabic from Modern Standard Arabic processes the string:
ﺃﺑﺠﺪﺑﻬﻮﺑﺄﺃﺑﺠﺪusing Prediction by Partial Matching (PPM).66 Other examples
can be found in Cahill (2007: 55), Al-Najem (2007: 68) and Khalifa et al.
(2017: 36). A related issue is whether the transliteration of Arabic,
which was useful and necessary a decade ago, is still necessary
nowadays.67
63 The same goes for Soliman et al. (2017: 259), who in addition replacesﺓbyﻩandﻯbyﻱ. These measures are more
far-reaching than they realize. For example, the verbﺃﻟﻘﻰʾalqaˉ (active form) becomes passive:ﺃﻝﻕﻱʾulqiya.
64 AymAn is transcribed according to the Buckwalter transcription.
65 When the hamza and šadda are not omitted, these forms become much more transparent:ﺇﻳﻤﺎﻥ(faith),ﺃﻳّﻤﺎﻥ(two
singles),ﺃﻳﻤﺎﻥ,ﺃﻳﻤﺄﻥ(oaths) andﺃﻳﻤﺄﻥ. That way only the third and the ﬁfth form do not differ from each other.
66 PPM is a method for compressing corpus data without loss, using an algorithm developed by Cleary and Witten (1984)
and further developed for Arabic by Alhawiti (2014). See for details: http://corpus.canterbury.ac.nz/index.html.
67 In 2007 Diab et al. (164) used the Buckwalter Transliteration Scheme (BTS). But Buchberger (2009: 310) prefers
another transcription system, because he ﬁnds BTS difﬁcult to read; Boudelaa and Marslen-Wilson (2010: 486) do
too, as do we. As for tagging a corpus, Jarrar et al. (2017: 767) state that: ‘incorrect annotations were made due to
mistakes when writing in Buckwalter transliteration, such as writing xls instead of xlS “enough’”. Others, for example
Darwish (2017a), mix different transliteration systems. Transliteration is useful for dialect corpora, and it may be time to
apply a uniform kind of Arabizi (Van Mol 2017a: 45–6), which is for most young Arabs nowadays easy to apply.
19 Arabic Corpus Linguistics and Related Tools
459

19.6
Natural Language Processing and Arabic Corpora
In order to analyse Arabic corpora, besides lexical resources, corpora are
annotated and POS-tagged and morphological analysers have been developed.
19.6.1
The Annotation of Arabic Corpora
Current annotation or tagging practices of corpora are problematic from two
points of view.68 In the ﬁrst place, they suffer from overcomplication because
programmers often rely on all theoretical possibilities, and in the second
place, the annotation tools are often complex and not user-friendly.69
Likewise the output, which is only partly user-friendly for programmers.70
As Jarrar et al. (2017: 771) state: ‘Annotation is often a complex proce-
dure. First of all, it is important to ﬁnd good annotators and to train
them.’71 For both MADAMIRA (a tool for morphological analysis and dis-
ambiguation of Arabic; Pasha et al. 2014) and DIWAN (an annotation inter-
face for Arabic dialectal texts; Al-Shargi and Rambow 2015), different
annotators and administrators are at work.72 Sometimes annotations
68 We do not treat here the process of chunking and parsing a corpus. For a recent thorough survey on available
morphological analysers and part-of-speech taggers, see Alosaimy and Atwell (2017). Taggers most often make use of
statistical models, such as the Hidden Markov Model or the Support Vector Machine algorithm (e.g., Diab et al. 2007;
Darwish et al. 2017b). Alkhazi (2017: 421) bases his analysis on PPM. See also note 66.
69 It sufﬁces to look at the elucidation of the MADA morphological tagger (www.ccls.columbia.edu/project/madatokan/),
where it is stated: ‘For Arabic, this (morphological analysis) gives us about 333,000 theoretically possible completely
speciﬁed morphological analyses. In contrast, English morphological tagsets usually have about 50 tags, which cover all
morphological variations.’ The forms proposed by Darwish et al. (2017a: 9) are also purely theoretical constructions.
According to the research of Alosaimy and Atwell (2017: 16–26), the number of tags for Arabic in the different
analysers varies from ‘not mentioned’, to over 16, to a maximum of 118. See also Darwish et al. (2017a: 9). Jarrar et al.
(2017: 756) states that the POS feature in MADAMIRA has 32 values. Diab et al. (2007: 173) refers to 24 tags. In our
database we distinguish 360 tags in accordance with the Arabic grammatical tradition and 648 combined tags for both
(partly) Arabic grammar and European POS tags. For an example of a POS-tag, see Van Mol (2012: 760). On the other
hand, Yassen et al. (2017: 106) points out: ‘POS tagging for Arabic text and the ambiguity of POS for Arabic text is still
an unsolved problem.’ However, he refers for this statement to Shereen Khoja (2001).
70 In order to have an idea of the complexity of the different kinds of outputs, see Alosaimy and Atwell (2017: 16–26). Often
the procedures of annotation or tagging are opaque. It is, for example, not clear what Fashwan and Alansary (2017: 85)
mean by the three concepts: ‘training data’ (450,000 words), ‘development data’ (55,000 words), and ‘testing data’
(55,000 words). They also do not mention the kind of texts they are working with. The way they describe their procedure
and results seems to be far too optimistic: ‘These rules get only the correct solution for the words’ context and consequently
eliminate all wrong solutions.’ Perhaps they generate all possible forms. One of the forms mentioned isﺃُﻓَﻀَّﻞ(which they
translate as ‘be preferred’), but which means, literally ‘I was preferred’, which, in our view, is an unlikely form.
71 See also Al-Shargi and Rambow (2015: 50), who consider annotation to be costly and slow. Adouane and Dobnik
(2017: 2) reckon ﬁve weeks to check and annotate a corpus of 20,000 words by three annotators. However, ‘weeks’ is
not a very clear measure. It would be interesting to know the exact time expressed in hours. It is clear from Jarrar et al.
(2017: 766) that the annotation process is not an easy affair. They write: ‘After annotating the three documents, the
two annotators were asked to meet, review and discuss their annotations and to come up with veriﬁed and agreed
annotations.’ The degree of inter-annotator agreement is expressed by kappa values. The kappa statistic (or kappa
coefﬁcient) is the most commonly used statistic to measure the agreement between two or more observers. A kappa
of 1 indicates perfect agreement, whereas a kappa of 0 indicates agreement equivalent to chance.
72 Just because a person is of Arab origin does not mean he/she has mastered Arabic and more speciﬁcally MSA.
Alqassas (2017: 83) states: ‘Studies show that target-like MSA grammar is not always achieved by Arab speakers.’ In
spite of the observation by Soudi et al. (2007: vii): ‘There are now a large number of computational linguists with
4 6 0
M A R K V A N M O L

contain ﬂaws probably caused by the manner of programming. For
Buckwalter (2007: 39), school, Moroccans, and Caliph are feminine singular.73
Jarrar et al. (2017: 758) use DIWAN, which displays different types of
metadata, such as preﬁx, stem, sufﬁx, lemma, gloss, in drop-down lists,
and allows the annotators to edit these ﬁelds. They write that using
DIWAN helped not only in speeding up the annotation, but also in sig-
niﬁcantly reducing the number of errors and typing mistakes that anno-
tators produced. However, the use of drop-down lists is time-consuming.
And when drop-down lists are long, the chances of making a mistake
increase as well as the amount of time.
19.6.2
Morphological Analysers and POS-Taggers
A morphological analyser produces all morphological analyses for a word
outside of any context, whereas a morphological tagger (or disambiguater:
Jarrar et al. 2017: 750) determines the correct morphological analysis –
including the POS tag – for a word in context (Al-Shargi and Rambow 2015:
50). El-Kah et al. (2017: 2) state that writing the diacritics (short vowels) has
a signiﬁcant impact on morphological analyses and that it usually helps in
resolving lexical ambiguity (which is very high in Arabic).74 The accuracy of
morphological analysers and POS-taggers is not always mentioned. Alosaimy
and Atwell’s (2017) investigation shows the following accuracy rates: 95.9 –
96 – 96.1 – 96.43 – 96.5 and 97.43 per cent correct morphological analysis.
However, it is not speciﬁed how this accuracy is calculated, so one does not
know whether it is calculated on, for example, the WER (Word Error Rate).75
For the purposes of this chapter, we brieﬂy evaluated the most popular
analyser, which is MADAMIRA, and give some primary observations here.
We tested MADAMIRA on a stand-alone version that was sent to us in
November 2017. First, it strikes us that the MADAMIRA tool is working on
the old MS-DOS platform. The application of the stand-alone version was
quite complex. We had to put the sentences into an xml ﬁle, let it run in an
a knowledge of Arabic’, there are still many basic ﬂaws that bias tagging even in the articles about Arabic language
processing. For example, can one consider yaquˉl li (Samih et al. 2017: 51) ‘he tells to me’ to be a stem? Darwish
(2007: 246) translates kitaˉb ‘book’ by ‘books’ (plural) and kataˉtib (plural) by ‘Qur’aˉn school’. He also uses unfamiliar
words (dialect?), such as katuˉb ‘skilled writer’.
73 Sometimes it is not clear on which basis tagging guidelines are deﬁned. According to the CODA (Conventional
Orthography for Dialectal Arabic) guidelines (Jarrar et al. 2017: 760), the raw wordﻣﺘﺤﻜﻴﻠﻬﺎﺵma-ti-h˙ ki-l-haˉ-š ‘don’t
relate [an account/story] to her’ should be written as the three words:ﻣﺎﺗﺤﻜﻲﻟﻬﺎﺵ. One wonders why they do not also
distinguish between the dative prepositionﻝ<l> ‘to’, the indirect object pronounﻩﺍ<haˉ> ‘her’, and the discontinuous
negatorﺵ<š>.
74 According to El-Kah et al. (2017: 2), previous reports about Arabic word ambiguity (Farghaly and Shaalan 2009)
calculated that the average ambiguities for a word meaning in MSA reaches 19.2 while this same rate reaches only 2.3
for most other languages.
75 Unfortunately, details are often lacking on what precisely researchers mean by accuracy. When they mean WER, it is not
clear how a word is deﬁned (cf. Section 19.3 and note 44). Nor is it clear on what basis the errors are calculated. Is it on
the basis of a dictionary (and which dictionary?) or is it on a table of ‘strings of characters between spaces’ generated
from digital texts?
19 Arabic Corpus Linguistics and Related Tools
461

MS-DOS environment, which produced another xml ﬁle with the output.
A randomly chosen sample sentence was taken from media Arabic and
contained no ambiguous forms. Apparently, the dictionary is based on
news samples. When we tested the following sentence from literature:
ﻛﻤﺎﻟﻮﺃﻧﻨﻲﻗﺮﺭﺕﻋﻘﺎﺏﻧﻔﺴﻲﺍﻟﻤﻀﻄﺮﺑﺔﻓﻘﺪﻇﻠﻠﺖﺟﺎﻟﺴﺎﻳﻮﻣﺎﻛﺎﻣﻼﺃﻛﺜﺮﻣﻦﻋﺸﺮﺳﺎﻋﺎﺕﻣﺘﻌﺎﻗﺒﺔﻋﻠﻰ
ﻛﺮﺳﻲﺧﺸﺒﻲﻭﺍﻧﺎﻣﺸﺪﻭﺩﺍﻟﻰﺟﻬﺎﺯﺍﻟﻜﻤﺒﻴﻮﺗﺮﻋﻠﻰﻧﺤﻮﻣﻦﺍﻟﻮﻟﻪﺍﻟﺸﻴﻄﺎﻧﻲMADAMIRA tagged
ʾannani (correctly); qarrartu (as qarrarat), although the verb is preceded by
the correct tag PRON-1S; al-mud˙t˙ariba is tagged as a NOUN with a feminine
sufﬁx, but not as a feminine adjective; z˙allaltu is treated as a third-person
feminine (as z˙allalat ‘to shade’); gˇa¯lisan is tagged as a noun, whereas we
would consider it to be an adjective. On the other hand, ka¯milan is tagged
as an adjective, and ʾaktar is tagged as an adjective, which it is, but we
would consider it to be an elative, a tag which is more precise. The
number ʿašar ‘ten’ is tagged as a noun (ʿušr ‘a tenth’). Our conclusion
about this sentence was that we had a TER (Type Error Rate) of 17% for
a sentence in which 63% of the types are unambiguous. When testing
the Qur’a¯nic verse:ﻳﺆﺗﻲﺍﻟﺤﻜﻤﺔﻣﻦﻳﺸﺎﺀﻭﻣﻦﻳﺆﺕﺍﻟﺤﻜﻤﺔﻓﻘﺪﺃﻭﺗﻲﺧﻴﺮﺍﻛﺜﻴﺮﺍ‘He grants
Hikmah to whom He wills, and he, to whom Hikmah is granted, is indeed
granted abundant good’, for which the program is not intended (but all of
these words with their meanings occur in Van Mol’s Modern Learner’s
Dictionary; Van Mol and Berghman 2001a and b), ﬁve wrong tags are
obtained on eleven tokens (45%) on a sentence of which 54% of the tokens
leave no ambiguity. The relative pronoun man ‘whoever’ is tagged as the
preposition min ‘from’ (two times), the verb ʾutiya ‘is granted’ is seen
as a proper noun, the noun h˘ayr ‘goodness’ is seen as an adjective, and
the adjective katīran ‘abundant’ is seen as a noun. These data lead us to
the conclusion that MADAMIRA is erroneously classiﬁed by Alosaimy and
Atwell (2017: 7) as a POS-tagger. The deﬁnition that a POS-tagger assigns
a tag that is contextually suitable is not fulﬁlled. It can be classiﬁed,
however, as a morphological analyser, with limitations. We then tested
the sentencesﺍﻟﻌﻘﺎﺏﻓﻲﻋﺸﻪandﺍﻧﺎﺁﻛﻞﻓﻘﻂﺳﻠﻄﺔ. Not all POS-tags are correct.
The translation given forﺍﻟﻌﻘﺎﺏﻓﻲﻋﺸﻪis: ‘punishment in nest’. For
the second sentence, the verb is wrongly tagged as VERB PAST 3 SING,
and as translations we obtain: ‘I – to feed – only – power’. Google
Translate gives for the ﬁrst sentence: ‘Punishment in its nest’ and for
the second: ‘I only eat salad’. It is interesting to see that when we combine
the two sentences in Google Translate we obtain for the last one: ‘and
I eat only authority’.
19.7
Classical versus Modern Standard Arabic
For many, the core issue remains on which version of Arabic to base
the analysis of Arabic corpora. As Buckwalter (2007: 39) correctly
states: ‘it is surprising that many of the traditional grammatical
4 6 2
M A R K V A N M O L

categories that are discussed in all treatments of Arabic morphology
have not been needed for successful treebanking, at least as deﬁned in
the phrase-structure Penn Treebank model.’ Zeroual (2017) holds the
opposite view and urges for a POS-tagset based on Arabic grammatical
tradition.76 The complications of annotation and tagging are partly
due to the approach used in tagging and analysing corpora. Some
stick to Classical Arabic to analyse modern texts.77 Farghaly (2010:
60), for example, states:
The only complete grammar of Arabic to date, is that written by early Arab
grammarians. This grammar written more than a thousand years ago still
serves as the main reference even when used to describe Modern Standard
Arabic. Most current work in Arabic computational linguistics relies at
least to some degree on the analyses made by those pioneering Arab
grammarians.
But, later, he states (61): ‘Objectives of these grammarians were: Proper
understanding and interpretation of the Quran and the Prophets’ sayings’,
which means that they are based on a corpus of a limited size compared to
current corpora.78 This issue also has to do with linguistic research on
corpora and the validation of its results. Alosaimy and Atwell (2017), for
example, examine POS-taggers developed for MSA on Classical Arabic text.
Unfortunately, the classical sample sentence on which they base their
investigation matches 100 per cent with MSA features on the lexicogra-
phical level as well as morphology and syntax.79
19.8
Questionable Corpus Investigations and Results
As a last item, some observations can be made about questionable practices
and results found in recent articles about resources, tagging procedures, and
76 Zeroual goes beyond strict POS-tags as he also mentions for verbs, for example, whether the root is defective or sound.
77 Dichy (2017: 19) correctly states: ‘Toutefois, l’intuition des locuteurs ne distingue pas toujours entre l’arabe littéraire
moderne de l’arabe littéraire classique.’ Even today we ﬁnd some odd deﬁnitions of Arabic language levels. Alshutayri
and Atwell (2017: 37) referring to Biadsy et al. (2009) consider dialectal Arabic to be a mix of Classical Arabic and
other ancient forms from different neighbouring countries that developed as a result of social interaction between
people in Arab countries and people in the neighbouring countries. Yassen et al. (2017: 106) writes: ‘The aim of this
paper is to transfer knowledge from Quran text to MSA to prove Quran text as a gold standard.’ It is also strange to read
that in spite of the availability of excellent grammars by Badawi et al. (2003) and Ryding (2005), Ibrahimi (2017: 29)
states: ‘Or, nous ne possédons pas, à l’heure actuelle, de descriptions satisfaisantes et sufﬁsament détaillées et
fouillées de cet usage que nous nommons standard.’
78 In some cases, we doubt the necessity to do so. Why do Al-Sayed et al. (2017: 5) base their research on the political
language of the king of Jordan (the use of the word takﬁiri) on classical and modern Arabic dictionaries, such as Al-
aʾayn (786 CE), Muʿjamma qaˉys al-Lughah (1004 CE), al-Mufradaˉt f gharb al-Qurʾaˉn (1109 CE), Lisaˉn al-ʿArab
(1311 CE), and Muʿjam al-Lughah al-ʿArabya al-Muʿaasira (2003 CE), but ignore other dictionaries of Modern
Arabic, such as Wehr (1994)?
79 The sample sentence from sayings from the Prophet is:ﻻﻳﺆﻣﻦﺍﺣﺪﻛﻢﺣﺘﻰﻳﻜﻮﻥﻫﻮﺍﻩﺗﺒﻌﺎﻟﻤﺎﺟﺌﺖﺑﻪ‘None of you truly believes
until his desires are subservient to that which I have brought’. Van Mol’s Arabic Learner’s Dictionary (Van Mol and
Berghman 2001a and b), which is based only on modern texts from 1980 onwards, contains all these words with the
correct meaning (and even more precise, as we have the translation ‘his passions’ forﻩﻭﺍﻩinstead of ‘his desires’).
19 Arabic Corpus Linguistics and Related Tools
463

Arabic language qualiﬁcations. From what we have discussed and what
follows, we can state that two ﬁelds overlap in Arabic Corpus Linguistics:
the ﬁeld of programming and the ﬁeld of Arabic language. In general, the
ﬁeld of programming seems to yield acceptable results. The weak point is in
Arabic linguistics itself. First, in the lack of experts in the Arabic language
who also know programming, and second, the importance that program-
mers who are native speakers of the language attach to Classical Arabic as
a normative standard at the expense of its modern spoken varieties. They do
not appreciate what programming could mean for the scientiﬁc investigation
and the teaching of Arabic. For that reason, the function of an Arabic com-
puter linguist becomes of strategic importance, a person who is an expert in
Arabic and has enough knowledge of programming to see the possibilities
and to evaluate the results.80
19.9
Conclusion
There still is a great deal of work ahead in the ﬁeld of Arabic corpus
linguistics. It is essential to go for accuracy, detail, and realism. Far too
often, promises are made and ﬁgures are given that do not completely
correspond to reality. In most cases, Arab programmers are working in the
ﬁeld of Arabic corpus linguistics. It is, however, necessary that experts in
Modern Arabic make their contribution to the ﬁeld. It would also be useful
for independent databases to be available to cross-check and validate
results of scientiﬁc investigations. And, last but not least, researchers
should take their time to provide quality investigations and databases. So
far, no relational databases of Arabic seem to be available.
References
Abdelnour, J. (1983). Dictionnaire Arabe–Franc¸ais. Bayreuth: Dar el-Ilm lil-
Malayin.
Abouenour, L., Bouzoubaa, K., and Rosso, P. (2013). On the evaluation and
improvement of Arabic WordNet coverage and usability. Language
Resources and Evaluation 47, 891–917.
80 The following weak points all relate to the ﬁeld of Arabic linguistics. Jarrar et al. (2017: 764) give much dialectal
information, but state that when they cannot ﬁnd that information in CODA, they replace the dialectal words with MSA
words. Al-Thubaity and Almujaiwel (2017: 5) investigate Arabic keywords in sports and religious texts. It is nowhere
explained how they deﬁned keywords in the corpus. In Table 13 they consider the words Tunisia (22), As-Sudan (31),
As-Sudani (38), and Maris (March) (39) as the religious keywords (with ranks for these words in brackets). The results
obtained by Boudelaa and Marslen-Wilson (2010: 486) are rudimentary and not clear. Abouenour et al. (2013: 910)
try to deﬁne Arabic hyperonyms and hyponyms. However, they state that their analysis is based on translations from
English for easy identiﬁcation of those concepts that have already been translated into Arabic, as well as those that have
been assigned to be translated during the Arabic WordNet project. It is doubtful whetherﻣﺜﻞ‘like/likeness’ is a
hyponym ofﺍﻟﻌﺪﻳﺪﻣﻦ‘a number of’, orﺍﻻﺧﺮﻯ‘the other’ orﺑﻌﺾ‘some’.
4 6 4
M A R K V A N M O L

Ad-Dahdah, A. (1990). Muʿjam qawa¯ʿid al-ʿarabiyya al-ʿa¯lamiyya [A Dictionary of
Universal Arabic Grammar]. Beirut: Maktabat Lubnan.
Adouane, W. and Dobnik, S. (2017). Identiﬁcation of languages in Algerian
Arabic multilingual documents. In N. Habash, M. Diab, K. Darwish et al.,
eds., Proceedings of the Third Arabic Natural Language Processing Workshop.
Valencia: Association for Computational Linguistics, 1–8.
Al-Badrashiny, M. (2017). Layered language model based hybrid approach to
automatic full diacritization of Arabic. In N. Habash, M. Diab, K. Darwish
et al., eds., Proceedings of the Third Arabic Natural Language Processing Workshop.
Valencia: Association for Computational Linguistics, 177–84.
Alfaiﬁ, A. (2015). Building the Arabic Learner Corpus and a System for Arabic Error
Annotation. PhD thesis, University of Leeds, School of Computing.
Alhawiti, K. (2014). Adaptive Models of Arabic Text. PhD dissertation, Bangor
University, Wales, UK.
Alkhazi, I. (2017). Classifying and segmenting Classical and Modern
Standard Arabic using minimum cross-entropy. International Journal of
Advanced Computer Science and Applications, 8(4), 421–30.
Al-Marwani, N. and Diab, M. (2017). Arabic textual entailment with word
embeddings. In N. Habash, M. Diab, K. Darwish et al., eds., Proceedings of
the
Third
Arabic
Natural
Language
Processing
Workshop,
Valencia:
Association for Computational Linguistics, 177–84.
Almujaiwel,
S.
(2017).
Discursive
patterns
of
anti-feminism
and
pro-feminism in Arabic newspapers of the KACST corpus. Discourse &
Communication, 11(5), 441–66.
Al-Najem, T. (2007). Inheritance-based approach to Arabic verbal root-and-
pattern morphology. In A. Soudi, A. van den Bosch, and G. Neumann,
eds., Arabic Computational Morphology: Knowledge-Based and Empirical
Methods. Dordrecht: Springer, 67–87.
Alosaimy, A. and Atwell, E. (2017). Tagging Classical Arabic text using
available morphological analysers and part of speech taggers. Journal
for Language Technology and Computational Linguistics, 32(1), 1–26.
Alqassas, A. (2017). Arabic diglossia and heritage language acquisition:
Remarks on acquisition planning. In H. Mehdat-Lecocq, ed., Arabe stan-
dard et variations regionals, Quelle(s) politique(s) linguistique(s)? Quelle(s)
didactique(s)? Paris: E´ ditions des archives contemporaires, 81–97.
Al-Sayed A., Hammo, B., and Yagi, S. (2017). Construction of an English–
Arabic political parallel corpus. in Proceedings of the New Trends in
Information Technology (NTIT-2017). Amman: The University of Jordan.
Al-Shargi, F. and Rambow, O. (2015). DIWAN: A dialectal word annotation
tool for Arabic. In N. Habash, S. Vogel, and K. Darwish, eds., Proceedings of
the Second Workshop on Arabic Natural Language Processing. Beijing:
Association for Computational Linguistics, 49–58.
Alshutayri, A. and Atwell, E. (2017). Exploring Twitter as a source of an
Arabic dialect corpus. International Journal of Computational Linguistics, 8(2),
37–44.
19 Arabic Corpus Linguistics and Related Tools
465

Al-Thubaity, A. and Almujaiwel, S. (2017). A quantitative inquiry into the
keywords between primary and reference Arabic corpora. Journal of
Quantitative Linguistics 25(2), 121–41. DOI: 10.1080/09296174.2017
.1359883, 1–20.
Badawi, E., Carter, M. G., and Gully, A. (2003). Modern Written Arabic:
A Comprehensive Grammar. London: Routledge.
Bernardi, F., Chakhaia, L., and Leopold, L. (2017). ‘Sing me a song with social
signiﬁcance’: The (mis)use of statistical signiﬁcance testing in European
sociological research. European Sociological Review, 33(1), 1–15.
Biadsy, F., Hirschberg, J., and Habash, N. (2009). Spoken Arabic dialect identi-
ﬁcation using phonotactic modeling. In M. Rosner and W. Shuly, eds.,
Proceedings of the EACL Workshop on Computational Approaches to Semitic
Languages, Athens, ACL, Stroudsburg, PA, USA, 53–61.
Biber, D. (1993). Representativeness in corpus design. Literary and Linguistic
Computing, 8(4), 243–57.
Blanc, H. (1960). Style variations in Spoken Arabic: A sample of interdia-
lectal educated conversation. In C. Ferguson, Contributions to Arabic
Linguistics. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 81–161.
Bouamor, H., Habash, N., and Oﬂazer, K. (2014). A Multidialectal Parallel
Corpus of Arabic. In Proceedings of the Ninth International Conference on
Language
Resources
and
Evaluation
(LREC’
14),
European
Language
Resources Association. (ELRA) Reykjavik, Iceland, 1240–5.
Boudchiche, M., Mazroui, A., Ould Bebah, M. O. M., Lakhouaja, A., and
Boudlal,
A.
(2017).
AlKhalil
Morpho
Sys
2:
A
robust
Arabic
morpho-syntactic analyzer. Journal of King Saud University – Computer and
Information Sciences, 29(2), 141–6.
Boudelaa, S. and Marslen-Wilson, W. (2010). Aralex: A lexical database for
Modern Standard Arabic. Behavior Research Methods, 42(2), 481. https://
aralex.mrc-cbu.cam.ac.uk/aralex.online/.
Bougrine, S. Chorana, A., Lakhdari, A., and Cherroun, H. (2017). Toward
a web-based speech corpus for Algerian Arabic dialectal varieties. In
N. Habash, M. Diab, K. Darwish et al., eds., Proceedings of the Third Arabic
Natural
Language
Processing
Workshop.
Valencia:
Association
for
Computational Linguistics, 138–46.
Buchberger, E. (2009). Book review: Arabic Computational Morphology. Natural
Language Engineering, 15, 309–10.
Buckwalter, T. (2007). Issues in Arabic morphological analysis. In A. Soudi,
A. van den Bosch, and G. Neumann, eds., Arabic Computational Morphology:
Knowledge-Based and Empirical Methods. Dordrecht: Springer, 23–41.
Buckwalter, T. and Parkinson, D. (2011). A Frequency Dictionary of Arabic Core
Vocabulary for Learners, London: Routledge.
Cahill, L. (2007). A syllable-based account of Arabic morphology. In A. Soudi,
A. Bosch, and G. Neumann, eds., Arabic Computational Morphology, Text,
Speech and Language Technology, vol. 38. Dordrecht: Springer, 45–67.
Carter, M. G. (2004). Sibawayhi. Oxford: Oxford Centre for Islamic Studies.
4 6 6
M A R K V A N M O L

Cleary, J. and Witten, I. (1984). Data compression using adaptive coding
and partial string matching. IEEE Transactions on Communications, COM-32
(4), 396–402.
Darwish, K. (2007). Adapting morphology for Arabic information retrieval.
In A. Soudi, A. van den Bosch, and G. Neumann, eds., Arabic Computational
Morphology. Knowledge-Based and Empirical Methods. Dordrecht: Springer,
245–62.
Darwish, K., Mubarak, H., and Abdelali, A. (2017a). Arabic diacritization:
Stats, rules, and hacks. In N. Habash, M. Diab, K. Darwish et al., eds.,
Proceedings of the Third Arabic Natural Language Processing Workshop,
Valencia, 9–17.
Darwish, K., Mubarak, H., Abdelali, A., and Eldesouki, M. (2017b). Arabic
POS tagging: Don’t abandon feature engineering just yet. In N. Habash,
M. Diab, K. Darwish, et al. eds., Proceedings of the Third Arabic Natural
Language Processing Workshop, Valencia, 130–7.
Diab, M., Al-Badrashiny, M., Aminian, M., Attia, M., Elfardy, H., Habash, N.,
et al. (2014). Tharwa: A large scale dialectal Arabic–Standard Arabic–
English Lexicon. In Proceedings of the Ninth International Conference on
Language
Resources
and
Evaluation
(LREC’14),
European
Language
Resources Association (ELRA) Reykjavik, Iceland, 3782–9.
Diab, M., Hacioglu, K., and Jurafsky, D. (2007). Automatic processing of
Modern Arabic text. In A. Soudi, A. van den Bosch, and G. Neumann, eds.,
Arabic Computational Morphology: Knowledge-Based and Empirical Methods.
Dordrecht: Springer, 159–79.
Dichy, J. (2002). L’enseignement de l’arabe, langue pluriglossie que dans la
France d’aujourd’hui. In R. Bistolﬁand A. Giordan, eds., Les langues de
la me´diterrane´e, volume des Cahiers de Conﬂuences Me´diterrane´e. Paris:
l’Harmattan, 313–29.
Dichy, J. (2017). Polyglossie de l’Arabe et subsidiarite´: au-dela` des confusions
entraıˆne´es par la naotion de diglossie. In H. Mehdat-Lecocq, ed., Arabe
standard et variations regionals, Quelle(s) politique(s) linguistique(s)? Quelle(s)
didactique(s)? Paris: E´ditions des archives contemporaires, 1–23.
Dichy, J. and Farghaly, A. (2007). Grammar–lexis relations in the computa-
tional morphology of Arabic. In A. Soudi, A. van den Bosch, and
G. Neumann, eds., Arabic Computational Morphology: Knowledge-Based and
Empirical Methods. Dordrecht: Springer, 115–40.
Ditters, E. (2013). Issues in Arabic computational linguistics. In J. Owens,
ed., The Oxford Handbook of Arabic Linguistics. Oxford: Oxford University
Press, 213–40.
Eddakrouri, A. (2018). Al-muda¯wwana¯t al-lug˙awiyyyat wa dawruha ﬁmuca¯lajat
an-nus˙u¯s˙ al-ʿarabiyya [Arabic Corpora and Their Role in the Analysis of Arabic
Texts]. Riyadh: King Abdullah bin Abdulaziz International Center for the
Arabic Language.
El-Kah, A., Zeroual, I., and Lakhouaja, A. (2017). Application of Arabic
language processing in language learning. In Proceedings of the 2nd
19 Arabic Corpus Linguistics and Related Tools
467

International Conference on Big Data, Cloud and Applications, New York:
Association for Computing Machinery. http://dx.doi.org/10.1145
/3090354.3090390, 1–6.
Farghaly, A. (2010). Arabic Computational Linguistics. Stanford, CA: CSLI
Publications.
Farghaly, A. and Shaalan, K. (2009). Arabic natural language processing:
Challenges and solutions. ACM Transactions on Asian Language Information
Processing (TALIP), 8(4), Article 14.
Fasha, M., Obeid, N., and Hammo, B. (2017). A proposed model for extract-
ing
information
from
Arabic-based
controlled
text
domains.
In
Proceedings of the New Trends in Information Technology, Amman: University
of Jordan, 86–92.
Fashwan, A. and Alansary, S. (2017). SHAKKIL: An automatic diacritization
system for Modern Standard Arabic texts. In N. Habash, M. Diab, K. Darwish
et al., eds., Proceedings of the Third Arabic Natural Language Processing Workshop,
Valencia, Association for Computational Linguistics, 84–93.
Habash, N. and Roth, R. (2009). CATiB: The Columbia Arabic Treebank. In
Proceedings of the ACL-IJCNLP 2009, Conference Short Papers, 221–4.
Habash, N., Zalmout, N., Taji, D., Hoang, H., and Alzate, M. (2017).
A parallel corpus for evaluating machine translation between Arabic
and European languages. In M. Lapata, P. Blunsom, and A. Koller, eds.,
Proceedings of the 15th Conference of the European Chapter of the Association for
Computational Linguistics, vol. 2, Short Papers, Valencia: Association for
Computational Linguistics, 235–41.
Hajicˇ, J., Hajivcova´, E., Pajas, P., Panevova´, J., Sgall, P., and Hladka, B. (2001).
Prague Dependency Treebank 1.0. www.researchgate.net/publication/
307174711_Prague_Dependency_Treebank_10.
Hinds, M. and Badawi, E. (2009). A Dictionary of Egyptian Arabic, Arabic–
English. Beirut: Librairie du Liban.
Holes, C. (2013). Orality, culture and language. In J. Owens, ed., The Oxford
Handbook of Arabic Linguistics. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 281–99.
Hoogland,
J.
(2003).
Woordenboek
Arabisch–Nederlands
[Arabic–Dutch
Dictionary]. Amsterdam: Dutch Language Union – Bulaaq.
Ibrahimi, K. (2017). L’arabe standard, une langue en queˆte de reconnais-
sance et de promotion. In H. Mehdat-Lecocq, ed., Arabe standard et varia-
tions regionals, Quelle(s) politique(s) linguistique(s)? Quelle(s) didactique(s)? Paris:
E´ ditions des archives contemporaires, 25–31.
Jarrar, M., Habash, N., Alrimawi, F., Akra, D., and Zalmout, N. (2017).
Curras: An annotated corpus for the Palestinian Arabic dialect.
Language Resources and Evaluation, 51(3), 745–75.
Kazimirski, A. (1860). Dictionnaire Arabe–Franc¸ais. Beyrouth: Librairie du
Liban, 2 vols.
Khalifa, S., Hassan, S., and Habash, N. (2017). A morphological analyzer for
Gulf Arabic verbs. In N. Habash, M. Diab, K. Darwish et al., eds., Proceedings of
the Third Arabic Natural Language Processing Workshop, Valencia, 35–44.
4 6 8
M A R K V A N M O L

Koplenig, A. (2017). Against statistical signiﬁcance testing in corpus
linguistics. Corpus Linguistics and Linguistic Theory, 15(2). doi: 10.1515/
cllt-2016–0036.
Köpru¨ , S. and Miller, J. (2009). A uniﬁcation-based approach to the mor-
phological analysis and generation of Arabic. In Proceedings of the 3rd
Workshop on Computational Approaches to Arabic Script-based Languages
(CAASL3).
Larkey L. S., Ballesteros, L., and Connell, M. E. (2007). Light stemming for
Arabic information retrieval. In A. Soudi, A. van den Bosch, and
G. Neumann, eds., Arabic Computational Morphology. Knowledge-Based and
Empirical Methods. Dordrecht: Springer, 221–43.
Leech, G. (2007). New resources, or just better old ones? The Holy Grail of
representativeness. In M. Hundt, N. Nesselhauf, and C. Biewer, eds.,
Corpus Linguistics and the Web. Amsterdam: Rodopi, 133–49.
Lelubre, X. (2017). Variations regionals et communication scientiﬁque en
arabe. In H. Mehdat-Lecocq, ed., Arabe standard et variations regionals,
Quelle(s) politique(s) linguistique(s)? Quelle(s) didactique(s)? Paris: E´ ditions des
archives contemporaires, 59–79.
Maamouri, M. and Bies, A. (2009). Penn Arabic Treebank Guidelines version
4.92. Tech. report, University of Pennsylvania.
Maamouri, M., Bies, A., Buckwalter, T., and Mekki, W. (2004). The Penn Arabic
Treebank: Building a large-scale annotated Arabic corpus. In Proceedings of
the NEMLAR Conference on Arabic Language Resources and Tools.
McCarthy, J. (1981). A prosodic theory of nonconcatenative morphology.
Linguistic Inquiry 12, 373–418.
McEnery, T. Xiao, R., and Tono, Y. (2006). Corpus-Based Language Studies: An
Advanced Resource Book. London: Routledge.
Mdhaffar, S. (2017). Sentiment analysis of Tunisian dialect: Linguistic
resources and experiments. In N. Habash, M. Diab, K. Darwish et al.,
eds., Proceedings of the Third Arabic Natural Language Processing Workshop,
Valencia, 55–61.
Menacer, M., Mella, O., Fohr, D., Jouvet, D., Langlois, D., and Smaili, K. (2017).
An enhanced automatic speech recognition system for Arabic. Proceedings of
the Third Arabic Natural Language Processing Workshop. Valencia, 157–65.
Mohamed, E., Mohit, B., and Oﬂazer, K. (2012). Annotating and learning
morphological segmentation of Egyptian colloquial Arabic. In Proceedings
of International Conference on Language Resources and Evaluation, 873–7.
Muhammed, R., Farrag, M., Elshamly, N., and Abdel-Ghaffar, N. (2011).
Summary of Arabizi or Romanization: The dilemma of writing texts. in
Proceedings of Jil Jaded Conference, University of Texas at Austin, 18–19
February (2011).
Nagoudi, E. and Schwab, D. (2017). Semantic similarity of Arabic sentences-
with word embeddings. In N. Habash, M. Diab, K. Darwish et al., eds.,
Proceedings of the Third Arabic Natural Language Processing Workshop.
Valencia, 18–24.
19 Arabic Corpus Linguistics and Related Tools
469

Parkinson, D. (2001). Future variability: A corpus study of Arabic future
particles. In D. Parkinson and S. Farwaneh, eds., Perspectives on Arabic
Linguistics XV. Amsterdam: Benjamins, 191–211.
Pasha, A., Al-Badrashiny, M., El Kholy, A., Eskander, R., Diab, M.,
Habash, N., et al. (2014). MADAMIRA: A fast, comprehensive tool for
morphological analysis and disambiguation of Arabic. In Proceedings of
the International Conference on Language Resources and Evaluation. Reykjavik,
Iceland.
Pinon, C. (2017). Inte´grer les variations dans l’enseignement de l’arabe langue
e´trange`re: enjeux et me´thodes. In H. Mehdat-Lecocq, ed., Arabe standard et
variations regionals, Quelle(s) politique(s) linguistique(s)? Quelle(s) didactique(s)?
Paris: E´ditions des archives contemporaires, 1–23.
Ryding, K. (2005). A Reference Grammar of Modern Standard Arabic. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
Saleh, M. (2012). Al-h˙a¯su¯b wa-l bahth al lug˙awiyy (al mudawanna¯t allug˙awiyyat
namu¯dajan) [The Computer and Linguistic Research (Corpora as a Model)].
Jaamiʾat al-Malik Sauud, Riyadh, 79.
Samih, Y., Attia, M., Eldesouki, M., Mubarak, H., Abdelali, A., Kallmeyer, L.,
et al. (2017). A neural architecture for dialectal Arabic segmentation. In
N. Habash, M. Diab, K. Darwish et al. eds., Proceedings of the Third Arabic
Natural Language Processing Workshop, Valencia, 46–54.
Schultz, T. and Schlippe, T. (2014). GlobalPhone: Pronunciation diction-
aries in 20 languages. In N. Calzolari, K. Choukri, and T. Declerck et al.,
eds., Proceedings of the Ninth International Conference on Language Resources
and Evaluation (LREC-2014), Reykjavik: European Languages Resources
Association, 337–41.
Sforza, V. and Soudi, A. (2007). Arabic computational morphology: A trade-
off between multiple operations and multiple stems. In A. Soudi, A. van
den Bosch, and G. Neumann, eds., Arabic Computational Morphology.
Knowledge-Based and Empirical Methods. Dordrecht: Springer, 89–114.
Soliman, A., Eissa, K., and El-Beltagy, S. A. (2017). Aravec: A set of Arabic
word embedding models for use in Arabic. Procedia Computer Science, 117,
256–65.
Soudi, A., van den Bosch, A., and Neumann, G. (2007). Arabic Computational
Morphology: Knowledge-Based and Empirical Methods. Dordrecht: Springer.
Taji, D., Habash, N., and Zeman, D. (2017). Universal dependencies for
Arabic. In N. Habash, M. Diab, K. Darwish et al., eds., Proceedings of the
Third Arabic Natural Language Processing Workshop, Valencia, 166–76.
Tratz, S. (2016). Arabic Dependency Treebank. ARL, US Army Research
Laboratory, https://catalog.ldc.upenn.edu/docs/LDC2016T18/ARL-TN-0735
.pdf.
Van den Bosch, A., Marsi, E., and Soudi, A. (2007). Memory-based morpho-
logical analysis and part-of-speech tagging of Arabic. In A. Soudi, A. van
den Bosch, and G. Neumann, eds., Arabic Computational Morphology:
Knowledge-Based and Empirical Methods. Dordrecht: Springer, 201–17.
4 7 0
M A R K V A N M O L

Van Mol, M. (1998). Variatie in Modern Standaard Arabisch in radionieuwsbulle-
tins, Een synchronisch descriptief onderzoek naar het gebruik van complementaire
partikels. PhD dissertation, University of Leuven.
Van Mol, M. (2000). Arabic language and vocabulary acquisition. MIDEO, 24,
434–40.
Van Mol, M. (2001). Evolution of MSA: The case of some complementary
particles. In D. Parkinson and S. Farwaneh, eds., Perspectives on Arabic
Linguistics XV. Amsterdam: Benjamins, 135–47.
Van Mol, M. (2003). Variation in Modern Standard Arabic in Radio News
Broadcasts, A Synchronic Descriptive Investigation in the Use of Complementary
Particles, Orientalia Lovaniensia Analecta, 117. Leuven: Peeters.
Van Mol, M. (2005). From lexical database to tagged Arabic corpus. Paper
Presented at the ACIDA/ICMI Conference, Tozeur, 5–6 November. https://ilt
.kuleuven.be/arabic/pdf/Mark%20Van%20Mol%20A031.pdf;
last
accessed
11 December 2020.
Van Mol, M. (2010). Arabic oral media and corpus linguistics: A ﬁrst meth-
odological outline. In R. Bassiouni, ed., Arabic and the Media: Linguistic
Analyses and Applications. Leiden: Brill, 63–79.
Van Mol, M. (2012). From paper dictionary to an elaborate electronic
lexicographical database. In R. Vatvedt and J. M. Torjusen, eds.,
Proceedings of the 15th EURALEX International Congress,7–11 August (2012).
Oslo: Department of Linguistics and Scandinavian Studies, University of
Oslo, 758–63.
Van Mol, M. (2014).ﺗﻄﻮﻳﺮﻣﺘﻜﺎﻣﻞﺇﻟﻜﺘﺮﻭﻧﻲﻟﺘﺪﺭﻳﺲﺍﻟﻠﻐﺔﺍﻟﻌﺮﺑﻴﺔﻟﻠﻠﻨﺎﻃﻘﻴﻦﺑﻐﻴﺮﻫﺎ[The devel-
opment of an all compassing electronic device for L2 Arabic learners] In
Al-Qahtani A. et al., eds.,ﺃﻋﻤﺎﻝﻣﺆﺗﻤﺮ:ﺍﺗﺠﺎﻫﺎﺕﺣﺪﻳﺜﺔﻓﻲﺗﻌﻠﻴﻢﻟﻐﺔﺛﺎﻧﻴﺔ[Proceedings of
the Current Tendencies in the Teaching of Arabic as L2 Language Conference].
Ryadh: Da¯r Ja¯micat al-Malik Sacu¯ d lil-Nashr, 219–55.
Van Mol, M. (2017a). La langue arabe et la deﬁnition de ses diffe´rents
niveaux de langue. E´xigences, possibilite´s et limitations d’une analyse
nume´rique sur base de corpus repre´sentatifs. In H. Mehdat-Lecocq, ed.,
Arabe standard et variations regionals, Quelle(s) politique(s) linguistique(s)? Quelle(s)
didactique(s)? Paris: E´ditions des archives contemporaires, 3–46.
Van Mol, M. (2017b). Arabic language teaching and the real linguistic situa-
tion: What does linguistic empirical research teach us about Arabic lan-
guage levels. In K. Shigeki, ed., Proceedings of the 8th Congress of Arabic
Linguistics (2015). Kyoto: Tokyo University of Foreign Studies, 331–51.
Van Mol, M. and Berghman, K. (2001a). Leerwoordenboek Modern Arabisch–
Nederlands, (Learners Dictionary Modern Arabic–Dutch). Amsterdam: The
Dutch Language Union, Bulaaq.
Van Mol, M. and Berghman, K. (2001b). Leerwoordenboek Nederlands – Modern
Arabisch (Learners Dictionary Dutch–Modern Arabic). Amsterdam: The Dutch
Language Union, Bulaaq.
Wehr, H. (1994). Arabic–English Dictionary, 4th ed. Urbana, IL: Spoken
Language Services.
19 Arabic Corpus Linguistics and Related Tools
471

Whitcomb, L. and Alansary, S. (2018). Using linguistic corpora in Arabic
Foreign Language Teaching. In K. Wahba, L. England, and Z. A. Taha, eds.,
Handbook for Arabic Language Teaching Professionals in the 21st Century, vol. II.
New York: Routledge, 219–31.
Yaghan, M. A. (2008). Arabizi: A contemporary style of Arabic slang. Design
Issues, 24, 39–52.
Yassen, K., Sawalha, M., and Al Zaghoul, F. (2017). Part-of-speech tagging
for Classical and MSA text using NLTK. In Proceedings of the New Trends in
Information Technology. Amman: University of Jordan, 106–12.
Yaʾqub, I. (1988). Mawsuʿat al-h˙uru¯f [Thesaurus]. Beirut: Dar al Jayl.
Zaghouani, W. (2014). Critical survey of the freely available Arabic corpora.
In N. Calzolari, K. Choukri, and T. Declerck et al., eds., Proceedings of the
Ninth International Conference on Language Resources and Evaluation (LREC-
2014), Reykjavik: European Languages Resources Association, 1–8.
Zahran, M. A., Magooda, A., Mahgoub, A. Y., Raafat, H., Rashwan, M., and
Atyia, A. (2015). Word representations in vector space and their applica-
tions for Arabic. In A. Gelbukh, ed., International Conference on Intelligent Text
Processing and Computational Linguistics. Dordrecht: Springer, 430–43.
Zeroual, I., Lakhoaga, A., and Belhabib, R. (2017). Towards a standard part
of speech tagset for the Arabic language. Journal of King Saud University –
Computer and Information Sciences, 29(2), 171–8.
Corpora and Web Resources
Arabic WordNet http://globalwordnet.org/arabic-wordnet/.
Broad Operational Language Translation (BOLT) program: https://catalog
.ldc.upenn.edu/LDC2017T07.
Infoguistics, Ayman Eddakrouri: https://sites.google.com/a/aucegypt.edu/
infoguistics/directory/Corpus-Linguistics/arabic-corpora.
LDC (Linguistic Data Consortium) www.ldc.upenn.edu/.
Penn Arabic Treebank Guidelines: www.researchgate.net/publication/
228395939_Penn_Arabic_Treebank_guidelines.
Prague Arabic Dependency Treebank (PADT) 1.0: https://catalog
.ldc.upenn.edu/LDC2004T23.
Quamus Arabic Lexicography: Buckwalter T (2002). www.qamus.org/.
Quranic Arabic Corpus: https://corpus.quran.com/documentation/.
4 7 2
M A R K V A N M O L

20
The Utility of Arabic
Corpus Linguistics
Mai Zaki, David Wilmsen, and Dana Abdulrahim
20.1
Introduction
The use of large, electronically searchable corpora for extracting Arabic
linguistic data began late in the emerging discipline of corpus linguistics,
likely owing to one of the charming qualities of Arabic: its resistance to
computing. One difﬁculty, among many, that Arabic presents to comput-
ing is the ambiguity inherent in Arabic orthography, in which short vowels
are not usually written. A typical example of this involves the root √k,t,b,
with the underlying meaning ‘writing’. An initial difﬁculty in machine
reading of Arabic texts was that, among many other orthographic ambi-
guities inherent in the writing system, given the sequenceﻛﺘﺐ(ktb), there
was no way for a non-intelligent (i.e., machine) reader to distinguish kutiba
‘was written’ (ﻛﺘﺐ) from kutub ‘books’ (ﻛﺘﺐ) or katabat ‘she wrote’ (ﻛﺘﺒﺖ) from
katabt ‘I/you wrote’
1
(ﻛﺘﺒﺖ).
Long vowels are usually written, but even then
ambiguities arise. For example, the words for ‘book’ kita¯b and ‘writers’
kutta¯b are both written (ﻛﺘﺎﺏ), the two only made distinguishable by
a diacritic
that indicates a doubled consonant, which is not necessarily
always written, viz:ﻛﺘّﺎﺏ.
Soon after such inherent difﬁculties in Arabic computing began to be
solved, some researchers began to compile electronically searchable cor-
pora of Arabic texts. Much of this was and is intended for application to
applied linguistics problems, such as natural language processing (Atwell
2019), speech recognition (Zitouni et al. 2002), and machine translation
(Guide`re 2002), or for use in teaching Arabic as a foreign language
(Parkinson 2019).
1 Such ambiguities would not present themselves in the analysis of recorded speech, whether spontaneous conversation
or read-aloud or recited texts, but the technology has not yet advanced enough to permit machine-assisted search of
oral recordings.

Interest within the Arabic linguistics community in utilizing electronically
searchable corpora for pure linguistics research remains relatively low
(McEnery et al. 2019: 1, 8–10). The reason for this may lie in the theoretical
approaches to language to which numerous Arabic linguists subscribe. These
often eschew the use of corpora as a source of natural language data. As late
as 2016, the notion persisted that electronically searchable corpora, or, for
that matter, any other kinds of corpora, are of limited use – or even of no
use – to linguistic enquiry. The contention is that, regardless of their size,
corpora cannot encompass an entire language, and cannot, therefore, pro-
vide an adequate account of the language competencies of individuals
(Desagulier 2017). The underlying basis of this viewpoint is the so-called
‘poverty-of-stimulus argument’, by which it is assumed that children do not
encounter in the so-called ‘primary linguistic data’ all crucial structures of
a language, but they nevertheless acquire and produce complete end-state
grammars. Countering this assumption, researchers using corpora to address
the so-called ‘logical problem of language acquisition’ speciﬁcally have
demonstrated that the chances are good that children will, indeed, encounter
in their primary linguistic data the crucial structures that they need in order
to learn a complete grammar by general learning mechanisms (Pullum and
Scholz 2002; MacWhinney 2004; see also Cowie 1999 and Clark and Lappin
2011). What is more, in a series of studies, Corpas Pastor and Seghiri (2010
and references) have shown that even moderate-sized corpora can achieve
adequate representativeness for speciﬁc genres.
Such Arabic corpus linguistics studies as do exist do not usually concern
themselves with such matters. Instead, the few researchers utilizing electro-
nic Arabic corpora seek to answer questions peculiar to Arabic, with little
regard to the broader concerns of the linguistics enterprise. A noteworthy
result of this is that much of the early work done with the use of corpora in
the linguistic analysis of Arabic was (and, indeed, continues to be) focused
upon the Arabic of writing and not of spoken Arabic. This may reﬂect the bias
of corpus designers and researchers alike, who tend toward the view that the
Arabic most worthy of study is the Arabic of writing, with its rich literary
legacy. Be that as it may, it could also reﬂect the sheer availability of raw
materials with which designers and researchers have to work. Arabic writ-
ings from all eras have been available in increasing abundance in various
electronic formats since the late 1990s, an increasing number of them
machine-readable and searchable, such that almost any historical text is
retrievable from online sources. As such, representative samples of written
Arabic of any size are now easily accessed.
For linguistics, however, writing is (or should be) regarded as but sym-
bolic of speech; it is not speech itself. This is especially true of Arabic, in
which attempting to draw conclusions about spoken Arabic by examining
writing is to look through a glass darkly. Working with applications of
corpus data to speciﬁc tasks (in this case sentiment analysis), Abu Kwaik
et al. (2019) ﬁnd that written Arabic ‘models cannot be easily, if at all, used
4 7 4
M A I Z A K I , D A V I D W I L M S E N , & D A N A A B D U L R A H I M

in dealing with DA [dialectal Arabic]. There is, thus, a growing need for the
creation of computational resources, not only for MSA [Modern Standard
Arabic], but also for DA.’
Nevertheless, the compilation of Arabic corpora representative of Arabic
speech has proven elusive. The reason for this is that, unlike European
languages, whose written representations function in manners identical to
the way they are spoken, or nearly so, Arabic writing does not always exhibit
faithful representations of speech. Arabic writing is a genre (or, more pre-
cisely, many genres) possessing structures and standards that are in some
crucial respects quite unlike those of Arabic speech. What is more, Arabic
orthography does not adequately represent the sound repertoire of the
Arabic dialects. For example, the Arabic of writing, when read aloud or
declaimed,
possesses
three
long
and
three
short
vowels
and
a corresponding six symbols to represent them, whereas most dialects of
Arabic possess at least ﬁve of each. Standard Arabic orthography is not
equipped to represent any more than three of them. What is more, colloquial
writing is rare when compared to the reams of writing in standard orthogra-
phy. As such, texts composed in formal written Arabic are far more available
than are those written in approximations of spoken Arabic.
The latter, however, are not entirely lacking, largely incorporating dra-
matic scripts, colloquial-style novels, or blog pages and Twitter feeds, all of
which are to varying degrees composed in approximations of spoken
Arabic represented in Arabic orthography. For these reasons, a very few
Arabic dialect corpora are readily available to linguistics researchers, and
they are small in comparison to the corpora of written Arabic.
For their part, corpora of written Arabic themselves have until recently
been relatively small compared to other language corpora, especially those of
European languages, and among them, especially English, which range in
size between 100 million to half a billion, to several billions of words and are
continuing to grow. What is more, the large corpora of Arabic that do exist
are generally behind expensive paywalls and are thus unavailable to research-
ers (Al-Sulaiti and Atwell 2006: 3–4). This is beginning to change; a recently
compiled corpus of Arabic, arTenTen, encompasses 5.8 billion words, of which
115 million words have been tokenized, lemmatized, and part-of-speech
(POS) tagged. It nevertheless devotes itself exclusively to modern Arabic
writing (Arts et al. 2014: 368). A roughly 1.5-billion-word historical corpus of
Arabic writing is being developed, encompassing texts from the earliest
extensive Arabic writing through to the modern era (Belinkov et al. 2019).
As useful as this will be, dialect materials in the corpus will be present only by
accident, and then in quantities so small and in such haphazard distribution
as to preclude any systematic insights into the history of spoken Arabic.2
2 A dramatic early ﬁnding with this corpus is a measurement of the lifespan of Arabic words in written texts as compared to
those of English. It transpires that the average lifespan of any particular Arabic word is 1190 years, as opposed to English
words, for which the mean lifespan is between 88 and 161 years (Belinkov et al. 2019: 23–4). About this, the authors
comment:
20 The Utility of Arabic Corpus Linguistics
475

With this overview in mind, let us now turn to a closer examination of
Arabic corpus linguistics and its gains and desiderata, beginning quite
naturally with an overview of the state of corpus studies of Arabic varieties
and of the use of Arabic corpora in computational linguistics, moving from
there into some scrutiny of the potential for the use of Arabic corpora in
the teaching of Arabic as a foreign language (TAFL) and in translation and
the teaching of translation.
20.2
Corpus Studies of Arabic Varieties/Written Arabic
By the middle of the 1990s, the difﬁculties in Arabic computing were
overcome sufﬁciently to allow the incorporation of electronically
searchable corpora into linguistic analyses of Arabic. At that time,
especially, the only Arabic variety that was effectively available for
corpus studies was the Arabic of formal writing. Because of this, early
corpus studies of Arabic analysed written usage. Nevertheless, they
produced some startling results. For example, Parkinson and Ibrahim
(1999), using an early version of arabiCorpus, an untagged corpus of
newspaper Arabic (described in Parkinson 2019), found marked differ-
ence in usage of formal and technical terminology between Egyptian
and Lebanese writers. This tended to put paid the oft-expressed asser-
tion that the Arabic of writing is an invariable standard throughout
the
Arab
world.
Similarly,
using
a
much
enlarged
arabiCorpus,
Parkinson (2003) found that contrary to expectations and innumerable
normative assertions, the marker of futurity (sawfa) that is placed
before an imperfective verb is used far less often than its alternative,
the preverbal clitic sa-. Again, using the arabiCorpus, he found (2008)
that verbal modals (for example, amkana/yu-mkinu ‘it is possible’ and
wajaba/ya-jibu ‘it is obligatory’) that are generally considered invariably
expressed in the masculine singular of the imperfective verb, may at
times, and depending upon the country origin of writers, inﬂect for
gender:
(1)
a.
yu-mkin
al-isˇa¯r-a
ila¯
sitta asma¯ʔ
3.M-be.possible.I P F V D E T- D E T-indication- F PR E P six
names
‘[It is] possible the indication of six names.’
b.
tu-mkin
al-isˇa¯r-a
ila¯
kita¯b
3. F-be.possible.I P F V
D E T- D E T-indicate- F
P R E P
book
‘[It is] possible the indication of a book.’
(Parkinson 2008: 76)
This provides quantitative conﬁrmation of an earlier qualitative observation: while Arabic-speaking schoolchildren
can read a text from 750 CE, an English-speaking middle school student would have a much more difﬁcult time
reading Beowulf, an Old English poem from ca. 1000 CE. It also means that any measures of change in
SA [standard Arabic] will need to be more sensitive than measures used for English in order to produce
a meaningful result.
4 7 6
M A I Z A K I , D A V I D W I L M S E N , & D A N A A B D U L R A H I M

c.
hal
ya-jib
muh˙a¯kamat
kilinto¯n
Q
3.M-be.necessary.I PFV
trial-F
name
‘[Is it] necessary the trial of Clinton?’
d.
ta-jib
muh˙a¯kamat
il-amrı¯kiyyı¯n
3. F-be.necessary.I P F V
trial-F
D E T-Americans
‘[It is] necessary the trial of the Americans.’
(Parkinson 2008: 74)
Extracting such examples of usage from a corpus accords a view of fre-
quency of use that chance encounters in writing (or, indeed, in the stream
of speech) cannot. What is more, from an Arabic perspective, it permits
a view of regional variation in usage. For instance, writers in the Egyptian
newspaper al-Ahram never used feminine agreement with yu-mkin through-
out the entire year (1999) that is represented in the corpus. For their parts,
writers of the Kuwaiti newspaper al-Watan used it only 1.3 per cent of the
time and Moroccan writers in the newspaper Tajdid a minuscule
0.7 per cent, but the mostly Lebanese writers of al-Hayat used the feminine
tu-mkin in 6.8 per cent of instances of the verb throughout the 1996
editions of the paper and in 10.0 per cent of instances in 1997 (Parkinson
2008: 85). Percentages trend higher with other verbs, with agreement with
a feminine subject reaching upwards of 98 per cent with other modal
verbs. Yet is it those in the lower percentages that are relevant to the
debate in the broader ﬁeld of linguistics. Parkinson comments:
It turns out that native speakers [of Arabic] are surprised that there is a lot
of feminine rather than masculine agreement with some verbs (ﻳﺠﺐ،ﻳﻤﻜﻦ
[ya-jib, yu-mkin]), while they are more surprised that there is masculine
rather than feminine agreement with other verbs (ﺗﻢّ
[tamm]). Rather than
conceiving of the phenomenon as a single thing, they tend to go verb by
verb. Further, native speakers of some regions seem far more aware of the
phenomenon than those of other regions, and, despite the copious corpus
evidence that both types of usage are reasonably common and that anyone
who reads the paper every day is likely to have encountered numerous
instances of both, I have had fairly sophisticated native speakers inform
me that they have ‘never heard of tumkin’.
(Parkinson 2008: 73–4)
This lends credence, and support from a non-western language, to argu-
ments against the poverty of the stimulus. As corpora now go, arabiCorpus
is relatively small, yet it reveals usage that native speakers of the language
claim that they have never encountered. Similarly, several researchers
using relatively small English-language corpora demonstrate that asser-
tions made in support of the poverty-of-stimulus argument can easily be
refuted by corpus evidence. Speciﬁcally, with respect to polar interroga-
tive questions (those with an answer of ‘yes’ or ‘no’) that involve inversion
of one of two stative verbs of the sort ‘Is the man who is tall happy?’, such
phrases are adduced with the claim that native speakers of English might
never encounter such an utterance in their entire lives. The claim,
20 The Utility of Arabic Corpus Linguistics
477

proffered as proof of intrinsic grammatical structures in the mind of
initial-language learners, was challenged soon after it was ﬁrst made
(Sampson 1989). It did not take those doubting its veracity long to ﬁnd
falsifying examples of mundane polar interrogative questions in small,
rudimentary corpora (see discussion in Pullum and Scholz 2002).3
Of course, such examples do not by themselves falsify the claim for
intrinsic language structures in the mind. Nor do they falsify poverty-of-
stimulus arguments. But they do contradict speciﬁc assertions that are
advanced in support of both. Pullum and Scholz readily acknowledge the
former, while also emphasizing that there has yet been no evidence to
support either:
On the basis of the four cases reviewed here, which include what are
unquestionably the most celebrated and widely cited instances of the
APS [argument from the poverty of the stimulus], we believe it must be
concluded that the defenders of the APS are still searching for a well-
conﬁrmed case of the type they need. This does not show that some
particular data-driven theory of language acquisition is correct. But cast-
ing doubt on alleged APS cases, in the way that we have done, undercuts
skepticism about data-driven learning.
(Pullum and Scholz 2002: 46)
The reference to data-driven learning evokes the theoretical position that
ﬁrst-language acquisition does not need a domain-speciﬁc mechanism to
assist the child learner, rather that children can readily encounter the
necessary models of usage in the language environment in which they
ﬁnd themselves, utilizing what is called ‘statistical language learning’
(Saffran 2003). For such a perspective, corpus data have the potential for
being of enormous consequence. Data from large electronically searchable
corpora are intrinsically statistical, and, as such, statistical analyses of
corpora should be at the heart of linguistic analyses (Chambaz and
Desagulier 2016):
Supporters of introspective linguistics might argue that a corpus should
not be a basis for linguistic studies if it cannot represent language in its full
richness and complexity. Most corpus linguists rightly counter that they
do not aim to explain all of a language in every study . . . We take a slightly
different stance. While we acknowledge that no corpus can provide access
to the true, unknown law of a language, we ﬁrmly believe that a corpus is
a sample drawn from this law. We consider that ambitious corpus linguis-
tics consists in bridging the gap between what we can observe and mea-
sure from a corpus, and what we do not know about a language. To achieve
this, ambitious statistics is needed.
(Chambaz and Desagulier 2016: 4)
3 Testing the availability of such constructions, one of the authors of this chapter conducted a spot experiment, using the
search engine Google as the corpus, by typing the sequence “is the man who is” into the search window. At the time, the
ﬁrst several pages of results yielded the title of the then recently released 2013 French ﬁlm about linguist Noam
Chomsky, entitled Is the Man Who Is Tall Happy? That may be considered a false hit, but the string “Is the woman who is”
yielded as the ﬁrst entry the question ‘Is the woman who is suing Paula Deen black?’ This was in reference to a tempest
brewing in the US media teacup at the time about a lawsuit pending against the host of a popular cooking show.
4 7 8
M A I Z A K I , D A V I D W I L M S E N , & D A N A A B D U L R A H I M

In its turn, the reference to introspective linguistics evokes the stand-
point of those who adopt the opposite point of view, that ﬁrst-language
acquisition requires domain-speciﬁc adaptations to the brain, who also
tend to embrace poverty-of-stimulus arguments. Researchers utilizing
that approach will often, after introspection, query native speakers of
a language about the constructions that the researchers have arrived at.
Yet Parkinson’s (2008) study casts doubt on the utility of such an
approach, at least insofar as a linguistics of Arabic is concerned. The
arabiCorpus throws up examples of usage that native speakers of the
language ﬁnd frankly surprising, some of them even denying that such
usage can exist.
Nevertheless, a strong caveat must be introduced: Parkinson’s studies
and others like it, often using the corpus tool that he developed, are
primarily based in the Arabic of writing. Intriguing as their ﬁndings are,
they can tell us little about spoken Arabic usage.4 In contrast to the usage
in the Parkinson studies, modalities in spoken Arabic are expressed by
a wide range of parts of speech; for example possibility and obligation are
expressed, among other ways, with participles of their verbal counterparts
in the Arabic of writing: mumkin ‘possible’ (< yu-mkinu) and la¯zim ‘must’
(< alzama/yu-lzimu ‘it is necessary’), which, when used as modals, are not
inﬂected for number or gender. By the same token, futurity in the verb of
spoken Arabic varieties is not expressed with sawfa, or, with the exception
of Maltese, not with sa-, either. As such, corpus studies of written Arabic
are ineffective at shedding light on the problem of language acquisition.
Such studies produce insights into how people write Arabic, not how they
speak it.
Some corpus studies of the Arabic of writing, do, however, hint at
spoken usage, for example Wilmsen (2010) discovers a subtle inﬂuence
of local usage on the language of writing in the differences in usage of
the pronominal object marker iyya¯-. Clearly and recognizably a lexeme
of the Arabic of formal prose, it appears in the earliest lengthy Arabic
writing in the fourth a¯ya of the opening su¯ra of the Qur’a¯n and a few
other a¯ya¯t:
(2)ﺇِﻳَّﺎﻙَﻧَﻌْﺒُﺪُﻭَﺇِﻳَّﺎﻙَﻧَﺴْﺘَﻌِﻴﻦُ
iyya¯-ka
na-ʕbudu
A C C- P R O.2 M S G
1 P L-worship.I P F V
wa
iyya¯-ka
na-staʕı¯n
C O N J
A C C- P R O.2 M S G
1 P L-seek.succour.I P F V
‘Thee do we worship, and Thee do we seek for succour.’
(Q1:5)
A search of arabiCorpus, which by the time of that writing had reached
over 130 million words, revealed that in the newspapers represented in the
4 The ﬁndings, should, however, be of great interest to those involved in the pedagogy of Arabic writing.
20 The Utility of Arabic Corpus Linguistics
479

corpus, Lebanese and Syrian writers tend to use pronominal object marker
iyya¯- 2.5 to 3.5 times more often than do Egyptian writers. The probable
explanation for this is that whereas iyya¯- is available in both Egyptian and
Levantine dialects of Arabic, its usage differs between the two, with
Egyptian speakers using it demonstratively to express strong sentiment
about a subject of conversation:
(3)
Egyptian Arabic
a.
il-ʔaraʔı¯sˇ
iyya¯-ha
D E T-ﬂatbread
D E M-P R O.3 F
‘That [delicious] ﬂatbread’
b.
il-musˇkila
iyya¯-ha
D E T-problem
DE M-P RO.3 M
‘That [embarrassing] problem’
(Wilmsen 2013: 336–7)
For their part, Levantine dialects use it as an object marker, with no
inherent emotional loading one way or the other:
(4)
Syrian Arabic
bidd-ak
ya¯-ni
desire- P R O.2 MS G
AC C-P R O.1 S G
a-xt˙ub
l-ak
iyya¯-ha
1-engage.I PFV
D AT-P R O.2 M S G
A C C- P R O.3F SG
‘[Do] You want me to get you engaged to her? [lit. to engage for
you her]’
It seems that Egyptian writers tend to avoid it for fear of the colloquial tone
that it may lend to their writing. Nevertheless, they do not eschew its use
entirely, it being sanctioned by Qur’a¯nic usage and by discussion of the same
in the writings of the medieval grammarians of Arabic. In contrast, Lebanese
and Syrian writers apparently feel no compunctions against using it, its usage
in their speech being analogous to its prescribed function in writing.
Another corpus-based study (that also relies upon arabiCorpus) also
hints at a historical (or rather, prehistorical) development of spoken vari-
eties of Arabic. In a statistical examination of motion verbs in modern
written Arabic, Abdulrahim (2019a) investigates verbs with the meaning
‘to go’. Among these is the verb ra¯h˙a, which is generally stigmatized as non-
standard dialect usage, but which, nevertheless, is used in the standard
Arabic of writing, where it exhibits telltale signs of grammaticalization.
Speciﬁcally, in 410 out of 500 hits found in the corpus, ra¯h˙a marks durative
or inceptive aspect of a following verb:
(5)
a.
ra¯h˙a
ya-qu¯l
go.PF V
3-say.IPF V
‘He went on saying . . . ’
4 8 0
M A I Z A K I , D A V I D W I L M S E N , & D A N A A B D U L R A H I M

b.
ruh˙-tu
u-raddidu-hu
go.PF V-1 S G
1SG-say.IPFV-P R O.3 MS G
‘I went on repeating it.’
(Abdulrahim 2019a: 31)
These written conﬁgurations of ra¯h˙a are reminiscent of its asyndetic and
aspectual usage in spoken Arabic. This unexpected ﬁnding raises implica-
tions as to the grammaticalization of the verb in the prehistory of the
variety (or varieties) of Arabic that eventually became codiﬁed as the
Arabic of writing and in the spoken dialects of Arabic alike.5 The implica-
tions have yet to be explored, but it is arguable that without the use of
electronically searchable corpora, the matter of the systematic use of the
verb ra¯h˙a as an aspectual marker in written Arabic might otherwise have
escaped notice, simply appearing to be a piecemeal curiosity.
20.3
Corpora of Spoken Arabic
Researcher biases aside, another reason that few corpus studies of dialects
have been attempted is that until recently, few dialect corpora have
existed, and the early ones to become available are relatively small.
Amongst easily accessible corpora of Arabic, the now roughly 175-
million-word arabiCorpus contains a small subcorpus of Egyptian dialect
materials amounting to 167,457 words. These comprise the script of a play,
the contents of a few Egyptian Arabic chatrooms, and the text of an inter-
view with a former president of Egypt. The Tunisian Arabic Corpus (ﺍﻟﺘﻮﻧﺴﻴﺔ)
has reached 881,964 words of an aspirational 4 million, culled from
Tunisian television serials, Tunisian blogs, and other web sources
(McNeil 2019). Another smaller Tunisian Arabic corpus is Tunico, with
94,652 words, drawn from recordings of some thirty hours of dialogues
and narrative interviews, compiled into twenty-four digital documents.
The Gumar corpus of Gulf Arabic encompasses over 100 million words
collected from online novellas composed in the dialects of Bahrain,
Kuwait, Oman, UAE, Qatar, and Saudi Arabia (Khalifa et al. 2016). All of
these corpora are freely available and machine searchable.6 Aside from
those, a few corpora that are available free of charge are machine search-
able only by use of the native search function of their platforms. Three of
these are the Shami Dialect Corpus, comprising Twitter ﬁles from Syria,
Palestine, Jordan, and Lebanon (Abu Kwaik et al. 2018a); the Corpus al-
Logha al-Musriya (CALM), encompassing about 2 million words of internet
5 On the other hand, Abdulrahim’s (2019b) study of ‘come’ verbs in written Arabic remains ﬁrmly within the conﬁnes of
written usage.
6 Zaghouani (2014) provides a survey of the freely available Arabic corpora, including multilingual and parallel corpora
and lexical databases.
20 The Utility of Arabic Corpus Linguistics
481

texts and the transcripts from ﬁlms and scripted television programmes
(White and Lonsdale 2019); and a corpus of the peripheral Nigerian Arabic
variety, comprising a series of recordings and their transcriptions (Owens
and Hassan nd). Insofar as peripheral dialects of Arabic are concerned, it
bears mentioning that a corpus of a peripheral dialect of Arabic, Maltese, is
the Korpus Malti, a well-developed, POS-tagged 250-million-word corpus of
various genres (Camilleri 2016).7 A few other small corpora of spoken
Arabic recordings exist behind prohibitively expensive paywalls.
20.4
Corpus Studies of Arabic Varieties/Dialectal Arabic
For obvious reasons, without accompanying recordings and electronically
searchable transcriptions, corpus studies of the phonology of the Arabic
dialects are effectively out of the question. Regardless, despite the exis-
tence of a few corpora of written representations of spoken Arabic, as yet,
few corpus studies addressing the morphosyntax of spoken Arabic dialects
have been attempted. As it happens, one of the few studies addresses polar
interrogatives in Tunisian Arabic similar to those carried out with English-
language corpora, but with opposite results. Instead of ﬁnding such ques-
tions readily available in mundane utterances of the type that were
claimed to be vanishingly rare (discussed in Pullum and Scholz 2002),
Procha´zka and Dallaj (2020), using the Tunico Corpus that they had com-
piled, which is, indeed, accompanied by recordings, found that polar
interrogative markers ya¯-xi and -sˇi are less commonly encountered than
had previously been intimated. This was especially so of polar interroga-
tive -sˇi, which may be afﬁxed to most parts of speech and is claimed to
occur often, as such:
(6)
Tunisian Arabic
yi-bda¯-sˇi
xu¯-k?
3-seem-Q
brother-P R O.2M S G
‘[It] seems he [is perhaps] your brother?’
(Procha´zka and Dallaj 2020: 236)
Rather than ﬁnding such overt marking of polar interrogatives occurring
frequently, Procha´zka and Dallaj ﬁnd that such marking is rare. Most polar
interrogatives in the Tunico Corpus ‘show rising intonation but lack any
interrogative pronoun or adverb’ (ibid.: 235).8 The researchers express
their surprise at the ﬁnding:
7 It is ironic that Maltese, which Camilleri describes as a highly under-resourced language (2016: 359), has a POS-tagged
corpus, whereas the same has eluded large freely available Arabic dialect corpora. To be sure, Camilleri is comparing
Maltese resources with those available for other languages of the European Union, of which Malta is a member state. It
is, as such, also ironic that when compared to its sister dialects of Arabic, Maltese is digitally rich.
8 Tunico is unusual in that it comprises recordings of dialogues and narrative interviews, which are also transcribed,
making the corpus searchable. Because the corpus is based on recordings, tone of voice can, in fact, be assessed.
4 8 2
M A I Z A K I , D A V I D W I L M S E N , & D A N A A B D U L R A H I M

The low frequency of -sˇi is particularly surprising, because it was frequent in
the . . . dialect ﬁfty years ago . . . The fact that it even has been borrowed into
Tunisian Berber is an additional indicator for its (former) widespread
usage . . .
According to the examples found in the TUNICO corpus ya¯-xi and -sˇi . . . are
used in certain contexts to modify questions. Their usage is restricted to
questions that refer to a given conversational context and they are to a very
high degree optional. This becomes obvious when we keep in mind that,
even together, they appear in less than 1 per cent of all polar questions.9
(Procha´zka and Dallaj 2020: 239)
The ﬁnding is not exactly analogous to the discussion of English polar
interrogatives, in which native speakers of that language utilize corpora to
challenge the frankly preposterous assertion that a certain type of such
interrogatives is so rare that speakers of the language might live out their
lives without encountering an example of it. With Tunisian polar inter-
rogatives, it was non-native speakers of the language who had implied that
the construction (especially that with -sˇi) is common.
Similarly, Wilmsen (2015), in a study using the entire Internet as
a searchable corpus, questions the implication that a certain construc-
tion, a modal auxiliary embedding a ﬁnite verb, is rare and restricted
to certain rural dialects of northern Syria. Indeed, the ﬁrst instance of
the construction to appear in the search (the fourteenth hit in the
search results) was from the title and a lyric of a song by the iconic
Lebanese singer Fairuz:
(7)
Lebanese Arabic
ma¯
ʔidir-t
insı¯-t
N E G
can.P F V-1 S G
forget.P F V-1 S G
‘I couldn’t forget’
(Wilmsen 2015: 158)10
The results were surprising in more ways than one. First, instead of
being restricted to a rural Syrian dialect, a modal embedding a ﬁnite
verb is widespread, a feature of the urban dialects of Beirut, Tripoli,
and Aleppo. Second, such constructions were found to occur through-
out the Arabophone world, from the Arabian Peninsula through
Morocco:11
9 Procházka and Dallaj point out that as early as 1958, a native speaker of Tunisian Arabic, working with the eminent
dialectologist of North African Arabic William Marçais, had, in fact, identiﬁed the contingent quality of questions marked
with -ši: ‘l’enclitique š(i) sert fréquemment à exprimer l‘éventuel-potentiel avec une nuance dubitative plus ou moins
marquée’ (Marçais and Guîga, cited in Procházka and Dallaj 2020: 236).
10 It appears in an even better-known song of Fairuz: min yoˉm-it-ha, maˉ ʕid-it šuf-t-u, ḍaˉʕ šaˉdi ‘From that day, I never saw
him again; Shadi was lost’ (ibid.: 162).
11 Because these are all culled from blogs, Facebook pages, and Twitter feeds, the characteristic phonologies of these
disparate dialects are not recoverable, having been written in more-or-less standard Arabic orthography. For example,
the <q> of written Arabic (ﻕ) would be realized as [g] in Najdi Arabic gadir-t; that of Sudanese Arabic might, depending
upon the regional variety be [ʔ] or [k]; and that of Morocco would be [q]. So, too, are the short vowels irretrievable,
inasmuch as Arabic is usually written without short vowels.
20 The Utility of Arabic Corpus Linguistics
483

(8)
a. Najdi Arabic (Saudi Arabia)
ma¯
qdr-t
sgˇgˇl-t
N E G
can.P F V-1 S G
register.P F V-1 S G
‘I couldn’t register’
b. Sudanese Arabic
in
bqe¯-t
qdr-t
gˇb-t
l-i
C O N D remain.P F V-2 S G can.P F V-2 S G bring.P F V-2 S G
D A T- P R O.1 S G
‘If you were able to bring to me . . . ’
c. Moroccan Arabic
ma¯
bqe¯-t
qdr-t
n-dı¯r-ha
N E G remain.P F V-1 S G can.P F V-1 S G 1S G-do.I P F V- P R O.3 F S G
‘I could no longer do it.’
(Wilmsen 2015: 165–6)
The use of the entire Internet as a corpus does not permit the compilation
of frequency data. It, therefore, cannot show how common or rare this
feature is. It does show, however, that effectively unlimited corpora can
provide insight into language usage, regardless of whether native speakers
of the language are actively and consciously aware of it or not. As far as that
is concerned, although the phenomenon was apparently ﬁrst pointed out
by non-native speakers of Levantine varieties of Arabic (Thackston 1996:
106; Brustad 2000: 5 and 158), native speakers of those varieties queried on
the matter found it difﬁcult to determine how or why the construction
might be used, and they were surprised to learn that it is regular and
widespread.
Such results hint at the intriguing ﬁndings that corpus studies of spoken
Arabic are bound to produce at any turn. Nevertheless, the use of corpora
for the study of the linguistic structures of spoken Arabic has been slow to
catch on. One rather wonders why graduate students are not jumping at
the chance to exploit such extensive data sources as are now becoming
available to them.
20.5
Arabic Corpora and Computational Linguistics
Indeed, those graduate students – and recent graduates who have contin-
ued the work that they began in graduate school – who do work with
dialect corpora (or, for that matter, corpora of written Arabic) appear most
often to be trained in coding and are constructing their own corpora for
their own particular ends. Those ends often fall into the realm of applied
linguistics, not – for lack of better names – descriptive or theoretical
linguistics. Much of the work is published, appropriately enough, in digital
journals and online conference proceedings. For example, natural lan-
guage processing and sentiment analysis have become hot topics, and,
4 8 4
M A I Z A K I , D A V I D W I L M S E N , & D A N A A B D U L R A H I M

with Arabic, a language with a large web presence, the ability to recognize
its many dialects becomes of paramount importance. A fairly large body of
literature has been developing on the matter in the 2010s.12 In this regard,
too, dialect corpora are crucial to natural language processing, particularly
in dialect classiﬁcation, automatic dialect identiﬁcation, sentiment analy-
sis, and opinion mining (for example, Abu Kwaik et al. 2018b; Lulu and
Elnagar 2018; Alshutayri and Atwell 2019; Salameh et al. 2018; Boudad et
al. 2018 and Duwairi et al. 2015). Abu Kwaik et al. (2019) remark:
SA [sentiment analysis] refers to the usage of variety of tools from Natural
Language Processing (NLP), Text Mining, and Computational Linguistics to
examine a given piece of text and identify the dominant sentiment sub-
jectivity in it . . . As a result of the rapid development of social media and
the use of Arabic dialectal texts, there is an emerging interest in DA
[dialect Arabic].
(Abu Kwaik et al. 2019)
The statistical potential of large corpora can be mobilized in determining
authorship of tweets (Albadarneh et al. 2015), or the identiﬁcation of
translators (El-Fiqi et al. 2019), and even in the settling of plagiarism
disputes (Omer and Oakes 2019).13 It can also be used in the more rareﬁed
applications such as computational stylometry for author attribution, an
application with great potential for solving mysteries of authorship of
medieval documents in, for example, distinguishing original authorship
from an extensive quotation, often without attribution, a practice in
which medieval writers of Arabic engaged with abandon (Zema´nek and
Milicˇka 2014; Romanov 2019).
It should be obvious from the dates of most works in this necessarily
brief overview that the use of corpora for such applied linguistics applica-
tions is a new but rapidly developing research arena, with most of the
work appearing in the 2010s, and even in the last few years of that decade.
Interested readers are encouraged to follow the leads in the reference
section, where the works cited are to be found nestled amongst the scores
of papers in the many conference proceedings, where much of the work
involved in building of and utilizing corpora is reported.
20.6
Corpus-Based Teaching of Arabic
One arena that is lagging behind, however, is that of teaching Arabic as
a foreign language (TAFL) (or, indeed, for that matter, any type of Arabic
teaching). In a survey that one of the authors of this chapter conducted –
being reported here for the ﬁrst time – out of a ﬁeld of twenty-six researchers
12 See, for example, Procedia Computer Science 142 (2018), an extensive volume devoted entirely to Arabic
computational linguistics.
13 Consider, also, the fortuitous discovery in Wilmsen (2013: 350, n. 32) of corpus-based evidence supporting the claim
that the works of Algerian novelist Ahlem Mosteghanemi were ghostwritten.
20 The Utility of Arabic Corpus Linguistics
485

responding to the survey, sixteen or 61.53 per cent reported a ﬁeld of applied
linguistics as a specialization. Respondents included graduate students,
teaching or research assistants (presumably also graduate students), research-
ers, lecturers, ﬁve assistant professors, and two professors. Of those, ten are
involved in computational linguistics or corpus linguistics as a specialization.
Another six reported a specialization in TAFL, some of them listing it as but
one of their specializations. Half of the TAFL specialists have not used an
electronically searchable corpus. Of those, two appear to say when asked why
they have not used a corpus, that they simply do not know how to use one.
This is a shame, because arabiCorpus, one of the early readily accessible
Arabic corpora that bills itself as ‘the Arabic corpus for the rest of us’, with
an easily grasped user interface, complete with attendant online instruc-
tions for use, was initially intended as a tool for students and teachers of
Arabic as a foreign language. The designer and curator of the corpus
provides a trenchant example of how the corpus continues to hold great
promise for teaching:
I would like to point out what an incredible thing it is to have access to
a free Arabic corpus with a comprehensible user interface. Countless
questions about Arabic and Arabic words that in the past would simply
have been wondered about and then forgotten can now be addressed with
actual data. As a simple-minded but not unimportant example, take the
various uses of the word wila¯yah, ‘state’. American students learn that this
word means ‘state’, but will sooner or later encounter examples where it
clearly means something else. They might wonder, as might their teachers
and dictionary makers, what the most common modern use of the word is,
and how broadly the ‘state’ meaning applies. A quick look at the before/
after section of the corpus conﬁrms that, in fact, the meaning ‘term in
ofﬁce’ is the most common modern use of the word (despite the fact that
this meaning does not even appear in Wehr, Google Translate, or
a number of other modern bilingual and monolingual dictionaries), and
that the uses meaning ‘state’ are most common with American states like
California and New York rather than any Middle Eastern counterpart to
the American concept of ‘state’. And ﬁnally, they will ﬁnd that a third
common usage involves the collocate faqı¯h, ‘legal scholar’, and refers to
the kind of rule or government that is currently extant in Iran. In short,
this is an incredibly rich resource that has the potential to get students
excited about words and how they are used.
(Parkinson 2019: 27)
Ignoring the utility of corpora in the teaching of Arabic as a foreign
language is a missed opportunity.
20.7
Applied Corpus-Based Descriptions of Language
The philosophical debate that often creeps into discussions of corpus
linguistics
tries
to
draw
a
line
between
those
who
see
it
as
4 8 6
M A I Z A K I , D A V I D W I L M S E N , & D A N A A B D U L R A H I M

a methodology or ‘essentially a technology’ (Simpson and Swales 2001: 1)
and those who see it as a theory or a discipline in its own right. Stubbs
(1993) clearly outlines the Firthian underpinning of corpus research as an
empirical study of language that is built on observations of language
behaviour. When computer technology entered the scene, it was only
natural for it to boost the discipline with the growing powers of computers
applied to the empirical study of large databases of language.
There are various ways to characterize the relationship between corpus
linguistics and applied linguistics. Conrad (2005: 393) identiﬁes three areas
where corpus linguistics has implicated L2 teaching:
a. descriptions of language, and their implications for pedagogical deci-
sions about what to teach
b. applications of corpus linguistics methods in the L2 classroom
c. studies of language produced by learners, i.e., building and analysing
learner corpora.
Description of language based on corpora is usually the ﬁrst step on the
road to incorporate corpus linguistics in teaching. According to Conrad
(2005), the earliest use of corpus methods applied to language teaching
was developing dictionaries for ESL learners. Working at the word level,
a corpus can provide useful information such as frequency and colloca-
tion. Any basic concordance software includes data on how often a word
has been used and with which other words in its company. Concordances
also generate frequency-based word lists which could be used for vocabu-
lary learning. However, corpus linguists still had to deal with criticism
questioning the relevance of all this descriptive information provided by
corpora to pedagogy. In the words of Widdowson (1991: 21), since peda-
gogy is more interested in ‘usefulness rather than use’, then corpus-based
information is not directly relevant in this case. But this argument has
been found to be incomplete, especially when ‘the contribution of corpus
linguistics is seen not as replacing other pedagogical considerations, but as
adding to them’ (Conrad 2005: 399). Considerations regarding frequency,
lexical and semantic associations, collocations, genre, historical develop-
ment, and users are all relevant for pedagogy and can all be systematically
induced from corpora.
Unfortunately, corpus-based descriptions of Arabic are severely lacking
compared to other languages. For the English language speciﬁcally, cor-
pora have been so inﬂuential in ELT to the extent that Burton (2012: 91)
states ‘corpus-based learner dictionaries are now the norm’. Examples
include dictionaries such as Collins COBUILD Advanced Learner’s English
Dictionary (2006, 5th edition) and a whole host of Macmillan English
Dictionaries,14 in addition to grammar reference books such as COBUILD
English Grammar (2017, 4th edition), which declares on the cover it is ‘the
14 See www.macmillandictionary.com/corpus.html.
20 The Utility of Arabic Corpus Linguistics
487

source of authentic English’, and Real Grammar: A Corpus-Based Approach to
English (Conrad and Biber 2009). For Arabic, on the other hand, there are
only a few corpus-based dictionaries, but the link from dictionary to
reference grammar does not exist so far. One is the Frequency Dictionary of
Arabic (Buckwalter and Parkinson 2011), which presents the 5,000 most
frequently used words, based on a 30-million-word corpus of written and
spoken Arabic. Buckwalter and Parkinson (2011: 1) state in their introduc-
tion to the Arabic frequency dictionary that the purpose of this work is to
‘prepare students of Arabic for the words they are most likely to encounter
in the real world’. The other is a reference book of Arabic synonyms
(Parkinson 2006), which is based on a corpus of newspaper Arabic, with
authentic corpus examples. Buckwalter and Parkinson (2011) also list
a few of the older frequency dictionaries from 1940 till the early 1990s
which highlight their limitations in relation to the size and representa-
tiveness of the corpora they used. In addition to this, there are several
other dictionaries which involve Arabic and other languages. For example,
Hoogland (1996) developed Dutch–Arabic/Arabic–Dutch dictionaries based
on a corpus of around 2 million words. Van Mol (2000) developed another
learner’s dictionary for the same language pair, but this one was based on
geographically distributed corpora of written and spoken Arabic of around
3 million words. Also, Zema´nek (2001) developed an Arabic–Czech dic-
tionary based on a 50-million-word corpus.
What all of these works have in common is an underlying belief that
frequency matters, especially when it comes to pedagogy. Yet so far (at the
time of writing in 2020) no textbook or reference grammar of Arabic has
made any appeal to corpus-based frequency information. It is important to
note, though, that frequency alone is admittedly unreliable, and it has to
be considered together with a variety of other factors before making any
pedagogical decisions about what to teach/learn ﬁrst. But disregarding
frequency altogether does not help, especially for a language like Arabic,
which is characterized, among other things, by a rich network of syno-
nyms. Parkinson (2006: xiii) explains that ‘it is not enough to know that
words have similar meanings, if one word is used ten times more fre-
quently than the other’.
In her work on GO and COME verbs in MSA, Abdulrahim (2013, 2019a,
2019b) stresses the importance of examining large amounts of corpus data
in the case of synonyms as a means of identifying the constructional
features that distinguish the use of each lexical item. These differences
can be morphological, syntactic, semantic, or even pertaining to genre.
She argues that ‘the availability of multiple GO and COME verbs in MSA is
not a reﬂection of extravagance in the lexical system of MSA. Rather, each
verb appears to highlight a particular aspect of the conceptually complex
deictic motion event’ (2013: ii).
Al-Sulaiti and Atwell (2006) survey the most important corpus resources
for Arabic up to the time of publication, before presenting their own
4 8 8
M A I Z A K I , D A V I D W I L M S E N , & D A N A A B D U L R A H I M

corpus of contemporary Arabic. They list a number of useful functions of
corpora for teaching and learning languages, stating that:
Teachers and learners can explore the use of a word in different types of
texts to see how frequently this word is used, how many meanings it has,
what syntactic environment it occurs in, whether the word has the same
frequency of occurrence in all types of texts. Teachers can identify the
most frequent words and select them as a basis for their material.
Al-Sulaiti and Atwell 2006: 5)
But in the absence of corpus-based reference grammars or textbooks for
Arabic, this all sounds easier said than done. There are several factors con-
tributing to this, including the challenges the Arabic language itself poses to
digitization and the building of corpora (Habash 2010), and the lack of
awareness of Arabic teachers until now of the usefulness of corpora in
teaching. Another important factor that is true for many languages, not just
Arabic, is the lack of suitable corpora for pedagogical applications, since the
majority of the available resources have been developed ‘as tools for linguis-
tic research and not with pedagogical goals in mind’, as Braun (2007: 308)
explains. On the other hand, Burton (2012: 98) diagnoses the reason behind
the lack of corpus inﬂuence on L2 textbooks as a supply-and-demand issue;
i.e., students, teachers, and even administrators do not demand it, therefore
there is ‘no motivation for publishers to innovate in this way’. It hardly bears
mentioning that the best way of demonstrating the usefulness of corpora to
language teaching and learning is to actually use corpora in the classroom.
20.8
Applications of Corpora in the Classroom
The work that has been done already in establishing a corpus-based
approach to English language teaching is nothing short of impressive.
A quick review of literature shows a wealth of both theoretical and practical
work in this ﬁeld (Wichmann 1997; Hidalgo et al. 2007; O’Keeffe et al. 2007;
Campoy et al. 2010; Frankenberg-Garcia 2010; among others) in addition to
numerous case studies in journal articles. These works contribute to what
Chambers (2007: 3) calls ‘the popularisation of corpus consultation within
the language-learning environment’. However, we cannot paint a similar
picture for Arabic corpus-based teaching. Most of the work on Arabic corpus
linguistics asserts the usefulness and potential of corpora in Arabic teaching,
but with little practical application. Mansour (2013), for example, who calls
for the creation of an Arabic National Corpus, cites language pedagogy as one
of its uses. According to him, a corpus allows learners to engage in ‘inductive
exploration of different linguistic constructions on vast amount of data’. But
while this remains an unfulﬁlled major project, teachers of Arabic might be
more interested in exploring the more manageable word frequency lists for
Arabic. These lists ‘are a quick guide and better curriculums materials for
20 The Utility of Arabic Corpus Linguistics
489

teaching and learning vocabulary’ (Zeroual and Lakhouaja 2018: 616).
Kilgarriff (2014) is one of the few available examples which takes pedagogical
considerations into account. Although frequency was not the primary factor
in this particular list – a part of a wider project involving nine languages – the
authors produced a 9,000-word list where ‘relevance to L2 learners overrode
frequency’ and ‘vocabulary items seen as essential to language learning with
few or no occurrences were added’ (2014: 125).
For the more ambitious teachers, though, word lists are not enough. For
the purpose of truly integrating corpus-based teaching in the curriculum,
teachers should make full use of an existing Arabic corpus to design their
own corpus-based tasks depending on the learners’ levels and learning out-
comes. Whitcomb and Alansary (2018: 219) explain that for teachers ‘corpora
not only provide raw material for homework assignments, in-class activities,
and other teaching tools, but also offer a means to expose students to
a sampling of how incredibly rich and diverse the world of Arabic is’.
Unfortunately, not much work has been done in the Arabic foreign/second
language classrooms so far. Zaki (2017) is one example which presents
a model of integrating corpus-based teaching within a textbook-based sylla-
bus. It uses arabiCorpus (Parkinson 2019) as a source for designing tasks for
vocabulary building and enhanced apprehension of grammatical rules. It
presents hands-on examples of corpus-based tasks involving one-word
searches as well as string searches, and the examining of word lists as well
as concordance lines to suit different proﬁciency levels and learning out-
comes. Whitcomb and Alansary (2018) use the same corpus to design a corpus
research project for third-year Arabic learners. These two examples show that
at least some Arabic teachers want to refute the claim that corpus-based
teaching is ‘more talked about than tested with real learners’ (Gaskell and
Cobb 2004: 317). However, they also show that the current state of corpus use
in the Arabic as a foreign language classroom is poor and that even the
limited available Arabic corpora remain underutilized.
20.9
Learner Corpora
As we leave the Arabic classroom, the last step in the process of applying
corpus linguistics to L2 teaching, according to Conrad (2005), is building and
analysing learner corpora. Learner corpora are deﬁned as ‘electronic collec-
tions of texts produced by language learners’ (Granger 2008: 259). However,
here too, Arabic does not fare well compared to English. According to the
Centre for English Corpus Linguistics list (accessed June 2019) of available
learner corpora, there are only two Arabic learner corpora of limited size (in
addition to one translator corpus) compared to ninety+ English learner
corpora. Alfaiﬁet al. (2014) mention two more Arabic learner corpora,
which are not freely available. Their attempt at overcoming this disadvantage
was to create the Arabic Learner Corpus, an open-source project, downloadable
4 9 0
M A I Z A K I , D A V I D W I L M S E N , & D A N A A B D U L R A H I M

from the website (www.arabiclearnercorpus.com). As to the usefulness of
such a corpus, Alfaiﬁand Atwell (2013) identify several key areas where
this corpus could be put to use, including contrastive interlanguage analysis,
compiling or improving learner dictionaries, error analysis, and designing
pedagogical materials. Even though Go¨tz and Mukherjee (2019: 1) argue that
‘learner corpora are only just beginning to impact the ﬁeld of language
teaching’, it is important to have enough resources, i.e., learner corpora, in
order to exploit them for teaching purposes. With the teaching of Arabic as
a foreign/second language on the rise in many parts of the world, some
collective
efforts
to compile
the
vast amounts
of
learner
data
in
a systematic manner are needed so that Arabic learner corpora can catch
up with other languages in the ﬁeld.
In conclusion, the situation of Arabic corpus-based teaching to date
shows that there is still a long way to go. It is therefore disappointing
that two major recent publications about Arabic corpus linguistics and
Arabic language pedagogy do not mention corpus-based teaching.
McEnery et al.’s (2019b) Arabic Corpus Linguistics and Lo’s (2019) The Arabic
Classroom are intended to reﬂect the current status of scholarship and
approaches in Arabic corpus linguistics and Arabic teaching respectively.
However, as this volume shows, Arabic corpus linguistics is very much
alive in the scholarly world of Arabic and great efforts are being exerted on
all levels (creating corpus resources, applying corpus methods in the class-
room, working with learner corpora) to progress this ﬁeld further.
20.10
Corpus-Based Translation Studies
Another area that has seen a tremendous change with the growing powers
of computers giving scholars access to vast amounts of digitized texts is
translation studies. Corpus linguistics has transformed translation studies
from a mainly prescriptive discipline that regards the source text as super-
ior to the target text, to an empirical view armed with statistical data that
aims at exploring and analysing features of translation norms and strate-
gies. According to Oakes and Ji (2012), one of the greatest advantages of
applying corpus-based methodologies to the ﬁeld of translation studies is
that it enables a more systematic account of the inherently complex net-
work of relationships between source and target texts.
According to Kruger (2002), corpus-based translation research emerged
in the 1990s, driven by the advances in corpus linguistics and its many
applications. As early as 1993, Baker argued that the building and analysis
of translation corpora would help scholars to gain an in-depth look at ‘the
nature of translated text as a mediated communicative event’ (1993: 243).
Similarly, Tymoczko (1998: 457) stated that corpus-based translation
research allows the study of both the process and the product of transla-
tion. Reviewing the literature on corpora and translation studies reveals
three general areas under which most of the work done so far falls: (1)
20 The Utility of Arabic Corpus Linguistics
491

designing and building translation corpora; (2) applying corpus-based
methods to translation studies; and (3) integrating corpora in translation
teaching and translator training. We will brieﬂy discuss each of these areas
in relation to Arabic.
20.10.1
Corpora for Translation
Since corpus-based translation studies were the offspring of the marriage
between descriptive translation studies and corpus linguistics, the starting
point should be the corpus itself. Building corpora for translation primar-
ily aims to provide data that allows combining quantitative analysis with
qualitative research. Therefore, translational corpora, parallel corpora,
multilingual corpora, and comparable corpora have all emerged since
the 1990s as useful resources because ‘the use of a corpus allows
a researcher to conveniently obtain statistical data regarding the features
of translated texts on lexical, syntactic, and textual levels’ (Hu 2016: 2).
Translational corpora are monolingual corpora which are made up of
translated texts. Baker and her team in the University of Manchester are
said to have started the ﬁrst ever translational corpus in 1995, the
Translational English Corpus, which includes around 10 million words of
texts translated into English from various source languages, including
Arabic.15 Parallel corpora generally refer to a bilingual corpus of a source
text and a target text aligned on some level (word, sentence, or paragraph
level). Multilingual corpora came into existence largely to rectify
a shortcoming in parallel corpora, i.e., that they display only one transla-
tion for each source text, which does not show differences in different
translations of the same text. Comparable corpora, on the other hand, are
bilingual or multilingual corpora which may or may not be translations of
one source text but are comparable in terms of some parameters such as
size, time span, register, design, structure, theme, and so forth.
As with other Arabic corpus resources, corpora for translation studies
are generally not on a par with those for other languages. As late as 2015,
Zantout and Guessoum were still complaining that ‘Arabic parallel cor-
pora are not as abundant as in other languages’ (232). Some of the large
parallel and multilingual corpora which include Arabic and are available
for download are the United Nations Parallel Corpus, including UN ofﬁcial
documents in the public domain, the TED Parallel Corpus, including TED
talks and their translation into Arabic as well as eight other languages, and
the Open Parallel Corpus (OPUS).16 There are also other resources which are
not freely available and require paid access from the large language data
providers. For example, the Linguistic Data Consortium (LDC) offers the
GALE Arabic Newswire Parallel Text Project.17 ELRA offers TRAD-Arabic-English
15 www.alc.manchester.ac.uk/translation-and-intercultural-studies/research/projects/translational-english-corpus-tec/.
16 http://opus.nlpl.eu.
17 www.ldc.upenn.edu.
4 9 2
M A I Z A K I , D A V I D W I L M S E N , & D A N A A B D U L R A H I M

Mailing Lists Parallel Corpus.18 Sketch Engine offers the arTenTen (a tagged
corpus of Arabic built on comparable parameters with thirty other
languages).19 Other relevant smaller corpora which form the basis of
various team projects come in all shapes and sizes, including, for example
Al-Raisi et al. (2018) – a monolingual corpus of texts translated into Arabic,
Inoue et al. (2018) – an Arabic–Japanese parallel corpus, Samy et al. (2006) –
a parallel multilingual Arabic–Spanish–English corpus, and Bouamor et al.
(2014) – a multidialectal parallel corpus of Arabic which includes ﬁve
Arabic dialects in addition to Standard Arabic and English.
It should be noted that many of the corpora mentioned above were
designed and created to be used for training machine translation or informa-
tion retrieval systems. Machine translation, i.e., the translation from one
natural language to another via computer software, relies heavily on corpora
to train such software. But the average researcher who wants to conduct
a corpus-based translation study need not get into the technical details of
building parallel corpora for their particular studies. They would be better
served by using a ready-made parallel corpus of Arabic and English, for
example, with a user-friendly interface. These are even harder to ﬁnd.
Parallel corpora in particular are notoriously complicated on a technical
level and pose many difﬁculties for their creators. When one language in
the corpus is Arabic, this adds more complexity. Zantout and Guessoum
(2015) explain that this is because of alignment issues. With most parallel
corpora, alignment is done automatically, but Arabic, with its complex mor-
phological system and sentence structure, makes this more challenging (see
also Farghaly and Shaalan 2009). One example of an ongoing project for
building an Arabic–English parallel corpus is described in Alotaibi (2017),
which aims to include 10 million words of various genres, and provide
a much-needed resource for researchers and students of translation.20
20.10.2
Applying Corpus-Based Methods to Translation Studies
Researchers who are interested in applying corpus-based methods to trans-
lation studies would largely agree with Hu’s argument that corpora are
integral to translation research because ‘translation studies will become
empty talk without scientiﬁc evidence provided by the use of corpora’
(2016: 26). Therefore, corpus-based translation studies have created and/or
used a wide variety of corpora to study various aspects of the translation
process (norms, strategies) or the translated product (linguistic features,
quality assessment) or the translator’s style (stylistics). Olohan (2004: 16)
outlines the characteristics of applying corpus methodologies to transla-
tion research. Underpinning the descriptive approach to translation stu-
dies, which combines quantitative and qualitative corpus-based analysis,
is the application of the methodology to different types of translation, i.e.,
18 www.elra.info.
19 www.sketchengine.eu.
20 http://aeparallelcorpus.net/index.php/content.
20 The Utility of Arabic Corpus Linguistics
493

‘translation in different sociocultural settings, modes, etc.’. Ultimately, as
Laviosa (1998) concludes, the marriage between corpora and translation
studies has generated a rich and coherent paradigm that addresses
a variety of issues related to translation theory, description, and practice.
As for Arabic, there has been a growing interest in corpus-based transla-
tion studies since the beginning of the new millennium. We cannot survey
all the corpus-based studies involving Arabic which are scattered between
book chapters and journal articles, but we can mention a few examples.
Gadalla (2006) analyses the translation of Arabic imperfect verbs into
English based on a literary corpus of two Naguib Mahfouz novels. Abdul-
Fattah (2010) studies clause structure and conjunctive explication in
Arabic using both a parallel corpus and a comparable corpus of texts in
the ﬁelds of history and philosophy. Abdul-Fattah (2018) continues his
study of explication as a translation-speciﬁc feature based on the specially
created parallel corpus of nearly a quarter of a million words. He provides
a quantitative and qualitative analysis of the translation of the English
causal conjunctive because and the corresponding Arabic conjunctive
liʔanna. Alasmri and Kruger (2018) were also interested in conjunctive
markers in English and their translation into Arabic. But they chose to
analyse a comparable corpus of translated and non-translated Arabic in
two registers – ﬁction and legal texts – to assess the effect of register on the
use and frequency of conjunctive markers. Furthermore, Bazzi (2014) is
interested in the cognitive and ideological factors affecting the translation
of metaphor in journalistic texts based on the analysis of parallel and
comparable corpora. Finally, Izwaini (2010) presents an in-depth study of
the language of information technology in English and its translation into
Arabic and Swedish, based on a trilingual parallel corpus.
The breadth and depth of these studies and their corpora are
a positive sign on the path to more progress in this area. What
distinguishes corpus-based translation studies from the more tradi-
tional approaches is its reliance on empirical data rather than the
researcher’s intuition and introspection. As Arabic corpora of various
kinds continue to grow, we hope more studies can produce empiri-
cally proven results.
20.10.3
Translation Teaching and Translator Training
Within the areas of translation studies impacted by corpus linguistics,
it could be argued that translation teaching and translator training are
far less developed than the previous two. Questions such as how to
integrate corpus methodology in the translation classroom or how to
incorporate corpora in the teaching materials, in addition to issues
such as the cost and logistics of accessing corpora, are still work in
progress for many in the ﬁeld. Hu (2016: 28) explains that the use of
corpora in translator training ‘allows students to better understand
4 9 4
M A I Z A K I , D A V I D W I L M S E N , & D A N A A B D U L R A H I M

the regularities and patterns of language transfer by observing large
numbers of existing translation samples’. Hu uses the term ‘corpus-
based mode of translation teaching’ (183) which is characterized by
two main features: (1) automatic extraction and analysis of data; and
(2) automatic presentation of translation examples. Along the same
lines, Bernardini et al. (2007) insist that translation pedagogy should
beneﬁt from parallel corpora to help students of translation develop
translation awareness and improve their competence as translators.
Similarly, Beeby et al. (2009) argue that corpora have great potential to
improve translation quality, but they highlight that they require both
technical skill and critical thought.
With this background in mind, it is no surprise that not much work
has been done to systematically employ corpora in translation teach-
ing or translator training involving Arabic. One particular study, Ben
Salhi (2010: 54) starts from the assumption that the current changes in
the translation market and profession as a result of interaction with
technology require that ‘an upgrading of the translator training class-
room should be performed in the Arab World’. He reports on an
experiment in Tunisia, where students are given access to small com-
parable and parallel corpora that they can use to overcome linguistic,
pragmatic, or cultural problems that they encounter in their transla-
tion assignments. Students were also encouraged to collect their own
small corpora and build their own glossaries of collocations and ter-
minology. Ironically, translators involved in using automatic tools and
translation memories are well aware of the role played by corpora,
while outside the realm of machine translation it seems that corpora
have no place in Arabic translation studies. Yet, as Malmkjaer (2003:
119) observes, ‘the use in translation studies of methodologies inspired
by corpus linguistics has proved to be one of the most important gate-
openers to progress in the discipline since Toury’s rethinking of the
concept of equivalence’. Arabic translation studies has yet to recognize
the utility of corpus data to its work and, as a consequence, transla-
tion pedagogy has yet to incorporate corpora into its teaching.
20.11
Conclusion
An unescapable conclusion of this survey is that despite the increasing
availability of Arabic corpora and their potential for providing profound
insights into the workings of the Arabic language in all of its varieties and
adding to the understanding of the workings of human language in gen-
eral, very few linguists working with Arabic have recognized the sheer
utility of working with Arabic corpora. This is as true of descriptive and
theoretical linguists as it is of applied linguists.
20 The Utility of Arabic Corpus Linguistics
495

References
Abdulrahim, D. (2013). A Corpus Study of Basic Motion Events in Modern
Standard
Arabic.
Unpublished
doctoral
dissertation,
University
of
Alberta, Canada.
Abdulrahim, D. (2019a). Go constructions in Modern Standard Arabic: A
corpus-based study. Constructions and Frames, 11(1), 1–42.
Abdulrahim, D. (2019b). Quantitative approaches to analysing COME con-
structions in Modern Standard Arabic. In T. McEnery, A. Hardie, and
N. Younis, eds., Arabic Corpus Linguistics. Edinburgh: Edinburgh University
Press, 170–200.
Abdul-Fattah, A. (2010). A Corpus-Based Study of Conjunction in Arabic
Translated and Non-Translated Texts Written by the Same Translators/Authors.
Doctoral dissertation, University of Manchester, UK.
Abdul-Fattah, A. (2018). Explicating structural shifts in English–Arabic trans-
lation: A corpus-based study of the causal conjunctives because and li’anna.
Arab World English Journal for Translation and Literary Studies, 2(1), 39–59.
Abu Kwaik, K., Chatzikyriakidis, S., and Dobnik, S. (2019). Can Modern
Standard Arabic approaches be used for Arabic dialects? Sentiment
analysis as a case study. In M. El-Haj, P. Rayson, E. Atwell, and
L. Alsudias, eds., Proceedings of the 3rd Workshop on Arabic Corpus
Linguistics (WACL-3). Association for Computational Linguistics, 40–50.
www.aclweb.org/anthology/W19-5606/; last accessed 14 December 2020.
Abu Kwaik, K., Saad, M., Chatzikyriakidis, S., and Dobnik, S. (2018a).
Shami:
A
corpus
of
Levantine
Arabic
dialects.
In
N.
Calzolari,
K. Choukri, C. Cieri, T. Declerck et al., eds., Proceedings of the Eleventh
International Conference on Language Resources and Evaluation: European
Languages Resources Association (ELRA), 3645–52. www.aclweb.org
/anthology/L18-1576; last accessed 14 December 2020.
Abu Kwaik, K., Saad, M., Chatzikyriakidis, S., and Dobnik, S. (2018b).
A lexical distance study of Arabic dialects. Procedia Computer Science,
142, 2–13.
Al-Raisi, F., Lin, W., and Bourai, A. (2018). A monolingual parallel corpus of
Arabic. Procedia Computer Science, 142, 334–8.
Al-Sulaiti, L. and Atwell, E. (2006). The design of a corpus of contemporary
Arabic. International Journal of Corpus Linguistics, 11(1), 1–36.
Alasmri, I. and Kruger, H. (2018). Conjunctive markers in translation from
English to Arabic: A corpus-based study. Perspectives: Studies in Translation
Theory and Practice, 26(5), 767–88.
Albadarneh, J., Talafha, B., Al-Ayyoub, M., Zaqaibeh, B., Al-Smadi, M.,
Jararweh, Y., et al. (2015). Using big data analytics for authorship authen-
tication of Arabic tweets. In A. Anjum and G. Papadopolous, eds.,
Proceedings of the 8th International Conference on Utility and Cloud Computing,
IEEE Press, 448–52.
4 9 6
M A I Z A K I , D A V I D W I L M S E N , & D A N A A B D U L R A H I M

Alfaiﬁ, A. and Atwell, E. (2013). Potential uses of the Arabic Learner Corpus.
In Proceedings of the Leeds Language, Linguistics and Translation PGR Conference
(2013). Leeds, UK.
Alfaiﬁ, A., Atwell, E., and Hedaya, I. (2014). Arabic Learner Corpus (ALC) v2:
A new written and spoken corpus of Arabic learners. In S. Ishikawa, ed.,
Proceedings of the Learner Corpus Studies in Asia and the World (LCSAW), 77–89.
Alotaibi, H. M. (2017). Arabic–English Parallel Corpus: A new resource for
translation training and language teaching. Arab World English Journal, 8
(3), 319–37.
Alshutayri, A. and Atwell, A. (2019). Classifying Arabic dialect text in the
Social Media Arabic Dialect Corpus (SMADC). In M. El-Haj, P. Rayson,
E. Atwell, and L. Alsudias, eds., Proceedings of the 3rd Workshop on Arabic
Corpus Linguistics (WACL-3). Association for Computational Linguistics, 51–9.
Arts, T., Belinkova, Y., Habash, N., Kilgarriff, A., and Suchomel, V. (2014).
arTenTen: Arabic corpus and word sketches. Journal of King Saud
University – Computer and Information Sciences, 26, 357–71. www
.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1319157814000330; last accessed
14 December 2020.
Atwell, E. (2019). Using the web to model Modern and Qur’anic Arabic. In
T. McEnery, A. Hardie, and N. Younis, eds., Arabic Corpus Linguistics.
Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press, 100–19.
Baker, M. (1993). Corpus Linguistics and Translation Studies: Implications and
Applications. Amsterdam: John Benjamins.
Bazzi, S. (2014). Foreign metaphors and Arabic translation: An empirical
study in journalistic translation practice. Journal of Language and Politics,
13(1), 120–51.
Beeby, A., Rodrı´guez Ine´s, P., and Sa´nchez-Gijo´n, P. (2009). Corpus Use and
Translating: Corpus Use for Learning to Translate and Learning Corpus Use to
Translate. Amsterdam: John Benjamins.
Belinkov, Y., Madigow, A., Barro´n-Ceden˜ o, A., Schmidman, A., and
Romanov, M. (2019). Studying the history of the Arabic language:
Language technology and a large-scale historical corpus. Language
Resources and Evaluation, 53, 771–805. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10579-019-
09460-w; last accessed 14 December 2020.
Ben Salhi, H. (2010). Small parallel corpora in an English–Arabic transla-
tion classroom: No need to reinvent the wheel in the era of globaliza-
tion. In S. M. Shiyab, M. G. Rose, J. House, and J. Dural, eds., Globalization
and Aspects of Translation. Newcastle upon Tyne: Cambridge Scholars
Publishing, 53–67.
Bernardini, S., Stewart, D., and Zanettin, F. (2007). Corpora in translator
education: An introduction. In F. Zanettin, S. Bernardini, and D. Stewart,
eds., Corpora in Translator Education. Beijing: Foreign Language Teaching
and Research Press, 1–14.
Bouamor, H., Habash, N., and Oﬂazer, K. (2014). A multidialectal parallel
corpus of Arabic. In N. Calzolari, K. Choukri, T. Declerck, H. Loftsson
20 The Utility of Arabic Corpus Linguistics
497

et al., eds., Proceedings of the Ninth International Conference on Language
Resources and Evaluation (LREC 2014). European Languages Resources
Association (ELRA), 1240–5.
Boudad, N., Faizi, R., Haj Thami, R., and Chiheb, R. (2018). Sentiment
analysis in Arabic: A review of the literature. Ain Shams Engineering
Journal, 9(4), 2479–90.
Braun, S. (2007). Integrating corpus work into secondary education: From
data-driven learning to needs-driven corpora. ReCALL, 19(3), 307–28.
Brustad, K. (2000). The Syntax of Spoken Arabic: A Comparative Study of Moroccan,
Egyptian, Syrian, and Kuwaiti Dialects. Washington, DC: Georgetown
University Press.
Buckwalter, T. and Parkinson, D. (2011). A Frequency Dictionary of Arabic: Core
Vocabulary for Learners (Routledge frequency dictionaries). London:
Routledge.
Burton, G. (2012). Corpora and coursebooks: Destined to be strangers
forever? Corpora, 7(1), 91–108.
Camilleri, J. J. (2016). Digitizing the grammar and vocabulary of Maltese. In
G. Puech and B. Saade, eds., Shifts and Patterns in Maltese. Berlin: De
Gruyter Mouton, 359–85.
Campoy, M., Belle´s-Fortun˜ o, B., and Gea-Valor, M. (2010). Corpus-Based
Approaches to English Language Teaching. London: Continuum.
Chambaz, A. and Desagulier, G. (2016). Predicting is not explaining: Targeted
learning of the dative alternation. Journal of Causal Inference, 4(1), 1–30.
Chambers, A. (2007). Popularising corpus consultation by language learners
and teachers. In E. Hidalgo, L. Quereda, and J. Santana, eds., Corpora in the
Foreign Language Classroom: Selected Papers from the Sixth International Conference
on Teaching and Language Corpora (TALC 6). Amsterdam: Rodopi, 3–14.
Clark, A. and Lappin, S. (2011). Linguistic Nativism and the Poverty of the
Stimulus. Chichester, UK: Wiley-Blackwell.
Conrad, S. (2005). Corpus linguistics and L2 teaching. In E. Hinkel, ed.,
Handbook of Research in Second Language Teaching and Learning. London:
Routledge, 393–411.
Conrad, S., and Biber, D. (2009). Real Grammar: A Corpus-Based Approach to
English. London: Pearson.
Corpas Pastor, G. and Seghiri, M. (2010). Size matters: A quantitative
approach to corpus representativeness. In R. Rabada´n, ed., Lengua, tra-
duccio´n, recepcio´n: en honor de Julio Ce´sar Santoyo / Language, translation,
reception. To honor Julio Ce´sar Santoyo. Leo´n: Universidad de Leo´n, 111–46.
Cowie, F. (1999). What’s Within? Nativism Reconsidered. Oxford: Oxford
University Press.
Desagulier, G. (2017). Noam Chomsky’s colorless green idea: ‘Corpus linguis-
tics doesn’t mean anything’. Around the Word, 5 December 2017. https://
corpling.hypotheses.org/252; last accessed 14 December 2020.
4 9 8
M A I Z A K I , D A V I D W I L M S E N , & D A N A A B D U L R A H I M

Duwairi, R., Ahmed, N. A., and Al-Rifai, S. (2015). Detecting sentiment
embedded in Arabic social media: A lexicon-based approach. Journal of
Intelligent Fuzzy Systems, 29(1), 107–17.
El-Fiqi, H., Petraki, E., and Abbass, H. A. (2019). Network motifs for translator
stylometry identiﬁcation. PLOS ONE 14(2), 2039–45. https://journals.plos.org
/plosone/article?id=10.1371/journal.pone.0211809;
last
accessed
14
December 2020.
Farghaly, A. and Shaalan, K. (2009). Arabic natural language processing:
Challenges and solutions. ACM Transactions on Asian Language
Information Processing, 8, 1–20.
Frankenberg-Garcia, A., Flowerdew, L., and Aston, G. (2010). New Trends in
Corpora and Language Learning (Research in corpus and discourse).
New York: Continuum International Publications.
Gadalla, H. (2006). Arabic imperfect verbs in translation: A corpus study of
English renderings. Meta: Translator’s Journal, 51(1), 51–71.
Gaskell, D. and Cobb, T. (2004). Can learners use concordance feedback for
writing errors? System, 32(3), 301–19.
Go¨tz, S. and Mukherjee, J. (2019). Learner Corpora and Language Teaching,
Studies in Corpus Linguistics, vol. 92. Amsterdam: John Benjamins.
Granger, S. (2008). Learner corpora. In A. Lu¨deling and M. Kyto¨, eds., Corpus
Linguistics:AnInternationalHandbook,vol.1.Berlin:WalterdeGruyter,259–75.
Guide`re, M. (2002). Toward corpus-based machine translation for Standard
Arabic. Translation Journal, 6(1). https://pdfs.semanticscholar.org/268e/
f55030a49207071c56538c634965ee568ed8.pdf; last accessed 14 December
2020.
Habash, N. Y. (2010). Introduction to Arabic Natural Language Processing
(Synthesis lectures on human language technologies, #10). San Rafael,
CA: Morgan & Claypool.
Hidalgo, E., Quereda R, and Santana, J. (2007). Corpora in the Foreign Language
Classroom: Selected Papers from the Sixth International Conference on Teaching
and Language Corpora (TALC 6), University of Granada, Spain, 4–7 July 2004
(Language and Computers, no. 61). Amsterdam: Rodopi.
Hoogland, J. (1996). The use of OCR software for Arabic in order to create
a text corpus of Modern Standard Arabic for lexicographic purposes. In
A. Ubaydli, ed., Proceedings of the International Conference and Exhibition on
Multi-Lingual Computing. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2701–16.
Hu, K. (2016). Introducing Corpus-based Translation Studies (New frontiers in
translation studies). Heidelberg: Springer.
Inoue, G., Habash, N., Matsumoto, Y. and Aoyama, H. (2018). A parallel
corpus of Arabic–Japanese news articles. In N. Calzolari, K. Choukri,
Gangemi, A., Maegaard, B. et al., eds., Proceedings of the 5th International
Conference on Language Resources and Evaluations, LREC 2018, 918–24. https://
aclweb.org/anthology/L18-1147; last accessed 14 December 2020.
20 The Utility of Arabic Corpus Linguistics
499

Izwaini, S. (2010). Translation and the Language of Information Technology:
A Corpus-Based Study of the Vocabulary of Information Technology in English and
Its Translation into Arabic and Swedish. Saarbru¨ cken: VDM Verlag Dr. Mu¨ ller.
Khalifa, S., Habash, N., Abdulrahim, D., and Hassan, S. (2016). A large-scale
corpus of Gulf Arabic. In N. Calzolari, K. Choukri, C. Cieri, T. Declerck
et al., eds., Proceedings of the Tenth International Conference on Language
Resources and Evaluation, Portorozˇ, Slovenia. Luxembourg: European
Languages Resources Association (ELRA), 4282–9. www.aclweb.org
/anthology/L16-1679; last accessed 14 December 2020.
Kilgarriff, A., Charalabopoulou, F., Gavrilidou, M., Johannessen, J. B.,
Khalil, S., Johansson Kokkinakis, S., et al. (2014). Corpus-based vocabu-
lary lists for language learners for nine languages. Language Resources and
Evaluation, 48(1), 121–63.
Kruger, A. (2002). Corpus-based translation research: Its development and
implications for general, literary and Bible studies. Acta Theologica
Supplementum, 2, 70–106.
Laviosa, S. (1998). The corpus-based approach: A new paradigm in transla-
tion studies. Meta: Translators’ Journal, 43(4), 474–9.
Lo, M. (2019). The Arabic Classroom: Context, Text and Learners. Abingdon,
Oxon: Routledge.
Lulu, L. and Elnagar, A. (2018). Automatic Arabic dialect classiﬁcation using
deep learning models. Procedia Computer Science, 142, 262–9.
MacWhinney, B. (2004). A multiple process solution to the problem of
language acquisition. Journal of Child Language, 31(4), 883–914.
Malmkjaer, K. (2003). On a pseudo-subversive use of corpora in translator
training. In F. Zanettin, S. Bernardini, and D. Stewart, eds., Corpora in
Translator Education, Manchester, UK: St. Jerome, 119–34.
Mansour, M. A. (2013). The absence of Arabic corpus linguistics: A call for
creating an Arabic National Corpus. International Journal of Humanities and
Social Science, 3(12), 81–90.
McEnery, T., Hardie, A. and Younis, N. (2019a). Introducing Arabic Corpus
Linguistics. In T. McEnery, A. Hardie, and N. Younis, eds., Arabic Corpus
Linguistics. Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press, 1–16.
McEnery, T., Hardie, A., and Younis, N. (2019b). Arabic Corpus Linguistics.
Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press.
McNeil, K. (2019). Tunisian Arabic Corpus: Creating a written corpus of an
‘unwritten’ language. In T. McEnery, A. Hardie, and N. Younis, eds.,
Arabic Corpus Linguistics. Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press, 30–55.
Oakes, M., and Ji, M. (2012). Quantitative Methods in Corpus-Based Translation
Studies: A Practical Guide to Descriptive Translation Research, Studies in
Corpus Linguistics, vol. 51. Amsterdam: John Benjamins.
O’Keeffe, A., McCarthy, M., and Carter, R. (2007). From Corpus to Classroom:
Language Use and Language Teaching. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Olohan, M. (2004). Introducing Corpora in Translation Studies. London:
Routledge.
5 0 0
M A I Z A K I , D A V I D W I L M S E N , & D A N A A B D U L R A H I M

Omer, A. and Oakes, M. (2019). The writing styles of Salwa and Al-Qarni. In
M. El-Haj, P. Rayson, E. Atwell, and L. Alsudias, eds., Proceedings of the 3rd
Workshop
on
Arabic
Corpus
Linguistics
(WACL-3).
Association
for
Computational Linguistics, 16–21.
Owens, J. and Hassan, J. (nd). In Their Own Words: A Sociolinguistically Informed
Corpus of Nigerian Arabic. Ms. Universita¨t Bayreuth. www.neu.uni-bayreuth
.de/de/Uni_Bayreuth/Fakultaeten/4_Sprach_und_Literaturwissenschaft/
islamwissenschaft/arabistik/en/Idiomaticity__lexical_realignment__and_
semantic_change_in_spoken_arabic/Nigerian_Arabic/index.html; last
accessed 14 December 2020.
Parkinson, D. (2003). Future variability: A corpus study of Arabic future
particles. In D. Parkinson and S. Farwaneh, eds., Perspectives on Arabic
Linguistics XV: Papers from the Fifteenth Annual Symposium on Arabic
Linguistics, Salt Lake City (2001). Amsterdam: John Benjamins, 191–211.
Parkinson, D. (2006). Using Arabic Synonyms. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.
Parkinson, D. (2008). Sentence subject agreement variation in Arabic. In
Z. Ibrahim and S. Makhlouf, eds, Linguistics in an Age of Globalization:
Perspectives on Arabic Language and Teaching. Cairo: The American
University in Cairo Press, 67–90.
Parkinson, D. (2019). Under the hood of arabiCorpus. In T. McEnery,
A. Hardie, and N. Younis, eds., Arabic Corpus Linguistics. Edinburgh:
Edinburgh University Press, 17–29.
Parkinson, D. and Ibrahim, Z. (1999). Testing lexical differences in regional
standard Arabics. In E. Benmamoun, ed., Perspectives on Arabic Linguistics
XII. Amsterdam: John Benjamins, 183–202.
Procha´zka, S. and Dallaj, I. (2020). Polar questions in Tunis Arabic. In G.
Chikovani and Z. Tskhvediani, eds., Studies on Arabic Dialectology and
Sociolinguistics: Proceedings of the 13th International Conference of AIDA held in
Kutaisi, June 10–13, 2019. Kutaisi: Akaki Tserteli State University Press,
233–40.
Pullum, G. K. and Scholz, B. C. (2002). Empirical Assessments of the poverty
of stimulus arguments. The Linguistic Review, 19, 9–50.
Romanov, M. (2019). Toward the digital history of the pre-modern Muslim
world: Developing text-mining techniques for the study of Arabic biogra-
phical collections. In T. L. Andrews and C. Mace´, eds., Analysis of Ancient and
Medieval Texts and Manuscripts: Digital Approaches. Brepols Online, 229–44.
Saffran.
J.
(2003).
Statistical
language
learning:
Mechanisms
and
constraints. Current Directions in Psychological Science, 12(4), 110–14.
Salameh, M., Bouamor, H., and Habash, N. (2018). Fine-grained Arabic
dialect identiﬁcation. In Proceedings of the International Conference on
Computational Linguistics (COLING), 1332–44.
Sampson, G. (1989). Language acquisition: Growth or learning? Philosophical
Papers, 18, 203–40.
20 The Utility of Arabic Corpus Linguistics
501

Samy, D., Sandoval, A. M., Guirao, J. M., and Alfonseca, E. (2006). Building
a parallel multilingual corpus (Arabic–Spanish–English). In N. Calzolari,
K. Choukri, A. Gangemi, B. Maegaard et al., eds., Proceedings of the 5th
International Conference on Language Resources and Evaluations (LREC 2006).
European Language Resources Association (ELRA), 2176–81.
Shiyab, S., Rose, S., House, J., and Duval, J. (2010). Globalization and Aspects of
Translation. Newcastle upon Tyne: Cambridge Scholars Publishing.
Simpson, R. and Swales, J. (2001). Corpus Linguistics in North America: Selections
from the 1999 Symposium. Ann Arbor, MI: University of Michigan Press.
Stubbs, M. (1993). British traditions in text analysis: From Firth to Sinclair.
In M. Baker, G. Francis, and E. Tognini-Bonelli, eds., Text and Technology.
Philadelphia: John Benjamins, 1–33.
Thackston, W. M., Jr. (1996). The Vernacular Arabic of the Lebanon. Cambridge,
MA: Department of Near Eastern Languages and Civilizations, Harvard
University.
Tymoczko, M. (1998). Computerized corpora and the future of translation
studies. Meta, 43(4), 452–9.
Van Mol, M. (2000). The development of a new learner’s dictionary for
Modern Standard Arabic: The linguistic corpus approach. In U. Heid,
S. Evert, E. Lehmann, and C. Rohrer, eds., Proceedings of the Ninth
EURALEX International Congress. Stuttgart, 831–6.
Whitcomb, L. and Alansary, S. (2018). Using linguistic corpora in Arabic
foreign language teaching and learning. In K. Wahba, L. England, and
Z. Taha, Handbook for Arabic Language Teaching Professionals in the 21st
Century, vol. II. New York: Routledge, 219–31.
White, M. G. and Lonsdale, D. W. (2019). Verbs in Egyptian Arabic: A case
for register variation. In M. El-Haj, P. Rayson, E. Atwell, and L. Alsudias,
eds., Proceedings of the 3rd Workshop on Arabic Corpus Linguistics (WACL-3).
Association for Computational Linguistics, 60–71. www.aclweb.org
/anthology/W19-5608; last accessed 14 December 2020.
Wichmann, A. (1997). Teaching and Language Corpora (Applied Linguistics and
Language Study). London: Longman.
Widdowson, H. (1991). The description and prescription of language. In
J. Alatis, ed., Georgetown University Roundtable on Language and Linguistics,
1991–Linguistics and language pedagogy: The State of the Art. Washington, DC:
Georgetown University Press, 11–24.
Wilmsen, D. (2010). Dialects of written Arabic: Syntactic differences in the
treatment of object pronouns in the Arabic of Egyptian and Levantine
newspapers. Arabica, 57(1), 99–128.
Wilmsen, D. (2013). The Demonstrative iyya¯-: A little-considered aspect of
Arabic deixis. Arabica, 60, 332–58.
Wilmsen, D. (2015). Perfect modality: Auxiliary verbs and ﬁnite subordi-
nates in Levantine (and other) Arabics. Al-ʿArabiyya, 48, 157–74.
Zaghouani, W. (2014). Critical survey of the freely available Arabic corpora.
In Proceedings of International Conference on Language Resources and Evaluation
5 0 2
M A I Z A K I , D A V I D W I L M S E N , & D A N A A B D U L R A H I M

(LREC 2014), Reykjavic, Iceland. https://arxiv.org/pdf/1702.07835.pdf; last
accessed 14 December 2020.
Zaki,
M.
(2017).
Corpus-based
teaching
in
the
Arabic
classroom:
Theoretical and practical perspectives. International Journal of Applied
Linguistics, 27(2), 514–41.
Zantout, R. and Guessoum, A. (2015). Obstacles facing Arabic machine
translation: Building a neural network-based transfer module. In
S. Izwaini, ed,. Papers in Translation Studies. Newcastle upon Tyne:
Cambridge Scholars Publishing.
Zema´nek, P. (2001). Clara (Corpus Linguae Arabicae): An overview. In
ELSNET, ed., Proceedings of ACL/EACL Workshop on Arabic Language
Processing. Toulouse, France. www.elsnet.org/acl2001-arabic.html; last
accessed 14 December 2020.
Zema´nek, P. and Milicˇka, J. (2014). Quotations, relevance and time depth:
Medieval Arabic literature in grids and networks. In A. Feldman,
A. Kazantseva, and S. Szpakowicz, eds., Proceeding of the 3rd Workshop on
Computational Linguistics for Literature (CLFL). Association for Computational
Linguistics, 17–24. www.aclweb.org/anthology/W14-0903; last accessed
14 December 2020.
Zeroual, I. and Lakhouaja, A. (2018). Arabic corpus linguistics: Major progress,
but still a long way to go. Studies in Computational Intelligence, 740, 613–36.
Zitouni, I., Olive, J. P., Iskra, D., Choukri, K., Emam, O., Gedge, O., et al.
(2002). ORIENTEL: Speech-based interactive communication applica-
tions for the Mediterranean and the Middle East. In Proceedings of the 7th
International Conference on Spoken Language Processing (ICSLP 2002). https://
pdfs.semanticscholar.org/fec6/336ef6a292e18fb83a46841fea9c80b77955
.pdf; last accessed 14 December 2020.
Arabic Corpora
Arabic Learner Corpus: www.arabiclearnercorpus.com
arabiCorpus: http://arabicorpus.byu.edu
CALM: http://linguistics.byu.edu/thesisdata/CALMcorpusDownload.html
Gumar: https://camel.abudhabi.nyu.edu/gumar/
Korpus Malti http://mlrs.research.um.edu.mt/index.php?page=corpora
shami-corpus: https://github.com/GU-CLASP/shami-corpus
Tunico: https://tunico.acdh.oeaw.ac.at/about_corpus.html
Tunisya: http://www.tunisiya.org
20 The Utility of Arabic Corpus Linguistics
503


Part V
Arabic Linguistics
and New Media
Studies


21
Language Policy and
the Arabic Localization
of Twitter
Amy Johnson
21.1
Introduction
In 2011, Arabic use on Twitter grew prodigiously, with one analysis of the
period ﬁnding a 2146 per cent increase.1 That year also saw the symbolic
linking of social media to the Arab Spring. Despite these developments, by
the end of 2011, Twitter still offered no Arabic interface. Indeed, the social
networking site had no interfaces in any language with horizontal right-to-
left directionality. While the language menu for the iconic user interface
offered seventeen languages, the language menu for the company’s Help
Center offered only ten. Neither included Arabic.2
Similarly, the site’s support for Arabic script was spotty. Twitter users
could use Arabic script in their bios and names. However, account handles
were – and remain – limited to roman script. And while users could tweet
in Arabic script, the tweets displayed with overall left-to-right direction-
ality rather than right-to-left. And, as the hashtag for the enthusiastically
* Many thanks to Mina Takla, Mohamed ElGohary, Sami Al Mubarak, and Mohamed Reda for generously sharing with me
their experiences of the early days of the Arabic localization of Twitter. For surfacing the history of Twitter’s localization,
the Internet Archive’s Wayback Machine has proved an invaluable resource. For feedback on this chapter, my thanks to
Nancy Baym, Li Cornfeld, Colleen Kim Daniher, Dean Jansen, Anna Jobin, Jennifer Pranolo, Maria Sidorkina, Martha
Umphrey, and Jackie Urla. I am also grateful to Habib Haddad, Nathan Matias, Clare Wilde, and Katie Zimmerman for
advice and pointing me toward helpful resources. Further, the thinking behind this chapter beneﬁted greatly from
discussions at the All Things in Moderation conference, held 6–7 December 2017 at UCLA. Thanks, as well, to Karin
Ryding and David Wilmsen for their patience and understanding as I wrote this chapter through multiple signiﬁcant
changes on the Twitter platform. Finally, my deepest respect and gratitude to the many volunteer translators who,
through their important and too often overlooked work, bring greater accessibility to social media platforms and other
sites.
1 Semiocast, Arabic highest growth on Twitter, English expression stabilizes below 40%. 24 November 2011, https://
semiocast.com/publications/2011_11_24_Arabic_highest_growth_on_Twitter. The analysis covered twelve months
of data, ending on 31 October 2011. Further, by the end of 2013, Arabic had become one of the top ten languages of
Twitter: https://thenextweb.com/shareables/2013/12/10/61-languages-found-twitter-heres-rank-popularity/.
2 Further, the language coverage suggested by the Help Center’s language menu was misleading: not all of the materials
in the Help Center were available in all of those languages (Johnson 2017a).

taken-up #letstweetinArabic campaign ironically showed, hashtag func-
tionality wasn’t yet enabled for Arabic script.
Meanwhile, developers who wished to build applications that used
Twitter’s application programming interfaces (APIs) had to navigate the
English-language instructions and help forum at dev.twitter.com.3 Ads
were still in their early stages; policies around paid promotion didn’t
specify any available languages but assumed English.4 Later, in 2016,
when the platform published eligibility requirements for its self-service
ads, it listed thirteen supported languages.5 Arabic was not included.
Language is a critical social resource, and systems of power treat it as
such. Governments have long controlled language, through both explicit
policy and implicit practice, in order to control access to other resources.
Termed ‘language policy’ by sociolinguists, linguistic anthropologists, and
other social scientists, such control can be used both to constrain and
expand access to resources.6 In its classic formulation, language policy
involves making decisions regarding the ‘preferred languages that should
be legitimized, used, learned and taught in terms of where, when and in
which contexts’ (Shohamy 2006: 45). Not surprisingly, contemporary lan-
guage policy intersects with colonialism, the modern nation-state, and the
linguistic rights movement. More recently, tech companies have become
important top-down makers and maintainers of language policy.7
Fundamentally, social media platforms are structures designed to sup-
port and analyse language interactions – and thus mediate relationships
and power. Who gets to interact and how depends on the decisions social
media companies make. When a company builds language settings –
whether explicitly in language menus or language tiers of markets, or
implicitly in algorithmic choices and employee practices – they are quite
literally building language policy.
3 https://dev.twitter.com didn’t offer any language options, but was only in English. English occupies an exceptional
position within programming languages and their communities of practice, such that programmers must typically have
some proﬁciency with English. See, for example, Ramsey Nasser (2017) on attempting to construct and spread
a programming language based in Arabic.
4 See web.archive.org/web/20110824065247/https://business.twitter.com/advertise/start. In addition to being
written in English and not specifying any available languages, such policies assumed markets in the US and UK as
a default. Promoted products became available to advertisers in the Middle East and North Africa in 2013: www
.wamda.com/2013/01/twitter-ﬁnally-expands-ad-products-to-the-arab-world-is-it-preparing-for-an-ipo.
5 See web.archive.org/web/20160617151556/https://business.twitter.com/en/help/overview/about-eligibility-for-
twitter-ads.html.
6 Language policy builds on and extends earlier work in language planning, with the two sometimes combined as
language policy and planning (LPP). This chapter follows contemporary practice in using language policy as the more
capacious term.
7 Language policy isn’t only a top-down process in which authorities explicitly deﬁne and police language, favour and
disfavour certain languages or language varieties, and plan future language abilities. Scholars (e.g., Spolsky 2004;
Shohamy 2006) have persuasively argued that language policy can be implicit and covert. Language policy can operate,
for example, through language ideologies, or norms and personal beliefs about how language works and what
constitutes ‘appropriate’ language for different roles and contexts. In turn, the ideologies and practices of bottom-up
language policy can inﬂuence more formal rule-making.
5 0 8
A M Y J O H N S O N

Following Shohamy (2006), this chapter seeks to expand the variety of
devices recognized as creating and maintaining language policy. In doing
so, it takes up the call of Wright (2004) to move beyond a nation-state
frame and investigate language policy in the contexts of transnationalism
and globalization.8 More speciﬁcally, it examines the language policy of
social media platforms, arguing that software localization – the process of
translating and adapting software to a new language and cultural context –
is an important form of contemporary language policy.
Increasingly, scholars and journalists attend to the ways the sociotech-
nical practices of social media and other internet services intersect with
matters of law and government, particularly with regard to the work of
content moderation (Chen 2014; Gillespie 2018; Klonick 2018; Roberts
2019), bias in algorithms (Noble 2018; Pasquale 2015; Sandvig et al.
2016), and advertising apparatuses (Angwin and Parris 2016; Nadler et al.
2018). Missing from these conversations, however, has been sustained
focus on the language politics of social media companies. And yet, at
a fundamental level, companies’ sociotechnical language practices pro-
duce disparities in moderation, algorithmic outputs, and advertising
opportunities.
When companies make and maintain large-scale, top-down language
policy – language policy that determines who can participate in the system
and how – they take on a role previously the purview of government. They
engage in governance by language setting, that is, they implement sociotech-
nical structures that use language to differentiate and organize users, and
to control access to system resources and capabilities; once implemented,
such
structures
–
often
infrastructure
–
typically
maintain
their
conditions.
Attending to governance by language setting illuminates operations of
power not yet well understood. Though a global structure, the Internet’s
globality is uneven at best, with irregular lurches toward improving
broader access. While this chapter focuses on the localization of social
media, this unevenness isn’t just a platform problem, it’s a larger net-
worked computational system problem. Thus, for example, despite being
a major global language, historically Arabic has received little technical
support, from character encoding to interface options to help materials.
Even when materials are available in Arabic, often it is in low-quality
8 This chapter thus joins a diverse body of scholarship, including work that examines Arabic language academies as
language planners (Sawaie 1986 and Elkhafaiﬁthis volume, Chapter 2), intersections of transnational migration and
national language policy (Stevenson 2006), and neoliberalism as a covert language policy (Piller and Cho 2013). More
broadly, the role of companies in language practices has been of increasing interest to scholars in linguistics, linguistic
anthropology, translation studies, and media studies, particularly as advertising and social media practices have made
everyday experiences of companies more visible. It’s a topic that has been approached from a number of angles,
including multilingualism in the workplace (Angouri 2014, Meyer and Apfelbaum 2010), corporate discourse (Breeze
2013), the role of advertising in linguistic landscapes (Riskedahl 2015), the languages of billboards and corporate/
institutional websites in a multilingual country (Shaaban 2017), and the manufacturing of audiences by search engines
(Bermejo 2009). This chapter builds on these to examine language policy in the form of localization practices.
21 Language Policy & Arabic Localization of Twitter
509

translation, with badly translated Arabic arguably a distinct register of
transnational commercial Arabic. At the same time, internet-based chan-
nels have become important spaces of expression and expressive culture
for Arabic-language users, from feminism in the Saudi blogosphere
(Tschirhart 2014) to youth activism in Egypt (Tohamy 2017) to online sex
counselling for Arabic-speaking Muslims (Abdel-Fadil 2017).
This chapter begins by explaining localization and its sibling, interna-
tionalization, and how these processes transform assumptions about lan-
guages – and users – built into software. Next, the chapter examines two
localization models that intersect in the localization of social media plat-
forms: the professional ‘FIGS’ approach and volunteer crowdsourcing.
These models differ in their histories, participant structures, and tools,
differences that affect both the language coverage the models produce and
who the models recognize as holding language authority. Both of these
models appear in the localization of Twitter. The ﬁnal part of this chapter
looks in detail at the actors and tools involved in the Arabic localization of
Twitter, from the 2011 user-led initiative to create an Arabic interface to
the crowdsourced localization in the Twitter Translation Center. These
efforts have had lasting effects on Twitter’s Arabic coverage and beyond.
Localization is an understudied but important subject, one that cuts
across multiple ﬁelds, including sociolinguistics, linguistic anthropology,
translation studies, science and technology studies, media studies, and
area studies. My hope is that this chapter can enable not only interdisci-
plinary conversations, but also assist policymakers, developers, and jour-
nalists seeking to regulate, modify, and report on the accessibility of
sociotechnical systems.
21.2
Language Policy and Software
Languages and markets interweave. Consequently, when a business seeks
to expand beyond its original linguistic borders it has to engage in explicit
language policy work around translation and adaptation. Thus, for exam-
ple, companies frequently organize languages in tiers associated with
growth priorities; which languages companies include and how they orga-
nize tiers are acts of language policy.
The relationship between market, language, the local, and nation tends
to be fuzzy and complicated. Typically, companies use language as an icon
for the local. From the perspective of economic growth, use of a region’s
ofﬁcial or dominant language can be an expeditious way for a company to
make a product more accessible to a market. At the same time, it is
a process of elision: it ignores and erases users of minority languages,
sidesteps pluralinguality, and de facto establishes a standard form. Such
a standard form will – as standard forms do – both simplify through the
elevation of a single language variant as well as favour and disfavour
5 1 0
A M Y J O H N S O N

certain groups of language users based on their relationship to that var-
iant. Further, the conﬂation of language and the local often includes an
implicit yoking of nation and language. Such policy constructs, in passing,
citizens as particular types of language users, much as have done, for
example,
the
various
components
of
Algeria’s
post-independence
Arabization (Mostari 2004) and the mandating of language classes for
(some) immigrants in transnational contexts (Stevenson 2006).
The language policy of the social media platform, however, emerges
from a markedly different context than that of the nation-state. Corporate
employees located in the United States typically craft social media’s lan-
guage policies, with policy priorities often shaped by the company’s goals
for market growth. Further, many language policies are written into – and
consequently enforced by – computer code. This can make language poli-
cies difﬁcult to challenge, recognize, and appeal. And while platforms
inhabit a global, simultaneous existence, their language policies are piece-
meal, surfacing variably in language menus, algorithms, platform rules,
and employee practices.
21.2.1
Internationalization and Localization
For software, the rise of global distribution entailed practices known as
internationalization and localization. These practices predate widespread pop-
ular use of the Internet – indeed software localization emerged as
a signiﬁcant component of the global information economy in the 1980s
(Cronin 2010: 135).9
Internationalization is the process of preparing software to support
multiple language versions. This includes an assortment of tasks, from
writing (or rewriting) texts addressed to the user to remove region-, lan-
guage-, or culture-speciﬁc details, to preparing software code for transla-
tion.
Programming
tasks
of
internationalization
include
building
architectural support for multiple languages, identifying strings that
require replacement, and modifying code governing everything from
time and date conventions to plural formation to syntax. The process
also often requires changes to interface design; this can be as basic as
adding a language setting to a navigation bar.
Internationalization thus both speciﬁes the languages for which it will
enable localized forms and deﬁnes which linguistic elements must be
made ‘local’ and which must stay in an original language or in some
form shared across languages. Through practices of both addition and
removal, then, internationalization addresses assumptions that the soft-
ware’s original language and cultural contexts were the only ones – or only
important ones – it would navigate. The degree to which this is necessary
9 In turn, software localization, and particularly its use of computer-assisted translation tools, has affected translation
practices more broadly (O’Hagan 2009: 95).
21 Language Policy & Arabic Localization of Twitter
511

depends on how the original creators of the software conceptualized who
would use their work and how.
Localization is the process of translating and adapting software to
a new language and cultural context. Localization includes everything
from translating and adapting texts addressed to users – such as user
interfaces, documentation, and help materials – to modifying software
and documentation in order to adhere to speciﬁc legal systems, to
designing (or redesigning) marketing materials for speciﬁc regions or
cultures. At times the process may also surface previously unrecognized
assumptions
embedded
in
the
code
that
need
to
be
addressed.
Localization, then, establishes a set of characteristics associated with
a particular region or culture.
Key to both localization and internationalization is the transformation
of an original. That original version bears a set of assumptions about its
users. As Akrich (1992) notes, technical objects ‘simultaneously embody
and measure a set of relations between heterogeneous elements’ (206). The
makers of software – a category that includes not only programmers, but
the design and marketing apparatus that supports software – inscribe
ideas about future users, future problems, and future contexts into soft-
ware interfaces, functionality, and architecture. The transformative pro-
cesses of internationalization and localization strive to alter (some of) the
original assumptions to reach a different group of users. Together, then,
internationalization and localization establish software’s marked cate-
gories. Internationalization identiﬁes relevant categories; localization
ﬁlls these categories with speciﬁc instances. Language policy shapes the
original assumptions, the additional assumptions, and the transformation
process.
Figure 21.1 Five examples of Arabic strings in the process of being localized, from the
Twitter Translation Center, 2012–2016. Localizers often work on strings that mix program-
ming code and user-facing text. Here, the Arabic strings are translations opened to voting;
English strings represent items already selected and prepared during Twitter’s internatio-
nalization process.
5 1 2
A M Y J O H N S O N

How important companies perceive localization to be – and which
localizations they perceive as important – is reﬂected in their commitment
of resources. These choices, too, are language policy at work. In the context
of governments, language policy has long guided the production of multi-
lingual materials both explicitly and implicitly. For example, as Suleiman
(2004) highlights in the context of multilingual street signs in Jerusalem,
everything from the order of the languages, the naturalness of each lan-
guage version, and even the varying legibility of fonts can reﬂect power
relationships.
Broadly, companies localize products and services to expand their acces-
sibility. Depending on the actors and tools involved, localization’s impact
on accessibility can vary considerably. Consider, for example, machine
translations, translations written by a handful of bilingual software engi-
neers and product managers, parallel translations produced by profes-
sional language service providers in conjunction with computer-assisted
translation (CAT) tools, and the translations and adaptations of a local
team on the ground. All of these forms of localization will expand acces-
sibility. However, how natural, broadly comprehensible, consistent across
multiple languages, and targeted to speciﬁc local conventions the result-
ing versions are will vary.10
It is important to note that the framing of localization and internatio-
nalization centres the company’s process and perspective. The user-led
initiative to create an Arabic interface for Twitter used a different phrase:
ﺗﻌﺮﻳﺐﺗﻮﻳﺘﺮor ‘the Arabization of Twitter’.11 This phrase directly connects the
work of Arabizing Twitter to longer histories of language change, from the
historical spread of Arabic in Africa, Asia, and Europe through conquest
and bottom-up language policy practices around migration and com-
merce, to top-down postcolonial language policy of Arab nation-states in
the twentieth century.12
21.3
Methods, Tools, and Participant Structures
of Localization
In October 2009, Biz Stone, one of the founders of Twitter, published
‘Coming Soon: Twitter in More Languages’ on the ofﬁcial company
blog.13 The post, which announced the beginning of what would become
the Twitter Translation Center, began with a photo of a packet of Bolands
10 The ‘naturalness’ of translation, or how much a translation resembles the language practices of native speakers, is a key
objective of translators, one that designers of machine translation have taken up with particular attention.
11 See, for example, the invitation to the initial October 2011 event: www.eventbrite.com/e/2275967480.
12 For example, the institution of programmes to Arabize schools and government in Algeria, Morocco, and Tunisia post-
independence from France (see, e.g., Holt 1994; Sirles 1999) and in Sudan post-independence from Britain (see, e.g.,
Sharkey 2008; Yokwe 1984).
13 https://blog.twitter.com/ofﬁcial/en_us/a/2009/coming-soon-twitter-in-more-languages.html.
21 Language Policy & Arabic Localization of Twitter
513

Fig Rolls (‘Sun drenched ﬁgs baked in golden pastry’) positioned diagonally
across a blue and yellow plaid cloth. Its opening paragraph explained:
Twitter is currently available only in English and Japanese. With some
help, we will soon be rolling out support for French, Italian, German, and
Spanish. These languages are commonly referred to using the acronym
FIGS and are often the starting point for services like Twitter when its [sic]
time for more language support. Later, we hope to offer Twitter in several
other languages. No matter how sophisticated technology gets, we’re
reminded daily that it’s about people and that’s something we’ve taken
to heart regarding translating Twitter.
The post continued on to underscore the role of user–platform collabora-
tion in the history of Twitter, highlighting third-party applications and the
creation of the site’s @mention and retweet features. Translation would
also draw on such collaboration: ‘Starting today, we are offering a simple
tool for people with experience in other languages to suggest translations
for the Twitter web site. Then, we’ll follow up technically.’ The post
concluded, ‘We’re very excited that more people will be able to use
Twitter in their native language!’
As Stone’s blog post demonstrates, two different models have inter-
sected in the localization of social media platforms: the professional
‘FIGS’ approach and volunteer collaborative translation. The models differ
in actors and tools, histories and power structures, with consequences for
language coverage and language authority.
21.3.1
The FIGS Approach: Professional Teams and Tools
Professional software localization is embedded in larger product cycles
and involves a team that works through a multistage process of analysis,
preparation, translation, engineering and testing, and review (Scha¨ler
2010: 211–13). Early software localization typically appeared nine months
or so after the software’s initial release; however, in the 1990s, simulta-
neous digital releases became common, originating in part from interna-
tionalization processes and large-scale reuse of already localized material
(210–11). The exponential growth of the Internet – and concomitant chal-
lenges to quickly localize internet-based genres like websites – shifted the
professional localization paradigm from a focus on particular localization
projects to a focus on assistive tools, driving the development of a variety
of translation technologies (Cronin 2010: 135).
Since then, whether undertaken by an internal team or contracted out
to professional language service providers (known in commercial transla-
tion as LSPs), the translation portion of software localization has, until
recently, largely drawn on the same sets of tools and practices.14 At its
14 Sometimes the process of modifying software for non-original markets is organized into four different stages:
globalization, internationalization, localization, and translation (GILT) (see, for example, Jiménez-Crespo 2013a).
5 1 4
A M Y J O H N S O N

base, a translation management system supports various tools of machine
translation and computer-assisted translation. Among these, translation
memory serves to suggest translations. Suggested translations may draw
from, for example, glossaries of project-speciﬁc terminologies, deﬁned
style guidelines, and previous translations. Such tools often draw on par-
allel corpora that include texts already translated across languages
(Hartley 2009: 110).
While these tools are intended to facilitate translation, professional trans-
lators in turn write to facilitate these tools, using controlled languages or
intentionally selecting language known to exist across corpora. Repetition
and the use of core content thus amplify the usefulness of these tools. As with
other algorithmic tools, using these tools also ampliﬁes other sociohistorical
features. Thus, for example, corpora for some languages may be more numer-
ous, extensive, readily available, or synced to other corpora than others,
making some languages easier to ﬁt within this system than others.
As Tymoczko (2007) has noted, Eurocentric and North American assump-
tions have been problematically built into both the translation profession
and translation studies.15 Such assumptions can be seen in English-
language case histories and practical guides to localization from the 1990s
that casually prioritize ‘Western European’ languages or the so-called FIGS
languages and then either Brazilian Portuguese or Japanese (e.g., Esselink
1998: 6; Adams et al. 1999: 250). When Stone wrote in his 2009 blog post
that the FIGS languages ‘are often the starting point for services like
Twitter’, he aligned the localization of Twitter with this approach. In the
late 2010s, this approach still wields considerable inﬂuence, with contem-
porary commercial translation providers, particularly those working in the
United States, continuing to emphasize the FIGS languages.16 This emphasis
has, in turn, affected the various assistive tools created and in use.
The choice to prioritize these particular languages is usually explained
through a combination of the size of the markets associated with the
languages and the technical ease of replacing a language that uses roman
script with another language that uses roman script. Given the widespread
adoption of Unicode character encoding as well as GDP rates for countries
such as China, India, and Russia, this explanation is insufﬁcient at best.
Not coincidentally, the FIGS approach to appraising ‘valuable’ consumers
also reﬂects and reinforces older European colonialist patterns.17 The
‘more people’ who Stone announces will soon be able to use Twitter ‘in
15 Tymoczko further underscores that if this inﬂuence continues, there is considerable danger that ‘translators will ipso
facto through their processes of translation, consciously or not, be enlisted in the political aspect of globalization from
a dominant Western point of view, that is, the use of globalization to further the carrying across of Western dominance –
military, political, economic, and cultural – in the world’ (2007: 6).
16 See, for example, https://unbabel.com/blog/are-the-ﬁgs-dead-translation/, www.capitatranslationinterpreting.com
/which-language-should-your-business-translate-into/, www.worldaccent.com/blog/2009/08/why-ﬁgs-translation-
matters-to.html, and https://globalvis.com/2008/03/the-case-for-ﬁgs/; all last accessed 16 December 2020.
17 Because colonialism played a key role in shaping contemporary markets, the market argument for the FIGS approach
also reﬂects a continuation of this organization of power.
21 Language Policy & Arabic Localization of Twitter
515

their native language!’ are a particular group of language users. The FIGS
approach has largely ignored or deferred Arabic.
The FIGS approach was visible in the language menu of Twitter’s Help
Center until early December 2017: the ﬁrst seven languages the menu listed
were, in order, English, French, Italian, German, Spanish, Japanese, and
Portuguese. That is, English, the FIGS languages, and then Japanese and
Portuguese. Note all the ordering schemes this is not: it is not chronological
(as Stone notes in his blog post, Japanese was the second language Twitter
became available in, after English), it is not alphabetical, it does not reﬂect the
popularity of languages used on the platform, it does not correspond to the
extent of language coverage available in the Help Center.18 Arabic, despite
commanding a relatively high degree of language coverage across Twitter’s
policies by this point (Johnson 2017b), came twenty-fourth in this language
menu.
For contemporary software applications, English dominates as a ﬁrst global
language. Perhaps not surprisingly, localization patterns of English-language
software vary in relation to where the software originates. For example,
Careem, a car service akin to Uber that is headquartered in Dubai and extends
throughout the Middle East and North Africa as well as South Asia, uses
English as a ﬁrst global language. Depending on the particular city location,
it may also offer Arabic or Turkish. Zomato, a restaurant review service begun
in India and used in South Asia, the Middle East, and elsewhere, for a total of
twenty-two countries scattered across six continents, offers its website in
Czech, English, Spanish, Indonesian, Italian, Polish, Portuguese (BR),
Portuguese (PT), Slovak, Turkish, and Vietnamese.19 Both services began
with an English-language product and have since gone through considerable
market expansion. In the course of that expansion, neither has shown any
inclination to localize along FIGS lines.
21.3.2
Crowdsourcing: Volunteers and Voting
Recently, another localization model has spread that sharply contrasts
with the professional FIGS approach: volunteer collaborative or crowd-
sourced translation.20
Where the FIGS approach connects to a longer history of European
colonialism and US imperialism, the collaborative crowdsourcing of
18 While language use – and measures of language use – ﬂuctuates, English, Japanese, and Spanish have typically formed the
trio of Twitter’s top languages; French, Italian, and German have usually been signiﬁcantly lower on the list, after languages
like Portuguese, Malay, Indonesian, Arabic, Turkish, and Korean. See, for example, https://mashable.com/2013/12/17/
twitter-popular-languages/. The December 2017 redesign of the Help Center’s language menu appears to have been
reorganized roughly by popularity of language, with English, Spanish, and Japanese listed as the ﬁrst three options.
19 Zomato lists its languages alphabetically by romanized versions which mix native language names with English-
language names for languages. Language details reﬂect the interfaces and language menus of Careem and Zomato as
of December 2017.
20 This isn’t intended to equate ‘collaborative’ and ‘crowdsourcing’; rather, crowdsourcing is one model of collaboration.
Discussions of these translation models often use both terms in conjunction.
5 1 6
A M Y J O H N S O N

localization draws from practices of online fan communities, such as those
that translate Japanese shows and comics (O’Hagan 2009).
Collaborative translation has multiple long traditions, from the multi-
stage processes of translating Buddhist sutras in China from 150 CE to
1150 CE (St. Andre´ 2010) to the intellectual cross-fertilizations of the
translation movement in Baghdad during the Abbasid period (Grifﬁth
2007) to the use of intermediate shared or ‘relay’ languages by translation
teams in medieval Europe (Bistue´ 2013). When the Internet shifted to
a phase of user-generated content, collaborative translation projects
came to the fore in what DePalma and Kelly (2008) refer to as ‘CT3’,
combining ‘community translation’, ‘collaborative technology and pro-
cesses’, and ‘crowdsourcing’ (in O’Hagan 2009: 97).
Key among these have been fan translation communities, particularly
those engaging in the fansubbing (translating and adding subtitles to
videos) and scanlation (adding translation to scanned comics) of Japanese
animation, dramas, and manga (O’Hagan 2009). Such fan translators typi-
cally mix technological skills and language skills. Their products can differ
from professional translation styles; for example, in choices of which
elements to gloss, the assignment of different colours of text to different
characters, and varied font use (Dı´az Cintas and Mun˜ oz Sa´nchez 2006 in
Chiaro 2009: 152). O’Hagan (2009) traces an evolution between such prac-
tices – as well as collaborative translation hacking in games – to inten-
tional, volunteer crowdsourcing of translation; such non-standard forms
of translation are often justiﬁed through claims that translation quality in
these cases requires domain-speciﬁc knowledge (99).
A number of social media platforms and similar sites have crowdsourced
volunteer translation work from their user communities to translate their
services. Typically, these efforts combine the professional model and the
collaborative volunteer model into a hybrid, with translators and/or transla-
tions reviewed by company employees. An early example of this can be found
in the volunteer translator–users of Second Life, an online virtual world
launched (in English) by Linden Lab in 2003. By the end of 2008, volunteers
approved by the company had localized the site into simpliﬁed Chinese,
Czech, Danish, French, German, Hungarian, Japanese, Korean, Polish,
Portuguese (BR), and Turkish (TAUS 2008 in Cronin 201021). These volunteer
translatorswereintegratedacrosslocalizationphases:theynotonlytranslated
material, they also managed terminology and tested localized versions (136).
Facebook and Twitter have both used similar hybrid models, with
a signiﬁcantly greater scale of users and the use of voting to handle that
scale. That is, volunteers can not only suggest translations, they can vote
on translations suggested by others. Facebook launched its translation app
in early 2008, at ﬁrst only for Spanish translation,22 but for another
21 The web page cited in Cronin’s chapter no longer exists.
22 https://techcrunch.com/2008/01/21/facebook-taps-users-to-create-translated-versions-of-site/.
21 Language Policy & Arabic Localization of Twitter
517

twenty-three languages later that year; by late 2012 it was available for 110
languages and language varieties (Facebook 2012 in Lenihan 2014: 208).
Twitter redesigned the translation tool announced in Stone’s 2009 blog
post into a larger Translation Center that opened in 2011. By 2012 more
than 400,000 volunteer translators had contributed to the Twitter
Translation Center.23
While these examples of user–platform localization collaborations have
so far received little attention in ﬁelds such as sociolinguistics, media
studies, and science and technology studies, translation studies scholars
have investigated them from a variety of angles. Of particular interest have
been collaborations’ new conﬁgurations of actors and the consequences of
these conﬁgurations. As Cronin (2010) notes, ‘both traditional expecta-
tions as to what constitutes acceptable translation and who is to be
accepted as translator are being altered by new conﬁgurations in the
virtual reality of the global web’ (136). Thus, for example, there have
been studies on translator communities and their motivations (Dombek
2014), the quality of translation (Jime´nez-Crespo 2013a; 2013b), and how
these hybrid models are challenging long-held translation paradigms (e.g.,
Cronin 2017, Jime´nez-Crespo 2011, O’Hagan 2009).
Further underscoring the changing conﬁgurations of actors involved,
Lenihan (2014), in a rare study examining such projects through the lens of
language policy, found that Facebook’s translation tool helped create
a tiered community of translators. Moreover, interactions within tiers of
translators as well as between the company and translators (through the
platform’s voting and assessment structures) produced a hybrid form of
language policy that challenges dichotomous views of language policy as
either a top-down or bottom-up process. This contrasts sharply with mod-
els that privilege traditional language authorities like language academies
as arbiters.
New conﬁgurations of actors surface, too, in how such translations are
initiated. Jime´nez-Crespo (2011: 135) has noted that in some cases, such as
Basque, language communities initiated Facebook’s translations. Arabic
localization of Twitter, as will be discussed at greater length shortly,
follows a similar pattern: at the end of the summer of 2011, two tech
workers living in Qatar pitched the idea of an Arabic translation to
Twitter. After discussion with the platform, the pair ran a collaborative
translation project to build an Arabic glossary for Twitter terminology and
agree on a style guide, which would then be used by platform users more
broadly for further localization.24
While the FIGS approach builds on an economic, technological, and colo-
nialist foundation, these user–platform hybrids also draw considerably from
fandom and linguistic rights initiatives. The inﬂuence of fandom on social
23 https://blog.twitter.com/ofﬁcial/en_us/a/2012/twitter-in-your-language.html.
24 Interview, Mina Takla and Sami Al Mubarak, 22 November 2017.
5 1 8
A M Y J O H N S O N

media localization extends beyond the inﬂuence of fan practices like fansub-
bing and scanlation on collaborative translation more broadly. Particularly
during a company’s startup phase, the relationship between a platform and
its users can resemble that of a fan relationship, producing both fans and fan
products. Volunteer localization is one such fan product.25
At the same time, the Internet has long been an arena in which to assert
linguistic rights. Thus, for example, in 2005 the Catalan community suc-
cessfully acquired the top-level domain name ‘.cat’ from ICANN, the ﬁrst
top-level
domain
name
designed
to
represent,
at
a
global
level,
a community of interest deﬁned through language and culture (Gerrand
2006: 2).26 When ICANN opened the domain name system to non-roman
domain names in 2009, Arab countries promptly sought Arabic domain
names. In April 2010, roughly six months after the ICANN process had
launched, seven of the thirteen countries that had passed through it –
Egypt, Jordan, Palestinian territory, Qatar, Saudi Arabia, Tunisia, UAE –
had requested Arabic domain names. Prior to this, scholars had debated
a number of proposals for general top-level domain names in Arabic,
ranging from single letters to word roots, full words, and Arabicized ver-
sions of ‘.com’, ‘.edu’, ‘.gov’, etc. (Al-Zoman 2003; Soomro and al-Qaimari
2007). Actors initiating and participating in user–platform localization
collaborations can be understood as similarly asserting linguistic rights.
Thus, in addition to directing the choices of language coverage made
during internationalization and localization, language policy also surfaces
importantly in the model of localization chosen. Crowdsourced translation
and the FIGS method have distinctly different actors, tools, and histories. The
model chosen affects who is recognized as having the language authority to
participate, the translation technologies used, and the sequence by which
language coverage progresses. The company is not, however, the only actor
involved. As the Arabic localization of Twitter shows, other actors can chal-
lenge – and change – language coverage, with lasting effects.
21.4
Arabic Localization of Twitter
This chapter began with a description of the state of Twitter’s Arabic
coverage in early 2011. At the time, Twitter had not committed to Arabic
localization. Consequently the platform failed to support Arabic use and
users in multiple ways. Up until this point, while the company’s piecemeal
localization had drawn on volunteer crowdsourcing, it had also roughly
aligned with a FIGS approach, with the notable exception of Japanese
being the second language version it offered.
25 Tech fandom may not be the only kind of fandom occurring here: several volunteer localizers emphasized having
a passion for Arabic, suggesting language fandom itself may offer another explanation for this enthusiastic volunteer
labour.
26 ICANN, or the Internet Corporation for Assigned Names and Numbers, manages the domain name system (DNS).
21 Language Policy & Arabic Localization of Twitter
519

There is reason to believe the lack of an Arabic interface had considerable
consequences for Twitter use in the Arab world. In 2011, use of Twitter
varied signiﬁcantly by country, in some cases paralleling use of Facebook
and in some cases diverging from it (Salem and Mourtada 2011). Salem and
Mourtada suggest that this may be directly related to the fact that while
Facebook had an Arabic interface at this point, Twitter did not. They found
that countries like Egypt, where users tended to use the Arabic interface of
Facebook, tended to have lower proportions of Twitter users. Countries
where users often accessed Facebook in English – including many Gulf
countries – tended to have higher proportions of Twitter users (24).27
The availability of Arabic interfaces changed notably after users colla-
borated to expand Twitter’s language coverage, prompting the company to
open its Translation Center to Arabic. Both the initial user collaboration
and the crowdsourcing of the Translation Center recognized language
authority in a diverse group of user–actors, with effects that continue
beyond Twitter. At the same time, the tools of the Twitter Translation
Center both shaped that language authority and structured localization
practices in a way that facilitated the uneven distribution of platform
capabilities across languages.
21.4.1
Taghreedat and the Twitter Translation Center
Throughout 2011, Twitter users called for an Arabic interface, with some
questioning the company’s priorities in making the site available in var-
ious less common Western European languages but not a major global
language like Arabic.28
Among those advocating for an Arabic interface was the non-proﬁt
Taghreedat. Taghreeda¯t – ‘tweets’ in Arabic – was founded in 2011 by Sami
Al Mubarak and Mina Takla, two tech workers in Qatar, as a non-proﬁt
initiative to expand Arabic content in digital contexts. Following an enthu-
siastic response to their #letstweetinArabic campaign, in August 2011 the
pair contacted Twitter with an offer: they would organize a group of Arabic-
language enthusiasts and everyday Twitter users to localize Twitter into
Arabic, for free.
Twitter was interested.29 In order to move forward with an Arabic
localization, Taghreedat was told they would need to create a set of trans-
lation guidelines and an Arabic version of the company’s glossary of basic
Twitter terminology, and, further, to recruit a core team of moderators.
27 In the case of Egypt, the authors additionally highlight that the bulk of Twitter use occurred in Cairo and use patterns
may reﬂect differences between the capital and the rest of the country (2011: 24).
28 For example, Mohamed ElGohary’s blog, Twitter translations priorities, 22 December 2011, https://ircpresident.com
/2011/12/22/twitter-translations-priorities/.
29 Interview, Mina Takla and Sami Al Mubarak, 22 November 2017. Mina and Sami explain that though Twitter didn’t
respond to their initial email, they knew someone working at Twitter’s headquarters in San Francisco – not on the
international team in charge of such localization, but someone who could put them in contact with that team.
5 2 0
A M Y J O H N S O N

The guidelines and glossary would be shared on the platform and serve as
the basis of future translations – for help materials, new features, etc. – so
the more people involved in their creation, suggested Twitter, the better.
To accomplish this, Taghreedat organized an initial event in Doha in
October 2011. Several hundred people attended the event, with partici-
pants ﬂying in from Bahrain, Saudi Arabia, and elsewhere.30 In the ﬁrst
two months, more than two thousand people collaborated on the project.
Consequently, by the end of December 2011, Taghreedat was able to
deliver a crowdsourced glossary and guidelines to Twitter.31 Drawing on
these documents, on 25 January 2012 – not coincidentally the one-year
anniversary of the #Jan25 movement in Egypt – Twitter opened its
Translation Center to Arabic.32
Available in English and Arabic, the style guide ultimately posted to the
Twitter Translation Center offered twenty-ﬁve different guidelines for the
translator community. These covered a range of topics, from how to
translate around code more generally and the importance of using polite
but not overly formal standard Arabic – no regional slang allowed – to
specifying the masculineﻣﻮﺳﺘﺨﺪﻡfor ‘user’ and rules for hamzas, tashkı¯l,
numbers, and dates.
In the Translation Center, with varying attention to this style guide and
glossary Taghreedat had midwifed, Twitter users offered translations – and
occasionally humorous alternatives or verses of the Qur’a¯n33 – voted on
others’ translations, and debated issues of translation. Such discussions took
place publicly in the Center’s forum, often yielding lengthy threads.
Moderators also had the option to comment directly within the translation
tool when debating the merit of options before ﬁnalizing a translation; these
discussions could not be seen by translators who did not hold moderator
status.
On 6 March 2012, less than two months after Arabic became available to
volunteer translators in the Translation Center, Twitter launched its ﬁrst
Arabic interface.34 The next few months saw a ﬂurry of revision in the
Translation Center as translators found typos, missing phrases, and pro-
blematic syntax on different systems. This round of localization prioritized
the iconic Twitter user interface. Other components of the platform, such
as the Help Center, would acquire Arabic language coverage – uneven and
incomplete – later.
30 The event included participants from at least nine different countries. Interview, Mina Takla and Sami Al Mubarak, 22
November 2017, and www.alarab.qa/story/156077/ﺍﻟﺘﻐﺮﻳﺪ-ﺍﻟﻌﺮﺑﻲ-ﺗﻄﻠﻖ-ﻣﺸﺮﻭﻉ-ﺗﻌﺮﻳﺐ-ﺗﻮﻳﺘﺮ.
31 Interview, Mina Takla and Sami Al Mubarak, 22 November 2017.
32 https://blog.twitter.com/ofﬁcial/en_us/a/2012/twitter-now-available-in-arabic-farsi-hebrew-and-urdu.html. At the
same time Farsi, Hebrew, and Urdu became available in the Translation Center. The selection of 25 January as the
publication date underscores the continuing impact the Arab Spring had on Twitter.
33 Mohamed Reda, personal communication, 5 November 2018.
34 https://blog.twitter.com/ofﬁcial/en_us/a/2012/twitter-now-available-in-arabic-farsi-hebrew-and-urdu.html.
21 Language Policy & Arabic Localization of Twitter
521

21.4.2
The Changed State of Arabic on Twitter
After the intense localization activity of early 2012, Arabic coverage con-
tinued to expand, albeit more slowly. New changes to the design of the
general user interface and its feature set began to launch with Arabic
versions. Hashtag functionality was enabled for Arabic and other non-
roman scripts. An assortment of general policies and advertising policies
were translated into Arabic (Johnson 2017a, 2017b). Across languages –
and individual policies – such coverage remains uneven; Arabic is one of
a dozen or so languages that has a relatively high degree of language
coverage, in a tier just below English (Johnson 2017b).
Twitter closed its Translation Center on 30 November 2017. While the
company has not made its model for further localization public, an email
to volunteer localizers assured them that the languages the site currently
offered would receive support from ‘business partners’, suggesting the
company has moved toward a model of professional language service
providers.35
While unevenness of coverage remains the norm, Arabic coverage
seems to be continuing to expand. In December 2017, Arabic became one
of the six languages in which the company publishes its biannual trans-
parency reports. These reports, which track the company’s responses to
requests from governments around the world for account information or
to remove content, thus became available in English, Arabic, Turkish,
Spanish, German, and Japanese. This set of languages is markedly smaller
than the language coverage of both the iconic user interface and the Help
Center – and not, it should be noted, the FIGS set of the professional
English-language software localizer. (For comparison, at the beginning of
December 2017, the iconic user interface was available in forty-eight
language varieties; language coverage in the Help Center changed across
pages, with a maximum of thirty-three varieties.36)
More broadly, that same month Twitter launched a redesign of its Help
Center that changed how it presents its language coverage. The redesign,
for example, eliminated the prioritizing of FIGS languages in the language
menu and tailored the languages displayed in that menu to the speciﬁc
page being accessed.37 And, too, the redesign relocated the language set-
tings menu from the top of the page to the bottom. This change not only
decreased the menu’s visual prominence, in some cases, such as the
35 https://twitter.com/Hooray/status/927748079373176832 accessed 14 November 2018. It’s worth noting that
some groups involved in volunteer collaborative translation online have moved to offering paid services, in turn
broadening the participant structures of professional localization. See, for example, Amara and its On Demand and
Enterprise services.
36 I use ‘varieties’ here because the options included regional varieties of languages, for example, ‘English’ and
‘English UK’.
37 The menu thus no longer shows all of the languages for which there exists coverage somewhere in the Help Center,
but rather only those languages for which that particular page is available. Further, languages appear to have been
reorganized roughly by popularity of language, with English, Spanish, and Japanese listed as the ﬁrst three options.
5 2 2
A M Y J O H N S O N

business blog with its continuous loading feature, it made the menu
impossible to access.
As of early 2018, Twitter policy did not allow Arabic to be used for
writing self-service ads, though such ads could paradoxically be targeted
to Arabic-language users.38 The business site (business.twitter.com) that
sells Twitter’s ad services, enabling users to start ad campaigns and run
analytics, was available in nine languages; not Arabic. As in 2011, the
developer site (dev.twitter.com), with its use cases, API directions, and
forums, was available only in English. Its design did not even include
a language menu. In contrast, the company’s investor relations site (inves-
tor.twitterinc.com), which hosts quarterly and annual ﬁnancial reports
and similar items, offered a language menu that listed twenty-four lan-
guages; only the English option worked.
Mapping the Arabic coverage in components that affect users but are
less externally visible – for example, the Arabic resources mobilized (or
not) in safety features, algorithmic monitoring, and translation systems –
remains challenging. That said, auditing reveals an unevenness similar to
that of the more directly observable. Thus, for example, when setting up
an account, users experience name restrictions unevenly applied across
languages. While Twitter doesn’t allow users to include variations of the
English word ‘Twitter’ in their names, users can, however, useﺗﻮﻳﺘﺮ([twı¯tir]
or ‘Twitter’ via transliteration), the name the company ofﬁcially uses to
refer to itself in its Arabic policies and documentation.
21.4.3
Actors and Language Authority
The Arabic localization of Twitter was initiated by volunteers and accom-
plished through user–platform collaboration. As a crowdsourced form of
localization, the Twitter Translation Center expanded the concept of who
holds the language authority to qualify as a translator and rule on linguis-
tic matters.
The expertise of members of Twitter’s translator communities differed
signiﬁcantly from that of professional translators, as well as the govern-
ments and language academies who usually enact top-down language
policy. In addition to the company involvement, individual translators
came from a mix of national and professional backgrounds, including
Saudi housewives, teenagers in Lebanon, university students in Egypt,
diasporic Arabic speakers, and many others.39 As a group, they shared
bilingual English–Arabic skills and Twitter competencies.40 Together
they negotiated the challenges of dialect differences, devised neologisms,
and established a register neither too formal nor too informal. This group
38 At least not using Twitter’s ‘self-service’ ad option: https://business.twitter.com/en/targeting/geo-and-language.html.
39 Interview, Mina Takla and Sami Al Mubarak, 22 November 2017 and https://blog.twitter.com/ofﬁcial/en_us/a/2012/
twitter-now-available-in-arabic-farsi-hebrew-and-urdu.html.
40 For many, these language and technological skills are further tied to education or economic status.
21 Language Policy & Arabic Localization of Twitter
523

of
non-traditional
language
authorities
assembled
in
the
Twitter
Translation Center thus acted as an ad hoc language academy, with endur-
ing effects.
The role of these volunteer translators expanded as well, similar to
what had occurred with the volunteer translators of Second Life. Not only
did the work of Twitter’s Arabic localizers blur boundaries between
translation and programming, at times volunteers participated in an
idea of localization that extended well beyond language and code.
Thus, for example, when Twitter sought Arabic-language accounts to
recommend to new users, the company solicited suggestions from the
translator community.41 Volunteer localizers also might see and com-
ment on features not yet released publicly.
Moderators had additional interactions with the company, explaining
differences between Arabic and English to the company’s international
Figure 21.2 A translator account proﬁle in the Twitter Translation Center, April 2013.
Dr Mohamed Reda (@archipoeta) is a doctor of veterinary medicine. The right-hand box
shows recent translation and voting activity. Note as well as the tallies of translations and
votes, game elements like achievement badges. https://archive.fo/HPQlb; image used with
the consent of Dr Reda.
41 ‘What are your favorite Arabic Twitter accounts?’ Translation Center thread begun by Twitter employee @gpena on
2 February 2012. translate.twttr.com/cms/node/799.
5 2 4
A M Y J O H N S O N

team and working directly with engineers and other employees on issues
of design. (For example, the display of content that included both right-to-
left and left-to-right organized items.) Moderators also ran the @Twitter_ar
account, the Arabic representative among the company’s set of ofﬁcial –
but community-run – language accounts. @Twitter_ar served as a support
channel and shared information about the Translation Center, digital
Arabic initiatives and related events in the Arab region, and Twitter
more broadly.42 By early 2016 the account had roughly two million fol-
lowers; the company has since closed it.
As both translators and moderators, members of this community thus
wielded considerable inﬂuence. Their work shaped both the localization of
Twitter – in the broadest sense – and the internationalization of the company.
The Arabic localization of Twitter has also had effects beyond Twitter
itself. Thus, for example, Taghreedat, though initially focused on Twitter,
subsequently expanded its volunteer crowdsourcing to other Arabic loca-
lization projects, including collaborations with WhatsApp, Storify, TED,
and Khan Academy. Further, according to Taghreedat’s founders, the glos-
sary that Taghreedat created for Twitter became the basis for the social
media glossary used by government agencies in the Gulf.43
For many volunteers, the Twitter Translation Center was their ﬁrst
experience of translation and localization work. Upon learning that the
site had closed, many recalled their collaborative accomplishments with
affection and pride. Some participants have since established careers in
professional localization. Others describe the experience as crystallizing
a personal commitment to translation as a form of public service, and
seeking further opportunities to translate in order to increase accessibility
for others.44
21.4.4
Language Policy and the Design of the Twitter Translation
Center
When the user–actors of the Arabic localization of Twitter exercised their
language authority, they did so within the hybrid tools of the Twitter
Translation Center. These tools not only expanded and shaped construc-
tions of language authority, they structured localization projects in a way
that facilitated the uneven distribution of platform capabilities across
languages.
The Translation Center’s localization process used a crowdsourcing
model that drew on democratic voting and game features. The design of
the Translation Center placed translations in competition with each other,
42 Interview, Mohamed ElGohary, 3 January 2018. Not all of the languages being localized in the Translation Center also
had accompanying Twitter accounts; what determined whether a language received such an account is not clear.
43 Interview, Mina Takla and Sami Al Mubarak, 22 November 2017.
44 For example, Mohamed Reda, personal communication, 15 November 2018, as well as conversations around the
#TTC hashtag since the Translation Center’s closure announcement.
21 Language Policy & Arabic Localization of Twitter
525

with selection decided by popular vote. Registered users could propose
translations; these translations could then be voted on by anyone with an
account who chose to participate. For each string, the top few translations
would be reviewed by the volunteer moderators, who would select one to
forward to the company for inclusion.
The voting model of the Translation Center thus both opened opportu-
nities for fresh allocations of language authority (anyone with a Twitter
account could participate), and shaped that authority into parcels made
meaningful largely in aggregate. Underscoring the importance of the
aggregate, the proﬁle pages of the Translation Center displayed not only
volunteer translators’ recent translations and votes, but also their larger
activity tallies, including numbers of translations a volunteer had offered
or voted on that had been approved (see Figure 21.2).
Further, the Translation Center organized localization projects primar-
ily around platform interfaces (see Figure 21.3). Internationalization, with
its decisions about which aspects should be localized into which lan-
guages, had already occurred. This organization scheme quietly excluded
certain materials from Translation Center localization. Separate dedicated
localization processes have not always been implemented. For example,
Twitter has been a publicly traded company since late 2013. Its annual
ﬁnancial reports aren’t localized.45
Organizing localization around a set of interfaces allows a company to
centre different technological structures in a sequence of its choosing. That
is, based on current priorities, a company can make available (or withdraw)
Figure 21.3 Twitter organized its Translation Center around interfaces. Image from the
2012 Twitter Translation Center guide for Arabic (the box around the ‘98% completed’ in the
Twitter.com category serves as part of the guide’s instruction to new translators).
45 https://investor.twitterinc.com/annuals-proxies.cfm#.
5 2 6
A M Y J O H N S O N

material for localization to whichever interface it chooses. This gives loca-
lization – and language policy – a modularity that allows it to align with the
instability of the platform, adapting to product development and changes
in the media ecology as necessary. This modularity also means that the
company’s localization decisions directly govern access to particular cap-
abilities – from advertising to the creation of third-party applications to
seeking assistance in the Help Center – by language.46 Thus, for example,
a user who wishes to run an advertising campaign must be able to navigate
one of the nine languages that interface is made available in.47
21.5
Final Thoughts
With the global distribution of software came the transformative pro-
cesses of internationalization and localization. These are important con-
temporary processes of language policy; they decide what language
coverage to enable and how.
Whether the professional FIGS approach, volunteer crowdsourcing, or
a hybrid of the two, the model of localization a company uses affects both
language coverage and the location of language authority. Further, the
actors and tools the localization draws upon have effects that extend
beyond immediate acts of translation, shaping future tools, policies, and
participants’ endeavours.
The case of Arabic on Twitter shows that language policy in the form of
localization can be challenged and can change. The events of 2011 and the
strong user advocacy efforts for an Arabic interface changed Twitter’s
localization priorities. Today, the company appears committed to main-
taining a relatively high level of Arabic coverage. While this signals greater
inclusion of Arabic, it does not necessarily signal greater inclusiveness
with regard to language coverage overall.
Social media companies like Twitter govern their users globally through
language policy. Such governance by language setting needs more atten-
tion from scholars, journalists, and policymakers, for language coverage
directly controls access and accessibility. It governs who can understand
and use the basic functions of a social media site, who can invoke its
policies and reporting apparatuses, who can advertise and be advertised
to, and who can design applications that use a site’s data. Indeed, in
enacting large-scale, top-down language policy, social media companies
take on – and signiﬁcantly expand – a role previously the purview of states.
46 Not all sites that draw on crowdsourced localization organize around interface: For example, Facebook, at least in the
2017 and 2018 iterations of its translation app, presented its volunteer translators with strings uncontextualized to an
interface and without offering a rationale for the order in which they were presented.
47 As of November 2018, the nine languages of the business.twitter.com interface were German, English, Portuguese,
French, Japanese, Indonesian, Dutch, Spanish, and Italian (listed in the language menu in that order).
21 Language Policy & Arabic Localization of Twitter
527

Unfortunately, such governance by language setting remains difﬁcult to
assess. Social media companies do not currently offer accessibility reports
akin to their transparency reports, and the near unknowability of plat-
forms obscures much of language policy.
References
Abdel-Fadil, M. (2017). Let’s talk about sex: Counselling Muslim selves
online. CyberOrient, 11(2), 29–60. https://cyberorient.net/wp-content
/uploads/sites/3/2016/09/CyberOrient_Vol_10_Iss_1_Abdel-Fadil.pdf; last
accessed 16 December 2020.
Adams, A. H., Austin, G. W., and Taylor, M. (1999). Xerox Corporation.
Technical Communication, 46(2), 249–54.
Akrich, M. (1992). The de-scription of technical objects. In W. E. Bijker and
J. Law, eds., Shaping Technology/Building Society. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press,
205–24.
Al-Zoman, A. H. (2003). Arabic top-level domain names. Paper presented at
the Expert Group Meeting on Promotion of Digital Arabic Content, the United
Nations’ Economic and Social Commission for Western Asia, Beirut.
June 2003.
Angouri, J. (2014). Multilingualism in the workplace: Language practices in
multilingual contexts. Multilingua, 33(1–2), 1–9.
Angwin, J. and Parris, T. Jr. (2016). Facebook lets advertisers exclude users by
race. ProPublica, October 28. www.propublica.org/article/facebook-lets-
advertisers-exclude-users-by-race; last accessed 16 December 2020.
Bermejo, F. (2009). Audience manufacture in historical perspective: From
broadcasting to Google. New Media and Society, 11(1–2), 133–54.
Bistue´, B. (2013). Collaborative Translation and Multi-Version Texts in Early
Modern Europe. London: Routledge.
Breeze, R. (2013). Corporate Discourse. London: Bloomsbury.
Chen, A. (2014). The laborers who keep dick pics and beheadings out
of your Facebook feed. Wired, October 23. www.wired.com/2014/10/
content-moderation/; last accessed 16 December 2020.
Chiaro, D. (2009). Issues in audiovisual translation. In J. Munday, ed., The
Routledge Companion to Translation Studies. London: Routledge, 141–65.
Cronin, M. (2010). Globalization and translation. In Y. Gambier and L. van
Doorslaer, eds., Handbook of Translation Studies. Amsterdam: John
Benjamins, 134–40.
Cronin, M. (2017). A new ecology for translation? Collaboration and resili-
ence. In A. Cordingley and C. Frigau Manning, eds., Collaborative Translation
from the Renaissance to the Digital Age. London: Bloomsbury, 233–46.
DePalma, D. and Kelly, N. (2008). Translation of, for, and by the People.
Massachusetts: Common Sense Advisory.
5 2 8
A M Y J O H N S O N

Dombek, M. (2014). A Study into the Motivations of Internet Users Contributing to
Translation Crowdsourcing: The Case of Polish Facebook User-Translators.
Doctoral dissertation, Dublin City University.
Esselink, B. (1998). A Practical Guide to Software Localization. Amsterdam: John
Benjamins.
Gerrand, P. (2006). A short history of the Catalan campaign to win the .cat
internet domain, with implications for other minority languages.
Digithum, 8(May), 1–8.
Gillespie, T. (2018). Custodians of the Internet: Platforms, Content Moderation,
and the Hidden Decisions that Shape Social Media. New Haven, CT: Yale
University Press.
Grifﬁth, S. H. (2007). The Church in the Shadow of the Mosque: Christians and
Muslims in the World of Islam. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Hartley, T. (2009). Translation and technology. In J. Munday, ed., The
Routledge Companion to Translation Studies. London: Routledge, 106–27.
Holt, M. (1994). Algeria: Language, nation, and state. In Y. Suleiman, ed.,
Arabic Sociolinguistics: Issues and Perspectives. London: Routledge, 25–41.
Jime´nez-Crespo, M. A. (2011). From many one: Novel approaches to trans-
lation quality in a social network era. Linguistica Antverpiensia New Series:
Themes in Translation Studies, 10, 131–52.
Jime´nez-Crespo, M. A. (2013a). Translation and Web Localization. London:
Routledge.
Jime´nez-Crespo, M. A. (2013b). Crowdsourcing, corpus use, and the search
for translation naturalness: A comparable corpus study of Facebook and
non-translated social networking sites. Translation and Interpreting
Studies, 8(1), 23–49.
Johnson, A. (2017a). Twitter and the Body Parodic: Global Acts of Re-Creation and
Recreation. Doctoral dissertation, Massachusetts Institute of Technology.
Johnson, A. (2017b). Some perils of platform policies as global tools of
governance: A multilingual analysis of Twitter’s policy documentation.
Paper presented at the All Things in Moderation conference, UCLA, 6–7
December.
Klonick, K. (2018). The new governors: The people, rules, and processes
governing online speech. Harvard Law Review, 131, 1598–670.
Lenihan, A. (2014). Investigating language policy in social media:
Translation practices on Facebook. In P. Seargeant and C. Tagg, eds.,
The Language of Social Media: Community and Identity on the Internet.
London: Palgrave Macmillan, 208–27.
Meyer, B. and Apfelbaum, B. (2010). Multilingualism at Work: From Policies to
Practices in Public, Medical and Business Settings. Amsterdam: John Benjamins.
Mostari, H. A. (2004). A sociolinguistic perspective on Arabization and lan-
guage use in Algeria. Language Problems and Language Planning, 28(1), 25–43.
Nadler, A., Crain, M., and Donovan, J. (2018). Weaponizing the Digital Inﬂuence
Machine: The Political Perils of Online Adtech. Report from Data and Society
Research Institute. October 17. https://datasociety.net/wp-content/uploads/
21 Language Policy & Arabic Localization of Twitter
529

2018/10/DS_Digital_Inﬂuence_Machine.pdf; last accessed 16 December
2020.
Nasser, R. (2017).ﻗﻠﺐ:ﻟﻐﺔﺑﻤﺮﺟﺔand the cultural baggage of computer science.
Paper presented at Command Lines: Software, Power, and Performance, the
Special Interest Group for Computing and Information in Society
(SIGCIS) of the Society for History of Technology. Computer History
Museum, San Jose, CA, 18–19 March.
Noble, S. U. (2018). Algorithms of Oppression: How Search Engines Reinforce
Racism. New York, New York University Press.
O’Hagan, M. (2009). Evolution of user-generated translation: Fansubs,
translation hacking and crowdsourcing. Journal of Internationalization
and Localization, 1(1), 94–121.
Pasquale, F. (2015). The Black Box Society: The Secret Algorithms that Control
Money and Information. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Piller, I. and Cho, J. (2013). Neoliberalism as language policy. Language in
Society, 42(1), 23–44.
Riskedahl, D. (2015). Lebanese political advertising and the dialogic emer-
gence of signs. Pragmatics, 25(4), 535–51.
Roberts, S. T. (2019). Behind the Screen: Content Moderation in the Shadows of
Social Media. New Haven, CT: Yale University Press.
St. Andre´, J. (2010). Lessons from Chinese history: Translation as
a collaborative and multi-stage process. TTR: Traduction, Terminologie,
Re´daction, 23(1), 71–94.
Salem, F. and Mourtada, R. (2011). Arab Social Media Report: Civil movements:
The impact of Facebook and Twitter. Report from the Dubai School of
Government. arabsocialmediareport.com/UserManagement/PDF/ASMR
%20Report%202.pdf; last accessed 23 December 2017.
Sandvig, C., Hamilton, K., Karahalios, K., and Langbort, C. (2016). When
the algorithm itself is a racist: Diagnosing ethical harm in the basic
components of software. International Journal of Communication, 10,
4972–90.
Sawaie, M. (1986). Arabic language academies as language planners. In
N. Schweda-Nicholson, ed., Languages in the International Perspective:
Proceedings of the 5th Delaware Symposium on Language Studies. Norwood,
NJ: Ablex Publishing, 56–65.
Scha¨ler, R. (2010). Localization and translation. In Y. Gambier and L. van
Doorslaer,
eds.,
Handbook
of
Translation
Studies.
Amsterdam:
John
Benjamins, 209–14.
Shaaban, K. (2017). The ongoing rivalry between English and French in
Lebanon. In A. Gebril, ed., Applied Linguistics in the Middle East and North
Africa: Current Practices and Future Directions. Amsterdam: John Benjamins,
161–82.
Sharkey, H. J. (2008). Arab identity and ideology in Sudan: The politics of
language, ethnicity, and race. African Affairs, 107(426), 21–43.
5 3 0
A M Y J O H N S O N

Shohamy, E. (2006). Language Policy: Hidden Agendas and New Approaches.
London: Routledge.
Sirles, C. A. (1999). Politics and Arabization: The evolution of postindepen-
dence North Africa. International Journal of the Sociology of Language 137,
115–29.
Soomro, T. R. and Al-Qaimari, G. (2007). Accommodating Urdu, Sindhi and
Arabic in internationalized domain name systems (IDNS). In Proceedings
of the Sixth IASTED International Conference: Communications, Internet, and
Information Technology, 189–92.
Spolsky, B. (2004). Language Policy. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Stevenson, P. (2006). ‘National’ languages in transnational contexts:
Language, migration and citizenship in Europe. In C. Mar-Molinero and
P. Stevenson, eds., Language Ideologies, Policies and Practices. London:
Palgrave Macmillan, 147–61.
Suleiman, Y. (2004). A War of Words: Language and Conﬂict in the Middle East.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Tohamy, A. (2017). Youth activism and social networks in Egypt. CyberOrient,
11(1), 86–109. https://cyberorient.net/2017/05/10/youth-activism-and-
social-networks-in-egypt/; last accessed 16 December 2020.
Tschirhart, P. (2014). The Saudi blogosphere: Implications of new media
technology and the emergence of Saudi-Islamic feminism. CyberOrient,
8(1), 55–79. https://cyberorient.net/wp-content/uploads/sites/3/2014/03/
CyberOrient_Vol_8_Iss_1_Tschirhart.pdf; last accessed 16 December 2020.
Tymoczko,
M.
(2007).
Enlarging
Translation,
Empowering
Translators.
Manchester, UK: St. Jerome Publishing.
Wright, S. (2004). Language Policy and Language Planning: From Nationalism to
Globalisation. London: Palgrave Macmillan.
Yokwe, E. M. (1984). Arabicization and language policies in the Sudan.
Studies in the Linguistic Sciences, 14(2): 149–70.
21 Language Policy & Arabic Localization of Twitter
531

22
Variation and Social
Change on Syrian
Dissidents’ Social Media
A Sociopolitical Approach to a Digital Sociolinguistics
of Arabic
Francesco L. Sinatora
22.1
Introduction
The sociopolitical turmoil known as the Arab Spring and the diffusion of
social media communication have led to a more nuanced understanding of
Arabic diglossia and variation. In addition to the increasingly heteroge-
neous multimodal and multilingual character of social media interaction
(Androutsopoulos 2015), Arabic has witnessed a higher presence of non-
standard written forms (see Caubet 2018; Mejdell and Høigilt 2017). These
forms do not exist in a vacuum, but they have been historically situated at
the centre of ideological and political tensions (Brustad 2017; Mejdell and
Høigilt 2017), whose implications are yet to be fully explored.
In this chapter, I argue for a further valorization of non-standard, hybrid
linguistic practices in the light of current sociopolitical and technological
developments. Such an approach concentrates on a study of variation in
connection with new identities previously marginalized in public political
discourse, yet increasingly vocal and present in political digital discourses.
After reviewing Arabic sociolinguistic studies on diglossia and variation,
I illustrate a sociopolitical approach to digital Arabic sociolinguistics
through a case study of Syrian dissidents’ discourse on social media.
With the advent of the Arab Spring, in particular, writing in (mixed)
Arabic on social media has been instrumental for Syrian protesters to
legitimize their demands as well as to reposition themselves towards the
new sociopolitical context of the uprising (Sinatora 2019). Since then,
digital written practices have played a central role in the political involve-
ment of Syrians in the diaspora. Drawing on the notions of hybridity
(Bakhtin 1981), chronotopes (Bakhtin 1981; Blommaert and De Fina 2017;
* I thank the editors of this volume, Karin Ryding and David Wilmsen. I also want to thank Eleonora Esposito and Valentina
Serreli for their invaluable feedback on previous drafts of this chapter.

Woolard 2013) and indexicality (Bassiouney 2014; Blommaert 2010), I show
how, through their linguistic choices, dissidents have positioned them-
selves toward and attempted to redeﬁne the sociopolitical context.
This chapter concludes by emphasizing how the study of Arabic socio-
linguistic variation in connection with emergent political identities on
social media is consistent with a ‘sociolinguistics of complexity’, which
sets out to explore new ways in which language variables and social
categorizations intersect in digital environments and in a context of glo-
balization (Al Zidjaly 2019a; Blommaert 2017, 2019).1
22.2
Diglossia and Variation in Arabic Sociolinguistics
Diglossia and variation in Arabic are situated in a wider ﬁeld of socio-
linguistic enquiry which has analysed language variables and social cate-
gories in connection with the notions of style, practice, identity, and
performance (Al-Wer 2013; Bassiouney 2009; Coupland 2007; De Fina
2007; De Fina et al. 2006; Eckert 2005, 2008, 2012). Central to the study
of variation in Arabic is Ferguson’s notion of diglossia, namely the use by
a linguistic community of dialectal and standard varieties, differing in
terms of function, prestige, literary heritage, acquisition, standardization, stability,
grammar, lexicon, and phonology (Ferguson 1959). Ferguson further theorized
the presence in a diglossic community of ‘communicative tensions [which]
may be resolved by the use of relatively uncodiﬁed, unstable, intermediate
forms of the language’ (332). Later scholars put great effort into the taxo-
nomic characterization of intermediate forms.2 According to Al-Wer, early
Arabic sociolinguistic studies focused primarily on two independent vari-
ables, namely style and education (Al-Wer 2013). Different styles, intended
as the departure from the purported natural vernacular speech, were
elicited through the manipulation of the ‘task’, ‘context’, and ‘topic of
conversation’ (Al-Wer 2013: 245, citing Eckert and Rickford 2001 and
Schilling-Estes 2002).
An example of how social variables were analysed in connection with
intermediate varieties is Badawi’s (1973) classic study on language varia-
tion in Egyptian society. Badawi theorized the presence of ﬁve linguistic
levels in Egyptian society and provided examples of radio programmes
which adopted the use of each of these levels, as well as stereotypical
examples of Egyptians whose speech is associated with each level. For
example, he suggested that one of these levels, fus˙h˙a¯ al-tura¯t¯ (‘the fus˙h˙a¯ of
the tradition’), is prevalently used by (male) religious scholars, whereas
programmes using ʿa¯mmı¯yat al-mutanawwirı¯n (‘the vernacular of the
1 The examples analysed in this case study have already been published in Sinatora (2020). I re-present them here as
illustrative of the proposed sociopolitical approach to a digital sociolinguistics of Arabic.
2 For an in-depth account of studies which focused on these intermediate varieties, see Owens (2001) and Mejdell
(2012).
22 Variation on Syrian Dissidents’ Social Media
533

enlightened’) feature a predominantly female presence. The correlation
between language choice and the independent variables of gender and
education gave rise to a signiﬁcant number of Arabic sociolinguistic stu-
dies. For example, Daher (1998), argued that Damascene speakers tend to
favour the standard feature [q] or the glottal stop based on different
perceptions of prestige associated with either variety. According to him,
men, who have a privileged access to education, tend to opt for the
standard variant [q]. Conversely, women avoid the use of the [q], which
they perceive as a rural and a male speech feature, and choose the glottal
stop instead, which they associate with ‘urbanization and moderniza-
tion’ (203).
Later Arabic sociolinguistic work added complexity to the account of
variation. Informed by Milroy’s (1987) notion of social networks, Al-Wer
(2002, cited in Al-Wer 2013) argued that education functions as a ‘proxy
variable’ (Al-Wer 2013: 247) which only acquires meaning in connection
with the individual’s social interactions. Bassiouney (2009) observed that
whereas a large group of second-wave sociolinguistic work in Arabic has
demonstrated that the direction of variation underlying linguistic change is
toward other more prestigious dialectal features, some studies (e.g.,
Versteegh 2001) also investigated the impact of Modern Standard Arabic
(MSA). Moreover, Al-Wer (2013) warned against a ‘top-down’ approach
‘which starts with diglossia as a framework for the analysis of variation in
Arabic’
(251),
and
argued
for
a
‘locally’
informed
analysis
and
a contextualized choice of independent variables. Similarly, Bassiouney
(2009) called for a culture-sensitive consideration of independent variables.
According to her, an approach to variation which focuses on variables
established a priori is ‘circular’ inasmuch as it presumes that there is
a correlation between these categories and language (Bassiouney 2009:
123). She explained that in deﬁned Arab contexts and societies religion,
ethnicity, and tribal afﬁliations are more ﬁxed than other variables, such as
social class, social networks, urbanization, and education. Furthermore,
Bassiouney conducted a detailed overview of the studies on language varia-
tion and gender and distinguished between binary and construction
approaches to gender. Whereas the former presume a direct relationship
between code and gender, the latter, consistent with a third-wave approach
to variation, consider language as an instrument to construct gender iden-
tities symbolically (Bassiouney 2009). Although a previous assumption in
Arabic sociolinguistics (e.g., Daher 1998) was that women favour the use of
the vernacular more than men due to men’s higher exposure to MSA
through education and literary texts, Bassiouney (2012) demonstrated quan-
titatively and qualitatively that women equally use MSA in talk shows in
order to project authoritative and professional identities.
A large majority of studies on variation in Arabic sociolinguistics, with
very few exceptions, has focused on phonological features elicited from
spoken data (Bassiouney 2009). The reason for a focus on spoken data may
5 3 4
F R A N C E S C O L . S I N A T O R A

derive from an assumption, particularly present in early variationist
approaches, that identity is the expression of a true self, and that the
elicitation of unmonitored spoken data is a gateway that reveals this
purported authentic identity (see De Fina et al. 2006). In concomitance
with the onset of socio-constructionist approaches (De Fina et al. 2006) and
the emphasis on identity as ‘the social positioning of self and others’
(Bucholtz and Hall 2005: 586), the ﬁeld has opened up to written and
planned speech. The study of codeswitching occupied a central role in
this line of investigation.
22.3
Codeswitching and Language Choice in Arabic
Informed by studies on bilingualism (Blom and Gumperz 1972; Gumperz
1982; Myers-Scotton 1993), Arabic linguists (Albirini 2011; Bassiouney
2006;
Eid
1988,
2002;
Boussofara-Omar
2003;
Mejdell
2006)
also
approached variation through the concepts of codeswitching and lan-
guage choice. The rationale for an approach to variation through code-
switching was that ‘there is a direct relation between the code used by
speakers and the projection of identity’ (Bassiouney 2009: 185). Great
effort was put into predicting codeswitching at the syntactic level and in
investigating the social motivations underlying code choices. Eid (1988)
proposed the term diglossic codeswitching to describe the alternation
between standard Arabic and Egyptian Arabic. Boussofara-Omar (2003)
and Bassiouney (2006) applied Myers-Scotton’s (1993) Matrix Language
Framework theory to analyse the occurrence of diglossic codeswitching
between Tunisian, Egyptian and Modern Standard Arabic and pointed out
the limitations of such a model in the Arabic context.
This descriptive endeavour aimed at identifying structural constraints
was also accompanied by an interest in the social functions and motiva-
tions
accompanying the
occurrence of
mixed forms
(see
Mejdell
2011–2012). Codeswitching did not only appear as a mechanical structural
aspect resulting from the co-occurrence of two different grammatical
systems, but also as a matter of ‘language choice’ (Eid 2002). Eid (2002)
posited a link between diglossic separation and male dominance in
society. By analysing the linguistic choices of a group of female Egyptian
writers, she showed how these authors used both Egyptian and MSA,
creating a ‘language that is simultaneously “conforming” and “subversive”
in its relation to the dominant discourse of linguistic duality’ (2002: 209).
Holes (1993: 37–8), based on a study of Gamal Abd al-Nasir’s switching
practices between MSA and the Egyptian vernacular, explained that ‘inten-
tions’ and ‘strategies’ underlie Arabic speakers’ linguistic choices, and
argued that language choice is constrained by three social factors, namely
the speaker’s ‘status’, the ‘discourse function’, and the speaker’s ‘role’
with respect to their interlocutors. Mejdell (2006, 2012) argued that
22 Variation on Syrian Dissidents’ Social Media
535

intermediate varieties may be studied in terms of ‘mixed styles’ resulting
from the speaker’s linguistic choices based on their perceptions of the
situation. Rather than analysing MSA and the vernacular as separate
grammatical systems, she advocated the adoption of qualitative methods
to investigate Arabic variation as the speaker’s choice of linguistic items
from a ‘common ground’, namely one ‘pool’ or ‘repertoire’ (2011–2012:
37). Citing Trudgill (1986), Holes (1987), and Owens and Bani-Yasin (1991),
Mejdell (2012: 164) also argued that speakers perceived some features to be
more ‘salient’ than others in the way they change codes in discourse. In my
analysis, I will refer to this saliency in terms of indexicality and symbolism.
Bassiouney (2009: 72–3) posited ‘a direct relation between change of role
and change of code’ in political speeches and concluded that the situation
of Arabic diglossia is more complicated than other bilingual situations due
to the presence of a large set of terms which can equally belong to both
fus˙h˙a¯ and the vernacular. She also argued that Egyptians’ codeswitching
practices are characterized by the presence of ‘predictable composites’
(2009: 55–6), which challenge previous structural constraints on code-
switching, and she attributed the presence of these mixed forms to the
Egyptians’ increased exposure to fus˙h˙a¯ throughout the second half of the
twentieth century.
The study of diglossic variation in Arabic as language choice occurred
concomitantly with a shift in the ﬁeld of bilingualism, which problema-
tized the notion of codeswitching as unﬁt to describe the linguistic beha-
viour of bilingual speakers (Auer 1995; Gardner-Chloros 1995; Rampton
1999; Woolard 1999). As observed by Blommaert and Rampton (2011), new
terms were coined to capture the nature of bilingual variation, including
language alternation (Auer 1995), crossing (Rampton 1999), linguistic simulta-
neity, a term informed by the Bakhtinian notion of linguistic hybridity and
proposed by Woolard (1999) in order to conceptualize the bilingual situa-
tion in autonomous Catalonia, and, more recently, polyglossia (Jørgenson
2008; Møller 2008), heteroglossia (Bailey 2007), translanguaging (Garcı´a 2009),
and metrolingualism (Otsuji and Pennycook 2010) (see Blommaert and
Rampton 2011). This shift led to a reconsideration of the link between
language choices and social identities. As argued by Auer (2005), through
linguistic hybridity speakers index different social identities besides eth-
nic identity. For example, he explained how the mixing of German and
Turkish by a speaker of Iranian and Azeri background in Germany might
lead to the erroneous categorization of this speaker as German/Turkish.
The study of variation in Arabic in terms of language choice was also
characterized by a shift from an exclusive focus on oral production to the
inclusion of written texts (see Mejdell 2014). Mejdell (2014) explicitly
embraced this shift in her analysis of bivalent forms in the ‘written
mixed style’ of ʿI¯sa¯ Ibra¯hı¯m’s commentaries in the Egyptian newspaper
Al-Dustu¯r, deﬁning bivalency in Arabic ‘as a strategy to erase the boundaries
between the varieties. Bivalent forms are – to paraphrase Woolard – not
5 3 6
F R A N C E S C O L . S I N A T O R A

either fus˙h˙ a¯ or ʿa¯mmiyya, nor neither fus˙h˙a¯ nor ʿa¯mmiyya, but rather both fus˙h˙a¯
and ʿa¯mmiyya (2014: 274). Mejdell’s (2014, 2017) understanding of bivalency
in Arabic also builds on Somekh (1991, cited in Mejdell 2014), who argued
that ‘a bivalent text’ is one ‘that exploits the inherent ambiguity of un-
vowelled Arabic script’ (1991: 120). Eid’s (2002) above-cited study on
a group of female writers’ ‘integration’ of MSA and the Egyptian vernacu-
lar challenged a previous assumption, which correlated women’s linguis-
tic practices with the dialect. In addition to deconstructing the correlation
between language choice and gender in Bassiouney (2009, 2012),
Bassiouney (2014) investigated the indexicality of MSA, Egyptian Arabic,
and English in the construction of national identity in written and spoken
contexts.
22.4
Globalization and Social Media: Variation
as ‘Complexity’
In the 2010s, a new sociolinguistic orientation has focused on the ana-
lysis of language and society in a context of globalization, further com-
plicating the relationship between language and social categories (Al
Zidjaly
2019a;
Blommaert
2019;
Blommaert
and
Rampton
2011;
Coupland 2013).
An understanding of language variation as the individual’s capacity to
choose from a pool of available resources in order to project determined
identities is captured in Blommaert’s (2005: 207) deﬁnition of identities as
‘particular forms of semiotic potential, organised in a repertoire’. The term
‘semiotic potential’ echoes the concept of indexicality (Eckert 2008; Ochs
1990; Silverstein 2003) identiﬁed by Eckert (2012) as the engine of ‘stylistic
practice’. Blommaert argued that indexicality functions in two ways. On
the one hand, it underlies language variation through the creative power
of indexical orders (Eckert 2012), a term coined by Silverstein (2003) to
describe the way new social meanings are attributed to forms based on
previous indexical associations; on the other, Blommaert explained that it
can also be analysed through the notion of ‘orders of indexicality’, namely
‘patterns of authority, of control and evaluation, and hence of inclusion
and exclusion by real or perceived others’ (Blommaert 2010: 38). I interpret
Blommaert’s notion of order of indexicality as a conﬁguration of semiotic
features that regulates social interaction, and that is used by an individual
or a group to project certain identities. These identities are chronotopic
(Blommaert and De Fina 2017), meaning that they are constrained by
chronological and spatial conditions. These identities correspond to the
way individuals or groups position themselves and others (Bucholtz and
Hall 2005) within historical contexts through and in relation to language
and linguistic ideologies (Blommaert 2016; Blommaert and De Fina 2017;
Woolard 2013).
22 Variation on Syrian Dissidents’ Social Media
537

In Sinatora (2019), I showed how the Facebook repertoire of a group of
Syrian dissidents shifted with the onset of the 2011 uprising. Whereas
their pre-uprising repertoire was characterized by the entextualization
(Bauman and Briggs 1990; Leppa¨nen et al. 2014) of English in the local
interaction with their friends and family, the post-uprising repertoire
stood out for the exclusive presence of Syrian vernacular and fus˙h˙a¯.
I argued that the pre-uprising and the post-uprising repertoires constituted
two different orders of indexicality. The former reﬂected the participants’
perception of themselves as cosmopolitan individuals, thus projecting an
identity which was chronotopically conformant to the sociopolitical con-
text of urban Syria before the uprising – characterized by a system of
‘neoliberal autocracy’ (Wedeen 2013) – whereas the latter reﬂected their
repositioning as dissidents on Facebook in the light of the new sociopoli-
tical context of the Syrian uprising.
Thinking of identities in terms of coherent mobile chunks of indexical
features, rather than as the reﬂection of predetermined social categories is
at the core of a shift from a ‘sociolinguistics of distribution’ to one of
‘mobility’ (Blommaert 2010). In the light of this shift, Blommaert and
Rampton (2011) and Blommaert (2015b) conceptualized variation in
terms of ‘superdiversity’. Their understanding of this term, which they
borrowed from Vertovec (2007), is grounded in a study of language which
foregrounds the ideas of ‘mobility, mixing, political dynamics and histor-
ical embedding’ (3). Although these notions, as they explained, had been
developed over the course of several decades, thanks to the work of
Gumperz, Hymes, and Silverstein, ‘superdiversity intensiﬁes the relevance
of these ideas’ in a context of globalization (3). Blommaert and Rampton
further outlined an agenda for the study of language in a time of globaliza-
tion, placing the investigative tool of ethnography and the notions of
multimodality and indexicality at the centre.3
Blommaert (2016, 2017) envisioned the necessity for another paradig-
matic shift in sociolinguistics, from ‘mobility’ to ‘complexity’. According
to him, a theory of complexity should help us describe new, and constantly
changing, group afﬁliations in a globalized reality. Blommaert (2017)
called the new social groups which take shape at the intersection of
online–ofﬂine interaction ‘light’ communities or communities of knowledge.
This term, he explained, captures the volatility, but at the same time the
social impact of these groups and of the ‘light’ practices which sustain
them. ‘Thick diacritics such as race, gender, class or ethnicity are not
absent, but they are performed in different and sometimes surprising
ways and thus in need of a more delicate balancing with a wide range of
other, “light” forms of identity’ (2017: 6). According to Blommaert, inves-
tigating the formation of communities of knowledge is the scope of
a sociolinguistics of complexity. For him, the need to bring the study of
3 For a detailed literature review of sociolinguistic approaches to language and globalization, see Al Zidjaly (2019a).
5 3 8
F R A N C E S C O L . S I N A T O R A

communities of knowledge to the centre of sociolinguistic investigation is
twofold. On the one hand, it is an adaptation of the term ‘communities of
practice’ to social-media dominated society. On the other, it acknowledges
the importance of practices which can be more volatile than those per-
formed by previously studied communities of practice. These practices,
which can be thought of as clicks, likes, sharing, are to be seen not in
isolation, but from a perspective of integration (Blommaert 2017), as it is
also through these seemingly volatile practices that individuals are ‘inte-
grated in a variety of communities, both thick and light ones, and to
differing degrees’ (14).
Al Zidjaly (2019a) heeded Blommaert’s call for a sociolinguistics of
complexity by introducing a compelling array of case studies which,
she argued, are innovative in the way they investigate identity and
community through the lens of language and globalization. After pro-
viding an in-depth review of studies on language and globalization, she
observed that the sociolinguistics of globalization so far has focused on
how individuals use language on social media to either ‘globaliz[e] the
local or localiz[e] the global’ and argued for ‘more case studies (and in
due time more interdisciplinary research) that transcend . . . binary the-
orization [i.e., globalizing the local or localizing the global] by examin-
ing what people actually do at the interface of the local and the global in
terms of the multimodal strategies used and for what ends’ (Al Zidjaly
2019a: 6). Additionally, she echoed Blommaert’s call to study the forma-
tion of social groups and communities based on ‘light’ practices
(Blommaert 2017) through a further inclusion of ‘under-represented
contexts and cultures’ (16). Al Zidjaly (2019a, 2019b) further argued
that an analysis of the interplay between local and global practices on
social media, and of the repercussions of these practices at the societal
level, is central in sociolinguists’ endeavours to capture social change.
According to her, a focus on creativity and ‘social agency’ is essential to
unravel the social function of these practices. One way creativity, or
‘stylistic practice’ (Eckert 2012), has manifested itself as expression of
‘social agency’ is in the use of local languages, or dialects, as resources
for identity performance in globalized contexts (Androutsopoulos 2015;
Bassiouney
2014,
2017a,
2017b;
De
Fina
2017;
Hachimi
2017).
Bassiouney (2017a: 26), in particular, argued for a new research agenda,
which takes ‘the ideological indexes that dialects and codes take on’ as
a central part in the study of variation in Arabic, and for a study of
linguistic practices against the backdrop of the sociopolitical context in
which they emerge.
How has the recent trend of globalization informed research in Arabic
diglossia and variation? How can Arabic variation contribute to the study
of complexity in a time of globalization?
In the next sections, I will tackle these questions through an overview of
recent contributions on diglossia and variation in written Arabic.
22 Variation on Syrian Dissidents’ Social Media
539

22.5
Written Variation in Arabic Social Media
With the advent of social media, written communication has occupied
a central role (Blommaert 2017). Whereas earlier Labovian approaches, as
observed by Eckert (2012), envisioned variation as the departure from
‘pure’ dialect, either toward other dialects or the standard, the predomi-
nance of written forms has made the focus on stylistic practice, indexi-
cality, and performance even more pressing (De Fina 2016; Eckert 2012).4
Mejdell and Høigilt (2017) constitutes the ﬁrst comprehensive collection of
studies that proposes to analyse new forms of written Arabic in the light of
the current sociopolitical context of globalization through the lens of
diglossia and language ideologies. Mejdell (2017) claimed that social
media communication has led to an irreversible historical phase of de-
standardization. Brustad (2017) argued for an understanding of diglossia as
an ideological construct that emerged in the nineteenth century with the
advent of the printed press, and which consolidated with the emergence of
twentieth-century national and pan-Arab ideologies. In her overview of
studies on variation in written Arabic, she emphasized that variation,
namely the practice of mixing colloquial and standard forms, constitutes
the norm in the history of Arabic, rather than the exception. She claimed
that, whereas forms that diverged from the standard had been system-
atically erased in the copyediting process since the advent of the printed
press, social media have yielded visibility to such practices. From an
analysis of linguistic practices on Twitter and attitudes toward writing in
the vernacular elicited from surveys in Rabat and Cairo, she concluded
that ‘standard language ideology is not disappearing, but it no longer
dominates public writing spheres’, and that register variation can be
better conceptualized in terms of ‘stylistic performance’ (65).
In line with third-wave variationist approaches (Eckert 2012) and with
a ‘sociolinguistics of mobility’ (Blommaert 2010, 2017), the study of writ-
ten Arabic in globalization has laid the foundations for an approach to
Arabic variation in terms of ‘complexity’ (Blommaert 2017). This strand
has denaturalized the idea of diglossia as a static, top-down, distributional
concept and emphasized its mobile, grassroots and sociohistorically situ-
ated nature (see Brustad 2017; Mejdell 2017). A shift from ‘mobility’ to
‘complexity’, according to Blommaert (2017, 2019), requires an adjust-
ment of the sociolinguistic focus from the analysis of language use in the
social context to the analysis of how society evolves through language by
the study of how new social groups (or, as Blommaert named them, ‘light
social groups’) take shape in global environments (also see Al Zidjaly
2019a). In other words, having acquired a more sophisticated understand-
ing of how Arabic diglossia functions in the social environment, building
4 Owens (2001) argued that the link between written language and social meaning in Arabic had already been
envisioned by some early grammarians, such as Siˉbawayhi.
5 4 0
F R A N C E S C O L . S I N A T O R A

on Blommaert (2017, 2019) and on Al Zidjaly’s (2019b) emphasis on social
change, a new direction in Arabic sociolinguistics should further investi-
gate how language practices and ideologies are used in context to change
society. Against this backdrop, in the next section I introduce an approach
to a digital sociolinguistics of Arabic which integrates sociolinguistic var-
iation within current strands of social media analyses of language.
22.6
A Sociopolitical Approach to a Digital
Sociolinguistics of Arabic
The evolving social and technological dynamics in the Arab world and the
renewed interest in the political and ideological dimensions underlying
non-standard written Arabic forms prompt us to explore new ways in
which
the
social
function
of
Arabic
hybridity
can
be
valorized.
A sociopolitical approach to a digital sociolinguistics of Arabic situates
diglossic variation vis-a`-vis three frameworks for the study of communica-
tion and discourse in digital spaces. Firstly, it grounds Arabic variation in
individuals’ social lives through the integration of online data analysis with
ethnographic
tools,
such
as
interviews
with
text
producers
(Androutsopoulos 2008). Secondly, it contextualizes these social lives
within broader societal and political discourses, which originate in and
have an impact on the non-digital world (KhosraviNik 2014, 2018;
KhosraviNik and Esposito 2018; KhosraviNik and Zia 2014). Thirdly, draw-
ing on an approach to digital activism which valorizes online-mediated
linguistic and multimodal practices as tools and actions toward social change
(Al Zidjaly 2014, 2019a, 2019b), a sociopolitical approach to Arabic variation
focuses on the role of Arabic social media users as new subjectivities who
position themselves toward, reshape, and reconstruct sociopolitical dis-
courses through their linguistically hybrid social media practices.
In the remainder of this chapter, I illustrate the importance of a focus on
hybridity in the light of the sociopolitical and digital evolutions through
a case study on Syrian dissidents’ discourse on social media. A major chal-
lenge to the analysis of hybridity in Arabic relates to the representation of
mixed written Arabic (see Eid 2002). Such a challenge is exacerbated by the
enhanced ideological value of linguistic resources (Bassiouney 2017a) and is
all the more pressing in digital political discourses. In the examples below,
all originally in Arabic script, I decided to adopt a transcripteration (Sinatora
2020) that takes into account the authors’ linguistic ideologies and the social
meaning of their linguistic practices. Such a strategy allowed me to high-
light the intersection of linguistic variables, social categories, and users’
ideologies underlying their sociohistorical positionings, demonstrating
how Arabic diglossic variation can provide a valuable contribution to the
study of broader social and identity dynamics within a ‘sociolinguistics of
complexity’ (Al Zidjaly 2019a; Blommaert 2017, 2019).
22 Variation on Syrian Dissidents’ Social Media
541

22.7
The Discursive Construction of Syrian Dissident
Identity on Social Media
The data analysed below is part of a larger longitudinal study of a group of
Syrian dissidents’ social media practices between 2010 and 2017. A useful
concept which helped me navigate their practices is linguistic hybridity, or
hybridization, a term coined by Bakhtin (1981) to refer to the unconscious
and conscious mixing of linguistic forms, a phenomenon he identiﬁed as
the engine of language variation and change. Building on the notions of
indexicality, namely the process underlying the symbolic meaning of lin-
guistic resources (Bassiouney 2014, 2017a; Blommaert 2005, 2010, 2015;
Eckert 2003; Johnstone et al. 2006; Silverstein 2003) and chronotopes, as well
as on the literature of bilingualism and globalization (Androutsopoulos
2015; Bailey 2007; Blommaert and Varis 2011; Varis and Wang 2011; Garcı´a
2009; Jørgenson 2008; Møller 2008; Otsuji and Pennycook 2010; Rubdy and
Alsagoff 2014; Woolard 1999), I elaborate on hybridity in Arabic as the mix
of symbolic linguistic and multimodal features enacted by individuals and
groups in order to emerge in discourse and to advance speciﬁc social and
political demands or agendas, emphasizing certain discourses over others
(Sinatora 2020). Although the mixing of different varieties is not uncom-
mon on Arabic social media in general (Brustad 2017), and the implications
for identity have been discussed and documented in several multilingual
contexts (e.g., Leppa¨nen et al. 2014; Otsuji and Pennycook 2010; Varis and
Wang 2011), the connection between hybridity, identity, and discourse on
Syrian social media is particularly signiﬁcant in the light of the 2011
Syrian uprising, given that Syria is one of the countries in which the
‘standard
language
ideology’,
sustained
by
a
linguistic
policy
of
Arabization (Brustad 2017; Suleiman 2003), was more advanced (Miller
2003). The guiding questions are: what is being done through hybridity?
How is hybridity used to change the social context?
In my study, it emerged that two Syrian dissidents changed their hybrid
practices on Facebook with the onset of the 2011 uprisings. Whereas until
2011 Facebook was used mainly to interact with family and friends, and
English linguistic and multimodal features were embedded in a local con-
text in order to project cosmopolitan identities within a sociopolitical
climate of ‘neoliberal autocracy’ (Wedeen 2013), their post-uprising reper-
toire consisted of an exclusive mix of Syrian vernacular(s) and fus˙h˙a¯. By
localizing their linguistic practices, through the use of local linguistic
varieties and the conﬁguration of vernacular idiomatic expressions,
Syrian dissidents rejected Bashar al-Asad’s delegitimization of protesters
as foreign inﬁltrators and projected a dissident identity as ‘real’ Syrians,
repositioning themselves chronotopically vis-a`-vis the new sociopolitical
context (Sinatora 2019). Indexicality played a central role in their reposi-
tioning. With particular reference to the Egyptian context, Bassiouney
5 4 2
F R A N C E S C O L . S I N A T O R A

(2014) identiﬁed ﬁrst-order and second-order indexical associations of the
Egyptian vernacular and MSA. At the ﬁrst-order level, she explained that
the Egyptian vernacular is the language of informality, spoken contexts,
and immediacy, whereas MSA is the language of abstraction and formality.
At the second-order level, the Egyptian vernacular is indexically associated
with prestige and authenticity, MSA with ‘the realm of the divine, author-
ity and legitimacy’ (145), and English with prestige as well as Western
colonialism (Bassiouney 2014). Fus˙h˙a¯ has been linked with male speech,
religion, rurality, and education; the vernacular with female speech and
urbaneness. Furthermore, Bassiouney (2014) explained that fus˙h˙a¯ has
a negative connotation deriving from Egyptian movies’ depiction of
Arabic teachers as unsophisticated people from the countryside.
Although these indexes can also be observed in the Syrian sociolinguis-
tic situation, the Syrian sociopolitical context, characterized by a more
radical policy of Arabization (Miller 2003) and the rise of an Alawite elite
in the second half of the twentieth century, led to the emergence of
additional
indexical
associations.
A
political
distinction
emerged
between the vernacular spoken on parts of the Syrian coast, stereotypi-
cally associated with the Alawite sect of President Bashar al-Asad, and the
Damascene vernacular. A salient sociolinguistic feature is the pronuncia-
tion of the letter qa¯f, realized as a voiceless uvular stop in the former, and
as a glottal stop in the latter. In addition, MSA became associated with the
government by virtue of the Baathist party’s pan-Arab policy of
Arabization toward the creation of a Syrian and Arab identity; conversely,
secular thinkers of Syrian nationalism, such as Antun Sa‘ada, did not
envisage a direct link between language and nation building and criti-
cized the pan-Arab project for fostering a phony Arab identity (Suleiman
2003: 165).
In the context of the 2011 uprising, the Damascene vernacular became
a symbol of anti-Asad resistance. From the interviews I conducted with the
authors of dissident Facebook pages and from their linguistic practices,
different views emerged about what ‘authentic’ Syrian vernacular means
and what it means to write in it. These are linked to their projection of an
anti-Asad dissident identity. For example, one female dissident explained
that by spelling the word ‘Syria’ with an alif instead of a ta¯’ marbu¯t˙a on her
Facebook page, she intended to reﬂect what she thought was original
Syriac orthography, thus projecting an ‘authentic’ local, pre-Islamic,
Syrian identity and rejecting the Arab identity fostered by the Baathist
government. Another study participant, a male journalist from Damascus
created a Facebook page in March 2011 named addo¯mari, after Ali Ferzat’s
satirical publication, launched during the Damascus Spring. In Syrian
folklore, the do¯mari is the city gatekeeper and lamplighter. It symbolizes
urbaneness and progressiveness. In addition to this local metaphorical
feature, through which he established a connection between his page
and pre-uprising dissident intellectuals, the author chose to write his
22 Variation on Syrian Dissidents’ Social Media
543

status updates in the Damascene vernacular, often consciously spelling
words containing the letter qa¯f as a glottal stop, either with an alif or
a hamza, in order to distance himself from both the Alawite vernacular
and MSA.
The examples below are drawn from the addo¯mari Facebook page
(Examples 1 and 2), an excerpt from a radio programme conducted by
two female dissidents, followed by a Facebook post published by one of
these two female dissidents in 2015 and her interaction with a Facebook
follower (Example 3), and the text of a petition written by a group of
dissidents in 2017 in protest against a commercial (Example 4). These
examples are also discussed in Sinatora (2020). Throughout these exam-
ples, I show how the use of the Damascene vernacular indexing an anti-
Asad dissident identity is mixed, in both scripted spoken contexts (radio)
and more or less planned written, presentational, and interactional con-
texts (Facebook posts, comments), with fus˙h˙a¯. Throughout these texts,
these varieties are indexed, or ‘keyed’ (Brustad 2017) symbolically in
order to project determined identities and to incite social change. In
other words, I will show how diglossia as ‘stylistic practice’ (Brustad
2017: 65) constitutes a tool actively used by individuals and groups to
shape the sociopolitical context. In addition, an idea of identities as
‘chronotopes’
interacts
with
previously
studied
social
variables
(Blommaert 2017; Blommaert and De Fina 2017). Through this case
study, I will show how social variables, such as gender and religion, still
play a role in the way participants use linguistic registers; however, these
interact with chronotopic identities. Indexicality, as will emerge from the
case study, straddles an understanding of identities as chronotopes and
one of identities as social variables.5
EXAMPLE 1: THE ADDO¯ MARI FACEBOOK PAGE
The example below is the description section of the addo¯mari Facebook page. In
the text, the author plays with a salient sociolinguistic feature, namely the qa¯f,
which he represented as a glottal stop through the letters alif and hamza. In this
description section, the author addresses an imaginary reader, encouraging
them to express their opinion and not to parrot propaganda.
1
ʾente mfakkir h˙a¯lak ʾinnak ʿala t˙u¯l mʿabbir ʿan raʾyak..
You always think that you’re expressing your own opinion..
2
bass fakkart sˇi marra ʾinnu raʾyak ha¯d mu mʿabbar ʿannak ʾabadan ..??
But did you ever think that this opinion of yours was not yours at all??
5 The centrality of indexicality in the analysis of variation and identity has been previously emphasized by Blommaert and
Rampton (2011) and Eckert (2012). The importance of indexicality and stance in the study of variation in Arabic has
also been emphasized by Bassiouney (2017a).
5 4 4
F R A N C E S C O L . S I N A T O R A

3
intabih ʾabl ma tʿabbir ʿan raʾyak ma¯ yku¯n har-raʾı¯ ha¯d mu ʾilak..
Careful before you express your opinion. Lest this opinion should not be
yours ..
4
w-yku¯n sˇi h˙ada mʿabbarlak ya¯h bi-t˙arı¯qa muba¯sˇra ʾaw g˙e¯r muba¯sˇra ..
But it is something that was referred to you by someone directly or
indirectly
5
w-yku¯n hal-h˙ada h˘alla¯k th˙iss ʾinnu ha¯d raʾyak ..
And that this person made you feel that this is your opinion
6
. . . w-inte btig˘i la-ʿanna baʾa¯ u-bts˙ı¯r biddak tufrud˙u ʿale¯na ..
And you still come bandying it around and imposing it on us
7
u-l-ʾah˙la min he¯k ʾinnak mfakkir ʾinnu raʾyak ..
And the best part of it is that you think it is your opinion
8
misˇa¯n he¯k intabih nah˙na bidna raʾyak mu raʾı¯bak r-ʾa-ı¯-ba-k ..
Therefore, be careful, we want your opinion, not that of your controller
9
mula¯h˙az˙a ..:
NB..:
10
laysa li-l-usta¯d¯ ʿalı¯ farza¯t ʿala¯qa bi-s˙-s˙afh˙a niha¯ʾı¯yan
The gentleman Ali Farzat has no relation with this page at all
The entire post is composed in the Damascene vernacular (except for lines
9 and 10). What stands out particularly as Damascene is the use of the hamza
and alif to represent the glottal stop in place of the qa¯f (e.g., line 3, ʾabl, ‘before’,
in line 6, baʾa¯, ‘still’ and the pun between raʾyak ‘your opinion’ and raʾı¯bak,
‘your controller’, line 8). The glottal stop in place of the qa¯f has been analysed
in previous sociolinguistic literature as an urban Damascene feature, used
predominantly by women in connection with cosmopolitanism and
modernity (see Daher 1998). In her study on rural migrants’ speech in the city
of Homs, Habib (2018) observed that, although the qa¯f is more frequent among
men, female speakers with a high level of education equally use the qa¯f. The
correlation between the use of the qa¯f, gender and education, however, only
partially helps us to understand the type of variation at hand. The author, in
fact, is an educated male speaker in his thirties. His positive attitude toward
the Damascene vernacular is motivated by his political stance and marks his
political repositioning on social media. For him, the hamza is a stereotypical
feature whose meaning should be interpreted politically in contrast with the
qa¯f. The urban vs. rural distinction is present, but its meaning is strongly linked
to the Syrian sociopolitical context, in which the rural qa¯f represents the
Alawite government. In addition to being present in Modern Standard Arabic
and to indexing prestige by virtue of its association with it (Daher 1998), in fact,
the qa¯f is a ﬁrst-order indexical feature (Silverstein 2003) of some rural coastal
dialects, where the Alawites hailed from. The indexical association between the
pronunciation of the qa¯f and the Baath conceivably emerged in the 1970s and
1980s with the rise of the Alawite ruling elite under President Haﬁz al-Asad.
Through this post, the author not only animates a sociolinguistic distinction
between the hamza and the qa¯f, but he makes a sociopolitical distinction, too.
The qa¯f stands for oppressive government and its propaganda, whereas the
hamza represents the Syrian people. The qa¯f, one can observe, is not indicated
everywhere as a glottal stop. For example, in line 4, the word t˙arı¯qa (‘way’) is
written with a qa¯f, although a Damascene pronunciation would be t˙rı¯ʾa. An
22 Variation on Syrian Dissidents’ Social Media
545

explanation for its partial use is that the alif and the hamza are deployed
symbolically in order to foreground this political indexical meaning. The
visual representation of the qa¯f as a glottal stop in only a few words is ‘just
enough’ (Blommaert and Varis 2015; Varis and Wang 2011) for the writer to
emerge in the discourse about the Syrian conﬂict and to reposition himself, his
page, and his readers vis-a`-vis the Syrian uprising. This repositioning, as I argue
in Sinatora (2019), is chronotopic, in that it leads to an irreversible re-deﬁnition
of what is indexically acceptable and what is not in the sociopolitical context of
the uprising, contributing to the construction of an online dissident identity.
The last two lines of this text are in fus˙h˙a¯. The use of fus˙h˙a¯ does not seem to
carry a social indexical meaning here. It could be argued that the swift shift
from the vernacular to fus˙h˙a¯ corresponds to a strategy of ‘code-alternation’,
a function of which is to provoke humour (Georgakopoulou 2011). The hybrid,
symbolic use of the Damascene vernacular and fus˙h˙a¯ is pervasive across
dissidents’ social media practices, as will be shown in the next examples.
EXAMPLE 2: ALIGNING AGAINST ADDO¯ MARI THROUGH HYBRIDITY
AND INDEXICALITY
Another example that shows how the intersection between hybridity and
indexicality creates sociopolitical meaning is illustrated in the comment of
a follower of the addo¯mari page, who criticized a satirical post, in which the
addo¯mari page author used the word yqa¯qu¯ (lit. ‘to cluck’) to describe the
repeated pronunciation of the qa¯f by a group of army ofﬁcers interviewed on
television, thus alluding to the sectarian, Alawite composition of the Syrian
government. The commenter argued against the post author by explaining
that he saw a soldier on Syrian television who was a Sunni, and that he was not
pronouncing the qa¯f.
ʾana raʾe¯t g˘undı¯ miskı¯n ʿala t-tilvizyo¯n s-su¯rı¯ sunnı¯ wa-qa¯l b-ismi l-la¯hi r-rah˙ma¯ni
r-rah˙ı¯m wa-huwa muhad¯d¯ab wa-sallam ʿala¯ wa¯lidayhi wa-lam yqa¯qı¯ .. . ..!! mu kullon
byqa¯qu¯ ya do¯mari ... u ʾana maʿandi musˇkile byqa¯qı¯ u-bntah
˘
ib ması¯h˙ı¯ u-bah˙ki kurdi
bass h˘allu la-wla¯dna wat˙an nifh˘ar bih bala ma yad‘u¯ ʿale¯na¯ kulna ʾyilli byqa¯qı¯ u-ʾyilli
byʾa¯yy!6
I saw a poor soldier on Syrian TV. He was Sunni. He said ‘In the name of God,
the Compassionate, the Merciful’ as a well-mannered person would do, he
greeted his parents and he didn’t pronounce the qa¯f. Not everyone
pronounces the letter qa¯f, Do¯mari. I don’t have a problem. I pronounce the
qa¯f, I vote Christian and speak Kurdish, but please leave our children
a country we can be proud of without dividing us into those who cluck and
those who luck.7
Unlike the rest of the comment, which contains markedly vernacular
features, the ﬁrst sentence is in fus˙h˙a¯. What renders it fus˙h˙a¯, however, is
not a strict adherence to fus˙h˙a¯ grammar rules, according to which, for
example, g˘undı¯ miskı¯n should have been inﬂected in the accusative, but
6 For vernacular forms, such as maʿandi, I opted for an approximate transcription, rather than a transliteration.
7 I thank Nazir Harb for suggesting the use of the creative word ‘luck’ to translate the commenter’s use of the hamza in
place of the qaˉf in the word ‘cluck’.
5 4 6
F R A N C E S C O L . S I N A T O R A

the symbolic choice of bivalent (Mejdell 2014) lexical items such as ra’e¯t,
rather than the more commonly vernacular sˇәft, and the negative
sentence introduced by lam. The choice of these items is arguably
indexical, in that it legitimizes, through the fus˙h˙a¯ index of authority
(Bassiouney 2014, 2017a), the commenter’s counter-evidence, namely
that there are well-mannered Sunni soldiers in the Syrian army. The
identity of ‘respectable Sunni soldier’ is validated by the fact that the
soldier used the religious phrase bismillahi r-rah˙ma¯ni r-rah˙ı¯m and that he
did not pronounce the qa¯f, an action which the commenter described
through the expressionﻟﻢﻳﻘﺎﻗﻲlam yqa¯qı¯ (‘he did not cluck’). Lam yqa¯qı¯ is
a hybrid. Following the fus˙h˙a¯ negative particle lam, the imperfect verb
yqa¯qı¯ should have been apocopated into yqa¯qi. In addition, the author
could not use the negation ma¯, more commonly associated with the
vernacular, because this would have had to be followed by the perfect
verb qa¯qa. The latter would have caused a loss in the indexical meaning
implied by the addo¯mari post author, according to which the verb yqa¯qı¯
indexes a political afﬁliation with the Alawite government. And it is this
very indexical meaning that the commenter argues against when s/he
suggests that the distinction between ‘those who cluck and those who luck’ is
not religious or ethnic, but purely political and ideological. The Alawite–
qa¯f correlation is not denied by the commenter. Although the commenter
afﬁrms that this correlation does not have a political impact, her/his
view of sociolinguistic variation (i.e., I pronounce the qa¯f, I vote Christian and
speak Kurdish) seems to reﬂect a politics of ‘multicultural
accommodation’, which, in Bashar al-Asad’s ‘neoliberal autocracy’, as
explained by Wedeen, has voided ‘experiences of difference’ of their
political meaning, making them ‘cultural and thereby unthreatening in
the ofﬁcial discourse’ (Wedeen 2013: 843, note 6). The comment author
cues their disagreement by capitalizing on linguistic indexical
associations to stylize the social persona of a ‘respectable Sunni soldier’,
by invoking religious and ethnolinguistic identities, and by deploying
hybrid linguistic features. Doing so, they align with a dominant ofﬁcial
discourse, thereby positioning themselves chronotopically toward the
historical context of the Syrian crisis.
EXAMPLE 3: FEMALE DISSIDENCE ON THE RADIO AND ON
FACEBOOK
The examples below are drawn from the 2015 radio and Facebook
practices of Layla, a female Syrian dissident and journalist.8 The question
guiding the analysis is, again, why hybridity is being used in this context
and to do what. I will show how Layla uses the Syrian vernacular and fus˙h˙a¯
indexically and symbolically (Bassiouney 2014; Suleiman 2013) in order to
position herself chronotopically as an anti-Asad dissident. Although
through the Syrian vernacular she projects an identity of dissident as
‘real’, ‘authentic’ Syrian, based on the indexical association between the
vernacular and authenticity, fus˙h˙a¯ has two functions. On the one hand, it
8 Layla is a pseudonym.
22 Variation on Syrian Dissidents’ Social Media
547

is consciously and chronotopically used in order to mimic and ridicule an
Islamic leader and to emphasize the distinction between the Syrian people
(represented through the vernacular) and the Asad government, rejecting
the ofﬁcial narrative which sees dissidents as pawns of extremist religious
groups. On the other, Layla uses fus˙h˙a¯ indexically to legitimize a pragmatic
political alignment with another Islamic leader. This latter use of fus˙h˙a¯, on
her Facebook page, is arguably less conscious. Behind these two symbolic
functions of fus˙h˙a¯ lurks an issue of gender. During her radio programme, it
emerges that the use of fus˙h˙a¯ is attributed to two male leaders, namely
Bashar al-Asad and the Islamic leader Zahran Alloush. In her Facebook
posts and comments, however, she also uses fus˙h˙a¯ in reaction to her male
friends’ criticism. Whereas the chronotopic use of the vernacular and
fus˙h˙a¯ is more visible, the gender distinction is arguably less transparent,
and is subordinate to the chronotopic one. I will return to this point
below.
The radio show
The ﬁrst example is drawn from a radio programme co-authored and co-
presented by two Syrian female dissidents, identiﬁed in the data with the
pseudonyms Layla and Dina. The show discusses current political issues
related to the Syrian conﬂict from the perspective of Syrian insurgency.
Layla explained her choice to use the Syrian vernacular on the radio as
follows:
What we use [in the show] is a lug˙a sˇa‘bı¯ye (‘the people’s language’)
[. . .]. You can’t address the people in a language similar to that of
a political leader. You have to show that you’re not a leader. To do so
you need a language that belittles the leaders. Humour is an
excellent way to do that. [. . .] Sometimes Dina and I have different
opinions on how to write. [. . .] I want to use more mundane
language. I try to use a language for the Syrians. My audience is the
Syrian people.9
In this episode the authors discuss the ﬁgure of Zahran Alloush,
a Syrian Islamist leader who studied sharı¯ʿa (‘Islamic law’) in Medina
and who commanded the rebel group of g˘aysˇ al-isla¯m in the Ghouta
area near Damascus after being released from prison in 2011. Alloush
was arrested in 2009 and was released from prison in early 2011 as
part of an amnesty (Lister 2015). This amnesty was interpreted by
Syrian dissidents as a deliberate strategy to delegitimize protesters as
pawns of radical Islamists whose intent was to spread ﬁtna (‘sectarian
chaos’). In the following excerpt, the presenters, speaking in
Damascene, introduce an audio segment (line 8, bolded) of Zahran
Alloush, in which the ﬁghter, in fus˙h˙a¯, exalts the primacy of Arabic
over all other languages.
9 Author’s interview, July 2015.
5 4 8
F R A N C E S C O L . S I N A T O R A

Excerpt 1
1
Dina:
ʿala sıˉrati l-madıˉna al-munawwara iš-še-h
˘
zahraˉn we-n daras?
speaking of the enlightened city of Medina, where did shaykh Zahran
study?
2
Layla:
b-g˘amʿat al-madıˉna l-munawwara bi-s-sa‘uˉdıˉye.
at the University of Medina in Saudi Arabia
3
Dina:
šu daras?
what did he study?
4
Layla
šu biddu ydrus yaʿnıˉ? ʾakıˉd muˉ . . .
what do you think he studied? Of course not . . .
5
Dina:
iš-šēh˘ zahraˉn daras . . . yaʿni šu daras?
shaykh Zahran studied . . . what did he study?
6
Layla:
šarıˉ‘a!
Islamic law! [duh!]
7
Dina:
yaʿni zalame daˉris
therefore, he’s an educated man!
8
Zahran Alloush: Audio segment
ʾuh
˙
ibb ʾan ’u‘aˉrrig˘ ʿalaˉ masʾala ʾann al-lug˙a l-ʿarabiyya yaˉ
ih˘ waˉnıˉ bi-dˉaˉt ʾawalan hiya ʾummu l-lug˙aˉt. t˙aˉniyan hiya ih˘ waˉnıˉ
tat˙awwur lug˙aˉt ʾahl al-’ard
˙
wa-’a ‘z
˙
am lug˙a hiya al-lug˙a
l-‘arabıˉya wa-laˉ yū g˘ad lug˙a mitl al-lug˙a al-ʿarabiyya [. . .] . . .
I would like to turn to the fact that the Arabic language my
brothers, is ﬁrst and foremost the mother of all tongues.
Secondly it is the essence of the development of all world lan-
guages. The most magniﬁcent language is the Arabic language
and there’s no other language like Arabic [. . .] . . .
9
Layla:
šuˉ huwe daˉris šarıˉʿa walla ʾadab?
what did he study, Islamic law or literature?
10 Dina:
laˉ, hallaʾ ʾyilli bydrus šarıˉʿa bydrus ʾadab bass ʾana h˙ aˉsse ka-ʾanno
well, those who study Islamic law study literature, but I feel as if
11 Layla:
ah yaʿni hinnen ma bytaʿaˉrad.u
oh ok, they are not in contradiction
12 Dina:
ka-ʾanno samʿaˉne hal-lug˙a min h˙ ada taˉni ya layla. basˇšaˉr al-ʾasad
ma kaˉn yh˙ ki ktıˉr bi-l -lug˙a al-‘arabıˉya?
I feel as if I heard this language from someone else, Layla. Wasn’t
Bashar al-Asad speaking in fus˙ h˙ aˉ all the time?
Whereas Layla’s and Dina’s interaction is prevalently in the Damascene
vernacular, Zahran Alloush’s excerpt stands out for being in MSA, except
for the Syrian pronunciation of the word mitl (‘like’, ‘as’). After the
segment, the presenters satirize the similarity between the Islamist
22 Variation on Syrian Dissidents’ Social Media
549

leader Zahran Alloush’s and Bashar al-Asad’s use of and ideological
stance toward fus˙h˙a¯. Similarly, in excerpt 2 below, Layla and Dina
ridicule Bashar al-Asad’s narrative that Islamists orchestrated the
revolution:
Excerpt 2
1 Layla:
il-muhimm ʾinnu sˇ-šēḫ zahraˉn kaˉn maʿ s-sawra mn ʾawal yoˉm
most importantly, Shaykh Zahran sided with the revolution since day one
2 Dina:
lak sˇu ʾawal yoˉm huwe kaˉn bi-s-sg˘uˉn lamma ballasˇšet әs-sawra, ssˇu bakıˉ
layla?!
wait, what do you mean since day one, he was in prison when the
revolution started, what’s the matter with you, Layla?!
3 Layla:
s
˙
ah
˙
s
˙
ah
˙
bass huwe /al-h
˙
amdulillaˉh/ t
˙
ilaʿ
right, right, praise be to God, he got out!
Audio segment:
4 Zahran
Alloush:
t˙umma intalaqtu baʿda l-h˘uruˉg˘i min as-sig˘n ʾilaˉ l-ʿamali l-g˘ihaˉdıˉ l-ʿaskarıˉ
ʾasʾaˉlu -I
˙
I
˙
aˉh tabaˉraka wa-taʿaˉlaˉ ʾan yataqabbalahu minnaˉ
After leaving prison I started the jihadi and military work, may God the
Blessed and the Sublime accept it
5 Layla:
wa-naʿma bi-l-llaˉh ya ah
˘
I-
by the grace of God, my brother!
6 Dina:
wa-naʿma bi-l-llaˉh ʿan g˘add
by the grace of God, indeed!
In line 4, the presenters include an audio segment in which Zahran Alloush
explains, in a highly formal variety of fus˙h˙a¯, which includes some desinential
inﬂection, that he left prison to undertake jihad.10 In lines 5 and 6 they mimic
the Islamist leader through the religious expression wa-na‘ma bi-l-lla¯h (‘by the
grace of God’). By mimicking the Islamist leader through audio segments in
fus˙h˙a¯, they reject Bashar al-Asad’s narrative, they afﬁrm their dissident secular
identity and, consequently, they cast doubt on the government’s secularist
discourse.
Layla’s Facebook page
While in this radio show, Layla used hybridity chronotopically to position
herself as a secular dissident and thereby reject Bashar al-Asad’s
delegitimization of dissidents as religious extremists, in June 2015, she
published a post on her Facebook page, in which she sided with an Islamist
leader, namely Al-Jolani, leader of the Nusra Front. In the post, composed in
the Syrian vernacular, she explained her stance based on the purported Syrian
authenticity of the leader. Her alignment needs to be situated in the 2012–15
sociopolitical context, which was very different from the beginning of the
uprising in 2011 and 2012. Between 2012 and 2015 radical Islamist groups
gained signiﬁcant victories over the ofﬁcial Syrian army and, for some
dissidents, they were the only force capable of defeating the Asad government.
It will be shown that Layla uses the Syrian vernacular and MSA both in her
posts and in the interaction with her critics. She uses the vernacular to identify
10 Desinential inﬂection ‘keys’ a high degree of formality (see Brustad 2017).
5 5 0
F R A N C E S C O L . S I N A T O R A

herself as a 2011 anti-Asad secular dissident (as we heard on the radio) and to
assign an identity to Al-Jolani as a ‘real’ Syrian. At the same time, she uses MSA
to articulate her pragmatic stance. In the post below, Layla describes Al-Jolani’s
appearance in a television interview, emphasizing the Syrian authenticity of
the leader.
1 ..ﺍﻟﺠﻮﻻﻧﻲﻛﺎﻥﻻﺑﺲﺍﻟﻠﺒﺲﺍﻟﺘﻘﻠﻴﺪﻱﻷﻱﺑﻠﺪﺓﺭﻳﻔﻴﺔﺳﻮﺭﻳﺔ
al-g˘uˉlaˉnıˉ kaˉn laˉbis al-labs at-taʾlıˉdi li-ʾayy balde rifıˉye suˉrıˉye..
Al-Jolani was wearing the traditional clothing typical of any Syrian country town ..
2 (ﻭﻣﺎﻛﺎﻥﻻﺑﺲﺧﻮﺍﺗﻢﻋﻘﻴﻖﺷﺎﺋﻌﺔﺍﻻﻧﺘﺸﺎﺭﺑﺄﺻﺎﺑﻊﺍﻟﺸﻴﻮﺥﻭ)ﺍﻷﻣﺮﺍﺀ
wa-ma kaˉn laˉbis h
˘
awaˉtim ʿaʾıˉʾ sˇaˉʾiʿet al-intisˇaˉr bi-ʾas
˙
aˉbiʿ isˇ-sˇuyuˉh
˘
u-(l-ʾumra)
he wasn’t wearing agate rings which usually shine on the ﬁngers of Shaykhs and ‘princes’
3 .ﺟﺒﻬﺔﺍﻟﻨﺼﺮﺓﺳﻤﻌﺘﻬﺎﻣﻨﻴﺤﺔﺑﺄﻣﺎﻛﻦﺗﻮﺍﺟﺪﻫﺎ)ﻋﺪﺍﺩﺭﻋﺎ( ﻭﺧﺎﺻﺔﺑﻈﻞﺍﻟﻨﺰﺍﻉﺍﻟﺪﺍﺋﻢﺑﻴﻦﺍﻟﻔﺼﺎﺋﻞ
g˘abhet an-nus˙ ra samʿe-ta mnıˉh˙ a bi-ʾamaˉkin tuwaˉg˘idha (ʿada daraʿaˉ) u-h˙ as˙ atan bi-ż ill
in-nizaˉʿ ad-daˉʾim be-n al-fas
˙
aˉʾil
the Nusra Front has a good reputation in the places which encountered it (except for
Daraa), particularly in the shadow of the endless struggle among the factions
4ﻛﺎﻥﺇﻟﻬﺎﺍﻟﻔﻀﻞﺑﺘﺤﺮﻳﺮﻛﺘﻴﺮﻣﻨﺎﻃﻖ.. ﻭﻻﻣﺮﺓﺗﺴﺠﻠﺖﺣﺎﻟﺔﺧﻼﻑﻋﻠﻰﺗﻘﺎﺳﻢﻏﻨﺎﺋﻢ. ﻭﻫﻲﻣﺸﻜﻠﺔ
kaˉn ʾila l-faḋ l bi-tah
˙
rıˉr ktıˉr manaˉt
˙
iʾ .. wa-la-marra tasag˘g˘alet h
˙
aˉlet h
˘
ilaˉf ʿala taqaˉsum
g˙anaˉʾim. u-hiye msˇkile
it had the merit of liberating many areas .. and it never reported a dispute over the booty.
This is a big problem
5ﻛﺒﻴﺮﺓﺑﺘﻌﺎﻧﻲﻣﻨﻬﺎﻛﻞﺍﻟﻔﺼﺎﺋﻞ.. ﻭﻓﻲﻛﺘﻴﺮﻣﻌﺎﺭﻙﺗﻮﻗﻔﺖﺃﻭﻣﺎﺑﻠﺸﺖ… ﺑﺴﺒﺐﻋﺪﻡﺍﻻﺗﻔﺎﻕﻋﻠﻰ
kbıˉre bt‘aˉni minna kill al-fas
˙
aˉʾil .. u-ﬁktıˉr maʿaˉrik twaʾ ʾafet ʾaw ma ballasˇet . . . bi-sabab
ʿadam al-ittifaˉʿ ʾala
from which all factions suffer .. in fact it interrupted or did not begin many battles . . . due
to the lack of agreement
6 .ﻣﻮﺿﻮﻉﺍﻟﻐﻨﺎﺋﻢ
mawḋ uˉʿ l-g˙anaˉʾim
over the issue of the booty
7 ..ﺷﺒﺎﺏﺍﻟﻨﺼﺮﺓﻏﺎﻟﺒﺎً ﻫﻨﻦﻳﻠﻲﺑﻴﻔﺘﺘﺤﻮﺍﺍﻟﻤﻌﺎﺭﻙ.. ﺇﻣﺎﺑﻌﻤﻠﻴﺎﺕﺍﺳﺘﺸﻬﺎﺩﻳﺔﺃﻭﻧﻮﻋﻴﺔ
sˇabaˉb in-nus˙ ra g˙aˉliban hinnen ʾyilli byftath˙ u l-maʿaˉrik .. ʾimma bi-ʿamalıˉyaˉt
istisˇhaˉdıˉye ʾaw nawaʿıˉye ..
the Nusra guys are those who most often start the battles .. either through martyrdom
or exemplary operations ..
8 ..ﺣﺴﺐﻋﻠﻤﻲ: ﻗﺎﺩﺓﺍﻟﻤﺠﻤﻮﻋﺎﺕﺑﺠﺒﻬﺔﺍﻟﻨﺼﺮﺓﻛﻠﻬﻦﺳﻮﺭﻳﻴﻦ
h
˙
asab ʿilmıˉ: qaˉdet al-mag˘muˉʿaˉt bi-g˘abhet in-nus
˙
ra kullon suˉrıˉyn ..
to my knowledge, the Nusra Front group leaders are all Syrians
9ﺃﺧﻴﺮﺍً.. ﺃﻧﺎﺿﺪﺃﻱﺇﻳﺪﻳﻮﻟﻮﺟﻴﺎﺑﻌﻴﺪﺓﻋﻦﺍﻟﻮﻃﻨﻴﺔ
.
ʾah˘ıˉran .. ʾana ḋ idd ʾay ʾidyuˉluˉg˘ıˉyaˉ baʿıˉde ʿan il-wat˙anıˉye
and ﬁnally .. I’m against any ideology that is far from nationalism
The Syrian vernacular MSA, and bivalent forms are used throughout the
post consistently with Layla’s intention to reconcile her secular dissident
identity with her pragmatic alignment with Nusra. She does so keying (Brustad
2017) the bolded sentence in MSA lexically and syntactically. The use of MSA
arguably helped her distance herself from this uncomfortable statement in
contradiction with her secular identity. Similarly, in her interaction with
a friend who criticized her stance in the commentary section, Layla reacted as
follows:
[Name of the commenter].. isˇ-sˇı¯ ʾyilli katabto lahu ʿila¯qa b-sˇag˙alte¯n: al-ʾu¯la¯.. al-ʾisˇa¯ra
ʾinnu l-gˇabha ʿam ys˙ı¯r ʾila qa¯ʿide sˇa‘bı¯ye h˙a’ı¯’ı¯ye la-ʾinnu sulu¯ka l-ʿa¯mm gˇayyid mʿa
n-na¯s. it-ta¯nye: ʾana bt‘a¯raḋ maʿa bi-sˇakl ad-dawle al-qa¯dim .. bass ma btʿa¯raḋ maʿh
22 Variation on Syrian Dissidents’ Social Media
551

bi-t˙arı¯’et muh˙a¯rabata li-n-niz˙a¯m u-ʾwe¯ta u-ʾәdre¯ta ʿala¯ h˙asm al-maʿa¯rik li-s˙a¯lih˙ as-
suwwa¯r wa-hiya minhum.. wa-mʿaz˙z˙am ʾafra¯diha su¯rı¯yn. ʾamma¯ sulu¯kuha tig˘a¯h an-
na¯sˇit˙ı¯n fa-huwa laysat al-wah˙ı¯da bi-had¯a¯ as-sulu¯k.. wa-t˙abʿan ha¯d la yaʿni ʾinni
ʿam ibarrir ..
[Name of the commenter], the thing I wrote is related to two things: ﬁrst,
there’s evidence that al-Jabha [Nusra] is becoming increasingly popular
because of their overall positive interaction with the people.. Second,
I disagree with it on the form of the future government . . . But I don’t
disagree with it in the way it ﬁghts against the regime and its strength and
ability to determine the outcome of the battles in favour of the
revolutionaries, and it is one of them. On top of that, most of its members
are Syrian. As for its behaviour towards the activists, it is not the only one
with this behaviour . . . This of course does not mean that I am justifying . . .
The text, keyed (Brustad 2017) in the Syrian vernacular, also contains MSA
and bivalent elements. Through the fus˙h˙a¯ expression ʾamma¯ sulu¯kuha tig˘a¯h an-
na¯sˇit˙ı¯n fa-huwa laysat al-wah˙ı¯da bi-had¯a¯ as-sulu¯k.. (‘As for its behaviour towards the
activists, it is not the only one with this behaviour..’) Layla distances herself
from an uncomfortable statement, which jeopardizes her identity as a secular
activist.
Layla received a lot of criticism from her male Facebook friends after she
declared her alignment with the Islamist leader Al-Jolani, to which she
responded with another Facebook post, this time almost entirely in fus˙h˙a¯.
ʿiddet sˇag˙la¯t h˙abbe ʾih˙kı¯yon ʿa¯l-ʿa¯mm li-g˘amı¯ʿ l-ʾas˙diqa¯ ʿ l-wa¯qiʿı¯yn wa-
w-il-iftirāḋ ı¯yn:
ʾawalan: g˘abhet in-nus˙ra bi-ra¯ʾi aktar tama¯sukan min ʾay fas˙ı¯l ʾa¯khar mawg˘u¯d
ʿala¯ l-ard˙ as-su¯rı¯ye wa-yuʿa¯diluha fı¯ d¯a¯lik l-g˘abha l-g˘anu¯bı¯ye fı¯ daraʿa¯. ta¯nyan: al-
ﬁkr allad¯i tah˙miluhu n-nus˙ra lam wa-lan yatawa¯faq maʿ ﬁkrı¯ l-h˘a¯s˙ al-h˙a¯lim bi-bina¯ʾ
dawla madanı¯ya li-gˆamı¯ʿ as-su¯rı¯yn, wa-lakinna as-sa¯h˙a alʾa¯n li-l-isla¯mı¯yn .. wa-
allad¯ı¯ yurı¯d ’an yarfuḋ had¯ihi l-h˙aqı¯qa fa-tafkı¯ruhu qa¯s˙ir wa-munfas˙il ʿan al-wa¯qiʿ ..
wa-’ana¯ ’ara¯ ’anna sulu¯k al-g˘abha ’aql salbīyatan min ba¯qı¯ l-fas˙a¯’il isla¯mı¯ya .. ʿala¯-
l-ʾaqall bi-t˙arı¯qat at-taʿa¯t˙ı¯ maʿ l-madanı¯yn wa-mumtala¯ka¯tihim wa-h˙aya¯tihim al-
yawmı¯ya. t¯a¯lit¯an, wa-hiya ʾila¯ ’asˇh
˘
a¯s˙ muh˙addadı¯n: ittiha¯mukum lı¯ bi-ʾannı¯
g˙ayyartu mawqifı¯ baʿda ʿamalı¯ fı¯ orient .. yusamma¯ dana¯ʾa wa-qillat h˙ı¯la fı¯ n-niqa¯sˇ
wa-mah˙du¯dı¯yat tafkı¯r .. wa-tattabiʿu¯n ʾuslu¯b an-niz˙a¯m bi-t-tuham al-g˘a¯hiza.
ʾah
˘
ı¯ran ʾana¯ lastu g˘iha¯d .. wa-la¯ ʾanwı¯ ʾan ʾaku¯n nush
˘
a ʿanhu. li-d¯alika la¯ tattabiʿu¯
maʿı¯ had¯a¯ l-ʾuslu¯b al-abawı¯ l-muqı¯t wa-sˇukran.
There are a few things I’d like to say publicly to all friends, both real and
purported ones.
First, the Nusra Front is, in my opinion, the most solid faction on
Syrian soil at the moment; the southern Front in Daraa is equally
strong. Secondly, what Nusra claims has not and will not reﬂect my
personal thinking and aspiration for the establishment of a secular
country for all Syrians. However, the ball is in the Islamists’ court
now. And those who refute this truth have limited thinking,
detached from reality. I think that the behaviour of an-Nusra is less
negative than the other Islamic factions .. at least the way they treat
the civilian population, their properties and their daily life. Third,
and this is directed to speciﬁc people, your accusations that
I changed my mind after I started working for Orient are vile and
5 5 2
F R A N C E S C O L . S I N A T O R A

denote lack of argumentative skills and limited thinking .. you’re
perpetuating the same type of ‘ready-made insinuations’ the regime
makes. Finally, I’m not Jihad, and I do not intend to be his copy.
Therefore, don’t continue treating me with these disgusting
paternalistic manners.
Whereas ʿiddet sˇag˙la¯t h˙abbe ʾih˙kı¯on ʿa¯l-ʿa¯mm (‘There are a few things I’d like
to say publicly’) deploys vernacular syntax, in the second part of the
sentence li-g˘amı¯ʿ l-ʾas˙diqa¯ʾ l-wa¯qi‘ı¯yn w-il-iftira¯d˙ı¯yn (‘to all the friends, both
the real and the purported ones’) Layla uses fus˙h˙a¯ lexical items to address
her critics sarcastically. In the rest of the post, Layla uses fus˙h˙a¯ to argue her
pragmatic alignment with Al-Jolani.
Her use of fus˙h˙a¯, I argue, is highly symbolic. Through the index of
fus˙h˙a¯ as authoritative, Layla assumes an assertive stance (Bassiouney
2014) toward her male friends’ criticism. The inclusion of lexical,
syntactic, and graphic features which are ‘quintessentially’ fus˙h˙a¯ occurs
concomitantly with a violation of some fus˙h˙a¯ syntactic conventions. For
example, the verb yatawa¯faq cannot follow both the particles lam and lan,
which respectively inﬂect the imperfect verb in the jussive and the
subjunctive. In the absence of written vowel inﬂection, yatawa¯faq can
apply both to the jussive and the subjunctive. Additionally, if one does
not pronounce the subjunctive verbal inﬂection, it can conform both to
a jussive form as well as to the subjunctive form of a spoken MSA style in
which ﬁnal short vowels are omitted. In other words, the violation of the
fus˙h˙a¯ conventions occurs through a stylistic strategy and a form that can
be considered hybrid.11 Additionally, in the expression ʾana¯ lastu g˘iha¯d,
the personal name gˇiha¯d, as the predicate of laysa, should have carried
the accusative marker alif. Finally, Layla interestingly indicates the
accusative diacritics on the word salbīyatan, as to elevate the tone of the
post.
Through this example, it is clear how hybridity underlies the
construction and the articulation of a dissident identity on the radio and
on Facebook. The indexical meanings of fus˙h˙a¯ and the vernacular are
employed chronotopically by Layla in order to consciously position
herself as an anti-Asad dissident. At the same time, the fus˙h˙a¯ index of
authority allows Layla to legitimize her new stance and reject the
criticism of her male Facebook friends. Another social category, or ‘thick
diacritic’ (Blommaert 2017), that of religion, is worth noting. Layla’s use
of religious expressions to ridicule Zahran Alloush is not only employed
to construct a secular dissident identity per se, but rather to reject an
ofﬁcial discourse which delegitimized dissidents as religious extremists.
These social categories, in other words, are not completely absent, but
they seem to be used instrumentally, in concomitance with
a chronotopic repositioning, in order to advance a particular social and
political agenda.
11 I thank Manuela E. B. Giolfo and Valentina Serreli for pointing out to me this form in connection with hybridity. The lam
wa-lan + imperfect form is a stylistic choice that, incidentally, can be commonly found in contemporary MSA texts.
22 Variation on Syrian Dissidents’ Social Media
553

EXAMPLE 4: HYBRIDITY, CHRONOTOPES, AND COMPETING
GLOBAL EMERGENT DISCOURSES
A ﬁnal example in which hybridity, chronotopes, and indexicality intersect is
represented by a series of actions (Al Zidjaly 2019b) undertaken by a group of
Syrian dissidents across social media platforms against a Ramadan commercial
uploaded on YouTube by the Kuwaiti telecommunication company Zain in
2017. The commercial is a hybrid multimodal composite, in which different
linguistic, audio, and visual modes, including the use of a very formal Arabic
variety which evokes Qur’a¯nic Arabic, pop music and images of Muslims
injured in terrorist attacks, are deployed to promote a ‘moderate’ Islamic
identity (see Sinatora 2020). In order to understand the commercial producers’
and the Syrian dissidents’ linguistic choices, it is necessary to refer to the
sociopolitical context. By 2017, the Syrian conﬂict appeared more and more as
a proxy war among local and international powers. For the US administration,
the ﬁght against ISIS became a priority over toppling the Asad government,
which managed to re-consolidate its power after a period, between 2012 and
2015, in which radical Islamic groups represented a tangible threat by gaining
signiﬁcant victories.12 In this geopolitical context, Syrian dissidents occupied
an increasingly marginal role, and their discourse entered into competition for
visibility with a global discourse about Islamic terrorism.
The linguistic and multimodal choices in the commercial led to different
types of reactions in the YouTube commentary section. Although an
overwhelming majority of Arab, Muslim, and Western commenters praised
the producers for their progressive message, some commenters criticized the
use of music associated with Qur’a¯nic expressions, a practice prohibited by
some radical forms of Islam. In addition, some Syrian commenters protested
against the use of the image of Omran Daqneesh, a Syrian child, a photo of
whom sitting in an ambulance was widely circulated in the media around the
world. In particular, the commenters argued that the child had not been
injured in a terrorist attack, but rather in a Russian airstrike, backed by the
Syrian government. One of the actions undertaken by a group of Syrian
dissidents is a petition published on the online activism platform Avaaz, in
which they accused Zain of distorting the truth about the Syrian conﬂict and,
consequently, of colluding with the Syrian government. Chronotopes and
indexicality, I will argue below, are central in order to fully understand the
social meaning behind the producers’ and the Syrian dissidents’ linguistic
choices. Underline added by me. The translation is mine.
ﺗﺴﺘﻤﺮﺷﺮﻛﺔﺯﻳﻦﻟﻼﺗﺼﺎﻻﺕﺑﺎﺳﺘﺨﺪﺍﻡﺍﻟﻘﻀﻴﺔﺍﻟﺴﻮﺭﻳﺔﻭﺳﻴﻠﺔًﺇﻋﻼﻧﻴﺔًﻟﺰﻳﺎﺩﺓﺭﺃﺳﻤﺎﻟﻬﺎﻭﺗﻠﻤﻴﻊﺻﻮﺭﺓﻗﺎﺗﻞ
ﺍﻷﻃﻔﺎﻝﺑﺸﺎﺭﺍﻷﺳﺪ.ﺇﺫﻇﻬﺮﻓﻲﺇﻋﻼﻧﻬﺎﻋﺒﺎﺭﺓ:
)ﺳﺄﺧﺒﺮﺍﻟﻠﻪﺑﻜﻞﺷﻲء(ﺍﻟﺘﻲﻗﺎﻟﻬﺎﻃﻔﻞﺳﻮﺭﻱﺗﻌﺮﺽﻟﻘﺼﻒ
ﻃﻴﺮﺍﻥﻧﻈﺎﻡﺍﻷﺳﺪ،ﻭﺻﻮﺭﺓﻋﻤﺮﺍﻥﺍﻟﺘﻲﺍﺩﻋﻰﺑﺸﺎﺭﺍﻷﺳﺪﺃﻧﻬﺎﻣﺰﻭﺭﺓ.ﺣﻴﺚﺃﻛﺪﺕ)ﺯﻳﻦ(ﺣﻘﻴﻘﺔﺍﻟﺤﺎﺩﺛﺘﻴﻦﺑﻌﺪ
ﺃﻥﻧﻔﺖﻣﺴﺆﻭﻟﻴﺔﺍﻟﻄﻴﺮﺍﻥﺍﻟﺮﻭﺳﻲﻭﺍﻟﺴﻮﺭﻱﻋﻨﻬﻤﺎﻭﺃﻟﺒﺴﺘﻬﻤﺎﻋﻨﻮﺓﻟﻺﺭﻫﺎﺏﺍﻟﻤﻤﻮﻝﻋﺎﻟﻤﻴﺎًﺍﻟﺬﻱﻻﻳﻤﻠﻚ
ﻃﻴﺮﺍﻧﺎ!!ﻟﺬﻟﻚﻗﺎﻡﺍﻟﻌﺪﻳﺪﻣﻦﺯﺑﺎﺋﻨﻬﺎﺑﻤﻘﺎﻃﻌﺘﻬﺎﺍﺣﺘﺠﺎﺟﺎًﻋﻠﻰﺍﻟﺘﺸﻮﻳﻪﺍﻟﻔﺎﺿﺢﻭﻋﻠﻰﺍﺳﺘﻐﻼﻝﻣﺂﺳﺎﺓﺷﻌﺐﺑﺄﻛﻤﻠﻪ
ﻛُﺮﻣﻰﻟﻤﺼﺎﻟﺢﻣﺎﻟﻴﺔﻭﺳﻴﺎﺳﻴﺔ،ﻭﺗﺤﺴﺒﺎًﻣﻦﺇﻣﻜﺎﻧﻴﺔﻫﺬﻩﺍﻟﺸﺮﻛﺔﺍﺳﺘﺨﺪﺍﻡﻣﺄﺳﺎﺓﺷﻌﻮﺏﻋﺮﺑﻴﺔﺃﺧﺮﻯﻟﺬﺍﺕ
ﺍﻷﺳﺒﺎﺏ.ﻭﺇﻻﻣﺎﺍﻟﺬﻱﻳﺪﻋﻮﺍﻹﻋﻼﻡﺍﻟﺴﻮﺭﻱﻟﺘﺼﻮﻳﺮﻭﺍﻟﺪﺍﻟﻄﻔﻞﻋﻤﺮﺍﻥﻟﻴﻘﻮﻝﺃﻥﺍﺑﻨﻪﺿﺤﻴﺔﺍﻹﺭﻫﺎﺏﺍﻟﻤﺘﺸﺪﺩ
ﻓﻲﻫﺬﺍﺍﻟﻮﻗﺖﺑﺎﻟﺬﺍﺕ؟!!ﺍﻵﻥﻧﺪﻋﻮﻣﻦﺗﺒﻘﻰﻣﻦﺯﺑﺎﺋﻦﻟـ)ﺯﻳﻦ(ﺃﻥﻳﻘﻔﻮﺍﻭﻗﻔﺔﺣﻖﻭﺇﻳﻤﺎﻥﺑﺎﻟﻌﺪﻝﻭﺃﻥﻳﻘﺎﻃﻌﻮﺍﻫﺬﻩ
ﺍﻟﺸﺮﻛﺔﺍﻟﻤﺰﻭﺭﺓﻟﻠﺤﻘﻴﻘﺔ،ﻭﺃﻥﻳﺸﺎﺭﻛﻮﺍﺑﺘﻮﻗﻴﻊﺍﻟﻌﺮﻳﻀﺔﻹﻳﻘﺎﻑﻫﺬﺍﺍﻹﻋﻼﻥﺍﻟﺬﻱﻳﺤﺎﺭﺏﺍﻹﺭﻫﺎﺏﺍﻟﺪﻳﻨﻲ
ﻇﺎﻫﺮﻳﺎً،ﻭﻳﺪﻋﻢﺇﺟﺮﺍﻡﺍﻟﺪﻭﻟﺔﺿﻤﻨﺎً.ﻭﻧﺪﻋﻮﺃﺧﻮﺗﻨﺎﻓﻲﺍﻹﻧﺴﺎﻧﻴﺔﺇﻟﻰﺗﻮﻗﻴﻊﺍﻟﻌﺮﻳﻀﺔﻭﺍﻟﻌﻤﻞﻋﻠﻰﺟﻤﻊﻣﻠﻴﻮﻥ
12 See www.bbc.com/news/world-us-canada-39450570
5 5 4
F R A N C E S C O L . S I N A T O R A

Whereas the Zain commercial includes a wider non-Arab audience
through English subtitles and images of non-Arab Muslims injured by
Islamic extremists, the text of this petition is exclusively in Arabic. On
the one hand, MSA helps them authenticate (Bucholtz 2003) their claims
by virtue of its index of authority (Bassiouney 2014, 2017a). The appeal
to this index is particularly evident in the use of desinential inﬂection
in the underlined words. On the other hand, it could be hypothesized
that the use of Arabic is consistent with the way they position them-
selves chronotopically toward society differently with respect to the
commercial producers. Syrian dissidents speak from (Blommaert 2005)
the sociohistorical context of the Syrian uprising. Arabic helps them
connect with the issue of ‘realness’ which emerged at the beginning of
the uprising. They see themselves as the ‘real’ Syrians, as opposed to
foreign inﬁltrators.
The producers, on the other hand, contextualize their hybrid linguistic
choices within the 2017 context, far from the 2011 civil uprising and char-
acterized by the threat of radical Islamic terrorism. In other words, their
indexicalities, or the symbolic meaning of their linguistic choices, belong to
different orders (Blommaert 2010) and are situated in two different historical
ﺗﻮﻗﻴﻊﻗﺒﻞﻧﻬﺎﻳﺔﺷﻬﺮﺭﻣﻀﺎﻥﺍﻟﻤﺒﺎﺭﻙ.ﻭﻧﻄﺎﻟﺐﺷﺮﻛﺔﺯﻳﻦﺑﺈﻳﻘﺎﻑﺍﻹﻋﻼﻥﻭﺍﻻﻋﺘﺬﺍﺭﺻﺮﺍﺣﺔًﻟﻠﺸﻌﺐﺍﻟﺴﻮﺭﻱ
ﻋﻠﻰﻣﺎﺍﺭﺗﻜﺒﺘﻪﻣﻦﺗﺸﻮﻳﻪٍﻭﺗﺰﻭﻳﺮ.
The telecommunications company Zain continues to exploit the Syrian
conﬂict as an advertising tool to increase its capital and whitewash the
image of the child murderer Bashar al-Asad. In its commercial, in fact, it
appeared the expression ‘I will tell God everything’, uttered by a Syrian
child who was injured by an airstrike of the Asad regime, as well as the
photo of Omran, which Asad himself alleged was fake. Zain testiﬁed the
truth of these two incidents after it denied the involvement of the Russian
and the Syrian air forces, and it attributed them to the violence of
internationally funded terrorism, which doesn’t own a single aircraft!!
Therefore, several customers have boycotted the company to protest
against the vile truth distortion and the utter exploitation of people’s
suffering for economic and political purposes, and to make sure that this
company does not use the suffering of other Arab peoples for the same
purposes. Why would have the Syrian media otherwise invited Omran’s
father to appear on TV and say that his son was a victim of extremist
[Islamic] terrorism at this precise time?!! We invite those who are still Zain
customers to take a righteous and just stance and to boycott this company
which distorts the truth, and by signing a petition to suspend this
commercial which on the surface ﬁghts religious terrorism, but tacitly
supports state crimes. We also invite our brothers in humanity to sign this
petition in order to reach one million signatures before the end of the holy
month of Ramadan. We also ask the company Zain to suspend the
commercial and to apologize sincerely to the Syrian people for distorting
and falsifying the truth.
22 Variation on Syrian Dissidents’ Social Media
555

contexts. In this light, religion is no longer an independent variable, but
a very mobile one. Through hybridity, both the producers and the Syrian
dissidents want to have an impact on the sociopolitical context. For the
commercial producers, a sociopolitical project of modernization is what
frames their linguistic and multimodal variation and their progressive view
of religion. For the Syrian dissidents, religion is irrelevant, and what matters
is their attempt to make their voice heard in the discourse about the Syrian
conﬂict.
22.8
Conclusions
In line with third-wave variation studies (Eckert 2012), recent approaches
in Arabic have analysed variation and diglossia as ‘stylistic performance’
(Brustad 2017: 65; Mejdell and Høigilt 2017) through the lens of indexi-
cality, stance (Bassiouney 2017a), and multimodality (Hachimi 2017). An
area in which Arabic can further contribute is the use of variation as social
change, a central concern in a sociolinguistics of complexity (Al Zidjaly 2019a;
Blommaert 2017). In this article, I investigated language variation as
social change through the notions of hybridity, deﬁned by Bakhtin
(1981) as the linguistic mixing underlying historical linguistic change,
indexicality (Bassiouney 2014, 2017a; Blommaert 2005, 2010; Eckert
2008,
2012),
and
chronotopes
(Bakhtin
1981;
Blommaert
2015a;
Blommaert and De Fina 2017; Sinatora 2019; Woolard 2013). Through
a case study on Syrian dissidents’ social media practices, I have shown
how individuals use the indexical meaning of linguistic varieties to have
an impact on the sociopolitical context and the discourse about the
Syrian conﬂict. For example, it was shown how the use of features
which are taken to be symbolically associated with the Damascene ver-
nacular underlies the construction of an anti-Asad dissident identity. At
the same time, fus˙h˙a¯ is used to legitimize determined political align-
ments. Throughout the examples, I further showed how the social cate-
gories of urbaneness, religion, ethnicity, and gender are not completely
absent, a point which was previously made by Blommaert (2019), but
emerge in the texts and the interactions among individuals in connection
with their political positionings.
The indexical associations which emerged in the data are not all
new. The political meaning of the qa¯f has conceivably been available
since the rise to power of the Alawites. However, whereas it originally
surfaced in spoken contexts, through social media it has been made
available for further social work. For example, I have shown how
a discussion about the use of the qa¯f underlay the creation of political
alignments in the light of the sociopolitical context of the Syrian
uprising. Similarly, throughout the examples it emerged how dissi-
dents consciously employed forms associated with the Damascene
5 5 6
F R A N C E S C O L . S I N A T O R A

vernacular in order to index local authenticity and the language of the
Syrian people ﬁghting against the government. At the same time, fus˙h˙a¯
is also used symbolically to index authority. In sum, through this case
study I have demonstrated how indexical associations are used con-
textually to create identities through which users interact, align, and
position themselves politically. I suggest that Arabic hybridity may
provide an empirical lens to the analysis of indexicality and chrono-
topic identities in the study of language variation and change, parti-
cularly
in
the
light
of
the
sociopolitical
and
the
technological
dynamics that have affected the Arab world in the 2010s.
References
Albirini, A. (2011). The sociolinguistic functions of codeswitching
between Standard Arabic and Dialectal Arabic. Language in Society, 40
(5), 537–62.
Al-Wer, E. (2002). Education as a speaker variable. In A. Rouchdy, ed.,
Language Contact and Language Conﬂict in Arabic: Variation on a Sociolinguistic
Theme. London: Routledge Courzon, 41–53.
Al-Wer, E. (2013). Sociolinguistics. In J. Owens, ed., The Oxford Handbook of
Arabic Linguistics. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 241–63.
Al Zidjaly, N. (2014). WhatsApp Omani teachers? Social media and the
question of social change. Multimodal Communication, 3(1), 107–30.
Al Zidjaly, N. (2019a). Society in digital contexts: New modes of identity
and community construction, Multilingua, 38(4), 357–75.
Al Zidjaly, N. (2019b). Digital Activism as Nexus Analysis: A Sociolinguistic
Example from Arabic Twitter. Tilburg Papers in Culture Studies, 221.
Androutsopoulos, J. (2008). Potentials and limitations of discourse-centred
online ethnography. Language@Internet, 5(8), 1–20.
Androutsopoulos, J. (2015). Networked multilingualism: Some language
practices on Facebook and their implications. International Journal of
Bilingualism, 19(2), 185–205. https://doi.org/10.1177/1367006913489198.
Auer, P. (1995). The pragmatics of codeswitching: A sequential approach. In
L. Milroy and P. Muysken, eds., One Speaker, Two Languages: Cross-Disciplinary
PerspectivesonCodeswitching.Cambridge:CambridgeUniversityPress,115–35.
Auer, P. (2005). A postscript: Codeswitching and social identity. Journal of
Pragmatics, 37, 403–10.
Badawi, E. A. (1973). Mustawaya¯t al-ʿArabiyya al-Muʿa¯s˙ira fı¯ Mis˙r [The Levels of
Modern Arabic in Egypt]. Cairo: Da¯r al-Maʿa¯rif.
Bailey, B. (2007). Heteroglossia and boundaries. In M. Heller, ed.,
Bilingualism: A Social Approach. New York: Palgrave Macmillan, 257–74.
Bakhtin, M. (1981). The Dialogic Imagination. Translated and edited by Michael
Holquist and Caryl Emerson. Austin, TX: University of Texas Press.
22 Variation on Syrian Dissidents’ Social Media
557

Bassiouney, R. (2006). Functions of Code Switching in Egypt: Evidence from
Monologues. Leiden: Brill.
Bassiouney, R. (2009). Arabic Sociolinguistics. Edinburgh: Edinburgh University
Press.
Bassiouney, R. (2010). Identity and code-choice in the speech of educated
women and men in Egypt: Evidence from talk shows. In R. Bassiouney,
ed., Arabic and the Media. Leiden: Brill, 97–122.
Bassiouney, R. (2012). Politicizing identity: Code choice and stance-taking
during the Egyptian revolution. Discourse and Society, 23(2), 107–26.
Bassiouney, R. (2014). Language and Identity in Modern Egypt. Edinburgh:
Edinburgh University Press.
Bassiouney, R. (2017a). A new direction for Arabic sociolinguistics. In
H. Ouali, ed., Perspectives on Arabic Linguistics XXIX: Papers from the Annual
Symposium on Arabic. Amsterdam: John Benjamins, 7–30.
Bassiouney, R. (ed.) (2017b). Identity and Dialect Performance: A Study of
Communities and Dialects. London: Routledge.
Bauman, R. and Briggs, C. L. (1990). Poetics and performance as critical
perspectives on language and social life. Annual Review of Anthropology, 19:
59–88.
Blom, J. and Gumperz, J. J. (1972). Social meaning in linguistic structure:
Codeswitching in Norway. In J. J. Gumperz, ed., Directions in Sociolinguistics:
The Ethnography of Communication. New York: Holt, Reinhart & Winston,
407–34.
Blommaert,
J.
(2005).
Discourse:
A
Critical
Introduction.
Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
Blommaert, J. (2010). The Sociolinguistics of Globalization. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
Blommaert, J. (2015a). Chronotopes, scales, and complexity in the study of
language in society. Annual Review of Anthropology, 44, 105–16.
Blommaert, J. (2015b). Commentary: Superdiversity, old and new. Language
and Communication: An Interdisciplinary Journal, 44(1), 82–9.
Blommaert, J. (2016). Society in language: Some sociological effects of
sociolinguistics. Paper presented at Connecting the Dots in a Glocalized
World Third International Conference on Language, Linguistics, Literature and
Translation, Sultan Qaboos University, 3–5 November 2016.
Blommaert, J. (2017). Society through the Lens of Language: A New Look at Social
Groups and Integration. Tilburg Papers in Culture Studies 178.
Blommaert, J. (2019). From groups to actions and back in online-ofﬂine
sociolinguistics, Multilingua, 38(4), 485–93.
Blommaert, J. and De Fina, A. (2017). Chronotopic identities: On the time-
space organization of who we are. In D. Ikizoglu, J. Wegner, and A. De
Fina, eds., Diversity and Super-Diversity: Sociocultural Linguistic Perspectives.
Washington, DC: Georgetown University Press, 1–16.
Blommaert, J. and Rampton, B. (2011). Language and superdiversity:
A position paper. Diversities, 13(2), 1–21.
5 5 8
F R A N C E S C O L . S I N A T O R A

Blommaert, J. and Varis, P. (2011). Enough is enough: The heuristics of
authenticity in superdiversity. Tilburg Papers in Culture Studies, Paper 2.
Blommaert, J. and Varis, P. (2015). Enoughness, Accent and Light Communities:
Essays on Contemporary Identities. Working paper. Tilburg: Tilburg
University, Babylon Center.
Boussofara-Omar, N. (2003). Revisiting Arabic diglossic switching in light
of the mlf model and its sub-models: The 4-M Model and the Abstract
Level Model. Bilingualism: Language and Cognition, 6(1), 33–46.
Brustad, K. (2017). Diglossia as ideology. In G. Mejdell and J. Høigilt, eds.,
The Politics of Written Language in the Arab World. Leiden: Brill, 41–67.
Bucholtz, M. (2003). Sociolinguistic nostalgia and the authentication of
identity. Journal of Sociolinguistics, 7(3), 398–416.
Bucholtz, M. and Hall, K. (2005). Identity and interaction: A sociocultural
linguistic approach. Discourse Studies, 7(4–5), 584–614.
Caubet, D. (2018). New elaborate written forms in Darija: Blogging, posting
and slamming in Morocco. In E. Benmamoun and R. Bassiouney, eds., The
Routledge Handbook of Arabic Linguistics. London: Routledge, 387–406.
Coupland, N. (2007). Style: Language Variation and Identity. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
Coupland, N. (ed.) (2013). The Handbook of Language and Globalization. Malden:
Wiley-Blackwell.
Daher, J. (1998). Gender in linguistic variation: The variable (q) in
Damascus Arabic. In E. Benmamoun, M. Eid, and N. Haeri, eds.,
Perspectives on Arabic Linguistics XI. Amsterdam: John Benjamins, 183–208.
De Fina, A. (2007). Style and stylization in the construction of identi-
ties in a card-playing club. In P. Auer, ed., Style and Social Identities.
Alternative Approaches to Linguistic Heterogeneity. Berlin: Mouton de
Gruyter, 57–84.
De Fina, A. (2016). Storytelling and reactions in social media. Language in
Society, 45(4), 473–98.
De Fina, A. (2017). Dialect performances in superdiverse communities: The
case
for
ethnographic
approaches
to
language
variation.
In
R. Bassiouney, ed., Identity and Dialect Performance. A Study of Communities
and Dialects. London: Routledge, 49–67.
De Fina, A., Schiffrin, D., and Bamberg, M. G. W. (eds.) (2006). Discourse and
Identity. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Eckert, P. (2003). The meaning of style. Texas Linguistic Forum, 47,
41–53.
Eckert, P. (2005). Variation, convention, and social meaning. Paper
Presented at the Annual Meeting of the Linguistic Society of America,
Oakland CA, 7 January 2005.
Eckert, P. (2008). Variation and the indexical ﬁeld. Journal of Sociolinguistics,
12(4), 453–76.
Eckert, P. (2012). Three waves of variation studies: The emergence of
meaning in the study of sociolinguistic variation. Annual Review of
Anthropology, 41, 87–100.
22 Variation on Syrian Dissidents’ Social Media
559

Eckert, P. and Rickford, J. R. (eds.) (2001). Introduction. In Style and
Sociolinguistic Variation. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1–19.
Eid, M. (1988). Principles of code switching between standard and Egyptian
Arabic. Al-ʿArabiyya, 21(1/2), 51–79.
Eid, M. (2002). Language is a choice: Variation in Egyptian women’s written
discourse. In A. Rouchdy, ed., Language Contact and Language Conﬂict in
Arabic. Variations on a Sociolinguistic Theme, London: Routledge, 203–32.
Ferguson, C. (1959). Diglossia. Word, 15(2), 325–40.
Garcı´a, O. (2009). Education, multilingualism and translanguaging in the
21st century. In A. Mohanty, M. Panda, R. Phillipson, and T. Skutnabb-
Kangas, eds., Multilingual Education for Social Justice: Globalising the Local.
New Delhi: Orient Blackswan, 140–58.
Gardner-Chloros, P. (1995). Codeswitching in community, regional and
national repertoires: The myth of the discreteness of linguistic systems.
In L. Milroy and P. Muysken, eds., One Speaker, Two Languages: Cross-
Disciplinary Perspectives on Codeswitching, Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press, 68–89.
Georgakopoulou, A. (2011). ‘On for drinkies?’ Email cues of participant
alignments. Language@Internet, 8. www.languageatinternet.org/articles/
2011/Georgakopoulou; last accessed 17 December 2020.
Gumperz, J. (1982). Discourse Strategies. Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press.
Habib, R. (2018). Standard Arabic [q]-lexical-borrowings in the speech of
Syrian rural migrants. Proceedings of the Linguistic Society of America, 3
(51), 1–12.
Hachimi, A. (2017). Moralizing stances: Discursive play and ideologies of
language and gender in Moroccan digital discourse. In J. A. Høigilt and
G. Mejdell, eds., The Politics of Written Language in the Arab World: Writing
Change. Leiden: Brill, 239–65.
Holes, C. (1987). Language Variation and Change in a Modernising Arab State: The
Case of Bahrain. London: Kegan Paul International.
Holes, C. (1993). The use of variation: A study of the political speeches of
Gamal Abd al-Nasir. In M. Eid and C. Holes, eds., Perspectives on Arabic
Linguistics: Papers from the Annual Symposium on Arabic Linguistics, V.
Amsterdam: John Benjamins, 13–45.
Jørgenson, N. J. (2008). Polylingual languaging around and among
children and adolescents. International Journal of Multilingualism, 5(3),
161–76.
Johnstone, B., Andrus, J., and Danielson, A. E. (2006). Mobility, indexicality,
and the enregisterment of ‘Pittsburghese’. Journal of English Linguistics, 34
(2), 77–104.
KhosraviNik, M. (2014). Critical discourse analysis, power and new media
discourse. In Y. Kalyango Jr. and M. W. Kopytowska, eds., Why Discourse
Matters: Negotiating Identity in the Mediatized World. New York: Peter Lang,
287–306.
5 6 0
F R A N C E S C O L . S I N A T O R A

KhosraviNik, M. (2018). Social media critical discourse studies (SM-CDS). In
J. Flowerdew and J. E. Richardson, eds., The Routledge Handbook of Critical
Discourse Studies. London: Routledge, 582–96.
KhosraviNik, M. and Esposito, E. (2018). Online hate, digital discourse and
critique:
Exploring
digitally-mediated
discursive
practices
of
gender-based hostility. Lodz Papers in Pragmatics: Special Issue on Narrating
Hostility, Challenging Hostile Narratives, 14.1(14), 45–68.
KhosraviNik, M. and Zia, M. (2014). Persian nationalism, identity and
anti-Arab sentiments in Iranian Facebook discourses: Critical discourse
analysis and social media communication. Journal of Language and Politics,
13(4), 755–80.
Leppa¨nen, S., Kyto¨la¨, S., Jousma¨ki, H., Peuronen, S., and Westinen, E.
(2014). Entextualization and resemiotization as resources for identiﬁca-
tion in social media. In P. Seargeant and C. Tagg, eds., The Language of
Social Media: Identity and Community on the Internet. Basingstoke: Palgrave
Macmillan, 112–36.
Lister, C. R. (2015). The Syrian Jihad: Al-Qaeda, the Islamic State and the Evolution
of an Insurgency. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Mejdell, G. (2006). Mixed Styles in Spoken Arabic in Egypt. Leiden: Brill.
Mejdell, G. (2011–2012) Diglossia, codeswitching, style, variation and
congruence. Notions for analyzing mixed Arabic. Al-ʿArabiyya, 44/45,
29–39.
Mejdell, G. (2012). The elusiveness of lugha wusta, or, attempting to catch its
‘true nature’. In R. Bassiouney and G. Katz, eds., Arabic Language and
Linguistics. Washington, DC: Georgetown University Press.
Mejdell, G. (2014). Strategic bivalency in written ‘mixed style’? A reading of
Ibra¯hı¯m ʿı¯sa¯ in al-Dustu¯ r. In O. Durand, A. D. Langone, and G. Mion, eds.,
Alf lahgˇa wa lahgˇa: Proceedings of the 9th Aida Conference. Vienna: Lit Verlag,
263–72.
Mejdell, G. (2017). Changing norms, concepts and practices of written
Arabic: A ‘long distance’ perspective. In J. Høigilt and G. Mejdell,
eds., The Politics of Written Language in the Arab World. Leiden: Brill,
68–89.
Mejdell, G. and Høigilt, J. (eds.) (2017). The Politics of Written Language in the
Arab World. Leiden: Brill.
Miller, C. (2003). Linguistic policies and the issue of ethno-linguistic mino-
rities in the Middle East. In A. Usuki and H. Kato, eds., Islam in the Middle
Eastern Studies: Muslims and Minorities, Japan Center for Area Studies,
Symposium Series 7, Osaka, Japan, 149–74.
Milroy, L. (1987). Language and Social Networks. New York: Blackwell.
Møller, J. S. (2008). Polylingual performance among Turkish-Danes in
late-modern Copenhagen. International Journal of Multilingualism, 5(3),
217–36.
Myers-Scotton, C. (1993). Social Motivations for Code Switching: Evidence from
Africa. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
22 Variation on Syrian Dissidents’ Social Media
561

Ochs, E. (1990). Indexicality and socialization. In J. W. Stigler, R. A. Schweder,
and G. Herdt, eds., Cultural Psychology: Essays on Comparative Human
Development. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 287–308.
Otsuji, E. and Pennycook, A. (2010). Metrolingualism: Fixity, ﬂuidity and
language in ﬂux. International Journal of Multilingualism, 7(3), 240–54.
Owens, J. (2001). Arabic sociolinguistics. Arabica, 48(4), 419–69.
Owens, J. and Bani-Yasin, R. (1991). Spoken Arabic and language mixture.
Bulletin d’e´tudes orientales, 43, 17–31.
Rampton, B. (1999). Crossing. Journal of Linguistic Anthropology, 9(1–2), 54–6.
Rubdy, R. and Alsagoff, L. (eds.) (2014). The Global–Local Interface and
Hybridity: Exploring Language and Identity. Bristol: Multilingual Matters.
Schilling-Estes, N. (2002). Investigating stylistic variation. In J. Chambers,
P. Trudgill, and N. Schilling-Estes, eds., The Handbook of Language Variation
and Change, Oxford: Blackwell, 375–401.
Silverstein, M. (2003). Indexical order and the dialectics of sociolinguistic
life. Language and Communication, 23(3–4), 193–229.
Sinatora, F. L. (2019). Chronotopes, entextualization and Syrian political
activism on Facebook. Multilingua, 38(4), 427–58.
Sinatora, F. L. (2020). Language, Identity and Syrian Political Activism on Social
Media. New York: Routledge.
Somekh, S. (1991). Genre and Language in Modern Arabic Literature.
Wiesbaden: Otto Harrassowitz.
Suleiman, Y. (2003). The Arabic Language and National Identity: A Study in
Ideology. Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press.
Suleiman, Y. (2013). Arabic in the Fray. Edinburgh: Edinburgh University
Press.
Trudgill, P. (1986). Dialects in Contact. Oxford: Basil Blackwell.
Varis, P. and Wang, X. (2011). Superdiversity on the Internet: A case from
China. Diversities, 13(2), 71–83.
Versteegh, K. (2001). The Arabic Language. Edinburgh: Edinburgh University
Press.
Vertovec, S. (2007). Super-diversity and its implications. Ethnic and Racial
Studies, 30(6), 1024–54.
Wedeen, L. (2013). Ideology and humor in dark times: Notes from Syria.
Critical Inquiry, 39(4), 841–73.
Woolard, K. A. (1999). Simultaneity and bivalency as strategies in
bilingualism. Journal of Linguistic Anthropology, 8(1), 3–29.
Woolard, K. A. (2013). Is the personal political? Chronotopes and changing
stances toward Catalan language and identity. International Journal of
Bilingual Education and Bilingualism. 16(2), 210–24.
5 6 2
F R A N C E S C O L . S I N A T O R A

Part VI
Arabic Linguistics
in Literature and
Translation


23
Vernacular Varieties
in Recent Arabic
Literature
Eva Marie Håland
23.1
Introduction
In this chapter, we attempt to provide an overview of the more recent
use of vernacular Arabic varieties in literature in particular. Several
studies, often focusing on Egypt, treat language choice in literature in
the modern period. Surveys of dialect literature often deﬁne it as texts
that are consciously written in a vernacular variety (thus excluding
Middle Arabic), and not written for the purpose of being read aloud.
They exclude novels and short stories that have dialogues in the
vernacular, or other forms of codeswitching or code-mixing (Davies
2006; Woidich 2010; Doss and Davies 2013). This chapter will include
both ‘pure’ vernacular texts and texts that have vernacular mixed or
alternating
with
fus˙h˙ a¯/Standard
Arabic,
aiming
to
provide
a presentation of various uses of the vernacular varieties in recent
literature.
The
two
main
countries
treated
here
are
Egypt
and
Morocco. Egypt has undoubtedly been a forerunner when it comes to
literary production in general and the amount of writing in the verna-
cular, and has naturally received more attention by scholars. Morocco,
on the other hand, has only more recently witnessed an increase in
the use of da¯rija for written purposes, which has also received some
scholarly attention. Factors mentioned as reasons for Moroccan da¯rija’s
late bloom as a literary variety are the late development of literary
production, as well as the wide use of French as literary language
(Miller 2017: 92). Jordi Aguade´ describes a ‘veritable cultural boom’
from the beginning of the twenty-ﬁrst century, and states that ‘it is
not surprising that some authors pay now more attention to their own
dialect, a language which allows them to reach a better expressivity
and more realism’ (2006: 254).

23.2
The Vernacular Reﬂecting Direct Speech/Oral
Literature
A common factor for use of the vernacular in literature is when it is employed
to reﬂect direct speech. Manfred Woidich (2010) provides a rich overview of
different stages in Egyptian literature, including, for example, the vernacular
dialogues and zajal in the satirical magazines of the late nineteenth and early
twentieth century, started by the leading ﬁgures Yaʿqu¯b S˙annu¯ʿ and ʿAbd
Alla¯h al-Nadı¯m.1 The written manifestation of direct speech per se is drama.
Although debates have concerned language choice in theatre, it is no longer
a disputed practice to write dialogue in the vernacular. This is not limited to
Egypt, but is evident at least also in Morocco (Miller 2017) and Tunisia
(Walters 2003). However, as several scholars point out, the function of the
written vernacular in plays in reﬂecting direct speech is conﬁrmed by the fact
that the plays’ paratext and stage instructions are usually written in fus˙h˙ a¯
(Walters 2003; Mejdell 2006; Miller 2017).
In Morocco, these types of texts in the vernacular have started to enjoy
increased attention also in Arabic as metalanguage (Miller 2017), together
with publications of texts which Miller (2017) refers to as ‘oral literature’,
such as zajal, malh˙u¯n, songs and proverbs. Literatures which have an ‘oral’
status are often left out of the category ‘dialect literature’. However, they
all serve an important role in the development and spread of vernacular in
writing (ibid.).
23.3
Vernacular in the First-Person Voice
Employment of direct speech or the ﬁrst-person narrative perspective
when writing in vernacular has long been common. Referring to Egypt,
it is pointed out by Diem (1974), Zack (2001), and Woidich (2010), and
a special case of ﬁrst-person narrations in ʿa¯mmiyya were the mud¯akkira¯t
genre of the 1920s and 30s.2 These mud¯akkira¯t were presented as narrated
by marginalized ﬁctional narrators to a journalist. Woidich explains the
development as follows:
One recognizes here the argument of the recorded verbal speech, which is
advanced here to justify the writing in the dialect: not in the form of
dialogues, but – and this is the new here – in the form of monologues in
the ﬁrst-person i.e. ‘me’ or ‘we’. From dialogue and role-play, formal
development thus continues to monologue.
(Woidich 2010: 75; my translation)
1 See Fahmy (2011) for a comprehensive treatment of Egyptian popular culture and mass media from the end of the
nineteenth century.
2 Most of these have the word muḏakkiraˉt in their titles, while others rather have ḫawaˉṭir (thoughts), iʿtiraˉfaˉt (confessions),
or h
˙
awaˉditˉ wa aˉraˉāʾ (stories and views). See Häusler (1990) for an exhaustive treatment of this genre.
5 6 6
E V A M A R I E H Å L A N D

To refer to a work written only in fus˙h˙ a¯ or only ʿa¯mmiyya does not shed
sufﬁcient light on the actual situation, neither in recent nor in modern
literature. Several scholars have reported the use of vernacular words or
sentences in a basically fus˙h˙ a¯ narrative (Diem 1974: 109; Somekh 1991:
29–30; Eid 2002). In addition, at least in Egyptian literature, it is
a widespread technique to insert ʿa¯mmiyya elements in an otherwise fus˙h˙ a¯
text, ﬂagging them by parentheses or quotation marks (Ha˚land 2018). We
prefer here to refer to the base variety in which a work or part(s) of it is
written.3 The vast majority of Arabic novels and short-story collections have
fus˙h˙ a¯ as their base variety in narratives. However, narratives that have
a vernacular base wholly or partly appear from time to time. An important
aspect to these, which is pointed to by Zack (2001), is that they are also often
narrated from the ﬁrst-person narrative perspective. With few exceptions,
such as Qant˙ara alladhi kafar by Mus˙t˙afa Musˇarrafa from 1965 and the short
story As-sayyid afandı¯ (Mr Sayyid) by Samı¯r ʿAbd al-Ba¯qı¯ from 1994, most novels
and short stories written in the Egyptian ʿa¯mmiyya have been written from
a ﬁrst-person narrative perspective.4 Some examples are S˙abrı¯ ʿUt¯ma¯n’s Rih˙ la
ﬁn-nı¯l (Journey on the Nile) (1965), Laban il-ʿas˙fu¯r (Bird’s Milk) by Yu¯suf al-Qaʿı¯d
(1994) (Zack 2001), Min h˙ ala¯wit ir-ru¯h˙ by S˙afa¯ʾ ʿAbd al-Munʿim (1998) and Ba¯nhu¯f
Ištra¯sa¯ (Bahnhofstraße) by Sa¯mih˙ Farag (1999) (Woidich 2010).
The ﬁrst-person narrative perspective still appears to be the most com-
mon perspective when the vernacular is used in narrative sections of
novels and short stories. Recent examples from Egypt are the riwa¯ya
(novel) ʿAsˇar kara¯sı¯ g˘ild s˙afra¯ʾ (Ten Yellow Leather Chairs) (Abu¯ al-Saʿu¯ d 2012),
which has ﬁve out of twelve chapters in the vernacular, and the short-story
collection Wiš ksu¯f (Shy) (Fa¯ru¯ q 2014), which has several stories narrated in
ʿa¯mmiyya. A common characteristic of the two books is that they consist of
several chapters or stories narrated from a ﬁrst-person point of view by
characters representing various strata of society, reminding us of skaz. As
deﬁned by Baldick (2008), the term skaz is used
more generally in studies of ﬁctional prose for the exploitation of collo-
quial speech in ﬁrst-person narratives, especially where the narrator’s
language is marked by non-literary or indecorous features such as slang
and dialect terms, expletives, solecisms, malapropisms, hesitations, and
other indications that the narrative is to be understood as being ‘spoken’
rather than written down.
The different strata of society are, in both books, carefully mirrored in the
different styles of ʿa¯mmiyya, as well as, to some degree, in the fus˙h˙ a¯ styles.5
The ﬁrst-person narrative appears to be a common choice among other
3 We avoid here the use of ‘matrix’ or ‘dominant’, so as not to be confused with terminology associated with
codeswitching.
4 Rosenbaum (2011) reports that the short story As-sayyid afand ıˉ was ﬁrst published in the weekly ‘Ṣabaˉh˙ al-Ḫ ayr’, and
later in a collection of short stories and poetry by the name Mawt as-sayyid afandıˉ (The Death of Mr Sayyid) in 1999.
5 See Hå land (2019) for an analysis of language choices in the former.
23 Vernacular Varieties in Recent Arabic Literature
567

Arab writers writing in the vernacular as well. The Moroccan writer Mura¯d
ʿAlamı¯’s novel Ar-rah˙ ı¯l damʿa misa¯ﬁra (Leaving, a Traveling Tear) from 2012 is
a travel narrative in Moroccan da¯rija, written from the ﬁrst-person narra-
tive perspective (Elinson 2013: 721). Idrı¯s Misna¯wı¯ wrote an all-da¯rija work,
labelled ‘stories’ in 2009 by the name Ta¯ʿirwuru¯t (Rose) (ibid.). Elinson
informs us that in this work, ‘the narrator speaks directly to the reader’
(2013: 721). Yu¯ suf Fa¯d˙il published the novel Qis˙s˙at h˙ adı¯qat al-h˙ ayawa¯n (The
Zoo Story) in 2008. The novel has, according to Moestrup (2012), fus˙h˙ a¯ as its
base, but ‘it is interspersed abundantly with vernacular exclamations,
inner monologues and long dialogues’. It can be expected that both inner
monologues and dialogues appear from a ﬁrst-person narrative perspec-
tive. The Syrian author Luqma¯n Dayrakı¯’s short-story collection Min sirat al-
hirr al-manzilı¯ (Excerpts from a House Cat’s Biography) from 2006 has two stories
in vernacular, and both are narrated from the ﬁrst-person perspective. The
same appears to be true of the novel Nazu¯la wa h
˘
ayt˙ asˇ-sˇayt˙a¯n (Tenants and
Cobwebs) (1986) by the Iraqi author Samı¯r Naqqa¯sˇ described by Clive Holes,
who says that in this ‘vernacular novel’, ‘[a]ll the characters tell their story in
their distinctive Baghdadi dialect: Muslim, Christian, or Jewish’ (2013: 295;
my italics). The Tunisian writer Fa¯tin al-Fa¯ziʿ’s (2018) book Asra¯r ʿa¯ʾiliyya
(Family Secrets) is written in Tunisian da¯rija from a ﬁrst-person narrative
perspective (inner voice).
Third-person narratives in ʿa¯mmiyya prove to be rare, but they do appear.
Two recent works by Egyptian authors are examples: the riwa¯ya Mu¯za¯yı¯k
(Mosaic) (2011) by H˙ usayn ʿAbd al-ʿAlı¯m, which has nine of twelve chapters
narrated from the third-person narrative perspective, and the short-story
collection ʿAtab il-buyu¯t (The Doorsteps) (2014) by Mah˙ mu¯ d Abu¯ Du¯ ma (2014),
also entirely in ʿa¯mmiyya and in which ﬁve of ten stories are narrated from
the third-person perspective. Elinson (2017) mentions three other novels
written in the Moroccan da¯rija, although he does not mention their narra-
tive perspective: ʿUkka¯z r-rı¯h˙ (The Wind’s Crutch) from 2013, Saʿd l-balda (The
Town’s Lucky Star) from 2014, and Alwa¯h˙ l-bu¯h˙ (Tablets of Confession) from 2015,
all by Idrı¯s Misna¯wı¯.
23.4
Dialogues of Novels and Short Stories
Reﬂection of direct speech in a realistic manner has also been, and con-
tinues to be, the most important incentive for using the vernacular in
dialogues of novels and short stories. In what is considered the ﬁrst
authentic Egyptian novel, Zaynab from 1914 by Muh˙ ammad H˙ usayn
Haykal, both fus˙h˙ a¯ and ʿa¯mmiyya were used in dialogues. According to
Paul Starkey, Haykal’s use of vernacular in dialogues ‘provided a model
that was widely imitated by succeeding writers’ (2006: 103). According to
Aguade´ (2006), using vernacular in dialogues of novels is not rare in
Moroccan novels either, and according to Sawaie (online 2011), ‘it is not
5 6 8
E V A M A R I E H Å L A N D

unusual to encounter dialogues in the dialectal varieties’ in Jordanian
novels and short stories. The Syrian author H˙ anna¯ Mı¯na¯ is mentioned by
Somekh as among the novelists who ‘ﬂuctuated between AM [ʿa¯mmiyya]
and FU [fus˙h˙ a¯] in their dialogues’ (Somekh 1991: 25).
It is often emphasized that most Egyptian authors use the Standard
Egyptian dialect: the dialect of educated Cairenes, in dialogues. Although
this should not be dismissed, there are several examples of the use of
dialects or sociolects other than that of educated Cairenes. Rosenbaum
(2008b) provides several examples of stereotypical features of s˙aʿı¯dı¯ (Upper
Egyptian) and falla¯h˙ ı¯ (peasant) dialects as portrayed in literature. An exam-
ple of an Egyptian novel where peasant dialect is represented is ʿAbd al-
Rah˙ ma¯n al-Sˇarqa¯wı¯’s Al-ard˙ (The land) (1954). In the more recent novel, Nisa¯ʾ
il-karantı¯na¯ (Women of Karantina) by Na¯ʾil al-T˙ u¯ h˘ ı¯ (2013), distinct features of
the Alexandrian dialect are frequently used.
The best-selling novel from 2005, Bana¯t ir-riya¯d˙ (Girls of Riyadh), by the
Saudi writer Raja¯ʾ al-S˙a¯niʿ is another example of the use of various national
and regional vernacular dialects in dialogues.6 For Morocco, Elinson points
to Muh˙ ammad Barra¯da and Yu¯ suf Fa¯d˙il as two authors who ‘utilize linguis-
tic diversity to great effect’ (2013: 728).
Egyptian authors exhibit diverging attitudes towards which register of
ʿa¯mmiyya should be used in dialogues; a moderate register which is
assumed to be more easily understood by all Arabs, or to reﬂect the great
variation within the Egyptian ʿa¯mmiyya (Ha˚land 2018). The travelling per-
spective is an incentive for authors choosing to use only fus˙h˙ a¯ in dialogues
(ibid.). Elinson (2013: 719–20) refers to the Moroccan author ʿAbd al-Fatta¯h˙
Kı¯lı¯t˙u¯ , who reports of a feeling of ‘alienation’ when reading an Egyptian
novel that has dialogues in ʿa¯mmiyya.
Neither do all Egyptian authors agree that the popular claim that
Egyptian ʿa¯mmiyya is understood by most Arabs due to TV and ﬁlm produc-
tion justiﬁes writing dialogues in ʿa¯mmiyya, or they are not convinced that
this situation will last. This again brings us to the point of target audience:
whether the text is meant for all Arabs, or only co-nationals of the author.
Other incentives for avoiding ʿa¯mmiyya in dialogues (as well) are the ideo-
logically motivated support for fus˙h˙ a¯ and its continuation, survival, or
revival (nahd˙ a).7 Although Egyptian authors do have diverging attitudes
concerning choice of register for dialogues, a recent study shows that
ʿa¯mmiyya still appears to be the most frequent choice. Out of ﬁfty-one
randomly selected riwa¯ya¯t written by Egyptian authors below ﬁfty years
of age and published between 2011 and 2014, eighteen had only fus˙h˙ a¯ as
the base variety in dialogues, twenty-seven had ʿa¯mmiyya as the base
6 See Abboud-Haggar (2010) for an analysis of the language(s) of this novel.
7 See Cachia (1967), Diem (1974), and Somekh (1991) for treatment of language choice in modern Arabic literature,
and Eisele (2003) and Suleiman (2004) for discussions on ideology.
23 Vernacular Varieties in Recent Arabic Literature
569

variety for dialogues and six had no apparent base variety in dialogues
(Ha˚land 2017).8
Certainly, the issue of vernacular or fus˙h˙ a¯ in dialogue is not limited to
either fus˙h˙ a¯ or vernacular; using both varieties is another common prac-
tice. One practice has been to render uneducated speakers’ dialogue in
the vernacular, whereas the educated speakers speak in fus˙h˙ a¯, even
though this does not reﬂect reality (Diem 1974: 109). The practice does
not appear to be as widespread today in Egypt, although more studies are
needed from more countries. Some authors aim for a mimetic represen-
tation of language use, where the situation, not only the character,
determines the choice of variety, which may also include codeswitching.
Abboud-Haggar argues that in ʿAla¯ʾ al-Aswa¯nı¯’s novel ʿIma¯rat yaʿqu¯biya¯n
(The Yacoubian Building) from 2002, there is a ‘manipulation of the diglossic
reality of the Arabic language and its social meaning’ (2010: 210), where
fus˙h˙ a¯ in dialogues does not always represent realistic use, but rather
indexes relations of religion and authority. In her study on language
and identity, Reem Bassiouney contends that code choice in dialogues
can be used to ‘highlight the identities of the different protagonists’
(2014: 264). She argues:
Writers use code-choice and codeswitching between SA [Standard Arabic]
and ECA [Egyptian Colloquial Arabic] in dialogues as a device that does not
reﬂect real patterns of language use, but rather redeﬁnes and reconstructs
different stances for the protagonists within different people in their lives.
(Bassiouney 2014: 241)
In her examination of language choice in short-story collections,
Mushira Eid (2002) ﬁnds that in one of her collections, Salwa¯ Bakr makes
no distinction between narrative and dialogue, and that ‘the language of
dialogue can mostly be read in either variety, thus literally tearing down
the linguistic divide in her stories’ (223). Tearing down the linguistic divide
has been further explored by Mejdell (2014) and what she refers to, build-
ing on Kathrine Woolard, as ‘strategic bivalency’.
23.5
Representation of Speech in Foreign Languages
The established norm of representing foreign language dialogues in fus˙h˙ a¯
(Diem 1974: 97) appears to be followed to a large degree also in recent
literature. However, the Egyptian author Na¯rı¯ma¯n al-Sˇ a¯milı¯ challenges
this norm in her novel Sifr iʿa¯dat t-takwı¯n (Re-Genesis) from 2012. She ‘trans-
lates’ foreign language dialogues into Egyptian ʿa¯mmiyya, marking them
with quotation marks to distinguish them from other dialogue in Egyptian
ʿa¯mmiyya. Her motivation is to represent the dialogues in the reader’s
8 The selected books were labelled riwaˉya, although not all ﬁt with the criteria for ‘novel’.
5 7 0
E V A M A R I E H Å L A N D

mother tongue (Egyptian ʿa¯mmiyya), to let the readers feel that the char-
acters are speaking in their own mother tongues (Ha˚land 2018).
23.6
The Vernacular Varieties in Other (Literary) Genres
Although fus˙h˙ a¯ still dominates the narratives of short stories and novels,
other genres have appeared or reappeared and enjoy greater acceptability
for use of the vernacular. Like folk literature, these genres do not easily get
accepted as canonical literature, but are often rather referred to as adab
h˘afı¯f (light literature). They include the best-sellers Ta¯xı¯ (Taxi) by H˘ a¯lid al-
H˘ amı¯sı¯ (2006) and ʿA¯ yza atgawwiz (I Want to Get Married) by G˙ a¯da ʿAbd al-ʿᾹl
(2008). A genre that has become established in Egypt in the early twenty-
ﬁrst century is adab sa¯h
˘
ir (satirical/satiric/sarcastic literature). In a foreword
likely to have been written at the beginning of the 1980s, Luwı¯s ʿAwad˙
claims that adab sa¯h˘ir is the ‘legitimate son’ of adab al-hija¯ʾ and the cousin of
al-adab al-fuka¯hı¯ (Ha˚land 2017). Whereas adab sa¯h
˘
ir has been used as a label
for
text
aiming
to
satirize
negative
aspects
of
the
society
with
a correctional goal, it appears that in the new wave of books labelled
adab sa¯h˘ir, books simply based on humour are also included (Haland
2017). The text types of adab sa¯h
˘
ir today are very varied, and a work of
this type can contain a medley of text types including articles, short
stories, memoirs, diary, dialogues, lists, words of wisdom, jokes,
Facebook posts, or tweets as well as other elements, such as drawings,
cartoons, photographs, and memes. Richard Jacquemond sums up the
elements which allow the reader to recognize a book as adab sa¯h
˘
ir: ‘humor-
ous title and/or subtitle, a cover illustration using the codes of press
caricature, a well-chosen excerpt of the book as blurb’ (2016: 358). Some
examples of recent adab sa¯h˘ir are Kull al-t˙uruq tuʾaddı¯ li-sittı¯n-60 da¯hiya (All
Roads Lead to Disaster) (2016) by Mus˙t˙afa¯ Sˇuhayyib, Ba¯lt˙u¯ wa fa¯nilla wa ta¯b
(Overcoat, T-Shirt and Tablet) (2016) by Ah˙ mad ʿA¯ t˙if, and Jaʿalu¯nı¯ ta¯ﬁhan (They
Made Me Useless) by Ma¯zin Ašraf (2012).9
Books are often labelled adab sa¯h˘ir or just sa¯h˘ir directly or indirectly
(Ha˚land 2017). A direct labelling can be (min al-)adab (al-)sa¯h
˘
ir, ittiga¯h sa¯h
˘
ir
(satirical direction) (ʿA¯ t˙if 2016), kita¯b sa¯h
˘
ir tanmawı¯ (satirical developing
book) (Ašraf 2012), kita¯b (dustu¯rı¯/h˙ arakı¯) sa¯h˘ir ((constitutional/movemental)
satirical book), maqa¯la¯t sa¯h
˘
ira (satirical articles), etc. Although it is well
established in Egypt that adab sa¯h˘ir is a genre separate from novels, short
stories, and poetry, with designated shelves in bookstores and its own
category on bookstore websites, it is often not clear whether a book should
be exhibited on this shelf or not. Writers themselves sometimes distance
themselves from the label, or any other label, in the prefaces of their
9 The titles are allusions to ‘all roads lead to Rome’, the ﬁlm title Sˇuˉrt wa faˉnilla wa kaˉb (Shorts, T-Shirt and a Cap) from
2000 and the ﬁlm title Jaʿaluˉnıˉ mujriman (They Made Me a Criminal) from 1955.
23 Vernacular Varieties in Recent Arabic Literature
571

books. For example, Jiha¯d al-Ta¯biʿı¯ writes the following in the introduction
of her book Il-h˙ ubb fı¯ zaman il-bu¯tuks (Love in the Time of Botox):10
This is not a book, it is a small piece of me, it is a bit of outpouring on
paper, some pictures that I have taken of my thoughts, yes you are in the
picture, sorry, I took them quickly and didn’t have the time to tell you:
stand straight, ﬁx your hair. Your mouth turns out crooked and your hair
is messy, and the picture is a bit hazy, but that is the truth.
This is not a satirical book (kita¯b sa¯h˘ir), how can you even allow someone
make fun of you, and at the same time buy his book!!
It is not a serious book either, how can you let someone act in
a pernickety way and pretend that he is the Mr. Know-it-all writer and
you say after him: Amen?!!
(al-Ta¯biʿı¯ 2012: 6)
In addition to this genre, we should shed light on other books that are
not riwa¯ya¯t, short-story collections, poetry, or adab sa¯h
˘
ir, but written com-
pletely or partly in ʿa¯mmiyya, or a mix of ʿa¯mmiyya and fus˙h˙ a¯. One such book
is Sˇarı¯f ʿAbd al-Ha¯dı¯’s (2015) Ḥabı¯b qalb ba¯ba¯ (Daddy’s Sweetheart), which is
labelled iʿtira¯fa¯t (confessions). The subtitle of the book is Hawa¯gis ab h˘a¯yif
bintu tikbar wa ma-tla¯qı¯hu¯sˇ (Concerns of a father fearing his daughter grow-
ing up without him), and it consists of entries where the writer addresses
his daughter and tells her about his experience having a child, the expecta-
tions, upbringing, and his wishes and advice for his daughter. The book
has parts in fus˙h˙ a¯, parts in ʿa¯mmiyya, and parts where the two varieties
alternate, all written from the ﬁrst-person narrative perspective. A rapper
who signs by the name Za¯b T¯ arwat (Ah˙ mad T¯ arwat) published a book in
2015 with the name H˙ abı¯b(a)tı¯ (My Beloved). It is an epistolary book in which
the author writes a letter to each of the beloved women in his life: his
mother, sister, daughter, wife, and Egypt. After each letter he leaves four
pages blank but with lines for the reader to write some words to their
beloved women.
Sindirı¯la¯ sı¯krı¯t (Cinderella’s Secret) by Hiba al-Sawwa¯h˙
(2017) quickly
became a ‘bestseller’ in Egypt. It was released at the Cairo Book Fair in
January 2017, and in September 2017, it was published in its twenty-sixth
edition. By 30 November 2017 it had received 1,179 ratings and 191
reviews on Goodreads.11 Hiba Al-Sawwa¯h˙ is a researcher, writer, and
specialized trainer in family relations and self-development living in
Canada. The book is introduced by a young girl asking her mother ques-
tions related to the story of Cinderella. As a response, the mother tells her
the story of Cinderella; however, the story begins after the marriage to the
prince, and Cinderella is a typical Egyptian woman (also referred to as
šu¯šu¯). As dialogues between Cinderella and the Fairy Godmother develop,
the book turns into a life-guidance book with humorous comments and
10 The allusion is to the novel Love in the Time of Cholera/ El amor en los tiempos del cólera by Gabriel García Márquez
from 1985.
11 www.goodreads.com/book/show/34105854 (last accessed 18 December 2020).
5 7 2
E V A M A R I E H Å L A N D

cartoons of the Egyptian Cinderella. The major part of the book is in
ʿa¯mmiyya; fus˙h˙ a¯ is used when the story of Cinderella is introduced, starting
with the traditional opening ka¯n ya¯ maka¯n (once upon a time). Again, the
use of ʿa¯mmiyya is accompanied by direct speech, either in dialogues
between Cinderella and the Fairy Godmother, daughter and mother, or
when the writer is talking directly to the reader, using ﬁrst- and second-
person pronouns.
Motivations given by several of the Egyptian authors of these genres are
again linked to the oral and direct speech function; they explain that they
want the reader to experience what is written as a conversation with a friend
(Ha˚land 2018). Other motivations stated by authors are that they want to
write in the language they think in, and that they want to avoid the
authoritarian index of fus˙h˙ a¯ (ibid.).
The list of books of various genres written in Egyptian ʿa¯mmiyya as the
base variety or where ʿa¯mmiyya is used in major parts of the book is long,
and I have provided here only a few examples. The phenomenon appears to
be, to our knowledge, much larger in Egypt than in any other Arab country,
but there are a few examples from other countries as well. One work from
Morocco from 2006, is Yu¯ suf Amı¯n al-ʿAlamı¯’s book Tqarqı¯b n-na¯b (Gossip/
Chatter), published in Moroccan da¯rija. Aguade´ (2005) [sic], who labels it
a ‘modern “bestiary”’, describes the content of this work as ‘a collection
of thirty texts which are a kind of short “ﬂashes” portraying (in a very
ironical, biting and sometimes even ruthless prose) several human types
very common in the present Moroccan society’ (2005: 265). The Tunisian
journalist and author Tawfı¯q bin Barı¯k published in 2013 a book in da¯rija by
the name Kalb bin kalb (Dog, Son of a Dog), which was apparently not only in
da¯rija, but had ‘strong’ language as well. It is described in a journalistic
article as sa¯h
˘
ir (satirical), s˙a¯dim (shocking), and adab sˇirrı¯r (wicked
literature).12 In 2017 another Tunisian writer, Muh˙ ammad Duqqı¯, pub-
lished a book by the name H
˘
a¯ltı¯ h
˘
ad˙ra¯ʾ (My Aunt Green), which was described
in an article entitled ‘Ḫ a¯ltı¯ h˘ad˙ra¯ʾ: the return of adab sa¯h˘ir’. Its composition is
described as a ‘humorous artistic union of fragments from popular satirical
poetry and expressive caricatures’.13 Increased scholarly focus on publica-
tions of different and new/renewed genres across the Arab world will reveal
how widespread this phenomenon is.
23.7
Mixing and Alternating Varieties
The above-mentioned genres do certainly appear to enjoy greater accep-
tance in terms of use of the vernacular, and authors tend to rather choose
12 www.aljazeera.net/news/cultureandart/2013/11/11/ﺍﻟﺘﻮﻧﺴﻲ-ﺗﻮﻓﻴﻖ-ﺑﻦ-ﺑﺮﻳﻚ-ﻭ-ﺍﻷﺩﺏ-ﺍﻟﺸﺮّﻳﺮ(last accessed 5 February
2019).
13 www.babnet.net/festivaldetail-141346.asp (last accessed 18 December 2020).
23 Vernacular Varieties in Recent Arabic Literature
573

the vernacular for genres that have less ﬁrm norms for language use
(Ha˚land 2018). However, these works are rarely in ‘pure’ vernacular
throughout the work: they often contain switches on different levels in
the text, either between chapters, sections, and paragraph, or within
paragraph and sentences.
Fus˙ h˙ aˉmmiyya
Alternating use of the two varieties often appears as a distinct style, as
Rosenbaum (2000a) describes is the case with fus˙h˙ a¯mmiyya.14 He coined the
term to describe a style in which fus˙h˙ a¯ and ʿa¯mmiyya elements are used
alternately in written texts. He claims that the elements are of equal value,
that the style often occurs in prose narrated from a ﬁrst-person perspec-
tive, and that it does not contain hypercorrections, as fus˙h˙ a¯ is not the ideal,
but rather the mix of the two. He points to hendiadys and parallelism as
common features of the style, and says that a ‘unique feature’ of this style
is that it can be created by elements from both varieties (ibid.: 77). These
features of the style described by Rosenbaum are found frequently in
recent Egyptian literature, especially of the adab sa¯h
˘
ir genre.
23.8
Genre and Parodic Stylization
Adab sa¯h˘ir works (in particular) often have an abundance of different text
genres throughout the book, and switches often take place between these,
for example poetry, ‘important notice’, or various types of lists, such as
words of wisdom, common sayings, newspaper headlines, constitution
draft, ‘how to’ instructions, and vocabulary lists. Several of these genres
are associated with a certain variety, such as fus˙h˙ a¯ for newspaper headlines
and constitution draft, or ʿa¯mmiyya for common sayings or proverbs. The
functions of these switches are particularly visible when the text is written
predominantly in one variety and where the switch creates a contrast.
Connotations and indexes of ʿa¯mmiyya and fus˙h˙ a¯ are utilized through parody
and contrasts to enrich the humorous aspects of the text. When a shift takes
place from ʿa¯mmiyya to fus˙h˙ a¯, fus˙h˙ a¯ can be found to be a pastiche or parody
on a speciﬁc genre, a phenomenon which is also identiﬁed in the book ʿA¯ yza
atgawwiz (I Want to Get Married) (Rosenbaum 2010). The Russian scholar
14 Rosenbaum notes that after writing the draft of his article, he was made aware of an article entitled ‘al-lug˙a.. al-
Fus˙ʿammiyya’ by ʿAlıˉ ʿAbd al-Waˉh˙id Waˉfıˉ. According to Rosenbaum, ʿAbd al-Waˉh˙id Waˉfıˉ uses this term differently: ‘he
considers ʿĀmmiyya as a “poor” language not suitable as a tool for writing texts of literary or scientiﬁc merit, and
describes the use of Fus
˙
h
˙
aˉ by writers of ʿaˉmmiyya who have no choice but to resort to the former because of the
weaknesses of ʿāmmiyya. The style thus created is disparagingly named by him “fus˙ʿammiyya” and is severely attacked
and criticized’ (Rosenbaum 2000a: 71). Interestingly, ʿUtmaˉn s˙abrıˉ, in his introduction to Rih˙ la fıˉ n-nıˉl from 1965
refers to the term al-fus˙ʿammiyya as equivalent to al-lug˙a al-wust˙aˉ and al-lug˙a al- tˉaˉlitˉa (from excerpt in Doss and
Davies 2013: 129).
5 7 4
E V A M A R I E H Å L A N D

Mikhail Bakhtin refers to parodic stylization as means by which heteroglossia
(lit. different-speech-ness) enters the text (novel), particularly frequent in
the comic novel. He refers to parodic stylization of ‘generic, professional and
other languages . . . as well as compact masses of direct authorial discourse –
pathos-ﬁlled, moral-didactic, sentimental-elegiac or idyllic’ (2010 [1981]:
302). Bakhtin’s notion can describe ways in which fus˙h˙ a¯ often enters an
otherwise ʿa¯mmiyya-based text. Occasionally, the genre is explicitly stated in
the text, but it is often left uncommented upon.
23.9
Change of Narrative Mode
Rosenbaum (2008a, 2012) draws attention to switches between the vari-
eties that appear as a result of a change of narrative mode. He identiﬁes
a function which he refers to as ‘changing the point of view through the
use of CEA [Colloquial Egyptian Arabic]’, which can reﬂect both ‘free
indirect speech’ and the thoughts of a character. He shows, inter alia,
how changing from fus˙h˙ a¯ to ʿa¯mmiyya when there is a ‘protagonist narra-
tor’ ‘helps in identifying the switches between the narrator’s reports and
thoughts’ (2012: 300; italics added).
23.10
Orthography
The orthography of Egyptian ʿa¯mmiyya has received some attention by
scholars. Refaat El-Farnawany (1981)’s doctoral dissertation ‘A¨ gyptisch-
arabisch als gescriebene Sprache: Probleme der Verschriftung einer
Umgangssprache’ provides a comprehensive overview of the orthographi-
cal solutions in an impressive number of source texts ranging from plays,
poetry, and mud¯akkira¯t to short stories and novels. Unaware of El-
Farnawany’s work, Rosenbaum (2004) published a similar work based on
a large number of texts. He refutes previous claims that the Arabic alpha-
bet is ill-suited for representing the Egyptian ʿa¯mmiyya, and claims that
‘the script of Egyptian ʿa¯mmiyya should be seen as an ʿa¯mmiyya Arabic
script and not as a fus˙h˙ a¯ one, whose characters have different functions
from those of the characters of fus˙h˙ a¯, or have absorbed new functions from
those of the characters of fus˙h˙ a¯’ (318). He also describes the orthography of
ʿa¯mmiyya as in a ‘ﬂuid state’, but that the many writers who employ
ʿa¯mmiyya ‘now share conventions of orthography, albeit with many varia-
tions’ (318–19). In a more recent study, Lucia Avallone compares selected
items from ten texts published between 1878 and 2008 and sees that the
most recent texts ‘follow a more restricted set of norm in respect to the
past
writers’
(2016:
85).15
Perhaps
resulting
from
the
observed
15 She says, however, that the article is based on the ﬁrst phase of larger research in progress.
23 Vernacular Varieties in Recent Arabic Literature
575

conventionalization of orthography, several writers also make use of the
ʿa¯mmiyya orthography to mirror dialects, for example using the letter jı¯m for
Cairene qa¯f/hamza, to present the Upper Egyptian dialect; we also ﬁnd ortho-
graphical representations of socially related variants such as palatalization
of /t/, /t˙/, /d/ and /d˙/, voicing of /s/, ﬂapping of /d/, emphatization of /s/, /t/, and /z/,
de-emphatization of /q/, devoicing of /d/, /g/, and /zˇ/, and vowel backing and
(other) consonant shifts (Ha˚land 2018).
With the increased production in and focus on written da¯rija in Morocco,
its orthography has also received attention from scholars. Aguade´ (2006)
introduces an article on the matter by comparing Moroccan literary pro-
duction in da¯rija to Rosenbaum’s (2004) description of Egypt, holding that
‘[t]he situation in Morocco is completely opposite: publications in
Moroccan dialect are very scarce because almost all authors prefer to
write either in Standard Literary Arabic or in French’ (Aguade´ 2006: 253).
Aguade´ bases his orthographical description on theatre, short literary
texts, dialogues of novels, compilations of proverbs and sayings,
a driving theory guide, and articles from a weekly. He concludes that ‘the
orthography of Moroccan Arabic is today still far from being uniform: lack
of uniformity and inconsistency are common features of all the analyzed
texts’ (Aguade´ 2006: 269). Marcin Michalski (2016) conﬁrms in his study of
Moroccan orthography that there is still great variation in orthographical
choices.
23.11
Translations
Translations into the vernacular variety have also played a role in the
writing of ʿa¯mmiyya, and several of the ﬁrst translations of drama by,
amongst others, Molie`re and Racine were translations into Egyptian
ʿa¯mmiyya by ʿUt¯ma¯n Muh˙ ammad Jala¯l. A book that has been translated
into many different languages, including Arabic vernaculars, is Antoine de
Saint-Exupe´ry’s Le Petit Prince. It was translated into Lebanese vernacular by
Mu¯ rı¯s ʿAwwa¯d in 1986 (Kallas 2009), Tunisian Arabic by al-Ha¯dı¯ al-Ba¯lig˙ in
1997 (Walters 2003), Algerian Arabic in 2008 by Za¯hiya T˙ a¯lbı¯ and Lucienne
Brousse (Nicosia 2016), Moroccan Arabic by ʿAbd al-Rah˙ ı¯m al-Yu¯ sı¯ in 2009
(Nicosia 2016), and Hassaniya Arabic in 2017 by ʿAzı¯za al-Barna¯wı¯.16 Mu¯ rı¯s
ʿAwwa¯d also published a translation of the Bible into Lebanese vernacular
in 2002/3 (Plonka 2006; Kallas 2009). Mura¯d ʿAlamı¯ has translated Rainer
Maria Rilke’s Duino Elegies and Gotthold Ephraim Lessing’s Nathan the Wise
into Moroccan da¯rija (both 2010), as well as collections of folktales and
jokes (2009 and 2012) (Elinson 2013), and ʿAbd al-Rah˙ ı¯m al-Yu¯ sı¯ has pro-
vided a Moroccan da¯rija translation of Samuel Taylor Coleridge’s The Rime of
the Ancient Mariner (2012) (Elinson 2013). In 2016, the young novelist and
16 www.petit-prince-collection.com/lang/show_livre.php?lang=en&id=4219 (last accessed 18 December 2020).
5 7 6
E V A M A R I E H Å L A N D

translator Na¯rı¯ma¯n al-Sˇa¯mlı¯ provided a ‘translation’ of Abu¯ al-ʿAla¯ʾ al-
Maʿarrı¯’s Risa¯lat al-g˙ ufra¯n (The Epistle of Forgiveness) into Egyptian ʿa¯mmiyya
(al-Maʿarrı¯ 2016).
23.12
Change in the Vernacular’s Valorization
There are several examples throughout history of writers who have expli-
citly stated that their works written in the vernacular were attempts at
proving that the vernacular variety is just as suitable as fus˙h˙ a¯ for ‘serious’
writing; for example Luwı¯s ʿAwad˙’s Mud¯akkira¯t t˙a¯lib baʿt¯a (Memoires of
a Scholarship Student) published in 1965 (Doss and Davies 2013: 115),
Mus˙t˙afa¯ S˙afwa¯n’s translation of Othello into Egyptian ʿa¯mmiyya (Safouan
2007: 52), as well as several of the translations listed in the previous para-
graph (Walters 2003, Elinson 2013). In Lebanon, Saʿı¯d ʿAql (1912–2014) is
known as a staunch advocate of the Lebanese identity and language with
a separate Latin-based alphabet, arguing that the Lebanese dialect is more
inﬂuenced by Phoenician languages than by Arabic. Although not all his
adherents used the Latin-based alphabet, they have produced texts in the
Lebanese vernacular: Michel T˙ra¯d, Mayy Murr, and Mu¯ rı¯s ʿAwwa¯d (Kallas
2009). In addition to his translations, Mu¯ rı¯s ʿAwwa¯d wrote the novel t-Tis˙wı¯ni
(The Enclosure) from 1985 in the Lebanese vernacular.17 In 2009, the writer
and poet Amı¯r Hlayyil started the literary periodical L-ʾArzya¯da.18 It advo-
cates for Phoenicianism and publishes poetry and prose texts, including
translations, in Lebanese vernacular (Plonka 2016).
However, in 2006, Madiha Doss pointed to a more general change in
attitudes towards the Egyptian ʿa¯mmiyya (Doss 2006). This is conﬁrmed in
the survey ‘Language Change in Egypt: Social and Cultural Indicators Survey’
from 2013, where 96 per cent of the respondents deemed ‘ʿa¯mmiyya mis˙riyya’
‘very important’ or ‘important’ to Egypt, and 94 per cent deemed fus˙h˙ a¯ ‘very
important’ or ‘important’ to Egypt. By contrast, only 63 per cent of the
respondents agreed or strongly agreed that ‘ʿa¯mmiyya has a place as
a written language’ (Kebede et al. 2013).19 An equivalent survey conducted
in Rabat reveals than only a little over 30 per cent of the respondents think
that ‘da¯rija has a place as a written language’ (Kindt and Kebede 2017: 27). The
surveys reﬂect the quantity of literature in vernacular from the two countries.
However, several scholars report of change of attitude towards the vernacular
in Morocco (Elinson 2013; Caubet 2017; Miller 2017), Tunisia (Sayahi 2014,
Kallel 2016), and Lebanon (Wardini 2011). More widespread use of the
17 According to the author, it is the ﬁrst novel written in the Lebanese language (Kallas 2009). No information is given
about narrative perspective.
18 According to Plonka (2016), 500–700 copies are made for each issue.
19 The same survey shows that 55 per cent of the respondents deemed ʿaˉmmiyya ‘not suitable’ for novels, whereas
35 per cent deemed it ‘suitable’. For short stories the results showed 47 per cent ‘suitable’ and 45 per cent ‘not
suitable’. Unfortunately, the survey did not make a distinction between narrative sections and dialogue.
23 Vernacular Varieties in Recent Arabic Literature
577

vernacular in popular print media, the establishment of many new private
publishing houses, and not least the spread in writing in vernacular in new
domains appearing with new technology, such as blogs and social media, are
important factors in the increase in use of vernacular varieties in writing.20
Only more research in this ﬁeld from different Arab countries will allow us to
predict the future of the vernacular varieties in literature.
References
Abboud-Haggar, S. (2010). Linguistic varieties in twenty-ﬁrst-century
Arabic novels: An applied study. In R. Bassiouney, ed., Arabic and the
Media: Linguistic Analyses and Applications. Leiden: Brill, 201–15.
ʿAbd Al-ʿAlı¯m, H˙ . (2011).ﻛﻴﺎﻳﻚ[Mosaic]. Al-Qa¯hira: Da¯r Mı¯rı¯t.
ʿAbd-al ʿAl, G˙ . (2008).ﻋﺎﻳﺰﺓﺃﺗﺠﻮﺯ[I Want to Get Married]. Al-Qa¯hira: Da¯r Al-
Sˇu¯ ru¯ q.
ʿAbd al-Ha¯dı¯, S. (2015).ﺣﺒﻴﺒﺔﻗﻠﺐﺑﺎﺑﺎ[Daddy’s Sweetheart]. Al-Qa¯hira: Da¯r
Dawwin.
Abu¯ al-Saʿu¯ d, R. (2012).ﻋﺸﺮﻛﺮﺍﺳﻲﺟﻠﺪﺻﻔﺮﺍء[Ten Yellow Leather Chairs]. Al-
Qa¯hira: Da¯r Layla¯ ‘Kaya¯n Ku¯ rb’.
Abu¯ Du¯ ma, M. (2014).ﺍﻟﺒﻴﻮﺕﻋﺘﺐ[The Doorsteps]. Al-Qa¯hira: Da¯r Sˇ arqiyya¯t.
Aguade´, J. (2005). ‘Darle Al Pico’: Un ‘bestiario’ de Youssouf Amine Elalamy En
A´ rabe Marroquı´. Estudios de dialectologı´a norteafricana y andalusı´, 9, 245–65.
Aguade´, J. (2006). Writing dialect in Morocco. Estudios de dialectologı´a nortea-
fricana y andalusı´, 10, 253–74.
Al-Fa¯ziʿ, F. (2018).ﺃﺳﺮﺍﺭﻋﺎﺋﻠﻴﺔ[Family Secrets]. Tu¯nis: Da¯r Sindiba¯d Tu¯nis lil-Nashr.
Al-H˘ amı¯sı¯, H˘ . (2006).ﻳﺎﻛﺴﺖ[Taxi], Al-Qa¯hira: Da¯r Al-Sˇu¯ ru¯ q.
Al-Maʿarrı¯, A. (2016).ﺭﺳﺎﻟﺔﺍﻟﻐﻔﺮﺍﻥ[The Epistle of Forgiveness], translated by N. al-
Sˇ a¯milı¯. Al-Qa¯hira: Al-Kutub Kha¯n.
Al-S˙a¯niʿ,R. (2005).ﺑﻨﺎﺕﺍﻟﺮﻳﺎﺽ[Girls of Riyadh]. Beirut: Da¯r Al-Sa¯qı¯.
Al-Sˇ arqa¯wı¯, A. (1954)ﺍﻷﺭﺽ[The Land]. Al-Qa¯hira: Da¯r G˙ arı¯b.
Al-Sawwa¯h˙ , H. (2017).ﺳﻨﺪﺭﻳﻼﺳﻴﻜﺮﻳﺖ[Cinderella’s Secret]. Al-Qa¯hira: Al-Riwa¯q.
Al-Ta¯biʿı¯, J. (2012).ﺍﻟﺤﺐﻓﻲﺯﻣﻦﺍﻟﺒﻮﺗﻜﺲ[Love in the Time of Botox]. Al-Jı¯za: Da¯r At˙las.
Al-T˙ u¯ h˘ ı¯, N. (2013).ﻧﺴﺎﺀﺍﻟﻜﺮﻧﺘﻨﻲ[Women of Karantina]. Al-Qa¯hira: Da¯r Mı¯rı¯t.
Ašraf, M. (2012).ﺟﻌﻠﻮﻧﻲﺗﺎﻓﻬﺎً
[They Made Me Useless]. Al-Qa¯hira: Aqla¯m ʿArabiyya.
ʿĀt˙if, A. (2016).ﺑﺎﻟﻄﻮﻭﻓﺎﻧﻠﺔﻭﺗﺎﺏ[Overcoat, T-Shirt and Tablet]. Al-Qa¯hira: Da¯r Tu¯ ya¯.
Avallone, L. (2011). Autori Egiziani Degli Anni Duemila. Blogosfera,
Graphic E Postmoderno: Nuovi Linguaggi Nel Panorama Letterario
Arabo. Kervan – International Journal of Afro-Asiatic Studies, 13(14), 25–46.
20 For language practice in popular print media, see Høigilt (2017, 2019); for literary blogs in Egypt, see Pepe (2017,
2019). See Caubet (2017) for Morocco, Kallel (2016) for Tunisia, Nordenson (2017a) for Kuwait, and Nordenson
(2017b) for Kuwait and Egypt. Although the focus of this chapter is on the use of vernacular varieties, the reader should
be aware of other frequent phenomena in recent (Egyptian) literature, such as the use of foreign languages, especially
English, either in Latin characters or transcribed in Arabic, the use of ‘oral’ language, emoji, etc.; see Rosenbaum
(2000b), Doss (2006), El-Ariss (2010), Avallone (2011), and Avallone (2012).
5 7 8
E V A M A R I E H Å L A N D

Avallone, L. (2012). Scelte Linguistiche E Stile Nella Narrativa Di’ahmad Al-
ʿAydi. Linguistica e ﬁlologia, 32, 161–92.
Avallone, L. (2016). Spelling variants in written Egyptian Arabic: A study on
literary texts. In G. Grigore and G. Bițuna˘, eds., Arabic Varieties: Far and
Wide. Proceedings of the 11th International Conference of Aida – Bucharest (2015).
Bucharest: Editura Universita˘ții din București, 79–86.
Bakhtin, M. M. (2010 [1981]) The Dialogic Imagination: Four Essays, translated
by M. Holquist and C. Emerson. Austin, TX: University of Texas Press.
Baldick, C. (2008). Skaz. In The Oxford Dictionary of Literary Terms. Oxford:
Oxford University Press.
Bassiouney, R. (2014). Language and Identity in Modern Egypt. Edinburgh:
Edinburgh University Press.
Cachia, P. J. E. (1967). The use of the colloquial in modern Arabic literature.
Journal of the American Oriental Society, 87(1), 12–22.
Caubet, D. (2017). Morocco: An informal passage to literacy in Da¯rija
(Moroccan Arabic). In J. Høigilt and G. Mejdell, eds., The Politics of
Written Language in the Arab World. Leiden: Brill, 116–41.
Davies, H. (2006). Dialect literature. In K. Versteegh, M. Eid, A. Elgibali,
M. Woidich, and A. Zaborski, eds., Encyclopedia of Arabic Language and
Linguistics, vol. I. Leiden: Brill, 597–604.
Dayrakı¯, L. (2006).ﻣﻦﺳﻴﺮﺓﺍﻟﻬﺮﺍﻟﻤﻨﺰﻟﻲ
[Excerpts from a House Cat’s Biography].
Beirut: Riad El-Rayyes Books.
Diem, W. (1974). Hochsprache und Dialekt im Arabischen. Untersuchungen zur
heutigen arabischen Zweisprachigkeit. Wiesbaden: Deutsche Morgenländ.
Doss, M. (2006). Cultural dynamics and linguistic practice in contemporary
Egypt. In M. Abdelrahman, I. A. Hamdy, M. Rouchdy, and R. Saad, eds.,
Cultural Dynamics in Contemporary Egypt, vol. 27. Cairo: The American
University in Cairo Press, 51–68.
Doss, M. and Davies, H. (2013).ﺍﻟﻌﺎﻣﻴﺔﺍﻟﻤﺼﺮﻳﺔﺍﻟﻤﻜﺘﻮﺑﺔ
[The Written Egyptian
ʿa¯mmiyya]. Al-Qa¯hira: Al-Hayʾa al-Mis˙riyya al-ʿĀmma lil-Kita¯b.
Eid, M. (2002). Language is a choice: Variation in Egyptian women’s written
discourse. In A. Rouchdy, ed., Language Contact and Language Conﬂict in Arabic:
Variations on a Sociolinguistic Theme. London: RoutledgeCurzon, 203–322.
Eisele, J. C. (2003). Myth, values, and practice in the representation of
Arabic. International Journal of the Sociology of Language, 163, 43–59.
El-Ariss, T. (2010). Hacking the modern: Arabic writing in the virtual age.
Comparative Literature Studies, 47(4), 533–48.
El-Farnawany, R. (1981). Ägyptisch-arabisch als gescriebene Sprache: Probleme der
Verschriftung einer Umgangssprache. Doctoral dissertation, Friedrich-
Alexander-Universität, Erlangen.
Elinson, A. E. (2013). Da¯rija and changing writing practices in Morocco.
International Journal of Middle East Studies, 45(4), 715–30.
Elinson, A. E. (2017). Writing oral and literary culture: The case of the
contemporary Moroccan Zajal. In J. Høigilt and G. Mejdell, eds., The
Politics of Written Language in the Arab World. Leiden: Brill, 190–211.
23 Vernacular Varieties in Recent Arabic Literature
579

Fahmy, Z. (2011). Ordinary Egyptians: Creating the Modern Nation through
Popular Culture. Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press.
Fa¯ru¯ q, D. (2014).ﻭﺵﻛﺴﻮﻑ
[Shy]. Al-Qa¯hira: Da¯r Dawwin.
Häusler, M. (1990). Fiktive ägyptische Autobiographien der zwanziger und dreißi-
ger Jahre. Frankfurt am Main: Peter Lang.
Holes, C. (2013). Orality, culture, and language. In J. Owens, ed., The Oxford
Handbook of Arabic Linguistics. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 281–99.
Høigilt, J. (2017). Dialect with an attitude: Language and criticism in new
Egyptian print media. In J. Høigilt and G. Mejdell, eds., The Politics of
Written Language in the Arab World, Studies in Semitic Languages and
Linguistics. Leiden: Brill, 166–89.
Høigilt, J. (2019). Comics in Contemporary Arab Culture: Politics, Language and
Resistance. New York: IB Tauris.
Ha˚land, E. M. (2017). Adab Sa¯khir (satirical literature) and the use of
Egyptian vernacular. In J. Høigilt and G. Mejdell, eds., The Politics of
Written Language in the Arab World, vol. 90. Leiden: Brill, 142–65.
Ha˚land, E. M. (2018). Language Choice in Egyptian Literature: A Study of Language
Practices and Attitudes among Egyptian Authors in the Years 2011–2014.
Unpublished PhD dissertation, Department of Culture Studies and
Oriental Languages, University of Oslo.
Ha˚land, E. M. (2019). Voices in the novel: Ten Yellow Leather Chairs. In S. Guth
and T. Pepe, eds., Arabic Literature in a Posthuman World: Proceedings of the
12th Conference of the European Association for Modern Arabic Literature Oslo,
30 May–4 June 2016. Wiesbaden: Harrassowitz, 93–118.
Jacquemond, R. (2016). Satiric literature and other ‘popular’ literary genres
in Egypt today. Journal of Arabic and Islamic Studies, 16, 349–67.
Kallas, E. (2009). Maurice Aouad un des Fleurons de la Litte´rature
Vernaculaire Libanaise. Oriente Moderno, 89(1), 101–10.
Kallel, M. A. (2016). ‘La Rolls et la Volkswagen’ Ecrire en Tunisien Sur
Facebook en (2016). Journal of Arabic and Islamic Studies, 16, 253–72.
Kebede, T. A., Kindt, K. T., and Høigilt, J. (2013). Language Change in Egypt:
Social and Cultural Indicators Survey – a Tabulation Report. Oslo: Fafo.
Kindt, K. T. and Kebede, A. T. (2017). A language for the people?
Quantitative indicators of written da¯rija and ʿa¯mmiyya in Cairo and
Rabat. In J. Høigilt and G. Mejdell, eds., The Politics of Written Language in
the Arab World: Writing Change. Leiden/Boston: Brill, 18–40.
Mejdell, G. (2006). The use of colloquial in modern Egyptian Literature – a
Survey. In L. Edzard and J. Retsö, eds., Current Issues in the Analysis of Semitic
Grammar and Lexicon. Wiesbaden: Harrassowitz, 195–213.
Mejdell, G. (2014). Strategic bivalency in written ‘mixed style’? A reading of
Ibrahı¯m ʿı¯sa¯ in Al-Dustu¯r. In O. Durand, A. D. Langone, and G. Mion, eds., Alf
Lahga Wa Lahga: Proceedings of the 9th AIDA Conference. Mu¨nster: Lit Verlag,
273–8.
Michalski, M. (2016). Spelling Moroccan Arabic in Arabic script: The case of
literary texts. In G. Grigore and G. Bițuna˘, eds., Arabic Varieties: Far and
5 8 0
E V A M A R I E H Å L A N D

Wide. Proceedings of the 11th International Conference of AIDA – Bucharest
(2015). Bucharest: Editura Universita˘ții din București, 385–94.
Miller, C. (2017). Contemporary Da¯rija writings in Morocco: Ideology and
practices. In J. Høigilt and G. Mejdell, eds., The Politics of Written Language
in the Arab World: Writing Change, Studies in Semitic Languages and Linguistics.
Leiden: Brill, 90–115.
Moestrup, E. (2012). Diglossia and the ideology of language: The use of the
vernacular
in
a
work
by
Youssef
Fadel.
Orientalia
Suecana,
61
(Supplement), 139–51.
Nicosia, A. (2016). Le Petit Prince in Algerian Arabic: A lexical perspective. In
G. Grigore and G. Bițuna˘, eds., Arabic Varieties: Far and Wide. Proceedings of
the 11th International Conference of AIDA – Bucharest (2015). Bucharest:
Editura Universita˘ții din București, 421–30.
Nordenson, J. (2017a). The language of online activism: A case from
Kuwait. In J. Høigilt and G. Mejdell, eds., The Politics of Written Language
in the Arab World. Leiden: Brill, 266–89.
Nordenson, J. (2017b). #ﺑﻴﺘﺤﺮﺵ_ﻟﻴﻪVs. #ﻟﻦ_ﻧﺴﻤﺢ_ﻟﻚArabic language use on
Twitter in Egypt and Kuwait. In N. S. Eggen and R. Issa, eds., Philologists in
the World: A Festschrift in Honour of Gunvor Mejdell. Oslo: Novus, 341–64.
Pepe, T. (2017). Mixed Arabic as a subversive literary style. In N. S. Eggen
and R. Issa, eds., Philologists in the World: A Festschrift in Honour of Gunvor
Mejdell. Oslo: Novus, 365–97.
Pepe,T. (2019). Blogging from Egypt: Digital Literature, 2005–2016. Edinburgh:
Edinburgh University Press.
Plonka, A. (2006). Le Nationalisme Linguistique Au Liban Autour De Saʿı¯d
ʿaql Et L’ide´e De Langue Libanaise Dans La Revue ‘Lebnaan’ En Nouvel
Alphabet. Arabica, 53(4), 423–71.
Plonka, A. (2016). Between linguistics, poetry, and ideology: The literary
periodical
L-ʾarzya¯da
in
the
Lebanese
language
(June
2009–
October 2014), general presentation, intellectual impacts, index of
authors, and ‘Lebanese’ lexis. In M. Sartori, M. E. B. Giolfo, and
P. Cassuto, eds., Approaches to the History and Dialectology of Arabic in
Honor of Pierre Larcher. Leiden: Brill, 493–515.
Rosenbaum, G. M. (2000a). Fus˙h˙ ammiyya: Alternating style in Egyptian
prose. Journal of Arabic Linguistics, 38, 68–87.
Rosenbaum, G. M. (2000b). Do you parler ‘Arabi’? Mixing colloquialArabic and
European languages in Egyptian literature. Materiaux arabes et sudarabiques –
Groupe d’e´tudes des linguistique et de literature arabes et sudarabiques, 10, 11–48.
Rosenbaum, G. M. (2004). Egyptian Arabic as a written language. Jerusalem
Studies in Arabic and Islam, 29, 281–340.
Rosenbaum, G. M. (2008a). Mixing colloquial and literary Arabic in modern
Egyptian prose through the use of free indirect style and interior mono-
logue. In J. Lentin and J. Grand’Henry, eds., Moyen arabe et varie´te´s mixtes de
l’arabe a` travers l’historie. Louvain-la-Neuve: Universite Catholique de
Louvain, 391–404.
23 Vernacular Varieties in Recent Arabic Literature
581

Rosenbaum, G. M. (2008b). S˙aʿı¯dı¯ and Falla¯h˙ ı¯ versus Cairene dialects: Use
and function in Egyptian culture and literature. In S. Procha´zka and
V. Ritt-Benmimoun, eds., Between the Atlantic and Indian Oceans: Studies on
Contemporary Arabic Dialects: Proceedings from the 7th AIDA Conference Held in
Vienna from 5–9 September 2006. Mu¨ nster: LIT Verlag, 383–94.
Rosenbaum, G. M. (2010). I want to write in the colloquial: An example of
the language of contemporary Egyptian prose. Folia Orientalia, 47, 71–97.
Rosenbaum, G. M. (2011). The rise and expansion of colloquial Egyptian
Arabic as a literary language. In R. Sela-Sheffy and G. Toury, eds., Culture
Contacts and the Making of Cultures. Papers in Homage to Itamar Even-Zohar. Tel
Aviv: Tel Aviv University: Unit of Culture Research, 323–43.
Rosenbaum, G. M. (2012). Mixed Arabic and stylistic choices in contempor-
ary Egyptian writing. In L. Bettini and P. La Spisa, eds., Au-Dela` de l’arabe
standard: Moyen Arabe et Arabe Mixte dans les sources me´die´vales, modernes et
contemporaines, vol. 28: Quaderni Di Semitistica. Florence: Dipartimento
di scienze dell’antichita`, Medioevo e Rinascimento e linguistica,
Universita` di Firenze, 291–306.
Safouan, M. (2007). Why Are the Arabs Not Free? The Politics of Writing. Oxford:
Blackwell.
Sawaie, M. (2011). Jordan. In L. Edzard and R. de Jong, eds., Encyclopedia of
Arabic Language and Linguistics. Brill Online.
Sayahi, L. (2014). Diglossia and Language Contact: Language Variation and
Change in North Africa. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Somekh, S. (1991). Genre and Language in Modern Arabic Literature.
Wiesbaden: Harrassowitz.
Starkey,
P.
(2006).
Modern
Arabic
Literature.
Edinburgh:
Edinburgh
University Press.
Sˇuhayyib, M. (2016).ﻛﻞﺍﻟﻄﺮﻕﺗﺆﺩﻱﻝ60ﺩﺍﻫﻴﺔ[All Roads Lead to Disaster]. Al-Qa¯hira:
Da¯r Tu¯ ya¯.
Suleiman, Y. (2004). A War of Words: Language and Conﬂict in the Middle East.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
T¯ arwat, Z. (2015).ﺣﺒﻴﺒﺘﻲ[My Beloved]. Al-Qa¯hira: Da¯r Dawwin.
Walters, K. (2003). Fergie’s prescience: The changing nature of diglossia in
Tunisia. International Journal of the Sociology of Language, 163, 77–109.
Wardini, E. (2011). Lebanon. In L. Edzard and R. de Jong, eds., Encyclopedia of
Arabic Language and Linguistics. Brill Online.
Woidich, M. (2010). Von der wörtlichen Rede zur Sachprosa: Zur
Entwicklung
der
Ägyptisch-Arabischen
Dialektliteratur.
In
H. H. Munske, ed., Dialektliteratur heute – regional und international
Forschungskolloquium am Interdisziplinären Zentrum fu¨r Dialektforschung,
Friedrich-Alexander-Universität Erlangen-Nu¨ rnberg, 19–20 November
2009. http://dialektforschung.phil.uni-erlangen.de/dialektliteratur/; last
accessed 18 December 2020.
Zack, E. (2001). The use of colloquial Arabic in prose literature: ‘Laban
Ilʿas˙fu¯ r’ by Yu¯ suf Al-Qaʿı¯d. Quaderni di Studi Arabi, 19, 193–219.
5 8 2
E V A M A R I E H Å L A N D

24
Stylistics and Translation
A Corpus-Based Case Study of English–Arabic
Demonstratives
Mai Zaki
24.1
Introduction
Any study of a literary text has to take into consideration the stylistic
choices made by the author. However, translated literary texts intro-
duce a new parameter to the discussion. As Malmkjaer (2003: 39) elabo-
rates, ‘a writer’s linguistic choices are restricted by genre conventions
and by what he or she wants to say; but a translator’s linguistic choices
are limited, further, by what the original text said’. Therefore, a study of
the stylistic choices of a translated text is essentially an exercise in what
has been termed ‘translational stylistics’. Malmkjaer (2003: 39) deﬁnes
this sub-discipline as being ‘concerned to explain why, given the source
text, the translation has been shaped in such a way that it comes to
mean what it does’. The study of the translation of demonstratives
speciﬁcally in a translated literary text needs to refer to factors far
beyond the relationship between the two languages involved. Factors
such as viewpoint and deictic centre, in addition to any semantic,
syntactic, or even cultural constraints can all play a role in the
discussion.
This chapter aims to highlight the relationship between stylistics and
translation through a case study of translating English demonstratives into
Arabic in a parallel corpus of English–Arabic literary texts. It uses
a combination of corpus-driven and hypothesis-driven approaches in ana-
lysing and interpreting the data. The corpus-driven approach starts by
exploring the corpus to answer two questions: (1) how are demonstratives
translated from the English source text (henceforth ST) to the Arabic target
text (henceforth TT)? and (2) why are demonstratives translated in that
way?
The
hypothesis-driven
approach
discusses
cases
of
non-
correspondence between demonstratives in the ST and the TT to identify
the translation strategies used. The analysis reveals four translation stra-
tegies adopted by translators for the rendering of demonstratives, namely

maintenance, shift, neutralization, and overmarking. Table 24.1 outlines
those strategies.
It is argued that, while the semantics and functions of English and
Arabic
demonstratives
have
much
in
common,
cases
of
non-
correspondence are a reﬂection of conscious decisions on part of the
translators to manipulate viewpoint in discourse and/or to enhance cohe-
sion in discourse.
The chapter proceeds as follows: Section 24.2 brieﬂy presents the disci-
pline of stylistics and its development. Section 24.3 outlines the demonstra-
tive systems in English and Arabic. Section 24.4 places demonstratives at
the heart of stylistic studies as it explores the role played by demonstratives
in literary texts. Special reference is made to Deictic Shift Theory (hence-
forth DST) and its interpretation of demonstratives as viewpoint markers.
Section 24.5 presents the results of the data analysis in terms of the four
translation strategies outlined above. Section 24.6 includes a general dis-
cussion of the ﬁndings. Finally, Section 24.7 presents some concluding
remarks on the limitations of the study and suggestions for future research.
24.2
Stylistics
Stylistics is simply deﬁned as the study of style in language. More speciﬁ-
cally, Verdonk (2002: 4) explains that stylistics is the ‘analysis of distinctive
expression in language and the description of its purpose and effect’. For
writers of literary texts, much of what deﬁnes their skill and success
depends on how they present their purpose and what effect this has on
their audience. Wales explains that stylistics deals with the interpretation
of texts ‘by focusing in detail on relevant distinctive linguistic features,
patterns, structures or levels’ (2006: 216). But these features also interact
with and are inﬂuenced by several non-linguistic variables, and it is the aim
of stylistics to account for this too. Therefore, notions such as text type,
motivation, perspective, and positioning often appear in stylistic studies.
Historically speaking, stylistics in the Western world has its roots in the
classical period of rhetoric and poetics which dates as far back as the ﬁfth
Table 24.1 Translation strategies in the corpus
Translation strategy
ST
TT
Maintenance
proximal
distal
proximal
distal
Shift
proximal
distal
distal
proximal
Neutralization
demonstrative
none
Overmarking
none
demonstrative
5 8 4
M A I Z A K I

century BCE with the beginnings of the Roman Empire and the work of
Aristotle (Burke 2014). In modern times, stylistics rose to attention with
the critical movement associated with Russian Formalist literature at the
beginning of the twentieth century (McIntyre and Walker 2019). It was not
until the 1960s that stylistics started to claim its status as a sub-discipline
of linguistics with the works of Nowottny (1962) on the language of poetry
and Fowler (1966) on language and style. Today, stylistics has developed far
beyond its original scope, and the more contemporary themes include
areas such as pedagogical stylistics, cognitive stylistics, feminist stylistics,
corpus stylistics, and translational stylistics.
Interestingly, Arabic stylistics shares a common history with its Western
counterpart. According to Ghazala (2011: 34), the roots of stylistics go back
to the classical period of Arabic studies of language and literature, i.e., the
study of rhetoric, which dates to the second century AH. At the time, Arabic
rhetorical studies were mainly motivated to be in service of the Holy
Qur’a¯n, particularly ‘to demonstrate the inimitability of the style of the
language of the Koran’ (ibid.). The term ʾuslu¯b (style) was used by the Arab
linguist and semanticist Abdul-Qaher Al-Jurjani, who deﬁned style as ‘a type
of syntactic sequence and the choices of word order of foregrounding and
backgrounding’ (Ghazala 2011: 34). But classical rhetorical studies were also
interested in the language of poetry – a pillar in Arabic literature and
culture – in the form of analyses of the poets’ styles as well as comparisons
between them. Modern Arabic stylistics was later revived in the twentieth
century, following the footsteps of the West, as a modern extension of
rhetoric, where original emphasis still lay on aspects of eloquence and
ﬁgures of speech but also included more cognitive and psychological
aspects of meaning (see also Sulaiman 1990; Eid 1993, among others).
Corpus stylistics and translational stylistics are among the recent major
developments in the ﬁeld of stylistics. Corpus stylistics grew out of the
growing use of computers in linguistics and what they can do with big
collections of digitized texts. Therefore, the aim of corpus stylistics is
‘discerning patterns in language use through the study of large quantities
of language data’ (McIntyre and Walker 2019: 17), all the while employing
corpus tools in the service of stylistic analysis.
The relationship of style to translation has not always been a strong one.
Until the beginning of the new millennium, the word ‘style’ would be only
cursorily mentioned in translation studies. However, Boese-Beier (2006)
ﬁrmly introduced the idea that style, not content, embodies the meaning
of a text. Later, she outlines the similarities between style and translation
as ‘both are concerned with the ﬁne linguistic detail of a text and how it
can be seen as a reﬂection of a writer’s textual choices and as the source of
effects on readers’ (2014: 393). Overall, whether it is understanding style
through translation or understanding translation through style, these new
approaches and corpus methodologies have the form–meaning interac-
tion at heart, and will continue to offer us new insights into the language
24 Stylistics and Translation
585

of literature. One area where this interaction plays a big role in under-
standing the text and the voices within is the use of demonstratives.
24.3
Demonstrative Systems in English and Arabic
The demonstrative systems in English and Arabic are grammatically dis-
tinct in many ways. However, there are also many similarities between
them in terms of function, semantics, and pragmatic effects.
Demonstratives have been studied in the literature under various terms.
They are referring expressions, singular terms, indexical expressions, deic-
tics, or simply ‘pointing words’, as they are literally called in Arabic grammar.
Generally, a demonstrative is deﬁned as a word that refers to some other
entity, usually associated with a notion of relative distance (proximal or
distal), either in the linguistic or non-linguistic context.1 In terms of function,
there are many descriptive taxonomies of the various functions that demon-
stratives perform in utterances. A broad distinction is made between ‘situa-
tional’ and ‘non-situational’ uses; i.e., referring to an entity in the physical
context of the utterance or referring to an entity in the discourse itself. In all
of these functions, context plays a crucial role (see Himmelmann 1996;
Cornish 1999; Diessel 1999; Enﬁeld 2003, among others). Fillmore (1997:
61), for example, explains that the interpretation of a demonstrative in
a given utterance has to refer to ‘certain aspects of the communication act’
in which this utterance has been used. Similarly, in the discussion of demon-
stratives in Arabic grammar (Ibn Al-Hajib 1980; Al-Nadry 1989; Al-Ghalayini
1993; Hassan 1995), the context of the utterance is deemed indispensable.
Hassan (1995: 338) claims that Arab grammarians consider demonstratives to
be ‘ambiguous’ because they can refer to anything but do not have an
independent meaning in themselves. Across languages, demonstratives
share the characteristics of context-dependency, lack of descriptive content,
and cognitive-situational immediacy.
Cognitive approaches to the study of demonstratives refute the inclina-
tion to believe that demonstratives are mostly used for pointing to refer-
ents in the physical environment. In written texts, especially ﬁction, more
attention has been paid to the discoursal and pragmatic functions of
demonstratives. Theories of mental spaces (Fauconnier 1985), cognitive
models (Lakoff 1987), and cognitive grammar (Langacker 1999) have all
been used to account for the behaviour of demonstratives in the written
mode. From the heart of these cognitive approaches, Deictic Shift Theory
(DST, Galbraith 1995) was born to highlight the notion of the different
‘voices’ in a narrative and the point of view from which to approach
events/actions in this narrative.
1 Kemmerer (1999: 47) notes that all languages have spatial demonstratives but that ‘there is a variation in the number
of distinctions that languages make with respect to the degree of remoteness of entities from the deictic center.’
5 8 6
M A I Z A K I

The demonstrative system in English makes a rather simple and straight-
forward distinction between two forms in terms of distance from the
speaker, i.e., this/these for the proximal and that/those for the distal. The
interpretation of proximity/distance can be conceived on both the physical
and the conceptual levels. In this sense, demonstratives share the same
functional status as other referring expressions in English, including the
deﬁnite and indeﬁnite articles. Croft and Cruse (2004: 11), for example, say
that ‘the meanings of the and a evoke the speech act situation because they
make reference to the mental states of speaker and hearer’. Lyons (1977)
emphasizes the historical semantic links between the deﬁnite article and
third-person pronouns on the one hand, and demonstratives on the other.
Typical of all deictic expressions, demonstratives are characterized by their
egocentricity, i.e., they are interpreted relative to speciﬁc parameters of the
communicative event which places the speaker as the centre of deixis.
Evoking the concept of a deictic centre in the interpretation of demon-
stratives often gives rise to a pragmatic effect that has been long discussed
in the literature in comparison to the deﬁnite article and personal pro-
nouns in English. For example, the use of the demonstrative in the phrase
that man to refer anaphorically to James, who is mentioned in the preceding
context, is said to convey a detached attitude to the referent that does not
obtain if the man or simply he is used instead.
This ability to manipulate the pragmatic attitude of the speaker toward
the referent has also been linked to the cohesive role played by demonstra-
tives in written discourse. According to Halliday and Hasan (1976), cohesion
occurs when one entity is a reference to another in a text. They further
explain that proximal demonstratives in English imply proximity to the
speaker, while distal demonstratives imply ‘near you, or not near either of
us, but at any rate not near me’ (ibid.: 59). The use of demonstrative
determiners and pronouns creates cohesion by virtue of their semantics,
which orient the reader’s attention to referents in the discourse.
The Arabic demonstrative system differs from the English one largely in
grammatical form. Literally, demonstratives in Arabic are called ʾasma¯ʾul
ʾisˇa¯ra (nouns of pointing). Hassan (1995: 238) deﬁnes their main function as
‘ﻛﻞﻣﺸﺎﺭﺇﻟﻴﻪﻟﻪﺇﺳﻢﺇﺷﺎﺭﺓﻳﻨﺎﺳﺒﻪﻭﻛﻞﺇﺳﻢﺇﺷﺎﺭﺓﻣﻘﺼﻮﺭﻋﻠﻰﻣﺸﺎﺭﺇﻟﻴﻪﺑﻌﻴﻨﻪ’ (every referent
has a demonstrative that suits it and every demonstrative refers exclusively
to one speciﬁc referent; my translation). Demonstratives in Modern
Standard Arabic (MSA) are also distance-sensitive; however, unlike English
demonstratives, which are only marked for number, Arabic demonstratives
are marked for number, gender, and case (for the dual).2 This creates a rather
2 Whereas MSA primarily uses proximal and distal demonstratives, Classical Arabic also recognized medial demonstrative
forms, traces of which can still be seen in MSA texts. The shrinking of the Arabic demonstrative system (including the
diminishing use of the dual forms) agrees with Frei’s (1944) theory about the relation between the size of
demonstrative systems and the cultural complexity of a language. According to him, ‘languages tend to reduce the size
of their deictic systems rather than to expand them as they increase in cultural complexity’ (quoted in Woodworth
1991: 275).
24 Stylistics and Translation
587

more complicated system than English in terms of grammatical forms. For
the purpose of this study, we are only considering the singular demonstrative
forms ha¯dha¯ﻫﺬﺍ, ha¯dhihiﻫﺬﻩ(proximal), dha¯likaﺫﻟﻚ, tilkaﺗﻠﻚ(distal), and the plural
forms ha¯ula¯iﻫﺆﻻﺀand ’ula¯ikaﺃﻭﻟﺌﻚ.
Arabic demonstratives share several features with their English counter-
parts. One of them is the historical relation between demonstrative forms
and the deﬁnite article and third-person pronouns; and another is the
similar semantic content demonstratives encode in order to help the
reader arrive at the referent.3 Arabic demonstratives are also known to
perform a range of situational and non-situational functions. In written
texts speciﬁcally, Mejdell (2006: 178) highlights the discourse deictic func-
tion of Arabic demonstratives as they are used to refer to the idea (ques-
tion, proposition, or event) in preceding context. Moreover, where in
English the term ‘emotional deixis’ has been used (Lakoff 1974; Cornish
2001), the same notion has been evoked when discussing uses of Arabic
demonstratives. Cantarino (1974 II: 30), for example, says that Arabic
demonstratives seem to be ‘frequently used with psychological approach
rather than merely with a local meaning . . . ha¯d¯a¯ is used for things that are
considered more important or more closely related to the person speaking,
while d¯a¯lika and d¯a¯ka express a more remote attitude’. Context plays a key
role in such pragmatic effects of demonstratives in Arabic. Al-Hashemy
(1999: 112), for example, stresses that both the proximal and distal demon-
stratives could be used to convey a positive or a negative pragmatic effect
depending on the contextual assumptions obtaining in the discourse. The
notion of distance encoded by demonstratives and its metaphorical exten-
sion in cognitive terms is a common feature of demonstratives in written
texts for both languages, especially in ﬁction.
Given the wide range of functions demonstratives can perform in dis-
course, several questions arise from a translation perspective as to the
translator’s choices in rendering these referring expressions. This is what
studies in the ﬁeld of translational stylistics discuss, as the following
section explains.
24.4
Demonstratives in Translational Stylistics
The underlying meaning of demonstratives has to do with situating
a particular referent at a particular point of distance. This spatial
anchoring between what is proximal and what is distal needs some
sort of deictic reference point to be meaningful, i.e., the deictic centre,
which is usually the speaker. The projection of a certain deictic centre
3 For reasons of space, this chapter does not discuss the semantics of English/Arabic demonstratives in any detail. Zaki
(2012) discusses the semantics and pragmatics of Arabic and English demonstratives through a corpus-based study,
and argues for a procedural semantic content which interacts with pragmatic considerations to arrive at the intended
referent.
5 8 8
M A I Z A K I

allows us to understand the positioning of the intended referent from
the speaker’s point of view. However, the interpretation of such posi-
tioning need not only be on the physical level; cognitive and emo-
tional extensions do frequently occur. Wu (2004: 77) explains that ‘the
situational deictic function which the demonstratives are used to per-
form in real space extends into textual and discourse deictic functions
for reference in discourse’. This is a typical feature of written texts.
The transformation from physical entities to mental representations of
propositions and events takes the interpretation of viewpoint via
demonstratives to another level.
The notion that demonstratives function as markers of a speaker’s view-
point is hardly a new idea. The conceptualization of the world by speakers
is at the heart of Cognitive Grammar, as developed by Langacker (1987,
1999). According to this, there is no direct mapping between language and
entities in the world, rather, the mapping is between language and entities
in the world as conceptualized by speakers. Therefore, the act of concep-
tualization is necessarily tied to the speaker’s viewpoint or perspective.
This affects the speaker’s choice of words in communication, where
demonstratives play a key role in shaping such a viewpoint. The interpre-
tation of viewpoint in discourse has been the primary concern of DST as an
analytical tool in reading literary texts.
The main hypothesis underlying this theory is that the speaking,
writing, or thinking voice represents a deictic centre ‘which a reader
can mentally project by adopting the cognitive stance that best
accounts for the sense of coherence across a text’ (Stockwell 2002:
78). As voices in a text locate themselves in relation to a particular
deictic centre, readers can get a sense of the movement of voices from
the
shifts
between
deictic
centres.
Stockwell
(2002:
79)
further
explains that ‘the readerly sense of the “movement” of voices lies in
the shifts between deictic centres’. There are several stylistic features
that typically act as deictic shift devices along the perceptual, spatial,
textual, temporal, or relational levels. Demonstratives are particularly
interesting because they can act as deictic shift devices on any of those
levels. This is important in literary analysis since the same poem or
narrative can be interpreted in different ways according to different
voices/deictic centres.
Within the applications of DST in stylistic analyses, translation does
not necessarily enter into the discussion. However, with the growing
interest in stylistic studies of literary texts, the ‘visibility of translators’
in terms of point of view or the translator’s voice became a widely
discussed area (Bosseaux 2007). Translators often leave their personal
marks on the texts through their stylistic choices and the patterns that
ensue from them. Therefore, it is easy to conceive of direct links between
translation and stylistics. In the words of Boase-Beier (2006: 393), ‘both
are concerned with the ﬁne linguistic detail of a text and how it can be
24 Stylistics and Translation
589

seen as a reﬂection of a writer’s textual choices and as the source of
effects on readers’. Hence, the ﬁeld of study known as ‘translational
stylistics’ lies at the intersection point between translation and stylistics.
This subﬁeld is not only concerned with the translation choices available
to the translator or the patterns that can be identiﬁed in translation
strategies. It also encompasses the pragmatic, cognitive, and possibly
cultural effects arising from these choices and patterns which leave
their mark on the reception of both the ST by the translator and the
TT by the reader. According to Pantopoulos (2012: 108), ‘the use of
stylistic analysis in relation to translation is an old tool that has been
commonly
used
in
a
prescriptive,
ST-focused
manner’.
However,
the growing interest in translational stylistics has been matched by
an
equal
interest
in
more
descriptive
and
analytical
TT-focused
approaches
to
translated
texts
(Boase-Beier
2006;
Bosseaux
2007;
Malmkjaer 2018).
Given that the style of the TT is an expression of the translator’s
choices, many stylistic approaches to translation aim to discuss how
the style of the TT ‘conforms to certain norms of the genre, of the
target language, or of the linguistic, literary or cultural system into
which the target text ﬁts’ (Boase-Beier 2006: 5). The analysis of
demonstratives in translation, not just as deictic expressions but
also as markers of viewpoint and cohesion in texts, drives the discus-
sion to the choices and motivations of both the author and the
translator.
Several
studies
have
tried
to
capture
‘the
strategies
through which narrative texts “involve” readers in their ﬁctional
world’ (Morini 2014: 141) by focusing on demonstratives. Labrador
(2011), for example, studies English demonstratives and their transla-
tion into Spanish, focusing on cases of non-equivalence or non-
idiomatic translations in the TT. The study highlights areas of under-
use and overuse of demonstratives in translation in relation to the
grammatical and idiomatic norms of the target language. Doiz-
Bienzobas (2003: 65) compares demonstratives in English, Spanish,
and Basque, pointing out that discourse deictic functions of demon-
stratives
are
where
‘one
may
easily
ﬁnd
instances
of
non-
corresponding forms in the three languages in the same linguistic
context’. He considers demonstratives as viewpoint providers in
a narrative context. For him, the English distal demonstrative form
is used to indicate that the situation ‘is construed by a distal view-
point to the situation itself’, while the proximal demonstrative form
is used to indicate that the situation ‘is construed by a proximal
viewpoint to the situation itself’ (2003: 67). Also, this study follows
the terminology proposed by Ribera and Cuenca (2013) in identifying
translation strategies of English demonstratives into Catalan. Their
study has shown that neutralization and overmarking play a greater
role in translation than expected.
5 9 0
M A I Z A K I

24.5
Data Analysis
The data for this study are based on the English–Arabic parallel corpus
compiled by Alotaibi (2017) at King Saud University.4 At the time of
data collection, the total number of words of this corpus was 204,117,
based on 7,877 texts. For the purpose of this study, I have only
extracted data from the literary subcorpus. Table 24.2 shows the
sources of the data analysed in this study5 (abbreviations have been
given to each title for easy reference).
The initial analysis of the demonstrative forms in the ST takes into
consideration two variables: the demonstrative type in terms of proximity
and distance and the translation strategy followed (a brief description of
each strategy is given). The results are presented in Table 24.3.
Table 24.2 Data sets used in the study
Title
Abbreviation Author
Year of
publication
Wuthering Heights
WH
Emily Bronte
1847
David Copperﬁeld
DC
Charles Dickens
1850
Gone with the Wind
GW
Margaret Mitchell
1936
The Da Vinci Code
DVC
Dan Brown
2003
Eat, Pray, Love: One Woman’s
Search for Everything
EPL
Elizabeth Gilbert
2006
Table 24.3 Translation strategies for demonstratives in the corpus
Translation Strategy
Proximal Distal Total
Maintenance
• demonstrative in ST is translated in the TT
55
29
84 (36.8 %)
Neutralization
• demonstrative in ST is not translated in the TT
11
9
20 (8.7 %)
Shift
• demonstrative in ST is translated in TT with shift in
deictic type
26
13
39 (17.1 %)
Overmarking
• no demonstrative in ST, demonstrative used in TT
36
49
85 (37.2 %)
Total
128
100
228
4 The author is grateful to Dr Hind Alotaibi, the developer of the corpus, for her help with several technical issues and
providing some missing information while using the corpus.
5 For copyright reasons, the parallel corpus does not include the full texts of these novels. Also, unfortunately, the corpus
website does not include information about the translators or the translated publications of these novels. The corpus
developers intend to include this type of information in the future (personal communication).
24 Stylistics and Translation
591

To further recognize translator patterns, the data are also analysed in
terms of one more variable: function of the demonstrative. This variable
follows the broad distinction between what is referred to in the literature
as ‘situational’ and ‘non-situational’ uses. Typically, demonstratives have
a situational function when they refer or point to an entity in the physical
environment of the utterance. Given that the corpus data is made up of
literary texts, it is expected that this is not the dominant function. In fact,
only 15 per cent of the demonstratives in the data are used with
a situational function, mainly in the dialogues between the characters in
the narratives. However, even in this category, only half of them have been
translated via the maintenance strategy, as Table 24.4 illustrates.
The following examples illustrate each translation strategy applied to
situational uses of demonstratives in the corpus.
Maintenance
(1) When Langdon saw the photo, his entire body went rigid. “This photo was
taken less than an hour ago. Inside the Louvre.”
(DVC)
ﻟﺪﻯﺭﺅﻳﺘﻪﻟﻠﺼﻮﺭﺓ٬ ﺗﺴﻤّﺮﻻﻧﻐﺪﻭﻥﻓﻲﻣﻜﺎﻧﻪﻭﺗﺼﻠّﺐﺟﺴﺪﻩﺑﺎﻟﻜﺎﻣﻞ.
"ﻟﻘﺪﺍﻟﺘﻘﻄﺖﻫﺬﻩﺍﻟﺼﻮﺭﺓﻗﺒﻞﺃﻗﻞﻣﻦﺳﺎﻋﺔ
".ﺩﺍﺧﻞﺍﻟﻠﻮﻓﺮ
Neutralization
(2) “Are we going to murder people right on our door step? Look at that poor
young gentleman – he can hardly breathe!”
(WH)
".ﻫﻞﺳﻨﻘﺘﻞﺍﻟﻨﺎﺱﻋﻠﻰﺃﻋﺘﺎﺏﺃﺑﻮﺍﺑﻨﺎ؟ ﺍﻧﻈﺮﻟﻠﻨﺒﻴﻞﺍﻟﺸﺎﺏﺍﻟﻤﺴﻜﻴﻦـ ﺇﻧﻪﻋﺎﺟﺰﻋﻦﺍﻟﺘﻨﻔﺲ"
Shift
(3) In the space of maybe ten minutes, this small Vietnamese man had drawn
every single one of us into his silence.
(EPL)
ﻭﻓﻲﻏﻀﻮﻥﻋﺸﺮﺩﻗﺎﺋﻖ٬ ﺷﺪّﺫﻟﻚﺍﻟﻔﻴﺘﻨﺎﻣﻲﻗﺼﻴﺮﺍﻟﻘﺎﻣﺔﻛﻞﻣﻨّﺎﺇﻟﻰﺻﻤﺘﻪ
Overmarking
(4) “Goodbye, Emily,” I said, “I don’t want to leave here.”
(DC)
".ﻗﻠﺖﻟﻬﺎ"ﻭﺩﺍﻋﺎًﻳﺎﺇﻣﻴﻠﻲ.ﻻﺃﺭﻳﺪﺃﻥﺃﺗﺮﻙﻫﺬﺍﺍﻟﻤﻨﺰﻝ
In example (1), the proximal demonstrative this is maintained in the TT in
a way which continues the thematic attention to the entity referred to in the
Table 24.4 Situational use of
demonstratives
Maintenance
18 (51.5%)
Neutralization
3 (8.5%)
Shift
7 (20%)
Overmarking
7 (20%)
5 9 2
M A I Z A K I

physical environment and in the preceding text. Although the distal demon-
strative in (2) singles out a referent in the physical context of situation as
opposed to people in general, the translator chose to neutralize this demon-
strative in the TT and use just the deﬁnite article instead. The character in (3)
uses the proximal to spatially anchor the referent in a close position from her
deictic centre, whereas the translator uses the distal demonstrative, shifting
the deictic centre to that of the narrator who sees the referent as distal.
Finally, the ST in (4) does not have a demonstrative at all while the TT uses
a proximal determiner to refer to the immediate locality expressed by here in
the ST and opts for a more descriptive rendering ‘this house’.
In the next subsections, speciﬁc results pertaining to each translation
strategy are presented and discussed, focusing on the non-situational uses
of demonstratives.
24.5.1
Maintenance
This translation strategy involves following the same style, making the same
choices as those of the ST. Indeed, it has been noted that one of the key
features of translating a literary text is not to deviate too much from the
original. Gutt (2000: 130), for example, argues that a literary translation is
particularly concerned with maintaining a close stylistic link with the ST, as
opposed to a non-literary translation which is simply concerned with report-
ing the content or reproducing the function of the ST regardless of style. This
is what translators have done in nearly half the cases of demonstratives in
the ST.
AsDSTsuggests,whenwereadatextwesuspendouregocentricconception
of deixis, and instead interpret deictic references from a deictic centre within
the world of the text. The maintenance strategy indicates that the deictic
centre remains unchanged in the translation. Therefore, this translation
strategy does not affect the point of view represented in the text. However,
it is noted in the data that certain linguistic and/or stylistic considerations
encourage the maintenance strategy. For example, this strategy is common
with temporal references in the texts. The notion of proximity or distance can
often be interpreted in terms of time, and this plays a signiﬁcant role in
shaping the character’s point of view of sequential events in the narrative.
Examples (5) and (6) illustrate this use of demonstratives which have been
maintained in the ST:
(5) He was a visitor here this week, and yet for many years he had been blessed
with a similar sanctuary in New York City.
(DVC)
.ﻛﺎﻥﻫﻨﺎﺯﺍﺋﺮﺍًﻟﻬﺬﺍﺍﻷﺳﺒﻮﻉ٬ ﺇﻻﺃﻧﻪﻛﺎﻥﻗﺪﻧﻌﻢﺑﻤﻼﺫﻛﻬﺬﺍﻓﻲﻣﺪﻳﻨﺔﻧﻴﻮﻳﻮﺭﻙ
(6) Spring had come early that year, with warm quick rains.
(GW)
.ﻟﻘﺪﺟﺎﺀﺍﻟﺮﺑﻴﻊﻣﺒﻜﺮﺍًﺗﻠﻚﺍﻟﺴﻨﺔ٬ ﺣﺎﻣﻼًﻣﻌﻪﺃﻣﻄﺎﺭﻫﺎﻟﺴﺮﻳﻌﺔﺍﻟﺪﺍﻓﺌﺔ
24 Stylistics and Translation
593

In other cases, maintenance seems to be the preferred choice for collo-
cations, especially with the distal demonstrative in both English and
Arabic. Examples (7) and (8) use distal demonstratives with a conjunctive
function:
(7)
I did not want to see him again, but after that he often came to the
house.
(DC)
.ﻟﻢﺃﻛﻦﺃﺭﻏﺐﻓﻲﺭﺅﻳﺘﻪﻣﺮﺓﺃﺧﺮﻯ٬ ﻭﻟﻜﻨﻪﺑﻌﺪﺫﻟﻚﺃﺻﺒﺢﺩﺍﺋﻢﺍﻟﺘﺮﺩﺩﻋﻠﻰﺍﻟﻤﻨﺰﻝ.
(8)
I must stop it, in spite of that! I murmured, breaking the glass with my
hand.
(WH)
.ﺗﻤﺘﻤﺖﻗﺎﺋﻼً:ﻳﺠﺐﺃﻥﺃﻭﻗﻔﻪﻋﻠﻰﺍﻟﺮﻏﻢﻣﻦﺫﻟﻚ!ﻓﻜﺴﺮﺕﺍﻟﺰﺟﺎﺝﺑﻴﺪﻱ
Also, many distal demonstratives are maintained in order to follow the
same emotional stance of the ST, especially in cases were the distal pro-
noun is used to refer to a whole proposition and it indicates that the
speaker is distancing himself or herself from the referent. This has been
discussed in the literature as ‘the emotional uses’ of demonstratives, and it
includes distancing, sympathetic, or camaraderie demonstratives (Chen
1990). Example (9) illustrates this:
(9) Later I told my mother about the conversation. “Don’t say that”, her face
was red but she was laughing.
(DC)
.ﺑﻌﺪﺫﻟﻚﺃﺧﺒﺮﺕﻭﺍﻟﺪﺗﻲﺑﻤﺎﺩﺍﺭﻓﻲﺍﻟﻤﺤﺎﺩﺛﺔ.
"ﻻﺗﻘﻞﺫﻟﻚ".ﻛﺎﻥﻭﺟﻬﻬﺎﻣﻜﻔﻬﺮﺍً٬ ﻭﻟﻜﻨﻬﺎﻛﺎﻧﺖﺗﻀﺤﻚ
Finally, many demonstratives are maintained when they are used
straightforwardly with an anaphoric reference, i.e., referring to an entity
previously mentioned in the discourse. Example (10) repeats the same
head noun from the preceding discourse:
(10) Far better to have rested ﬁrst in Italy, gotten my strength and health back,
and then showed up. Because I will need that strength now.
(EPL)
.ﻭﻛﺎﻥﻣﻦﺍﻟﺠﻴﺪﺃﻧﻨﻲﺍﺳﺘﺮﺣﺖﺃﻭﻻًﻓﻲﺇﻳﻄﺎﻟﻴﺎ٬ ﻭﺍﺳﺘﻌﺪﺕﻗﻮﺍﻱﻭﺻﺤﺘﻲﻗﺒﻞﺍﻟﻤﺠﻰء ﺇﻟﻰﺍﻟﻬﻨﺪ.ﻓﺄﻧﺎﺑﺤﺎﺟﺔﺇﻟﻰ
ﺗﻠﻚﺍﻟﻘﻮﺓﺍﻵﻥ
24.5.2
Neutralization
The cases of neutralization in the corpus represent only 8 per cent of the
data, which makes it the least used strategy. Translators prefer to translate
a demonstrative in the ST by a demonstrative in the TT in most scenarios.
However, when a demonstrative is not translated, this usually occurs in
one of two ways: either the demonstrative is completely deleted, or it is
replaced by another referring expression such as the deﬁnite article or
a third-person pronoun. Examples (11) and (12) illustrate the ﬁrst case:
5 9 4
M A I Z A K I

(11)
‘This is the concierge, monsieur. I apologize for this intrusion, but you
have a visitor. He insists it is urgent’.
(DVC)
".ﺃﻧﺎﻋﺎﻣﻞﺍﻻﺳﺘﻘﺒﺎﻝﺳﻴﺪﻱ،ﺃﻋﺘﺬﺭﻟﺘﻄﻔﻠﻲﻟﻜﻦﻟﺪﻳﻚﺯﺍﺋﺮﻭﻫﻮﻳﺼﺮﺃﻥﻳﺮﺍﻙﻷﻣﺮﻋﺎﺟﻞ
(12) There must be only one servant, I thought. That must be why the grass is
growing up between the subject stones, and the plants are growing wild.
(WH)
.ﻗﻠﺖﺑﺪﺍﺧﻠﻲ:‘"ﻻﺑﺪﺃﻥﻫﻨﺎﻙﺧﺎﺩﻣﺎًﻭﺍﺣﺪﺍًﻓﻘﻂ،ﺇﻻﻟﻤﺎﻧﻤﺖﺍﻟﺤﺸﺎﺋﺶﺑﻴﻦﺍﻷﺣﺠﺎﺭ،ﻭﻟﻤﺎﺻﺎﺭﺕﺍﻟﻨﺒﺎﺗﺎﺕﺗﻔﺘﺮﺵ
ﺍﻷﺭﺽﺑﻬﺬﺍﺍﻟﺸﻜﻞﺩﻭﻥﺗﺸﺬﻳﺐ
In (11) the use of the proximal demonstrative in this kind of context is
idiomatic in English, compared to the unidiomatic ‘I am the concierge’.
Yet, in the TT this was rendered as a ﬁrst-person pronoun as a more natural
translation than maintaining the proximal demonstrative. In Arabic,
a proximal demonstrative used in the subject position often refers to the
whole proposition or other higher-order representation, rather than
a ﬁrst-mention physical referent. The second demonstrative in (11) is not
rendered at all and the possessive pronoun is used instead, with a different
kind of deictic force. In (12), the whole structure of the sentence in the TT
was changed so that it does not need to use a demonstrative at all.
Regardless of the reason for not rendering a demonstrative, Ribera and
Cuenca (2013: 38) note that neutralization results in ‘a loss of deictic
force and sometimes also of the emphatic nuance which affects the
implication of the character or the narrator’. For example, in (11), the
emphatic nuance carried by the phrase ‘this intrusion’ does not have the
same implication on the character as the possessive pronoun in ‘my
intrusion’. On the other hand, the translation in (12) has changed the
information packaging in the whole sentence so that the TT no longer
conveys the same emphatic effect from referring to the proposition
[there must be only one servant].
In another extreme case, the demonstrative in the ST was not rendered
in the TT because the whole phrase containing the demonstrative has been
deleted in the translation. In Eat, Pray, Love the author writes about the yoga
master’s ability to captivate the audience, describing it as ‘this is divine
power’. The translator completely omitted this sentence in the TT. It is
argued that this was motivated by religious considerations concerning
Arabic readers, as ‘divine powers’ are usually associated only with Allah.
The examples in (13) and (14) illustrate cases when the demonstrative is
substituted by another deictic expression, i.e., the deﬁnite article or a third-
person pronoun.
(13) I ﬁnally asked another Indian teenager who he was. She replied, “This is
the son of one of the local shopkeepers.”
(EPL)
.ﺃﺧﻴﺮﺍًﺳﺄﻟﺖﻣﺮﺍﻫﻘﺔﻫﻨﺪﻳﺔﺃﺧﺮﻯﻋﻤّﻦﻳﻜﻮﻥ.ﻓﺄﺟﺎﺑﺖ:
"ﺇﻧﻪﺍﺑﻦﺃﺣﺪﺃﺻﺤﺎﺏﺍﻟﺤﻮﺍﻧﻴﺖﺍﻟﻤﺤﻠﻴﻴﻦ
24 Stylistics and Translation
595

(14) She held up a copy of Boston Magazine. Langdon cringed. Where the hell
did she get that?
(DVC)
"ﻭﺭﻓﻌﺖﻧﺴﺨﺔﻣﻦﻣﺠﻠﺔﺑﻮﺳﻄﻦ.ﺍﻧﻜﻤﺶﻻﻧﺠﺪﻭﻥﻋﻠﻰﻧﻔﺴﻪﻣﺘﻤﺘﻤﺎً"ﻳﺎﺇﻟﻬﻲﻣﻦﺃﻳﻦﺣﺼﻠﺖﻋﻠﻰﺍﻟﻤﺠﻠﺔ؟
The alternative phrases ‘he is the son’ or ‘where the hell did she get it/the
magazine?’ do not change anything in the reference assignment. In fact, in
(13) the third-person pronoun would be an appropriate choice given the
anaphoric function of the referring expression to the ‘he’ mentioned in
the previous co-text. Similarly, in (14) the referring expression has
a situational function referring to a salient object in the immediate physi-
cal environment and the immediate preceding text. However, what the
demonstrative has that the other referring expressions do not is what
Cornish (2001) calls the ‘modal deictic reference’, i.e., the cognitive
modal effect of a relating/distancing attitude on the part of the speaker
towards the referent. This is what has been lost in the TT by neutralizing
the demonstrative. The distal demonstrative in (14), for example, does not
only signal that the referent is physically far from the deictic centre of the
speaker, but also that the speaker has a negative attitude towards the
referent. In (13), the demonstrative is in the subject position in the ST,
and it signals that the referent is the focal point of the sentence. In the TT,
the emphatic particle ʿinna with the attached pronoun attempt to com-
pensate for the lack of the demonstrative.
24.5.3
Shift
The cases of shift in the corpus represent around 17 per cent of the
data, where the demonstrative in the ST has been translated by
a demonstrative at the opposite end of the distance spectrum. These
cases are a direct example of shift in the deictic centre, hence in the
point of view of telling the story. Neary (2014: 175) deﬁnes point of
view in literature as ‘the angle of telling of a narrative act’, a notion
that has been extensively discussed in the literature on stylistics.
According to Short (1996: 263), viewpoint in a text is controlled by
several small-scale linguistic choices. Deixis, including demonstratives,
is one of those choices which reﬂect the psychological tendency of an
author to assume that he/she is the deictic centre of the world of the
narrative. He goes on to explain, ‘because deixis is speaker-related it
can easily be used to indicate particular, and changing, viewpoints.’
(1996: 270) In a translated literary text, the viewpoint of the translator
also has to be taken into consideration.
Segal (1995: 15) further explains that the deictic centre includes all
deictic elements of a given situation, including temporal, spatial, and
personal. According to him, in ﬁctional narrative, ‘readers and authors
shift their deictic center from the real-world situation to an image of
5 9 6
M A I Z A K I

themselves at a location within the story world’. In this sense, the transla-
tor as reader would also shift his/her deictic centre from the real world to
the story world, hence producing a translation from a different location in
the deictic centre.
In the cases of shift in the corpus, it is noted that more than 64 per cent
of the examples are where a proximal demonstrative in the ST has shifted
to a distal one in the TT. Examples (15) and (16) illustrate the case of the
proximal demonstrative determiner this shifting to the distal one in
translation:
(15) She loved him and she wanted him and she did not understand him. And
now, like a thunderclap, had come this horrible news.
(GW)
.ﻛﺎﻧﺖﺳﻜﺎﺭﻟﺖﺗﺤﺒﻪ،ﻭﻛﺎﻧﺖﺗﺘﻤﻨﺎﻩﻭﺗﺸﺒﻬﻪﻟﻨﻔﺴﻬﺎﻣﻦﺩﻭﻥﺃﻥﺗﻔﻬﻤﻪ.ﻭﺍﻵﻥ،ﻣﺜﻞﺻﺎﻋﻘﺔﺭﻫﻴﺒﺔﺇﻧﻘﺾﻋﻠﻴﻬﺎ
ﺫﻟﻚﺍﻟﺨﺒﺮﺍﻟﻤﺸﺌﻮﻡ
(16) The ancients developed these physical stretches not for personal ﬁtness,
but to loosen up their muscles and minds in order to prepare them for
meditation.
(EPL)
ﻭﻟﻢﻳﻄﻮّﺭﺍﻟﻘﺪﻣﺎﺀﺗﻠﻚﺍﻟﺘﻤﺎﺭﻳﻦﺍﻟﺠﺴﺪﻳﺔﺳﻌﻴﺎًﻭﺭﺍﺀﺍﻟﻠﻴﺎﻗﺔﺍﻟﺒﺪﻧﻴﺔ،ﺑﻞﻟﺘﻠﻴﻴﻦﻋﻀﻼﺗﻬﻢﻭﺃﺫﻫﺎﻧﻬﻢﺍﺳﺘﻌﺪﺍﺩﺍً
.ﻟﺘﺄﻣّﻞ
In the ST, there is no grammatical reason that would prevent the
replacement of the proximal with a distal demonstrative. Therefore,
the author’s choice of the proximal demonstrative in both cases is
a reﬂection of a particular viewpoint; that of the narrator in (15) and
that of the narrator/character in (16). In both cases, the translators
have achieved a shift in viewpoint by choosing to use the distal
demonstratives. This change in viewpoint is encouraged by the seman-
tic/temporal context of the utterances. In (15) the demonstrative deter-
miner refers to bad news from which the narrator in the TT could be
seen to distance himself, and in (16) the distal temporal context of the
referent (encouraged by the noun ‘ancients’) warrants the use of
a distal demonstrative. Similarly, the following are examples of the
proximal demonstrative pronoun in the ST being replaced by a distal
demonstrative in the TT:
(17) As Langdon stared at the bizarre image, his initial revulsion and shock gave
way to a sudden upwelling of anger. “Who would do this!”
(DVC)
.ﻭﻓﻴﻤﺎﺗﺄﻣﻞﻻﻧﺠﺪﻭﻥﺍﻟﺼﻮﺭﺓﺍﻟﻐﺮﻳﺒﺔ،ﺗﺤﻮﻝﺭﺩﻓﻌﻠﻪﻣﻦﺍﻟﻤﻔﺎﺟﺄﺓﻭﺍﻟﺼﺪﻣﺔﺇﻟﻰﻣﻮﺟﺔﻏﻀﺐﻋﺎﺭﻣﺔ.
"ﻣﻦ
"ﻳﻤﻜﻨﻪﻓﻌﻞﺫﻟﻚ
(18)
“I’m afraid of it,” Emily said. “Are you afraid of the sea?”
“No,” I said. But this wasn’t quite true.
(DC)
.ﻗﺎﻟﺖﺇﻣﻴﻠﻲ:
"ﺇﻧﻨﻲﺃﺧﺎﻑﻣﻨﻪ،ﻫﻞﺗﺨﺎﻑﻣﻦﺍﻟﺒﺤﺮ؟ ﺃﺟﺒﺘﻬﺎﻗﺎﺋﻼً:
‘"ﻻ"،ﻟﻜﻦﺫﻟﻚﻟﻢﻳﻜﻦﺻﺤﻴﺤﺎً
24 Stylistics and Translation
597

In both examples, the demonstrative pronoun refers to a complete propo-
sition or event in the context of the situation. Although the proximal
demonstrative in the ST invites a reading of cognitive immediacy vis-a`-
vis the referents, i.e., the event just seen in the picture before his eyes in
(17), and the proposition just communicated in the preceding text in (18),
the translator chose to convey the deictic effect on a different level. The
distal demonstratives in the TT could be seen as marking distance in an
emotional space. The context of situation in (17) clearly indicates an
unfavourable attitude towards the referent, while the proposition in (18),
itself a negative answer, is being described as a lie. As is often noted in
literary texts, the interpretation of demonstratives could ‘point to
a change from literal to metaphorical space: here literal nearness is turned
into emotional distance’ (Peer and Graf 2002: 139).6
Examples of what is referred to in the literature as ‘indeﬁnite this’ present
another interesting case. Gundel et al. (1993) assign a special cognitive
status to this particular use of the proximal demonstrative in their hierar-
chy of referring expressions. With this use, the speaker intends to refer to
a particular entity for which the hearer has to construct a new representa-
tion. In the data, it was noticed that whenever indeﬁnite this is used in the
ST to introduce a new referent in the discourse, the demonstrative shifts to
a distal one in the TT. Examples (19) and (20) below illustrate this:
(19) So I pay my taxi driver, tuck my backpack behind a tree, slip off my
shoes, kneel and touch my forehead to the temple step and then ease
myself inside, joining the small gathering of mostly Indian women who
are singing this beautiful hymn.
(EPL)
.ﺩﻓﻌﺖﺃﺟﺮﺓﺍﻟﺴﺎﺋﻖﻭﻭﺿﻌﺖﺣﻘﻴﺒﺔﺍﻟﻈﻬﺮﺧﻠﻒﺇﺣﺪﻯﺍﻷﺷﺠﺎﺭ.ﺧﻠﻌﺖﺣﺬﺍﺋﻲﻭﺳﺠﺪﺕﻋﻠﻰﺩﺭﺟﺔﺍﻟﻤﻌﺒﺪﻗﺒﻞ
ﺃﻥﺃﺩﺧﻞﻭﺃﻧﻀﻢّﺇﻟﻰﺍﻟﻤﺠﻤﻮﻋﺔﺍﻟﺼﻐﻴﺮﺓﺍﻟﻤﺆﻟﻔﺔﺑﻤﻌﻈﻤﻬﺎﻣﻦﻧﺴﺎﺀﻫﻨﺪﻳﺎﺕﻳﻨﺸﺪﻥﺗﻠﻚﺍﻟﺘﺮﻧﻴﻤﺔﺍﻟﺠﻤﻴﻠﺔ
(20) But then this evening of music begins, with a single violin in the shadows
playing one long note of longing. Then comes the harmonium, then the
slow drums, then the voices.
(EPL)
ﻭﻟﻜﻦ،ﺑﺪﺃﺕﺗﻠﻚﺍﻟﻠﻴﻠﺔﺍﻟﻤﻮﺳﻴﻘﻴﺔﻣﻊﻧﻐﻤﺔﻃﻮﻳﻠﺔﺗﻮّﺍﻗﺔﻋﺰﻓﻬﺎﻛﻤﺎﻥﻭﺍﺣﺪﻓﻲﺍﻟﻈﻼﻝ،ﺗﺒﻌﻪﺍﻟﻬﺎﺭﻣﻮﻧﻴﻜﺎ،ﻭﺍﻟﻄﺒﻮﻝ
.ﺍﻟﺒﻄﻴﺌﺔ،ﻭﻣﻦﺛﻢﺍﻷﺻﻮﺍﺕ
In both cases, the referents ‘beautiful hymn’ and ‘evening of music’
have not been mentioned before in the discourse, so they introduce
new referents. The translations of those demonstratives with the distal
6 Even in the Qur’aˉn, the distal demonstrative dhaˉlika (that) is famously used with the actual meaning of the proximal one
haˉdhaˉ (this) in the verse ‘This is the Book in which there is no doubt’ (2:2). There have been many explanations as to why
the distal demonstrative has been used in a context when it is supposed to refer to an immediate referent (i.e., the Qur’aˉn at
hand). It has been argued that the demonstrative could refer to the known portion of the Qur’aˉn, or to the Preserved Tablet.
Ibn Kathıˉr (1419) even states that Arabs are known for using both demonstratives interchangeably. Another theory argues
that the distal demonstrative is used in order to glorify the Qur’aˉn and refer to it on a higher level of status and unattainable
exaltedness. This exempliﬁes how the effect of the demonstrative can expand from the literal to the metaphorical (see
traditional exegeses of the Qur’aˉn such as Ibn Kathıˉr (1419) and Al-Tabariy (1968), or modern ones such as Nasr (2015)).
5 9 8
M A I Z A K I

form in Arabic resemble what is known in the literature as ‘recogni-
tional that’ (Himmelmann 1996). According to Leonetti (2000: 4), ‘the
only way to get ﬁrst mention DPs is to present an entity as if it were
familiar for the addressee, strategically appealing to shared experi-
ence, even if the referent is not known’. Such shared experience
could beneﬁt from common personal or cultural assumptions. In
Arabic, ﬁrst-mention demonstratives could be proximal or distal,7
usually with additional information about the referent embedded in
a relative pronoun clause to make it more accessible. Therefore, the
demonstratives in the TT could have been maintained in the transla-
tion while having the same function as ﬁrst-mention demonstratives.
However, it was noticed in the data from this particular novel that it
has the most cases of shift of all the other data sets. This implies
a general trend on the part of the translator to take an external
perspective to the events narrated by the main character in the
novel, hence the use of the Arabic distal demonstrative.
On the other hand, cases where the distal demonstrative in the ST has
been changed to a proximal one in the TT are in the minority in the data.
Some of them are a straightforward case of a shift in the deictic centre
from which the events are narrated. Fairly early in the story of David
Copperﬁeld, in a typical Dickensian style,8 the narrator in the text is the
main character who narrates all the events from his external point of view.
So, in the ST in (21), although the referents of ‘I’ and ‘that boy’ are the
same, the text assumes individual personalities for the character and the
narrator.
(21)
I was that boy and my name is David Copperﬁeld.
(DC)
.ﻛﻨﺖﺃﻧﺎﻫﺬﺍﺍﻟﻮﻟﻴﺪ،ﻭﺍﺳﻤﻲﺩﻳﻔﻴﺪﻛﻮﺑﺮﻓﻴﻠﺪ
However, the translator does not follow the same narratological
stance and opts for a more intrinsic perspective where the character
relates to the events he is narrating. In other cases, a syntactic trend is
noticed to be the key catalyst for the shift in translation. In (22) and
(23), the distal pronoun that in the ST refers to the whole preceding
proposition and it is in the subject position in the sentence. In the TT,
both have been shifted to the proximal demonstrative, which seems to
be favoured in this syntactic position.
(22)
She knew he loved her. Why did he not tell her so? That she could not
understand.
(GW)
.ﻋﺮﻓﺖﺃﻧﻪﻣﻐﺮﻡﺑﻬﺎ.ﻟﻜﻦﻟﻤﺎﺫﺍﻟﻢﻳﺨﺒﺮﻫﺎﺑﺬﻟﻚ؟ ﻫﺬﺍﻣﺎﻟﻢﺗﻔﻬﻤﻪ
7 See Zaki (2012) for a discussion of this particular use.
8 It is often noted that nineteenth-century writers, such as Dickens, often presented ‘an external, uninvolved perspective
of their characters in a strong authorial tone’ (Bosseaux 2007: 16). This developed in twentieth-century literature to
a more internal perspective.
24 Stylistics and Translation
599

(23)
I know what she meant to say (that almost everyone in India has a Guru)
but I related more to her unintentional statement, because that’s how
I feel sometimes.
(EPL)
ﺃﻋﻤﻞﻣﺎﺃﺭﺍﺩﺕﻗﻮﻟﻪ)ﺇﻥﻛﻞﺍﻟﻨﺎﺱﻓﻲﺍﻟﻬﻨﺪﺗﻘﺮﻳﺒﺎًﻟﺪﻳﻬﻢﻏﻮﺭﻭ(ﺇﻻﺇﻧﻨﻲﺍﺳﺘﻌﻤﻠﺖﺗﻌﺒﻴﺮﻫﺎﻏﻴﺮﺍﻟﻤﻘﺼﻮﺩﻷﻥﻫﺬﺍ
.ﻣﺎﺃﺷﻌﺮﺑﻪﺃﺣﻴﺎﻧﺎً
If we compare this to (24) below, the proximal demonstrative pronoun in
the ST is also in the subject position. However, in the TT this has changed
to the distal, a head noun has been added, and the whole structure of the
Arabic
sentences
has
changed
to
avoid
foregrounding
the
distal
demonstrative.
(24)
Even for me, even after all this time, I still ﬁnd myself sometimes balking
at the word Guru. This is not a problem for my friends in India.
(EPL).
ﻭﺣﺘّﻰﺑﺎﻟﻨﺴﺒﺔﺇﻟﻰّ،ﺑﻌﺪﻣﺮﻭﺭﻛﻞﻫﺬﺍﺍﻟﻮﻗﺖ،ﻻﺯﻟﺖﺃﺟﺪﻧﻔﺴﻲﻣﺘﺮﺩﺩﺓﺃﻣﺎﻡﻛﻠﻤﺔﻏﻮﺭﻭ.ﻋﻠﻤﺎًﺃﻥﺃﺻﺪﻗﺎﺋﻲﻓﻲ
.ﺍﻟﻬﻨﺪﻻﻳﻌﺎﻧﻮﻥﻣﻦﺗﻠﻚﺍﻟﻤﺸﻜﻠﺔ
In all of these examples, the shifting process ‘lift[s] the message away from
the SL deictic perspective and orient[s] it in accordance with the deictic
necessities of a TL text’ (Richardson 1998: 126). The English and Arabic
texts share a common tendency to exploit demonstratives as a tool of
referential cohesion in the text. However, it is the point of view of the
story and the referents within that are affected by this shift.
24.5.4
Overmarking
Cases of overmarking the TT with demonstratives where the ST does not
use one represent 37 per cent of the corpus data. This is a considerable
number which sheds some light on the characteristics of ﬁctional dis-
course in Arabic. The distribution of proximal and distal overmarked
demonstratives is as follows: 59 per cent distal, and 41 per cent prox-
imal. Data analysis shows that there are two broad categories of over-
marked
demonstratives
in
the
TT.
First,
there
are
cases
where
demonstratives are used in Arabic within ﬁxed grammaticalized expres-
sions to fulﬁl a conjunctive function in the discourse. Second, there are
cases where the introduced demonstratives in the TT are for non-
conjunctive functions which nevertheless result in various discourse
effects.
The ﬁrst category makes up 20 per cent of the overall overmarked cases,
with the majority of those using demonstrative pronouns rather than demon-
strative determiners. This particular use of the Arabic demonstratives seems
to be motivated by the differences between the two languages in terms of
stylistic conventions. Arabic uses conjunctive-like expressions, which usually
include a demonstrative, at the beginning of clauses, sentences, and para-
graphs as a means of creating a more cohesive text. Examples of such
6 0 0
M A I Z A K I

expressions includeﺑﻌﺪﺫﻟﻚـ ﻋﻮﺿﺎًﻋﻦﺫﻟﻚـ ﻭﻫﻜﺬﺍـ ﻭﻣﻨﺬﺫﻟﻚﺍﻟﺤﻴﻦـ ﻭﻋﻠﻰﻫﺬﺍ, in addition to
the expressionﻫﺬﺍﻭ, which is typical of journalistic texts with no equivalent in
English. Cohesion, in this sense, is considered in a broader light so that ‘any
element [is] cohesive as long as it signals a conjunctive-type relation between
parts of a text’ (Al-Amri 2005: 192). Cohesive links in a text, as Halliday and
Hasan (1976) argue, can be achieved by a multitude of linguistic means, and in
varying concentrations according to text type. In literature, the study of
cohesion is an important area in stylistics, as Jeffries and McIntyre (2010: 85)
note that ‘the variability in the extent of cohesion of a text is quite signiﬁcant
in literary work’.9 The following examples from the data illustrate this con-
junctive use:
(25)
“Sit down,” said the young man roughly. “He’ll be in soon.” I obeyed. One
of the dogs now came up in a more friendly manner than before. (WH)
ﻗﺎﻝﺍﻟﺸﺎﺏﻓﻲﺣﺪﺓﻭﺧﺸﻮﻧﺔ:
"ﺍﺟﻠﺲ،ﺳﻮﻑﻳﺄﺗﻲﺇﻟﻴﻚﺑﻌﺪﻗﻠﻴﻞ".ﺟﻠﺴﺖ.ﻓﻲﺗﻠﻚﺍﻟﻠﺤﻈﺔﺟﺎﺀﻧﻲﺃﺣﺪﺍﻟﻜﻼﺏ
.ﻭﻟﻜﻦﺑﺄﺳﻠﻮﺏﺃﻛﺜﺮﻭﺩﺍًﻣﻤﺎﺳﺒﻖ
(26)
Many of you use his textbooks in class. The students in the crowd nodded
enthusiastically.
(DVC)
ﻓﺎﻟﻜﺜﻴﺮﻣﻨﻜﻢﻳﻌﻮﺩﺇﻟﻰﻛﺘﺒﻪﻛﻤﺮﺍﺟﻊ.ﻭﻋﻠﻲﻫﺬﺍﺃﻭﻣﺄﺍﻟﻄﻼﺏﻣﻮﺍﻓﻘﻴﻦﺑﺤﻤﺎﺱ.
(27) The connections may be invisible, he often preached to his symbology
classes at Harvard. But they are always there, buried just beneath the
surface.
(DVC)
ﻗﺪﺗﻜﻮﻥﺍﻟﺮﻭﺍﺑﻂﻏﻴﺮﻣﺮﺋﻴﺔ،ﻏﻴﺮﺃﻧﻬﺎﺩﺍﺋﻤﺎًﻣﻮﺟﻮﺩﺓ،ﻣﺪﻓﻮﻧﺔﻫﻨﺎﻙﺗﻤﺎﻣﺎًﺗﺤﺖﺍﻟﺴﻄﺢ.ﻫﺬﺍﻣﺎﻛﺎﻥﻳﺮﺩﺩﻩﺃﺛﻨﺎﺀ
.ﻣﺤﺎﺿﺮﺍﺗﻪﻟﻠﻄﻼﺏﻓﻲﺻﻒﻋﻠﻢﺍﻟﺮﻣﻮﺯﻓﻲﻫﺎﺭﻓﺮﺩ
In all three examples, the demonstrative expression is at the beginning of the
sentence as it functions as a sentence connective between the utterance it
occurs in and the previous text. In (25), the ST uses the time deictic now, but
the translator chooses to front the expression of time to the beginning of the
sentence, to use the distal demonstrative tilka as a determiner adding the
noun lah˙z˙a (moment). This puts more emphasis on the time of the action,
although the translator also chooses to render it as distant from the point of
view of the character. In (26) and (27), demonstrative pronouns are preferred.
According to Diessel (1999: 125), one way sentence connectives could be
formed is via ‘pronominal demonstratives that are used as discourse deictics’
by establishing an anaphoric link in the discourse. Diessel deﬁnes the dis-
course deictic pragmatic function of demonstratives by virtue of referring to
propositions rather than speciﬁc referents. In his words, ‘discourse deictic
demonstratives focus the hearer’s attention on aspects of meaning, expressed
by a clause, a sentence, a paragraph, or an entire story’ (1999: 101). As such,
they serve a language-internal function.
9 See also Gray (2010) and references within for the use of demonstratives as cohesive devices in academic prose.
24 Stylistics and Translation
601

However, such a language-internal function is not restricted to sentence
connectives as discussed earlier. This leads to the second category of over-
marked demonstratives, which are referred to here as the ‘non-conjunctive’
use. In fact, 80 per cent of overmarked demonstratives in the TT are of that
type, which use pronominal and adnominal demonstratives alike. In this
category, the demonstratives do not necessarily occur at the beginning of
the sentence or clause, and in a large number of cases they are chosen as
a translation of other referring expressions, such as the deﬁnite article or
a third-person pronoun. It is also noted that in many cases the use of an
overmarked demonstrative in the TT is linked to other cohesive devices in
the ST, such as ellipsis and substitution. The use of demonstratives in this
category adds deictic force to the TT, resulting in a number of stylistic dis-
course effects in terms of point of view. The data analysis of this category is
shown in Table 24.5.
Examples (28) and (29) from the corpus illustrate this type:
(28) The three have spent all their lives in the open and troubled their heads
very little with dull things in books.
(GW)
.ﻭﻗﺪﺃﻣﻀﻰﻫﺆﻻﺀﺍﻟﺜﻼﺛﺔﺣﻴﺎﺗﻬﻢﻓﻲﺍﻟﻬﻮﺍﺀﺍﻟﻄﻠﻖﻭﻟﻢﻳﺰﻋﺠﻮﺍﺃﺩﻣﻐﺘﻬﻢ،ﺇﻻﻧﺎﺩﺭﺍً،ﺑﺎﻷﺷﻴﺎﺀﺍﻟﺒﻠﻴﺪﺓﻓﻲﺍﻟﻜﺘﺐ
(29)
Langdon turned and looked out the window, forcing the picture from his
mind.
(DVC)
.ﺍﺳﺘﺪﺍﺭﻻﻧﻐﺪﻭﻥﻭﺣﻮّﻝﻧﻈﺮﻩﺇﻟﻰﺍﻟﺨﺎﺭﺝﻣﺤﺎﻭﻻًﺇﺧﺮﺍﺝﺗﻠﻚﺍﻟﺼﻮﺭﺓﻣﻦﺭﺃﺳﻪ
The demonstratives in both examples add an emphatic effect as an added
value to the interpretation which does not necessitate the demonstrative
at all. In (28) the emphasis is on the characters being described in the
narration. In (29) the distal pronoun also highlights the emotional distan-
cing of the referent from the point of view of the character.
In (30) and (31), the demonstratives replace the third-person pronoun in
English. In the translations, deletion or pronominalization would result in
an ambiguous or an unnatural construction in the TT, therefore
a demonstrative has been used instead.
Table 24.5 Non-conjunctive use of overmarked
demonstratives
Non-conjunctive use of overmarked demonstratives
Translation of the
11 (16.5%)
Translation of it/he/she
21 (31%)
Ellipsis/substitution in ST
23 (34.5%)
Addition to TT
8 (12%)
Misc.
4 (6%)
Total
67
6 0 2
M A I Z A K I

(30) Sometimes I just can’t seem to admit it because, as a new Englander,
skepticism and pragmatism are my intellectual heritage.
(EPL)
ﻓﻔﻲﺑﻌﺾﺍﻷﺣﻴﺎﻥ،ﻻﺃﺟﺮﺅﻋﻠﻰﺍﻹﻗﺮﺍﺭﺑﺬﻟﻚﻷﻥﺍﻟﺘﺸﻜﻚﻭﺍﻟﺒﺮﺍﻏﻤﺎﺗﻴﺔﺷﻜﻼﻥﺟﺰﺀﺍًﻣﻦﺇﺭﺛﻲﺍﻟﻮﻃﻨﻲ
(31) I can’t think of anything. Besides, when Scarlett gets mad, everybody
knows it. She doesn’t hold herself in like some girls do.
(GW)
.ﻻﺃﺳﺘﻄﻴﻊﺗﺬﻛﺮﺃﻱﺷﻲء.ﺑﺎﻹﺿﺎﻓﺔﺇﻟﻰﺃﻧﻪﺣﻴﻦﺗﻐﻀﺐﺳﻜﺎﺭﻟﺖﻳﻌﻠﻢﺍﻟﺠﻤﻴﻊﺑﺬﻟﻚ.ﻓﻬﻲﻻﺗﺨﻔﻲﺷﻴﺌﺎًﻛﻤﺎﻳﻔﻌﻞ
ﻏﻴﺮﻫﺎﻣﻦﺍﻟﻔﺘﻴﺎﺕ
Examples (32) and (33) showcase ellipsis and substitution as grammatical
cohesive devices in the ST which have been translated using a demonstrative
in the TT. In (32), not using a demonstrative in the TT would be equally
grammatical; however, the translator could be motivated to add the demon-
strative to preserve the cohesive link in the TT. In (33), the adverb ‘so’ in
English has a discourse-marker function that plays a role in the intricate
network of references in discourse. This function can only be expressed in
Arabic using a demonstrative. The choice of the distal demonstrative is appro-
priate given the previous negation and the character’s emotional attitude.
(32) “The sea killed my father,” she said. “I know,” I said.
(DC)
ﻗﺎﻟﺖﻟﻲ:
"ﻟﻘﺪﻗﺘﻞﺍﻟﺒﺤﺮﻭﺍﻟﺪﻱ".ﻗﻠﺖ:
"ﺃﻋﺮﻑﺫﻟﻚ"
(33) She knew he loved her. Why did he not tell her so?
(GW)
ﻋﺮﻓﺖﺃﻧﻪﻣﻐﺮﻡﺑﻬﺎ.ﻟﻜﻦﻟﻤﺎﺫﺍﻟﻢﻳﺨﺒﺮﻫﺎﺑﺬﻟﻚ؟
Finally, in some uncommon cases, a demonstrative in the TT is
added with little incentive from the ST. In (34), the translator chooses
to paraphrase the French expression de´ja` vu using a demonstrative. In
(35), the demonstrative following the proper noun is not only uncalled
for by the ST, but it conveys a derogatory connotation in a more overt
way than the nouns ‘servant’ and ‘black’ suggest in English.
(34)
The image was gruesome and profoundly strange, bringing with it an
unsettling sense of de´ja` vu.
(DVC)
ﻟﻘﺪﻛﺎﻧﺖﺍﻟﺼﻮﺭﺓﻣﻘﺰﺯﺓﻭﺷﺪﻳﺪﺓﺍﻟﻐﺮﺍﺑﺔ،ﺣﻤﻠﺖﻣﻌﻬﺎﺇﺣﺴﺎﺳﺎًﻣﻀﻄﺮﺑﺎًﻳﻨﺒﺌﻪﺑﺄﻧﻪﻗﺪﺭﺃﻯﻫﺬﺍﺍﻟﻤﻨﻈﺮﻣﻦﻗﺒﻞ
(35) After an interval, James, who was their boy servant and had been their
childhood playmate and was a tall black boy of their own age, came
toward them.
(GW)
ﺑﻌﺪﻣﻀﻲﻓﺘﺮﺓﻣﻦﺍﻟﻮﻗﺖ،ﺗﻘﺪﻡﻧﺤﻮﻫﻤﺎﺟﻴﻤﺲ،ﻭﻫﻮﻓﺘﻰﺯﻧﺠﻲﻃﻮﻳﻞﺍﻟﻘﺎﻣﺔﻓﻲﻣﺜﻞﻋﻤﺮﻫﻤﺎ.ﻭﺟﻴﻤﺲﻫﺬﺍﻫﻮ
ﺧﺎﺩﻣﻬﻤﺎﺍﻟﺸﺨﺼﻲﻭﺻﺪﻳﻖﻃﻔﻮﻟﺘﻬﻤﺎ.
The expression in (34) could be paraphrased in a number of ways which do
not necessarily need a demonstrative. However, using the demonstrative
determiner marks a continuation in the thematic link in relation to the
24 Stylistics and Translation
603

referent. The structure [proper noun + demonstrative]10 in (35) results in
a negative pragmatic effect which is derived from the interaction of the
demonstrative with the contextual assumptions warranted by the text. It is
also noted that the embedded clause in the ST would have been awkward
to translate as it is into Arabic, hence the altered sentence structure in
the TT.
24.6
Summary and Discussion
In any work of ﬁction, the text is made up of a number of deictic centres,
chief among which are those of the author, the narrator, and the charac-
ters. During the process of reading, readers respond to deictic cues in the
text and assume, maintain, or shift certain cognitive stances in the ﬁc-
tional world. This process is ‘a deictic projection made from the situation
of production of the text to the reception of that text by the reader’
(Richardson 1998: 125). In the same vein, translators are receptors of the
text, and in this capacity, they attempt such deictic projections. However,
translators are also creators of a parallel text which attempts to convey the
‘same’ meaning. In their creations, translators would be inﬂuenced by the
poetics of the ST, i.e., ‘the system of choices the translator ascribes to the
source-text author’ (Boase-Beier 2018: 200), as well as by the linguistic and
stylistic necessities and limitations of the target language. Therefore, an
author’s use of demonstratives in the ST is not always met with the same
decision by the translator.
A translator’s maintenance of the same deictic projections as those of
the author is a common strategy, but it is not the only one. Some linguis-
tic and/or stylistic factors encourage this strategy, which could be
deemed the translator’s way of helping readers of the TT to receive the
text in more or less the same way as readers of the original. Temporal
references, straightforward anaphoric reference, and certain colloca-
tions all encourage translators to maintain the proximal/distal cognitive
viewpoint.
Nevertheless, translations hardly exhibit a uniform deictic perspective.
Shifts, neutralizations, and overmarking are also common strategies in
a narrative. Translators sometimes ﬁnd themselves in a position to shift
the deictic focus of a demonstrative, to neutralize the deictic meaning
altogether, or to introduce one to the TT for various reasons. In the words
of Pantopoulos (2012: 106), this helps to ‘bring the translator sharply into
focus as a (re-)writer of texts with his/her own stylistic ﬁngerprint and his/
her personal reading of the ST’. In the present study, more than 60 per cent
10 See Zaki (2012: ch. 5) for a discussion of this particular structure and function of demonstratives in both English and
Arabic.
6 0 4
M A I Z A K I

of the demonstratives in translation were a result of choices made by the
translator for reasons other than maintaining the same deictic reference.
When translators neutralize a demonstrative in the ST, they either
delete it altogether or use another referring expression, most notably the
deﬁnite article or a third-person pronoun. In both cases, the implication is
one of loss of deictic force. Even though neutralization was the least used
strategy in the data, it should be recognized that deixis is a central tool in
narrative as it reﬂects the characters’ point of view and attitude in the
course of events. In her study of linguistic losses in the translation of
Arabic literary texts, Al-Masri (2008: 193) stresses that deictic expressions
‘should not be ignored in translation’, but also that the translator ‘should
use the deictic perspective appropriate for the target language’. As vague
as this statement may be, it points to certain semantic and grammatical
constraints which inﬂuence translation in general, and the translation of
demonstratives in particular. The examples discussed here show that
demonstratives in Arabic are versatile tools for asserting viewpoint and
positioning on all levels of meaning, literal and metaphorical.
In the shift strategy, temporal and cognitive/emotional distance some-
times act as a catalyst for a shift from the proximal to the distal. Similarly,
introducing new referents in discourse via ‘indeﬁnite this’ in English is
expressed by distal demonstratives in Arabic, but distal demonstratives in
the subject position which refer to whole propositions favour the proximal
demonstrative in Arabic. However, the shift in the demonstrative may be
just a direct reﬂection of a change in the deictic centre from which the
translator interprets the text. This is particularly true when the demon-
strative is part of the narration rather than direct speech by one of the
characters. It has been noted in one novel, for example, that the translator
adopts an external viewpoint on behalf of the narrator throughout. This
has important implications for the overall style of the translator. Munday
(1998: 15) considers this phenomenon to be part of the ‘idiolect of the
translator’ and he does not consider such instances errors in translation.
Furthermore, Bosseaux (2007: 88) explains that such ‘microstructural
shifts occur throughout the text and thus affect the structure of the
story’. Since demonstratives are but one of the linguistic features which
constitute the notion of point of view, evidence from other linguistic
features is needed in order to assess the full scope of a shift in point of
view.
Finally, the overmarking strategy is used to achieve two functions: the
conjunctive and the non-conjunctive. Discourse deictic demonstratives, as
Diessel (1999: 105) explains, ‘function to establish an overt thematic link
between two propositions: the one in which they are embedded, and the
one to which they refer’. This is apparent in the grammaticalized expres-
sions used in the TT at the beginning of sentences or clauses including
a demonstrative. In non-conjunctive uses, the demonstrative in the TT
adds a pragmatic emphatic effect that does not obtain with the deﬁnite
24 Stylistics and Translation
605

article or the third-person pronoun in English, which lack the metapho-
rical extension of the notion of distance. In some cases, a demonstrative
has been used in the TT to avoid referential ambiguity or an unnatural
structure in Arabic. Arabic demonstratives function as cohesive markers in
structures where the English language uses ellipsis or substitution instead.
Richardson (1998: 138) argues that some of the decisions made by transla-
tors in dealing with deictic expressions are simple; however, others are
‘quite subtle and affect precisely those qualities in the text which help to
give the text an identity’. The high percentage of overmarking, regardless
of its motivation, helps in shaping the Arabic identity of the TT.
The English and Arabic demonstrative systems are different in terms of
grammatical form and markings, but they are not very different in terms
of the range of functions they are able to perform in discourse.
Nevertheless, translators deviate from the ST author’s use of demonstra-
tives for a variety of reasons. Some syntactic, lexical, and pragmatic con-
straints are at play, but the notion of style should not be underestimated.
Richardson (1998: 138) claims that ‘deictic feature selection is often
a stylistic decision rather than a grammatical one’. This is largely true for
both authors and translators. As much as demonstratives are highly
context-dependent items, they are also highly style-inﬂuenced items
within the parameters of the language concerned. In a work of ﬁction,
the style of the author can be detected through a close examination of
deictic elements. Given that no two languages work exactly in the same
way, a certain degree of variation in the translation of demonstratives
should be expected. However, the consequence of stylistic preference in
Arabic demonstratives has been shown to play a large role in this variation.
24.7
Concluding Remarks
Demonstratives have long preoccupied linguists who have tried to com-
prehend the range of meanings and functions these words seem to convey.
Enﬁeld (2003: 82) blatantly argues that demonstratives are ‘one of the
great puzzles of linguistic science’. This study is an attempt to shed more
light on how and why translators translate demonstratives in a literary
text in a certain way. In addition to situational and non-situational func-
tions, demonstratives in literature have come to be known for their key
role in the linguistic construction of a point of view in text. In this study,
the analysis of the parallel corpus has shown that the translation of
demonstratives from English into Arabic is not a straightforward process
of maintaining the same deictic form and force. On the contrary, the sheer
number of non-corresponding cases of demonstratives in the ST and the TT
demonstrate how these linguistic items can manipulate the overall cogni-
tive structure of the narrative.
6 0 6
M A I Z A K I

As in any study, there are certain limitations to this work, which only
encourage further research into this area. One limitation is the small size
of the corpus investigated. Although translation patterns could be iden-
tiﬁed and analysed, a bigger corpus is needed in order to draw a clearer
picture of translators’ motivations in shifting, neutralizing, or overmark-
ing demonstratives in their texts. Similarly, another limitation with the
corpus used here is the incompleteness of the literary works. As discussed
before, the stylistic study of a certain work of ﬁction would beneﬁt
greatly from the analysis and comparison of full literary texts, since
‘the style of the target text is an expression of the translator’s choices’
(Boase-Beier 2006: 5). Analysing complete texts could highlight more
stylistic tendencies pertaining to the translators themselves rather than
the texts. This would also help to further explore the effect of the transla-
tion strategies exploited in the translation of deictic expressions on the
macro-level of the text. Richardson (1998: 132) argues that ‘on a macro-
pragmatic level, contextual features constrain the markers of deictic
perspective in translation, but also, on a micro-pragmatic level, deictic
perspective
changes
as
the
discourse
progresses’.
For
example,
a dominant shift translation strategy in a particular literary TT would
shape the reader’s reception of such a text in a way that would be very
different from the ST. It is hoped that future developments in the world
of parallel corpora between Arabic and English would encourage more
corpus-based translational stylistic studies to tackle such limitations.
Another
direction
for
future
research
would
be
to
conduct
a comparative stylistic analysis of different translations of the same ST.
Such an analysis, focusing on the translation of deictic expressions,
would shed more light on the translator’s stylistic identity, and the over-
all effect of the translation strategy on the viewpoint of the narrative.
This research path could also be seen useful for translators themselves,
i.e., in enabling them to produce more stylistically aware translations.
Boase-Beier (2018) highlights several features indicative of stylistic
awareness that a translator should bear in mind. Awareness of viewpoint
and its markers in a literary text would help a translator assess the extent
to which these markers affect the overall reception of a text.
References
Al-Amri, K. (2005). Arabic/English/Arabic Translation: Shifts of Cohesive Markers in
the Translation of Argumentative Texts: A Contrastive Arabic–English Text-
Linguistic Study. Unpublished PhD dissertation. University of Durham, UK.
Al-Ghalayini, M. (1993). Ja¯miʿal-duru¯s al-zarabiyyah. Beirut: Al-Maktabah Al-
ʿAs˙riyyah.
Al-Hashemy, A. A. (1999). Jawa¯hir Al-Bala¯gghah. Beirut: Al-Maktabah Al-
ʿAs˙riyyah.
24 Stylistics and Translation
607

Al-Masri, H. (2008). Linguistic losses in the translation of Arabic literary texts.
In D. Parkinson, ed., Perspectives on Arabic Linguistics: Papers from the Annual
Symposium on Arabic Linguistics, vol. XXI. Amsterdam: John Benjamins,
173–204.
Al-Nadry, M. A. (1989). Nah˙ w al-lug˙ah l-ʿarabiyyah. Beirut: Al-Maktabah Al-
ʿAs˙riyyah.
Al-Tabariy, M. J. (1968). Ja¯mi al-baya¯n ﬁtafsir al-qur’a¯n [The Unabridged
Commentary on the Qur’a¯n]. Beirut: Da¯r al-Maʾrifah.
Alotaibi, H. M. (2017). Arabic–English Parallel Corpus: A new resource for
translation training and language teaching. Arab World English Journal, 8
(3), 319–37.
Boase-Beier, J. (2006). Stylistic Approaches to Translation. Manchester:
St. Jerome Publishing.
Boase-Beier, J. (2014). Stylistics and translation. In M. Burk, ed., The
Routledge Handbook of Stylistics. New York: Routledge, 393–407.
Boase-Beier, J. (2018). Stylistics and translation. In K. Malmkjaer, ed., The
Routledge Handbook of Translation Studies and Linguistics. New York:
Routledge, 194–207.
Bosseaux, C. (2007). How Does It Feel? Point of View in Translation: The Case of
Virginia Woolf into French, Approaches to Translation Studies, 29.
Amsterdam: Rodopi.
Burke, M. (2014). Rhetoric and poetics: The classical heritage of stylistics.
In M. Burke, ed., The Routledge Handbook of Stylistics. New York: Routledge,
11–30.
Cantarino, V. (1974). Syntax of Modern Arabic Prose. Bloomington, IN: Indiana
University Press.
Chen, R. (1990). English demonstratives: A case of semantic expansion.
Language Sciences, 12(2/3), 139–53.
Cornish, F. (1999). Anaphora, Discourse and Understanding: Evidence from English
and French. Oxford: Clarendon Press.
Cornish, F. (2001). Modal that as determiner and pronoun: The primacy of
the cognitive-interactive dimension. English Language and Linguistics, 5(2),
297–315.
Croft, W. and Cruse, D. A. (2004). Cognitive Linguistics. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
Diessel, H. (1999). Demonstratives: Form, Function and Grammaticalization.
Amsterdam: John Benjamins.
Doiz-Bienzobas, A. (2003). An analysis of English, Spanish and Basque
demonstratives in narrative: A matter of viewpoint. International Journal
of English Studies, 3 (2), 63–84.
Eid, R. (1993). Stylistic Research: Present and Past. Alexandria: Munsha¯tul-
Maʿa¯ref of Alexandria.
Enﬁeld, N. J. (2003). Demonstratives in space and interaction. Language, 79,
82–152.
6 0 8
M A I Z A K I

Fauconnier, G. (1985). Mental Spaces: Aspects of Meaning Construction in Natural
Language. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Fillmore, C. J. (1997). Lectures on Deixis. Stanford, CA: CSLI Publications.
Fowler, R. (1966). Essays on Style and Language. London: Routledge & Kegan
Paul.
Frei, H. (1944). Syste`mes de de´ictiques. Acta Linguistica, 4: 111–29.
Galbraith, M. (1995). Deictic shift theory and the poetics of involvement in
narrative. In J. Duchan, G. Bruder, and L. Hewitt, eds., Deixis in Narrative:
A Cognitive Science Perspective. New York: Routledge, 19–60.
Ghazala, H. (2011). Cognitive Stylistics and the Translator. London: Sayyab
Books.
Gray, B. (2010). On the use of demonstrative pronouns and determiners as
cohesive devices: A focus on sentence-initial this/these in academic prose.
Journal of English for Academic Purposes, 9(3), 167–83.
Gundel, J. K., Hedberg, N., and Zacharski, R. (1993). Cognitive status and
the form of referring expressions in discourse. Language, 69(2),
274–307.
Gutt, E. (2000). Translation and Relevance: Cognition and Context, 2nd ed.
Manchester, UK: St. Jerome Publishing.
Halliday, M. A. K. and Hasan, R. (1976). Cohesion in English. London:
Longman.
Hassan, A. (1995). Al-naw al-wa¯fy. Cairo: Dar Al-Maʿa¯rif.
Himmelmann, N. P. (1996). Demonstratives in narrative discourse:
A taxonomy of universal uses. In B. Fox, ed., Studies in Anaphora.
Amsterdam: John Benjamins, 205–54.
Ibn Al-Hajib, U. (1980). Sharh˙ al-wa¯ﬁyah nadhm al-ka¯ﬁyah. Al-Najaf Al-Ashraf:
Al-a¯da¯b Press.
Ibn Kathı¯r, E. A. (1419). Tafsı¯r al-qur’a¯n al-‘azı¯m (the exegesis of the great Qur’a¯n).
Beirut: Da¯r al-Kutub al-Ilmı¯yya.
Jeffries, L. and McIntyre, D. (2010). Stylistics (Cambridge textbooks in lin-
guistics). New York: Cambridge University Press.
Kemmerer, D. (1999). ‘Near’ and ‘far’ in language and perception. Cognition,
73(1), 35–63.
Labrador, B. (2011). A corpus-based study of the use of Spanish demonstra-
tives as translation equivalents of English demonstratives. Perspectives,
19(1), 71–87.
Lakoff, G. (1987). Women, Fire and Dangerous Things: What Categories Reveal
about the Mind. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Lakoff, R. (1974). Remarks on this and that. Proceedings of the Chicago
Linguistics Society, 10, 345–56.
Langacker, R. W. (1987). Foundations of Cognitive Grammar, vols. I and II.
Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press.
Langacker, R. W. (1999). Grammar and Conceptualization. Berlin: De Gruyter
Mouton.
24 Stylistics and Translation
609

Leonetti, M. (2000). The asymmetries between the deﬁnite article and
demonstratives: A procedural account. Paper presented to the 7th
International Pragmatics Conference, Budapest, July.
Lyons, J. (1977). Semantics, vols. I and II. Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press.
Malmkjaer, K. (2003). What happened to God and the angels: An exercise in
translational stylistics. Target, 15, 37–58.
Malmkjaer, K. (2018). The Routledge Handbook of Translation Studies and
Linguistics. New York: Routledge.
McIntyre, D. and Walker, B. (2019). Corpus Stylistics: Theory and Practice.
Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press.
Mejdell, G. (2006). Mixed Styles in Spoken Arabic in Egypt: Somewhere between
Order and Chaos. Leiden: Brill.
Morini, M. (2014). Translation, stylistics and To the Lighthouse: A deictic shift
theory analysis. Target, 26(1), 128–45.
Munday, J. (1998). A computer-assisted approach to the analysis of transla-
tion shifts. Meta, 43(3), 1–16.
Nasr, S. H. (2015). The Study Quran: A New Translation and Commentary, 1st ed.
New York: HarperOne.
Neary, C. (2014). Stylistics, point of view and modality. In M. Burke, ed., The
Routledge Handbook of Stylistics. London: Routledge, 175–90.
Nowottny, W. (1962). The Language Poets Use. London: Athlone Press.
Pantopoulos, I. (2012). Two different faces of Cavafy in English: A
corpus-assisted approach to translational stylistics. International Journal
of English Studies, 12(2), 93–110.
Peer, W. and Graf, E. (2002). Between the lines: Spatial language and its
developmental representation in Stephen King’s IT. In E. Semino and
J. Culpeper, eds., Cognitive Stylistics: Language and Cognition in Text Analysis.
Amsterdam: John Benjamins, 123–52.
Ribera, J. and Cuenca, M. J. (2013). Use and translation of demonstratives in
ﬁction: A contrastive approach (English–Catalan). Catalan Review, XXVII,
27–49.
Richardson, B. (1998). Deictic features and the translator. In L. Hickey, ed.,
The Pragmatics of Translation. Clevedon, UK: Multilingual Matters, 124–42.
Segal, E. (1995). Narrative comprehension and the role of deictic shift
theory. In J. Duchan, G. Bruder, and L. Hewitt, eds, Deixis in Narrative:
A Cognitive Science Perspective. New York: Routledge, 3–18.
Short, M. (1996). Exploring the Language of Poems, Plays and Prose. London:
Longman.
Stockwell, P. (2002). Miltonic texture and the feeling of reading. In
E. Semino and J. Culpeper, eds., Cognitive Stylistics: Language and
Cognition in Text Analysis (Linguistic approaches to literature, vol. 1).
Amsterdam: John Benjamins, 73–94.
Sulaiman, F. (1990). Stylistics: Theoretical and Practical Introduction. Cairo: Al-
Matbaʿah Al-Fanniyah.
6 1 0
M A I Z A K I

Verdonk, P. (2002). Stylistics. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Wales, K. (2006). Stylistics. In K. Brown, ed., The Elsevier Encyclopedia of
Language and Linguistics, 2nd ed., vol. 12. Oxford: Elsevier, 213–17.
Woodworth, N. (1991). Sound symbolism in proximal and distal forms.
Linguistics, 29(2), 273–99.
Wu, Y. (2004). Spatial Demonstratives in English and Chinese. Amsterdam: John
Benjamins.
Zaki, M. (2012). The Semantics and Pragmatics of Demonstratives in English and
Arabic: A Corpus-Based Study. Saarbrücken, Germany: Lap Lambert
Academic Publishers.
24 Stylistics and Translation
611

Index
AIDA (see Association Internationale de
Dialectologie Arabe)
ACTFL (see American Council on Teaching
Foreign Languages)
accusative case, 365–6
adverbials, 354, 357, 364, 366
Agree, 375, 380, 384–5
agreement, 372–82
impoverished, 373, 376
rich, 375–6, 378
subject-verb agreement asymmetry (SVAA),
373–8
al-ʿA¯ jarru¯ miyya, 131
Aleppo dialect, 483
Algerian dialects, 228, 231, 289, 414, 576
American Council on Teaching Foreign
Languages (ACTFL), 18, 85, 89, 108
proﬁciency guidelines, 19, 85–6, 90
oral proﬁciency interview (OPI), 18,
85–90, 108
Amman dialect, 188, 224
analytic structures, 231–2
Ancient North Arabian, 310
Andalusi Arabic, 215, 232, 259
Anatolian dialects, 221, 232
Arabian names (see onomastics)
Arabian Peninsular dialects, 182, 221, 226, 257,
264, 270, 483
Arabic as foreign language pedagogy
‘Army method’, 84
audio lingual method, 84–5
historical approaches, 84
grammar translation method, 84
MSA ﬁrst, 22, 127
teaching phonology, 128, 132–5, 140–3
Arabic case system, 359–66
Arabic corpora
accuracy, 458–61
overcomplication, 458
oversimpliﬁcation, 459
annotation, 460–1 (see also tagging)
learner, 490–1
multilingual, 492–3
parallel, 492–3, 514
size, 453–6
spoken Arabic, 481–2
representativeness, 456–7, 474
terminological confusion, 453–5
translation pedagogy, 494–5
Arabic domain names, 519
Arabic language academies, 33–4, 40, 43–4
Arabic language planning, 34–9
ALECSO (Arab League Educational, Cultural
and Scientiﬁc Organization), 33, 40
Arabterm, 40
borrowing, 39
contemporary, 35–7
early, 35
global, 39–41
Infoterm (International Information Centre
for Terminology), 40–1
ISO (International Organization for
Standardization), 39–40
mother-tongue disadvantage, 41–2
language planning problems, 38–9
planning agency functions, 37
teaching variation (integrated approach),
19–22, 143
Arabic WordNet, 436
arabiCorpus, 301, 455, 476–7, 479, 486
Arabization, 34–9, 42, 43
Arabizi, 432, 434
assessment
ACTFL proﬁciency guidelines, 85
Arabic proﬁciency test (APT), 85, 88
Arabic-speciﬁc challenges, 96–7
basic language cognition (BLC), 87–8
cloze and C-test formats, 94–5
Common European Framework of Reference
(CEFR), 86, 89
computer-assisted language assessment, 91–3
computer-assisted screening tool (CAST), 88
computer oral proﬁciency interview
(COPI), 91
Defense Language Proﬁciency Test (DLPT), 88
higher language cognition (HLC), 87
oral proﬁciency interview (OPI), 85–6
other test formats, 95–6
performance-based and task-based language
testing, 89

Simulated Oral Proﬁciency Interview
(SOPI), 91
Standard Test of Arabic Proﬁciency in
Speakers of Other Languages (STAPSOL), 88
Standards-Based Measure of Proﬁciency
(STAMP), 88
study abroad, 90–1
Association for Computational Linguistics (ACL),
437–8
Association Internationale de Dialectologie
Arabe (AIDA), 216
automatic speech recognition, 428
Auto-segmental Metrical Model (AM), 332–4
b- preﬁx, 161–3, 287–9, 296, 418
Baghdad dialect, 223, 297, 298, 568
Bedouin dialects, 164, 165, 223, 227, 228, 233,
289, 415, 418
Bahraini dialects, 164, 223, 481
Beirut dialect (Beiruti), 53, 188
bi-clausal coordinate structure, 379–80
borrowing, 39, 44, 249–50, 280
Cairo dialect (Cairene), 2–3, 188, 410, 417, 418
Casablanca dialect, 183, 187, 190, 224, 261
case, 354, 357–8, 362–3 (see also individual
cases: nominative, accusative, and
genitive)
as a complex notion, 356–7
Case Filter, 382
G&B, 382, 383
hierarchy, 357–8 (see also individual cases)
morphology, 358–9
P&P approach, 382
Semitic, 353–4, 358, 364–5
case theory, 354–7, 367, 382–7
Computational linguistics/Natural Language
Processing research, 432–4
application-oriented evaluation, 433
language-independence and cross-lingual
adaptation, 433–4
representation and featurization, 433
codeswitching, 204–7, 535–6
constraints on, 205–7
collaborative translation, 516–19
complexity
dialect morphology, 431
fewer distinctions principle, 157–9
measures, 156–7
morphological richness and complexity, 430
one-meaning-one-form principle, 156
opacity, 168–76
overspeciﬁcation, 156, 160–8
relative complexity, 157
structural elaboration principle, 156, 168–71
Trade-off Principle, 157
variation as, 537–9
computational linguistics/natural language pro-
cessing (CL/NDP), 427
applications, 428
automatic speech recognition, 428
information retrieval, 428
machine translation, 428, 515
optical character recognition, 428
speech synthesis, 428
enabling technologies, 428
language/dialect identiﬁcation, 428
part-of-speech (POS) tagging, 428
syntactic parsing, 428
tokenization, 428
contact, 176, 184, 249–50
with Aramaic, 166
continuous and non-continuous negative mor-
pheme (see misˇ, negative circumﬁx ma¯-sˇ,
and non-verbal negator misˇ)
coreferential dative, 167 (see also differential
object marking)
corpus-based Arabic language teaching, 485–6,
487, 489–90
corpus-based descriptions of Arabic, 486–7
corpus-based dictionaries, 488
corpus-based translation studies, 491–4
corpus studies of written Arabic, 476–9
corpus studies of spoken Arabic, 482–4
crowd-sourced translation, 516 (see also
volunteer translators)
CT3 (community translation, collaborative tech-
nology and processes, and crowdsour-
cing), 517
Damascus dialect, 188, 221, 225, 230, 232, 258,
261, 534, 543–6, 548, 549, 556 (see also
Syrian dialects)
declension, 360–2
declination, 336–8
degrammaticalization, 292–3
deictic centre, 587, 589, 593, 596
Deictic Shift Theory (DST), 586, 589, 593
demonstratives, 586–8, 600–2
proximal/distal, 586–8
situational and non-situational, 592
derivation, 408–9
derivational morphology, 406–7, 408
dialect literature, 565
adab sa¯h
˘
ir (satirical/satiric/sarcastic literature),
571–2, 573, 574
direct speech in, 566–8, 572, 573
ﬁrst-person narrative, 566–8
fus˙h˙a¯mmiyya, 574
mudakkira¯t, 566, 575
orthography, 575–6
third-person narrative, 568
translations into, 576
vernacular in dialogue, 568–70
dialects
atlases, 217
CL/NLP, 440
classiﬁcation, 220–4
communal, 223
dictionaries and glossaries, 217–18, 235
distribution, 219–21, 222
groupings, 221, 222
innovations, 227–31
isolation, 248–9
literature, 565
preservation of archaic features, 226–7
reference works, 218–19
valorization of, 577
dialectology
at Arab universities, 215
comparative, 216–17
early scholars, 215–16
nomadic/sedentary division, 221–4
rural/urban division, 223, 545
differential object marking (DOM), 166–8, 232
digital dictionary resources, 235
Index
613

diglossia, 54–5, 533
codeswitching, 204–7
constraints on, 205–7
complexity, 157–9
corpora, 234–5
formal spoken Arabic (FSA), 200–1
in language teaching, 20, 134–40
need for fresh views of, 182–3
durative/progressive ga-, 280
Durayd, Ibn, 313–14
early words (see language development studies/
ﬁrst-word production)
Educated Spoken Arabic (ESA), 199
teaching, 137–8, 140–3
Egyptian Arabic, 50, 52, 53, 67, 69, 109, 161, 162,
163, 170, 172, 175, 224, 228, 251, 253, 258,
266, 289, 296, 391, 416, 431, 432, 480, 481,
535, 567, 569, 570, 573, 575, 576 (see also
Sa’idi dialect)
Emirati Arabic, 263, 264, 297, (see also UAE
dialect)
emotional deixis, 588
enclave dialects (see peripheral dialects)
enclitic -sˇ, 395–7
error analysis approaches, 12–18
acquisition of negation and interrogation,
12
communication strategies, 12
cognitive processing models, 13
speech processing constraints, 13
Universal-Grammar-based accounts, 14–16
with heritage learners, 16–17
European Language Resources Association
(ELRA), 437, 447–50
existential particle, 173, 252–4, 263–5, 269
Facebook
addo¯mari page, 544–7
Farra¯’, al-, 265, 390
FIGS (French, Italian, German, Spanish), 514
Eurocentric and North American assump-
tions, 515
ﬁrst conjunct agreement (FCA), 378–81
Formal Spoken Arabic (FSA)
designations, 199–200
diglossia, 200–1, 204–7
inter-Arabic, 201–2, 209
intermediate register (mixed variety),
202–3, 210
pedagogy, 207–8
founder effect, 254
full agreement (see rich agreement)
future marker, 160, 161–2, 230, 280, 295–6,
297–9, 359, 476
genealogy, 313–14
generative grammar, 371
genitive, 364–5
Ghamdi dialect, 184, 192
government and binding framework (GB), 374,
380, 384
grammatical sˇı¯, 254–64, 269
existential, 263–5
negation, 256–7
polar interrogative, 257–61
quantiﬁer, partitive, determiner, 261–2
sequential, 262–3
wh-interrogatives, 255
grammaticalization
active participles denoting ‘sitting’, 297–9
body-part terms, 286–7
future marker, 295–6
g˙adi and masˇi from motion participles, 293–4
in Egyptian Arabic, 281–2
in fus˙h˙a¯, 282
prepositional forms, 285–6
progressive, 296–7
reﬂexes of ra- from verb of perception, 289–90
reﬂexes of -sˇi, 290–1
verbs of motion, 480–1, 488
Gulf Arabic, 162, 163, 164, 165, 167, 170,
175, 228
Gumar (corpus), 235, 263, 289, 296, 481
Hassaniya dialect, 410, 576
H˙ azm, Ibn, 313–14, 317
head movement, 387
heritage learners, 16–17, 90
H˙ imyarı¯, al-, 245
Hisha¯m, Ibn, 376–7
identity, 190–1, 201, 247–8, 316, 318, 320–1, 543,
546, 547–50
impoverished agreement, 373, 376
inﬁxed -in-, 163–5
inﬂectional categories, 413–20
aspect, 416
deﬁnitiveness, 420
degree, 418–19
gender, 414–15
mood, 417–18
number, 413–14
person, 416
tense, 417
voice, 418
inﬂectional head (Inﬂ), 374–5, 380, 383
inﬂectional morphology, 407–8, 430
information retrieval, 428
intonation and grammar, 338, 342–3
intonational focus and information structure,
339–40
intonational parameters, 340–1
intonation units, 334–5
Iraqi dialects, 161, 166, 224, 226, 232, 298
ism, 315–16
Jeddah dialect (see Najdi dialects)
Jespersen’s Cycle, 396–7
Jordanian dialects, 52, 54–5, 61, 67, 69, 182, 186,
187, 190
Juba Arabic, 234, 396–7, 418
Judeo-Arabic, 223
Jurja¯ni, al-, 585
Kalbı¯, Ibn al-, 313
Khalı¯l, al- (Ibn Ah˙ mad al-Fara¯hı¯dı¯), 130, 362
Korpus Malti, 482
kunya, 315–16
Kuwaiti dialects, 61, 297–8, 339, 396, 481
language development studies, 49–59
ﬁrst-word production, 49–50, 52–3, 59
differences between Arabic varieties, 54–5
developmental milestones, 55
morphosyntactic development, 59–63
614
Index

collective plural marking, 62–3
dual marking, 62
plural formation, 61
root and pattern, 59–60
verbal inﬂection, 60
phonological development, 51–9
consonant acquisition, 52–3, 55diglossia in,
54–5gemination, 53
gliding processes, 52
glottal replacement, 52
pragmatic development, 72
Speciﬁc Language Impairment (SLI), 72
syntactic development, 63–72
negation, 67–70modal, 69–70sentential,
69–70stages, 67–9
word-order, 70A-chain, 70SVO/VSO,
70–1, 75
language/dialect identiﬁcation, 428
language modelling approaches, 429
machine learning (ML), 429–30
supervised, 429
unsupervised, 429
language policy, 508
laqab, 315–16, 317
laysa (negator), 169–70, 174, 388–9
Lebanese dialects, 53, 166, 170, 221, 258, 261–2,
267, 379, 381
Leuven Arabic Corpora, 452
Levantine dialects, 3, 161, 163, 170, 221, 253, 431
lexical innovation, 234
words for ‘now’, 234
interrogative sˇ, 234
Lexicalist Hypothesis, 355–6
Libyan dialects, 163, 229, 234, 289, 296, 298
Linguistic Data Consortium (LDC), 437, 450–1
localization and internationalization, 511–13
professional software localization, 514
locative case (vestigial), 364
ma¯ (negator), 389–90
machine translation, 428, 493
Maghrebi dialects, 204, 221, 224, 228, 229, 231,
246–7
Maltese, 3, 228, 232, 257, 264, 297–8
borrowed vocabulary, 249–50
entry of Arabic speakers onto Malta, 245–6
existential particle emm, 252–4
European inﬂuences, 246–8, 249–50
parent varieties, 246–7
phonology, 250–3
ma¯sˇi (negator), 172, 392
Mauritanian dialect, 289
Mesopotamian dialects, 221, 257
Minimalist program, 384
misˇ (negator), 169–74, 390–2
modals and modality, 229, 282–3, 476–9, 483–4
modelling challenges, 430–2
ambiguity, 431
dialect morphology, 431
morphological richness and complexity, 430
orthographic inconsistency, 431–2, 575–6
resource poverty, 432, 474–5
Modern South Arabian Languages, 264, 291, 406
Modern Standard Arabic (MSA), 535
mood and aspect, 229–31
morphological analysis and disambiguation,
434–5, 461–2
Moroccan dialects, 59, 161, 172, 204, 224, 228,
229, 230, 231, 232, 258, 261, 266, 267,
289, 339, 377, 379, 391–2, 395–6, 452,
484, 576
morphological reduction, 228
morphology
derivational, 406–7
inﬂectional, 407–8
inﬂectional categories, 413–20
Nabataean inscriptions, 311–12
Najdi dialects, 164, 218, 289, 415, 418, 484
Jeddah dialect, 54, 190
nasab, 315–16
negation, 169–74, 390–8
and complexity, 169–76, 228
disjunction, 393
enclitic -sˇ, 395–7
imperative, 397–8
nominal sentences, 388–9
tensed, 387–8
verbal, 228
negative circumﬁx ma¯-sˇ, 169–74, 390–2
non-argument positions negated by, 173
negative complex ma¯-h˙add-sˇ, 394
negative polarity items (NPI), 394–5
negative verbal complex (with two argument
clitics), 393
neo-Arabic/old-Arabic, 225–6
nisba, 315–16
North African dialects, 253, 301
nomadic dialects, 223, 224
nominative case, 363
non-boundary accent, 335, 341–2
non-concatenative morphology, 406–8, 414
non-standard romanization, 432
non-verbal negator misˇ, 169–74
nunation, 163–4, 225, 360, 362, 364, 365, 420
oblique case, 365
Old Arabic, 310–12
names, 311–12
Omani dialects, 164, 218, 230, 287, 289, 412,
417, 418, 419, 420, 481
onomastics, 301, 314–15
European inﬂuence, 317
identity, 316, 318, 320–1
names in the prophetic tradition, 317
names inspired by animals, 317
names inspired by beauty, 316
names inspired by nature, 316
national laws concerning, 317
Old Arabic names, 311–12
sociolinguistic and ethnographic studies, 319
traditional Islamic names, 316
opaque rule, 168, 169, 175–6, 266–7
OPI (see American Council on Teaching Foreign
Languages – oral proﬁciency interview;
assessment - computer oral proﬁciency
interview (COPI); simulated oral proﬁ-
ciency interview (SOPI))
optical character recognition, 428
orthographic processing, 434
Palestinian dialects, 3, 61, 70, 166, 187, 188,
397, 418
parsers, 436
Index
615

part-of-speech (POS) tagging, 428, 461–2,
463, 475
partial agreement (see impoverished agreement)
participle
active, 230–1
peripheral dialects, 228, 244, 247–9
phonology
affrication, 227–8
of [k] to [cˇ], 189–90
AFL teaching materials, 133–4
alternation between h and ?, 252
chain shifts, 188–9
θ >f, 252
interdental > post-dental, 192, 227
k>cˇ, 188
q>k, 188
interdental fricatives to stops, 192, 227
palatalization, 191–2
realization of [q], 139, 223, 227, 543, 544–7
velarization, 228
postverbal subject (see VS order)
poverty of stimulus argument, 474, 477–9
principle of localized identity, 247–8
principles and parameters approach (P&P), 371,
374, 378
proﬁciency testing, 18–19
oral proﬁciency interview, 18
progressive, 161–3, 168, 171, 229, 280, 284, 289,
296–7
negation of, 171
prosody, 330–1
deaccenting, 335
neglect of in traditional grammars, 330–1
stress, 335–6
Qatari Arabic, 481
Ra¯zh˙ ı¯t˙ (dialect), 420
reanalysis, 281, 291–2
without grammaticalization, 292
relic assumption, 248–9, 254
remnant dialects (see peripheral dialects)
rich agreement, 375–6, 378
rural dialects, 184, 189, 223, 224, 483, 534
Sa’idi dialect, 172, 397, 576
Safaitic, 266, 268–9
San’ani dialect, 408, 410, 411, 414, 415, 416, 417,
418, 419
Saudi dialects, 175, 192–3, 218, 415, 420
semantic modelling, 436
sedentary dialects, 223, 224, 227, 228, 418
sentiment analysis, 436, 484–5
Shami Dialect Corpus, 481
Shiite dialects (Bah˙ a¯rina), 164, 223
Sı¯bawayhi, 130, 359, 454
social media, 72, 235, 431–2, 440 (see also
Facebook, Twitter)
glossary, 525
variation in writing, 540
sociolinguistics
chronotropes, 544, 547–8, 555–7
digital, 541
hybridity, 542
indexicality, 542
of fus˙h˙ a¯, 547–8, 555
of [q], 543, 544–7
third wave, 181–7, 534, 540
superdiversity, 538
South Arabian Languages, 220
speech synthesis, 428
statistical language learning, 478
stress, 175–6
and syncope, interaction of, 175–6
study abroad
experience, 110–12
Arabic compared with other languages,
112–13
ideologies, 114–16
increase in numbers, 106–7
linguistic and intercultural development,
108–10
negotiating identity, 113–14
gendered, 113
racial and ethnic, 113
religious, 114
sexual harassment, 113
unpopular US policies, 113
pragmatic competence and intercultural
development, 109–10
research-based interventions, 116–17
sociolinguistic variation, 109, 534
stylistics, 584–5
corpus, 585
translation, 585, 588–90
maintenance, 592, 593–4, 604
neutralization, 592, 594–6, 604–5
overmarking, 592, 600–2, 604–5
shift, 592, 596–600, 604–5
subject-verb agreement asymmetry (SVAA),
373–8
Sultan Qaboos Encyclopedia of Arabic Names,
318–19
subject-verb-object (SVO), 70–1, 75, 96, 283,
373–5 (see also agreement and SVAA)
Sudanese dialects, 175, 221, 484
SV order, 373–5
syntactic parsing, 428, 435–6
synthetic structures, 233
Syrian dialects, 161–2, 166, 170, 224, 226, 232,
255, 261, 284, 289, 295, 296, 396, 418, 480,
483, 542, 543, 550, 551, 552 (see also
Damascus dialect)
tense and aspect, 416, 417
in dialects, 160–3
tensed negation, 387–8
Tihama (dialects), 163, 420
tokenization, 428
toponyms, 319–20
translation corpora, 492–3
transliteration
in Arabic corpora
of Arabic names, 320–1
treebanks, 432, 436
triglossia, 204
Tripoli (Lebanon) dialect, 483
Tripoli (Libya) dialect, 223
Tunico (corpus), 481
Tunisian Arabic Corpus, 481
Tunisian dialects, 209, 218, 221, 223, 224, 228,
229, 230, 235, 253, 254, 257–61, 263, 264,
267, 289, 297–8, 301, 482–3, 535
Twitter, 507–13, 540
Arabic interface, 520, 521
fansubbing, 517–19
616
Index

scanlation, 517–19
Taghreedat, 520–1, 525
social media glossary, 525
Translation Center, 513–18, 520–2, 525–6
volunteer translators, 516–19, 521
UAE dialect, 164, 481 (see also Emirati Arabic)
Universal Grammar, 14–16, 55
urban dialects, 139, 184, 186, 189, 209, 223, 224,
253, 289, 415, 483, 545
valency, 355
reduction of, 409–10
verb forms, 410
variation
historical, 182
quantitative analysis of, 184–5, 193–4
regionality, 192–3, 476–7
social variables, 183, 191
verb-subject-object (VSO) (see subject-verb-
object (SV))
verbal negation, 169, 228
village dialects, 214, 218, 224, 227
vocative case, 363–4
volunteer translators, 516–19, 521
VS order, 373–8
Yemeni dialects, 163, 164, 218, 221, 224, 226,
255, 264, 265, 266, 339, 410, 415, 420 (see
also San’ani dialect & Tihama dialects)
Index
617


