of the 1950s won't work. We don't want to push girls and boys back into 1950s-style pink and
blue cubbyholes, and we couldn't do so even if we wanted to. As a society and as parents,
we face a challenge without precedent. We have to help girls and boys make the transition to
a gendered adulthood, to adult life as women and men in a culture in which women can do anything,
including being rocket scientists, and men can do anything, including staying home to raise the
baby. We have to find ways to value and cherish gender differences without restricting freedom
of opportunity. We have to acknowledge that gender matters without allowing gender to limit our
children's horizons. It won't be easy, but I think it can be done.
Extra Stuff Sex Differences in Hearing
Researchers have learned that girls and boys, women and men, differ significantly, on average,
in how they hear. One researcher made this comment about those sex differences.
Intuition handles well the idea that complex behaviors and structures, higher-order functions,
can differ between the sexes, but it stumbles over the existence of sex differences in what
are regarded to be simple, low-level functions and structures. Why this counterintuition?
Perhaps because the existence of sex differences in simple, low-level abilities carries the implication
that they, both the sex differences and the abilities, have all along been more important
than has been appreciated.
Stevens N.
How loudly is that teacher speaking? It seems like a simple question that should be easy enough
to answer. The amplitude or volume of a sound is usually measured in decibels, dB. Go to an
electronics store and purchase a sound meter. Sit in a classroom with your sound meter switched
on, as I have done on a few occasions when visiting classrooms, and record how loud the teacher's
voice is as heard at the back of the classroom. I find that one soft-spoken teacher registers
around 54 dB on my sound meter. Another teacher with a louder voice registers about 64 dB on the meter.
So, I have documented an objective difference of roughly 10 dB in the loudness of these two teachers' voices.
But how big a difference is 10 dB? The physical amplitude of a 64 dB sound is 10 times greater
than that of a 54 dB sound. A 10 dB difference always represents a ten-fold difference in amplitude. A 20 dB difference
represents a hundred-fold difference in amplitude. A 30 dB difference represents a thousand-fold difference
in amplitude. But a student is a human being, not an automated sound meter. The student's subjective
experience of the sound is not a linear function of the objective amplitude. No human being experiences
an 85 dB sound as being a thousand times louder than a 55 dB sound. The 85 dB sound is louder, certainly,
but not a thousand times louder. How much louder is it? To explain how an increment in the amplitude of
a sound affects the subjective loudness of the sound, I have found that it's useful to make an analogy to
vision. Imagine a windowless room. It's totally dark. Now you switch on a light, a single light bulb. Wow,
what a difference you can see. Now suppose you switch on a second light bulb identical to the first.
The room becomes brighter. You switch on a third, a little brighter still, and a fourth, a fifth. By the
time you switch on the fifth light bulb, the incremental change in brightness might seem small.
Objectively, however, the difference in illumination between the fourth light bulb and the fifth light bulb,
compared with the difference between no light bulb and the first light bulb, is the same. In each case,
it's one light bulb brighter, or about 800 lumens brighter if you are using conventional incandescent 60
watt light bulbs. To put this in technical language, the subjective experience of brightness is not a
linear function of the objective stimulus. Psychophysics is the part of psychology that is about
understanding the relationship between an objective stimulus, in this case the light from a light bulb
or the sound of the teacher's voice, and the subjective experience, in this case the perceived
brightness of the light bulb or the perceived loudness of the teacher's voice. J.J. Stevens,
a professor at Harvard, recognized 50 years ago that for most visual and auditory stimuli,
the subjective experience can be related to the objective stimulus by a relationship generally
referred to today as Stevens' power law, or just Stevens' law. In the case of sound,
Stevens' law relates the subjective loudness of a tone, L, to the physical amplitude of the tone,
phi. L equals k times phi to the power of n, where k is a scaling constant and Stevens' n is some number
less than one. The value of n varies from one individual to the next and therefore must be
measured for each person individually. Stevens' n is a measure of how sensitive a person is to sound.
The higher the value of n, the more sensitive the person is to sound. In one study, researchers
measured the variability in subjects' identification of the loudness of tones at different intensities,
and were thereby able to derive estimates of n for their subjects. Averaging across all frequencies
and intensities, they found that the average value of Stevens' n for women was nearly 38 percent higher
than the value of Stevens' n for men. This difference between women and men was highly significant.
In another study, researchers used a different approach to measuring Stevens' n. In this second study,
the average value of Stevens' n for women was between 44 percent and 49 percent higher than the
value of Stevens' n for men, depending on the amplitude of the sound being tested. Again, these were
highly significant differences. Researchers noted that the higher value of n for women compared with
men implies that females are more sensitive to a given physical range of tones than are males.
An earlier study from Stanford provides direct support for that assertion. Stanford researcher Diane
McGinnis measured the sensitivity of women and men to loud tones. Across a wide range of frequencies,
from 250 hertz to 8 kilohertz, she found that women's average maximum comfort level was consistently
about 8 dB lower than that of men. See the figure called Most Boys and Men Need the Sound Turned Up
in the PDF that accompanied this audiobook. A British researcher, Colin Elliott, reported similar
girl-boy differences in children as young as five years old. Another group measured subjects' most
comfortable listening level and subjects' acceptable background noise level. Their subjects included 25
females and 25 males, all between 19 and 25 years of age and all with normal hearing. The most comfortable
listening level for females was 36.2 dB. For males, it was 42.1 dB or about 6 dB louder, a significant difference.
In other words, males preferred speakers to speak about 6 dB louder on average than the loudness
preferred by females. Likewise, the acceptable background noise level for females was 24.8 dB, while for males
it was 31.7 dB or about 7 dB louder. Again, a significant difference. To put this finding another way, males tolerated
significantly louder background noise than females did. Psychophysical investigations in which subject's
sensitivity to sound is measured directly, as in each of the studies mentioned above, consistently find
that the average female is more sensitive to sound than the average male. However, different results are
obtained when researchers just ask subjects whether or not they are sensitive to sound. For example, a psychologist
named Neil Weinstein devised a questionnaire back in 1978 to assess noise sensitivity. Weinstein would
categorize you as being insensitive to noise if you agreed with statements such as,
I wouldn't mind living on a noisy street if the apartment I had was nice. No one should mind much if
someone turns up his stereo full blast once in a while. Or, in a library, I don't mind if people carry on a
conversation if they do it quietly. Conversely, Weinstein would categorize you as being noise-sensitive
if you agreed with statements such as, I get mad at people who make noise that keeps me from falling
asleep or getting work done. Or, I get annoyed when my neighbors are noisy. Weinstein showed no awareness of
how the social construction of gender might influence subjects' answers to his questionnaire.
In the 1970s, when Weinstein administered this questionnaire, young women were probably less
likely than males to agree with any statements that began, I get mad at people who...
Getting mad at people was not a desirable trait for young women in the 1970s. Likewise, other things
being equal, young women in the 1970s would have been more likely than young men to agree with statements
that began with, I don't mind if, or no one should mind if. Giving in, not minding, and letting the
other person have their way are well-documented attributes of traditional femininity in patriarchal
cultures, a category that arguably includes American culture in the 1970s. No wonder that women in
Weinstein's study were not more likely to identify themselves as sensitive to noise. There have been
other claims that gender doesn't matter with regard to noise sensitivity, and those claims are
unpersuasive for similar reasons. Applications
In Chapter 2, I hinted that sex differences in hearing could make a big difference in the
classroom. The sex differences noted here suggest that the average boy may need the teacher to speak
more loudly, roughly six to eight decibels more loudly, if the average boy is to hear the teacher as
well as the average girl hears the teacher. If a particular classroom is arranged with children
sitting in the same seats day after day, and the teacher is at the front of the classroom, then
moving an inattentive boy from the back of the classroom to the front may be beneficial. I have
personally been involved in the evaluation and ongoing supervision of boys in my own practice
whose academic performance improved substantially after they were moved from the back row to the
front. However, in my experience, this intervention is reliably effective only with the youngest boys,
in kindergarten or first grade. It is less likely to be helpful for older boys and may even be
counterproductive for boys in middle school and high school. How come? If girls and boys are allowed
to sit wherever they like in the classroom, typically there will be one or two studious boys in the front
row, with most of the girls in the front or middle rows, the gender-typical boys are more likely to sit
toward the back of the room, with the rowdiest boys typically occupying the back row of seats.
If a teacher in a classroom of eighth graders moves an inattentive boy from the back row to the front,
then that boy's first priority often may be to prove to his buddies in the back row that he is not a
teacher's pet. As a result, he may become more defiant and inattentive in the front row than he was in the
back row. So that simple strategy doesn't work well with older boys. Moving your son to a different classroom with a
teacher who runs around the room and speaks more loudly might be a better strategy. Each of the
studies cited earlier demonstrating sex differences in Stevens N also documented substantial variation
among males and among females. Some males are very sensitive to sounds, including background noise,
and some females are less sensitive than some males are. Not all boys benefit when the teacher speaks more
loudly. Some boys are acutely sensitive to sound. These boys may have an auditory processing disorder,
also referred to as central auditory processing deficit or central auditory processing disorder.
Such a boy may be disadvantaged by being placed in a classroom with a teacher who speaks more loudly.
That boy would likely do better with a soft-spoken teacher.
Another application of the sex differences in hearing noted here is that boys typically tolerate
a higher level of background noise in the classroom than girls do, about six to eight decibels higher.
The hum of a buzzing fan or the sound of fingers tapping on a desk may be quite annoying to a girl or to
the female teacher, but is less likely to annoy a boy. If your son's teacher tells you that your son is
always tapping his pencil on the desk and it's very distracting, you might share this book with the teacher.
Suggest that the teacher read the section titled Extra Stuff Sex Differences in Hearing, the section you are
listening to now. The teacher may not be aware that there are in fact sex differences in the amount of noise
the average boy will tolerate compared with the average girl. When the teacher tells your son to
stop tapping his pencil and he does stop, but five minutes later he's tapping his pencil again,
he isn't necessarily being defiant or disrespectful. He's just not hearing the tapping the way that the
female teacher and the girls are hearing it. Offer a suggestion. Pipe cleaners. Pipe cleaners give your
son something to tap without making any noise on the desk. Don't ignore sex differences. Work with
them. The benefits may be substantial. The six-year-old boy who told you he hated school last week now says
that he loves school. I've seen it happen. Extra Stuff Sex Differences in Vision
Would you rather play with a truck or a doll? If you took a course in developmental psychology at
almost any university in the past 50 years, odds are good that you learned about a number of classic
experiments done in the 1960s through the 1990s. All these experiments were some variation on the
following. The experimenter offers a young child, perhaps three or four years old, a choice between playing
with a doll or some other girly toy and playing with a truck or some other boy toy. Girls typically
show a slight preference for the doll over the truck. Boys typically show a great preference for trucks
rather than dolls. There is a graph in the PDF that accompanies this audiobook that shows a typical
result from one of these studies. The black bar indicates the amount of time the child spent playing
with a feminine toy such as a doll. Girls spend slightly more time playing with the doll than
with the truck. Boys, on the other hand, typically spend a great deal more time playing with the truck
rather than with the doll. Very few boys spend even a minute playing with the doll. The boys greatly
prefer the truck. The girls slightly prefer the doll. When I learned about those studies 37 years ago as a
graduate student earning my PhD in psychology at the University of Pennsylvania, we were taught that the
social construction of gender is the appropriate framework in which to understand these results.
My professor at Penn, Justin Ehrenfried, explained it to me this way. We give girls a fairly consistent
message that girls are supposed to play with dolls and not with trucks. So, when offered a choice,
girls will be more likely to play with dolls rather than trucks. But if a girl picks up a truck,
it's not a catastrophe. With boys, Professor Ehrenfried explained, the stakes are higher.
We send boys a much stronger message about what a boy is and is not supposed to do.
Boys are not supposed to play with dolls. Boys get that message loud and clear. So, boys are much more
likely to play with trucks rather than dolls. When Professor Ehrenfried gave me that explanation,
I didn't question it. It seemed like common sense. In 2008, Kim Wallen and his colleagues at the
Yerkes National Primate Research Center in Atlanta decided to do this familiar study again with a little
twist. Instead of offering human children a choice between dolls and trucks, they gave that choice to
monkeys. They gave monkeys the opportunity to play with a boy toy, such as a truck, or with a girl toy,
such as a doll. Their results are also shown in the PDF that accompanies this audiobook.
As you will see, the basic pattern of results was similar to the pattern seen with human children.
The female monkeys slightly prefer to play with dolls rather than trucks. The males substantially
prefer to play with trucks rather than dolls. It is difficult to invoke the social construction of
gender to accommodate this finding. You would have to assert that a monkey in authority, maybe a parent,
is saying to a young male monkey, don't let me catch you playing with a doll. But in fact, nothing of the
sort happens. Monkeys don't appear to care whether other monkeys, female or male, are playing with trucks
or with dolls. And yet the main effect, the preference of the male to play with a truck rather than with a doll,
is clearly present in monkeys as it is in human children. But the social construction of gender
cannot reasonably be invoked to explain this effect in humans, in view of the fact that a similar effect
is present in monkeys. The social construction of gender can be invoked to explain the difference
across species. The main effect is more pronounced in our species than in monkeys, as you can see from
the graphs. So, the social construction of gender in our species can reasonably help to explain the
difference between our species, in which culture plays a significant role in the construction of gender,
gender, and monkeys, in which culture plays little or no role. Monkeys do not have culture in the human
sense, meaning customs and behaviors that are not genetically programmed and that may differ
profoundly from one location to another. Dr. Melvin Connor sums it up nicely in just three words.
Culture stretches biology. The main effect, the preference of the male to play with a dull gray truck rather
than with a colorful doll, has to be hardwired because it is conserved across different species.
But that effect is more pronounced in our species because culture stretches biology, because human
culture and the social construction of gender exaggerate and exacerbate the hardwired difference.
All right, so we've explained, perhaps, the difference in this finding between humans and monkeys.
But we still haven't explained the main effect found in both humans and monkeys. Why is it the case that
juvenile males, whether humans or monkeys, greatly prefer to play with a dull gray truck rather than with a
colorful plush doll? Monkeys, girls, boys, and toys.
Developmental psychologist Jerrion Alexander thinks she might know.
Professor Alexander actually was the first to offer monkeys a choice of playing with boy toys or with
girl toys. Just like Dr. Wallin's group, Professor Alexander found sex differences among monkeys
similar to the sex differences we see among human children. In 2003, one year after she published her
monkey study, Professor Alexander published her theory explaining why female and male monkeys,
as well as female and male humans, might prefer to play with different toys.
Scientists have known for more than thirty years that our visual system is actually two separate
systems operating in parallel, beginning at the level of the ganglion cells in the retina and
extending back to the visual cortex and visual association cortex. One system is devoted to answering the
question, what is it? What's its color? What's its texture? The other system is devoted to answering
the question, where is it going? And how fast is it moving? These two systems in the brain are often
referred to as the what system and the where system. Professor Alexander was the first to suggest that
hard-wired sex differences in the visual system may explain findings such as the observed sex
differences in the toy preferences of children as well as monkeys. She conjectured that maybe girls have
more resources in the what system while boys have more resources in the where system. Girls are more
likely to play with a doll rather than with a dull gray truck because the doll has a more interesting
color and texture. Boys are more likely to play with the dull gray truck because it has wheels. It moves.
Professor Alexander's hypothesis helps to make sense of many findings that otherwise are hard to explain.
For example, baby girls, three to eight months of age, but not baby boys of the same age,
prefer to look at dolls rather than at toy trucks. When researchers show women and men different colors
and ask them to name the colors, women respond faster and more accurately than men.
When researchers test men and women to see how accurately they can target a moving object,
men are significantly more accurate than women. Some might argue that male-female differences in targeting
moving objects merely reflect differences in preferred pastimes. Boys are more likely than
girls to play games where they throw things at moving objects. Boys have more practice targeting
moving objects than girls do, so boys are better at it. But there is an intersex condition called
congenital adrenal hyperplasia, CAH, in which a female baby is exposed to male hormones while in her
mother's womb. Those male hormones masculinize the girl's brain in utero. CAH girls are much better
than normal girls at targeting moving objects. In fact, the CAH girls are just as accurate as the boys.
Finally, researchers in Germany have reported dramatic sex differences in the anatomy of the human visual
cortex in adults, with significantly more resources devoted to the wear system in men than in women,
even after adjusting for any overall size differences in the brain.
All these findings fit Professor Alexander's hypothesis. Researchers who recently reviewed
this research concluded that there is now a large body of evidence indicating that sex differences in
visual perception and its neural basis are real and lend support to the folk belief that males and females
really do see the world differently, even if only to a degree. But why should you care about any of this?
I find that Professor Alexander's hypothesis helps me to understand the gender differences I have seen
firsthand in schools from Edinburgh to Toronto to Dallas to Auckland in gender-specific best practices for
teaching subjects as diverse as physics, creative writing, visual arts, and even modern foreign languages.
The best way to teach physics to boys is pretty much the way we do teach physics to boys – keep the focus
focus on action, cars accelerating, football players colliding, etc.
Action engages the where-is-it-going system, the system that appears to predominate in males.
The best way to teach physics to girls appears to be focusing on answers to questions like
What is it? What is light made out of? What is matter made out of? What laws govern the universe?
Why those laws and not others? Please listen to Chapter 5 of this book for some practical applications of this approach.
How we see influences how we perceive the world. It influences what we like to read and how we like
to write, particularly when we are young. In my book, Boys Adrift, I explored how a lack of awareness of this
point disengages boys in subjects such as creative writing and visual arts. Some boys want to write
stories with an emphasis on action, but they lose their enthusiasm when the teacher says,
Tell me more about your characters, Justin. What do they look like? What kind of clothes are they wearing?
The teacher wants Justin to emphasize the features that engage the what visual system, but Justin wants
to tell a story that engages the where-is-it-going visual system. Most teachers don't know anything
about sex differences in the visual system. How could they? Very few schools of education provide any
instruction on this topic or on anything related to sex differences in best practices for teaching
various subjects. The general lack of awareness of gender differences disadvantages both girls and
boys, but it disadvantages them in different ways. When teachers don't understand these gender
differences, the result too often is a school where the boys think creative writing is for girls and the
girls think physics is for guys. When teachers understand these gender differences, they can break down
gender stereotypes. I've seen it firsthand.
This concludes the reading of Why Gender Matters, What Parents and Teachers Need to Know About the Emerging
Science of Sex Differences by Leonard Sachs, M.D., Ph.D. Copyright 2005 and 2017 by Leonard Sachs.
This book was read by Keith Sellin Wright, a member of SAG-AFTRA. This unabridged recording was published
by arrangement with Felicia F. Literary Agency and was produced in 2017 by Blackstone Audio Inc.,
which holds the copyright. Neither this recording nor any portion of it may be reproduced or used for
any purpose without prior written authorization from Blackstone Audio Inc. If you would like to obtain a
monthly update telling you about new releases, call 1-800-SAY-BOOK. That's 1-800-729-2665.
For a complete listing of our titles, visit our website at www.downpour.com. Thank you.
Audible hopes you have enjoyed this program.
