Welcome. This is a course about Africa, a course about the long run of Africa's history.
Over the centuries, Africa has meant many things to many people, but I think it's safe
to say that to many people in the Western world, Africa has seemed to be almost the lost
continent. I don't happen to share that view, but I can readily understand why it has seemed
to be the lost continent to so many of us in the Western world, and I think this is
true for two main reasons. The first reason is that Africa seems lost from view. We don't
hear much about it. We don't know much about it. We don't think much about it. To many
in the Western world, Africa is marginal to their consciousness. The second reason why
Africa can seem to be the lost continent to the West is that so much of what we do here
reinforces an image of Africa as hopelessly lost, a place whose past and present is mired
in poverty, disease, violence, disaster, corruption, tyranny.
Now, this negative imagery about Africa, in fact, has a long history itself in the West.
Although, for a long time, it was not based so much on yesterday's depressing news story
out of Africa. After all, there was considerably less circulation of what we would consider news
a century or two ago. It was more of a fairly straightforward dismissal, a dismissal of Africa
as the very repository of savagery, of anti-civilization, if you like. This was true, I would say equally
true, of ordinary folk and intellectuals, often intellectuals of the very first rank. And I'd like
to give three examples of what I mean by this dismissal of Africa by such intellectuals, indeed
of the first rank. One from the 18th century, the 1700s, one from the 19th century, and one
from the middle to late portion of the 20th century. I'll start with a man who was remarkable
in many ways. And he was part of that group that emerged in Scotland towards the end of
the 18th century and came to be stalwarts of what is usually called the Enlightenment. I'm
speaking of David Hume, part of that group that included people like Adam Smith and so
on. Here is Hume writing in the middle of the 18th century on Africa and referring directly
to Africans. He was, quote, apt to suspect the Negroes to be naturally inferior to the whites.
There scarcely was ever a civilized nation of that complexion, nor even any individual,
imminent either in action or speculation. No ingenious manufacturers among them, no arts,
no sciences. Now, let us leap forward, not quite a century, to the year 1831, when one of the giants
of the history of philosophy. And I refer to the German philosopher, Georg Wilhelm Hegel, delivered
a series of lectures which eventually would become famous on their own. And here is what Hegel had
to say about the African. He said, he, quote, exhibits the natural man in his completely wild and untamed
state. There is nothing harmonious with humanity in this type of character. At this point, we quit
Africa, not to mention it again, for Africa is no historical part of the world. What we properly
understand by Africa is the unhistorical, undeveloped spirit still involved in the conditions of mere
nature. And finally, leaping forward to the 20th century and going to one of the giants of my own
profession, the historical profession, certainly one of the master historians of the 20th century,
the former Regis professor of history at Oxford. And I'm referring to Professor Hugh Trevor Roper.
And here is Trevor Roper's comments on Africa in particular relation to his own field of history.
Perhaps in the future, there will be some African history to teach. But at present, there is none, or very
little. There is only the history of Europeans in Africa. The rest is largely darkness, like the history
of pre-European, pre-Columbian America. I do not deny that men existed even in dark countries and dark
centuries, nor that they had political life and culture. Interesting to sociologists and anthropologists.
But history, I believe, is essentially a form of movement. The positive content of history consisted not in the
meaningless fermentation of passive or barbarous societies, but in the movement of society.
The meaningless fermentation of passive or barbarous societies. I first encountered that phrase in graduate
school, I wondered what I was getting into. As you might expect, I don't approach our subject from the
kind of perspective that Trevor Roper offered. Mine is indeed, as I think you will see, fundamentally different.
But at this point, I want to hasten to add, and I want to be very clear, that my object is not, in a sense, to
lurch to the other extreme. It is not, it will not be, to sugar coat, to explain away, to make excuses. There is
enough reality behind the images of misery that we mentioned a moment ago, to make doing so, doing
those things I mentioned, explaining away, making excuses, sugar coating Africa's history or its
present realities, a genuine disservice, a disservice above all to Africans themselves. This is not a course,
therefore, where everything about Africa is going to be romanticized, or where all of its problems are
or challenges are going to be attributed to outsiders. I doubt that any of you want such a course.
I do want to provide here a much fuller and more balanced perspective on the continent and on its
history over the long run. We're seeking a subtler understanding and appreciation of the varieties of the
African experience. I come to this subject with great affection, born of my own experiences there. I come to it with
great enthusiasm, because of the fascination that I think the raw materials of African history offer. But I also come to it
critically, which behooves me, I believe, as a scholar, but also as a citizen of the world. To me, in a nutshell, in short,
African history is fully human history. Nothing more, nothing less. Now, let me be more specific about where we are
indeed heading. Reflecting the training, the research interests, and the teaching concentration of your instructor,
in other words, of me, this course will concentrate on Africa, south of the great Sahara desert. Now, I mentioned training.
The way that one becomes a professor, the ticket to that opportunity, as I'm sure you know, is, of course,
those three little letters, PhD. Obtaining a doctorate, getting a doctorate in a field like history, means
obtaining a doctorate in a particular field, as it is defined at the graduate school you attend, Yale in my case.
And indeed, that field was defined as sub-Saharan African history. So, at one level, there's a sort of truth
in advertising thing here. I don't want to pretend to be anything resembling expert on areas I was not trained in.
More substantively, to include North Africa and give it what it deserves would include serious considerations,
of course, of whole new themes, broad themes of Mediterranean, Near Eastern, and European history.
Our 36 lectures simply don't allow us that luxury.
Now, we're not going to be obsessive about this. In fact, I'm going to devote a whole lecture to the history of ancient Egypt
and the upper Nile, which on the surface contradicts my sub-Saharan African focus. I do so because the interpretation
of the Egyptian history in particular, and its relation to themes of world history and African history,
questions like so-called civilization, means it's something we simply can't avoid. So, our concentration, I think, is clear,
but it's not a rigid one. We certainly will be devoting very considerable attention to West Africa,
to Central Africa, to East Africa. Southern Africa will especially concern us, partly, again,
for personal reasons of my own background. Most of my research has been centered in Southern Africa.
I did a dissertation years ago in Southern Zambia. I've studied and taught in Zambia and in the next-door country of Zimbabwe,
and my research and experience has continued into South Africa. But I think there are, again,
also substantive reasons to devote a considerable amount of attention in this course to Southern Africa,
and perhaps above all to the country which is its anchor in many respects, and that, of course, is the modern Republic of South Africa.
At several junctures in this course, I think that we can discover some fascinating comparisons with the history of North America,
with the history of the United States of America. Both of these places had indigenous populations,
indigenous populations which faced the arrival, beginning in the 1600s, of transplanted immigrants from European countries,
like Holland in the case of Southern Africa, like England, France, and so forth in North America.
Both of these countries then had colonial histories. Both of them had histories of slavery. Both of them had frontier histories.
Both of them, in the 20th century, and I mean the United States and South Africa here, both of them developed systems of legalized, rigid white supremacy,
which were known in both countries as segregation. And, of course, both of them have seen considerable efforts, movements arise to combat those systems of white supremacy.
Okay. Well, again, let me increase the degree of specificity here, and try to offer what I'm going to call a roadmap for finding Africa,
for this journey to find Africa and its history over the course of these 36 lectures.
History is often described as drama. Historians are fond of making that comparison. If that's true, it's played out on a stage.
Our stage, in the first sense, is the natural environment, the physical endowment of Africa.
I start all the courses that I do with geography because I find that it affects the human unfolding of experience at every turn.
So we will look at not a single stage, not a single environment, but an incredible variation of environments.
We want to understand what Savannah, tropical rainforest, desert, what the Great Rift is all about in looking at Africa, its climate, its natural realities.
In our third lecture, I'll attempt to take you on a sort of virtual tour of some of Africa's great places, starting at the Cape of Good Hope,
moving up into places like Mount Kilimanjaro, Lake Malawi, and one of the Seven Wonders of the World, Victoria Falls on the Zambezi River.
But despite the importance of the stage, the play is the thing.
Of course, we are primarily interested in human history, and we're interested in it in the long run.
If we're interested in it in the long run, then we've got the longest human history of all.
Various kinds of evidence.
Above all, fossil evidence and a new form of discipline, DNA investigations, in more recent times,
several forms of these evidence point us toward Africa as what we can call the cradle of humankind,
the birthplace of humankind.
We will look at that evidence.
The rest of the way home, after, in a sense, we get humankind firmly established and established first on the African continent,
we're interested in the principal phases in the unfolding of the human experience in this vast, vast continent.
Now, certain themes will recur, and I will mention a few of them in a moment.
Let me say a word at this point, though, about chronology.
History is nothing without chronology.
Now, this is not because of the proverbial need to memorize dates.
You can imagine how many students have told me over the years that that's precisely what killed their interest in history in middle school or high school or what have you.
History is nothing without chronology because, without it, we cannot get at sequence, at change, at causation.
We can't attempt to discover the seeds of a particular situation or epoch or age in the preceding epoch or age or situation.
We can't understand the growth, the flowering of those situations and how that situation, in turn, will provide the seeds for what comes next.
So, chronology is important, and my plan here is to follow an essentially, a basically chronological pattern.
And indeed, we're going to go from A to Z in this course.
We're going to go from Australopithecus, our pre-human ancestor discovered in Africa, to Zimbabwe.
And our next-to-last lecture will center on the contemporary crisis in that southern African country.
However, just as I'm not going to be obsessive about defining the courses on sub-Saharan Africa, I'm not going to be obsessive about a strict chronology.
There will be examples of lectures where, for the sake of continuity, I will stick with a particular place or a particular theme and, in a sense, fast-forward the tape.
I'll stick with it and bring it up to contemporary times, in the case of a lecture on Ethiopia, for instance, or a later one on what started life as the Belgian Congo and eventually became known as the Congo today.
So, some of our major recurring themes.
A first one would be, how have Africans and outsiders who came to Africa encountered that natural environment that we tried to describe in the early lectures?
At first, Africans were foragers.
They extracted directly from the environment through hunting and gathering activities and, therefore, altered it rather little.
That changed and it changed dramatically, beginning with perhaps the greatest revolution in all of human history, the introduction and spread of agriculture.
In Africa's case, this is reinforced by the introduction and spread of iron tools.
Eventually we see a growth in population, the emergence of cities, infrastructure like railways and roadways, the extraction of raw materials.
All of these things have profoundly altered the relationship between people and nature.
Now, a second major theme is how have Africans organized, how have they structured their communities?
What is the nature of African identity?
What do we mean by a clan, a lineage?
What do we mean by matrilineal, patrilineal?
What is an age set?
What about exogamous marriage?
And maybe most crucially, what about ethnic identity?
What is a tribe, anyway?
We want to look at the status, the roles, the position, the power, or lack of it, of women in African societies, past and present.
Okay, a third theme that will concern us will be Africa's religious history, or perhaps more broadly its religious and spiritual history.
We want to provide an overview, as best we can, of a varied religious indigenous tradition, but one that we can find common elements in, elements about creator deities or the power of the supernatural to affect the mundane world and so forth.
But we also want to trace the arrival and spread of two of the world's great religions, Christianity and Islam.
They have become major parts of the African scene over many centuries, but we will stress throughout that they do not result in the erasure of the pre-existing indigenous kinds of ideas about spirituality or religion.
We will stress themes like syncretism, the combining of religious elements into single systems of thought.
A fourth great theme in our course will be one that's again a universal, just as religious history is.
And this revolves around the rise of Africa's major states, kingdoms, empires, in Africa as elsewhere, in Asia, in Europe, in Latin America.
These have been unavoidable parts, major parts of this unfolding of the human experience.
So, we want to look at Africa's first major state, and that was ancient Egypt.
Upstream from it, however, one less famous, Kush, may in fact have greater relevance to us.
Ethiopia, a kingdom which stretches back to the 3rd or 4th century AD and became a Christian outpost, indeed, for a history of 15, 16, 1700 years since that time.
We want to go to West Africa and look at kingdoms which have given their names to current states, like Ghana and Mali.
We want to look at an ancient city that actually was a real place, Timbuktu, which played a part in these African kingdoms of its so-called Golden Age.
On the East African coast, we want to look at a variation on the emergence of states, the city-states of the Swahili world which dotted the East African coast and were connected across the Indian Ocean.
In Southern Africa, we want to look at Great Zimbabwe, the largest stone ruins in Africa, south of the Nile River Valley, and the center of a major kingdom there.
In Southern Africa as well, the Zulu Kingdom, Zulu like Timbuktu, one of those words which is awfully familiar to people even in the Western world, will try to develop an understanding of exactly what it refers to.
A fifth theme has to do with Africa in the context of world history.
Africa has not nearly been so isolated as many imagine.
What were the critical aspects of Africa's relation with the wider world?
I've already mentioned the impact, for instance, of Christianity and Islam.
Very early on, we begin to see commercial contact across that sea of sand represented by the Sahara Desert with the Mediterranean European worlds across a real sea,
and that's the Indian Ocean in the case of the Swahili contact with Southern Asia, Arabian Peninsula, and indeed the Far East.
About 500 years ago, when we consider the global context for the unfolding of African history, we reach a turning point, symbolized pretty well by Columbus's famous voyage.
From that point forward, we're going to increasingly see, century by century, that Africa's history cannot be understood apart from the global context.
Certainly a part of this post-1500 African experience, a major part of it, was the African participation or the African part played in the Atlantic slave trade over a period of two and a half centuries.
We will look at the southern tip of the continent, again, in the post-1500 epoch, and understand why it is that these parallels between the history of North America and the history of South Africa are so pronounced and striking.
And then about 100 years ago, we come to another turning point in Africa's relation with the outside world.
The onset of colonialism, the partition of Africa into colonial empires of Britain, France, Portugal, and so on.
And of course, we head towards the ending of colonialism in the late 20th century and the emergence of independent Africa.
And indeed, in the latter portions of the course, I will be referring to recent situations indeed, and trying to survey some of the more recent events,
ranging from a miraculous one like the democratization of apartheid South Africa to a horrific one like the genocide in Rwanda.
Closer and closer to the end, we encounter a series of questions, really.
Why is Africa's independence been such a disappointment, especially for Africans?
Is development, that word we hear all the time, a realistic prospect?
Or has it become a pipe dream?
Has survival become a more realistic goal?
In connection with that, what about the epidemic, the global pandemic of HIV-AIDS?
The impact of AIDS has fallen overwhelmingly on one place, one continent.
That is Africa.
What does it mean today and for the future?
What about subjects like debt and foreign aid?
What does the future hold for the poorest continent on Earth?
A continent where over half the population is under 15 years of age?
Now, as I've said, as we near the end of the course, we present really more questions, perhaps, more challenges than answers or solutions.
But without being Pollyanna, without being Pangloss, which I've already told you I refuse to be, I hope to close the course by offering some reasons for hope.
Even in cases like the HIV-AIDS plague, even in a case like the Rwandan genocide, we will look for human evidence of renewal.
I've mentioned the word journey.
If a course is a journey, I've certainly embarked over the years as a teacher on many such journeys.
I have to tell you that each time I do, I find it inspiring.
I find it a privilege.
I find and I feel that I'm lucky to be able to make my living by leading people on such journeys.
This one, though, as you know, is different.
This course, this journey, in this setting, with this audience, in this particular sequence of subjects, with this particular road map, this journey is a new one for me.
And I'm excited about it.
Over 30 years ago, I first visited Africa.
It was the summer after my first year of graduate school.
And like a lot of graduate students, I wasn't sure I wanted to continue.
I went to East and Central Africa.
I took planes, trains, and automobiles.
I hitchhiked, rode on the back of trucks carrying tons of fruit through parts of Kenya, Tanzania, Malawi, and Zambia.
I got my first looks at Kilimanjaro and Victoria Falls.
The places I saw were a revelation.
But even more of a revelation were the people I met, which seemed so different from the stereotypes I had grown up with.
People of generosity and humor, but also people living through, intertwined with dramas, human dramas, family dramas, national dramas, historical dramas.
The stories I heard from old men and women convinced me that here was a place, the history of which could become a life's work.
I went back to graduate school, and I've never, ever regretted doing so.
That trip was the genesis of the excitement I mentioned a moment ago that I hope to bring to this course.
I'm going to give it everything I've got in hopes that you can share some of that excitement.
Thank you for your attention in this first lecture.
Let's do it.
