Hello everyone, my name is Alan Gelso, and I'm the Henry R. Luce Professor of the Civil
War era at Gettysburg College. I'm also the director of the Civil War era studies program
at Gettysburg College, where we have something we call the Gettysburg Semester. Students from
colleges and universities all across the United States can spend a semester's study away from
their home campuses at Gettysburg College, studying just, only, and exclusively the American Civil War.
But I don't teach the American Civil War exclusively. You could say that the Civil War is, for me,
only one chapter in a far larger story about the history of American ideas. There are many
different ways you can do American history. You can study the social history of America,
or the political history of America, or the economic history of America. And in so doing,
you may sometimes feel that these three ways of studying America almost present three entirely
different Americas to our gaze. Sometimes it seems as though the one hardly happened in the same place
as the other. What ties all the various kinds of history together, however, is how we think about
them, and how we have, as a people, thought about America over the last 200 plus years. This is what
we call intellectual history. As a discipline, intellectual history can take in quite a broad
swath of territory. A little bit of philosophy, or rather philosophers, a little bit of popular
culture, a sprinkle or two of political ideas, some very sharp-edged social criticism, a little
literature, and all of it stirred by the two cooks from which we inherit our most fundamental
assumptions. The Puritan cook of New England and the secular cook of the 18th century
Enlightenment. Naturally, as the old saying goes, the more cooks, the more liable you are to spoil the
soup. And the more liable you are to see the two cooks end up beating each other over the head. And so
we will. But that's what makes the study of American ideas so interesting. The psalmist said,
as a man thinketh in his heart, so is he. That expresses for me how very central the history of
ideas is to American history. At the end of the day, the tail which has wagged our historical dog
as a nation is its ideas. Its society, its politics, its economics are all the working out of ideas.
And I would now like to take you on a tour of them. The first thing I should do in introducing a
course entitled The American Mind is to admit candidly that there are large numbers of people
for whom the very proposition that there is an American mind is a puzzlement. By far, the largest
segment of that population of skeptics are those who believe that the great defining characteristic of
Americans, as opposed to the Germans or the French or the Chinese, is precisely that we don't labor
under the burden of a national mind. Americans are doers, not thinkers, or at least we're more inclined
to can-do than think about. We respect knowledge and education, but only to the extent that it helps us
solve problems, solve problems, or make sales. Part of the reason for this is that we are comparatively
new among the nations of the earth. And we've had the job of developing an entire continent on our hands
for the last 200 and some years, and this has kept us too busy to pay much attention to how we think.
But another reason is the fear we have of what ideas can do to people if they become too preoccupied with
them. We have the example of the last century in Europe to remind us what furies people are capable
of unleashing in the name of ideas, whether those ideas go by the name of the dictatorship of the
proletariat or the final solution. We are people of moderation in ideas. We are of the political
center of belief, but with the firing pin removed. Sometimes we even congratulate ourselves on not
possessing an American mind at all. In his famous address on the American scholar in 1837, Ralph Waldo
Emerson jeered at the book-learned class who value books as such, but not as related to nature and the
human constitution. Emerson believed that character is higher than intellect. And he hailed the coming
of a democratic paradise in which the single person made up his own mind on everything without the
dictate of others. The great American historian and librarian of Congress, Daniel Boorstin, summed this
up in a burst of self-satisfaction when he described early Americans as a people who focused on
immediate, changing, and unpredictable needs. They did not, Boorstin said. They did not pursue
the absolute nor expend their thinking on doctrinal quibbles. In every aspect of American life,
Boorstin said, ideology was displaced by organization. Sharp distinctions of thought and purpose
were overshadowed by the need to get together on common purposes. Even American lawyers, said
Boorstin, proceeded warily and undogmatically from case to case, rich in the prudence of individual
cases, but poor in theoretical principles. European observers, however, were not quite so confident
that this was a good thing. The French political observer, Alexis de Tocqueville, wrote a famous
commentary on American democracy based on his travels through the United States in the early
1830s. He was dismayed to find that there is no country in the civilized world where they are less
occupied with philosophy than the United States. And not only philosophy, less occupied with theology,
with political theory, with fewer great artists, illustrious poets, and celebrated writers than in
Europe. And this had occurred, according to de Tocqueville, not as one of the virtues or the strengths of
democracy, not as something as Boorstin and Emerson would have, something to be boasted about, but rather, Tocqueville
treated this as one of the unavoidable ill effects of democracy. I mean, Tocqueville would have agreed with
Emerson. In a democratic society, everyone is permitted and even encouraged to think for themselves. The problem is that
that that may not always take us in encouraging directions. Each, therefore, said de Tocqueville, each
withdraws into himself and claims to judge the world from there. But a man, said de Tocqueville, who would
undertake to examine everything by himself, could accord but little time and attention to each thing. And so, in
democracies, de Tocqueville concluded, people have only the shallowest of ideas and tend to be tightly
chained to the general will of the greatest number. In other words, democracy has made a thoughtless herd out of
all of us. No one, however, has been harder on American mindlessness or more convinced that it rules the
truth than Americans themselves. In America, James Fenimore Cooper complained in 1838. In America, the
popular press tyrannizes over public men, letters, the arts, the stage, and even over private life. In 1842,
Supreme Court Justice Joseph Story blamed the vast predominance of the taste for light reading and amusing
compositions over that for solid learning and severe and suggestive studies. He took that as a sign of
American intellectual decrepitude. The consequence is, said Justice Story, that many of our best minds,
and especially those who pant for early distinction, devote all their thoughts and all their time to
labors of this sort. The psychologist G. Stanley Hall, writing in 1879, indicted the control over college
curriculums exercised by the churches and denominations that had founded them. There are,
Hall wrote, less than half a dozen colleges or universities in the United States where metaphysical
thought is entirely freed from reference to theological formulae. And the faculties, Hall said,
the faculties were composed of mere professorlings who did nothing but parrot what their teachers had
taught them. By the 20th century, a Harvard philosopher like George Santayana could believe that serious
intellectual life in America was a strictly back row affair to industrial energy, a genteel tradition,
and Santayana's contemporary, the journalist and critic Henry L. Mencken, dismissed the American cultural
landscape as what he called a Sahara of the Beaux-Arts. If so many Americans and Europeans agreed that there
has been no intellectual life worthy of a historical survey, what am I doing here teaching you about it? Why should we
beg to differ? Let me add one other thing which has undercut the notion that America has a mind.
This is a history course taught by a history person, not a philosopher. So if I was to give this course a
technical classification, it would be American intellectual history or something like the history of ideas in
America. But if Americans as a whole have been skeptical that they have a history of ideas, well,
the historical profession has been one of the most eager to agree with that. The preoccupation of
professional history people like myself, ever since history became an independent discipline of its own
in the 1800s, is to look for historical change and historical explanation in purely material,
rather than intellectual causes. Now, the principal model for this has always been Karl Marx,
who effortlessly reduced all human events to a struggle, to a dialectic, between different economic
classes. Now, Marx was neither unique nor original in this, but his blunt reduction of well-nigh everything
to purely material causes carried virtually every other history practitioner along with him, in varying
degrees but with him. The result has been the triumph of either social and economic history or cultural
history, which tends to treat all intellectual activity as a front for the real causes, political or economic
power, and whether this comes in the form of the so-called Annals School in post-World War II France, or more
recently in the clothing of the so-called New Historicism. It's what people owned or ate or manipulated
that counts, rather than what they thought. It's not, in other words, that Americans lack a mind,
it's that in the minds of many historians, it's precisely minds that don't matter.
So whenever some brave soul does venture to teach a course on American intellectual history or
the American mind, the results are very curious. Your usual course of study follows what I call
the great convention of American intellectual history. And a conventional listing of the authors who
should be read in such a course looks something like this. First of all, begin with the Puritans of
Massachusetts Bay in the 1630s. In fact, if you really want to be daring, begin with America before the
Puritans actually arrive and build the town of Boston so as to emphasize the enormous emptiness of the
American landscape and the work that it would require to reclaim it from the wilderness. This would show
how much work had to be done that could not spare time for thinking by these Puritans. Never mind,
of course, that the American landscape was not vacant. But touch, if you like, on the fact that these
Puritans possessed a university-trained leadership and organized themselves around a university-trained
clergy sunk deeply in theology and medieval scholasticism, but be sure to dismiss this as little more than
very dense holy rolling and simply note in passing that the Puritans founded Harvard College only six years
after settling the town of Boston. Move as quickly as decency permits to Jonathan Edwards. Not that Edwards is
all that interesting as a thinker in this way of reckoning things, but treat him as undoubtedly the
last example of whatever thinking it was the Puritans did. Dwell at length on his role as a hellfire
preacher during the great awakening of the 1740s. But even more, dwell on the fact that the awakening died
out that Edwards was fired from his job as pastor of a church and died just as he was assuming the
presidency of Princeton in 1758. Let Edwards stand as a sign of how badly America treats its thinkers.
But somehow, simultaneously, make him out to be not much of a thinker after all.
This will get you, by the third week of class, to Benjamin Franklin. And here you will rhapsodize
on Franklin's famous autobiography and how it introduces us to the model American, practical,
commonsensical, business-like, born with an eye to the main chance. You can, if there's time, talk a little
bit about the ideology of the American revolutionaries, Jefferson and the Declaration and all that. But
don't forget to keep Benjamin Franklin at front stage. Jump from Franklin to Ralph Waldo Emerson and
the Transcendentalists. Read a few New England novelists, like Melville Hawthorne, and then get ready to jump again
to William James to William James, John Dewey, and the triumph of pragmatism as the first true and only
American philosophy. And precisely because it is a philosophy which sees no intrinsic use for ideas,
but uses them only as instruments for obtaining results. The rest of the course can be spent waxing
long and eloquent on the airs of John Dewey, on results-oriented social commentary, and the new left of the
sixties. And with that, your work of a semester is done. In addition to hitting all the conventional
highlights, this kind of course makes it clear that American intellectual history has only two real messages.
The first is how we escaped the influence of religion and why all American intellectual roads lead to
pragmatism. That is the great convention. There is, however, a difficulty. Oh, a difficulty with this great
convention of American ideas. Or rather, there are actually three difficulties. The first is that the
the more you look at this, the more apples and oranges get packed into the same crate. Notice that
there are very few systematic thinkers here, apart from Edwards and Dewey. Notice also that these writers
represent different and incompatible genres. Emerson, for instance, never wrote a book longer than 45 pages.
He was an essayist who specialized in the miniature, at a time when writing miniatures for literary reviews
still paid pretty handsomely. And he earned most of his celebrity as a thinker, as a popular lecturer.
Dewey, by contrast, was a lifelong academic, a terrible speaker, and an intolerably dense writer,
who nevertheless managed to become something of an American intellectual idol by the time of his
death in the 1950s. That's one problem. The second problem is that most of this great convention
is suspiciously concentrated around one location, Boston. And that is a product,
I suspect, I suspect, of the dominance among American intellectual historians of Harvard,
and Harvard-trained academics. Well, it's true, Harvard has played a great role in American intellectual
life. But it is not the only role to be played there. As it is, the great convention's preoccupation
with Harvardians is a little like trying to write the history of opera in America as though it were
little more than the story of the Metropolitan Opera. But the third and the most serious problem
that the great convention offers you is that it presents this succession of thinkers as though they
composed a linked chain. Like one of those charts showing the development of homo sapiens from a cringing
monkey to an upright man. Like those charts, however, the great convention ignores a number of missing links.
Between the day the Puritans found at Harvard and the day Jonathan Edwards began preaching stretches
an entire century, in which New Englanders wrestled mightily with the impact on the world of scholasticism
by Cartesian epistemology and Newtonian science. And far from acting as the coda to the Puritan era,
Edwards shaped the creation of two generations of independent preachers and theological thinkers who
applied Edwards' creative adaptations of New England's struggle with Descartes and Newton to questions of
personal identity, knowledge, and religion. Nor can it be said that Benjamin Franklin represented some
great new departure in American ideas. Franklin was an amateur, an entrepreneur of ideas, and a talented
self-promoter. But whether he had any significant intellectual impact on anyone in America is not clear.
There were Edwardsians for a hundred years after the death of Jonathan Edwards, but I have never yet heard
anyone tagged as a Franklinian. Franklin's own adopted home of Philadelphia, in fact, belonged, at least
intellectually, not to Franklin, as though it were his private possession, but to the 18th century
enlightenment as a whole. There are, in fact, various ways of defining that enlightenment, both in Europe and
America. And at its broadest, we have to say that even Jonathan Edwards belongs to the enlightenment, to the
same enlightenment that Benjamin Franklin belonged to. But in the simplest terms, the enlightenment was an
attempt to create, out of criticism and skepticism, a new objective and universal understanding of the world,
based on reason and nature, and on the scientific discoveries begun by Galileo and Newton in the 1600s.
Rather than standing aloof from the religious concerns of evangelical awakeners like Jonathan Edwards,
the enlightenment actually incorporated those concerns and produced a generous flowering of what
came to be called moral philosophy. With its headquarters in Philadelphia and its most formidable academic
promoters in Harvard's, in Harvard's Francis Bowen, Yale's Noah Porter, Brown University's Francis
Wayland, Williams College's Mark Hopkins, Oberlin College's Charles G. Finney, another incidentally
hellfire preacher on the Edwards model, Princeton College's James McCosh and Princeton Theological
Seminary's Archibald Alexander and Charles Hodge. This enlightenment also produced a counterpart in
political theory, in the ideology of the American Whig Party, represented in this course principally by
Abraham Lincoln. By contrast with these heavyweights, Emerson and his transcendentalists were romantic
cocoa puffs. And I mean romantic in a very specific sense too. Puritanism and its renewal by Jonathan
Edwards in the 1740s, opposed many of the things the Enlightenment stood for. Puritans and Edwardsians were
people of religious faith. They accepted certain truths about God and the world as they were described
in the Bible. And many of those truths were sorted out and shaped by the theology of John Calvin and by the
experience of religious individualism and moral rigor laid down by the first Puritan generation. But
Puritanism had more flex in it than we often think. And even Edwards's fiery evangelicalism had an
overlap with the Enlightenment in its respect for reason and universal moral principles. Puritanism
and the Enlightenment represent what a few minutes ago I called the two cooks of American intellectual
history, I think with a little bit nobler intent. We ought to call them the two souls of American
intellectual history. But it's interesting that religion and the Enlightenment, Puritanism and the
Enlightenment were souls that could inhabit the same American body without necessarily inducing
schizophrenia. Or to switch the analogies back, the two cooks didn't always fight over what the
soup tasted like. Romanticism, however, was another matter. The Enlightenment's dedication to reason,
to nature and to science paled after a while on succeeding European generations. And during that
long century that stretches between the French Revolution and the First World War, a massive counter
movement against the Enlightenment appeared, which denounced reason as stale and tedious, and which exalted
feeling, which looked for nature, not to control it, but to adore it, which saw science as a mean, groveling pursuit,
compared to the search after the experience of the sublime, and sometimes the experience of the neurotic.
The Enlightenment believed that all real questions had real answers, and that these answers were
knowable and universally compatible with one another. The Romantics disagreed. Reason was a limited and
broken tool, and did not reveal half of what it claimed to reveal about the world. The Romantics believed that
people needed to be guided by passion rather than reason, and that what appeared true to some people was not
necessarily true for others or for other cultures. Consequently, Ralph Waldo Emerson should not be at all
linked to Benjamin Franklin, but to the European Romantics, to the later Kant, to Hegel and Chateaubriand.
In fact, Emerson and the Transcendentalists were not even the best representatives of the transition of
Romanticism to America. That laurel belonged instead to the Romantic theologians, to John Williamson Nevin
at Mercersburg Theological Seminary, and to the Connecticut Congregationalist Horace Bushnell,
and to the Romantic politicians who flew the banner of Southern Agrarianism, John Randolph of Roanoke,
and John C. Calhoun. However, the Great Convention is right on at least one point,
and that is the revolutionary upthrust of pragmatism at Harvard after the Civil War.
But even here, the Great Convention often fails us by trying to see the first generation of the
pragmatists. People like William James, Oliver Wendell Holmes, Charles Sanders Peirce. The Great
Convention frequently wants to see them as little more than an authentic and full-blown movement
waiting to pop out of the American grain. This ignores how very much pragmatism's origins were tied to
specific historical events, to the catastrophe and disillusionment of the Civil War, to the adoption of
Charles W. Eliot's curriculum reforms at Harvard in 1869, and to the increasing role played by corporate
cash and federal regulation in driving out religion from the universities. The Great Convention also
downplays how different John Dewey's brand of pragmatism was from William James's, or how much
it grew out of the soil of transcendentalism, or how vainly Josiah Royce struggled to substitute a rival
version of pragmatism for James's. Above all, the Great Convention misses the boat entirely on two
developments in the 20th century which none of the pragmatists could have foreseen. The first of
these was the rise of a neo-orthodox religious critique, especially as championed by Reinhold Niebuhr in the
1950s, and the persistence of the seriousness which with theology continued to be conducted as an intellectual
enterprise in America. The second of these developments was a massive wave of European
emigre intellectuals in mid-century and the emergence from their context in violent fashion of the new left
in the 1960s and the new conservatism of the 1980s and 1990s. My aim in this course is to lay out for you an
entirely different map of the American mind from the one that is laid out by the Great Convention.
I want to begin, like the others, with the Puritans, but I want you to see them as participants in a larger
transatlantic realm of philosophical work with living connections to the Cartesian and Newtonian revolutions
and thought. And I want us to see Edwards and his awakeners and the Enlightenment and its reasoners as
those two souls within the American body, conflicting but not canceling each other out. And I want us to
understand the genuinely revolutionary implications of American Romanticism and to understand, in the case of
pragmatism, how immediate historical contexts shape ideas. And in the case of Abraham Lincoln and the Whigs,
I want us to see how ideas can just as easily shape those historical contexts. I will want us to understand
American pragmatism and to understand, as the historian Arthur Lovejoy once wrote, why there are as many as 13 different
brands of pragmatism and why Josiah Royce's dissent is important for us today. And I want us to understand
how pragmatism joined and jostled but did not unseat theology in America. Finally, finally, we'll talk about
what pragmatism could not account for, for the old left, the new left, and the new conservatives. All roads in
American intellectual life do not lead to pragmatism and religion is not gotten rid of quite so easily
as the great convention implies. Rather than a great convention that declares winners and losers,
what I think we have in American intellectual life is more like an ongoing conversation in which the
personalities change, but the fundamental positions and fundamental attitudes do not.
Well, I also have a more basic aim right at this moment, and that is to convince you that Americans
really do have a mind. The American Republic was, after all, founded, as Lincoln put it, on an idea or a proposition
that all men are created equal. For that reason, if for no other, it's about time we got acquainted
with our own mind.
And let's begin.
We get started.
.
.
