Welcome. In the last lecture, we examined the crucial transformations brought about
by the revolutions of agriculture and iron, resulting in larger, more settled, and more
complex societies in most of the African continent. In this lecture, we can state it very simply.
We want to take a closer look at those societies. Now, Iron Age societies in Africa were organized
in an endless variety of forms. Nonetheless, I'm going to describe in this lecture certain kinds
of what I'll call building blocks. By that, I mean units binding or associating individuals together,
the relationships binding or associating individuals together, building blocks which have repeatedly
appeared in the structure and the functioning of African communities.
Now, one key to locating such building blocks is to consider the universal questions,
I believe they are, surrounding identity. I think that every person struggles in some sense with
questions like, who am I? What am I? What am I a part of? Who are my people? Who are those people?
What is it that makes those people similar or different from my people? Now, identities are always
multiple. Everyone listening to this lecture has multiple identities. Everyone can give several
answers to the question, who are you? Well, I'm a Smith or a Jones. I'm a Christian or a Jew.
I'm a lawyer or a mechanic or a student. I'm Irish or I'm Zulu. And not least, of course, I'm male
or I'm female. I'm black or I'm white. Now, the specific answer, the specific identity which comes to the
surface in response to the question, who are you, often depends on the context. At a certain moment,
the most important thing in the world is whether you're male or female. And the same could be said,
I think, for any of the other sorts of pairings, any of the other kinds of identities that I
mentioned a moment ago. Still, certain kinds of identities seem to be privileged and have played
important roles in African history in society. And I want to note three of them. First, identities and
relationships built on kinship are important everywhere, but perhaps even especially so in
Africa. Now, that's a generalization. And generalization can lead to stereotypes. But I will stand by it.
Kinship matters, and it matters a lot in Africa. Now, kinship can be literal. That is, it can be traceable,
knowable, identifiable relations by blood or by marriage. Or it can be assumed. It can be by mutual
agreement. We agree to believe that we are descended from a given ancestor, although that was so many
generations ago. Nobody can actually prove it. Now, a second form of identity would be ethnic
identity. When I said or offered the possible answers to, who am I, and said, I'm Irish, or I'm Zulu,
I was getting at ethnic identities. It's important, so important that I'm going to take about the last
third of this lecture and devote my attention to ethnicity. A third form of identity, often vital,
is membership in a political unit, in a country. I'm part of a nation. I'm a citizen of a state.
I'm inside a chiefdom or a kingdom. Now, in many of the lectures to follow, but not today,
we will trace the rise and the fall of precisely such units. Now, let's focus for a bit on kinship,
then, in Africa. Marriage and the families that result are, again, universals. With due caution,
with due caution to the dangers of generalization, we can offer some characteristics of family relations
common in Africa in the past and or in the present. If you see a word that ends with the three letters
G-A-M, fairly often the subject is marriage. I have in mind, of course, monogamy, for instance,
or monogamous marriage, or polygamous marriage, polygamy. Although polygamous marriage, that is
polygamy. Marriage involving more than one male, one female, one bride, one husband, has a long history
in the Western world. It's fair to say that it's shown more staying power in Africa. Now, of course,
in theory, there are three possibilities for polygamous marriage. You could have more than one
husband, more than one wife. You could have one wife, more than one husband. That would be polyandry.
And you could have one husband with more than one wife. And that would be polygyny. And it is,
of course, the third of those that I'm talking about when I talk about the staying power of
polygamous marriage, of polygynous marriage in Africa.
In general, polygynous households, that is, those involving a single husband and more than one wife,
have been more likely to emerge around a powerful or a wealthy male.
Kings in African history fairly often had multiple, in some cases, numerous wives.
In a few cases, that's still true. The king of Swaziland today certainly would be a good example.
Now, in more recent Africa, in today's Africa, to find instances of polygyny, which are still
around, I would look to older generations and to rural settings. My longtime research partner,
research collaborator, living in a rural village in Zambia, a man of about 60 years old, has two
wives. But if you go to the city and you go to a younger generation, it's going to be increasingly
rare. It's quite unusual among the young and the urban.
Families, again, a generalization, can, of course, be nuclear or extended. And we're more likely to find
that a given household was, and is, inclusive, more inclusive than the nuclear unit, either vertically,
that is, including more than one generation, grandparents, grandsons, etc., or laterally,
what we would call cousins, nephews, nieces, etc., although the terminology for a first cousin
in many African societies would, in fact, be brother or sister. Now, again, this is possibly
and probably is related to rural cultures, etc. We don't have to think far to think of
the rural past of the U.S. or other parts of the Western world, where extended households
were also more common than the nuclear household, which has become the, quote, norm.
Now, let's consider another form of kinship, of a kinship-based building block. I'm going to
call it the unilineal descent group. The unilineal descent group. And I think that they have, indeed,
been quite important units of identity, of solidarity, you might say, in Africa, past and present.
Now, unilineal, today we're going to be doing a lot of kind of prefix-suffix rearrangements here.
Unilineal essentially means tracing descent, of course, through one parent, one gender,
and not the other. Therefore, the two possibilities are patrilineal descent and matrilineal descent.
In patrilineal systems, a child inherits membership in the group from the father. Now, again,
whether that's a boy or a girl child, both of them inherit membership in this descent group
from the father. Matrilineal, of course, is exactly the opposite. Both the boy child and the girl child
are going to inherit their membership in their first, their primary descent group from the mother.
Now, other terms which refer to unilineal descent groups would include clans and lineages. In other
words, when we talk about clans and lineages, we're talking about unilineal descent groups in most cases.
What's the difference between a clan and a lineage? Basically, size.
Let's do the math on this one. In Jomo Kenyatta's classic ethnography, he was the first president of Kenya,
and we'll be talking about him, but he wrote an ethnography of his people, the Kikuyu peoples of central Kenya,
back in the 1930s. And he tells us in the first chapter that the clan, the tribe,
and the age set are the most important things in making the Kikuyu who they are.
Go to clans. How many clans were there in the Kikuyu society? Nine. Every Kikuyu was born into one of nine clans.
Now, in the 1930s, if there were a million Kikuyu, that would mean something on the order of 100,000 plus
in each of those clans. And indeed, in many Bantu societies, in particular, you'll find a number
around nine, ten, twelve, fourteen, which seems to be typical in terms of the number of clans.
And everyone is slotted, either through a matrilineal process or a patrilineal line, into one of those.
So clans tend to be very large units. They are spread far and wide, and the chances are very good
that you, in fact, don't know the great majority of the fellow members of your clan.
This is one of those cases where you agree to believe, you assume that you are descended,
in the Kikuyu case from one of nine original ancestor figures.
Lineage, on the other hand, I would put it this way, are the local, knowable, identifiable
representatives in your particular local community of that wider descent group of the clan.
So at the local level, you're more likely to use a term like lineage, at a larger or a wider level of clan.
But both of them, unilineal descent groups. Now, patrilineal, at base, these are systems of logic.
And in a lot of ways, the Western world is used to patrilineal forms of logic.
I mean, if you take the traditional way of assigning children last names, that's patrilineal logic, you know?
They inherit it from one parent, not the other. Matrilineal systems tend to throw us somewhat.
But this is a little bit tougher to parse, to analyze, and so forth.
For instance, am I saying that in a matrilineal culture, matrilineal society,
that a man's children are not part of his lineage?
That a man's own children are not part of his primary descent group?
Yes, I am saying that. That's exactly what I'm saying.
Now, his line continues, but it cannot continue through him because he's a male.
It will continue through his sister.
We'll come back to that and we'll illustrate it in some later lectures.
Don't confuse matrilineal with matriarchal.
These are quite separable entities.
Matriarchal would mean women holding power, dominating positions of power.
And I don't have to tell you that that is relatively unusual.
There have been instances, but they are uncommon in African history as elsewhere.
So, it's quite possible to have a patriarchal system where, for instance,
the expectation is that a male is going to inherit the kingship from a male,
and yet that inheritance will follow matrilineal rules of succession.
Again, we'll get into some examples of this when we look at places that were matrilineal and patriarchal,
like the old kingdom of Ghana that we encountered in lecture number 10.
In general, patrilineal systems are more common in Africa,
though there tend to be some matrilineal belts in both West Africa and East Africa.
It's difficult to explain why matrilineal as opposed to patrilineal emerges long ago in almost the unknowable past.
Some have tried to associate matrilineals with matrilocality,
just to take these prefixes and suffixes another step.
In other words, the notion that it's the husband that goes and lives with the bride's family as opposed to the reverse.
And some, in turn, have suggested that bride's service,
that is a male husband performing service for his bride's parents,
takes the place of bride wealth, a transfer of wealth from the husband to the bride's family.
Some have suggested that matrilineality and matrilocality are more likely in places,
for instance, without cattle.
In other words, if you don't have cattle for that transferable bride wealth,
then bride's service is going to be more likely.
That would imply matrilocality, and this would make matrilineal descent more likely.
That works in some places.
I've got to tell you, the place I know best,
which is the Tonga peoples of southern Zambia,
quite firmly a matrilineal culture for a long time.
Cattle keepers, and very fond, indeed, of their cattle.
Okay.
Now, membership in a particular descent group,
I mean, what difference does this make?
Membership in a particular descent group tends to matter most
at critical milestones of life, I would say.
At birth, you're born into one or the other.
You're born into something.
At marriage, at the birth of one's own children,
where you pass on membership, or your spouse does.
And at death, because death, of course,
raises these questions of inheritance,
and matrilineal versus patrilineal can readily affect that.
Take marriage, for instance, at the time of your own marriage.
It's not unusual to find, let's play the GAM game again,
it's not unusual to find rules of exodemous marriage
in a number of African cultures,
and essentially what that means is marrying outside the group, of course,
and a lot of times it is the descent group.
In other words, the ideal marriage partner should come,
not from my own clan,
but from, you know, a spouse from one of the others.
Exodemous rules of marriage.
So, your range of choice there is constrained.
Not a whole lot, but it is constrained.
It affects the marriage situation.
Crucial milestones of life.
The other time that they have tended to matter,
that is, the solidarities built around unilineal descent,
is at times of stress or crisis,
when one needs help or is obliged to give it.
The great anthropologist Elizabeth Coulson likes to define kinship that way.
Who can I turn to for assistance?
Who am I obligated to assist?
Well, let's look at another building block here.
In many parts of Africa, age sets or age grades,
uniting males or females born within a few years of one another,
have occupied important places in the social structure.
Age sets are not based on actual kinship.
The members are drawn from all the families,
all the descent groups, in a given locality.
But the members develop a kind of quasi-kinship
from going through crucial experiences,
like initiation into manhood.
In Nelson Mandela's autobiography,
he gives a very riveting account,
a very graphic account at some point,
of his initiation at the age of about 16 into adulthood.
And he, of course, goes through that experience
with the fellow members of his age set.
Now, age sets then, like exogamous marriage,
cut across the lines of descent.
In other words, exogamous marriage unites people
from different descent groups, from different clans.
Age sets unite peoples from various different descent groups.
Now, these kinds of cross-cutting ties,
which I will call them,
are particularly important in what we can call stateless societies.
In other words, societies in old Africa,
I won't say a whole lot about it now,
but who did not have state structures,
which did not have authority structures
involving kings and rulers and so forth.
Because these linkages across the descent groups
tended to act as a break, a B-R-A-K-E.
They retarded and acted as an incentive
not to allow the loyalties based on descent
to degenerate into feud or civil war
because you had crucial relationships,
exogamous marriage relationships.
You had fellow members of your age set
who were members of that other clan,
that other lineage, that other descent group.
Now, we've been discussing kinship in the biological sense,
I suppose, the most basic sense.
There is no kinship without gender.
This may be a moment just to, not in any detail,
but to say a word or two about women
and women's status in African societies.
Easy generalizations about oppressed African women
are fraught with danger.
Were there African queens? Yes.
Were there formidable female soldiers? Yes.
Do ordinary women have considerable resources of power? Yes.
Still, we would err, and I think err substantially,
to imagine that there was an essential equality,
past or present.
I would hasten to add that that is true, of course,
of many, probably most other places as well.
But issues like polygyny,
issues like bride wealth,
and maybe most controversially of all,
issues like female circumcision
or what its opponents call
female genital mutilation, FGM.
These raise very serious questions
about women's status on the first level.
they also raise questions of a more universal sort,
which I will encapsulate by saying that
it raises questions of cultural relativism,
that is, the notion that each culture has
the right to decide essentially what's right and wrong,
how it wants to practice life.
Cultural relativism versus notions of universal human rights.
is polygynous marriage something that no woman should have to suffer?
It would seem a little hypocritical for me,
having taken in the generosity of the polygynous household,
which I've stayed so often to make that.
On the other hand, something like female circumcision,
FGM to its opponents,
may raise a more universal notion
of something that shouldn't happen to anyone.
Let me stress that female circumcision
is not universal in Africa.
It's virtually unknown in southern Africa,
but it is certainly practiced,
especially in northeastern Africa,
places like Somalia and parts of Kenya
and in parts of West Africa.
Now again, without resolving those,
I think it is important to at least put them on the table
and return to them at the very end of this course.
Okay, I want to move to a very important subject indeed.
What about Africa's legendary tribes?
Now, tribes is a word that I usually use in quotation marks.
The word tribe itself has an interesting history.
In the Western world,
tribe has been part of a group of worlds
that have often conveyed images of the primitive,
the savage, uncivilized.
Who lives in Africa?
Well, the natives do.
Well, what do they live in?
Oh, they live in tribes.
Well, what are they like?
They're primitive.
I mean, when I was growing up,
a sentence like a tribe of,
a phrase like a tribe of primitive natives
would practically roll off the tongue.
So it seemed to be bundled up
with a whole series of stereotypical images.
Okay, but if you go to Africa itself,
at least certainly in my experience,
and I will stand by this,
if you encounter at the University of Zimbabwe
or, you know, University of Nairobi,
Africans who are conversing,
let's say, in English and using the term tribe,
they're using it in a very value-neutral way.
They're using it to get at a form of identity.
They're using it to get at ethnic identity.
They are trying to describe either themselves or others
in terms of one of these forms of identity.
Again, to go to Nelson Mandela's autobiography,
in the first two pages of that autobiography,
Mandela uses the word tribe no less than four times.
He doesn't put it in quotation marks.
He obviously doesn't, you know,
Mandela would be the last person on earth
to describe Africans, you know,
in the kind of negative terminology
that I've been talking about.
He's trying to introduce himself.
He's trying to identify himself.
And he uses the word tribe
to describe a group or groups
that he is a part of
or that others are part of.
Very value-neutral.
Who am I?
Ethnic identity matters.
Sometimes it matters a lot.
Sometimes it's a life and death matter.
Sometimes it doesn't matter much at all.
But what exactly is it?
I'm going to suggest a few criteria,
but I will stress now and later.
No single criterion always works
in trying to locate
or nail down ethnic identity.
It is above all fluid, changeable.
It also is a product of history.
It is overlapping.
And we'll see that again and again.
Now, ethnic identity does usually imply
descent from a particular population
which was once, at least,
concentrated in a particular home area.
Even if many, maybe most,
of the descendants
are now scattered far and wide.
Think of the language
which is used nowadays
to talk about ethnicity
in the United States.
It often is two-word phrases.
It's sometimes hyphenated,
sometimes not.
The last word is often American.
And the first word is what?
Irish-American, African-American,
Italian-American, Asian-American.
The first of those two in the pair
in each case is a place.
And it's a place from which
people have descended from a population
at one time concentrated in that place.
Let's move on.
Ethnic identity usually implies
a degree of cultural difference
in Africa as it does elsewhere.
When we talk about differences
between Italian culture
and German culture,
we might go to things like
styles of music
or cuisine
or clothing.
Well, the same can be said
about Tonga
and Bimba
and Zulu
and Vinda
and so forth
in Africa.
But I do enter
a note of caution here.
This has often been
the stuff of stereotype
as we know perfectly well.
So the notion
that everybody
in that ethnic group
does it this way,
you know,
can easily descend
into stereotypes
which may not only be
derogatory
but downright misleading.
Still,
if you take culture seriously,
then you have to take
cultural difference seriously.
And this is one of the factors
which can go into
who am I,
who are my people,
who are those people,
partly because we do
or think certain things
differently from them.
Now, in Africa,
if I had to bet
on one criterion
of cultural difference
to distinguish
between ethnic groups,
I would put my bet
on differences
in language.
What is language?
Language, in a sense,
is a catalog
of ways of doing things
and ways of thinking
about things.
It's a catalog of culture.
Language difference
is, again,
probably the first,
the best bet criterion
I think,
for locating
ethnic differences.
Am I saying that,
is it a fair thing
to say that in South Africa,
where there are now
11 different official languages,
that that can be used
to say that,
yes,
there are about 11 major
ethnic groups
in South Africa?
Yes,
I would say that.
And I think it would work
pretty well
for places like
Tanzania,
Nigeria,
Nigeria,
also.
But again,
nothing ever works
all the time.
The deadliest example
of ethnic hostility
in recent Africa
was something
we'll devote a lecture to,
and that is the genocide
in Rwanda
in 1994.
Now,
there's a lot more
than ethnicity
involved in that,
as we'll get to,
but you would have
to be foolish
not to recognize
that notions of
Hutu versus Tutsi
were a big part
of that story.
Well,
guess what?
Hutu and Tutsi
speak the same language.
So the criterion
which I just put
my money on,
in fact,
doesn't work
in a dramatic case
where ethnic difference
made a lot of difference.
So,
I would emphasize
yet again
that ethnicity
is fluid
and changeable.
It's not primeval
and fixed.
In that sense,
it's related
to conceptions
of so-called race.
And in fact,
it's a fair question
to ask.
What about race?
Is that part
of ethnic identity?
It often seems so.
Sometimes in this culture,
in American culture,
ethnicity
and so-called race
are often used
almost interchangeably.
I would suggest,
so that they are
different,
though often
overlapping categories.
Again,
take the South African
example.
In terms of so-called race,
legally for a time,
there were certainly
blacks in South Africa
and certainly whites.
And it made
a considerable difference.
But as part of that
so-called black
racial category,
there were at least
nine different
ethnic groups
and indeed
nine different
major languages
within that group.
Within the
racially determined
white category,
there were at least
two major
ethnic identities,
Afrikaner
and English.
So,
overlaps can affect it,
but I think
there are useful
distinctions
to keep apart.
Now,
there's been a long
tendency,
I'm afraid,
in Western
considerations
of Afro approaches,
perhaps especially
among the media,
to think that
ethnicity trumps all.
If a coup takes place
or there is conflict,
the name of the game
is in a sense
to define the tribe
and then
the tribes involved
and you understand it all.
Sometimes it explains
a great deal.
Sometimes it doesn't
explain much at all.
Let me give an example
again from South Africa.
It's been common
in news reports
out of South Africa
for two or three decades
to take a prominent
South African,
and I'm thinking of
Mangasutu Butelezi,
the head of the
Inkata movement
in South Africa,
not part of the ANC,
the ruling party,
to take Butelezi
and he'll often
be labeled in stories
from the mainstream
press in the West
as the spokesman
of the Zulu,
the leader of the Zulu
and so forth.
Now, indeed,
most of Butelezi's
followers in his movement
are Zulu.
It is fair to say
that he has tried
to build,
or did try to build,
something of a
Zulu nationalist movement.
But to say that
most of his followers
are Zulu
is a logically
quite different statement
from saying
that most or all
Zulu
are followers
of Butelezi.
If I say that
all the people
listening to this lecture
are intelligent,
that doesn't mean
that all intelligent people
are listening
to this lecture.
So, these are
logical differences.
In fact,
there are many
thoroughly
Zulu people
in South Africa,
and I'm talking
about parts of
Zulu royalty,
who were never part
of Butelezi's movement.
So, when we've said
Zulu,
we haven't said it all.
We haven't explained
it all.
Ethnicity is an
important factor there,
as it is in so many
other places,
but it has to be
combined with
other units of analysis
to get a full
understanding.
In the end, then,
my suggestion
on ethnic identity
in Africa is this.
Don't ignore it,
but don't exaggerate it.
Look at it
in context.
Thank you.
