The North American colonies, established by the Spanish and the French in the 1500s and 1600s, were state enterprises.
Which means that although many of them were the offspring of the derringdo of conquistadors and missionaries,
their conquests were the property of a king, and the king made, or unmade, the governors and viceroys who ruled them afterwards.
The English and the Dutch were a different story, because in their cases, colonial enterprise was strictly a franchise operation,
in which the state preferred to have as little involvement as possible.
This did not turn out to be a very effective way of undertaking colonization,
whether from mismanagement in America or from undercapitalization by investors and organizers in Europe,
not one of the chartered corporations that set up money-making operations in America was still in business there half a century later.
Only two parties came out the winners in this sorry process.
One of them was the imperial government in London, which acquired title to vast stretches of the North American coastline,
complete with settlements and settlers, without having to lay out a farthing to maintain troops in North America,
or station a permanent naval squadron.
All of that was up to the colonials.
The other set of winners were the actual colonials themselves.
When the corporations they worked for collapsed, as they did in Virginia in 1622,
this left the Virginia settlers pretty much to their own devices.
And even before the dead hand of the Virginia Company was removed in 1624,
representatives from every Virginia settlement were assembling as a House of Burgesses
to levy taxes, tie the hands of a royal governor,
and create a series of incentives for new immigrants from England to refresh the population.
So London got an empire at pretty much no cost,
and the Virginians got more freedom from control than any English subjects at home had ever enjoyed before.
The problem with this was that an assembly like the House of Burgesses was illegal,
or at least it had no legal standing.
There was only one recognized legislative assembly for the English,
much less one that had the power to devise taxes and levy taxes,
and that was the Parliament in London.
But from the colonists' point of view, London was 3,000 miles away,
and there was no one there in position to act well or wisely on Virginia's affairs.
And from London's point of view, this arrangement cost London no money.
In fact, it saved London the cost of paying attention to Virginia.
And so the imperial government turned what later would appear to be a fatally blind eye to American affairs.
This turning of the eye was easy to do because the House of Burgesses
and the other colonial assemblies, which sprang up after it,
did not look much like any legislative assembly any English had ever seen.
Parliament was a legislature, but it was far from being representative.
Parliament was the preserve of the nobility, the church, and the landed gentry.
In its two houses, the House of Lords and the House of Commons,
the bishops, the dukes, the earls, they all dominated the first,
and the wealthiest elite dominated the second.
Now, this aristocracy in England was actually less top-heavy than its counterparts elsewhere in Europe,
but it was top-heavy enough by contrast with America.
In England, 40% of the wealth of the kingdom was owned by its top 1% of the population,
a wealth based largely on the fact that they owned 70% of the land.
Most of the English population were renters, and they had neither voice nor stake in English political life.
In America, however, the cheapness and availability of land inverted those proportions almost exactly.
Almost two-thirds of the white population of the British colonies owned 60% of the land.
The would-be gentry in America actually controlled only about 30%.
This meant that colonial elites might enjoy a position and power which made them look and feel like gentry,
but they were critically dependent on the goodwill of the vast and surly array of independent farmers all around them.
And even in Virginia, election days compelled great landholders to court the farmers' votes
and to keep their legislative actions within the tolerance of the landholders.
The royal governors labored under the same constraints.
On paper, the powers of a royal governor in the colonies were substantial.
They could appoint judges, they could control appointments to other offices, they had a power of veto.
In fact, the number of appointments they could make was small.
Their leverage, minimal, and their actions hedged by restrictions.
And moments when those restrictions were not observed produced outbursts of crowd action.
In 1736, unhappy Bostonians gathered at midnight and demolished the town marketplace.
As a protest against the construction of the marketplace by the town's selectmen as a means of regulating public food sales.
In 1763, a mob of Scots-Irish immigrants from Paxton in Lancaster County.
Filled with fury against marauding Indians and against the Quakers in the Pennsylvania Assembly who refused to vote money for their defense.
They took out their frustrations on a defenseless band of Indians at Conestoga Manor, killing six of them.
Never mind that these Indians were Christians, converted by pacifist Moravian missionaries.
14 more Indians who were locked up in the county workhouse for their own protection were pursued by the Paxton Boys and murdered.
250 of the Paxton Boys then marched on Philadelphia.
And only when Governor John Penn sent Benjamin Franklin and a persuasive delegation to meet them at Germantown did the Paxton Boys turn and head home.
American elites could imagine that they filled the place of the English gentry, but only if they did not step too heavily on the popular toes.
So, by a metamorphosis that few people in London understood, the rowdy lowlifes who had departed for the colonies a century before had turned into competitors for economic dominance within the empire.
Had developed anglicized elites who, as I was talking about them in lecture three, thought of themselves as the equals of their English cousins.
And created domestic legislatures exercising powers that were technically illegal.
And elected by farmers who had an unpeasantly penchant for independence.
All the Americans lacked was a political philosophy to give it all coherence.
And in the 1760s, the imperial government unwittingly provided them with it.
England was a monarchy, but it had never been a happy monarchy.
The vice of the French, it was said, was lechery, but the vice of the English was treachery.
And the English overturned dynasties with a regularity that appalled the rest of Europe.
The Plantagenet kings were overthrown by the Tudors.
The Tudors yielded childlessly to the Stuarts.
But the Stuarts were overthrown not once, but twice in 1642 and again in 1688 in the Glorious Revolution.
And after that, Parliament tied the hands of the kings and queens so securely that when a new ruling house from Hanover in Germany was installed with the coronation of George I in 1714,
government in England was already being described, not in terms of a king on a throne, but of a three-way system of checks and balances.
King, lords and commons.
The people who were most apt to use this three-part way of describing English politics had been known since the 1670s as Whigs.
Now, the term Whig came into use from Whigamore, which was a kind of point-and-laugh way of describing a country yokel.
And, indeed, the Whigs liked to think of themselves as the sturdy sons of the countryside,
characterized by a simple, strict Protestantism, and concerned with the promotion of the good of their rural communities.
If Whiggery could be distilled to four political propositions, they would be that, first of all, liberty is natural.
And because it's natural, it cannot be the gift of a monarch.
Second, liberty, however, can be destroyed normally by a corrupt elite who strive to concentrate power in themselves and to corrupt others.
Third, Whigs believed that liberty, therefore, requires an alliance with virtue for protection from corruption and power,
whether in the form of the natural virtues, like modesty, productive work, or self-restraint,
or religious ones, such as would be found in strict Protestant moralism.
Lastly, because Whigs prefer virtue to power, they are most often found outside the centers of power.
Hence, their identity with the countryside, rather than with the corrupt royal courts at the empire center.
Not surprisingly, Whiggery had long roots in Puritanism, and it had strong associations with Parliament.
And it was Parliament's Whigs who had been the chief engineers of the Glorious Revolution in 1688.
Some of the most radical of Whigs argued for abolishing a monarchy entirely, and erecting a republic.
But even the mainstream of Whig opinion wanted monarchy severely curtailed.
And to rationalize this curtailment, and to rationalize their glorious revolution, they turned to John Locke.
Now, we've met the multifaceted Mr. Locke before, as a philosopher.
But he was no less controversial, and no less talented, as a political theorist.
And in his two treatises on government, Locke went as thoroughly to the bedrock of politics,
as he had in the essay concerning human understanding in epistemology.
In the treatises on government, Locke asked for what we might call a thought experiment.
In order to understand the nature of government, let's imagine ourselves back to a point in human history before governments existed.
Now, some people might have wanted to argue that this was impossible.
That humanity has a natural bent towards social organization.
And if social organization was there from the start, so was government.
But the people who made this argument in Locke's day were usually arguing that God had created kings from the beginning,
with full, divinely ordained powers to rule.
And only the most ultra-monarchists in Locke's England wanted to make that argument in 1688.
Besides, the Bible, which was still the touchstone book for all of European society in 1688,
the Bible saw government as a gradual, undirected growth.
And the European explorations of North America seemed to offer plenty of evidence of Indian societies
without any elaborate systems of government.
So the objection lost a good deal of its force.
So, back to Mr. Locke.
We begin with our thought experiment at a point when human beings are simply there in the landscape,
as though they had just stepped onto a deserted island.
This is what Locke called the state of nature.
In that state, just like any deserted island or isolated colony, the first priority was survival.
And the first fact which impressed itself upon you in that state of nature was how unlikely that survival was.
Locke's state of nature is a state dominated by scarcity, or at least the scarcity of things you can readily eat or wear.
To survive, you must delve in the earth.
You must pick the fruit from the trees, or you must plant the trees in the first place.
You must hunt the game.
You must harvest the crops.
You must bake the bread in pots and pans you have fashioned yourself.
Now, two things happen as a result of all this.
First of all, you survive.
And then, by mixing your labor with the natural materials at hand to create food and clothing and shelter,
you create a new quantity.
Property.
Now, the problem with property is that it is not you.
It can be detached from you.
And there are plenty of other people out there in the state of nature who might be happy, indeed,
to save themselves the effort and solve the problem of scarcity by taking your property from you.
And it is at this moment, Locke hypothesized, that the idea of government is born.
The reason why men enter into society, Locke wrote, is the preservation of their property.
In other words, they sacrifice the total freedom they had in the state of nature,
and by giving up a little of that freedom and joining in concert with others in a protective arrangement,
they preserve the balance of that freedom and their property in safety.
For instance, they agree to chip in part of their property, maybe in the form of taxes,
toward the hiring and equipping of a security patrol.
And they agree to create a board of oversight to administer security.
Now, it may cause some of the parties to this agreement, a measure of heartburn,
to turn over any of their hard-won property to this supervisory board.
But they reason better lose that little for a good purpose and save the rest than lose it all to raiders or burglars.
And from this primal beginning, Locke said, all known governments have developed.
Now, there are three things you need to notice by this.
First of all, for Locke, the fundamental problems of human life are scarcity and security.
And government's principal reason for existing is to provide security for the solutions we invent for scarcity.
It is, in fact, the only reason government exists.
Man in the state of nature, says Locke, is the absolute lord of his own person and possessions,
equal to the greatest and subject to nobody.
But in the state of nature, the enjoyment of those possessions, said Locke,
is very uncertain and constantly exposed to the invasion of others.
Now, this leads us to the second point.
Government is, therefore, an invention of the people.
It's not handed down from heaven on a silver platter.
Kings are not born, booted and spurred by God and ready to ride all the rest of us.
Nor is anybody born with an inherent status like duke or earl or nobility in the state of nature.
In the state of nature, everyone is born equally poor and equally empty handed.
And we invent kings, we invent dukes, we invent earls and whatnot to serve as protectors of people's property.
Third, if a government or a king or a duke or an earl are not doing the job they were invented to perform,
the people who made them, precisely because they made them,
have the authority to toss the scoundrels aside and find some other useful way of protecting their property.
For instance, said Locke, the moment you catch them governing without settled standing laws,
that's a sure sign a change is needed.
Because no matter how much they may rage and plead some form of divine right for what they do,
no one would ever have left the state of nature and put themselves under their rule were it not, said Locke,
to preserve their lives, liberties and fortunes and by stated rules of right and property to secure their peace and quiet.
Or, said Locke, when you see the supreme executor of the government going about to set up his own arbitrary will in the place of law,
or when that executor employs the force, treasure and offices of the society to corrupt the rest of the government by solicitations, threats, promises.
Ah, at that moment, said Locke, such an executor cannot any longer be trusted.
Locke is what we might call the prophet of liberalism.
Now, I don't mean liberal or liberalism in the party politics sense that we use it today.
What I'm talking about is the classical liberalism of the Enlightenment,
which was concerned with throwing off the yoke of monarchy,
making reason rather than tradition the guide of political life
and downplaying the role of inherited and non-rational factors like race or religion or language,
and which looked expectantly to the future for progress.
Liberalism was, you might say, the political equivalent of the Enlightenment's new epistemology and logic.
The latter sought to undermine the authority of Aristotle and theology.
The former sought to undermine the authority of kings and tradition.
And it's in that sense, by the way, that virtually all Americans,
I don't care what their political or party identification might be,
all Americans are classical Lockean liberals.
And this is because we identify ourselves as Americans by our loyalty to a series of what Abraham Lincoln called propositions.
We identify ourselves by our allegiance to those propositions,
not by our identification with a certain ethnic group or religious denomination or so forth.
We identify ourselves by certain propositions about liberty.
We are in that sense, that classic Enlightenment sense,
we are all liberals and America is the perfect example of a classic liberal regime.
But Locke was only the most celebrated and the most English of the Whig liberals.
He was joined on the Whig platform by other Enlightenment political writers.
Voltaire, Beccaria, Montesquieu.
Locke's contemporaries, Algin and Sidney and Henry Bolingbroke,
and the radicals James Harrington and Henry Neville swelled the crowd.
And Locke was more than matched in popularity by the cadre of political satirists,
which English Whigism seemed to have a talent for attracting.
Joseph Addison in his celebrated magazine, The Spectator,
and John Trenchard and Thomas Gordon in their sensational The Independent Whig and Cato's Letters.
If anything, what Locke represented was actually Quigism's middle path.
Because Locke insisted that the three-part model of English government after the Glorious Revolution,
that three-part model of king, lords and commons,
Locke insisted that was the best realization of a government that protected property through the rule of law.
On the left flank of Whigism, however, were people who, much more radical than Locke,
were outright Republicans or Commonwealth men, like Harrington,
who suspected that the restoration of the English monarchy in 1660 had been a big mistake,
and that the glorious revolution in 1688 had been a missed opportunity to get rid of the entire institution of monarchy.
Many of these Whig Republicans drew their inspiration from the well-nigh universal reading in Greek and Roman history,
Tacitus, Scutonius, Plutarch and Cicero, which was the required staple of English education.
From this reading, and from their own aversion to the hedonism and corruption of the royal courts,
these Whig Republicans imagined an earlier and better form of government than monarchy,
a form of government that dispensed with kings and glorified the rule exercised not by nobility,
but by noble and self-denying Romans over the Roman Republic.
That was the model.
Trenchard and Gordon's Cato's letters were given that title precisely to call to mind
that most relentlessly self-righteous of all Roman Republicans, Cato the Younger.
Like the Whigs in general, the Republicans thought of property as land worked by the sweat of one's brow,
a sweat which taught honesty and integrity.
Property owners of this sort lived lives of virtuous simplicity
and came together to form governments of only the most minimal size,
eliminating the possibility of corruption and oppression by taking their lead
from a civic public-spiritedness that served the public good rather than private interests.
The emphasis of the classical Republicans was therefore on the achievement of the public good.
Other Whig Republicans, however, thought this was taking the classical past,
taking the ancient Romans a little too far and a little too seriously.
I mean, admirable as civic virtue and dedication to the public good are,
classical Republicans were probably expecting too much from human nature.
If they thought that wicked kings and nobles were the only thing holding nations back from embracing republics.
Republics imposing or demanding virtue might become just as tyrannical as monarchies demanding taxes and obedience.
So the alternative embraced by liberal Republicans, as opposed to the classical Republicans,
was to back government out of the virtue business entirely,
and allow the free competition of people mixing labor and land to produce as much property as they could,
and so to produce within the bounds of law the best results.
Now, liberal Republicanism sometimes required an optimism almost as sweeping as the optimism of the classical Republicans,
that virtue would always win the day in the hearts of the people.
It assumed that on a law of average basis, that the marriage of hard work and talent,
with self-interest and self-preservation, would produce the best results all around for everyone.
At least the liberal Republicans had this in their favor, though.
Because they had no preconceived template for what their society should look like,
unlike the classical Republicans who had Suetonius and Plutarch to tell them what a virtuous society looked like,
the liberal Republicans had no outcomes to force on anyone.
So where the classical Republicans liked to think in terms of a public good,
the liberal Republicans preferred to speak of private or individual rights.
Although it has to be said, and this is the warning I attach to this whole explanation,
polarizing Republican political thinking this way is not an accurate reflection of how Whigs often behaved,
since many Whigs borrowed pretty freely from both the classical and liberal modes of thought.
To most English readers of Locke, Harrington, Sydney, the others,
Whigism was a carefully calculated descent, rather than a program for action.
If only because no one in England could seriously imagine the origins of English society
really being what Locke described as a state of nature.
In America, however, it was different.
Locke's state of nature seemed to describe perfectly the conditions under which the North American colonies had been founded.
The creation of government to protect property seemed to be exactly what called those colonial legislatures into their clandestine existence.
And minimal government intervention looked like exactly what the colonies had experienced as normal state affairs,
both from an uninterested and far away imperial government and from the royal governors sent out to oversee them.
John Adams, musing over Sydney, Harrington, Locke, Milton in colonial Massachusetts in 1776,
admitted that the condition of this country for 10 or 15 years past has frequently reminded me of their principles and reasonings.
And so Locke and the other Whigs and the Whig Republicans, be they liberal or classical,
came to be read not as political utopians, not as people just drawing out ideal blueprints for ideal societies that were never going to come to being.
Instead, Locke and the Whigs are read as confirmations of what Americans had all along known as reality.
Now this also meant that as Americans accepted Locke's theory of political evolution,
they also accepted Locke's warnings about the process of political degeneration.
There is an element of anxiety running through Locke since the step out of the state of nature, necessary as it is,
is also fraught with the danger that the governments people create will decay and corrupt,
that they will set aside the rule of law, that they will grab for more and more power
and leave correspondingly less and less liberty available.
And to the extent that Americans read Locke on the state of nature as a reality,
they began looking for confirmations that Locke's warnings were realities as well.
And in the 1760s, they began to find all the confirmation they needed that something in the British Empire,
the empire they had known as home and the king they had known as monarch,
had all gone disastrously astray.
.
.
