Forty years after the beginning of the American Revolution, the two most famous fomentors
of that revolution, John Adams and Thomas Jefferson, exchanged opinions on how the American
colonies could have thrown off British rule so completely, and then on top of that, instituted
in their new government so complete a repudiation of the British example of government. Adams
gently reminded Jefferson that the change was not nearly so dramatic as Jefferson thought.
The revolution, said Adams, was in the minds of the people, and this was effected from 1760
to 1775, in the course of 15 years, before a drop of blood was shed. Adams was not only
right, but probably more right than he thought, in the sense that the ideas which paved the
road to American independence had been aborning for much longer, even than 15 years. One source,
as we saw in the last lecture, was John Locke. Thomas Jefferson, who preferred to see himself
as an original thinker, did not like being told that the Declaration of Independence he was
delegated to write in 1776 sounded like it was copied from Locke's treatise on government. But even
Jefferson admitted that Locke's little book on government is perfect as far as it goes. Still,
Locke was hardly the only figure on the horizon of American minds before 1776. The Enlightenment,
as a whole, contributed a general resistance to the notion that traditional authorities,
including kings and parliaments, had to be deferred to, while the Scottish common sense philosophy
offered a particular source of alternative authority in the shared, natural sense of truth and right
which everyone was supposed to possess, whether they were a prince or a peasant. Above all, in the most
hard-headed sense, it was the penny-pinching attitude of benign neglect by the imperial government that led
the colonies to make a virtue out of the necessity of self-government in the first place. And the
colonies were astounded at the prospect of parliament trying to change those rules, so to speak, in
midstream. In 1843, when one of the last survivors of the revolution's first fight at Lexington and
Concord was interviewed about his reasons for taking up arms against the British, he was quizzed about
whether he had been reading Harrington, Sidney, and Locke about the eternal principle of liberty.
I never heard of these men, 91-year-old Levi Preston replied. The questioner, Mellon Chamberlain,
was dumbfounded. Well, then, what was the matter? Young man, Preston replied, what we meant in going
for those redcoats was this. We always had governed ourselves and we always meant to. They didn't mean we
should. But let's not underestimate another long-festering source of resistance, and that
was the religious radicalism that went into the founding of so many of the colonies. Not only the
Puritans of New England, but the Quakers of Pennsylvania and the Baptists of Rhode Island had
their roots in dissent from an established state church. And even more quiescent emigrant religious
groups like Scots-Irish Presbyterians in Pennsylvania, Dutch Calvinists in New York,
German Lutherans, Moravians, Roman Catholics, all of them sat outside the circle of a Protestant
Church of England culture. And that could lend weight to political dissent the moment this sense of
alienation and being on the margin attached itself to political grievances. The fiery hue of many of
those religious radicalisms, Puritan, Quaker, Presbyterian, had lost a lot of their crackle by 1760.
But it is surprising how little it took to reawaken, if not the substance of radical religion,
then at least its energies. A case in point concerned the founding of King's College. In 1746,
the New York Assembly authorized a public lottery with the aim of establishing a college in New York
City on a par with Yale and Harvard and the other colonial colleges. As a crown colony, however,
the Assembly assumed that the New York College, like Oxford and Cambridge, would have to be a Church of
England College. In other words, its faculty would have to be communicants of the Church of England.
The required worship and religious instruction would have to be Church of England. And most likely,
its students would have, at least to publicly, conform to the Church of England. But New York had
originally been founded by the Dutch. And when the English seized the city in 1664, part of the
settlement that allowed for a peaceful transition was an agreement not to force the Church of England
down Dutch Calvinist throats. The result was that New York became a mixed multitude of Dutch Reformed
churches, Presbyterians, Quakers, Jews, Baptists, while the actual Anglican communicants of the colony
numbered no more than 20% of the population. To the colony's non-Anglicans,
the people who were not communicants of the Church of England. The notion that public revenues were
going to be used to fund an Anglican college, a Church of England college, that looked like picking
their pockets to create a machine whose graduates would proselytize and undermine their churches.
And their dim view of things was not helped by the selection of the Connecticut Apostate,
Samuel Johnson, as the first president. In the summer of 1753, shortly before the new King's College
was slated to open, a terrific pamphlet war broke out in New York, led by the wealthy Presbyterian
William Livingston. And it was significant for what was to follow that Livingston wrapped his religious
suspicions of the King's College project around an appeal to Locke's notion of government.
Rulers and magistrates, argued Livingston, occupied their places as men above the rest dependent upon
the free exertion of the will of the latter for the good of the whole. That obligated the magistrates
to the pursuit of the welfare of the community, not to the exercise of partisan favoritism toward one
part of it. And the transformation of King's College from a publicly funded college into what
Samuel Johnson unwisely called an Anglican seminary was precisely such a partisan perversion.
When that happens, Livingston argued, the magistrate has become little more than a private trespasser.
At that moment, the people may consider themselves, and these are Livingston's words,
as in a state of nature, which authorized resistance and the formation of a new government.
Well, in the end, Livingston's campaign failed. King's College opened its doors in the spring of 1754,
with Samuel Johnson as its head. But Johnson was forced to back off on restricting the college
only to Anglican communicants. And in 1763, the trustees forced Johnson into retirement and began
the process of making King's into a professional school for New York's wealthy upper classes.
And this was only what happened in places like New York, where the Presbyterianism of a William
Livingston was still comparatively mild stuff. Among those touched by the Great Awakening,
the scorch of revival tended to re-arouse all the anti-authoritarian intellectual habits that a
century of occupation and settling down had tended to obscure.
Whitefield's combat with the old lights, the disruption of Yale by David Brainerd,
and Jonathan Edwards' dismissal from Northampton in 1750 were only the best-known examples of the ease
with which religion could rouse the spirit of puritanical contention.
And an even more unnerving example was on offer in Virginia.
The Great Awakening came later to Virginia than anywhere else in British North America,
since Virginia was complacently Church of England and commercial in its spirit,
and the tradition of radical religion was not terribly strong on the ground for revivalists to appeal to.
But Virginia soon acquired such a radical tradition. Through the 1750s and 1760s,
Scots-Irish Presbyterian migrants from Pennsylvania filled her down into the Shenandoah Valley,
carrying with them much of Presbyterianism's Calvinistic fervor.
The cocky independence they carried with them as small independent farmers and planters broke like a vision
on Virginia's long-suffering populations of poor white farmers,
who had been squeezed unhappily between the great Tidewater planters,
who alternately despised them and solicited their votes,
and the vast landmass of misery all around them in the army of black slaves who tilled the Tidewater's tobacco fields.
Poor Virginia whites flocked after evangelical Scots-Irish preachers.
And by 1772, as many as 10% of the Tidewater's whites had joined the most wildly individualistic
and self-assertive of all of the awakening churches, the Baptists.
Now this posed a challenge to the Anglican ascendancy in Virginia.
Not only because the Baptists increasingly balked at paying taxes to support the Church of England in Virginia,
but also because the strict moralism of these evangelical Baptists
called the hedonistic lifestyles of the great planters into question.
One Virginia colonel shook his head in despair over this development.
The indisposition to our people, he said, to episcopacy prove that we are verging fast
towards republicanism and puritanism, and this to me seems to be sufficient reason
for the kings sending a bishop amongst us, who I hope would in some measure contribute
to check a spirit so adverse to our present happy form of government.
Well, he could wish as much as he liked because there would be no bishop sent to Virginia.
One reason being the old problem of the British Empire's reluctance to spend its own cash
for anything in America. Instead, the American colonies were treated as an ecclesiastical extension
of the Church of England's Diocese of London, with the Bishop of London as their titular head.
Emphasize the titular part, because no Bishop of London ever took the trouble to visit British America.
Instead, the bishop appointed a commissary to represent his interests there.
And the bishop's commissaries proved to be very skilled at staying out of any trouble about bishops.
But the more compelling reason why there would be no bishop in America was that the colonies,
plainly, would not stand for it. Too many of them had left the established church behind them
in coming to America to welcome it catching up with them. Too many of them had acquired too much
experience in running their own church affairs to want some Anglican busybody running them for them.
And even the most unpuritanical certainly did not want to be taxed for the benefit of an
Anglican bishop. And it took no great difficulty for any of these people to treat efforts by the
imperial government to extend its secular powers over the colonies in precisely the same way.
So as I said in the opening lecture, even in laying the very foundations of the American
Republic, Puritanism and the Enlightenment, far from being at each other's throats,
were already stirring the American pot together.
Those efforts at stirring the American pot really began as early as the 1660s,
when Parliament began its first halting attempts at regulating the external commercial traffic
of the colonies across the Atlantic. Now regulation of external commerce was not a new idea,
because European governments had always kept a mistrustful grip on business. In societies where
monarchs and landowning noblemen were understood to have a heaven-bequeathed right to rule,
merchants and entrepreneurs were regarded as a pretty suspicious, maybe even subversive lot.
After all, the profits of merchants and entrepreneurs and enterprisers and businessmen
were not based on land. They did not rise or fall according to the nobility of their forebears.
In a world that prized stability, commerce and enterprise meant instability. And so kings regularly shackled it
by handing out monopoly charters over large stretches of their economies to their noble kin that would
keep them in their place. But the Enlightenment put its faith in measurable realities. And the most
obvious measurable reality was that commerce could do the empire a whole lot more good if it was directed
intelligently and with a due respect for the numbers, rather than by some chicken-brained duke or earl.
So, hand in hand with Isaac Newton's effort to reduce motion in the universe to equations,
enlightened imperial planners in London began fashioning regulatory legislation over the colonies
and their transatlantic commerce, which would reap profits in taxes and duties for the empire.
empire. They were not particularly successful, at least at first. Regulation may generate revenue,
but it also costs money to enforce. And the Crown was pathologically reluctant to pay for the kinds
of troops and ships it needed for the proper enforcement of the regulation of transatlantic commerce.
But then began the great wars for empire with France, which culminated in the worldwide Seven Years' War,
from 1755 to 1763. Britain emerged from those great imperial wars as the victor over France and the world's
first superpower. But it did this at a hideous cost in public borrowing to finance the wars. And in casting
its eyes around for potential sources of servicing its wartime debts, parliament's eyes fell on the
American colonies. Regulation, up to this point, had, after all, only taxed the colonies' external trade
across the Atlantic Ocean. Nothing had been done about extending the hand of the taxman into the internal
economies of the colonies to raise taxes, because taxation of the colonies' domestic economies was
something which was done by the colonial legislatures that we saw in the last lecture. Except that parliament
was the legislature of the empire. And the colonies were, you know, technically, simply plantations.
And if parliament had need to raise funds to meet the costs it incurred in defending those
plantations, why not exercise parliament's lawful right to tax the internal colonial economies as well
as their commerce on the high seas? And so, in 1764, began that long and dreary procession of
confrontations over tax bills, the Stamp Act, the Townsend duties, the Tea Act, between a parliament,
on the one hand, which could not comprehend, through its fury, why the colonials thought they enjoyed some
sort of immunity from taxation for their economies, and the colonies, who could not comprehend, through
their even greater fury, why parliament would think it could simply jettison the rights and privileges
that their legislatures had built up, without any serious questioning, over the course of more than a century.
Now, to the party of the king in parliament, the Tories, the answer to this conundrum was simple,
traditional, and pre-Newtonian. The Americans were rebels by nature, and needed to be subordinated to
the will of their God-given master, the king. And to the colonies, the answer was equally simple.
And a good deal of it was bound up in John Locke. Societies emerge from the state of nature,
as individuals agree to sacrifice a part of their natural liberty in order to protect the remainder
of their liberty and property. A process more than confirmed by the experience of their own settlements.
They had never been plantations, for the very obvious reason that Britain had never treated them
that way, or at least never bothered to offer the funding and subsidies and support, which would
have made the claim that the colonies were only parliamentary plantations believable. And so the colonial
legislatures were, in the minds of the colonists, the one true creation of the people of the colonies
for their own government. In the first great revolutionary tract, James Otis's The Rights of the British
Colonies Asserted and Proved in 1764. Otis insisted that these supreme and subordinate powers of legislation
should be free and sacred in the hands where the community have once rightfully placed them. And that
meant the colonial legislatures and not parliament. And all of this, just to add another brick to the wall,
all of this, as these Scottish common sense realists would have said, was open and self-evident to anyone with an
unperverted moral sense. But the moral sense can, of course, become perverted if, as John Locke warned,
sufficient corruption and degradation occurred on the part of a government. And Americans who read
Whig satire from the pens of Trenchard and Gordon, or who nursed long-time beliefs that Anglican bishops were
the emissaries of the Antichrist, or who had to put up with snubs from blue-blood English army officers
and tax officials and royal governors, not to mention those who got a whiff of the general
behavioral morals of the average British soldier during his posting to the colonies in the French
and Indian War. The following generation of these soldiers were what the Duke of Wellington fondly called
the scum of the earth. Colonists who experienced all of these things did not require much convincing
that the mother country was swiftly descending into the mother of whores, and that the whole
controversy over taxation was a plot by what Mercy Otis Warren called the intrigues of artful or ambitious
men. It only remained for Tom Paine in the revolution's most sensational pamphlet, Common Sense, to conclude that
a king has little more to do than to make war and give away places, which in plain terms is to impoverish
the nation and set it together by the ears.
However, old habits and sentimental attachments to the old country do not die quickly. It took 10 years,
from 1764 to 1774, for the mounting cycle of accusation and confrontation to turn into violent
resistance on the part of the colonials in the infamous Boston Tea Party of December 1774.
After that, though, the trajectory of violence turned sharply upwards. In April, British troops
stationed in Boston tried to seize arms and ammunition stored by the colonial militia at Lexington and
Concord and found themselves trapped in a full-scale firefight that became the first battle of a revolution
against British authority. There was still time for negotiation and compromise, but it fled quickly.
And in July of 1776, the representatives of 13 of the British North American colonies called
together as the Continental Congress announced that their allegiance to Great Britain was at an end,
and declared the formation of an independent league known as the United States of America.
The American Revolution managed to carry along with it almost all the disparate
streams of intellectual resistance that had set the stage for it, whether or not those streams
really, in fact, were more like oil and water. Presbyterian preachers who saw in the new
imperial taxation schemes the entering wedge of an American Anglican Episcopate turned out in such
numbers for the Continental Army that the disgruntled Tory Chief Justice of Massachusetts referred to the
a dissenting clergy who took so active a part in the rebellion as Mr. Otis's black regiment,
walking straight out of the days of Oliver Cromwell and his Puritan hosts.
Out of the other stream, John Adams, the most talented purveyor of what are called revolution principles,
rejoiced to see in the revolution the dawning of Enlightenment politics,
the principles of Aristotle and Plato, of Livy and Cicero and Sidney, Harrington and Locke,
the principles of nature and eternal reason.
Well, for the time being, the principles of nature and eternal reason, not Puritanism,
would have the upper hand in the shaping of a new American order.
When the Continental Congress finally cast its vote for independence,
it delegated the writing of a legal declaration to preface the independence motion.
The independence motion read that these united colonies are and of right ought to be free and
independent states. Congress delegated the writing of that declaration framing the motion to Thomas
Jefferson, who in less than two days produced a draft declaration, which was simultaneously one of
the most memorable political documents in the English language, and a monument of Lockean simplicity
and Scottish moral sense philosophy. One reason why Thomas Jefferson was delegated to write that
declaration was that in one sense he had already done so. In 1774, Jefferson had made his first public
mark in defense of American rights with a summary view of the rights of British America, which itemized in
detail. A long list of offenses of which the imperial government was gilding. To compose a declaration
for the independence motion really required little more of Jefferson than the crafting of a series of
whereas's, stating what those offenses were which justified independence. And in fact, a list of 21 such
offenses forms the bulk of Jefferson's declaration. But the really memorable part of the declaration
grew out of Jefferson's decision to write a preamble, a preface to the list. And that lifted this otherwise
pedestrian document into the realms of enlightenment political philosophy. In one long sentence, Jefferson
captured the core of the Lockean and Scottish critique of tradition and hierarchy and made it the nuclear
core of the American Revolution. We hold these truths to be self-evident, self-evident at least to anyone,
as the Scots insisted, possessing an uncorrupted moral sense, that all men are created equal.
That they are endured by their creator with inalienable rights. That among these are life, liberty,
and the pursuit of happiness. These, of course, life, liberty, the pursuit of happiness, are what we find in
the state of nature. And that is what people are born with, created with naturally. That to secure these
rights, governments are instituted among men. In other words, in order for people in an environment
of scarcity, with lack of security, in order to preserve those rights, people create governments.
Now, they derive their just powers from the consent of the governed. They don't come from God and
heaven. They don't come from history and tradition. They don't come from a nobility or whoever your
parents might have been. They come from the consent of the government. That whenever any form of government
becomes destructive of these ends, it is the right of the people to order or to abolish it and to
institute new government, laying its foundation on such principles and organizing its powers in such
form as to them shall seem most likely to effect their safety and happiness.
We have warned these words of Jefferson's so familiar with usage and repetition that we're no longer
shocked by their, frankly, secular tone or by the ease with which Jefferson folded so much of the territory of
enlightenment and Whig thinking into that single sentence. Nor are we shocked any longer by the sheer audacity with
which the declaration of independence propelled the American revolutionaries into the front rank of
the enlightenment's experiment in rewriting the foundations of human society. More than merely
signaling America's political dissolution from the British empire, these words pegged the republic
Americans would create to the expectations and principles of the enlightenment, to Locke, to the
republicans, classical and liberal, to Harrington, to Sydney, to Neville. And thus the Americans dissolve not only
their political ties to Britain, but their intellectual ties to the long train of the traditional European past.
Or at least, at least they almost would abandon all those ties. Provided that one forgot about that
the peculiar and, for the moment, sidelined black regiment of Mr. Otis.
