In lecture four, we spent a lot of time in the company of Jonathan Edwards, although I have to admit I did leave him dangling there at the end of that lecture, and you might have been right to wonder just what really in detail happened to him after his self-exile
to the Western Massachusetts Indian Mission at Stockbridge. Well, the answer is not very much. Edwards had hoped in his heart of hearts that the Great Awakening was simply the overture to the Day of Judgment and the thousand-year reign of God directly on Earth, the Millennium, when religion shall in every respect be uppermost in the world.
But instead of the dawning of a general revival of the Christian Church, what Edwards got was the day-to-day routine of superintending a mission to Indians whose language he did not speak, and an English congregation whose attention span was, in Edwards' judgment, not up to what it should have been.
His own attention soon strayed back to his early enchantment with philosophy. And between 1750 and 1757, he composed three great treatises in moral philosophy on original sin, on freedom of the will, and the nature of true virtue.
All the while praying for a new awakening, until, as we saw in Lecture 5, the trustees of the Infant College at Princeton invited him to take up the presidency there in 1757.
And he goes there at the beginning of 1758, only to find that smallpox is in the neighborhood, he takes the inoculation, but the inoculation turns out to be more lethal than the smallpox, and he dies of the complications.
What ultimately followed, on the heels of the Great Awakening, was not the new awakening Edwards hoped for, or even a spiritual millennium, but a secular revolution.
And the leadership of the colonial churches was no better prepared for the upheavals of the revolution than it had been for those of the Great Awakening.
The vast majority of New England Congregationalists and Middle Atlantic Presbyterians rallied to the American cause.
The immigrant-speaking Lutherans were more, German-speaking Lutherans were more equivocal.
Even the Church of England, since it was legally a department of the British government, lost three-quarters of its American clergy, who fled for their lives to the safety of the British army and exile in England or Canada.
Of course, for those Congregationalists and Presbyterians who joined the revolution, the war was seen as a marvelous opportunity to condemn the corrupt, commercialized society of Great Britain.
And any of its American partners and admirers, and to even upscores with their hated Church of England rivals.
But they also looked upon the revolution and the role that they played in its progress as exhorters and recruiters.
They looked upon the revolution as an opportunity to earn a special place of respect for Christianity in the construction of this new republic.
This was, however, exactly what did not happen.
The disruptions created by occupation, invasion, enlistments, and the general uprooting of war battered all of the churches equally.
The Philadelphia Baptist Association saw its congregations decline from 42 to 26, and its membership dropped off by a fifth.
Moreover, the revolutionary leadership was controlled by Washington, Jefferson, John Hancock, John Adams, Alexander Hamilton, James Madison.
These were men with little interest in Christian theology, and whose case against the British was fed by secular political theory.
Instead of leading the revolution, the clergy of the American churches found themselves being used by it.
And when the revolution was over, instead of having carved out a new public role for the churches in American society,
they found that they had lost almost all vestige of the public roles they once had.
New Jersey, Pennsylvania, and Delaware eliminated all public funding for churches in 1776, and New York followed in 1777.
In Massachusetts, the new revolutionary constitution of 1780 kept public tax support for the congregational churches in force.
But it now allowed taxpayers to send their tax money to churches of their own choosing, not just the congregationalists.
Virginia suspended taxation to support the Church of England in 1776, and in an effort to nail exclusion down more securely,
Thomas Jefferson wrote a statute for religious freedom, adopted by the Virginia Assembly in 1786 with Madison support,
which affirmed that no man shall be compelled to frequent or support any religious worship, place, or ministry whatsoever.
Jefferson's statute for religious freedom was only the most famous of the efforts that Jefferson and Madison made to force religion off the public square.
Sitting in the Confederation Congress in 1785, Madison actually opposed a plan to reserve public lands in each new township of the Northwest Territory for the support of religion.
And five years later, he opposed listing ministers among the occupations tallied on the federal census.
Since the general government, he explained, is proscribed from interfering in any manner whatever in matters respecting religion.
Jefferson preferred putting the most useful facts from Grecian, Roman, European, and American history into the hands of children rather than the Bible and Testament.
And his 1817 plan for a system of public education in Virginia decreed that no religious reading, instruction, or exercise shall be prescribed or practiced.
First, the involvement of Jefferson and Madison in Virginia's dismantling of public religion throws some much-needed light on the final blow to the hopes of the churches,
that the revolution and the millennium could be had for the same price.
And that is that the First Amendment to the new federal constitution contained no official endorsement of religion.
Instead, Congress stipulated the First Amendment shall make no law respecting an establishment of religion or prohibiting the free exercise thereof.
Now, although technically this no-establishment clause only addressed the federal government
and left states like Massachusetts free to establish state churches or state funding,
this no-establishment clause clearly set a direction to public policy that was not friendly to an official seat for religion on the public square.
Religion is a matter which lies solely between man and his God, Jefferson wrote sympathetically to a group of unhappy Connecticut Baptists
who had to put up with paying state taxes for religion until 1817.
I contemplate, said Jefferson, with sovereign reverence, that act of the whole American people which declared that their legislature should
make no law respecting an establishment of religion or prohibiting the free exercise thereof.
Thus, he added, building a wall of separation between church and state.
A wall of separation between church and state was not what the righteous Presbyterians and Congregationalists of America had gone into the revolution for.
And it became a very good question what they proposed to do about it.
And the first answer came from the heirs and disciples of Jonathan Edwards.
Curiously, the intellectual fuel for this answer lay buried in the pages of Edwards' great treatise on free will.
And it arose out of an important distinction Edwards wanted to make
so that he could demonstrate that all human actions were divinely ordered by God, that's his Calvinism,
and yet still hold people morally accountable for those actions.
When God decreed a certain act, well, that act became necessary.
It had to happen.
But acts can become necessary in one of two very different ways.
First, God could actually arm wrestle someone into doing what God wants.
All the while, the person is kicking and screaming in protest because they really want to do something else.
That's one way an act can become necessary.
And this is mostly the caricature of what people think Edwards and Calvinism and unconditional election are about,
if you remember my explanation of Tulip in the second lecture.
On the other hand, though, an act can become necessary on your part if you already have a certain psychological inclination toward that act.
If you like chocolate, I can pretty well bet money that if I point out just the right chocolate or just the right amount of it, you'll choose it.
There is a certain measure of predictability in human behavior.
We don't live or act or behave randomly.
And the more intense a person's inclination toward a sort of behavior, the more likely it is that it will be acted upon.
Edwards called the necessity that involves force, the arm-twisting version of necessity, he called that natural necessity.
And he cheerfully admitted that anyone who is compelled to act under the force of natural necessity cannot be held morally accountable for what they do.
If you force me at gunpoint to drive you to and from the scene of a crime, I can't be held as your accomplice.
You violated my free will.
But the other kind of necessity, which arises from our own inclinations and desires, that Edwards called moral necessity.
And because nobody is actually forcing us to do things by moral necessity, we can be held liable.
In fact, the greater the force of an evil inclination on or in our own actions, then the more accountable we are, precisely because we had all the physical power we needed to do otherwise and not do that evil thing.
But it was our inclinations, but it was our inclinations, which made it necessary.
And with that, Edwards hit everyone's panic button.
As sinners in the hands of an angry God, we possess a nature that inclines us to sin.
In fact, it inclines us to sin all the time.
That's why the first element in Tulip was total depravity.
We labor day by day, hour by hour, under the force of moral necessity.
And that gives us a moral inability to do anything other than sin.
But none of this happens because God forces us to sin.
That would be a natural necessity.
And then we would have an excuse.
We could say we were made to do it that way.
You can't blame us.
The fact is, said Edwards, we actually possess all the natural ability we could ever want not to sin.
Now, translated into practical terms, what this meant was that no one could shelter themselves from the call to repentance and conversion,
as they had for generations in New England, behind such pious fig leaves as the halfway covenant,
or the plea that they were gradually working their way through their depravity, almost like therapy,
by using the means of grace, such as prayer, or the sacraments, or reading the Bible, or listening to sermons,
or coming under conviction of sin, and so on and so forth,
all of which would take place in very slow order, like most therapy.
You were, Edwards taught, depraved, totally, and there was nothing you could do about it.
But you had arms, and legs, and lips, and a brain.
And you could use them all to bow down in the dust, and to base yourself before God and repent.
And you could do it now, without waiting for grace to get you around to do it.
And so you were liable, even if you were totally depraved.
If we were to look at this as a modern psychologist might,
we would say that Edwards was creating a moment of mental crisis.
He was confronting people simultaneously with their depravity,
but then he was offering a release, a catharsis,
by telling them that they were, nevertheless, fully responsible to repent and believe.
Well, Edwards himself did not live long enough to put this into full play,
but his two disciples, Samuel Hopkins of Great Barrington, Massachusetts,
and Joseph Bellamy of Bethlehem, Connecticut, they did.
What both men generated first was not revival, but controversy.
In 1766, Hopkins' An Inquiry Concerning the Promises of the Gospel
indicted the New England churches for having watered down the depravity of original sin,
and then turned conversion into a genteel embrace of polite morals,
and thus ended up by making God into an indulgent uncle rather than a righteous father.
Given the profound moral warpage of human depravity,
one might as easily expect a handless climber to scale rock faces
as to expect a sinner to therapeutically use the means of grace.
And given God's hostility to human sin,
its ill effects could only be overcome, said Hopkins,
when God gives a new heart and regeneration.
Because only then is a foundation laid in the mind
for a discerning of the truths of the gospel in their real beauty and excellency,
to which the unregenerate heart or the mind under the dominion of lust is wholly blind.
This meant that there could be no gradual ramping up to a new heart
through the use of means.
Instead, this change is wrought by the Spirit of God
immediately and instantaneously, said Hopkins.
Nobody should fool themselves into believing
that there were promises of regenerating grace
made to the exercises and doings of the unregenerate.
There was only one option.
Hopkins said,
Men are required to repent and believe
and turn to God on pain of eternal damnation
and are declared to be in a state of condemnation until they do so.
The established congregational order in New England
was aghast at the prospect of a new divinity
which discounted all the efforts sincere parishioners were making
under the use of means
and demanding that they put forth
the full use of their natural ability
and immediately repent.
They liked it still less
when Hopkins and Bellamy
began excommunicating those who didn't repent at once.
And when Hopkins began teaching
that not only were people obliged to use
all their natural ability to repent,
but were also obligated to exercise
after repentance in living a Christian life
and utterly self-denying,
disinterested benevolence toward others.
They should, in fact, according to Hopkins,
be willing to be damned to hell themselves
if that would glorify God the more.
Well, it was shocking, but it worked.
Through Edwards' juxtaposition
of natural ability and moral necessity,
Hopkins and Bellamy could preach
the most extreme Calvinistic versions
of absolute divine sovereignty
and immediately switch over
and demand the utmost exertions of their people.
Now, they enraged some people by this.
Hopkins, in fact, was forced out of his church
in Great Barrington, Massachusetts,
in 1769 and moved to Newport, Rhode Island,
where he enraged still more people
by denouncing the slave trade
as the ultimate sin against disinterested
or impartial benevolence.
On the other hand, Hopkins and Bellamy
enthralled many others.
Bellamy stayed as pastor
of Bethlehem, Connecticut,
for 50 years.
And as one odd witness put it,
his preaching made God so great,
so great.
Indeed, it did.
And restless and idealistic theological students,
fresh from the tepid atmosphere
of Yale or Harvard,
flocked to Hopkins and Bellamy
for ministerial apprenticeships.
It was these next-generation Edwardians
who really lit the terror-soaked bonfires
of revival across New England
in what became generally known
as the Second Great Awakening.
By the 1790s, Hopkins estimated
that he and Bellamy had planted
over 100 of their pupils and sympathizers
in pulpits across western Massachusetts
and western Connecticut.
In 1799, Hopkins told the English Baptist
that revivals were sweeping
more than 100 towns in New England,
and most of them under the preachers
of this new divinity.
Well, fearsome as the new divinity men
became as preachers,
they prided themselves just as much
on the passion with which they wrote
and studied.
Nathaniel Emmons
stoically devoted himself
for 78 years
from 10 to 16 hours a day
in his study
and wore four holes in the floor
where the legs of his desk chair rubbed.
Hopkins met with two of his students
to talk theology through the day
and then saw one of them
out to the stable for his horse.
They fell to talking some more,
and eventually they noticed
what they thought was a glow
from a fire in the east.
It was actually the sun
coming up the next day.
Bellamy was even more determined
to train new divinity missionaries
for the New England churches.
Upwards of 60 theological students
passed through the barn
he refurbished in Bethlehem
as a one-man seminary.
John Smalley,
Samuel Spring,
Levi Hart,
Jonathan Edwards the Younger,
this is only naming
the most famous.
They became the most vivid
and demanding voices
for a consistent Calvinism,
that's what they called it,
in the post-awakening
and post-revolutionary decades.
They, in turn,
trained ministerial students
of their own.
Hart trained Charles Backus,
and Backus trained 50 others.
Asa Burton of Thetford, Vermont,
trained another 60,
and Nathaniel Emmons,
who was trained by Smalley,
set the record
by training 87 ministers
during his 55-year career.
Emmons and Burton
even managed to create
new subdivisions
within the New Divinity.
Burton taught
that God presented motives
to human nature,
or taste,
and from that point,
human nature took over
in making the choices
God wanted made.
Hence, that became known
as the taste scheme.
But for Nathaniel Emmons,
even that smacked
too much of a natural necessity,
and he countered
by insisting
that there was nothing
worth the name
called human nature.
In terms that oddly
resembled David Hume's
skeptical epiphenomenalism,
Emmons would only say
that human consciousness
was so constituted
that it put forth exercises
directly in response
to motives.
Hence, this became known
as the exercise scheme.
None of the New Divinity
Ministers, however,
cleared as wide a path
for himself
in American culture
as Charles Grandison Finney.
Born in Western Connecticut,
Finney moved
to upstate New York
and originally trained
as a lawyer.
But in 1821,
Finney was dramatically
converted
and embarked
on a new career
as a preacher
of revivals.
No one ever wielded
the thunderbolts
of the sinner's
moral ability,
the need for
immediate repentance,
and the requirement
for a perfect,
disinterested benevolence
than Charles Finney.
And from 1824
to 1832,
he ignited revivals
all through
the Mohawk River Valley.
He served as pastor
of the Chatham Street Chapel
and the Broadway Tabernacle
in New York City
and eventually became
one of the leading lights
in founding Oberlin College.
He denounced selfishness
as the sin of sins
and the diametric opposite
of disinterested benevolence.
And under the heading
of selfishness,
Finney included
everything from
slave-owning
to overdressing.
As Edwards
could have told
the New Divinity men,
revivals of religion
are not permanent
states of affairs.
With Finney,
the violence of
the New Divinity
reached its apex
and then guttered out.
His preaching
dwelt so much
on the sinner's
natural ability
to repent
that people forgot
and accused him
of forgetting
that he was,
after all,
supposed to be
a Calvinist.
Disinterested benevolence,
which shaped
both the origins
of the anti-slavery movement
and the organization
of foreign missionary work,
finally degenerated
into a cheerless
code of do's and don'ts.
When Finney
tried to illustrate
just how much
natural ability
sinners had
by installing
an anxious bench
near his pulpit
and inviting
anxious sinners
to come and sit there
and to be prayed with,
even his fellow
revival laborers
began to dismiss him
as a sensation-seeking
embarrassment.
Yet,
these intellectual
heirs of
Jonathan Edwards
turned their
Second Great Awakening
into a great
cultural force.
in a secular republic
rigged and trimmed
to sail
a secular course,
the revivalists,
by sheer main force,
wrenched control
of the wheel
of the republic,
or at least
of the republic's culture,
out of the hands
of the deists,
out of the hands
of the secularists,
and turned the ship
that Jefferson
and Madison
had imagined
would sail
before secular winds
and set it to sail
before God's winds.
They showed by this
that American religion
did not need
an official,
tax-supported,
government-recognized
place in American politics
in order to have
a decisive influence
on American life.
In almost the same way
that Edwards had taught
that God rules
human conduct
not by force,
but by the presentation
of motives,
so the Edwardsians
transformed all
but a handful
of the Protestant
churches of America
into presenters
of motives
to American culture
rather than
tax collectors
who were backed up
and reinforced
by civil statutes.
Closed off
from making policy,
they made converts.
Unable to legislate,
they organized
independent societies
for Bible distribution,
for alcoholism reform,
for observance
of the Sabbath,
for suppressing
vice and immorality,
and for the end
of slavery,
especially
slavery.
After all,
enslavement
described precisely
the sort of
natural inability
and natural necessity,
which Edwards
insisted was not
the true notion
of Calvinism.
And to the extent
that slavery
literally involved
the forcible repression
of Christianity
among the slaves
by their masters,
it was bound
to arise
the animus
of the new divinity.
Oddly enough,
Edwards himself
had been
a slave owner,
although not
on the dimensions
of Thomas Jefferson.
His slave ownership
was really limited
to the purchase
of an occasional
domestic helper
for the Edwards household
in 1731
and 1736.
But,
as early as 1741,
Edwards was already
criticizing
the New England-based
slave trade.
And during
Edwards' pastor
in Northampton,
six African slaves
were admitted
to full
communicant membership
on an equal par
with any of the white
citizens of Northampton.
But it was Hopkins
who,
characteristically,
applied the full logic
of Edwards
to slavery.
And in 1771,
began his preaching
against the slave trade
as a violation
of the principle
of disinterested
benevolence.
Two years after that,
Hopkins began
directly attacking
not just the slave trade,
but slavery itself.
as he was joined
in his protest
by Edwards the Younger
in New Haven,
and two years after that
by another Edwardsian,
Levi Hart,
in eastern Connecticut.
Radical opposition
to slavery
eventually became
an independent issue
of its own
for the new divinity.
And in 1859,
the most radical blow
yet struck
against American slavery
would come from
a man nurtured
under a new divinity
pastorate
in Torrington, Connecticut,
John Brown.
The power
generated by
the revivals
and awakenings
and the new divinity
theology
gave the now
disestablished
parsons
of New England
everything they needed
to accomplish
the reforms
that Jefferson's
wall of separation
prevented them
from imposing
directly
as organized churches.
When the French liberal
Alexis de Tocqueville
took his celebrated tour
of the United States
in the 1830s,
he was amazed
to find that
while in the United States
religion has no influence
on the laws
or on the details
of political opinions,
nevertheless,
it directs the mores
and through that
it works
to regulate the state.
But if
Edwardsian-style
revivalism
was an important
means for firing up
interest
in religion
and reform,
the truth was
that it was
a less
than happy instrument,
less than successful
instrument
for sustaining
that interest.
The demand
for immediate repentance
and for disinterested benevolence
was supposed
to infuse
new virtue
back into public life
through renewed individuals.
Well, unhappily,
it might just as easily
convince renewed individuals
to have nothing further
to do with public life,
to disengage entirely
from the sinfulness
of their surrounding neighbors.
So Edwardsian revivalism
was,
at the end of the day,
still a reflection
of the old
Puritan weakness
for separatism.
The revivals
called people
to repentance,
but they also
called them
out of society,
out of their
normal relations,
out of their
everyday moral lives,
to participate
in an intensely
demanding,
but still
very otherworldly
version
of Protestant
Christianity.
The very fact
that a revival
was judged
necessary
at all
was a judgment
on the failures
of the regular churches
and the impurities
of conventional society,
and its logical end
was to turn people
into come-outers
of various sorts
and to inflate
a radical individualism.
To maintain
momentum,
to maintain
influence,
and to maintain
it broadly
in society,
there had to be
a second answer
to the problem
of religion's role
in leading American life.
And that would come
from the 19th century
academic moral philosophers
and from John Witherspoon's
Scottish philosophy
of common sense.
