Hello. As we have seen in the last two lectures, which focused on West Africa and East Africa,
the spread of Iron Age agriculture and pastoralism and the development of long-distance trade
set the stage for the emergence of towns and states. Southern Africa is no exception
to that pattern. However, since farming and iron working generally moved southward across
the continent, the southern African subcontinent was the last major region to be transformed.
Nonetheless, radiocarbon dates for archaeological research show evidence for the whole so-called
Iron Age package, that is, crops, cattle, and iron, south of the Limpopo River in modern-day
South Africa by the 3rd century A.D. and has spread through the whole eastern half of that
country by around 1000 A.D. I should add that this also was part of the arrival of Bantu peoples
and languages which came to dominate in the eastern half of South Africa. Now, these radiocarbon
dates represented the sort of death knell. They were the most decisive refutation of an apartheid
era notion of the so-called empty land. You'll often see references to this as the so-called
empty land, or excuse me, the myth of the empty land. Now, the myth of the empty land has had
a long-staying power in South Africa, and it shows up in curious places. I actually have
encountered it, not so much recently, but 20 years or so ago, I would encounter it more
than once among ordinary Americans who, thank God, were curious enough to delve into South African
history, for instance, a bit. Now, the myth of the empty land took a number of forms. I think
it probably one of the more extreme forms I ever heard was from the guy, the real estate
guy who was trying to sell me my first home. When he learned what I did for a living, he obviously
had done some delving into Southern African history, which I'm always happy to see. Anyway, he pronounced
that most people are unaware that, in fact, South Africa was empty, and that, I believe his actual words were,
the blacks came down to get the jobs. Now, I would say, again, that's rather an extreme elaboration of the myth of the empty land. More commonly, it was simply held that Bantu peoples and Iron Age cultures were moving into South Africa at about the same time that Europeans were moving in their frontier expansion to the country.
as well. Now, clearly, this myth had political, you might say moral political utility, as people like my old mentor, Leonard Thompson of Yale showed in his rather brilliant book, The Political Mythology of Apartheid.
What I mean is, by moral political, if it is true that the bulk of South African land was not occupied or not held by the ancestors of the indigenous majority, then it certainly puts a different light.
It means that it means that it means that it means that it means that it means that it means that it was not necessarily expropriated or taken away from that population by the immigrant Europeans.
Now, as I say, this has fallen rather hard under the impact of radiocarbon dating in particular.
But myths, including historical myths, however misleading they may be, often, you know, contain a kernel somewhere in there, a grain of truth.
I mean, even my real estate man, the blacks came down to get the jobs.
Well, the kernel of truth is, of course, that in the 19th and 20th century, he's right, millions of blacks did come down from areas further north and engage in the migrant labor pattern, which is going to be so important to our discussion of South African history later in the course.
And in this case, you know, again, the kernel of truth here, it is true that Bantu expansion, Iron Age culture expansion, apparently halted at the point, the so-called 20 inch rainfall line, where there was insufficient moisture for their crops.
Now, this 20 inch rainfall line that I referred to is a line, it's a little, it may be a bit of an exaggeration to consider it a single line, but a zone, let us say, which runs north to south and essentially bisects modern day Republic of South Africa.
So, to the east of that line, to the right side of that line on the map, there was an excess of 20 inches, on average, of rainfall a year, which is about the minimum for the cultivation of crops.
To the west of that line, to the west of that line, to the left side of the map, there generally was not, with the exception, however, of course, of that Mediterranean basin in and around Cape Town.
But, remember that from where the 20 inch rainfall line falls to Cape Town is a space of several hundred miles, so there's a considerable gap in there.
One can always ask the question, you know, would it have been possible for Mandela's ancestors, the Xhosa peoples of South Africa, who were the southernmost Bantu people, to have, I'm going to use this term, to have colonized that Mediterranean basin?
Well, yes and no, again, are adaptation of crops to environment.
The crops that they were used to cultivating, like millet and so forth, in fact, don't do well, like a grain like wheat does, in that Mediterranean climate.
Nonetheless, it's always useful to ask what might have happened.
It's conceivable, but as we'll see, something else happened instead.
So, these cultures then were, of the late Bantu Iron Age, are concentrated on the right side, inside the modern Republic of South Africa.
To the west of that line, there was no extension of cultivation, although there was an adoption by considerable numbers of people of half of the agricultural revolution, and they became pastoralists.
We'll meet them again when we look at the formation of the Cape Colony.
Now, in the later Iron Age, let us say the late first millennium A.D., especially in the savannah grasslands of what is now western Zambia, Zimbabwe, eastern Botswana, and eastern South Africa,
we see increasing wealth, we see increasing wealth complexity, stratification, and commerce.
We've seen it before in other parts of Africa, and we're seeing it again.
The hilltop settlements known as the Tautzwe tradition, when the name comes from the largest excavated site in eastern Botswana,
It seemed to illustrate the importance, above all, of one of our old friends, increasing numbers of cattle.
Again, the measure, the store of wealth, perhaps supreme in this part of the world.
Control of cattle was the key to power and wealth, and because cattle were held by males in general,
this may also have sharpened the gender divide, if you will.
Emerging slightly later was the cultural complex called Leopard's Copy, after a site in southwestern Zimbabwe.
The word copy, K-O-P-J-E, is actually Afrikaans, the Dutch-based language for hill.
Certainly cattle in this successor cultural complex remained central.
Peoples here in this rather dry part, especially dry part of, we could say, the southern savannah,
maximize the efficiency of cultivation by the use of stone terracing on hillsides.
They also use stone to construct residences and cattle enclosures.
And the peoples of the Leopard's Copy culture mined not only iron, but large quantities of copper,
and then probably beginning in the 10th century, again, very late in the first millennium, gold.
The culmination of the Leopard's Copy culture, early in the 2nd millennium A.D.,
was what we could perhaps style as the first urban center in southern Africa.
And that was the town of Mapangubwe, located around a hill site,
just south of the Limpopo River in modern-day South Africa.
The physical evidence here, which has been extracted for decades by particularly archaeologists
from the University of Pretoria, but is only now showing up in places like museums in South Africa
and so forth, suggests a sharply defined hierarchy.
Rulers at literally the top of the hill, living in deed like royalty,
living in structures made of stone,
in the flatter country or the bottom portions of the hill,
were the poorer commoners.
Mapangubwe was clearly connected with the Swahili-dominated east coast
that we surveyed in the last lecture.
Ivory and gold were traded eastward,
and excavations have uncovered many glass beads from India, in particular,
and fine Chinese porcelain bowls at Mapangubwe.
Now, the full flower, in a sense, of these southern developments is seen at Great Zimbabwe,
located in the central portions of the modern country, of course,
which took the name of Zimbabwe at its independence in 1980.
This was the capital of a major late Iron Age state, generally given the same name,
a bit like Mexico City, being the capital of Mexico, if you like.
The city of Great Zimbabwe represented the largest stone ruins, represents today,
the largest stone ruins in Africa, south of the Nile River.
Great Zimbabwe comprises essentially two focal points.
There is the so-called hill complex, which, as you'd expect, is located on the hill
where the kings and the royals resided for most of the time,
and the valley complex, which housed the ordinary citizens of this town of perhaps 20,000 people.
But the valley complex also included the most impressive single ruin,
the high-walled Great Enclosure.
The Great Enclosure has an outer wall which runs in elliptical shape for approximately 700 feet.
Its greatest diameter is approximately, or the greatest space between the edges of the walls
is approximately 300 feet across.
The walls themselves are 30 to 35 feet high,
sometimes decorated at the top or, in other cases, even midway by coursing.
Coursing is the word for a layering of stone by decorative patterns.
The largest walls at the base are some 15 feet thick,
and they are solid throughout.
There's no cavity in them,
although they taper upwards and therefore narrow as they reach the top.
This is the largest single structure,
by a considerable margin,
in pre-colonial sub-Saharan Africa.
Now, the Great Enclosure, with its passageways,
its stairs,
its inner chamber surrounding the so-called Conical Tower,
which, again, is about 30 feet high and about 20 feet at its base,
was likely the political and, indeed, the religious focal point of the nation.
In other words, the speculation by archaeologists is that
at certain moments, obviously, harvest festivals, religious rites, etc.,
that the kings probably descended from the hill complex
and carried out these practices inside the Great Enclosure
and, most likely, around this so-called Conical Tower.
Millions of blocks of stone went into the walls of Great Zimbabwe.
It must have taken many years, probably, certainly, we can talk about decades,
to complete, which was accomplished by about the year 1300 or so.
The granite outcrops in this part of southern Africa
have fissure lines, so-called fracture planes,
created over eons by a constant alternation of exposure to a very bright and warm sun,
but very cold nights, because this is situated on a plateau
at about 4,000 feet elevation or so.
By addition, on the part of the builders,
of additional heat to these granite outcrops,
in a sense, it's possible to sort of peel off the granite
in more or less flattish layers.
At that point, the builders are able to cut
and finally shape the individual granite blocks
with, what else?
Iron tools.
We encounter, again, an example of how none of this is on the cards
until this gift of iron becomes part of African life.
Now, the walls are dry-stacked.
That is, there is no mortar used in the construction of Great Zimbabwe
in these millions of blocks.
And, again, the fact that they are still standing predominantly
700 years or so later
suggests that there was certainly considerable skill
on the part of the dry-stacked masons.
Archaeologists believe that the largest buildings here
are designed primarily to convey the power and the prestige of the rulers
almost by cloaking them behind these walls
and imposing or imparting an air of secrecy and mystery.
And, you know, to visit this place,
it certainly does emit this aura of mystery.
European architecture, of course, long ago
became quite concerned with the straight line,
the sharp corner, often the right-angle corner, etc., etc.
And, obviously, this created some masterpieces.
This is very different.
There are no corners at Great Zimbabwe.
It's constant gentle curves and ellipses.
Often, particularly in the hill complex,
the constructions of the humans are, in essence,
blended into and make use of the actual granite outcrops themselves.
So you have this combination of sort of the human injection of construction
with what was put there by nature.
When I say mysterious, you know,
if you go from the, or go inside the great enclosure
and down a passageway which lies between the outer wall
and an immediately parallel inner one
and leads over a course of 200 or 300 feet
into this kind of inter-sanctum of the conical tower,
that's quite an experience.
First of all, the sun, you know,
because it's such a narrow passage, very rarely hits it.
And you walk in there and suddenly, you know,
the temperature is about 10 degrees cooler.
It starts out at probably about 8 feet wide,
but it continually shrinks and narrows.
And so that by the time you finally see the tower in front of you,
and the speculation, again,
is this would have been sort of the center of the center
of the religious political life of the nation,
it's barely as wide as your shoulders.
Now, as I said, this is perched on the edge, as it were,
of the quite high-lying Zimbabwe Plateau,
a classic example of one of those overturned bowl images
that I used earlier.
Great Zimbabwe was well-situated to take advantage
of both the high-country pasturage and low-country pasturage,
or in Southern African terminology,
high-felt and low-felt pasturage.
In other words, in the much drier winter months,
you could move cattle down into the lower country
and take advantage of still-flowing rivers and pasturage there.
There's no question that we see an enormous multiplication
in wealth as measured by the presence and the possession of cattle.
And there's some interesting evidence that comes from this
of what we might call the royal or at least the elite lifestyle.
In the 1960s and 70s,
some excavators intentionally began to collect fragments of animal bones
to try to get at some clues about Great Zimbabwe.
They collected something like 140,000 pieces of this,
and they did a fairly detailed examination
of no less than 20,000 or so of them.
Of the 20,000, all but 263 of them,
in other words, well over 99% or so,
were in fact cattle bones.
But something more interesting occurred here.
80% or so of these cattle had apparently died,
had apparently been slaughtered,
at the ages of approximately 24 to 30 months.
That is the prime time for beef.
And it certainly suggests that there was a very regular slaughter
of cattle to provide beef for the consumption of an elite.
Because you may recall in lecture number six,
I was quite emphatic in saying that cattle alive
to an ordinary African cultivator long ago or today
are too valuable living to embark on regular slaughter.
In the case of the capital of a major state and its elite,
that's not necessarily the case.
Now, Great Zimbabwe is an even better place
than Mapungubwe to export gold and ivory
to the east coast.
And the ruins have yielded many samples,
far more than Mapungubwe,
by far the most of any single site,
of prestige goods brought in from India, Persia,
child of the usual suspects at this point.
Glazed Persian bowls with inscriptions on them
from the 13th and 14th century.
Again, the Chinese porcelain and caledon
were glass beads from India and the Near East.
There, of course, was homegrown treasure as well,
perhaps above all the carved stone birds,
which represented the oracle of the king, you might say.
Again, there's some evidence of divine kingship of a sort
or semi-divine kingship.
Unfortunately, most of these birds,
there were probably eight or ten of them,
and we're talking about sculptures
that are probably six feet high or so.
Most of them were actually looted
when outsiders first reached this city about a century ago.
After independence in 1980,
quite a number of them were actually recovered
and brought back to the museum there by the ruins.
Now, for reasons that are not entirely clear,
by the way, just one more thing on that,
that those stone-carred birds,
the so-called shiri-yamwari, or bird of God,
has become the modern symbol of the nation of Zimbabwe.
It appears, for instance, on their flag.
For reasons that are not entirely clear,
Great Zimbabwe was abandoned
rather suddenly,
sometime around 1500 or so.
The experts have ruled out evidence of invasion here
and have generally turned to ecological explanations.
Again, we've seen exhaustion of local resources,
particularly timber,
in the case of Meroe, for instance.
Some speculation that perhaps a human disease epidemic
or a cattle epizotic
may have led to the abandonment of it.
However, the kingdom which Great Zimbabwe anchored
was clearly the prototype
for a series of successor states
built by Zimbabwe's Shona peoples,
the largest single ethnic group in Zimbabwe,
past and present.
And these successor states,
like Torwa or Manamatapa,
the last of these,
survived to the 19th century.
And the capitals of these later states,
although not as large,
were constructed of stone in a similar style,
in some cases even more intricate.
My personal favorite is a Zimbabwe,
a small z there,
representing the sort of generic term,
translated usually as,
literal meaning is house of stone,
but it generally carries the connotation of royal court.
Sometimes it's simply translated as capital.
At Nalatale, there is a Zimbabwe with a small z,
and this is on top of a really high hill.
It's beautifully decorated
with several examples of the chevron styles
and alternating coloration of stone and so forth
at various stages in the coursing.
There's some speculation
it may have been a sort of summer getaway
because of the coolness of the very high hill
for the old royalty.
Now, let us flash forward a bit.
After the British, led by Cecil Rhodes,
colonized southern Rhodesia,
which, of course, is the same,
which became modern Zimbabwe,
many white settlers who came to the country
refused to believe that Africans were capable
of such a creation as Great Zimbabwe.
The civilizing mission, so-called of colonial rule,
it seemed, required the absence
of anything resembling civilization
prior to its arrival.
Instead, the official line was that
Great Zimbabwe was a mystery.
Now, it is mysterious, I just tried to convey,
but not exactly in the context
that it was intended here,
that the origins of it were a mystery,
that perhaps it was the doing of the lost tribe of Israel
or, indeed, the Queen of Sheba,
whom we encountered in the lecture on Ethiopia,
or maybe the Phoenicians had had a colony here
long, long ago that was lost.
King Solomon's mines and so on.
In other words, anybody but the local Africans.
Just to give some of the flavor of this,
a book published in the 1960s concluded,
quote,
that Great Zimbabwe is completely out of character
of the Bantu and has no justification
from other Negroid parts of Africa,
past or present.
As late as 1974,
the old Rhodesian regime
sent instructions to the,
essentially the Parks Department,
that any brochure on Great Zimbabwe,
quote,
should indicate quite clearly
that as yet no irrefutable evidence
is available on the origin
of the ruins, unquote.
Now,
this contradicted the quite clear conclusions
of every professional archaeologist
for almost a hundred years
who had examined these ruins,
starting with Randall McIver in 1905,
Richard Caton Thompson in 1931,
and followed by people like Peter Garlick
and Roger Summers later.
They all concluded that it was of local origin,
built by ancestors of the Shona
and of medieval vintage.
For one,
part of the evidence for that
is that,
as I mentioned a moment ago,
Great Zimbabwe is not unique.
It's simply the largest
of some 200
of these Zimbabwe,
small z,
that are found all through Zimbabwe today
in the western parts of Mozambique,
in the eastern parts of Botswana,
in the northern parts of South Africa.
In this part of the world,
people built in stone
whenever it was available.
The pottery,
and there's an enormously
greater amount of pottery
scattered over the entire town site
than anything else,
including the more exotic importations
and so forth,
bear all the hallmarks
of the period of pottery style
and design
that was typical
of the Shona ancestors
in that period.
Roger Summers,
who was a fine archaeologist
and eventually
had a sort of precarious position
because his salary
was paid by the Rhodesian government
in the 1970s.
And he commented at one point
that anybody who questioned
the notion of external construction
of this,
that this had been done
by outsiders,
in Summers' words,
quote,
was met by anything
from polite incredulity
to downright abuse.
And Roger Summers found out
the hard way
that that was true.
I remember clearly
a moment from graduate school
in the 1970s.
We had just read a book
by Summers
called Ancient Gold Mining
in Rhodesia
and walked into the seminar
and Leonard Thompson,
the teacher,
mentioned that he
had just heard
that Roger Summers
had been sacked
for, in essence,
following his professional conscience,
if you like,
and asserting the local origin
of Great Zimbabwe.
Now, a couple of lectures ago,
you know,
when we were looking
at the history
of ancient Egypt,
its relation
to the history
of ancient Greece,
it took up
these questions like
who were the ancient Egyptians,
what color were they,
and so forth.
You know,
it simply underscores
that as human beings
we cannot help,
any of us cannot help,
viewing the past repeatedly
from our own perspective.
All we can do,
and I'm not saying
that we should avoid that,
all we can do
is be aware
in a sense of how
the contemporary concerns
we have,
how these contemporary lenses
are affecting,
perhaps,
our view
of the past.
I would suggest,
again,
perhaps,
in an echo
of how I ended
the lecture on Egypt,
that the colonial
Rhodesian mythology
about Great Zimbabwe
is most revealing
is most revealing
about the colonizers
themselves.
We foreshadowed here
some lectures
which will concentrate,
in fact,
in our penultimate
35th lecture
on the origins
of the contemporary crisis
in Zimbabwe.
Thank you.
Thank you.
