Edwardian revivalism was one way of solving the problem of how to generate and ensure
virtue in a republic. It was not, however, the only way, and in truth it really couldn't
have been the only way. The Enlightenment had won too many converts to deism, and there
were too many routine, ordinary Protestants who were reluctant to embrace the hothouse
atmosphere of the revivals, for Edwardian revivalism to be the only solution. However,
there was an alternative, and that lay remarkably close to hand in the Scottish common sense
philosophy, which, as we saw in Lecture 5, had made its first major beachhead in America
before the Revolution at Princeton under John Witherspoon. It also had done so to a lesser
degree at Yale under Thomas Clapp, but it was really Witherspoon who garnered most of the
credit for introducing Scottish thinking to American thinking. It hadn't really been the
purpose of the Scottish philosophy to engineer a republican virtue. The real purpose of the
Scottish philosophy had been, as we saw in that lecture, to produce a realist epistemology
that would reassure people about the reality of the exterior world and the reliability of
the mind's perceptions of it, and in so doing rescue the Enlightenment from the dead end of
skepticism. On the other hand, epistemology, bless its heart, is never far removed from ethics.
If you cannot be sure what or how you know something, then you're certainly not going to be sure about
what you ought to do. And so, in short order, the chief laborer of the common sense philosophy
became the formation of a workable, republican brand of ethics. Now, this was not as easy as it sounds.
Newtonian science taught its bedazzled admirers in the Enlightenment to find in physical nature
not the personal interventions of God, but repeatable and dependable laws of nature.
But what about human nature? Did human nature function the same way as physical nature? The same
reasoning that erased intelligence and purpose from physical nature and reduced it all to law
could just as easily erase intelligence and purpose from the human soul and reduce everything we think
of as unique to human behavior to some kind of psychological determinism. The effects of this
kind of skepticism on science would be withering. Well, on epistemology, they would be deadly and on
ethics, fatal. This didn't necessarily trouble some of the American founders. Alexander Hamilton
cheerfully accepted the notion that self-interest rather than virtue was the basic engine of human
action. So, little wonder that the Federalist papers described the Constitution as a natural system
that could work purely by checks and balances rather than by virtue. But from any other viewpoint,
the disappearance of virtue was an intellectual disaster. And it was the Scottish philosophy
which became the second means of restoring virtue to public life.
It's one measure of how enormously influential the Scottish common sense philosophy was that
in American colleges before the Civil War, just about every major collegiate intellectual was an
enthusiastic disciple of Scottish common sense realism. Thomas Clapp, Timothy Dwight,
Nathaniel William Taylor, and Noah Porter, all preached it to the undergraduates at Yale College.
Francis Allison established it at the University of Pennsylvania. Henry Philip Tappan did so at City
College of New York and later on at the Infant University of Michigan. James McCosh, Archibald Alexander,
and Charles Hodge did likewise in Princeton. Thomas Upham did so at Bowdoin. Francis Weyland at Brown,
Mark Hopkins at Williams, Francis Bowen, Levi Hedge, and Andrew Preston Peabody at Harvard. Charles Finney,
Asa Mahan, and James Harris-Marchild at Oberlin College. All of these were the point men, so to speak,
for Scottish common sense thinking. Even including the fabulously overnamed Lawrence Perseus Hickok
at Union College. These ethicists, or moral philosophers, were not content merely with using
the Scottish philosophy to establish a certain epistemology. They wanted that epistemology to pay
them the added dividend of articulating a public ethic that would serve as the foundation for public
virtue and moral order in this new secular republic. And they proposed to do this in three steps.
First of all, they proposed to establish a realist epistemology. An epistemology that was guaranteeing
that the human mind was not passive, not mistaken in its apprehensions of a real exterior world.
There was, argued the Scottish epistemology, a real world exterior to the mind. It was filled with real
objects. And the mind had real connections, real direct apprehensions of this world. And this,
as we saw in lecture five, this was really the stock and trade of the Scottish common sense thinkers
like Hutchison and Reed. Now the second step, after having done that, was to erect on that foundation,
that epistemological foundation, the proposition that purpose and intelligence in the universe
also had to be real. If all those objects out there were real, and we had direct apprehensions of them,
then we had to include perceptions of intelligence and purpose as real. Because our perceptions of
intelligence and purpose are the undeniable default position of human consciousness. We look outside
ourselves and we see objects. And the Scottish philosophy said those objects are really there,
and we have direct apprehensions of them. But we also look out of the external world, and we see
cause and effect. Well, we don't see cause and effect the same way we might see a chair or a table.
But nevertheless, we do it. It's the default position of human consciousness. Therefore,
cause and effect should be understood to be as real as those desks and those chairs. And not only do we
see cause and effect, when we see cause and effect, we also have to see a causer. And that means we have
to see intelligence and purpose. And when we see those things in such an elemental fashion, argued
the moral philosophers, then we ought to understand that intelligence and purpose in the universe
are qualities fully as real as all the other qualities that your mind perceives in things or objects
exterior to yourself. Now, the third step comes when you invite the student to shift attention from physical
nature to human nature, and ask whether the same intelligence and purpose cannot also be perceived in human
nature as well as physical nature in the exterior world. And then you calculate from the nature of that
intelligence and purpose what the contents of a real moral code ought to be. And you do it not as though
this moral code was based on religious doctrine or the product of religious teaching, but as an
induction from the observed facts of human nature, fully as scientific in its method as Newtonian physics.
On that basis, such a code of ethics could be embraced by all the citizens of the Republic, Christian,
deist, or otherwise, because it was simply a scientific realization of the moral facts hardwired into human
nature. Moral philosophy would thus become what Yale's Noah Porter called the science of duty. Was there a science of
physics? Sure. And we had direct apprehensions of physical operations in the universe. Was there a science of
duty? Sure. Because we have direct apprehensions in human nature of intelligence and purpose. Now, fitting ethics and
morality into the same clothes as science required that the moral philosophers produce a hermeneutical or
interpretive principle, which would allow them to transfer the patterns of intelligence and purpose
that they saw in physical nature to the human soul. And that principle was the principle of analogy.
Analogy worked like this. By the epistemological rules of the common sense realist philosophy,
everybody experiences inescapable intuitions about the existence of facts. Facts are there. You cannot avoid
coming to conclusions about facts. Facts are all around you. You have direct apprehensions of them. You
can't crawl under the sofa. You can't hide under the desk to get away from the reality of what is all around
you and outside of you. The existence of facts is inescapable. Well, one of the most basic of those
facts is that change operates in a law-like fashion. Certain things exist and certain changes are taking
place in them, argued Francis Wayland. And this we know because we cannot avoid knowing it. But when we
know it, we also know that these changes don't take place at random. What we are compelled to know,
because we cannot avoid knowing it, is that change occurs in the order of a succession. At first,
dimly, but by close inspection, more clearly seen. So not only is it inescapable that you have
intuitions about facts external to yourself, but you also know that those facts change and that the
change follows a law-like pattern. Now, more to the point, all laws can, according to Francis Wayland,
be shown to have a single pattern. I mean, if they didn't, then we could scarcely talk about law at all,
because every motion or every substance in the universe would then be a law unto itself. And the
result, as Wayland pointed out, would be universal ruin. So, if the mind could really know the exterior
world, and knew it to be governed by laws, then one should expect the interior world of human
consciousness to be governed by the same lawfulness. There should, in other words, be a striking ground of
analogy, between the laws of things, which command the putting forth of force uniformly, and the laws
of persons, which make certain ethical choices obligatory. No man was ever known to exist who in
any sense could be called a developed human being who did not recognize certain ethical distinctions
as real and esteem them of supreme importance, wrote Noah Porter. We take them as we know them,
whether civilized or savage. So, you see, morality or virtue is not merely a cultural accident. It's not
merely a social convention. It's not just an illusion. It's a conscious component of the mind.
And like the laws of physical science, it instructs people in the laws of character development,
of social relationships, of politics, of economics, and their spiritual duties to God.
Now, this common sense morality was the perfect prescription for a secular republic in which
both Thomas Jefferson and John Witherspoon had to live together. It yielded moral laws
without compelling people to embrace Protestant Christian theology. But it allowed Protestant
Christians to slip the fundamentals of Christian morality into public affairs without the hubbub
of Edwardsian revivalism. And thus, it allowed a kind of low-level evangelism to operate on the
republican masses. For instance, the analogy of the human soul, wrote Noah Porter, furnishes a decisive
argument in favor of the conclusion that the creator and thinker is one being. Now, in saying that,
Porter was not actually proselytizing anybody. He was simply making an inductive statement of ethical
fact. But the end result of that thinking would very likely be some form of Christian behavior.
So it was through this carefully scientized methodology that the moral philosophers were able to rebuild
the structure of Christian public ethics in the half-century after the American Revolution and
offer it as a guide to national virtue without breaking over Jefferson's wall of separation and
without needing to turn loose the furies of revivalism. The principle of analogy, in fact,
works so well that sometimes it was hard not to get carried away with it.
Through the intuitive response of a moral consciousness, Mark Hopkins rediscovered an
intricate three-fold class of duties for which human beings had been created, including a moral
obligation to obtain air, exercise, sleep, and clothing. But also, in a more bourgeois vein, he discovered a
right to property, which is graciously bestowed upon mankind for the purpose of rousing them from
sloth and stimulating them to action. Union College students in the 1850s found, through Lawrence
Perseus Hickok, that they had natural and self-evident moral obligations to cleanliness of dress and
person, which incidentally tells you that some things about college students have not changed since the 1850s.
And even more than that, Hickok believed that this common moral sense would teach people directly
that they should privatize the post office. Because, as he put it, state interference is oppressive to the
public freedom. And like all, tyranny should at once be abated. All of these intuited moral obligations
climaxed in what Francis Weyland called the general obligation to supreme love to God.
And this, for Weyland, led point by point to the cultivation of a devotional spirit,
to prayer, and even to good Sabbath-keeping.
As Weyland happily concluded, as everything which we can know teaches a lesson concerning God, if we
connect that lesson with everything which we learn, everything will be resplendent with the attributes of
deity. On the other hand, the fact that morality was supposed to be as real as physics did not mean that
everyone naturally obeyed those moral laws the way inanimate nature obeyed the laws of physics.
After all, people had free will. And they could choose to trump those laws if they wished.
Whether we can or cannot answer arguments against liberty, remarked the Presbyterian Archibald Alexander,
we know that we are free. Sort of an odd statement for a Presbyterian Calvinist to make, but we'll come back to that in a minute.
Though we may not be able to understand or explain with precision wherein this freedom consists,
yet, said Alexander, this ignorance of its nature should not disturb our minds. We have free will.
Take it for granted. But free will was not the only culprit that kept people from realizing their moral
duties. A consistent pattern of unwise choices would derange and harden the faculties. The result would be a
permanent moral warpage of the soul, something like a path of an errant comet. Now, it's worth noting at this
point that the 19th century moral philosophers were still talking about the human mind as a collection of
faculties. Whatever else the enlightenment had succeeded in questioning, it had not shaken people
loose from the notion that the mind was an arrangement of mental departments. And for the moral
philosophers, the old warfare for supremacy between will and intellect had not aged a day. If anything,
the enlightenment's suspicion of the way intellect could be perverted into wasting its energies
on the creation of vast pyramids of theological nonsense, gave a new respectability to the
legitimacy of the emotions, or the passions, as their critics called them, or the affections,
as their friends like Jonathan Edwards called them. In Thomas Reed's version of the Scottish common
sense thinking, the mind's faculties could be divided into three sections. The mechanical faculties,
the reflexes, the animal faculties, the physical, the emotional, and the rational faculties,
which were composed of the conscience and the intellect. David Hume had dismissed morality as an animal
faculty, as just an emotion. But Reed upgraded the moral sense to the ranks of the rational faculties.
So the moral sense was above emotion. And as befitted the republican context of America,
the moral sense was not ruled by the intellect. It ruled alongside it.
Moral philosophy was a confident enterprise, but it also contained a number of important anxieties.
The first of these anxieties, furiously enough, concerned religion. Not whether moral philosophy
had too much of it, but whether it might actually have too little. The college-based teachers of moral
philosophy recorded their thinking and their speculations in a lengthy collection of textbooks on ethics,
many of which had very long lives and very high sales. Francis Whelan's great Elements of Moral Science,
which was first published in 1835, had sold 40,000 copies by 1851 and 100,000 copies by the end of the century.
These textbooks strained to present a semblance of uniformity on moral basics.
And indeed they had to because only uniformity would give a sense of verisimilitude to the claim that
they were only reflecting the common sense of every conscious mind. However, the colleges where
these moral philosophers taught were overwhelmingly church-related. And the faculties who taught in them
were still overwhelmingly ordained clergy with specific and sometimes very conflicting denominational loyalties to serve.
Wayland was an ordained Baptist minister. Mark Hopkins was the grand-nephew of Samuel Hopkins and an ordained
congregationalist minister. Archibald Alexander was an old-school Presbyterian who had served briefly as
the pastor of Old Pine Street Presbyterian Church in Philadelphia. It might prove highly inconvenient for a
purely inductive and objective moral science to stumble across facts of human behavior like
free will, which is supposed to be a fact of human behavior, which might militate against their particular
denominational identity, like Calvinism. Or worse still, it might be very embarrassing for these moral
philosophers to find themselves in entire and uniform agreement in ethics with reverend gentlemen whom
they were otherwise required by their denominations to anathematize. This was a particular problem for
Calvinists in the Presbyterian and congregational churches and colleges, like Hickok at Union,
or Porter at Yale, or Alexander at Princeton. Because they could not have been happy at finding
themselves allied in the cause of moral philosophy and the teaching of virtue alongside Unitarians like
Francis Bowen or Levi Hedge on the one hand, or with the Oberlin College band of Finney, Mahan, and Fairchild,
and the wildfire revivalists on the other. On the other hand, the moral philosophers may have been almost
too loyal to their denominations too loyal to their denominations. The very fact that they were, most of
them, ordained clergy, and sometimes the officers of denominationally backed institutions, that prevented
them from setting up the kind of defensive national professional organization that other budding academic
disciplines in America were already using to promote their own disciplinary interests and the careers of
their members. Finney, Alexander, Bowen, they all had to swear to the existence of a natural and therefore
common Christian morality, but their conflicting denominational and theological identities prevented any of them
from joining arms with each other in defense of either their discipline or that morality. And in the context of
academic professionalization, that failure to organize any form of national professional association helped
to delegitimize, helped to subvert and undermine the whole moral philosophy endeavor. So they found
themselves confused by the urge to remain loyal to their own denominational traditions and paralyzed by the
cynical suggestion that their denominational tradition really should mandate that they never be seen
together with these Unitarians and these revivalists. The second of moral philosophy's anxieties touched
on its claims to having a purely scientific, non-partisan parentage. The moral philosophers liked to
describe their inductive method of teasing universal moral principles out of the facts of consciousness as
purely Baconian, after Sir Francis Bacon's Novum Organum. In other words, as purely scientific as an
experiment in a laboratory. But to professional scientists, morality is not something you can measure in a test tube or
predict on an experimental basis. And what was worse than the disapproval of the scientific professionals was the
disapproval of the scientific amateurs. Already in the 1840s, Americans were becoming fascinated by a series of
scientific enthusiasms which boded nothing good for the integrity of moral philosophy. Phrenology, for instance,
tried to establish direct correlations between moral character and the physical outline of the cranium,
thus offering a dramatic shortcut toward understanding human moral attributes simply by dropping out the need
for analogies between physical and human nature and reading physical nature, in this case the cranium, as human nature.
A similar threat emerged from a new interest in racism, sparked, in large measure, by the hankering of
southern slaveholders for ways of justifying the enslavement of African Americans. Racism did this by means of
racial distinctions. And racial distinctions did what craniums had done for the phrenologists. In other words,
racism fused the identity of human moral nature and moral characteristics with simple differences in
human physical nature, without the need to consult the facts of consciousness or a moral sense.
moral philosophy promised that it could discover a logical order, not just in physical nature, but in
moral and economic and political nature as well. Only to find over time that the really serious ethical
problems about virtue in the republic were so complicated and so mottled with ambiguity that no absolute
solution had any hope of appearing right to everyone's moral sense. The moral philosopher has achieved
consensus, but only on the issues that were so trivial that they mattered to no one but themselves.
On the big ticket issues, like slavery, moral philosophers in the North and in the South arrived at solutions
which flatly contradicted each other. So flatly that it called into question the notion that everyone
possessed some form of common moral sense that would always, like a scientific experiment, yield the same conclusion.
By the 1870s, moral philosophy, attacked on one hand as too scientific to be religious,
and attacked on the other hand as too religious to be scientific, and with both accusations sometimes coming
from the same secular critics, with analogy no longer able to bear significant scientific freight,
and with social control rather than virtue acquiring a higher premium among the elites of industrial
America for giving order to American life. With all of those developments, moral philosophy
hemorrhaged intellectual legitimacy. The last great textbook in moral philosophy, Our Moral Nature,
by Princeton's James McCosh was published after McCosh's retirement in 1888. By 1908, just 20 years later,
when John Dewey collaborated with James Tufts in producing a textbook on ethics for the American science series,
all mention of analogy and moral philosophy had been effaced by pragmatism and social democracy.
And yet, if the claims of the moral philosophers to scientific universality in ethics fall somewhere short of
legitimacy, theirs was still an important failure. The moral philosophers forced upon their hearers and
their readers an inescapable sense of their moral nature as human beings, and with it the need to order
their lives on a plane considerably higher than the hedonism and indifference which their successors,
pragmatism and psychology, ended up so dismally condoning. It was, and it has been, the damning crime of evolutionary
humanism that it gave no joy and less humanity to America than it had had at the hands of the moral philosophers.
Inscribed on the wall of the memorial church in Harvard yard is a memorial tablet to Andrew
Preston Peabody. He moved among the teachers and students of Harvard College
college and wist not that his face shone. I've not heard the like said about many of his successors.
The
recipid camp
The
