Welcome.
The most profound connection between Africa and America is, without doubt, the forced
migration of large numbers of Africans as slaves and their eventual permanent settlement
here. What is true for America in the sense of the United States is even more true for
many other parts of the Americas, more broadly speaking, including Latin America and the
Caribbean? In this lecture, we want to use a very wide lens, indeed, to survey the scope
and overall organization of the Atlantic slave trade. In the next lecture, we want to bring
our focus back to Africa, the operation of the slave trade in Africa, and consider its
possible long-term effects on the continent.
In several recent lectures, I have alluded to something like a turning point, a divide
in world history and in Africa's place in that history, coming about approximately 500
years ago. The year 1992, not that long ago, the year marking the 500th anniversary of Columbus's
voyage, of course, across the Atlantic. In that year, some people celebrated his accomplishment
and some decried it. But all of them had reason to observe it. This is not because his feat was
a first. It almost certainly wasn't. But because it symbolizes the epoch-making changes which followed
it, it's what comes in the wake of Columbus's voyage that really matters. I have a cartoon at home which
makes this point perhaps in a rather perverse way. It's a cartoon by the cartoonist who wrote under the name,
or pinned under the name of Larson and wrote a panel called The Far Side, which many of you, I'm sure,
are familiar with. And of course, he has since retired with bagfuls of money. He had a wry, some would say sick,
a sense of humor, perhaps. The one I have in mind has three Native Americans, three American Indians.
And they're standing on a bluff and looking out over the water at the departing three ships, the famous
three ships, the Nina, you know, of Columbus as they sail away. And the caption on the cartoon is,
one of the Native American figures is saying to the others, did you think there was something ominous
in the way they said, see you later?
Did you think there was something ominous in the way they said, see you later?
Well, of course, Native American, American Indian communities were indeed seen later. Maybe I should
say sooner rather than later, but seen increasingly by increasing numbers of ships in the centuries,
which followed Columbus's. So Columbus's voyage symbolizes changes, which indeed affected the whole
globe, but were particularly profound, it would seem, for the four continents, that is Africa, Europe,
and the Americas bordering the Atlantic Ocean. An Atlantic system was being born, and I'm going to be using
that term in these next couple of lectures. An Atlantic system was being born, and an Atlantic slave trade
would come to be a central part of it.
Now, at a global level, we can speak as well at this time, approximately, of the onset of the age of mercantile
capitalism. Now, historians like me are very fond of ages, and we're constantly naming them, and
re-dividing them, and what have you. The age of mercantile capitalism has had a pretty long run amongst historians.
Let's take the second term here. Capitalism, of course, it's a term like state. You can define it
a great number of ways. All I would highlight right now is, and emphasize, is that under capitalism,
critical economic actors make critical decisions based on calculations of profit. Now, I rushed ahead that
often those calculations, but often those calculations are wrong. You know, they're mistaken. But nonetheless,
the calculation of it drives actions, determines actions.
In the age of mercantile capitalism, and again, that can be defined a number of ways,
things. At one level, the name of the game, if you will, was to go somewhere, obtain things,
or persons defined as things, take them somewhere else, either back home or to a third location,
and do these, make these actions, invest in those actions in the hope of generating profit.
Now, obviously, the precondition for all of this was a quantum leap in the ability to sail the oceans
and transport things across them. It may be the stuff of grade school social studies, but we cannot take
the maritime revolution, so-called, lightly. And of course, Columbus symbolizes that rather well
also. Okay, about this time, tastes were changing in Europe, and in this case, I mean changing literally.
It seems hard to believe that it was the desire for something sweet, sugar, that initially touched off
the processes which would utterly change, or in some cases, end the lives of millions of people.
After all, sugar is not a staple food. Now, cane sugar, of course, is a tropical or subtropical, at least,
crop. It was originally domesticated in New Guinea, in the Pacific Ocean.
In certain parts of the New World, and when I say New World, I simply mean the Western Hemisphere,
notably Brazil and the islands of the Caribbean, conditions were ideal for the production of sugar.
Other crops, though, eventually would figure in the system of New World plantation slavery as well,
although none would rival sugar in importance over the long haul. And some of those crops, as you know,
would be coffee, tobacco, or cotton. Again, it's worth observing that of those, cotton has the most utility.
You can wear it. The others are really luxuries. Some might call them drugs. Tobacco, certainly.
Coffee, probably. Sugar, perhaps. So it was traffic in these things, not basic foodstuffs or that ilk.
That was the basis of the system. That in itself, I find rather sobering.
Now, there was surely money to be made. There was surely profit to be generated from New World sugar and
the other commodities which I mentioned. But to stay with sugar for a moment, the production and
extraction, refinement of sugar is a labor-intensive process. Where would this labor come from?
It is hardly surprising that the Western European colonizers of the New World, Spain, Portugal,
England, France, Holland, that they would eventually turn to slavery as the labor solution.
After all, slavery, including chattel slavery, the most extreme form, and by chattel slavery,
chattel is a legal term basically. I mean that people are legally defined as property and chattel
slavery did indeed become the particular strain that we're talking about dominant in the New World.
Of course, slavery and chattel slavery had a long history in the Old World.
Most recently, at the period we're talking about, along the shores of the Mediterranean.
In that long history, many groups had been enslaved for many reasons and in many ways.
Some of them, but by no means most, were Africans. In our look at the
kingdoms of the savannah in West Africa, the Sudanic belt in West Africa, for instance,
we noted the long history of commerce between those places and across the Sahara Desert and into the
Mediterranean world. We emphasized things like gold and salt, although it is certainly true that in some
cases humans, defined as slaves, were part of that process. But again, they were by no means the core of
the slave labor forces in Southern Europe in the late Middle Ages, beginnings of the modern era,
and indeed the slave systems as a whole in Southern Europe were not central to the European economy
in anything like the way they became central to the plantation economies in the New World.
It's revealing, perhaps, when we consider that long history of slavery comparatively,
to consider where the word comes from, into English or in variations into French and so forth.
Its root actually comes from the term Slav, and it is a reference to the Slavic peoples of Eastern Europe,
who had been sold as slaves in the slave markets, particularly which were located on the Black Sea.
But again, let's return to our question here, whether slave or free, who is going to constitute
the workforce on these plantations, beginning with sugar plantations, and mostly on sugar plantations,
in the New World? Now, in our own time, or in more recent American history, perhaps, it has seemed to
become almost natural. It's for many people to assume that plantation laborers were, well, of course,
enslaved Black Africans. But that was not necessarily inevitable. Think again of the Slavs,
imparting the very terminology that we're talking about. The ancient Greeks seemed to be equally happy to
enslave either dark-skinned persons from the areas of inner Africa they called Ethiopia, or light-skinned
Scythians from North Europe. It is not inevitable that Africans from West and West Central Africa
would come to fill the niche they did in the New World economy. Let us consider the possibilities then,
as we do so, a number of factors are relevant. That's highlight one, and that is disease.
We know a lot more about disease than we used to do. That is, it's been one of the real
growth industries of the historical profession, I think, in the last three decades or so. I'm
certainly no authority on it, but I certainly, like so many other historians, have found that it opens up
new issues, new ways of looking at things that can be very stimulating indeed. Now, vulnerability to disease
is heightened by a population's lack of previous exposure to the disease or to the vectors that carry
that disease. Exposure of some sort generates, over time, resistance. In a sense, again, without being an
epidemiologist here, the logic, it seems to me, is essentially similar to an individual's use of a
vaccine. In other words, you're exposed to a bit of what you hope to generally avoid or avoid the real
thing when it comes. So, a population's lack of exposure to turn it over to a particular kind of disease
can increase susceptibility to that disease. So, distance between the population and the disease
and the carriers of it may be a factor we want to keep in mind here. And I suggest we keep kind of two
axes when I talk about the distance between a given population and the, if you like, the home area or
the original home of a particular disease. Two axes. One would be longitudinal. If you're looking at the
map, in other words, sort of horizontal, across. For instance, the divide between the old world and
the new, the Atlantic Ocean. The other axis would be, on the map, vertical. It would be,
it would be latitudinal. And in this case, I have in mind, in particular, the, the distance and the
contrast between tropical zones and, and temperate ones on the, on the Earth's surface.
Now, it's back to our, our question then about who will constitute this workforce
on the plantations of, of the new world. Well, what about Native Americans? What about Indians,
American Indians? After all, they are in situ. They're already there.
Rather quickly, that possibility came to be all but eliminated.
And disease was the key. It's, I think, proper to use a term like population catastrophe to refer
to what happened demographically to American Indian, Native American populations in the centuries,
especially the first century, after Columbus's voyage. The, the numbers are, are staggering,
in some cases, of the, the deaths resulting from old world diseases, like smallpox or, or, or measles.
Just to give you some, uh, examples here. This is drawn from, from Edward Reynolds books, but
he uses, uh, figures of 90 to 95 percent reduction in the population of the new world.
Uh, in, in, in total in the Americas, he offers an estimate of a hundred million dropping to something
like 10 million, uh, again, in essentially a little more than the century after Columbus.
In Mexico, something like 20 million in 1519, a little over 1 million in 1608.
In Hispaniola, the island, which, uh, of course, is the place that Columbus first
touched, uh, ground in the, in the new world, and now, uh, divided between Haiti and the Dominican Republic.
Uh, the estimate was 60,000 in 1508, 30,000 in 1554, and 500 in 1570.
So, in a lot of respects, they simply are physically not available as, uh, a workforce on the scale that
we're talking about. Even if they had been, remember that Native American populations would have been,
um, in a sense, on their home ground. And that, in turn, would have made, it stands to reason,
escape, which I would emphasize is probably the oldest and the most common form of resistance to
slavery. It's not the most dramatic, you know, the slave rebellion is the most dramatic, but
it would have made escape, uh, easier. And in fact, it's worth noting, again, in, in a comparative
study of slavery, that it seems to be very common, and maybe even almost universal, that slavery,
particularly the more extreme forms like chattel slavery, almost always involve the transplantation
of the enslaved persons, the enslaved population. In other words, the movement of Slavs to the
Mediterranean, or, or what have you. And it may, well, indeed, be to, of course, increase the, or maximize
the possibilities of control. We are talking, after all, about the ultimate form of, of controlled
labor. And transplanting people to the alien, the new environment seems to increase that.
Okay. Well, what about Europeans themselves? Um, working class Europeans, of course, uh, that we're
talking about. What about them as the labor force in, in the new world? Now, in this case, the latitudinal,
or if you like, the vertical shift, uh, makes a considerable, uh, difference here. In other
words, the toll was enormous, uh, even for those who went as, you know, the bosses, as, as the planters,
or the, uh, uh, ship's captains, or what have you, of the movement from the temperate zones of Europe
into tropical places like the Caribbean or, uh, uh, or, or Brazil, let alone, uh, going to Africa.
Um, the, this took some toll. In, in the Caribbean, they use the term seasoning, that a European who
came there needed a time of, of kind of light, uh, uh, you know, uh, uh, workload and so forth,
in order to, to get used to this tropical climate. And of course, the different diseases there
could have a considerable impact and, and take a toll on, on, on those Europeans. Europeans could
also make legal and religious claims against enslavement. And indentured servitude, a different
form, was of course only a, a temporary form of, uh, of control. Well, what indeed then about, about
Africans? Now, Africa, of course, is part of the old world, not part of the new. Um, and remember,
we've mentioned it several times already in this course, that, for instance, the Sahara, which,
which seems like such a barrier, uh, in modern times, even though it came to be traversed frequently,
once, uh, the, the camel was, uh, domesticated, uh, in particular. But remember, it's a very young desert.
So, if we're talking about the very long run of human history in the old world, there was, in fact,
not that barrier there. And, uh, there was, therefore, uh, a considerable amount of exposure,
both over the long run and on that trans-Saharan, uh, traffic to, uh, diseases, for instance,
coming from Europe to Africa or, or vice versa. In other words, more resistance to the kinds of things
that wiped out so many, uh, uh, Native Americans.
Of course, West and Central Africans, at least, were moving, if we take our other axis, from one
tropical zone to another. So, they don't suffer the, the shock in the longitudinal axis, excuse me,
the latitudinal axis, the, the vertical axis that the Europeans did. Now, this is not to say that,
you know, Africans didn't die in substantial numbers on the plantations of the New World. They did.
But, uh, again, compared to the, the kinds of, uh, impact that we got on the other two possibilities
we raised, um, it, it was, it was less. Now, again, I, I would simply point out that the, the kind of
shock of resettlement here of, um, of West and Central Africans into a New World setting, uh, at least in the
short run, not in the long run, you know, the history of the Underground Railroad and, and so forth,
shows that escape eventually, of course, becomes a, a widespread form of resistance. But at least in the,
in the short term, um, it makes escape less likely. Now, all of these options were, in fact, tried.
In fact, some Europeans were actually enslaved and taken to the New World. There were certainly experiments
with, uh, uh, enslaving Native Americans. Um, and indentured servitude was not always applied to,
to Europeans. In fact, the very first, um, shipload of, of Africans brought to Virginia,
legally speaking, were indentured servants, not slaves. So, there were these various, it, it took some time
for this, this system to, to crystallize, if you like. But gradually, inexorably, the labor answer,
in a sense, came to be enslaved Africans. And the consequences of this, over centuries, were colossal.
So, but, aren't we begging a question here? Weren't Europeans culturally predisposed to
enslave Africans? Well, I don't like to straddle fences, but I'm going to say yes and no.
As for skin color, there were definitely negative associations in, um, pre- and contemporary, uh,
European cultures with, with darkness and with blackness. Associations with, with evil, with uncleanliness.
Uh, the, the old phrase of, um, to, is it possible to wash an Ethiopian white? It's a little bit like, uh,
can you change the leopard spots? And so forth. But again, obviously, the implication of that
is an equivalence between darkness and uncleanliness. Uh, you know, references to black magic,
uh, and, and so forth. There are some counter-indications, you know, positive associations
with black, um, judges' robes, or, or the, the gowns that graduates use, uh, and so forth. And some
negative with, with white, um, association with sickliness, or, or weakness, or, or death. Um,
on balance, I would have to say there is, uh, a tilt towards the negative imageries, for sure.
Uh, though certainly nothing like what it would become. Now, if it was culturally more acceptable
to, to enslave non-Christians, and again, that, that religious difference in, in the early days was
often what came to the fore before what we've come to call racial differences. If it was more
culturally acceptable to enslave non-Christians, the Africans involved certainly qualified. But so
did Native Americans. So again, I return to the, the notion that it wasn't particularly
inevitable, was not predetermined that it would be Africans from West and Central Africa, Black Africans,
who would become the enslaved workforce of the New World. In terms of this question between cultural
predisposition and the materialist forces, uh, that I, I have outlined in terms of economics and, and
disease, if you like, I, I would have to conclude that, to me, is a classic chicken and egg situation.
Africans were somewhat more likely to be thought inferior, but as they were actually enslaved,
and became identified over time with slavery, belief in their inferiority deepened.
And slavery and racism were mutually reinforcing. So West and West Central Africa came to play a crucial
part in the Atlantic system, the provider of enslaved labor upon which the wealth of the system depended.
Again, to go back to sort of middle school, um, social studies where you may have read of the,
the old triangular system of, um, you know, cheap manufacturers going from Europe,
uh, to, to Africa, uh, enslaved persons going from Africa to the New World, sugar and coffee and so forth,
coming back to complete the triangle to Europe. It's an oversimplification, there was a whole lot of
coming and going in a whole lot of different directions, but at least it does get us to the notion of an
interconnected, uh, interlocking, mutually dependent, uh, kind of, of system.
Millions, just how many millions we, we answer in the millions of Africans, we answer, uh, in the next
lecture endured the, the horror beyond horror, the middle passage.
It's almost incomprehensible to, to think of the, uh, chaining and leading of several hundred
Africans into the holds of these stinking, creaking ships, where they would spend several weeks in
either a reclining or semi-reclining position,
awash with seawater, urine, vomit, feces,
brought up perhaps once a day if, if fortunate for air and, and feeding,
and re-secured the middle passage.
This was the largest forced migration in modern history.
Now, the making of the, the modern new world, uh, lies obviously outside our scope, uh, in this,
this course. But consider this, before 1800, it changes, uh, after, but before 1800,
something on the order of four out of every five persons who crossed the Atlantic and settled in the
Americas were Africans. Something like four out of five who crossed the Atlantic and settled in the
Americas came from Africa. Whatever the, the new world became, Africans were obviously critical
in the building of it. And in the years since, they have influenced countless aspects of culture
in every part of that new world. Thank you.
