Politics was the way in which Americans most effectively grappled with the Enlightenment.
But outside the sphere of politics, it has to be said that theology remained the principal
focus of American intellectual energy right up until the Civil War. Until the 1820s, chemistry,
physics, and the other sciences had only the most meager profiles in American colleges,
and they looked less like professionalized disciplines and more like the hobbies of eccentric
individuals. Benjamin Silliman, who was an undergraduate at Yale in the 1790s, remembered
that chemistry was then hardly known in the institution, even by name. There were a few
articles of natural history in the miscellaneous museum, but they had little or no reference
to science. Collegiate professors of science were, as often as not, clergymen or theological
students or physicians who were enticed out of their parishes and practices to plug up
the scientific holes in the teaching programs at the colleges. When the first conference
of New England collegiate faculties was organized in New Haven in the fall of 1818, with representatives
from Harvard, Yale, Bowdoin, Middlebury, Union College, and the University of Vermont, the principal
topic was not science, but the general interest of letters. Even where the sciences developed
beachheads of their own, a good deal of the scientific work was done mainly in the interest
of supporting the moral hermeneutics of analogy, and showing how order in the physical universe
provided the epistemological ground for assuming the existence of moral order in the cosmos as
well. But this did not mean that the colleges were merely hothouses for theological instruction.
That was certainly not what Andrew Preston Peabody found when he entered Harvard as a freshman
in 1828. Peabody wrote,
When I entered college, the entire Cambridge Common, then an unenclosed plane, was plately
covered on commencement day and on the nights preceding and following it with drinking stands,
dancing booths, montabank shows, and gambling tables. And I have never since heard such a horrid
din, tumult, and jargon of oath, shout, scream, fiddle, quarreling, and drunkenness as on those
two nights. Theology, in fact, had never been a significant intellectual component of the
colonial colleges, at least not as an independent field of study. There was always a certain measure
of religious instruction on offer, and of the 109 colleges dotting the American landscape by 1848,
all but a dozen of them were church-related, and were staffed predominantly by clergymen of the
denominations they were related to. But the collegiate curriculums were organized around the classics,
around moral philosophy, and around a smattering of related topics.
They were intended to give shape and formation to a class of gentlemen professionals, without really
training them to any specific profession. Those who were inclined to practice law went thereafter and
read law in the offices of a practicing attorney, in much the way an apprentice printer went to work in the
shop of an established one. Those who aimed for the ministry, likewise, were fitted for ordination and the
pastorate by a year or so assisting a regular pastor in his work and reading theology from a list the
pastor provided and supervised, in the way we saw among the new divinity parsons of western Massachusetts
in lecture 11. However, the ground under the fitting and training model began to shift even before the
American Revolution. And the first place it shifted was in medicine. The most immediate impact
Enlightenment science had on American intellectual life was in botany. And then, after that, medicine and
anatomy. And from the 1730s onwards, more and more aspiring American physicians began seeking
specialized graduate education in hospitals in London, in the new medical schools of Padua and Leiden,
and above all for English speakers, the University of Edinburgh. Of the 10 medical degrees awarded at
Edinburgh in 1765, half of them went to Americans. In 1766, Americans had had enough of traveling abroad
for medical education, and a medical college was established in Philadelphia. And within three years,
it had 40 students. By the 1840s, there were 34 medical schools in the United States, four of them in
Philadelphia, and four of them as far west as Missouri. Law followed this pattern next, and mainly for two
reasons. First, the overthrow of British rule and the abolition of social hierarchy raised the provocative
possibility of overturning Blackstone and the entire body of English common law and starting all over.
Second, the long-term result was the incorporation and adaptation of Blackstone and English common law into
an American framework, rather than their replacement by an entirely new system of American statute law. But hammering out that
adaptation of Blackstone required more time and thought than the ordinary law practice and law office would
permit, and it would have to have been matched by greater preparation for the practice of law than an
apprentice could get in a law office. By the same token, the blessing given by Hamilton and the Federalists to
American manufacturing and finance forced the attention of American law away from its traditional focus on the
enforcement of public morality to the enforcement of commercial contract. And the mastering of the
intricacies of contract required much more preparation than just reading law in an office could afford.
So as early as 1791, independent courses of law lectures were being offered in Philadelphia by James
Wilson, aimed at trying to work out the parameters of a new American law, an American law that would devote
itself to contract and to the Americanization of Blackstone and common law. And over the next 40 years,
a dozen graduate level law schools were opened in the United States to perform this. Most of them as branches of
already existing colleges, like the Dane College of Law at Harvard. By contrast with medicine and law, the
study of theology in America experienced no equivalent revolution within the subject itself. But the
emergence of professional graduate schools for training lawyers and doctors did create a substantial sense of
status anxiety for the clergy, so long at least as their education seemed stuck in the amateurish mode of
apprenticeship. So it was as much with a view to proving that theology required as much effort and deserved as
much respect for that effort as it was any other reason that colleges began setting up specialized theology
lectureships, like the Hollis Chair of Divinity at Harvard. And the most bookish of the pastors began erecting
freestanding theological seminaries, beginning with the Congregationalist Seminary at Andover, Massachusetts in 1808.
From that point, the establishment of graduate theological schools dwarfed both the growth of medical and of legal schools.
Between 1812 and 1836, 30 theological seminaries were founded in the United States, with the
greatest rush occurring in the decade between 1816 and 1826. Harvard's Unitarians organized a separate
divinity school in 1816. Trinitarian Congregationalists founded Banger Theological Seminary, a divinity
community school at Yale in 1822, and even a dissident seminary at East Windsor, Connecticut in 1834,
after the most unreconciled Edwardsians in New England decided that Banger and Yale and Andover had all gone soft.
Episcopalians founded General Theological Seminary in New York City in 1817 and Virginia Theological
Seminary in Alexandria, Virginia in 1822. And this only itemizes the most visible among the theological
seminaries. None of them, however, towered more prominently above the pack than the Presbyterian
seminary organized at Princeton in 1812, which not only had the largest student body by 1846,
it had 146 students, but it had a larger student body than the next two closest seminaries combined.
And no theologians in the American 19th century enjoyed greater intellectual prestige than
Princeton's two most famous teachers, Archibald Alexander and Charles Hodge.
Princeton Theological Seminary was not founded as part of Princeton College, despite being located in the
same New Jersey town, sponsored by the same Presbyterian church and sitting on adjacent property.
Oh no, quite the other way. Princeton Seminary was founded as a vote of no confidence in the theological
soundness of the college. There had not been much question about that soundness, so long as the
presidency of the college had passed through hands like that of Aaron Burr, the senior Burr, not the dualist who killed
Hamilton, Jonathan Edwards, and John Witherspoon. But when Witherspoon died, the presidency of the
college passed into the hands of Witherspoon's son-in-law, Samuel Stanhope Smith. And Smith's
intellectual loyalties lay more with the Philadelphia Enlightenment than with Presbyterian
Orthodoxy. Smith infuriated the influential pastor of Philadelphia's second Presbyterian church,
Ashbell Green, by shelling out $3,000 in 1805 to acquire a cabinet of scientific curiosities. While at the
same time, the proportion of Princeton graduates entering the Presbyterian ministry was falling to just
nine percent. In 1809, Green and the Presbytery of Philadelphia petitioned the Presbyterian General
Assembly to establish a theological school separate from the college. A board of directors for the
seminary was elected in 1812, and on August 12th of that year, Archibald Alexander was inaugurated as its
first professor of didactic and polemic theology. He was joined in 1813 by Samuel
Miller, who was elected professor of ecclesiastical history and church government, and by Charles
Hodge, who joined the faculty in 1822 as professor of Oriental and Biblical literature, without
significantly having ever served as a parish pastor. Hodge, who as a teenager had witnessed
Alexander's inaugural in 1812 from the balcony of the Presbyterian church in Princeton, graduated
from Princeton Seminary in one of its earliest classes, and he came to regard Archibald Alexander
Hodge as a sort of second father. Hodge, in turn, would hand over his own professorship to his literal
son, Archibald Alexander Hodge, in 1877, after presiding for 55 years as a teacher there. Over those three
intellectual generations, Archibald Alexander, Charles Hodge, and A. A. Hodge, over those three generations, Charles
Hodge was proud to declare that not one new idea had ever been introduced into the seminary. And such
was the hold of the Alexander Hodge example that Princeton Seminary's curriculum, in fact, remained
virtually unchanged for yet another generation through the professorship of Benjamin Breckinridge
Warfield, from 1887 to 1916. It seemed to me, wrote one of Warfield's pupils after Warfield's funeral in 1921,
that the old Princeton, a great institution it was, died when Dr. Warfield was carried out. Then and not until then.
The critical figure in the founding of this dynasty was Archibald Alexander. Born in 1772, Alexander was
raised on the Virginia frontier, and happenstancely attended what would later become Washington and Lee
University. Happenstance or not, he was a voracious reader and a natural intellectual talent, and he was
licensed to preach by the Presbyterians in 1791. He vaulted from there to a professorship at Hampton
Sydney College, then to its presidency in 1802, and in 1806, he became the pastor of the high-profile
Third Presbyterian, or Old Pine Street Presbyterian Church in Philadelphia. When he was named the first
professor at Princeton Theological Seminary, Archibald Alexander was all of 39 years old.
What was even more important was the middle ground Alexander occupied between the radical
Edwardsian revivalists on the one hand, and the reasonableness of the Enlightenment on the other.
A middle ground that Alexander found in wedding the Scottish philosophy to evangelical earnestness.
Alexander, who described mental science as my favorite study, Alexander had been heavily
schooled in John Witherspoon and Witherspoon's effort to turn the evidence of common sense into a
refutation of skepticism. Alexander took as his starting point Witherspoon's and the Scots assumption
that sensation immediately and accurately conveys to the consciousness information concerning the outward
external world. And that the consciousness not only receives this information, but simultaneously judges
whether or not it is reliable. On that basis, Alexander, like the other moral philosophers,
concluded that there are some basic truths which no one can avoid knowing. Because the knowing process itself,
by presenting information accurately, and by involving a judgment that the information is reliable,
puts us under an inescapable necessity of acknowledging whether we like it or not. Among the truths which our minds
automatically acknowledged were things that we have seen earlier in Lecture 12 and which were the staples of
19th century collegiate moral philosophy. First among those things was continuity or analogy. In other words, the
qualities of a given substance or being simply do not change unless something steps in to interfere. It is self-evident that what is
human today will not become reptilian tomorrow. Now this was important for Alexander and all the other
common sense moralists whom we saw in Lecture 12 because in response to Hume, this asserted that knowledge was not
arbitrary. Things were not one thing one moment and another thing another moment and with nothing to give them
continuity in between but the way our minds connect them. Those who made the universe arbitrary, even those
like Jonathan Edwards who did so for the pious purpose of frightening sinners into repentance, were asking for
skepticism, not for piety. Second factor in the creation of Alexander's intellectual scheme involved morality.
Whatever disagreements people had about what was good and what was evil, no one ever disagreed that
minds automatically understand that there's a difference between the two. Alexander could find no other
way to account for the universal perception of right and wrong than by attributing it to a moral sense within
the consciousness. A moral sense which provided in addition to the conscious judgment that things were real, the
additional judgment that a moral relationship existed between those things. Now this ran the risk of basing morality
or moral perceptions entirely upon what sounded like a natural psychological function rather than on the revelation of God
God himself. But Alexander was willing to risk the appearance of naturalism because then the existence of a
moral sense could be taken as evidence of an orderly design in human consciousness. And if there was such a design, then there must
there must also be a designer. And beyond that, the designer had himself to be a moral being.
Because what else except a moral being could design moral facts?
This argument for the existence of God, Alexander lectured to his seminarians, is solid and independent of all other arguments.
He believed God had left an indelible proof of his authority in the mind of every man.
The next factor in the creation of Alexander's scheme of things was the priority of the intellect. And here once again we
come back to that old struggle, going all the way back to the Puritans as we saw in lecture two, between will and intellect, volition and
perception and intellect. Unlike Edwards, Alexander was no voluntarist. Alexander did not believe that the will had much or anything to do with perception.
Because a self-evident truth had to be perceived regardless of the will. And if the will could interfere in the self-evidence of a truth, then it wouldn't be self-evident.
So while he satisfied the requirements of piety with proofs of the existence of God, Alexander was also intent on making sure that those proofs were rational,
and that the knowing process operated on the basis of evidence.
Truth and reason are so intimately connected that they can never, with propriety, be separated, said Alexander.
And if that meant that even the Bible had to be weighed in the balances of reason before being believed,
well, that was a test Alexander was willing to apply.
No doctrine can be a proper object of our faith, which it is not more reasonable to receive than to reject.
If a book claiming to be a divine revelation is found to contain doctrines which can in no way be reconciled to right reason,
it is a sure evidence that those claims have no solid foundation.
But it was on just these grounds that Alexander and Hodge possessed and taught the most exacting faith in the literal truth of the Bible.
And since facts are what the consciousness immediately submits to as truth,
it became Alexander's, and especially Charles Hodge's labor,
to prove that the Bible does indeed contain facts and not errors.
And that God guaranteed this through a process of inspiration,
by which he divinely safeguarded the writers of the Bible from recording any outright errors in those specific writings.
It was Hodge who had far more training in languages and exegesis than Alexander.
I mean, Hodge had even studied in Germany from 1826 to 1828 to acquire those skills.
It was Hodge more than Alexander who gave the idea of biblical inspiration its most sophisticated shape.
So much so that Hodge frequently looked upon himself as little more than an extension of Alexander's intellectual agenda.
Born in 1797 in Philadelphia and a graduate of both Princeton College and the seminary,
Hodge embraced all the basic Scottish premises.
That sense data are directly presented to the mind,
that the mind directly perceives them and intuitively judges them to be facts,
and that when data of a moral kind are presented,
the mind is assisted by the moral sense to render an equally intuitive judgment about what is good and what is evil.
Truths like the existence of God, for instance, are understood by all men everywhere,
simply because the mind is so constituted that it cannot help perceiving them as facts and judging them to be real.
The chief labor of the mind, therefore, is to organize these facts by induction until they assumed an appropriate pattern all their own.
A pattern which in Hodge's hands would, wouldn't you know it,
come out looking very suspiciously like Orthodox Presbyterian theology.
The principal source of these facts, according to Hodge, was the Bible.
And nothing in this process of intuiting moral and religious facts would amount to anything unless the Bible did indeed contain facts.
To sustain that, Hodge published in 1857 a major article on inspiration that carefully defined the composition of the Bible as a living partnership between God and the Bible's human writers.
The process, Hodge argued, began with God's initiative, but it took the form of an influence on certain select men,
which produced what Hodge called a communication of God's mind and will.
As a communication from God, it had to be without error.
Otherwise, God has violated the law of continuity or analogy and become an author of falsehoods.
This influence, likewise, was not merely a kind of emotional or prophetic ecstasy.
The process of inspiration included the very words the human authors chose to write down.
Yet, Hodge was willing to allow that this influence that God exerted on the people who wrote the Bible
was only that, an influence, not an act of stenographic dictation.
The process of inspiration was indirect.
It was a kind of superintendence that prevented error.
But it still resulted in the recording of facts.
Of course, it was possible to ask whether if God influenced the process so much that what was written in the Bible was always what he wanted,
that the process was really free or less than mechanical.
But for Hodge, and earlier for Alexander and the other moral philosophers,
the common sense philosophy had already established the self-evidence of human freedom,
even though Hodge was a Calvinist's Calvinist and attributed absolute sovereignty to God.
If self-evident freedom and divine sovereignty were alike recognized and accepted by the mind as facts,
there was no reason why divine influence or control and human creativity should be regarded as a conflict in the process of inspiring the Bible.
Both were alike facts. Both had simply to be accepted as such.
Hodge's confidence that minds are made not to construct facts but to recognize them,
and only then sort them into their own patterns by the most rigorous and logical induction,
set Hodge miles and miles apart from the Romantics.
Even as a man of faith, Hodge was very much a man of the Enlightenment.
And he and Alexander and the Princeton tradition they stood for were the best examples in American thinking
of the reconciliation of Enlightenment rationalism with traditional Protestant Orthodoxy.
Born into a loyally Federalist family, Hodge was a Whig who detested Democratic Romanticism in general,
and the cult of Andrew Jackson in particular.
This kind of rational believing gave Hodge scant patience with Ralph Waldo Emerson,
and only slightly more patience with fellow Calvinists who broke ranks to embrace Romanticism.
When Edwards Amasa Park, the last of the great New England Edwardsians and professor of theology at Andover,
when Park trying to argue for the validity of a theology of the feelings alongside the theology of the intellect in 1850,
Hodge accused him of appealing to the feelings as a way of getting around inconvenient facts that reason would otherwise have pressed on him.
In this way, Hodge wrote, it is obvious that any unpalatable doctrine may be got rid of,
but no less obviously at the expense of the Word of God.
But what he really wanted to dispute was Kant's suggestion that there were two ways of knowing.
The knowledge of the phenomenal, which is indirect, and the knowledge of the noumenal, which is direct and intuitive.
No, insisted Hodge.
The one rational soul apprehends, feels, and determines.
You cannot eliminate the intellectual element and leave the feeling.
Nor, for that matter, can you divide them.
There can be no right feeling but what is due to the apprehension of truth.
Truth is objectively presented in the world, and thus the feelings are produced as adjuncts of spiritual cognition.
Adjuncts to the reason, not rulers over it or substitutes for it.
Although a man of faith, Charles Hodge was also very much a man of the Enlightenment.
And yet it has to be said that Hodge was not a dry-as-dust rational theologian.
He was a man of deep and intense personal piety.
He was crippled for most of his adulthood by rheumatoid arthritis.
And he was sympathetic to human suffering.
And quick, in his seminary classroom, as one student recalled,
with tearful, wide-open eyes to press home a quick-risen inference of the love of God.
Together with Alexander, Hodge's guiding star was the reconciliation of faith and reason.
With Scottish moral philosophy as the glue holding them together.
And if the Romantics had been the only threat that they needed to beat off,
Alexander and Hodge could probably have done so successfully.
It was not the excesses of faith, either of the Romantic or the Edwardsian sort,
which finally undid the Princeton theology.
But a new kind of subversion, based on the very facts of nature
which Charles Hodge believed the mind intuited as self-evident.
.
