Welcome. It's still a bit breathtaking to think back to the years of the late 1980s
and early 1990s. If the winds of change were sweeping across Africa in the early 1960s
or even earlier in the 1950s, in the late 80s and early 90s, they seemed to affect the
whole globe. To Americans raised on the Cold War, the collapse of the Soviet Union and the
satellite regimes of East Europe, symbolized perhaps above all by the literal collapse
of the Berlin Wall, was almost unbelievable and certainly unpredicted. It's true it was
not predicted. In virtually any quarter, liberals thought that, for better or worse, the Soviet
Union was here to stay and you'd better learn to coexist with it, else we'll blow up the
whole world. Conservatives considered it the evil empire, constantly expanding its strength
and perhaps installing new bases in the new world, in the Western Hemisphere like Nicaragua.
It's actually only on the far intellectual right, people like Milton Friedman, who predicted
that the Soviet experiment would collapse of its own weight. It's food for thought. In any
case, the other parts of the world involved in this rising tide of democracy and, call it what
it was, freedom, certainly included Latin America and, not least, our own focus, Sub-Saharan
Africa. Now, the international context of the late 80s and 90s is important for our African
nation. In two main ways. First, through the inspirational power of example. If they can do it, people ask,
why can't we? Just as India, in the late 40s, becoming independent in 1947-48, served as a model of
inspiration for the aspirations for independence in Africa, we see something similar in the dynamic at
this point. And secondly, the international context was important in the more mundane form of pressure
from international donors, upon which many African regimes had become dependent. Okay, let's begin,
though, with the more exciting stuff, the internal pressures generated by African citizens themselves
against their authoritarian rulers. I will rely substantially here on the masterful synthesis
of the whole process in a book called Democratic Experiments in Africa by Michael Bratton and Nick Vandewall.
Michael Bratton grew up in southern Rhodesia, which became Rhodesia. He left that country rather than
be drafted to be a soldier in Ian Smith's army and began his research at the same time I was, next door in
Zambia. Since then, he's conducted ongoing political science research in many countries in Africa. I don't know
anybody with a better grip, a better understanding, a more encyclopedic knowledge, and I'm going to depend
on him. Okay, they develop in this book a prototypical succession of steps seen in country after country
between about 1989 and 1994. And I'd like to summarize them for you.
The preconditions are the economic crisis, or the precondition is the economic crisis surveyed in our
last lecture, as well as the generalized deepening crisis of legitimacy facing African rulers as the 1980s
progressed. People had simply lost faith that their leaders could deliver anymore, that they could solve
their problems, or offer them a better life, or even worse, that they were very much trying.
They are living high on the hog, while we suffer.
The second step, then, follows from the first. Widespread popular protests broke out, again in country
after country, some of the very first in the West African country of Benin, formerly known as Dahomei.
Protests break out, mainly over economic grievances, above all the erosion of purchasing power.
Another way, I suppose, of looking at the terms of trade. What do I have to pay to get a loaf of bread?
Students shut down universities over bursaries, which left them literally hungry. Trade unions,
civil servants, struck over pay holdups and freezes. Market women demonstrated over imposed price freezes.
Almost entirely, the protests were urban rather than rural in base. That probably shouldn't surprise us.
Cities, after all, since the wave of strikes that we looked at a few lectures back in the 1930s and 40s,
which very much preconditioned the rise of nationalism, cities had been where the action was.
Okay, the third step, then, is that the authoritarian rulers responded in the usual fashion,
which I would characterize as crack down and or buy off. That is, use a lot of stick, but also some carrot.
But the critical difference this time around was that the constricted economy limited the resources with
which the authoritarian rulers could do either of these things, either crack down or especially buy off.
The protests, therefore, did not abate. Instead, and here's their fourth step,
they took on an increasingly politicized and aggressive character. People, again, often inspired by the sense of
possibility which the international context offered, began to fashion genuine visions of alternatives.
Maybe it doesn't have to be this way. At a minimum, and most importantly, in many people's minds,
this called for an end to political monopolies, whether those took the form of the one-party states,
or they took the form of the military governments usually created by military coups.
The next step in the developing dialectic was political liberalization by the rulers.
Okay, we'll end the government monopoly of all the media.
We'll allow the discussion of a return, just talk about it at least, of a return to multi-party competition.
We'll control, we can control still, and limit the process.
We can palliate the dissension. Again, we can let the steam off a bit.
It rarely seems to work that way, as we've seen before.
When the British and French reformed their empires, soon enough they lost them.
When the Soviet Union began its process of reform, it was the beginning of the end.
The opposition took due advantage of the openings, often by organizing the ubiquitous national conference.
And you see a form of this happening again in country after country.
It's usually a gathering of all manner of representatives from what a lot of people call civil society.
That is from organizations, you know, women's organizations, cooperatives, the Boy Scouts, certainly churches, trade unions, and so on.
And they're usually presided over by figures with a sort of an above-it-all kind of status, sort of unassailable status.
Quite often religious figures, a bishop, for instance, whom by virtue of their own virtue and by virtue of their position is less likely to wind up being arrested, for instance.
So, these conferences actually drafted, in many cases, alternative constitutions.
Sometimes they even declared themselves to be sovereign.
Again, like some of the things that took place in the 1950s, these were enormously exciting gatherings, assemblies of people to their participants.
I think of a scholar like Georges Nzongola Ntalaja, based at Howard University, but originally from the Congo, and the author of a number of works on Congolese history.
And his own excitement in taking part in the early 1990s at a national convention in, where else?
Mobutu's Zaire at that time.
And even though the subsequent history is certainly not turned in terribly positive directions,
Nzongola certainly will make the case that this was a permanent contribution to what must eventually come in his home country.
He'll argue, for instance, that merely the testimony that they gathered day after day after day of how the Mobutu regime actually worked will, in the long run, prove valuable.
Okay, at this point, we should step back and again return to the international context.
With the collapse of the Soviet Union came, of course, the effective end of the Cold War.
And we've seen in previous lectures just how important the Cold War context could be in a place like the Belgian condo, in a place like Angola, excuse me.
African leaders, with the disappearance of this Cold War context, could no longer simply proclaim their Marxism-Leninism, for instance,
and expect aid from the Soviet Union, as Augustine Neto and the MPLA government in Angola, for instance, could.
They could no longer proclaim their adherence to capitalism and anti-communism,
as Mobutu in Zaire did, or as Jonas Savimbi, the would-be president, the rebel leader in Unita, the Unita movement in Angola did.
They couldn't simply proclaim their anti-communism and automatically expect aid from the West.
So this definitely reduces the options available to Africa's leaders.
With the collapse of the Soviet bloc, assistance from the West became essentially the only game in town.
We go from what they would have called a bipolar world to essentially a monopolar world.
There's one superpower.
The United States very much allied with the economic union, the European Union, in Europe, obviously.
And essentially, that's where one has to turn.
In this respect, the structural adjustment programs, the SAPs, of the institutions like the International Monetary Fund and the World Bank,
and which we looked at at the close of the last lecture,
in this new context, the SAP option, with it being or becoming essentially the only game in town, looms that much larger.
Now, on the surface, it's slightly hard to believe that the policymakers of the IMF and the World Bank,
on one hand, and struggling urban Africans, on the other, would share an agenda.
But in some respects, they did.
The donors were interested in, were concerned, mainly about the sheer inefficiency in basic economic performance measurement.
The sheer inefficiency of corrupt and closed regimes.
The people, on the other hand, if I can say that, said, damn right.
Open them up.
We agree.
These closed and corrupt regimes can no longer deliver.
Let's get something in their place.
So, various degrees of political conditionality were increasingly a part of the SAP packages, the structural adjustment programs.
In other words, it isn't simply lower the tariff barriers or balance your budget or devalue your currency.
Now, the lenders of last resort are insisting on multi-party elections.
They're insisting on removing the curbs on media and allowing publication of independent newspapers,
in some cases even broadcasting, being opened up as well.
So, these features, the end of the Cold War, the political accountability criteria,
beginning to be added to the structural adjustment programs,
are aspects of this international context,
which certainly made a difference in the democratization movements that we are discussing.
That said, Bratton and Van der Waal conclude, and I agree,
that these international pressures, though important, were secondary to the domestic one.
Secondary to the ones generated from the populations themselves.
In any case, all over Africa, and I do mean all over Africa,
one-party and military regimes eventually conceded the inevitability of multi-party elections,
which were duly held.
In a lot of respects, that moment, coming in the early 90s in most cases,
was the moment of the high tide, the peak tide of these democratization movements.
After them, things become less clear.
However, the water muddies again.
We shouldn't expect a fairy tale, and we don't get one.
Now, yet again, let me illustrate from my first love, and that is Zambia.
By the late 1980s, Zambia was, to be blunt, a mess,
an economic basket case.
We might say that it was on life support, except there was very little support
coming through the tubes, the IV.
People had lost their patience with Kenneth Callender's regime.
A nice man, maybe, but we have had it.
I can give you two illustrations of this, one urban and one rural.
I was in Zambia in 1989, conducting research, and for a time, I lived in a hostel attached
across the road from the University of Zambia, which by that time had, I'm sad to say,
become a shadow of that gleaming new citadel of learning that represented the hopes of the
whole generation and the whole country when it was built in the 1960s.
In any case, I'm living amongst a group, essentially, of graduate students at the University, of young
lecturers, very bright people indeed.
Most of us took our rather humble meals in the hostel's dining hall each evening.
And most people, there wasn't a whole lot to do, retired to the lounge to watch a little bit of TV
on the one black and white television that we had at this hostel.
On most evenings, the news, which, of course, was controlled by the government, controlled
by the one party, allowed to be legally in existence and to control the government, the
news usually included and turned to President Callender's message for the day or his activities
of the day or what have you.
And time after time, when that stage came, these young people simply got up and left.
They didn't throw things at the television.
They didn't curse it or curse him, I suspect because, on one hand, for some lingering respect
that they still have for a guy who did retain a fundamental sense of decency throughout, and
secondly, because it had perhaps become increasingly dangerous to take aggressive anti-Kaunda stances.
Let me give you a royal example, though.
Down in southern Zambia, amongst the village folk that I have been visiting for 30 years or so,
if you're visiting down there and you take a nice meal produced, usually it has to be said by the women of a particular household,
a meal of nshuma, let's say, that thick porridge based on ground cornmeal and some nice jishu, some sauce,
perhaps it's made from yama of meat or madede, tomatoes or nkugu, chicken.
After you've finished a meal like that, the proper thing to say, the polite thing to say, is to say twakuta.
And in fact, you might even sort of rub your belly a bit, twakuta means satisfying, I'm full, thank you.
You know, it's a form of courtesy, it's a form of etiquette, twakuta, I'm full.
People, by 1989, were muttering twakuta in a very different context.
And the closest translation would be, we're fed up, we've had a belly full of Kaunda,
we've had a belly full of one-party rule, and so on.
So, true to the model proposed by Bratton and Van der Waal, protests begin to erupt again, particularly in the cities,
especially what were usually called food riots, when the subsidies were removed on staples,
particularly, again, the staple at this point in Zambia's history, obviously maize meal or maize cornmeal.
And bear in mind that the removal of the subsidies on this is often in response to the prescriptions
of the structural adjustment programs, which calls for market, you know, allowing the price of cornmeal to rise
to, you know, its economic level and so forth.
So, the notion of subsidizing urban consumption is often lifted as a part of, as one of the conditions
of obtaining assistance from external donors, but, of course, perhaps predictably,
this turns around and has consequences in terms of discontent and the eruption of protests.
Indeed, by the late 80s, we have a couple of instances where Kaunda is able to stay in power
by repelling or repulsing attempts at military coup.
Now, heavily dependent on foreign assistance at this point, Kaunda had little chance, little choice,
but to listen to Western encouragement of liberalization, including the encouragement
that came from his friend, Jimmy Carter, who, as we know, has remained quite active in international affairs
since his retirement from the presidency.
And, indeed, they are friends.
They share some things.
They both have lost presidency, although Kaunda had a considerably longer run at it than Carter.
But, I think the real basis for their friendship, frankly, is very simple.
It's a shared, quite deep and sincere Christianity.
Now, the opposition in Zambia coalesced around the perfectly named Movement for Multiparty Democracy,
the MMD, the Movement for Multiparty Democracy,
which was led by the diminutive trade unionist Frederick Chaluba.
Chaluba occupied, then, the head of what had always been, from the 1930s on,
a strategic point of power, and that is the apex of workers' organizations.
After all, in the critical industries, like copper, organized workers obviously wield
a very considerable measure of influence and power,
and Chaluba had used that, a trade union position,
to gradually expand his own agenda and his own visions
and was supported by many for doing so.
I said diminutive.
Chaluba is quite the opposite from figures like Joshua Nkomo in Zimbabwe
or Jonas Savimy in Angola.
He stands barely five feet tall, but, believe me, he loomed large at that moment,
articulating again and again the necessity for change and change now.
Somebody gave me a T-shirt from the early 90s in Zambia,
which is an MMD T-shirt and has a picture of Chaluba on one side,
and on the other side it has a picture of a clock,
and the minute hand is up there at about 58 or 59,
and it says,
the hour has come.
The hour has come.
And that was their mantra,
repeated again and again,
now is the time to open this system up,
the movement for multi-party democracy.
And finally, in 1991, elections were held.
Kaunda,
and this is a precursor to a phenomenon we'll see in our 35th lecture
on Zimbabwe and Robert Mugabe,
Kaunda actually believed that he'd prevail.
You know, he was the father of the nation.
We sometimes lose sight of the fact
of how isolated from reality leaders can become.
Sometimes people talk about, you know,
the isolation of the Oval Office
in the case of American politics or what have you.
But it's true that leaders can often be surrounded
by people who tell them the good news
and tell them that the people are still behind them
and so forth.
And Kaunda, in a lot of respects,
was genuinely shocked
when the results of this election,
which international observers, by and large,
pronounced to be free and fair,
came in.
The electorate had rejected Kaunda
after 27 years in power
and elected none other than Frederick Chaluba
by a margin,
and it is a staggering margin,
of 4 to 1,
80% to 20%
against Kaunda,
the father of the nation,
and replacing him with Frederick Chaluba.
Now, to his everlasting credit,
Kaunda accepted the verdict.
He didn't cancel the election, you know,
after it's gone on for several hours
or after the returns are coming in.
And that certainly has happened in other places.
He didn't decide that it had been fraudulent,
which would be hard to do
since his own government organized it
in many respects.
He accepted it
and he went gracefully
and he offered his successor the best.
Like Carter,
Kaunda has remained active
and, in fact,
his stock has risen again
in Zambia
in the decade and a half
or something like that
since he was thrown out of office.
Many people,
precisely because
his incumbent
proved more corrupt
than anybody
in Kaunda's regime,
have taken to reminiscing a bit
about the good old days
under Kaunda,
something that would have been unthinkable.
in the late 80s.
And it is sad to say
that Chaluba
began a
very hopeful
moment in Zambia's
history
and
allowed it
or
turned it himself
quite sour.
He has, in fact,
in the last couple of years
actually been
arrested and charged
with corruption.
He is out
on what we would call bail.
At this point,
it remains to be seen
whether those
charges will
materialize
or not.
Okay, well,
some might say,
you know,
looking at Zambia
or elsewhere
in Africa,
that the democratic
moment came
and that it went.
That we had
a sort of
return to the
status quo
ante.
Now,
to be sure,
this revolution
revolution of rising
expectations
or maybe we should
call it
revolution of rising
expectations
too.
It's the second
democratic
revolution
in
recent African
history.
Like the first one,
the one that,
of course,
revolved around
the gaining of
independence,
this revolution
has met with
much disappointment.
Some leaders
held on to power,
manipulating the very
reforms they permitted.
In other cases,
as I've just
mentioned,
a figure like
Chaluba proved
worse than the
old once in
power.
And also,
we might pause
here to say
freedom can mean
many things.
As in the
Soviet Union,
freedom from
the old regime
of the Communist
Party dictatorship
certainly opened
up a lot of
things that we
recognize as
democratic or
libertarian or
what have you.
But freedom
has also resulted
in,
in the Soviet
Union,
as I think
a lot of
the former
Soviet Union,
in a place
like Russia,
as I think
a lot of
Russians could
tell you,
and the
freedom to
swindle,
the freedom
to hustle,
the freedom
to cheat.
You know,
you have a
greater scope
to sort of
act the part
of the
confidence man
once the
party monopoly
on things
is no longer
in place.
People in
southern Zambia,
for instance,
the farmers
who I've been
talking about,
they used
to curse
at the
inefficiency
and the
slowness
and so
forth of
the government
owned marketing
boards who
would collect
the maize
from them
or the
cotton or
what have
you,
but they'd
get there
late and
some of it
would spoil
or the
checks that
they were
promised
didn't come
and so
forth and so
on.
And at first
this seemed
like a great
alternative.
You know,
those boards
are gone.
We have
the marketing
operations
are now
in private
hands,
but they
then found
of course
that they'd
have guys
who would
show up
in trucks
take the
maze,
promise payment
one sort
or another
and issue
them counterfeit
stuff or
simply disappear
with the,
you know,
come in
and spirit it
off in the
middle of the
night and so
forth.
So freedom
is great
stuff,
but it can
take a lot
of unpredicted
and not
always positive
turns.
Okay,
we can
be as
disappointed
as we'd
like,
but it's
almost true
to say
that today
there is
not a
single
official
one-party
state
or military
government
left in
Africa.
In places
like Zambia,
people and
parties compete
for power
with a
tolerance
that was
unthinkable
even a
little while
ago.
People are
less likely
to acquiesce
in corruption.
There's a
lively,
free,
and critical
press.
They're less
likely to
accept
misrule.
I doubt
that they
will go
back.
No,
it wasn't
a fairy tale,
but the
democratization
movements
were a
courageous
step forward
and should
be recognized
as such.
Thank you.
I
did
get
too much
information
they
love
to
them which
won't
with
go
to
the
coast
world
there's
