Welcome to the Acton's podcast, where we will present short, digestible segments clipped
from Team Com's weekly active inference live streams.
If you like what you hear and want to learn more, check out the entire live stream on
the Active Inference Lab YouTube channel.
My name is Blue Knight, and I will be guiding you through this podcast, which is clipped
from Active Inference Lab live stream number 3.1.
In this live stream, we discuss the paper, A World Unto Itself, Human Communication as
Active Inference, by Jared Vassell, Paul Badcock, Axel Constant, Carl Friston, and Maxwell Ramstead.
Daniel Friedman is facilitating the live stream discussion.
He's based out of Davis, California, and he's going to start our episode off leading you
with a verbal description of the figures in the paper.
So, here we are in Figure 1, and for Team Com, this was a really great image that we had
shared a lot before this discussion because it brings together the skeleton of Active Inference
in a way, which is this cycle that goes from internal states, which influence through policy
states, action states, action states influence external states of the world, which are also
influencing each other, but we're not too worried about those.
External states influence our sensory states, the retina and the tympanic membrane, and then
the sensory states allow us to update our internal model of the world that's also generative.
So, that's the very basic skeleton of the Active Inference cycle here reflected with just one
agent in feedback with the world.
And so, the flow is always going this way, but also, all these things are happening all
at once.
Your legs are always engaged in an action state.
Your retina is always involved in a sensory state, even if your eyes are closed.
Your internal states are always updating.
So, they're all happening at once, but we can kind of trace this causal diagram through
time.
And then, you also see represented in this image the equations.
And there is a level of math that is just sort of brought up in this paper and cited to other
places for where people can learn more.
But, suffice to say that each of these different sectors can be thought of as happening at various
levels of mathematical description.
So, what does anyone else see in Figure 1?
My name is Shannon.
I'm at the University of California in Merced.
But, because of the pandemic, I'm at home in South Dakota for the foreseeable future.
I suppose, not quite in Figure 1, but in something you mentioned about the parts of your body that
are doing the action, they're doing the sensation.
It's a great skeleton, like you said.
But, then there's all of the action that's happening constantly at sometimes conscious
and sometimes subconscious level, but like saccades of the eyes.
So, you're constantly having a small action to resample the environment or the like proprioceptive
sensations of your legs.
So, even within that larger cycle, there's all of these much, much smaller cycles happening
where this perception action loop is functioning in like every part of the sensorium of your
body.
Very nice.
Good point.
And, this image has the sensations coming into the person.
This kind of puts the black box or the Markov blanket, if you will, around the whole person.
But, it's actually a nested Markov blanket situation.
So, each neuron has internal states, action states, external states for the neuron, which
are other neurons, other cell types, and then sensations.
So, this is something that is about the world and about people, but it also exists as a skeleton
whenever we want to draw the boundary around any kind of active inference system.
And, thinking about communication more broadly than the human case is where we start to see,
oh, yeah, that's right.
Honest communication is the norm.
Neurons don't expect each other to be deceptive.
Sure, it might happen, but that's the decimal point.
And, the real framework is about how cooperative communication goes down because adversarial
relationships just don't persist over as long of time durations or spatial durations because
they break down almost by definition.
And so, thinking about this multi-level in space as well as multi-time scale, and there's a lot
to this.
And, it's awesome.
And, one of the key contributions of the free energy principle, which have to do with all of
these equations, that potentially, despite the differences in the specifics between time
scales and spatial scales and different modes of communication, there may be some similar equations
underlying the dynamics, and that would be something quite fantastic.
So, let's build on figure one to figure two.
It's the action states that influence the world and then comes back through sense to the person.
But, the two key differences here, first off, is instead of just internal states, it's now reflecting
specifically the regime of attention.
So, that's salience or attention.
And, it can be thought of as a subset of the total internal generative model of the world by the brain.
But, now we're talking about what specifically in the internal model should attention be paid to.
And, then, the key here, and this is almost the genesis of Team Calm, in some senses, is the world
for communicating agents is other communicating agents.
And, it's a deceptively simple conclusion or claim because it's one thing when you have the person
in feedback with the world that makes it, it's kind of, I'm thinking about Tom Hanks playing ping pong
against a wall.
It's him, he's in feedback, it's a dynamical system.
But, the fixedness of his opponent makes the moves that he makes very, very specified and easy
to determine.
Whereas, once you even get two that are communicating and they have different attention, they're paying
attention to different things because they have different internal models, all of a sudden
you get these totally novel and improvisational dynamics that they call thinking through other
minds.
Any thoughts on this?
That was a really great Tom Hanks ping pong metaphor, though.
I mean, it would be that easy if you were just typing to a chat box and then it just copied
and pasted exactly what you wrote back, for example.
It wouldn't be quite a conversation.
And, then, you could imagine speaking to a chatbot or something like that.
Maybe attention is playing out differently on the computer versus in your brain, so the internal
states are different.
But, again, we kind of already knew that.
The action states are different.
The point is the shared epistemic resources, so the epistemic being related to the knowledge,
the cues for the chat box, what time the message was sent or who the person who sent it was,
the cues and the resources are a shared resource.
They're a shared niche.
And then, each of those agents, depending on which sense states make it to their regime of
attention, are going to update their action policies in a different way.
And so, one other thing I really like about this framework for communication is it highlights
the necessity and the importance of alignment, but not perfect alignment.
It actually, as a starting place, takes that different people are going to be coming from
different perspectives.
It's not that there's one correct interpretation of what person A says, and if person B gets it
perfectly, they succeed.
And if they don't get it perfectly, they failed.
It's kind of an absolutist notion of communication.
And here, we take a really fully pluralist approach to communication where you have two
communicating agents.
They have different internal models of the world, and the communication is happening in
this world that they share, in the informational and in the physical niche that they share.
And it's actually an action-oriented interaction that the agents are engaged in that's happening
as their very different internal models are aligning.
And so, it highlights the process of alignment without being too hard on the need for a perfect
alignment.
And that just, in so many situations, is a helpful starting point about where am I at in
this conversation?
Where is my conversant in this conversation?
How are we going to align?
What is this alignment for?
Are there any thoughts here?
Hello, everybody.
Yeah, my name is Alex.
I'm from Moscow, Russia.
I'm a researcher in System Management School and trying to find a way how to join concepts
from system engineering and active inference frameworks.
let me try to add about maybe about actions because as for this model and everything is
about alignment of the models and actions are like not side effects but not primary one for
example if a team or a company speaking about planning actions some kind of strategies or
something like this basically it's again about alignments and that's why if company or team
want to develop something or make some research it's a need to planning recursively not from
actions but from models and alignments yeah and to kind of give an example of that if we were
working together on a team to build a car the goal isn't to align on what the perfect car would be
the goal is the action of actually making that car happen and that's going to require us to
synchronize on mental states but also contribute our unique skills and perspectives and then to
give one more example about action declarative speech is an action it's an action it's a motor
behavior it has to do with the way that muscles move so speech is an action this is one action
that results in speed in sound clapping but their body actions that result in different cues and so
placing speech uh fundamentally as an action state it helps us get away from this um well you have
acts and then you have speech but of course there are speech acts and speech is an action and in pure
conversation where the feedback is happening through conversation uh it gives us the same uh action
oriented uh model that we can apply to non-linguistic systems and now we're thinking about speech as an
action in a communicating system so we can really build on the strengths of linguistics like jared was
talking about without overly making it about the specifics of any human communication style or even a
cultural communication style because speech is again just one of the many multifaceted ways that we
share information and that we call people's attention to different features of the world
we hope you enjoyed this episode of the actin podcast where we related the active inference framework
to communication stay tuned for future episodes where we will talk about active inference in relation to
many other topics
and that we will talk about active inference in relation to many other topics
and that we will talk about active 없어
