Welcome to the ACT-INF podcast, where we will present short, digestible segments clipped
from Teamcom's weekly active inference livestreams.
If you like what you hear and want to learn more, check out the entire livestream on the
Active Inference Lab YouTube channel.
My name is Blue Knight, and I will be guiding you through this podcast, which is clipped
from Active Inference Lab livestream number 3.1.
The paper that this livestream is discussing is called A World Unto Itself – Human Communication
as Active Inference.
And the first author, Jared Vassil, is on the livestream.
The other authors are Paul Badcock, Axel Constant, Carl Friston, and Maxwell Ramstad.
Daniel Friedman, who is based out of Davis, California, will be facilitating the livestream
discussion and leading everyone through the paper.
So let's work through the abstract and see how the authors reflected or summarized for
everyone what they did.
They wrote, the purpose of this paper is to extend the account of human cooperative communication
by proposing an integrative model of biobehavioral dynamics of cooperative communication.
Our formulation is based upon Active Inference.
Active Inference suggests that action perception cycles operate to minimize uncertainty and optimize
an individual's internal model of the world.
We propose that humans are characterized by an evolved adaptive prior belief that their
mental states are aligned with or similar to those of conspecifics.
For example, that we are the same sort of creature inhabiting the same sort of niche.
The use of cooperative communication emerges as the principle means to gather evidence
for this belief – again, that we're in a shared niche and that we're similar kinds
of interactors or English speakers or were interested in this topic – allowing for the development
of a shared narrative that is used to disambiguate interactants' hidden and inferred mental states.
What does it mean to disambiguate the hidden and inferred mental states?
My name is Shannon.
I'm at the University of California in Merced, but because of the pandemic, I'm at home in
South Dakota for the foreseeable future.
I guess it's not just to know what the other person might be thinking or could say in words,
but also to know that you're both maybe attending to the same reference or that you're both experiencing
a similar emotion or if it's different, like why is the other person sad right now?
So any sort of experience I suppose that two people could be feeling is to figure out what
they're feeling and what you are feeling and align them.
Yeah.
And we have such a rich internal experience that it's not enough just to infer the external
states of a person.
Oh, they're sitting down.
Big surprise.
We need to actually do a lot of work to disambiguate or to reduce our uncertainty about hidden states,
states, which are mental in this case.
Thus, by using cooperative communication, individuals effectively attune to a hermeneutic
niche composed in part of others' mental states and reciprocally attune the niche to their own
ends via epistemic niche construction.
Jared, what is a hermeneutic niche and an epistemic niche?
Are there similar ideas or different?
Yeah.
So the idea of a hermeneutic niche is that, you know, when we're communicating, we both
have our sort of individual perspectives.
So it's, you know, it's an I or a me and a you.
In addition to that, there's, you know, the we, it's our shared dialogue.
We are talking about something.
At the same time, of course, we can decompose that into, like I just said, our own individual
perspectives.
And so what I was trying to get out there was the idea of hermeneutics is, if y'all have
read, for instance, the first and first 2015 duet for one paper, they talk about this hermeneutic
idea where it comes from the idea of like a deep reading of a text.
So if you want to really fully understand a text, for instance, you have to both take words
in their immediate context in a sense in which they're composed, then also.
So relate them to the larger context of the paragraph or the chapter or the whole book
or whatever.
So the idea is relating these two or more different scales of analysis to one another and seeing
it as a sort of integrative explanatory whole.
And the epistemic niche construction component, trying to link up with some stuff that Axel Constant
has been doing on niche construction.
So we construct our niche so as to offer up very precise certain affordances for us.
I.e., we make our niche more easily understandable.
That could, in this case, in the instance of communication across long stretches of intergenerational
time.
You see these patterns of using this terminology epistemic niche construction where languages,
cultures build up.
I should say cultures build up a set of constructions, a set of four meaning pairings, that if you
align to that set of four meaning pairings and ontogeny makes your niche very easily understandable,
i.e., easily inferrable.
Um, you can, um, easily grab ahold of, uh, others hidden states as it were others mental
states, um, by using these sorts of, uh, uh, very reliable, um, sort of epistemic tools
or devices, which are, we talked about in the paper, uh, communicative constructions.
And, and the way that you described that, it makes me think about the royal we in English.
And if somebody said, well, what am I talking about?
It's almost like, wait, what are you talking about?
If you're not sure what you're talking about, what are you talking about?
But when somebody says, what are we talking about here?
It's a rhetorical question that helps us, uh, have a shared informational niche.
And I agree.
Axel's work in that respect is excellent.
This means that niche construction enables features of the niche to encode precise, reliable
cues about the deontic or shared value of certain action policies, e.g., the utility of using
communicative constructions to disambiguate mental states, given expectations about shared
prior beliefs.
What is deontic value in this context?
The person answering this question is Stephen Sillett, based out of Toronto.
Yeah, well, deontic is kind of the, the, the way of knowing, um, rules of the game, so to
speak, like key cues, which are set like a stop sign or something that you have in a, in your
environment.
So, um, it can be useful.
So it's kind of a longer standing cue that's kind of established in the niche.
Um, just one thing I was thinking when I was seeing this, I think it's quite important that
they're talking about cooperative communication here.
And that narrows it down then to something a bit more instrumental.
Um, uh, it's not necessarily coordinated communications.
It's not necessarily as action orientated as that, but there is a sense that this is trying
to get to, we're trying to achieve or trying to cooperate towards something.
Therefore I want to align my mental states because if you're not cooperating with someone, you
could be just trying to work out the hidden states of like, what is it that it's important
for me to talk to them about, which may not be their mental state.
It just may be their state in the world at the moment.
That makes sense.
So I think it's like, this is like, you've already got some alignment and assumed, I think.
Right.
And if it's not cooperative, it might be adversarial, which kind of takes us to Dennett's intentional
stance where you just say, whatever it is, if it's a computer or if it's a human, I'm just
trying to win this little local game theory interaction.
And the paper doesn't go that direction.
It moves towards cooperative communication.
So Jared, any thoughts there?
Yeah.
Yeah.
So this is all great discussion in this, um, building on the point that you just said about,
you know, cooperative versus adversarial sorts of, for instance, communication.
Um, even, even in the case of, you know, say, you know, I'm using communication or shared
language to try to outsmart you or outdo you or something, um, exercising like a kind of
like Machiavellian intelligence, I think it's been called, um, that still relies on, you know,
the shared presupposition, I guess, if you want to use that language of, um, a cooperative
bedrock.
So, you know, the idea is if I'm using this piece of language, typically it's for, you
know, honest, genuine communicative goals.
And the idea of, for instance, deception relies on me using, you know, kind of exploiting that
shared assumption to my own benefit, to your detriment.
Um, so even at least in the case of humans, when you're, you know, lying or something, um,
adversarial communication or whatever, still relies on there being some shared set of cooperative
presumptions.
And that, that, that, that is what is exploited, um, for humans when they're communicating.
Um, and also about the, the, the deontic value that those sorts of ideas, uh, deontic or shared
value that, um, the idea there is that we, you know, when, in ontogeny, when you are attuning
to learning your culture set of communicative constructions, do you, what, what these constructions
are, are in speakers' brains, there's, um, lots of good work, for instance, from, uh,
someone who I like, Joan Bybee, um, that suggests that these are very automatized, automatic sorts
of mappings between form and meaning that, um, at least in their normal use, um, don't
require, uh, expensive, heavy sorts of computations.
Maybe when you're first learning them, they do, but, um, the more you use them and exercise
them in actual, uh, joint practice with others, uh, in aligning mental states, they become very
automatic.
And so the idea of deontic value is that it bypasses, uh, the deontic value of a policy
bypasses all the kinds of heavy computational updates that, uh, might be required by, for
instance, someone learning how to use constructions, but, um, yeah, and, and instead, um, provides
a very automatic mapping between, uh, states.
So, uh, it depends how you chunk a construction, but, um, constructions become linked up in a very
automatized way, and then it can be used effortlessly by speakers.
Um, that's the idea of the, at least in this case, the deontic or shared value of certain
action policies, i.e. constructions.
Cool.
And, and using the niche info niche, uh, idea, it's kind of like a tragedy of the commons.
If people pollute the, the environmental niche, it doesn't work as well as it could.
And if people pollute the informational niche with deceptive signaling, it also doesn't work.
So it's a, the niche metaphor really works well.
So let's think about the last part of the abstract.
In turn, the alignment of mental states, which are prior beliefs, enables the
emergence of a novel contextualizing scale of cultural dynamics that encompasses the
actions and mental states of the ensemble of interactants and their shared environments.
The dynamics of this contextualizing layer of cultural organizational feedback across
scales acts to constrain the variability of prior expectations of the individuals who
constitute it.
And then just to close it with the contribution.
Our theory additionally builds upon the active inference literature by introducing a new set
of neurobiologically plausible computational hypotheses for cooperative communication.
We conclude with directions for future research.
This concludes the discussion of the abstract from the paper, A World Unto Itself, Human
Communication as Active Inference.
We hope you enjoyed it and that it provides a framework or contextualizes the future podcast
episodes where we'll be having continuing conversations about human communication.
and we'll see you next time on the topic.
Now, we'll look after the text and stretch off some datos.
Let's take a look.
It does end up in time.
Today we're deste americ convert platform where we're within facing Durkompress.
So, this is what we're gonna see where we might be well.
Now, that's what we see.
I'll be
