Welcome to the ActInf podcast, where we will present short, digestible segments clipped
from the Active Inference Lab weekly live streams.
If you like what you hear and you want to learn more, check out the entire live stream
at the Active Inference Lab YouTube channel.
My name is Blue Knight and I will be guiding you through this podcast episode, which is
clipped from Active Inference Lab live stream number 4.2.
This discussion will be loosely structured around the paper, Cultural Affordances, scaffolding
local worlds through shared intentionality and regimes of attention by Maxwell Ramstead,
Samuel Vessier, and Lawrence Kiermaier.
This week's episode will be about communication and the construction of meaning.
Daniel Friedman will be facilitating the discussion and he will be starting off with a quote from
the paper.
Conventions need not be explicitly formulated as rules and may instead originate in the
actor's engagement with local backgrounds over time.
That is, from non-contentful developmental experiences, learning or participation in
social and cultural practices.
To operate with conventional affordances, agents must have shared sets of expectations.
We must know what others expect us to expect.
There's a lot, we're kind of spiraling another layer and coming back to this idea where we're
in a remote group right now.
And so we are getting our expectations about what to expect and all these things.
Not only are they going to be very different person to person because our local worlds are
quite different, but there's this algorithmic level that influences what we expect and it
changes on the inputs that we receive and reducing our surprise about the sensory inputs is one
of the drivers of behavior.
And so how does what we see in the news feed end up recapitulating the things that we will
draw our attention to?
And that's sort of this self-radicalization process that can happen is attention is brought
to something and then it continues to basically percolate upwards as people pay more and more
attention and are more and more cautious or more and more aware of something that it's hard to take a
step back from any scientific worldview and say that one is better or the other, because although
I'd love to hear a workaround, it's hard to get a purely secular perspective because someone could say,
I'm just pursuing my accuracy by doing something that's aberrant to you and it's difficult to see
purely within the framework, nor does there have to be.
I think what free energy and active inference and focusing on the communication dynamics allows us to do
is let our values be values, let our communication be communication, let our behavior be behavior, and
talk about what we expect using ways that we want to communicate.
And if people don't want to use nonviolent communication, other people may or may not choose
to communicate with them.
But it's how we communicate what we expect when there's not only that computational intervention,
communication, but also a lot of, you know, coming together of different perspectives.
It's one of the challenges of our day.
And then also just this cultural iceberg was a nice image.
The quote on here is,
joint attention is usually understood as occurring in a diet of two people or between agents in direct
interactional spheres of communication, gaze following, finger pointing, or other verbal or
nonverbal cues to address more complex social situations.
It is useful to revise current socio-cognitive models of joint attention to encompass fundamentally
triadic situations in which the third is the socially constituted niche of affordances supported
by local ontologies and abilities.
So before you get the questions, just some of these in the iceberg above the iceberg, we have
dress, folklore, language, fine arts, holidays, food, and below we have family values.
We have gender roles, pride, concept of justice.
My questions here were, what is the third member of a social interaction?
And how can active inference help us design culture?
Well, so I'm Maxwell Ramstad.
I'm the first author on this paper, Cultural Affordances.
If I can jump in quickly, it's sort of, it's sort of that.
So a human, once in culture, it is never alone, in a sense.
We're always constantly seeing things through the eyes of others.
It starts off as, what would mommy want me to do in this situation?
And it just, I mean, it's remarkable.
Canadians are really good at this.
We, there were, I'd have to pull up the studies, but there are, there are studies that show that
Canadians, even at night, you know, when there are no policemen, will stop at a red light
and just wait it out, you know, and, and go, even if there are no agents that could penalize
them.
I mean, it's, it's really remarkable the extent to which we, we internalize these kinds of norms
and they end up then directing the way that we interact with, with others.
Yeah.
Any other thoughts on this or we can just, it's, it's something for pondering because
we have the explicative portion of our experience, which is that, which comes to our conscious
awareness, that which is stated verbally, but on the input side, subconscious input and
on the generative models that can't be expressed in words, sometimes they can be expressed through
art or through action, but the whole iceberg is there.
And so it's just, I really liked that.
Once you're in cultured, you're never alone and indeed we, we are never alone because
to be aware is to be communicating.
It's almost like the, uh, cog ergo sum it's like I communicate, therefore we exist something
like that.
We're going to switch topics now and Maxwell is going to lead off talking about social
networks.
I think we've raised a lot of issues that could be pursued as papers.
Uh, yeah.
Particularly this, uh, issue that you were raising Alejandra about, uh, social networks
and the way that they tie into, uh, attentional dynamics, I think, uh, should be the target
of much more, uh, discussion.
And, uh, yeah, I mean, I, I thought everyone had very, very interesting, uh, things to say.
So thank you.
Here's one angle on that is an evolutionary prior is that your social networks are constituted
of people who are not adversarial with you.
Most of the people who you're engaged with, whether or not they believe the exact same thing,
you have to be relaxed enough around them to sleep, for example.
And so the, the deepest prior is if we're relating, then we're going to be to some broad extent
in agreement.
Okay.
Now we know from active inference and niche construction that the two ways that you can,
um, deal with uncertainty or with unexpected sensory inputs is by changing the environment.
That's niche construction or by changing your internal model.
That's inference.
So what happens when you're in a social contrived situation?
It says, Oh, but your friend posted this.
Okay.
So it's coming in through the friend door and it's, uh, something that for my current value
system at time T I think of is not chill.
There's all kinds of things not being chill, but it just isn't.
And the two ways that I can deal with that are change my model to be more like that.
So I make that less surprising, some type of hateful speech.
I get numb to it, or I come to embody it actually to reduce my surprise on the inference side,
or I can get doubled down in my beliefs and try to reduce my uncertainty or the surprise
from those sensory cues by getting into a debate.
I mean, think about how much mental energy gets burnt on these sort of debates and people
trying to change each other's mind online.
And there's something beautiful about people sharing their differences in idea, but when
that whole discussion is being basically overviewed by an algorithm that doesn't exactly have
those people's mental health or the alignment of different cultures in mind, not exactly,
not, not exactly.
You know, it's just, it's correlated.
No, it can get off the rails.
And so that deep evolutionary prior isn't something that can just be unlearned, like you were speaking
about earlier, Maxwell.
And so when our deepest prior and our intergenerational ones get taken advantage of, it's like these
slow waves and they can't quite cope with these very fast frequencies.
And so the options are to slow it down.
That's like the RKO futurist, you know, oh, well in the future we'll return to a more heterogeneous
organization of people.
So slow down these high frequency waves or come to a better way that we can predict and communicate
about them.
I mean, there's, there's a lot more that we could think about there, but it just, it's
yeah, there's yeah.
Steven and then Alejandra.
Thank you.
Hi, I'm Steven.
I'm based in Toronto.
I do a lot of work with participatory theater and community development, and I'm researching
how social topographies can be used across scales.
Well, I think like you were saying, these ways that we think about what is happening is
really important in terms of how we construct our conversations.
But I think there's also the where, the where we've taken our attention to be able to have
our conversations.
So when you're locked in, they call it context collapse when you're on like Facebook, because
you have no context, you have no story, you have no.
So one of the things with complex adaptive systems, the work of Cynthia Kurtz and David
Snowden, they work with stories for small micro stories.
So you fight a hundred, a thousand and start to make sense of them, like attribute them with
titles and metadata and actually work with story.
Because when you're working with story, each story, if it's kept raw, so it's not an opinion,
they call it, it's like it's kind of maintains the internal complexity of it.
So you can still reinterpret it.
But once you've got an opinion, an opinion's collapsed out, you can't really reinterpret
an opinion.
So we're kind of trapped in these kind of interpretive kind of inductive, deductive spaces, which is
great if it's a case of like, I have the right answer or you have the right answer.
So then we can like debate it.
But the trouble is, what if we don't know and no one wants to admit they don't know?
So can we work with something more complex and maybe that's a where question and a how
question, not a what question?
Alejandra?
Hello.
Hello, everybody.
My name is Alejandra and also as usual, I'm here in Mexico.
So taking what Sasha said, that the idea that we are talking with our friends and yeah, that's
like the, like our conscious internal belief, they are our friends, but we actually not have
any idea how these platforms work, how these platforms are manipulating our attention.
So we are communicating with others, but we have something between this communication that
we don't know actually how it's working.
And I don't know, I was thinking that we are kind of playing in terms of active inference to
constantly increase our prediction error.
And you have to engage with this platform in order to reduce or minimize prediction error in terms of
emotions or, um, the way I react to other, um, giving a like or, um, sharing a post.
So, um, I don't know this idea that we are interacting with friends or we're, um, close people, but we don't
know what's happening in between.
Sasha?
Hi, everyone.
Um, I'm Sasha and I'm in California.
Um, yeah, I think that that's a great point, um, to touch on that we don't really understand
what's happening, uh, this hidden state between, um, us and the person that we're trying to
communicate with and how that's being manipulated.
And while that's, that's a totally valid critique of social media platforms, um, we could say the
same thing for like telephone communication or even telegram, um, the people who were sending
the message shouldn't necessarily understand what was happening, um, in, in that process.
And yet, uh, they felt, or they, they would trust that it was, um, the integrity of the
message was maintained or that it wasn't, uh, nothing was lost in that process or manipulated.
But so it's been kind of like a steady, uh, a steady march of, uh, technology, technological
advances that are more and more removed from what we think we're doing in this process of
communication.
Yep.
The neutral claim is that context directs attention.
So if there's a bunch of arrows pointing to something, even though it's not in the exact
object, it will draw your attention to it.
Or something that's placed on top of a pyramid is what your attention is supposed to be drawn
towards.
Well, in the telegram case, not the app, the Morse code version, the context is that you
trust that Western union or whomever isn't going to be, uh, garbling your message.
And the context is who it's from.
And so you can actually unpack it as if that person were just telling you, but when it's
a stranger and it's like engaging the gas and the brake on, is this an adversary or not?
And the context is constrained.
So you can only see their name or a fake internet name and a picture.
And then is it a surprise that given a picture and what somebody says, somebody is going to
unpack it in potentially the least charitable way based upon identity or based upon a typo
or based upon some sort.
Whereas in person, we just look at each other and we can have more of this human sense.
We can have the context and that helps us understand.
And then beyond the context cues, when we can actually feel like we're part of a shared
society, then we want to help people who are in need in our local worlds.
And there's only one world.
So it is our local world, Spaceship Earth.
So there's so many angles and the question would just be, what are those on-ramps and then how
is it all going to actually play out?
We hope you enjoyed this week's episode.
Stay tuned next week when we'll be talking about a new paper entitled Multiscale Integration
Beyond Internalism.
