Welcome to the ActInf podcast, where we will present short, digestible segments clipped from the Active Inference Lab weekly live streams.
If you like what you hear and you want to learn more, check out the entire live stream at the Active Inference Lab YouTube channel.
My name is Blue Knight, and I will be guiding you through this podcast, which is clipped from ActInf Lab live stream number 4.2.
This discussion will be loosely structured around the paper, Cultural Affordances, Scaffolding Local Worlds Through Shared Intentionality and Regimes of Attention,
by Maxwell Ramstead, Samuel Vessier, and Lawrence Kiermaier.
Daniel Friedman will be starting off the discussion talking about embodied affordances.
All right, so we are going to have a few embodied affordance questions.
So here's a quote from the paper.
Sports science provides an illustration of this tendency towards optimal grip.
Studies of the dynamic interplay between a boxer's stance and position and the action possibilities available to them as a function of stance and position
have shown that punching bags afford different kinds of strikes to boxers as a function of the distance between boxer and punching bag.
Boxers tend to move their bodies to an optimal distance from the punching bag,
specifically one that affords the greatest variety of strikes.
So not the most powerful, not the most rewarding, not the most unexpected to the other person in a theory of mind,
but actually the greatest variety from an embodied perspective of the actor.
This is a case of moving towards optimal grip.
So it's beyond the grasping.
Now we're talking about stance.
When observing a painting, we also move our bodies and our gazes in a way that maximizes our grip on the scene or details observed.
We might call such dynamic adaptive engagement with a field of affordances
in rolling cycles of action, perception, skilled intentionality.
So the question here is, what is being optimized by the body?
What do bodies do?
There's probably a couple of answers and we can maybe go reveal half of the hint,
which is how do predictions play into this optimization?
So what is the body optimizing?
Doesn't need to be the end all be all answer, but what is something the body optimizes?
And then how do predictions play into this optimization?
Well, so I'm Maxwell Ramstad.
I'm the first author on this paper, Cultural Affordances.
Well, I mean, a lot of my own work has been about, since writing this paper,
has been about figuring out exactly what this means.
But, you know, if the free energy principle holds,
then it's not just brains that are doing this free energy minimization business.
It's really every level of biological self-organization.
And there, it really just means the same thing across all levels,
which means that, you know, you have a desired distribution over your data.
And, you know, actions acting on the environment is generated such that
this preferred data distribution is brought about.
What changes at each scale is what the relevant data is,
what the relevant set points are,
and what the mechanisms are that bring about the preferred data distribution, right?
So, you know, from a cellular point of view,
you know, the Markov blanket of a cell is effectively its membrane,
where the sensory states are all the receptor surfaces of the cell,
and the active states are like the cytoskeleton
and other mechanisms that allow the cell to move about
and to effectively generate the patterns of data that it expects to encounter.
But this very same story can be told at basically every level of,
like I was saying, a biological self-organization,
where, like, from an interoceptive point of view,
what the body is doing is trying to keep some of its core homeostatic variables
within viable ranges, right?
So, you know, core body temperature might be maintained using such a mechanism
where when you register a deviation from 36 1⁄2 degrees,
you know, you might have, like, a kind of low-level autonomic kind of reaction.
You know, you'll start shivering, and you'll get goosebumps and so on.
But, you know, for animals like ourselves that have repertoires of cultural behavior,
well, you might put on a parka, you might turn your air conditioning on.
And there are a bunch of other solutions to the same issue.
And, I mean, I think this is really the strength of the free energy principle.
I alluded to this last week.
At the time of writing this, I sort of had an idea how this would work,
but it took the following four years of my life to really figure out what that entailed,
you know, along with our collaborators, Carl Friston and everyone else.
If I can add one point on this and how the predictions play into the optimization.
So there's the classical control theory thermostat, temperature drops,
and then the body can engage in the interoceptive affordances like uncoupling in the mitochondria
or shivering, or the behavioral and the cultural affordances like wearing a jacket.
But how about if you were planning a trip to somewhere that was cold?
So there's nothing in your local environment that's telling you that your temperature is dropping.
In fact, you could be in Arizona sweating, but you're packing for somewhere that's cold.
And so traditional theories of semiotics might be challenged by that.
They could say, well, you saw the cold city and you looked at the website.
And so you made some sort of connection and you keep on doing this back propagation of symbols,
which is a valid account.
But also we can think about what the body's doing is optimizing its thermal range.
It's minimizing surprise about excursions from its thermal range that's tolerable.
And then it's acting based upon its prediction.
And so similarly, there's substances or states where your body's prediction,
it's now cast prediction or its future prediction can be wrong.
And so you can have people who are shivering,
even though their body temperature is high in the case of the flu or something like that.
So it's really the interaction of the prediction and the affordances,
not necessarily the instantaneous.
However, the instantaneous is often the most at hand.
Sasha?
Hi, everyone.
I'm Sasha, and I'm in California.
This metaphor reminded me of just kind of the stereotypical,
like when you go out, your mother tells you to bring a jacket.
And that's because like the older caretaker role thinks farther ahead into future states
and the younger child role, they're just thinking about right now
or where they're going and they're not thinking to this possible future state.
They're not planning for that possibility.
So I just thought that was a nice parallel to this whole jacket thermoregulation,
how far ahead we're willing to plan to reduce variability or uncertainty in our environment.
And differences potentially in risk tolerance too.
Even say, I know it's going to be cold, mom.
I just don't want to risk losing my jacket or I want to be cold or something like that.
Or I don't want to listen to you because whatever.
Sasha, I think you're putting your finger on precisely like the core kind of political economic issue
that we're dealing with as a species right now,
which is that the problems that we're dealing with are occurring at a scale
that is more or less invisible to the generative models that we've evolved in our heads effectively, right?
So climate change, global warming, these are processes that unfold over decades
and that require large-scale responses, you know, probably to address this, you know, in any way decently,
like a kind of multinational coordinated response.
But our brains are meant to deal with phenomena spanning from a few seconds to, you know,
maybe a year in more traditional societies when you're like dealing with the season cycle and everything.
And so there's a huge gap there.
And, you know, I think the disconnect between the kind of scientific consensus
and, you know, at least in the U.S., the kind of lay consensus on, say, climate change
has to do with the difference in temporal depth of the models that we're looking at.
So as scientists, we deal with these like, you know, models that in the case of like astrophysics
allows us to increase by like, you know, orders and orders of magnitude
for like the scope of our predictions and so on.
But then there's this gap, you know, between our intuitive understanding of the world and physics.
And this also connects back to the world that we live in, you know, what kind of world we share ultimately.
Yeah.
So all of that stuff.
Yeah.
Yes.
Nice.
Stephen?
Hello, I'm Stephen.
I'm in Toronto right now and very excited about being here today.
Yeah, I think I agree with what's being said.
And we've got into this world at the moment where we're very focused on what we want
and how we can achieve that.
But in our bodies might be when we're putting on the coat or something,
we're meeting our needs as an organism for the heat.
And in complex adaptive systems of development, they're looking at like need, want and love to have happen.
And like the want is what we might, you know, and we tend to focus on this instrumental want.
But that can change within like this construct.
But our bodies, we tune into this kind of deeper feeling of what we need.
Like we can infer that and connect to that.
And I think that is, that's partly what active influence sort of helps us go back to.
Okay, when we're starting to sit into that, because indigenous cultures look at that thing
of seven generations.
And it's not like they plan for seven generations, but they sense what's needed.
So they're kind of working at that kind of, you know, organic level.
One way also that the temporality becomes embodied in our language, enacted through language is
which words don't have plurals in English.
Now, this isn't like a hard and fast rule, but oil, fish, sheep.
There's a lot of words where it's just like it's air.
It's just there's no airs.
How many airs are here?
It's just air is around us.
So implicitly, one shouldn't have to worry about depleting it, right?
Well, wrong, because of course you can overfish.
And so it really bridges us to asking about how could we construct our actions today so
that it influences the way that we want the future to be.
