Welcome to the ActInf podcast, where we will present short, digestible segments clipped
from the Active Inference Lab weekly live streams.
If you like what you hear and you want to learn more, check out the entire live stream
on the Active Inference Lab YouTube channel.
My name is Blue Knight, and I will be guiding you through this podcast, which is clipped
from Active Inference Lab live stream number 4.1.
This week's episode is a discussion of the paper, Cultural Affordances, Scaffolding
Local Worlds Through Shared Intentionality and Regimes of Attention by Maxwell Ramstead,
Samuel Vessier, and Lawrence Kiermeier.
Daniel Friedman, who is based out of Davis, California, is facilitating this week's live
stream discussion of culture.
What is culture?
Or in the sense of this paper, in the sense of culture that's being scaffolded within a
kind of framework that we might want to build out, what would that kind of culture refer
to?
Well, so I'm Maxwell Ramstead.
I'm the first author on this paper, Cultural Affordances.
So culture, at least in the sense that we're using the term here, means something like the
taken for granted, I think is sort of the heuristic way that I like to think about it.
It's sort of like in a given local frame of reference, in a given environment shared by a group of
people living together, what are the things that are taken for granted?
What are the sets of expectations and beliefs and sets of practices and norms, you know, that are
shared and that essentially structure people's intuitive grip on their shared social world?
The next person to answer this question is Richard Niemeyer.
In sociology, we define culture. It's kind of three different dimensions. You have the symbolic
ideal dimension, which is really, I think, equivalent to semantic knowledge. We break it up in terms of
norms, values and beliefs. We have a psycho behavioral dimension, which is really about in body culture, how your body moves, the skills that you have. In terms of psychological kind of terminology, I would really say your skills and habits in kind of that non-negotiable way.
In kind of that non declarative memory sense. And then the third dimension is really our material dimensions of the physical things that we create, the tools, the buildings, the fashion, which I think the degree to which I understand the affordance literature, I think all three of those dimensions definitely have versions of affordances that could could connect to that.
I think that was one thing I did see in the paper that it did seem to be very much focused on just that semantic kind of symbolic dimension and not really explicitly incorporating the other dimensions that, at least in sociology, we would kind of include in that definition of culture.
And I think the question about multiple kinds of culture, ranging from the semantic concepts to the externalized production to the artifacts of culture, bring us to this idea of scaffolding culture.
So what is a way that culture is scaffolded? Someone can raise their hand, maybe someone new, but something that guides the construction, just like a scaffold.
I'll give one way, which is education, because pedagogy is sort of the guide rails for how individuals learn about those norms, as well as how to use the artifacts and construct new artifacts.
These are ways in which culture is scaffolded because it provides structure for the growth to happen within.
What is shared intentionality or what's a way in which somebody has seen shared intentionality play out in their recent experience?
Well, so there are two parts to that, right? There's shared and there's intentionality.
So intentionality, at least in the sense that we're using it in the paper, draws on the philosophical construct of intentionality that we can basically, you know, you can draw lineage all the way back to Brentano effectively.
So by intentionality, we mean orientation towards a world. We don't necessarily mean intentionality in the sense of having the intention to do this or that. It's from the Latin, I think, intensio, which is the word that was used to describe what an archer is doing with his arrow to hit the target.
It is intensio with the target. And so it's this that we're trying to get at. And one of the things that we're trying to argue here is that part of what makes a shared social world just that, a shared social world, is that there are forms of relating to that world.
So forms of intentionality that are also shared among the people who live in that world together. So that's what we're trying to get at ultimately, I think.
I think what's interesting in terms of if you take that definition and you look back at the scaffolding, you know, if you look within the individual, there's this network of semantic and episodic memory and non declarative memory that's organized in the brain.
If you put me into contact with another individual from my culture who shares my language and we begin to construct this we space, if you look at the phenomenology.
And then now what happens with this dyad, either we introduce a third person or we then one of us leaves the relationship when we go interact with someone else.
If you spread that dyadic interaction out to a network and then you look at the fractal scaling of that network, there's this way to, I think, to very deliberately keep track and build up from organized memory in the brain to an institution of 25,000 people dynamically interacting by following these mechanisms by which you create the shared space and looking at those emergent properties and trying to model them mathematically.
I couldn't agree more.
And there's a quote from the paper, which I'll spare Maxwell from reading is near the end.
It says to address more complex social situations, it is useful to revise current socio cognitive models of joint attention to encompass fundamentally triadic situations in which the third is the socially constituted niche of affordances supported by local ontologies and abilities.
So we're just jumping in today, but that's sort of where we're wanting to go with this paper and in discussion is towards understanding what is that third space and how does the aim or does the intent play in.
At this point, the conversation is going to shift from discussing and defining culture to discussing and defining affordances, natural affordances, cultural affordances and conventional affordances.
What is an example of each of these kinds of affordances or what are the differences between these types of affordances?
So what we're essentially arguing is that in humans, all affordances are at least minimally cultural in the sense that, I mean, I don't know about you, but as I was growing up, my mother told me not to slouch while I was at the dinner table.
And so, you know, something is simple and natural as sitting does actually come with a cultural scaffold.
And what we're saying is that there's basically a spectrum of affordances.
You can think about the space of affordances with his with which humans interact as going on a kind of continuum from natural to conventional where natural affordances depend mainly just on the biophysics of the human body in its interaction with the environment.
Whereas conventional affordances depend on these implicit or explicit sets of conventions or shared beliefs.
So, you know, an example of the latter would be a king's throne, right?
You don't sit on the king's throne unless you're a very specific agent.
So a king's throne doesn't afford sitting for everyone in the same way that, say, just a chair or a stool might afford sitting.
There are conventions, shared conventions, the kind of structure which affordances are available and which are not for a given agent.
Yeah.
Cool.
Richard?
Yeah.
I was just curious.
You're hearing literature in the neuroscience about, like, actually distinguishing that.
So if I see a cup, my mirror neuron system fires and I begin to kind of enact the act of reaching out and grabbing it.
But then semantically, I know that, you know, as a lowly surf, I'm not allowed to touch that.
Is there actually any research showing the conflict between semantic knowledge about, you know, and self-related knowledge that I'm not allowed to do that with the automatic kind of reaching out mirror neuron system simulation of touching the cup?
Yeah.
That's really interesting.
I'm not sure.
I don't know if there's any data about this particularly.
It would be very interesting, though.
One thought I had was some experiments, I believe, by Michael von Elk, with hands grasping cups at incorrect ways.
So something when your mirror neurons see, oh, that's not how you're supposed to grab a cup.
Well, why not?
Well, because I can't rotate my wrist again to drink it.
So it's the wrong way to hold it because it's not really a cup of water if I can't drink from it in that functional, affordance-based sense.
But I agree, it would be interesting and we'll follow up on that.
And Stephen, did you have any thoughts?
Hello, I'm Stephen.
I'm in Toronto.
I'm just working on a practice-based PhD.
I do a lot of work with participatory theatre and social topographies.
Yeah, I actually had a workshop when I was working with a group with disability and I mentioned about affordances as part of it.
And partly having done this paper and one of the participants, she was saying how when she sees a cup because she can't pick it up,
and she doesn't see it as a cup unless it's one that's got a handle that she can reach her hand into and do that.
So that kind of sense of things presenting is quite true.
And I like this breakdown because I get a sense that following on from the later work that Maxwell did,
like natural affordances is like, you know, if there's a cliff, it doesn't afford me to walk any further.
Whereas cultural is a bit more of like this mixing sort of a godic kind of space,
where it's conventional is like the throne. It's like it's not up for negotiation.
It's like you don't sit on the chair. It's like a fixed rule.
There's no kind of intersubjective piece going on.
So in some ways, the cultural piece seems to have some sort of negotiation associated with it, which is quite, quite cool.
Would it be accurate to say that in a sense of if I had the simulation to reach out and grab the cup,
but then my semantic memory says, no, we're not allowed to do that.
Could that almost be like a prediction error in the sense of like, I'm predicting that I'm going to do this.
Well, no, we don't do that.
Precisely. And the way that you would do that is probably by having a hierarchical model,
where basically the notion of hierarchy, I mean, it has political implications and we can kind of ditch those.
So I prefer thinking about it in terms of center and periphery, right?
Where like the periphery is the end of it that's closer to the sensory motor like interactions and the center is something more like,
you know, what we would think of as the top of a processing hierarchy where representations are progressively more compressed.
So if you look at the hierarchy from from periphery to center or from bottom to top, what you have represented there,
if you'll allow me the language of representation for a second, we can finesse it later.
But what's essentially represented there is as you progress towards the center, slower and slower or more and more abstract regularities.
So you might think that, yeah, as you see the chair at a kind of more automatic kind of sensory motor level,
you see it as something that you could sit on.
But as that ascends the processing hierarchy, at some point it registers an error as in like semantically,
I'm not allowed to sit on this because it's a king's chair.
So precisely, that's how that would work.
And you can you can accommodate for this kind of conflict by allowing the system to have a layered or hierarchical structure.
And great point. And this relates to how it's a spectrum of affordances.
So for example, a violin, when I look at a violin, I have the biophysics to bend my fingers, but I can't play violin.
So I see an affordance for something I could pick up potentially and not everybody may see that affordance.
However, somebody else sees that and culturally they think, oh, I could play this song or I could play that song.
And so what song they see the devices being able to be used for is going to be part of their enculturation,
part of their education, which builds upon the biophysics of the human body.
And that's why we have different dance styles in different places from different cultures,
even though everybody's elbows still move the same way. Sasha?
Hi, everyone. I'm Sasha and I'm in California.
Yeah. So in trying to understand affordances, I tend to think of it as like the space of what is allowed.
But in walking through the different kinds of affordances that we have, it becomes pretty clear that it's not just what is allowed.
It's very strongly gated by the top down priors of what you think should be allowed in your space.
And it just kind of reminds me of this anecdotal understanding of how children interact with an environment versus adults and how children would use or sit on objects that adults would never think of sitting on.
And kind of the different ways that they see and use the world because they don't have these top down priors of what one should and should not do.
And so that's a nice way of kind of circling back to the point of this paper that everything is embedded in culture and you don't just start from kind of the biophysics of sitting and work your way up.
You're always going back and forth.
This is such a great point. Thank you for pointing that out, Sasha.
The agenda here is to pursue this kind of cooperative turn in the anthropology literature, which is to say that, you know, as Joseph Henrik, who's one of my favorite anthropologists slash psychologists out there,
as he point as he puts it, we've crossed the evolutionary Rubicon in a way are our survival as humans depends on our ability to reliably access and use stored cultural information effectively.
And that's had an influence on the way that our biology is evolved.
So, you know, compared to chimps, for example, we have really weak digestive juices and that's because we've been able to offload the metabolic cost of, you know, having this extremely elaborate digestive system to our technology effectively.
You know, so tool use, the use of fire cooking technology has allowed us to process food in a way that then co-evolves with our bodies and takes the kind of processing load of the food off the body itself towards these cultural artifacts and practices that have co-evolved with our biology.
And that's really the point is that all human affordances are cultural affordances, which exist on a spectrum from more natural to more conventional.
But human biology is a cultural biology and biologic and yeah, culture is a biological phenomenon.
I think that the two are kind of irreconcilably joined in the case of human.
We hope you enjoyed this week's discussion of culture and cultural affordances.
Stay tuned for next week's episode, which will be discussing the same paper in greater detail.
Clyde
Clyde
Clyde
Clyde
Clyde
Clyde
Clyde
