This is Audible.
This is Innovative Language Learning.
This is a brief introduction to our language learning system.
Listen to this short introduction and the sample lesson that follows.
Congratulations!
You've just discovered the fastest and most fun way to learn a language.
Hundreds of thousands of language learners just like you have already discovered the
power of our system.
Since our start in December 2005, language learners in over 120 countries have downloaded
our fun and effective language learning lessons over 100 million times.
And every month, they download 5 million more.
So why are these lessons so popular?
You see, there's a powerful secret to learning a language.
A secret you'll find inside our language learning program.
Once you discover it, language learning becomes fun and fast.
Are you ready to discover the secret to language learning success?
Now, I can't just tell you the secret.
That wouldn't be fair.
It's something you'll discover for yourself as the program progresses.
Most people get it by the fifth lesson.
Some even after the first.
Simply use the program and you'll find it.
This program offers you a brand new way to learn a language.
You'll be speaking from the very first lesson with our fun, easy to use, and innovative method.
At the core of this new approach is a radio talk show format that keeps learning fun and entertaining.
The program is taught by two hosts.
One is a professional language teacher with classroom experience.
The other is an accomplished learner who knows what it's like to go from absolute beginner
to advanced proficiency.
Together, they'll guide you through practical, real-world conversations in a fun and relaxed
way.
Master pronunciation, key vocabulary, and gain insight into the inner workings of the language
from the language teacher.
Learn advanced tips, tactics, and shortcuts to second language mastery from the accomplished
language learner.
Together, the two hosts offer you a powerful perspective that you won't find in any textbook.
This collection is a best of the best, a carefully selected group of up-to-date language lessons.
Designed with feedback from a large community of language learners just like you, you'll
learn key vocabulary and phrases, essential grammar, and cultural insight explaining the
real world of today.
Imagine using your language skills to speak with a partner, family member, coworker, teacher,
or friend.
Imagine the looks on their faces when they hear you speaking with fluency and perfect pronunciation.
So whether you're learning for personal growth, travel, business, or school, or to understand
culture or pop culture like movies, TV shows, or music, this course will help you meet your
language learning goals fast.
Follow the five simple steps outlined in our program and start speaking from the very first
lesson.
You'll learn proper pronunciation, cultural insight, and insider information that will
utterly shock and amaze your friends, family, coworkers, and teachers.
How to use the program This program focuses on building core skills
necessary to learn a language fast.
Each part of the program focuses on a particular skill, and the course was carefully designed
so each lesson builds upon the previous one.
We recommend 45 minutes to listen, study, and review each lesson, but you can master a lesson
in as little as 8 to 15 minutes.
A lesson consists of a lesson audio track, which is 8 to 15 minutes, a conversation-only audio
track, which is under a minute, a key vocabulary review audio track, which is approximately
3 minutes, and the lesson notes, which take approximately 25 minutes to review.
To get the maximum benefit from our system, follow the following five simple steps.
These steps reduce complexity and accelerate learning.
Lessons stay fun and interesting, and you'll reach your language learning goals in the fastest
time possible.
Step 1.
Listen to the lesson audio track one time all the way through.
Each audio track is about 8 to 15 minutes, and each component of the lesson is designed
to improve a specific language learning skill or teach you some new information.
The lesson format was developed by professional teachers using feedback from the language learning
community.
The flow of the lesson track is as follows.
First, the host will provide context for a practical, real-world conversation in the language
you're studying.
Next, you'll hear the conversation, recorded by professional voice actors, three times in
a series.
First, you'll hear it at natural native speed, then at a slower speed with intonation clearly
pronounced, and finally with an English translation.
It's natural at this point that you won't understand every little nuance of the conversation.
Don't be alarmed or anxious, but continue to listen to the program.
Listening to the dialogues first is a key part of our system of accelerated learning.
The hosts will then take you inside the conversation and give you insight into the larger cultural
issues that frame it.
Next, you'll hear the key vocabulary.
Each word or phrase is presented once at natural native speed.
Then, you'll hear the English translation.
After this, you'll hear it broken down in the native language, syllable by syllable, and
repeated once more at natural native speed.
The syllable by syllable breakdown of key words is critical to mastering pronunciation and
adjusting your ear to the sound of the language.
Next, you'll learn more about usage of key words and phrases as they are illustrated by
examples.
Finally, master the grammar used in the conversation with a detailed grammar explanation by the hosts.
Step two, listen to the conversation-only audio track, which is less than a minute.
You'll understand the conversation much better this time, and by adding this short audio track
onto your portable media player or onto your computer's audio playlist, you can quickly
and easily review the whole lesson anywhere and at any time.
Step three, practice with the audio review track, which is approximately three minutes.
When you listen to this track, you will hear a series of key words and core phrases
that reinforce fluency and pronunciation.
Listen to the word or phrase.
A pause will follow and give you time to say the word or phrase aloud.
Do so at this time.
It is very important to your progress that you say the words out loud.
Next, you'll then hear the English translation.
At the midway point of the track, the order will be reversed.
You'll hear the English translation first.
Your job is to say the equivalent word or phrase out loud in the pause that follows.
You'll then hear the word or phrase in the target language.
This review track allows you to both practice and evaluate yourself.
Step four, read the lesson notes, which takes approximately 25 minutes.
Reading the transcript, translation, vocabulary, and grammar point will reinforce everything
you've heard so far.
You'll rapidly improve your reading ability and familiarize yourself with the writing
system of the language.
This exercise is designed to improve a different set of skills.
Step five, read through the lesson notes while listening to the main audio track one more time,
which takes approximately eight to 15 minutes.
Commit new information to memory and reinforce everything you've learned by following along with
the lesson notes.
Read the conversation transcript and study vocabulary and phrases while listening to the audio.
See a detailed explanation and examples of the grammar point as you read along.
Commit it to memory by reviewing all information you learn in the lesson.
Many new learners make the mistake of feeling they must reach 100% comprehension and mastery
to move on to the next lesson in the series.
Feedback from hundreds of thousands of listeners has taught us that seeking perfection actually
slows down learning and makes it tedious and less effective.
We designed our system from the bottom up to be self-reinforcing.
Once you reach about 80% comprehension of the dialogue in a lesson, you should feel free
to move on to the next lesson in the series.
It's important to listen to the lessons in order.
And since this course is one level in a larger system, once this level is complete, move on
to the next.
You'll master new language skills and also reinforce the lessons from this level.
Experience has taught us that this is the fastest and most enjoyable path to second language
mastery.
Course content.
What will you be able to do after the course?
After using our system, you'll be able to effectively navigate life in a foreign society.
You'll be able to talk with friends, partners, family, teachers, and coworkers.
Imagine being able to order the food you want in restaurants and getting around town with
confidence in taxis, trains, buses, and cars.
Display mastery of manners, etiquette, and local customs.
Meet people and make friends.
And enjoy pop culture like movies, music, TV shows, and online media.
And the results?
Shockingly good, in the words of a user.
Program users are shocked at their rapid progress.
And native speakers are shocked at their language ability.
Many of our language learners have told us that native speakers are truly shocked at some
of the practical, everyday words and phrases they use.
The native speakers repeatedly ask where they learned such good language skills.
Follow our five simple steps and you, too, will see shocking results fast.
Go even faster.
Further enhance and accelerate your learning experience by visiting InnovativeLanguage.com.
Innovative Language Learning has developed a number of features offered through its websites
that make your language learning experience even more effective and fun.
Find the links to these sites and these features at InnovativeLanguage.com.
Some of these features include self-study tools, community interaction, line-by-line audio transcripts,
the voice recorder tool, and evaluation tools.
Self-study.
Vocabulary flashcards that let you select what you want to study and keep track of your progress.
Community.
Meet other language learners and interact with our staff of professional hosts and teachers
directly through the website.
Have a question about a lesson?
Ask it directly on a page devoted to the lesson.
Have a comment or feedback?
Share it with others on that same lesson page or in our popular forums.
Line-by-line audio transcripts.
With a click of the button, you can hear the conversation broken down while reading the text
of the conversation.
Practicing with the line-by-line audio transcript allows you to practice reading and listening
comprehension simultaneously.
The voice recorder tool.
Using the voice recorder, you can practice while following along with the line-by-line audio
notes.
Try your best to copy the pronunciation of the native show hosts.
Evaluation tools.
Lesson-specific and general quizzes will reinforce what you've studied in the course and aid those
preparing for standardized language proficiency tests.
These are perfectly integrated with our five-step system.
Visit InnovativeLanguage.com to take advantage of these fun and advanced tools today.
This advanced audio blog is entirely in Arabic.
To get more Arabic lessons and for free, go to ArabicPod101.com and sign up for your free
lifetime account.
Signing up takes less than a minute and you'll find more great lessons just like this one.
In addition, you'll find the transcript of this audio blog in the first comment of this
post.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
على أن ضمرها الزلزال الكبير سنة 1775
كما ضمر لشبونة عاصمة البرتغال
عند نهاية القرن الثامن عشر
تم بناء المدينة من طرف سيد محمد الثالث
ولا ذالت تحتفظ بالاسم العربي الدار البيضاء كازابلانكا
إلى جانب اسمها
من الأشياء التي تتميز بها المدينة
المدينة هو الفرق بين المدينة الجديدة
التي تأثرت بتابع الأرت ديكو
ديكو أرت
إضافة إلى المدينة العتيقة
ذات الطابع الأصيل والتي تغضع دائما للترميم
توجد بالدار البيضاء مدينة تدعى بالمدينة الجديدة
وهي تضم أهم سلسلة من المنشآت العصرية
ذات الفن الأرت ديكو بالمغرب
وقد تم تخطيط الطرق الرئيسية والمعالم في المدينة الجديدة
من طرف الفرنسي
هنري بروست
وكانت مثال لمدينة جديدة في ذلك الوقت
على الرغم من دقتها
استطاعت الدار البيضاء أن تحفظ على جمال خاص
يجمع التراث المغرب الأصيل وفن الأرت ديكو
اشتركوا في القناة
Remember, repeating the words aloud really helps improve pronunciation
Halfway through, we'll switch the order
Are you ready?
زلزل
Earthquake
ميناء
Port
مدينة
City
الدار البيضاء
Casablanca
المغرب
Morocco
Okay, now we switch it up
First we give the English
Then, we'll give you a couple of seconds to say it in Arabic
Finally, we'll give you the translation
Ready?
لسبون
Lispona
Portugal
Portugal
Capital
Capital
آسمة
Piret
Kursan
Cursan
France
France
France
France
France
France
الدار
الدار البيضاء
كازابلانكا
تقع الدار البيضاء في غرب المغرب على الساحل الأطلسي
وهي تعد أكبر مدينة بالمغرب حيث يتجاوز عدد سكانها ثلاث ملايين نسمة
إن موقع الدار البيضاء الاستراتيجي جعل منها أهم ميناء بالمغرب
أكبر ميناء بشمال أفريقيا وأكبر ميناء استناعي في العالم
اسم الدار البيضاء من أصل برتغالي ويعني البيت الأبيض
بدأ التأثير البرتغالي على المدينة منذ القرن الخامس عشر
حيث قام البرتغال بالسيطرة عليها
بحجة القضاء على القراصنة الذين يستعملون الميناء قاعدة للإغارة على السفن البرتغالية
ازدهرت الدار البيضاء إبان الحكم البرتغالي
على أن دمرها الزلزال الكبير سنة 1775
كما دمر لشبونة عاصمة البرتغال
عند نهاية القرن الثامن عشر
تم بناء المدينة من طرف سيد محمد الثالث
ولا ذالت تحتفظ بالاسم العربي الدار البيضاء كازابلانكا
إلى جانب اسمها
من الأشياء التي تتميز بها المدينة
هو الفرق بين المدينة الجديدة
التي تأثرت بتابع الأرت ديكو
ديكو أرت
إضافة إلى المدينة العتيقة
سات الطابع الأصيل والتي تغضع دائما للترميم
توجد بالدار البيضاء مدينة تدعى بالمدينة الجديدة
وهي تضم أهم سلسلة من المنشآت العصرية
ذات الفن الأرت ديكو بالمغرب
وقد تم تخطيط الطرق الرئيسية
والمعالم في المدينة الجديدة من طرف الفرنسي
هنري بروست
وكانت مثال لمدينة جديدة في ذلك الوقت
على الرغم من دقتها
استطاعت الدار البيضاء
أن تحفظ على جمال خاص
يجمع التراث المغرب الأصيل
وفن الأرت ديكو
ترجمة نانسي قنقر
