Welcome to the ACT-INF podcast, where we will present short digestible segments clipped
from the Active Inference Lab weekly live streams.
If you like what you hear and you want to learn more, check out the entire live stream
at the Active Inference Lab YouTube channel.
My name is Blue Knight and I will be guiding you through this podcast episode, which is
clipped from ACT-INF Lab live stream number 5.1.
This discussion will be loosely structured around the paper, Multiscale Integration Beyond
Internalism and Externalism by Maxwell Ramstead, Michael Kirkhoff, Axel Constant, and Carl Friston.
Daniel Friedman from Davis, California will be facilitating this week's discussion about
Multiscale Integration.
So just as a warm up and to hear from everyone who would like to speak by raising their hand,
let's just start with asking what drew you to this paper or topic today?
So I'll start and while other people are raising their hand, and I described this a little
bit in the 5.0 video, but I think the idea of integrating Multiscale Systems is really interesting
and there's so many ways to go about it.
And it's almost undeniable that we're living in Multiscale Systems, but the question is, what
now?
We're always interested to hear about systems for thinking about what now and also for different
people's perspective.
Great.
Muddy, and anyone else can raise their hand.
Hi, guys.
My name is Muddy.
So I was a PhD student with Carl Friston, graduating back in 2016.
But I think nested systems are an incredibly important way to view real dynamical systems that
we see all the time in the spatial web, so we constantly have streams of data coming from
IoT.
And then we're kind of met with the scalability challenge of how do we actually model a system
accurately to represent the dynamics that we wish without getting bogged down in this
sort of field of complexity.
So by abstracting away these layers into really, really meaningful nested heterarchies is really,
really key in being able to practically deploy some of these novel learning paradigms in real
world spaces.
So I think without this sort of, quote unquote, dimensionality reduction, and I mean that in
more of a philosophical sense than a mathematical sense, we're going to struggle to apply AI at
scale.
So that's why I'm particularly interested in the work that Maxwell and the Free Energy Principle
group is doing.
Cool.
Let's hear from Maxwell, then Sasha.
Sasha, do you want to go first?
I don't have to go next, necessarily.
Hi.
Thank you.
My name is Sasha.
I'm a neuroscience graduate student at Davis.
I was drawn to this paper because as a neuroscientist, I think a lot about multiscale levels and to decide
at which level a system should be studied because even though we're studying something at a molecular
level or even in a different species, we ultimately want to make claims about larger cognitive processes and how to do that without abstracting away really important aspects of the system at the scale that you're studying it.
It's a huge question.
It's a huge question.
So I really like thinking about these Markov blankets at different levels and where to draw
the line.
Cool.
Maxwell, then Richard, then Alex K.
Hey, I'm Maxwell Ramstad.
I'm a postdoctoral fellow at McGill University.
I think my remarks are going to echo a lot of what's been said.
I got into the free energy principle stuff originally because I was looking for a theory that could address dynamics at and across multiple different.
Well, the way I used to see it is ontological levels in working with the free energy principle.
I've come to reject the traditional metaphysics of ontological levels in favor of this view that there are big things and there are small things and big things are made up by small things and big things tend to be slow and small things tend to be fast.
And what you actually have is like this nested series of systems that are made up of increasingly big things.
And yeah, back when I was starting up my PhD in 2015, there wasn't any theory that I could see that was really able to not only define dynamics at each of these different levels, but propose a way, a mechanism by which they were all integrated.
And this is what I found via the free energy principle.
So I sort of made it my thing from 2016 to now actually to explore the multiscale implications of this framework.
Awesome. Richard, then Alex K.
So my name is Richard Niemeyer. I'm an assistant professor of sociology in Denver, Colorado.
Yeah, I think one thing that I've been really drawn to the last couple of years is the mechanistic philosophical perspective of Carl Craver and Lindsay Darden.
They give you this really nice, I think, tool set on how to talk about decomposing mechanisms, levels of mechanisms, which is very intuitive.
And I think works well with with sociology and biology, which has this very clear conceptual way to move up and down, quote unquote, levels of reality.
But the thing that's I think always been missing is how do I take that conceptual language and match it with an empirical framework that this allows me to model those levels of reality in a way without losing any of the subtleties and any of the conceptual apparatus that is so critical to talking about those those different frameworks.
And the more and more I get into the free energy principle, it seems like it can give you that empirical language that has a very nice, natural transition into that conceptual language I'm so used to, that gives you all of the stuff you're trying to talk about conceptually, but then also gives you these empirical tools that allows you to go above that and talk about the organization of the mechanism in a very nice, precise, empirical language that's just impossible to do, I think, with a lot of existing methods in the fields that I'm used to.
Cool. Let's do Alex K and Steven. And then I'm going to go to the second question.
Hi, everyone. I'm Alex. I'm coming from a philosophy and cognitive science background. So I just recently sort of gotten into this whole multiscale picture associated with the FTP. And I guess my interest in this is, it seems to me like, like, I'm nearly 100% convinced that this is a really good description of reality at multiple scales, but I'm not completely convinced that this
has the radical kind of philosophical implications that some people think it does. I mean, this paper actually strikes kind of a nice middle ground. But I guess to put it briefly, like, I view this as we've got nested multiple systems, each of which possibly has a physical as well as a cognitive description.
And maybe the bounds of cognition within that hierarchy are maybe less strict than may have been thought. Like, I'm happy describing cognition or ascribing cognition to systems at various levels within this hierarchy.
But I don't see that it's so hard to pin the cognitive properties of one particular system onto a particular physical system. So I'm not, I'm not sure. Anyway, I hope that that gets, we can get through some of that. Also, I'm not sure which system I am in this hierarchy of embedded systems that, you know, my brain involves many systems in itself.
And that's self embedded in larger systems. So I'm trying to figure out which type of system within that hierarchy an individual person might be identified with.
Cool, Stephen, and then we're going to go to the next question to Muddy and Mel or anyone else who raises their hand.
Okay.
Hi, I'm Stephen Silly. I'm in Toronto. And I do community development projects using theatre and immersive participatory approaches. And yeah, I'm very interested in how this gives a kind of action orientated meso level approach, which is really useful, because when I'm working with, say, a community, trying to understand how to connect to the individual, to the group,
to the team, to the organization, or maybe influencing change at the municipality, or broader social levels, is this real problem of bridging scale.
And it ends up getting caught up in all this language in whichever field has been, you know, the psychological perspective, or this perspective, or that perspective.
So this gives a kind of seems like a very neutral, clean way of understanding how people make sense of different levels. And that's really valuable. I think that's been missing from community psychology is really actually psychology itself suffering from that, because it's kind of stuck in this level of
perspective perspective or interpretation. So this gives a way to actually go into the sub personal. So for me, getting into all of this has actually opened up all this sub personal neuroscience side, which I actually haven't really got into before. So it's kind of interesting.
Nice. Thanks for all these responses.
We hope you enjoyed this week's podcast episode. Stay tuned for next time when people will be discussing the specific multi-scale systems that they work with.
Okay.
