Welcome to the ActInf podcast, where we will present short digestible segments clipped from the Active Inference Lab weekly live streams.
If you like what you hear and you want to learn more, check out the entire live stream at the Active Inference Lab YouTube channel.
My name is Blue Knight and I will be guiding you through this podcast episode, which is clipped from ActInf Lab live stream number 5.2.
This discussion will be loosely structured around the paper, Multiscale Integration, Beyond Internalism and Externalism.
By Maxwell Ramstead, Michael Kirchhoff, Axel Constant and Carl Fristin.
Maxwell Ramstead, the first author, will start off our discussion talking about internalism and externalism.
I just want to point out that our agenda in this paper was sort of to dispel the isms of internal and externalism, right?
So, I mean, the idea is sort of that, well, cognitive science for most of its, you know, from its inception to basically the heuristically like the late 80s was an internalist program.
And then externalist approaches started appearing in the late 80s and 90s, you know, that emphasized things like embodiment, you know, the fact that cognition is grounded in the operations of a body.
You know, and then you saw the appearance of theses in philosophy, like the extended mind thesis or the extended cognition thesis, which is a strong metaphysical claim that says, well, actually, the realizers of cognitive processes spill over into the environment.
So that if you're going to draw a boundary around the cognitive system, you have to include external components, environmental components as realizers of these processes.
And the kind of hard line externalist position is basically kind of the traditional inactivist position.
It's the equal partners principle, which essentially says cognition is always necessarily a loop between, you know, internal structures like the brain and action and external structures like, you know, the ones in the environment that we're interacting with.
And our view on that was that any essentialist position about the boundaries of cognition, which is to say any position that says, OK, well, we can define a necessary and sufficient set of conditions such that we can identify whether this or that, you know, is a bit of cognition and whether it's internal or external to some, you know, the organism's boundary that any essentialist position of that sort is going to be wrongheaded.
That there's not kind of a one size fits all way to cut up system.
So basically, we're making two kind of ontological claims about the boundaries of cognition, which is that they're multiple and that they're nested.
So, you know, they're multiple in the sense that depending on your what you want to explain, then the relevant boundaries might be around, you know, a cluster of cells in the brain or it might be the brain itself or some region of the brain.
Or maybe it's the brain body system or maybe, you know, so it depends.
And then the epistemological point, which is precisely that it depends on our explanatory interests.
So, you know, it may be that if you want to explain, for example, daydreaming or some other kind of phenomenon, well, you're mostly going to be appealing to brain processes.
But if you want to explain sport performance, then this loop thing is going to be the most important.
And importantly, the point of the article is that the free energy principle gives us reason to think that we shouldn't take these strong essentialist positions.
That there's a way around them and a way of being more ecumenical and flexible about where we situate these boundaries.
Daniel Friedman will continue facilitating this discussion.
Very nice.
I agree.
And hopefully that's where this discussion will take people is beyond the dogma towards the specifics of the situation.
And I also was thinking about, like, dreaming versus action.
Are these internalist versus externalist stances challenged by actionless experience, like a dream?
Or is a dream, are they going to couch that as some type of experience?
And you know what?
Enough with that.
Let's just look for a framework that will help us deal with the specifics of the situation.
So, speaking of internal and external and how they're treated under the free energy principle, let's talk a little bit about Markov blankets.
There's a quote in the paper that the Markov blankets are a result of the system's dynamics.
And two twin questions that I wanted to raise and think about were, what if we compare two systems that have the same components but different dynamics?
And the sort of inverse of that question, which is two systems that have different components but the same dynamics.
So, especially if we think about the Markov boundary shielding internal states, so black box around some level of analysis, all we're able to see are the emitted states.
So, the dynamics of the emitted states may be similar even though there's two different underlying realities.
So, two different computers, different hardware, but then they're able to run the same program at the same speed.
And then the other side of the question would be, okay, you can have the same computer with the same underlying componentry, but then it might be involved in multiple different kinds of dynamics.
So, how does that fit with the Markov blanket?
What is the Markov blanket really tracking?
Is it tracking the inputs and the outputs of the objective system?
Is it tracking the inputs and the outputs of us measuring the system?
Well, so, one thing to highlight just before we really get started is that I think too much emphasis has been placed on the literature, in part, I mean, in my own work also, on the Markov blanket on its own.
Markov blankets are very common and explanatorily uninteresting just on their own for the most part.
So, I mean, in a Markov blanket, you have a set of random variables.
You want to see whether, you know, this and that one are independent.
Well, the Markov blanket is the set of random variables that renders them independent in the sense that basically they're conditioned on the existence of this other set of variables.
Then these two are statistically independent in terms of like their, yeah, so that's cool, but there are Markov blankets everywhere, right?
So, you can think of like the present as a Markov blanket between the past and the future, for example.
It's a very general thing.
In the context that we're talking here, the Markov blankets like get their explanatory purchase when you combine it with the other kind of moving parts of the free energy principle, formalism, which are the non-equilibrium steady state slash generative model thing.
So, basically, the Markov blanket tells you which set of states kind of belong to the system and which don't.
And then the non-equilibrium steady state density tells you, well, what is the basically like the set of correlated values that these states can have such that the phenotype is maintained.
And it's the two together that really get you the explanatory power of the free energy principle, sort of like where the system is and what it is.
The where kind of answered by the Markov blanket thing and the what answered by the generative model aspect of it.
Yeah, and so the Markov blanket itself in the free energy principle stuff, you get it from a sparsity constraints on the flow.
So, basically, this means like I know it sounds technical, but it basically means that all of the states of the system are flowing, right?
They're changing dynamically.
They're moving around in the state space.
The system is moving around in its state space.
And basically, when we say sparsity conditions on the flow, it's that some variables don't affect the change of other variables.
So that, you know, the rate of change of one variable with respect to some other set of variables is a relevant kind of way of measuring the influence of one set of variables on another.
And, I mean, if the general idea is if conditioned on some set of variables, the rate of change of one variable relative to the other is zero, then you can say that there's an independence statistically, right?
So the way that the blankets are constructed is by analyzing the dependencies structure of the flow and then saying, okay, well, the dynamics themselves seem to carve out these kind of independencies.
So it's a dynamical notion.
And I'm emphasizing that because the dynamics themselves are premised on the whole generative model aspect of it.
So it all kind of moves together.
Yeah.
And you don't get the free energy stuff just out of Markel Blanket.
Shannon?
I'm Shannon Brooks.
I'm in South Dakota currently, but I'm usually based at the University of California.
Following up on that, I think there's a way to rephrase these two questions.
And that the first question, comparing systems with the same components, but different dynamics, is asking sort of how the same set of components, if you give them a different set of initial conditions, can exhibit completely different behaviors or like come to embody different phenotypes in a certain niche.
And then the second question, what if they have different components, but they have the same dynamics, is a question of multiple realizability, where you could have the same sort of computation or something enacted with different components.
And these questions together, I think, highlight the importance of if you have this Markel Blanket over time, this sort of like system of interest over time, the importance of the way that system is structured and the function between
We could say the different nodes underneath the Markov Blanket, and that's more important than the actual physical stuff it's made out of, maybe.
And back to the first question, the role of the environment in affecting the internal states of that system.
Cool. Thank you.
And well stated and tied back to these other questions about multiple realizations.
The follow-up question to that was just in which ways the blanket is tracking just the pure observations of the system versus the causal relationships.
And you gave a great example about how, depending on the initial conditions, that means that the conditional dependencies in the systems may be very different.
And so in those cases, the Markov Blankets are different.
And in some senses, this is an implication of saying that the boundaries of cognition are context dependent, because it shouldn't surprise us that the Markov Blanket, and we will get to the generative model and internal states soon, but it shouldn't surprise us that the boundaries change, because there's times where the cognitive process is happening in different causal ways or different spatial scales.
We hope you enjoyed this episode, stay tuned for next time when we will be talking about nested instrumentalism and the generative model.
