Welcome to the ActInf podcast, where we will present short, digestible segments clipped from the Active Inference Lab weekly live streams.
If you like what you hear and you want to learn more, check out the entire live stream at the Active Inference Lab YouTube channel.
The link to the live stream is provided in the episode description.
My name is Blue Knight, and I will be guiding you through this podcast episode, which is clipped from ActInf Lab live stream number 5.2.
This discussion will be loosely structured around the paper, Multiscale Integration, Beyond Internalism and Externalism, by Maxwell Ramstead, Michael Kirkhoff, Axel Constant, and Carl Friston.
Daniel Friedman, who is facilitating this discussion, will start off talking about the generative model.
Let's look at this very provocative quote, which is,
In this sense, cognitive science might be understood as the study of generative models and processes.
It is the business of modeling the correlational or causal structure of actions and observations of the organism.
The generative model, then, is not the vehicle of something like content or mutual information.
Instead, it is the tool that we use to study cognitive systems as an explanatory model, and indeed, perhaps more speculatively, the guide or path living systems entail and follow to stay alive as control systems.
So, in both of these quotes, there are some pretty interesting notions from a cognitive science perspective, and also, it hints at this way that the Markov blanket or that the active inference idea, it not only is how organisms are in their environment, and so that's referring to this path that living systems follow to stay alive.
In other words, in other words, that that's what the bacteria is doing, but also, it's the tool that we use to study cognitive systems, and I thought it was pretty interesting that it was first and foremost and unambiguously presented as a tool that we use to study systems, and then, perhaps more speculatively, it was a guide that living systems follow to stay alive.
Yeah, so, Maxwell, yeah, I'm curious just about that breakdown.
Yeah, to give you some context, this paper, Multiscale Integration, the Schrodinger, answering Schrodinger's question, and A Tale of Two Densities were all originally the same paper, that we split up into different lumps, with answering Schrodinger's question being the more kind of theoretical, mathematical statement,
and then these two other papers being kind of philosophical explorations of the consequences of all this.
So, over the past few months, it's become clearer to me what's going on here, and I have a paper on this now, which has been published in Entropy with Ineshi Polito and Carl Friston.
It's called, Is the Free Energy Principle a Formal Theory of Semantics?
And, yes, is the answer to that question.
And, basically, I've been playing around with the idea that there are kind of two levels of instrumentalism that are at play here.
So, instrumentalism, broadly speaking, in the philosophy of science is the view that, well, the work of science happens by leveraging scientific models and getting them to do some interesting explanatory work, explaining the variance in our data and stuff like that.
So, an instrumentalist would claim that scientific models aren't literal descriptions of the universe, but a kind of useful tool that we as scientists use to explain the main causal features of the phenomena around us.
So, there's a first level, then, that you can be instrumentalist about the free energy principle.
And, I think that, you know, on a good day, when I wake up on the right side of the bed, I'm an instrumentalist about scientific models.
You know, science is about, I think, you know, comparing models of data with theoretical and formal models, ultimately.
And, these can be read in a very, very large way.
So, you know, on a bad day, I'm a realist, or I have a realist bent, and I really think that these models are getting at, you know, something like the true causal structure of reality.
But, that's, I think, scientific hubris, maybe, or whatever.
But, anyway, so, there's this kind of meta level, this philosophy of science kind of instrumentalism level.
And, I think that there's a debate there.
You know, you can, some of my, you know, close friends and collaborators think that the FEP is finally a literal theory of, you know, how brains, you know, process information.
So, it's not just a metaphor or, like, you know, an as-if thing, but it's really, this is how it happened.
All this is independent from what the theory, the free energy principle itself says.
And, so, the more controversial claim, but I think, increasingly, I think this is the only way to really interpret what the math does, like, coherently.
What the free energy principle is, in a sense, is a statement about how organisms are able to exploit, use, or leverage the statistical structure of their bodies in motion to generate patterns of adaptive behavior.
So, from that point of view, you know, regardless of what your position is at the meta level or the philosophy of science level, at the theoretical level, what the FEP is telling you is that organisms are exploiting a model, effectively, that they are a statistical model that they embody in order to generate patterns of adaptive behavior.
So, that was the, that's the clarify.
Increasingly, I think that, you know, double instrumentalism, I'm all about this nested stuff, right?
So, instrumentalism nested within instrumentalism is probably the right way to, to approach these questions.
But, it definitely, for sure, at the theory level, the free energy principle is an instrumentalist theory of cognition, regardless of whether we're realist about the ontology that it might entail.
So, thanks for that clarification and kind of reading between the citations there.
And I also really agree with that.
It's sort of like, well, we've tuned into the idea that it really is about our model of the world and about us in relationship with the world.
And now people just say, well, how is the world really?
And then the free energy principle saying, well, it's really about the feedback between the organism and the environment.
And then we still want something to pin down to that's really how it is.
But that's the instrumentalism of science is whether you use optimal foraging theory or an economic theory or some other theory, that doesn't change what the system is doing.
The bacteria doesn't know, doesn't care what version of which theoretical framework you're using or, you know, what papers you have or haven't read.
It's doing what it does. And the free energy principle is saying that what it does is, as you had just described, leveraging the bodies in motion.
Though also I have some questions about where thought fits into that.
And that's really it. It's really us in feedback, understanding our environment to guide skillful action.
And you can't just cut the loop there and say, well, but then what is just what is really happening?
It's really what's happening. And the real implications of that are as you described.
So if there's no other comments on this slide, I'm going to go to this next few points about what is internal and what is generative.
So first was a very interesting quote in the latter part of the paper.
And they wrote, first, we take issue with the claim that under the free energy principle, the generative model is something internal to the organism.
So they're dissenting from the opinion that the generative model is something that is merely internal, i.e. that the generative model comprises neuronal vehicles or any other vehicles, I guess like cars.
Rather, the generative model is a mathematical construct that explains how the quantities embodied by the system's architecture change to transcribe, that is, update beliefs about, the causes of the system's sensory observation.
What should be at stake in the debate between the internalists and externalists is the status of the guess that the organism embodies, namely, the posterior beliefs encoded by internal states and whether this guess does or does not constitute the limits of cognition, understood as the avoidance of surprisal or informational homeostasis.
So my question here was, if the internal states are not generative models, or another way to say, if the generative model is not something that's just internal to the organism, what are the internal states?
And then the other side of that question is, well, then what or where is this generative model playing out?
So I can answer that.
I think it's a lot simpler than it might seem initially.
So in machine learning, if you have a bunch of variables, some of which are hidden, some of which are observable, and you write a joint probability distribution over all of those variables, then that joint probability distribution or density is called a generative model.
So it's called generative because by representing all of the statistical relations between all of the different variables as this big joint density, you're effectively able to generate the outcomes or the data that you would expect contingent on these causal relations
actually holding between all of the different variables that you're talking about, so just from a mathematical point of view, this joint density is never represented explicitly anywhere in the brain in the free energy active inference approaches.
Typically, typically this whole joint density, in all of these kind of more formal models, what you'll typically see is like one big probability distribution written on the left-hand side of an equation,
p over all of the states that you're trying to look at, often these will be states and precisions and all these things, and then is equal to some big product of likelihood and priors.
So the idea is that there is a generative model at play, but it's only at play in the dynamics.
The generative model is sort of like the wave of falling dominoes.
The wave itself is only present in the kind of motion or dynamics of the domino pile falling.
Yeah, so what we're kind of proposing here, and we'll be discussing this a bit more in the next weeks with a tale of two densities of the paper, which is specifically about this.
But the idea here is what body states actually encode are posterior estimates, right?
So posterior estimates of the value of states.
Like your body is basically your best ongoing guess as to what's causing your sensory states.
And yeah, the generative model itself is sort of like the point of reference for the dynamics.
So, I mean, if you think about it, what is this joint probability distribution thing?
Well, it's essentially a kind of surface that the system is moving around over, or equivalently that describes the probability of finding the system in a given state at random if you're just sampling it.
And what it's telling you is the allowable covariations between all of the values of the variables that make up the system such that the phenotype is maintained.
So, you know, speaking a bit loosely, perhaps, this generative model thing just is the phenotype of the organism in this kind of broad statistical sense of harnessing all of the possible combinations of states that are compatible with the continued existence of the organism.
So, I mean, it's a bit hard to grasp, I'll admit, but at least the mathematics of it kind of look like that.
Thanks for that explanation.
And it's why we're here is to really dive into some of these key issues.
I think just reflecting on the pieces that I'm taking away from this is, one, is that the free energy principle is describing how scientists investigate systems or investigators of any kind.
And then, as was put, perhaps more speculatively is what is actually happening in the system, but in some sense that's secondary because it's so important to be clear about how we're approaching the system.
So instead of saying, oh, well, it's an optimal forager, it's like, no, I'm studying the ants foraging within an optimal foraging framework.
No one can take that away from me.
And then whether the ant is doing optimal foraging or some other thing, it's almost a secondary question because it's so critical to be clear about our perspective.
And then the second piece is this internal and external debate or whatever it is, tension between those two stances is to be clear about where the generative model is and what it is and isn't.
And also, it's just a map and territory distinction.
We hope you enjoyed this week's episode.
Stay tuned for next time when we will take a deeper dive into the generative model.
