Welcome to the ActInf podcast, where we will present short, digestible segments clipped
from the Active Inference Lab weekly live streams.
If you like what you hear and you want to learn more, check out the entire live stream
at the Active Inference Lab YouTube channel.
My name is Blue Knight, and I will be guiding you through this podcast episode, which is
clipped from ActInf Lab live stream number 5.1.
This discussion will be loosely structured around the paper, Multiscale Integration,
Beyond Internalism and Externalism, by Maxwell Ramstead, Michael Kirkhoff, Axel Constant,
and Carl Friston.
Maxwell Ramstead, the first author, will start off our discussion of inactivism and operational
closure.
Part of the argument that we're making, I think that's controversial, is that basically
most of what the inactive approach does, we can do with the active inference approach,
but in a way that's formally backed, you know, by like a principled physics-based approach.
And so we're just discussing here the notion of operational closure that inactivists use
to define an autopoietic entity, like a self-producing entity.
And the argument that we make immediately after is that, well, active inference doesn't just
say there is this operational closure, it tells you why there is operational closure.
Daniel Friedman will continue facilitating this discussion.
Nice.
And also to reference what we were talking about with Mel just briefly, Kant performed a teleological
analysis and said that the organism is not just the limits per se of the epithelium, not
a physical boundary, but it's actually the teleologically closed entity.
And so that is really consonant with the idea that the eusocial insect colony is an organism,
not a superorganism.
By calling it a superorganism, we reify the boundary of organism being at the epithelia.
And people say, oh, well, it's like a superorganism.
It's all these little insect organisms working together.
But actually, because of the major evolutionary shift in eusociality in the ants, for example,
the colony is the organism.
We don't draw a little single cell organism barrier around each one of our cells and then
spend all of our time running the math on the altruism between the nerve cell and the
muscle cell and the sex cell and things like that.
We just say, no, that's the teleological level.
The liver is going to make sense in a broader end.
And that end is the organism.
And then the question about what the privileged level of analysis should be, the organismal
teleological analysis says, right, the liver and the stomach make sense at the level of
the organism.
But in some sense, doesn't the organism only make sense in the context of its cultural
niche and of its social relationship?
So why stop there?
Where should the teleological closure end?
Where should the functional closure end?
And that's what demands, I think, a true multilevel perspective, because there's going to be questions
where the functional boundary is the epithelium around the person or around the single amp
nest mate.
But there's other times where what we're talking about is the closure around the organism as
the teleological whole.
And that's not always the same thing as the epithelium.
Yeah.
Richard?
So my name is Richard Neumeyer.
I'm an assistant professor of sociology in Denver, Colorado.
Yeah.
I think this general argument is really captured well in the Craver and Darden mechanistic philosophical
perspective to where a phenomenon is defined by the entities and activities that generate
it or produce it.
And so whatever phenomenon you define, whether it's the ant, it's the colony, there's going
to be some mechanism that generates it.
And that mechanism is decomposable down to whatever you want.
So the colony can be decomposed down to the individual ant, which can be decomposed down
to the various biological structures.
And really, when you want to move up and down, you're just simply identifying, OK, what are
the entities and activities that generate a phenomenon that interacts with other phenomenon
entities and activities to create that, right?
And you build up and down.
Because I think it gets really dangerous in sociology.
We do this a lot to where there is no individual.
There's only society in this theological reasoning where it gets very hard to keep track of, OK,
well, Bob commits a crime, not the entire society that Bob's a part of.
So how can I drill down on Bob as an entity that I want to talk about, but then recognize
that Bob is part of a larger structure and not reducing it to the group as the entity in
itself?
Yes, it's 100 percent related to that book of Helen Longino, whether, you know, was it
the arm that committed the aggression?
Was it the person or was it the group?
And so it's funny.
I'm sorry.
You mentioned that because I mean, that's kind of a symptom in schizophrenia where a lot
of criminals will say, I didn't kill him.
The bullet did.
And logically, that makes sense in terms of that reasoning.
But any rational person would say, well, no, you pulled the trigger.
So therefore, the bullet is responsible.
You know, are you responsible for the bullet's pathway?
Well, no, no, I didn't kill him.
The bullet did.
So that that logic, I think, when pushed to its logical extreme, breaks down pretty quickly.
But yet, nonetheless, I think we do tend to implicitly rely on it a lot in our analysis.
Yep.
And before we go to Stephen, it's again, it's those causal stories.
Guns don't kill people.
People do.
Well, depending on cognitive diversity, that statement is going to sound true or not to
you.
And someone could say, well, it's not even the bullets.
It's actually blood loss or it's not even blood loss.
It's reduction in blood pressure.
Where does the causal chain end?
And so at some point, we need to cut through the descriptive approach with an action oriented
approach.
OK, are we going to ban bullets, guns, people?
Where do we stop?
There's no single answer just from identifying the territory to action.
And so these are really the big questions about causal relationships in multilevel systems.
We'll go with Stephen and then Muddy.
OK.
Hi, I'm Stephen.
I'm in Toronto and I do community development projects using theater and immersive participatory
approaches.
And I think the ability to have these mechanisms is made possible because of processes.
So we think about this in art because art is seen as a process and that is creating something.
So in the same way with the ants, there may be a mechanism by which ants chew up and masticate
pieces of wood or mud.
And there's a mechanism by which they build the ant colony.
And that ant hill has a structural integrity that allows air to flow through certain systems
of movement that creates a cooling effect.
However, the processes, which I think the Markov blankets are working with, are what make
the mechanisms possible to happen.
Like the ant is following these kind of statistical dependent processes to do what it does.
And in doing so, it has a mechanism, just like if someone's firing the bullet, there's a process
the body's using to infer.
Yet the mechanism is something we see.
So I think this is, these, these things are kind of entwined, but they are slightly different.
Agreed.
Muddy, and then back to Maxwell.
Hi guys.
My name is Muddy.
So I was a, I was a PhD student with Carl Briston, graduating back in 2016.
But I guess this is where my original drive with philosophy of science came from an empiricist
point of view.
So for me, you know, where do you snip the causal chain is something that can be empirically
defined.
You know, if I have an extremely strong coupling between action A and action B, such that action
B doesn't occur without action A, then move the Markov boundary beyond it.
Right.
That's, that's good.
So anytime anyone says guns, you know, bullets don't kill people, people do or whatever.
Oh, sorry.
People don't kill people, bullets do.
I don't know what the spurious phrase is or whatever.
But you can say, well, let me actually empirically look at this.
What percentage of, and I'm sure there is, like somebody's going to come up with an example
of, oh, there was this gun that went off of itself or whatever.
But statistically speaking, if I threshold that, I can find basically a probability of
one or very, very, or tending towards this, that the gun was fired by a human being.
So I think it's a bit of a, when, when somebody, when somebody presents such a philosophical
argument, I'm like, well, you know, there is an empirical response.
Science gives you these empirical tools to infer these sorts of things.
So that's kind of where my, my original gripe about the possibility of science is coming
up.
Again, I've softened on it, but I just wanted to say, I think there's an answer to these
things philosophically.
And it comes from something with data.
Cool.
Maxwell, before we finish out the figures.
Cool.
Well, I just want to pick up on something that was mentioned in the chat by Richard is that
the, so there isn't any, I think, systematic work that relates the free energy stuff to
neo-mechanistic philosophy a la Craver.
Something I'd like to discuss with you all next week is, so as I understand it, the multi-level
framework, I started off as a neo-mechanist, I have to say, like, you know, the Craver-Bechtel
orientation was really something that I was pursuing.
And around 2013, 2014, I, I kind of spent a lot of time trying to see whether I was able
to, you know, use the mechan, the neo-mechanistic framework to articulate multi-level causation.
And my big gripe with, uh, neo-mechanism, at least in its most popular renditions, is that
it effectively eliminates, uh, cross-scale, uh, causal effects.
Uh, so there's a part of this that I buy, which is that, you know, part of my rejection
of metaphysical levels comes from the neo-mechanist approach, uh, but I, I think that, because
with the, the, the story, we should discuss this maybe in, in another podcast, but the,
their story is something like, well, uh, what looks like, uh, you know, inter-level causation
is really, uh, is really just, uh, it's, it's just the same causal stream that you're
re-describing at another level.
One of the things I like about, uh, the FEP formalism is that while it's consonant with
the broad outline of, uh, neo-mechanistic philosophy, it does explain the way that you
have causal effects that trickle up and down.
Um, so I think that's like an outstanding issue that, that should potentially be, uh,
discussed in a short to flag that for the next step.
Um, yeah, good call.
Um, Alex K.
Uh, hi everyone.
I'm Alex.
Um, I'm coming from a philosophy and cognitive science background, but I guess I briefly just
wanted to say, yeah, I think if you, if you go back to like Kant's definition of mechanism,
which I can't recite, but, uh, basically he contrasted mechanism with systems that involve
top-down sort of causation as well.
Like, you know, that holes can affect parts.
Uh, I would guess you could still get some kind of mechanistic description at each scale,
or like approximately or something, but anyway, it's an interesting topic.
Oh yeah, yeah.
Uh, just to, to be clear, my view is that the FEP is broadly consonant with, uh, and is
in fact an exemplar of the neo-mechanistic research strategy as outlined by Bechtel and
Craver and so on.
But I think it, it, it does impose a different metaphysics of levels, uh, than the one that's
been, uh, attempted at least in a few papers, uh, that I saw by Bechtel and company, like
the one called looking up, down, and around, I think, uh, where they essentially say that,
well, there's no such thing as cross-scale, uh, influences.
There are really just big things interacting with small things.
And, uh, that's where I, I think I strongly disagree, uh, for reasons that hopefully we'll
unpack, uh, next week and that are related to how these multi-scale systems are actually
constructed.
And I mean, essentially you've got the same base system, uh, that's acting.
So it's like, I don't know, it's a Ladyman and Ross style.
There are only basically quantum fluctuations or whatever, but what you're doing is whenever
you define a new scale of interactions, you're adding a slower and spatially larger set of
constraints on the same fundamental set of things.
Um, so there is something like cross-scale talk in the sense that what it is to be a
multi-scale system is, uh, essentially to have components that are constrained by successively
higher level, uh, constraints on the dynamics.
Uh, so, but I, I don't think ultimately this, this conflicts with the philosophical perspective
of neo-mechanism, which ultimately at the end of the day just says, well, there are parts
and processes and a mechanism is a coordination and an organization of parts and processes
that produces some kind of interesting output that we can study.
So cool.
