Welcome to the ActInf Podcast, where we will present short, digestible segments clipped
from the Active Inference Lab weekly livestreams.
If you like what you hear and you want to learn more, check out the entire livestream
at the Active Inference Lab YouTube channel.
My name is Blue Knight, and I will be guiding you through this podcast episode, which is
clipped from Active Inference Lab livestream number 5.1.
This discussion will be loosely structured around the paper, Multiscale Integration Beyond
Internalism and Externalism by Maxwell Ramstead, Michael Kirkoff, Axel Constant, and Carl Friston.
Daniel Friedman from Davis, California will be facilitating this week's discussion, starting
off talking about multiscale systems.
Next on the stack is Madi and then Mel, and feel free to answer either the first question
or the second question about what a multiscale system you work with is.
So Madi first.
Hi, guys.
My name is Madi.
So I was a PhD student with Carl Friston, graduating back in 2016.
Great.
So they actually kind of bowled into each other.
So one of the things that I wanted to mention was the practical challenges of implementing
inference in industry, which we kind of do it in a black box way.
I think it was Sasha who mentioned that, or Alex who mentioned he had an interest in this
as well.
And what we find is that the practical correlates in terms of hardware and chip design that we
need to deploy this stuff in reality is difficult based on the data sets that we collect.
So one of the systems that we're currently modeling right now is warehouse pick and pack working
for Amazon.
And understanding that the systems that drive why people pick certain boxes from certain
shelves, for example, is like a multi-nested system of everything from how valuable an item
is to how tired the pick and pack work is, even down to the function of how tall they are versus
how high on the shelf the particular item on the waiting list is.
So understanding how to pick that apart and deliver value essentially in industry eventually.
So, yes, we have this wonderful way of viewing the world, but we also have a practical set of
tools, which are a wonderful way of modeling the world as well.
And so having this nested system, I think is really, really important in terms of biting
into the problem of practical deployment of these, these types of models at scale in order
to deliver value.
And I don't just mean business value.
I mean, you know, inside value as well.
So those are just a couple of comments that I wanted to introduce into the discussion as well.
So.
Thanks for that, Mel.
And then anyone else can raise their hand.
Hi, I'm Mel Andrews.
I'm in Cincinnati, Ohio right now.
Hi.
I was drawn to this topic because I've been trying to convince Maxwell for a long time
that the FEP is just that basically we should be taking as instrumentalist approach to this
as we possibly can.
This is like the bare bones.
It's, it's just a model.
It doesn't constitute knowledge of the world.
It doesn't constitute falsifiable claims.
It doesn't constitute, et cetera, et cetera, et cetera.
It's just a model.
And we just, we use it to get at things in the world and, and, and that's it.
And this paper is interesting to me because in it, Maxwell is the one pushing the instrumentalist
line that, that I don't want to like, namely that's a, that there's nothing more to the
boundaries of systems than is it useful to model it that way?
Right.
Is it, is it, can it, can it be used to be modeled as the batteries here for me?
I'm, I'm very, I'm very willing to privilege the organism as a privileged scale or, or level
or unit of analysis.
And I'm very willing to privilege the brain as well in that order.
Interesting fighting words, Mel, um, Shannon, and then anyone else can raise your hand too.
I'm Shannon Brooks.
I'm in South Dakota currently, but I'm usually based at the university of California.
I, I feel partial to those, those last words from Mel on privileging the organism or the
brain.
Um, but that could be just because I, I study the brain.
I want to know the, the neural mechanisms that are giving us any of our perceptions or
engagement with the world.
Um, but I think I was drawn to this topic because, um, I was drawn through a lot of,
I was drawn through predictive processing literature and like, um, Andy Clark's work.
And then eventually on here to the free energy principle.
Um, but a lot of what was written and like is now has these great mathematical models,
um, that we've touched on before, like an ability to translate, um, maybe some sort
of phenomenal logical experience into a formal model.
Um, it meshed really well with, um, my studies in music and what like teachers of music will
instill upon you in that you're basically through your musical experience, you're modeling something
about the human experience.
Um, so you're choreographing aspects of tension and release, which sounds a little bit like
balancing, um, predictions and prediction errors.
Um, and you're trying to maintain a certain boundary within a musical piece of the emotion
that you are experiencing or that you want your audience to experience.
audience to experience.
And this is sounds a lot like a boundary on a certain phenotype of experience.
Um, and just sort of this like superficial matching of the language of musical expression.
And then this empirical, um, like statistical language is sort of what drew me in.
And I suppose that answers the multi-scale system.
I work with, um, music and musicians and people.
Cool.
Very interesting.
We'll go to Richard.
And then the third question.
So my name is Richard Niemeyer.
I'm an assistant professor of sociology in Denver, Colorado.
Kind of building a little bit on, on Mel's point in terms of the multi-scale system.
So obviously as a sociologist, I deal with groups, I deal with society and, you know,
I can take an individual and I can take two individuals.
Now I have a dyad.
I have another one.
I have a triad.
I can model that as a network.
I can collapse the network down and model it as a dynamical system.
Uh, and now I can talk about organizations.
I have multiple dynamical systems, talk about them interacting.
Now I have a network of coupled oscillators.
I can go in.
I can use fractal geometry to talk about how properties are scaling up and down from the
dyad, the triad, all the way up to that network of coupled oscillators.
And at the end of the day, I I'm never really confused about whether or not I'm really talking
about networks or am I really talking about dynamical systems?
They're all just models that allow me to capture the phenomenon that I do believe is
real.
I do believe society exists.
Um, if you've ever want to get into a very strange conversation, go to a conference
of sociologists arguing about whether or not the United States is real.
And my comeback is always don't pay your taxes on April 15th.
And you'll figure out very quickly if the United States is, is real or not.
And so I think, you know, a lot of these philosophical questions are always fascinating.
Um, especially at three o'clock in the morning in a pub when you've had too many to drink.
But I think ultimately end of the day, you know, there is a concrete reality.
The question is what empirical model just allows you to model it, um, as true to the
theory or the concepts that you're, that you're dealing with, um, without losing information,
you know, unnecessarily.
So I think, you know, again, I think any empirical model that allows me to do that is fascinating.
Um, but at the end of the day, I do believe, you know, the humans that I'm ultimately talking
about are concrete in our, our real nice.
I'm going to introduce the third question.
We'll go to buddy first here and anyone else can raise their hand.
The third question is why does our philosophy of systems matter?
Um, that is quite bizarrely scary and psychic because that's what the point I was going to
make just to, just to, uh, piggyback on, on, on, on Richard's, uh, comments just there,
which is, um, I remember these discussions, these really, really lively discussions about,
you know, how representative is this model of reality.
And I remember at some point just thinking, well, how useful is this a question to ask?
You know, at some point is, is the model just a tool, a means to an end?
And do we employ bounds on what we expect from these models in terms of their utility?
And if these models and their outputs satisfy these bounds, great.
You know, I, I, sometimes I, I see some of the discourse around free energy principles
and what it means philosophically and we lose what it gives us in terms of explainability.
And an actual measurable dynamics.
So I actually fall probably like very far on the side of, I don't think our philosophy
of systems matter at all.
I think our explainability of empirically measured data is by far the most important thing.
And trying to explain systems where our datasets are incredibly sparse.
So for example, the entire hierarchical organization of the brain from cell to effective connectivity,
I think is sometimes missing the point of just how valuable these novel schemes can be.
So that, that, that's kind of what I wanted to touch on that.
Nice.
Steven.
And then anyone else before we close out this question?
Steven.
Okay.
Hi, I'm Steven.
I'm in Toronto and I do community development projects using theatre and immersive participatory
approaches.
And yeah, I think that that empirical pieces and practicality or practice application is really
a good point.
One thing that has caught me out though, and I've realized is, is that perspectivism is very
much part of systems generally.
And it's also part of psychology.
Like we take a perspective on stuff and there's this assumption that everything, well, what's
your perspective?
And that word just gets used all the time.
And it's like, but the thing is that the free energy principle gives you a way.
And then they say, okay, and now we're going to do stuff that's performative or arts based.
And it's a bit like, we don't know what to do with that.
So we just call it another field.
Right.
And then they do that.
But the, the, the, the, the active inference gives you realize, well, there's, there's a
way that you can abductively or from within be creating meaning, um, during experience.
And it's, um, I suppose a bit like that person picking stuff from the shelves and they're
not sitting there as they do it, having a perspective, but they may take a perspective.
If you give them a qualitative survey later, which is what nearly all social science does.
So you take a perspective, a first person perspective on your experience, but the experience
wasn't first person perspective.
The experience was just the experience.
So this gives a way for that to all be kind of, um, unified in some way.
Cool.
Let's go to Alex and then Richard, then close out this check-in.
Uh, hi everyone.
I'm Alex.
Um, I'm coming from a philosophy and cognitive science background.
Just really briefly.
I mean, I think, I think it mattered philosophy of systems matters because I think the philosophy,
well, I guess I'm sort of a wholist in a way, uh, at least in terms of explanation.
So I think it matters because, um, the philosophy of every little bit matters, uh, because it
connects to everything else.
But also this is sort of a question that can be applied at multiple scales.
So, so it could potentially matter a lot, I guess.
I mean, that doesn't really answer the question of why philosophy matters ever, but I think
it's because it's part of a big theoretical framework.
I'm sort of equining about this stuff.
So these questions about realism and instrumentalism don't land all that well with me because, I
mean, for example, um, I think the FEP, if it ends up being part of our best overall sort
of account of things, then I think it's confirmed or disconfirmed by proxy whenever anything, any
observation is recorded.
Right.
So, um, unless you want to say that it doesn't have any inferential connections to anything
else, in which case it's really weird.
I don't know why we're talking about it.
Um, anyway, that's enough for me.
Perfect.
Richard and Mel to close out this section.
Thanks.
Yeah.
I think in many ways, and this is probably just maybe disciplinary specific, but the
philosophy of systems and the philosophy of what we do in science, I think is incredibly
important in the social sciences because so much, so much of our concepts, so much of
our, our theory that, that we deal with now is, is deeply indebted to Dewey and, uh, Kant
and, you know, Hegel and these, these, uh, philosophical arguments about the relationship between mind,
body and society.
What is a thing?
What are the boundaries of things?
And these things have been baked into our theories.
And many times we don't recognize that they're there and they're, they're deeply affecting concepts
and how things are operationalized and what we consider to be a truth value or not.
And to go in and unpack those theories, find those philosophical arguments, and then interrogate
them from these kind of emerging perspectives and say, you know, was Whitehead onto something
about kind of, you know, uh, the extension of reality as, as an ontological category, or
was he not?
And if he wasn't in this new principle can deal with a lot of those ideas in ways that
were significantly shaped, uh, sociology, then great.
We have something to kind of move on to.
Um, so I think there's, if philosophy is always this thing, as much as I try and get
rid of it, it's always coming in the back door, some, somehow, some way.
And I think just being sensitive to it, being comfortable dealing with it and interrogating
it from these new perspectives, I think is always going to be something that's very
important because it's, it's always there in the background somewhere.
If you dig deep enough.
Thanks.
Well said.
And then Mel, and then we'll let Maxwell have a last thought as well.
In my mind, philosophy doesn't answer questions.
It raises questions.
Um, and the empirical sciences attempts to answer those questions.
You need philosophy to both raise those questions and then to, uh, to tell you how those questions
have been potentially answered by the empirical results.
So, um, there is no such thing as, as kind of science operating in a vacuum without philosophy
of science.
That's my opinion, uh, that, that there's this necessary dialectic between philosophy of
science and science itself, uh, going on.
Cool.
Agreed.
Maxwell, and then Professor Klippinger, if you'd like.
Hey, I'm Maxwell Ramstad.
Uh, I'm a postdoctoral fellow at McGill University.
Well, so I think that there's a, there's a methodological component to this as well.
I, I want to echo what, what everyone said earlier.
Uh, you know, if, if we're going to study, uh, multi-scale systems, it's good to get our
ontologies straight.
Uh, and you know, the fact that nature seems to have this multi-scale structure suggests
that our theoretical accounts of nature should also reflect its, uh, multi-scale structure.
But, um, I think from a more pragmatic point of view, um, I, I like to think that a lot
of the, uh, kind of single discipline, uh, topics have, uh, been covered in, in a very significant
way.
Uh, but that there isn't, there isn't the same kind of, um, you know, established work connecting
different methodologies that operate, uh, at different scales.
So I think that, you know, the getting this systems take right, not only has theoretical
implications, but also has practical implications, uh, for the way that we conduct, uh, research,
namely that we should aim to form, uh, multi-disciplinary groups that address questions of interest from several
different angles, uh, simultaneously.
So, and this is echoed in the paper, um, that we'll be discussing today, where we're essentially
trying to do is advance, uh, on the one hand, a pluralistic ontology, a multi-scale, uh, ontology.
And on the other hand, um, a, a, uh, methodological pluralism, uh, where several different, uh, sets
of methodologies can come and interact together.
Nice.
Professor Clivenger or anything else there?
Uh, hi everybody.
My name is John Clivenger.
Um, I am now, I'm in Northern New Hampshire, Jefferson, New Hampshire, a farm, but I actually
am generally out of Cambridge, Mass.
I, I just want to throw my hat in to say, I'm, I'm sort of in, in, uh, a Muddy's camp,
uh, and looking at explanatory power.
Um, and I think a lot of that is there.
I, I'm so sort of, uh, ditto with, with, uh, what Maxwell is saying in terms of.
Uh, providing a integrative framework.
Uh, I, of course, as a philosophical, the philosophy has a place in it, but I think we're there.
There were so many losses embedded in historical situations that are really not.
I think we're, we're at another level of understanding that it's what becomes really important is being able to start to test these things and be able to rigorously test them.
And because there are a lot of very powerful claims that are being made that if they're true, they're quite transformative, but they, they need to be tested.
Awesome.
Thank you everyone for this very exciting check-in and I'll, I'll just add one comment on why the philosophy of systems matter.
And it's examples that are brought up by, um, Helen Longino in her book, studying human behavior, uh, which level of analysis, which discipline we default to molecular neuroscience or environmental studies.
If we default to a higher level of organization or lower level to look for our explanations philosophically, it's going to directly translate to what kinds of interventions we think are going to be possible in the system.
And so if the story about, for example, aggression and sexuality, which is what professor Longino studies in that book, if the story is it comes from genes, well, then you're going to be less likely to undertake affordances related to the environment.
If the story is, um, about the environment, you're going to be unlikely to take affordances related to molecular interventions.
So even before we say what it actually is, and that's of course a complex question or what is the best thing for the system, I would fall on the side that it really does matter in the background.
And sometimes it's just the water we swim in, how we think about these multi-level systems.
So let's just like for a three second aside, I will happily admit that I'm a, a staunch empiricist, somebody who's worked in industry, basically the moment I could.
And so I, you know what I've, I'm just conceding a little bit that actually you're right.
Without the philosophy of science, we don't introduce novel ideas that are worth testing in the first place.
Right.
And that discourse is what leads to the models that allow me to try to issue value from that quote unquote value.
So I am backing down just a little bit from my empiricism after this discussion.
So I just wanted to say that.
Yeah.
Nice.
A live conversion story.
You heard it here first, but even pragmatism is defined within a use view.
So it's like all models are wrong.
Some are useful.
And then the second part of that sentence might be useful for whom or under what conception.
There's no model that just useful outside of a value set.
We hope you enjoyed this week's podcast.
Stay tuned for our next episode where we will be discussing Markov blankets.
int jos my cup is not real.
Let's see.
Let's see.
