This is Audible.
Python, a complete step-by-step beginner's guide to programming with Python.
Python programming language coding.
Written by Leonard Edison.
Narrated by Jim Raposa.
Introduction.
Chances are, if you're listening to this audiobook, you're brand new to Python.
You might even be new to programming altogether.
Either way, you have come to the right place and chosen the right language.
Python is a very easy-to-learn programming language, and I wish that this book will convince you to take in consideration to use it for your future projects.
It is indeed a great language for either beginners who approach themselves to the programming world, or if you're already a professional programmer.
You don't already have to be an expert to comprehend this book, due to the fact that it will explain Python and the basics of programming functions through a very simple step-by-step process, thought to be headed towards those who are approaching computer programming for the first time.
You don't need to have a particular OS in order to run Python, because it works perfectly on every OS.
In the first chapters, we'll discuss the importance of learning how to use Python, its pros and cons.
In the fourth chapter, we'll go through the process to install Python on Windows, Mac, and Linux.
From the fifth chapter, we'll start a step-by-step process designed to take you from a pure beginner who is just approaching the programming world to a student ready to start more complex projects.
I hope you'll enjoy this audiobook.
Chapter 1. Getting Your Programs Set Up
You'll need to make sure that you're going to be able to use Python to create programs.
The thing about that is, though, that you need to have a good environment for those programs.
The first thing you'll need to do is install Python.
There's a very small chance that the program is already installed on your machine, but if it is not, it is very simple to install yourself.
If you're using Windows, you'll just need to search for Python.
You'll need to use a command line on Mac and Linux if you want to be able to find Python on either of those systems.
Once you've found it, you can skip ahead and get started using it.
If you didn't find Python on your computer, you'll need to download it.
Start out by going to python.org so that you can find the program.
There's a section on the website that's labeled Downloads, and you just need to click on it.
There, you'll see the latest version of Python.
There'll be a download button close to it.
Make sure that it is the real download button, though, because there might be ads for other things that are close,
so be sure that you're actually clicking the right button.
You'll have to go through the install wizard that was created by Python, but as soon as that's complete, you're good to go.
You'll also need a text editor that converts to plain text.
Microsoft has this kind of system, or you can choose to download any plain text program of your choice.
Python is a powerful, high-level, object-oriented programming language created by Guido Van Rossum.
It has simple, easy-to-use syntax, making it the perfect language for someone who is trying to learn computer programming for the first time.
This is a comprehensive guide on how to get started in Python, why you should learn it, and how you can learn it.
What is Python? The basics.
Before getting started, let's get familiarized with the language first.
Python is a general-purpose language.
It has a wide range of applications, from web development like Django and Bottle, scientific and mathematical.
Computing, Orange, Simpy, Numpy, to desktop graphical user interfaces like Pygame and Panda 3D.
The syntax of the language is clean, and the length of the code is relatively short.
It's fun to work in Python because it allows you to think about the problem rather than focusing on the syntax.
Three reasons to choose Python as a first language.
Simple, elegant syntax.
Programming in Python is fun.
It's easier to understand and write Python code.
Why?
The syntax feels natural.
Take this source code, for example.
A equals 2.
B equals 3.
Sum equals A plus B.
Print, sum, in parentheses.
Even if you've never programmed before, you can easily guess that this program adds two numbers and prints it.
Not overly strict.
You don't need to define the type of a variable in Python.
Also, it's not necessary to add semicolon at the end of the statement.
Python enforces you to follow good practices.
Like proper indentation, these small things can make learning much easier for beginners.
Great community and support.
Python has a large supporting community.
There are numerous active forums online which can be handy if you're stuck.
Chapter 2.
Pros and Cons of Learning Python
Python is a high-level, interpreted, and general-purpose dynamic programming language
that focuses on code readability.
The syntax in Python helps the programmers to code in less steps compared to Java or C++.
Python is widely used in big companies because of its multiple programming paradigms.
They usually involve imperative and object-oriented functional programs.
It has a comprehensive and large standard library that has an automatic memory management and dynamic features.
Why do companies prefer Python?
Python has topped the charts in the recent years over other programming languages like C, C++, and Java
and is widely used by programmers.
The language has undergone a drastic change since its release 25 years ago
as many add-on features are introduced.
Python 1.0 had the module system of Modula 3
and interacted with Amoeba operating system with varied functioning tools.
Python 2.0 introduced in the year 2000 had features of Garbage Collector and Unicode support.
Python 3.0 introduced in the year 2009 had a constructive design that avoids duplicate modules and constructs.
With the added features, now the companies are using Python 3.5.
Software development companies prefer Python language because of its versatile features and fewer programming codes.
Nearly 14% of the programmers use it on operating systems like Unix, Linux, Windows, and Mac OS.
The programmers in big companies use Python as it has created a mark for itself in the software development
with characteristic features like interactive, interpreted, modular, dynamic, object-oriented, portable, high-level, extensible in C++ and C
advantages or benefits of Python.
Python language has multiple applications in the software development companies such as in gaming, web frameworks and applications,
language development, prototyping, graphic design applications, etc.
This provides the language a higher plethora over other programming languages used in the industry.
Some of its advantages are
Extensive Support Libraries
It provides a large standard library that includes areas like string operations,
internet web service tools, operating system interfaces, and protocols.
Most of the highly used programming tasks are already scripted into it.
That limits the length of the codes you need to write in Python.
Integration Feature
Python integrates the enterprise application that makes it easy to develop web services
by invoking COM or COBRA components.
It has powerful control capabilities as it calls directly through C, C++, or Java via Jython.
Python also processes XML and other markup languages as it can run on all modern operating systems through the same bytecode.
Improved Programmer's Productivity
The language has extensive support libraries and clean object-oriented designs that increase 2 to 10-fold of programmers' productivity while using the languages like Java, VB, Perl, C, C++, and C Sharp.
Productivity
With its strong integration features, unit testing framework, and enhanced control capabilities contribute towards the increased speed for most applications and productivity.
It's a great option to build a scalable, multi-protocol network application.
Limitations or Disadvantages of Python
Python has varied advantageous features, and programmers prefer this language to other programming languages because it's easy to learn, and code too.
However, this language has still not made its place in some computing areas that include enterprise development shops.
Therefore, this language may not solve some of the enterprise solutions, and some limitations are
Difficulty in using other languages
The Python lovers become so accustomed to its features and its extensive libraries that they face problems when learning or working on other programming languages.
Python experts may see the declaring of cast values or variable types,
Syntactic requirements of adding curly braces or semicolons as an onerous task.
Weak in Mobile Computing
Python has made its presence on many desktop and server platforms, but it is seen as a weak language for mobile computing.
This is the reason very few mobile applications are built in it like Carbonell.
Get slow in speed
Python runs with the help of an interpreter instead of the compiler,
Which causes it to slow down because of the compilation and the execution that helps it to work normally.
On the other hand, it can be seen that it is fast for many web applications too.
Runtime errors
The Python language is dynamically typed, so it has many design restrictions that are reported by some Python developers.
It is even seen that it requires more testing time, and the errors always show up when the applications are finally run.
Underdeveloped Database Access Layers
As compared to the popular technologies like JDBC and ODBC, the Python's database access layer is found to be bit underdeveloped and primitive.
However, it cannot be applied in the enterprises that need smooth interaction of complex legacy data.
PCAP or PCAP
Programming Essentials in Python
Python is a general-purpose programming language used to build just about anything.
Python is key for back-end web development, data analysis, artificial intelligence, and scientific computing,
all of which are key for pursuing IT careers.
With PCAP, Programming Essentials in Python, you'll learn to design, write, debug, and run programs encoded in the Python language.
No prior programming knowledge is required.
The course begins with the very basics, guiding you step-by-step until you become adept at solving more complex problems.
The course aligns to the PCAP, Python Certified Associate Programmer Certification,
validating your expertise to employers and expanding your IT and IoT career opportunities.
Develop a working knowledge for how computers operate and how computer programs are executed.
Evolve critical thinking and problem-solving skills using an algorithmic approach.
Learn about the programmer's role in the software development process.
Translate real-world issues into computer-solvable problems.
Connect with the Global Cisco Networking Academy Community.
Chapter 3.
The Math Aspect of Python
You'll need to create files as you go throughout this book.
It will not only help you keep track of what you're doing,
but it will also help you practice all of the things that you can do while you're learning Python.
It's a great way for you to learn,
and it'll give you the chance to truly make the choices that you need for your Python experience.
The first file that you should create is ch2.py.
This is something that you'll need to do each chapter up until we get to chapter 11,
where you'll learn exactly how to apply the skills that you've learned throughout the first 10 chapters of the book.
The first thing that you'll learn about during this time includes variables and values.
V and V.
Variables come first and have a given value.
They're used in nearly every type of programming language,
and they're able to see the way that things are done.
Here's an example of what it would look like in Python.
Car,
equal sign,
and in closed quotes,
Volkswagen Jetta.
You don't need to use the string term like you would use in other types of language.
There are different types that you can use with Python.
Make sure, though,
if you want to use a string,
you use the closed quote signs around them that you are putting in a string.
Otherwise,
Python will just recognize it as a basic idea.
Here are some of the definitions of the different types of variables that you will find in Python.
Now you're going to practice it.
In the file that you created,
you're going to verify the integers and the strings that are included with the different types of variables.
Use your favorite food and a set number of days.
You can choose to use these examples,
or if you feel daring,
you can use your own.
Favorite food,
equal sign,
and in closed quotes,
hot pocket.
Days,
equal sign,
and the number 30 in closed quotes.
After that,
you can give it a command which is so easy to do.
Print,
open quote sign,
I love to eat,
and then a percentage sign,
and the letter S,
period,
and then a closed quote.
Percent favorite food.
The variables,
if you hadn't figured it out,
are the ones on the left side,
and the values are the ones on the right that determine what the variables are going to do.
Operator.
There are other ways that you can add additional information.
For example,
you can change your favorite food to your second favorite food.
Favorite food,
equal sign,
hot pocket in closed quotes.
Days,
equal sign,
the number 30 in closed quotes.
Print,
in closed quote,
I love to eat,
percentage sign,
and then the letter S,
period,
closed quote,
and the percent sign,
favorite food.
Favorite food,
equal sign,
avocado,
in closed quotes.
That isn't the end of it though.
You can make a new print statement that will be added to the string.
Print,
quote,
actually,
I have had,
percent sign,
D,
days in a row.
I need to move on to something else.
My new favorite food is,
percent sign,
the letter S,
period,
closed quote.
Percent sign,
days,
comma,
favorite food.
Now that this second part is included with the string,
it should make more sense for you to try and get the total favorite food amount included in the sentence.
This is how you put things together with the Python language.
When you do this,
it will show up in different ways,
and it will allow you to try new things with it.
If you have variables that you want to be able to use,
the best way to do it is to start out with basic ones,
like the ones we listed above.
They're simple,
easy to expand on,
and will give you the chance to be able to try new things with the Python codes that you've chosen to use.
It can sometimes be complicated to figure out which codes are going to work best for you,
so keep that in mind before you work on the different aspects of Python.
Once you have all of those codes done,
you can add in new variables.
They're all written the same way,
just make sure that you use the values that you want for each of the variables.
Essentially,
you would be able to tell a story the whole way through based on the variables,
and the values that you have.
The best part is, though,
that it will change based on what you use and the context that you use it in.
For example,
you could use it for a webpage that gives the things that you have recently read.
When you've read the first book that you've enjoyed,
you can put that into the information.
After that,
you can try different avenues that will allow you the chance to put new information into it.
The variable value outlook is one that is great for trying with websites that have different listings,
that have variables that will constantly change,
and that has information in it that you will need to keep people updated on.
If you want to change things within the variables,
make sure that you always put a new command in the line that you want it to change.
Without the command,
you won't be able to show people what you're talking about,
and it will not appear on the programming that you've worked so hard to be able to create.
Essentially,
it will be null of doing any good for you,
or for the way that you want to try new things with the variables that you have.
It can be difficult to understand and do,
but it will be a great way for you to get started with your programming.
As you learn more about commands,
you can try new things.
You don't always have to use the print command,
but it is one that is simple to use and also simple for you to understand.
It's what most people start with in programming,
and it's easy to use,
no matter what level of programmer you are or how much experience you have with Python.
Now,
you'll learn to compare the values that you have.
There are many things that you can do with values and variables,
but the ability to compare the ability to compare them
is something that will make it much easier for you to try and use Python.
It's something that people will be able to do no matter what type of values that they have,
and they can make sure that they're doing it in the right way
so that their program will appear to be as smooth running as possible.
To compare your variables is one of the many options that Python offers you,
and the best way to do it is through an if statement.
Now,
you'll create your chapter 3 file by saving it as ch3.py.
This is what you'll need to be able to do.
Here is the way that an incidental will look.
Apples,
equal sign,
the number 6.
Bus,
equal sign,
and the word yellow in closed quotes.
If,
apples,
equal sign,
equal sign,
the number 0,
colon sign,
print,
quote,
where are the apples,
question mark,
unquote,
print,
quote,
did you know that buses are,
percent sign,
the letter S,
question mark,
closed quote,
and the word bus,
B-U-S.
Run the code through your Python program.
It will look like this.
Did you know that buses are yellow?
The easiest way to understand why the output looked like this is because the apples were not included with the variation.
There were not zero apples,
and that was something that created a problem with the code.
For that reason,
it wasn't put in the output because there was no way to do it and no way to make it look again.
To make sure that you're going to be able to use it with a not statement,
you can use another if statement in combination with that not.
If not apples,
equal sign,
equal sign,
the number 0,
print,
quote,
how bout them apples,
exclamation point,
closed quote.
Now you can try to run the program again through the program that you created.
It will look like this.
How bout them apples?
Did you know that buses are yellow?
Both of the things that you wrote in the code are included with the statements,
and then you'll be able to try different things.
If you do not want to write out the not statement,
you can simply use the exclamation sign.
If apples,
exclamation sign,
equal sign,
zero,
print,
quote,
how bout them apples,
exclamation sign,
closed quote.
This will help you put the code in,
and will make it easier for you to be able to write out in the code that you're creating.
It can sometimes be hard to figure out the right way to do it,
and then you'll be able to apply it.
When there is an input in your program,
such as the number of apples that someone wants,
or a fact that they have that they can teach you about,
the output will look the same.
Either they'll get a statement about the apples,
or they'll get a statement about the bus being yellow.
If there are no apples that are put into the equation,
then you will have the output show up as,
where are the apples?
The conditionals that you use are made up of simple expressions.
When you break them down into even smaller pieces,
it's easy to understand how they can be used,
and what you'll be able to do with the expressions that you have,
and the things that you do.
It will also give you the chance to be able to show that there is so much more
than what you initially had with the variables and values.
Absolutes.
There is a way to create the conditional so that there is a block of codes
that will show you whether or not there is a conditional,
and it has something that it can do even if the conditional is not true
and cannot be verified with the different things that you do.
That is where the absolute conditionals come into play.
You will need to see whether or not there are different things that you can put in.
Create the variable.
Apples.
Equal sign.
Now, you will need to put the input in with the different things that you have created
in chapter 2's version of the file that you saved.
Print, what is your age?
Question mark.
And that should be in closed quotes.
Age.
Equal sign.
Raw.
Underscore.
Input.
And then, closed parentheses.
That's the way that you'll be able to see how old someone is.
But, how exactly does that relate to the number of apples you have?
It doesn't.
It just shows you how the variable works so that people can put things in.
You'll create apples.
Equal sign.
Raw.
Underscore.
Input.
And then, in parentheses and closed quotes,
what number of apples are there?
Question mark.
Forward slash.
And the letter N.
That's the easiest part of it,
and it will help you to create the variable that you need for the rest of it.
If.
Apples.
Equal sign.
Equal sign.
The number 1.
Colon.
Print.
Quote.
I don't know what to do with just one apple.
Exclamation point.
Closed quote.
You'll get an error though because apples is actually just a string
and you need to make it an integer.
Simple.
I-N-T and the word string in closed parentheses.
Now it will look like this.
Apples.
Equal sign.
Raw.
Underscore.
Input.
And then, in closed parentheses and closed quotes,
what number of apples are there?
Question mark.
Forward slash N.
Apples.
Equal sign.
I-N-T.
And then, in parentheses, the word apples.
A-P-P-L-E-S.
If.
Apples.
Equal sign.
Equal sign.
And the number 1.
Print.
Quote.
I don't know what to do with just one apple.
Exclamation point.
And close quote.
Put this whole string into your file or change the wording around a bit so that you can figure
out what you want to do with it.
That is truly great practice for you.
When you have put it in, run it through.
The code will work because you created a variable, you added different elements to it, and you
allowed for the input of the apples in the sequence so that you would be able to show
how things worked with it.
This was one of the greatest ways that you could do new things, and it also allowed you
the chance to be able to try new things so that you were doing more with it.
While you're creating strings of integers, you'll need to make sure that you're transforming
them into integers instead of simple strings, so that you can make sure that they show up
and there are no error codes.
This is your first program.
You don't want to show tons of errors, do you?
Chapter 5.
Formats for Strings
Now that you've learned to create the variables and what you can do with the variables, it's
important to look at the way that you can format the strings so that they'll do exactly
what you want.
This is where the print commands come in and the different things that you'll be able
to do with them.
If you do not want to do the print command, you can figure out different ones that work
for you and what they'll be able to do.
In this chapter, you'll be creating a new file and changing the way that you can do different
things with the strings that you've created.
By formatting them to do exactly what you want, you'll be well on your way toward being
a very independent programmer.
When you break it down, the print command that you were doing was nothing more than a
format statement that shows the way things will appear on the program.
Create your ch4.py file so that you can use it in combination with the other strings that
you've created in the previous chapters.
Ferrets
Equal sign
3
Ferrets
F-E-R-R-E-T-S
Chickens
Equal sign
4
Llamas
Equal sign
0
Llamas
Llamas
Bison
Equal sign
The number 1
Bison
B-I-S-O-N
Goats
Equal sign
And then the number 3
Then create it so that it shows up in the print style sequence that you wanted to be able
to use for your output.
I bought percent sign the letter D
ferrets, comma, and I also purchased percent sign, letter D, chickens, period.
Percent sign could be ferrets or chickens.
Print, quote, I bought percent sign, letter D, llamas, forward slash, N, percent sign, letter D, bison, comma, forward slash, N-A-N-D, percent sign, letter D, and the word goats.
Percent sign, percent sign, percent sign, percent sign, percent sign, letter D, and the word livestock.
Percent sign will be llamas plus bison plus goats.
Run this through your Python program so that you can try something new and see what it's able to do to make it look better for you.
I bought three ferrets and I also purchased four chickens.
I bought zero llamas, one bison, and three goats.
The total I bought in allows me to have four livestock.
This is the easiest way to write it, and that's why we will continue to use the print format so that you can make sure that it shows up.
It's a very simple process and one that you'll be able to make the most use out of, depending on the information that you want to put into it.
To be able to create the string to print out, you'll need to make sure that there are things that you can print.
There are the integers that you'll be able to use no matter what type of string you wanted.
This is something that will make your printing better and will allow you to see that there are different things that can be printed.
Hopefully, by now, you'll realize that printing does not actually refer to sending information to a physical printer like the way that you would normally think of printing.
Instead, it simply prints the words into the program that you have so that you'll be able to see the different aspects of each of the things that you're doing.
Without printing, it will not show up on your program.
Escape Sequences
The forward slash marks that are used throughout the formats and the sequences are used for escaping from the code.
It's as simple as writing one when you want the program to stop using the code and, instead, focus on the text that you're going to be able to use.
With the escape sequence, you should make sure that you're only using them in the way that you want to stop coding.
If you try to use them in the middle of the code, it will ruin the whole thing.
You'll need to go back and rewrite it all, and it can be very difficult to try and get the exact thing done the way that you had written in the past.
When you're working with the codes that you have, you'll want to use an escape code if you're not using a statement.
For example, use the escape code that you would want to show people that you want to stop using the codes.
Simply do something like, I have, or there are.
These are the simplest statements that you can use.
After you write those, put the code in, and then put the forward slash into the end of the code so that it will stop coding it,
and you can actually try new things with the information that you're putting into your program.
As you learn more about the different codes and the ways that they're able to work within the Python code,
you'll be able to try new things.
It's always important to remember to escape when you no longer want to write the codes out
and when you want to be able to try new things.
It's imperative to the way that you change your codes that you do this
and that you make sure that you're doing it all of the time that you're trying new things.
Without the ability to make the codes that you want, you'll struggle with the programming.
The next chapter is very complicated.
It has data sets that are difficult to understand,
and you'll need to make sure that you're prepared by writing out simple codes.
If you did not get something in one of the previous chapters,
go back, listen to it again, review it.
It's also a good idea to try something new
and put the practices that were outlined in those chapters to good use.
If you haven't done so already,
try to make sure that you're using the codes in the right way
and that they're put into the different parts of your files.
When you're comfortable with the concepts outlined in chapters 2 through 4,
you'll be all right to move on to chapter 5.
If you're struggling, always go back to review what you did.
Chapter 6. Using Data Sets
Now that you've learned the true basics of Python
and what you can do with it,
you'll need to start working with data sets.
This is one of the only ways that you'll be able to truly get the most out of Python
and create a program that really works for you
with the different things that you want to do.
If you thought it was simple up until this point, don't worry.
It will still be simple.
You'll just have to make sure you follow each of the steps
and pay attention to how important it is
to learn the different types of steps before you get started.
Lists
The lists that you're going to create
are just like the strings that you created in the earlier chapters,
but they'll be able to do more for you
than what the strings were able to do on their own.
Lists look something like this.
Int
The word grades
G-R-A-D-E-S
The number 4 in parentheses
The equal sign
And then in brackets
These numbers
32, 58, 12, 100
This is the way you can create different things.
You could also write it out as integers with the student numbers,
but that would take a really long time
and you might not be able to get what you wanted out of the sets that you're doing.
For that reason, you can put them together into a set of data.
A data set.
Get it?
It's simple.
You'll need to change the grade so that there's a new one in the array that you have
and so that you can make sure that you'll be able to try more with what you have.
It's very easy to try new things and to make sure that you're going to be able to get the sets that you need
when you want to add more to the information.
Arrays are the same as lists, except they specify the number of things that they can hold in them.
Lists seem to work better because of the following reasons.
They can have their size adjusted the right way.
And you don't need to have just one in a set of data.
This is great for later on when you start to learn about children and offshoots that come from the data you put in.
The strings that you put together are easy
and you can try it out by creating a ch5.py file that you're going to put all of this information into.
The chances are that you'll be able to use them for some type of data later on,
but don't worry about making them match up with the other sets of data that you have in other files.
They will not be used in combination with those
and are actually out of order with the rest of the book and the way that the chapters are put together.
Dictionaries
The only other data set that you need to be aware of as a beginner is dictionaries.
They're able to help you define exactly what you want when it comes to the various lists that you have.
They are the map and the key that your Python will need to decode all of the different things that you're doing.
If you're going to have a working program, you will absolutely need to have dictionaries included in with it
so that you can try new things and make the most out of what you're using.
The dictionary, when it comes to the grade example that was used earlier in this chapter,
will help you figure out what the different things are.
We'll use initials for the people who got the grades.
Assignment
The number 1
The word grades
G-R-A-D-E-S
Equal sign
And then in brackets put the following
In closed quotes
The letters
J-D
Colon
The number 32
Comma
In closed quotes
The letters
P-G
And by the way, these letters are in caps
Colon
The number 58
In closed quotes
C-B
Colon
The number 12
Then in closed quotes
M-S
Colon
100
These are all the grades of the students who are being identified by their initials.
When someone goes into the program, they can see that there are different things that people do,
and they'll be able to see the grades for each of the people depending on what they scored on the tests.
For example, you may want to see what J-D's grade is.
For that, you'll create a screen that says
User, that word in lowercase, and then
I-N in uppercase
Equal sign
The word raw
R-A-W
Underscore
Input
I-N-P-U-T
Then in parentheses and closed quotes
Whose grade do you want to see?
Question mark
Forward slash
N
Then the person will be able to see what they can do by putting in the initials.
There is a chance, though, that they could put the wrong initials in, or they could put in someone's name instead of their initial.
This will mean that you'll have to have something there in case they do.
If
If
User in
In assignment
The number one
Grades
Colon
Pound sign
Different name
Next line
Print
Assignment
The number one
Grades
In brackets
User I-N
Next line
Else
E-L-S-E
Colon
Next line
Print
Quote
We don't have that name
Unquote
This string shows you that you'll be able to tell if they put in the right initials or if they put in something that was totally wrong.
If they do put in information that is wrong, or they cannot let anyone know about the information that they have, it will be like an error message, but just kindly reminding them that it wasn't a valid initial that they put into the input box.
If you're going to use this for anything, you need to make sure that you have that option available to your users.
The dictionaries are great, but they will not do anything to make it easier on you when you want to be able to try new things.
It's imperative that you try and make sure that all of the information you put into the codes is used for different purposes.
Since you're allowing raw input, you won't be able to keep track of every single thing that people are putting into the input boxes.
So you have to be prepared for major variables in the way that things are put in.
That's all there is to data sets.
Not too bad, right?
Chapter 7
Looping Your Programs
When you're creating a program, you'll need to make sure that you're able to loop it.
Because of the different things that you need to do with the programs that you have, loops are a great way to ensure that you are truly getting the best job possible with the program and while using Python.
The loops are great to use for different purposes, and each one has its own specific job when it comes to programming.
By making sure that you know all of the different parts of the loops, you can give yourself the best chance possible at success.
Looping While
If a condition that you have set up is true, the while loop is going to remain steady and will keep doing the same thing over and over.
You need to make sure that you are using the while loops in the best possible way and that you're going to be able to truly get the most out of the loop so that you can try new things and that you'll be able to get what you need out of it.
With game loops, you can use a boolean that shows the different parts of the loops that you're going to use.
As you learn more about the loop, you can then add in more while statements that will help you to identify the different factors that are included with the loops.
They'll then be able to look something like this if you know what you're doing and add them in the correct way.
In this example, all letters are lowercase except where noted.
The word total, then a plus sign, equal sign, int, and in parentheses, user, u-s-e-r, capital I, lowercase n, close parenthesis.
This is how you'll add the integer, and it will change the appearance that comes along with the different aspects of the loops.
If you're working to create as many loops as possible, you'll then need to add new information to it and create different statements that will help you have a more functional experience with your programming.
The next step is to make sure that your loops look like this.
First line, the word else, e-l-s-e, and a colon.
Next line, the word print, then, in quotes, backslash, the letter n, goodbye, capital G-O-O-D-B-Y-E, an exclamation point, backslash, lowercase n, close quote.
A pound sign, the letter A, the word goodbye, G-O-O-D-B-Y-E, message, M-E-S-S-A-G-E, dash, dash, we aren't, monsters.
Next line, run, R-U-N, equal sign, false.
After you've put all of the other information into it and you've created the exact type of while loop that you want,
you'll need to make sure that you can do things like this string of text.
First line, the word run, equal sign, true, capital T-R-U-E.
Next line, the word total, T-O-T-A-L, equal sign, the number zero.
Next line, while run, W-H-I-L-E, and then the word run, colon.
Next line, indented, user, capital I-N, equal sign, raw, underscore, input.
Then in closed parentheses, a quote mark, backslash n, backslash n, backslash n.
Those are all in lowercase.
Then the word current with a capital C, the word total, then is, then a colon, then a percent sign,
the letter D, lowercase, dot, backslash, lowercase n, the word enter, capital E-N-T-E-R,
a, number, comma, or anything else to exit, dot, backslash, lowercase n, close quote, percent sign,
and the word total, and then close the parentheses.
Next line, if user, capital I-N, dot, I-S-D-I-G-I-T,
close parentheses, colon.
Next line, indented, total, plus sign, equal sign, I-N-T, and in parentheses, user, capital I-N.
Next line, else, E-L-S-E, colon.
Next line, indented, print, and then in quotes, backslash, lowercase n, capital G-O-O-D-B-Y-E,
exclamation point, backslash, the letter N, exclamation point, and close the quote.
If the object remains the same and is always true each time, then it enters into the loop.
The loop will continue to spit out the same things.
It will also make it easier for you to see the different aspects of the loops that you have.
Your total output will then look like this.
Current total is, colon, zero, period.
Next line, enter a number, comma, or anything else to exit, period.
Next line, the number three.
Next line, current total is, colon, three, period.
Next line, enter a number, comma, or anything else to exit, period.
Below that, the number nine.
Next line, current total is, colon, the number twelve, and a period.
Below that, enter a number, comma, or anything else to exit, period.
Below that in lowercase, FL.
Next line, the word goodbye with a capital G and an exclamation point at the end.
When you see this message, you'll know that you've reached the point where you have successfully
created a while loop, and that the same thing will consistently show up each time there's
a definitive truth to the way that things are done in the programming language that
you're using.
It is something that you'll be able to do, and you'll be able to make sure of while
you're doing different things with your programming.
Looping for.
When it comes to Python, for loops are different than what they could have been because of
the way that they're used and the way that they're set up.
It's important that you try to make sure that the for loop is something that you're
doing in all instances and that you're using it to make sure that things are true about
the different avenues you're working on.
The idea behind this type of loop is that it shows the type of data and the sets of data
that you're using for your various looping process.
No matter what type of loop you're using or the variable that you're changing with the
loops, the I identifier will always be something that will go along with it and will help people
to be able to see what you're doing.
The idea behind the for loop is so that you don't have to write your code out line by line.
Instead, you can just write it in a for loop and then you'll be able to see the major
differences in the loops and what they mean for the different codes that are put into
the process.
One of the best parts about using a for loop is that you don't always have to have the
data sets that are included with your loop.
If you have an open range of data that you plan to use with the loops that you have set up,
all you need to do is put a code in that looks like this.
First line.
The word for for, then the letter I, in, range, and in parentheses the number 10 and a colon sign.
By the way, this is all lower case.
Next line.
Print I plus the number 1.
The idea of this is because you will not have to worry about data sets.
If someone puts something into the loop input generator, you don't need to worry about whether
or not it's going to fit into a data set.
This is an especially good idea if you're going to use raw inputs or other types of inputs
that will have a profound effect on the output that is released from the print command option
on your program.
If you want to make sure that you're getting the best option possible for your programming
and with the various input categories you have, you'll need to make sure that you're
using your input amounts and that the loops are going to include everything that you want
to have on them.
For loops, while they seem relatively simple, can be especially tricky thanks to the fact
that you cannot really determine whether they're going to go through or cause a null statement
to come up with the input data.
You'll need to try your code out at least one time before you finalize it to make sure
that the for statement was created correctly.
Chapter 8.
Python's Methods
There's a lot of stuff that you can do while you're using Python.
Python.
The majority of the things that you'll do will actually be very complicated and not
at all like the simple strings that you put together throughout the chapters of this book.
Be aware that they will be somewhat complicated and that you will need to work with different
things to be able to get each of the strings done.
With functions, you would generally need to copy and paste every single line of information
that you have into the file that you want to be able to show to people.
Methods eliminates this problem and allows you the chance to be able to put the codes to good
use instead of spending a long time trying to get it all to fit in.
The actual term method refers to the following, return data, all one word, type T-Y-P-E with a function name,
all one word, in it.
You will then need to put return value.
Not all functions need this part of the code though.
You can do this to create a function depending on the numbers that you want to be able to use.
You can also create this to get the number input that you want to go into that multiplication sequence.
The word main, M-A-I-N, and then in closed curly brackets, you'll do the letter X, an equal sign,
and then the words multiply, num, multiply in lowercase and then capital N-U-M, in parentheses,
the number 6, followed by a semicolon, and then the closing brace.
The function that goes into the equation is the F-X.
That would be lowercase f, and then in parentheses, the letter X,
which is similar to many different things that you may have seen in various math classes throughout your life,
further proving that programming, and the idea behind Python, all goes back to math,
and what math is able to do in a sense of computing.
It all relates back to what you can do with different math equations.
Since you're using Python though, you can easily understand the way that methods work.
They're nearly identical to the options that you have with different codes,
but Python has made it much easier for you to understand the information that is included with each of these options.
To define a function in Python, all you have to do is let Python know that you're creating a method,
which is the exact same thing as a function.
In a line, write this code, def, function, name.
That would be lowercase d-e-f, f-u-n-c-t-i-o-n, capital N-A-M-E.
And then in parentheses, the word arguments, a-r-g-u-m-e-n-t-s, and a colon.
In the next line, pound sign, and the words code here.
The next step of functions is to start working with functions on your own.
Create your Chapter 7 file by saving it as ch7.py.
After you have created the file, you're going to use it to make a size calculator for your home.
It will allow you to put the square footage of the home in it,
and it will give you an idea of the size of your hypothetical home.
You're going to have completely perfectly square rooms in your home for the purpose of this file.
In a line, write the word rooms, lowercase r-o-o-m-s, then an equal sign, and then array access brackets.
Those would be the half rectangle ones that you see on your keyboard.
You'll want to enter the left and the right hand brackets.
Now, you'll need to create the method that is necessary for figuring out what the area of the home is going to be.
In this line, write, in lowercase, defcalculate, d-e-f-c-a-l-c-u-l-a-t-e, and then the word area,
and this is all one word, area spelled with a capital A,
immediately followed in parentheses with lowercase words length, followed by a comma,
and then the word width, w-i-d-t-h, and a colon.
Next line, print, quote mark, forward slash, lowercase n, room, capital R, lowercase o-o-m,
square footage, then a colon, then a percent sign, lowercase d, and then close the quote.
That will be followed by a percent sign, and then in parentheses, the word length, l-e-n-g-t-h,
an asterisk, and the word width, w-i-d-t-h, and then close the parentheses.
That is immediately followed by the words return length, in lowercase, then an asterisk,
and then again the word width.
The function for the room will be as follows.
In lowercase, def, add, d-e-f-a-d-d, then the word rooms with a capital R,
and in parentheses, room list, r-o-o-m-l-i-s-t, close that parentheses, and then put a colon.
Next line, square feet, and you're going to abbreviate it this way, all lowercase s-q-a-r-e-f-t,
then a colon, and then the number zero.
The next step is using iteration.
Do you see where this is going?
You're applying all of the principles that you've learned throughout the previous chapters
to this function creation.
Make your iteration this way, for room in room list.
Now you can put in the total square footage of the room that you were using.
The line will read this way, all lowercase, abbreviated square feet, s-q-a-r-e-f-t, a plus
sign, equal sign, the word room, then a pound sign, then s-q-a-r-e-f-t, a plus sign, and
the word room.
Next line, again, all lowercase, return s-q-a-r-e-f-t.
Now you'll need to know how many rooms are in the house.
This is something that you need to do, so make sure that you are converting it from
a function into an integer, so that you can make the new information present for it.
There are many different options for doing this, but all you need to do is go back to
what you learned in the previous chapters.
For example, int, and then in parentheses, raw underscore input, followed by number of
rooms in house with a question mark, and that phrase will be in close quotes, number of rooms
in house, and then two right-hand parentheses.
This is the way that it will be able to change when someone puts some type of input into the
room or the house that they have seen in the different areas.
It's going to change the number instantly from a string in a part of a list to an integer.
From there, it will allow you to see the square footage.
Declare the loop you're going to use.
In this line, write, all lowercase, for f-o-r, space, the letter i, space, the word in, space,
range, range, r-a-n-g-e, space, left-hand parentheses, rom, r-o-m-m, space, then capital c-o-u-n-t,
close the parentheses, and put a colon.
Then, get the length and the width of the room that you're going to get.
L equals i-n-t, then in parentheses, raw input, quote, how long is the room, question mark,
close quote, w equals i-n-t, again in parentheses, raw input, and in quotes, how wide is the
room, question mark.
Now you can get the area by multiplying them, and that will tell you the square footage of
the room.
It will go through the calculator.
That line reads, area, room, all overcase, equal sign, and then as one word, calculate
area, then in parentheses, the word length, followed by a comma, and then width.
Then, just add it to the list of the rooms that you have already created.
That line would read, rooms dot append, a-p-p-e-n-d, and then in parentheses, the word area, a-r-e-a.
This will allow you to see the total area of the rooms that are in the house.
They'll be added together in accordance with their individual square footage, and that
is the total square footage of the house that you're trying to figure out.
There are so many ways to do this, and you'll be able to use your math skills to apply it
in a real-life situation, like with rooms that are not perfectly square, to be able
to find the exact amount.
To be able to find rooms that aren't square in the way that these rooms are, all you need
to do is subtract the negative space of the rooms from the other square footage of the
rooms.
If you want to figure out that type of house, you'll need to create a completely different
calculator, because it will not work at all in the same way as what you would normally
be able to do.
It's necessary to try and make sure that you're creating the most realistic version of each
of the things possible, so that when users put their information in, they'll get the
exact information that they need based on the method that you created.
Chapter 9.
Input and Output of File
The file input and output is necessary if you ever want to do any type of actual programming.
You need to use this activity to make sure that you can save your progress, put the data
into the fields that they belong, and even be able to pull data out of information that
you've collected.
There are so many things that you can do with file I.O. that it can sometimes be difficult
to figure out what you're doing and the way that it is helping you work the right way.
Programs like word processors use file input and output because they need to have a way
to save the information that you've put into them.
If you're saving a file or opening one up, then you're using file I-O, I-O, and may not
even know it because of the way that the program works.
Programming the right way makes things like file input and output go almost perfectly and
provides nearly seamless integration of the different things that are going on in the
situations that you do them.
As with all things related to Python, it is very easy to be able to put the file information
and pull the file information when you need it.
You don't even have to worry about the problems that most other programs require you to use
when you're in different situations.
The easiest things that you can do with Python will all involve the use of file I-O.
It's much easier than any of the other codes that you've written in the past few chapters.
Open.
The way that you write files with Python is easy to understand and just as easy to be
able to do.
You'll need to interact with files if you want to be able to try different things, so
you should make sure that you're doing it in all different areas that you've worked
with and will continue to work for you if you make sure that you're doing it the right
way.
To open, you will just need to know the interaction modes.
Operator.
Meaning.
Description.
W.
Write Mode.
Erases the file that you wrote.
Writes it from scratch.
R.
Read Mode.
Allows you to read the file and nothing else.
R+.
Read the file or write it so that you can position yourself.
A.
Append Mode.
Allows you to add content onto the file that you created.
Similar to what you experience with certain word processing documents and programs that allow
you to process, you will automatically get the read-only outlook if
that is what you're looking for.
So, if you want a read-only document or processing option, then all you need to do is not specify
the interaction mode.
If you don't do it, it will default.
If you want it to be anything other than read-only, you'll need to make sure that you can specify
it.
F equals open.
Create ch8.py.
Write the code to open the file with example.txt.
This will allow you to open something that is in write-only mode.
You don't have to worry about what you're erasing because there's nothing on the actual
file that will ever be erased, since nothing was on the file in the beginning.
This is how your code should look.
F equals open.
And in parentheses, and then a quotation mark, example.txt.
Close the quotation, add a comma, and then, again in a closed quote, lowercase w.
Make sure you add the right hand or close the parentheses.
You'll need to add a loop to this so that you can try new things with the options that
come up.
You won't have to worry about the different things that are associated with the text if
you open it in a loop, and if you work to make sure that they are truly looping through
the different documents.
This is what your string will look like with the loop.
All lowercase, for, f-o-r, the letter i, in, range, and in parentheses the number 9.
Next line, all lowercase, the letter f, dot, write, w-r-i-t-e.
And then in parentheses, a quotation mark, the percent sign, lowercase d, forward slash,
lowercase n, asterisk, percent sign, and then a left-hand parentheses mark, lowercase i,
the plus sign, and the number 1.
Close that parentheses with a right-hand parentheses, and then another right-hand parentheses.
The total amount of it is going to show up when the file opens.
This will happen each time there is a user who puts the information in, and when there
is a change to the way that the information is processed.
If you want to be done with the file, you'll need to close it.
Close.
Similar to opening a file like you did in Python, closing is simple.
The only thing that you need to write down in the code to close up the file and to allow
things to go back to the way they were is as follows.
All lowercase, the letter F, dot, and then C-L-O-S-E, and closed parentheses.
If you're going to have a document, and you're going to be able to process it while using the
program that you created, you'll need to have a string of text.
This is the code, and it can be put into the program so that you'll be able to make changes
to it whenever you want.
While it seemed like each of the steps were really simple, they all led up to this.
Next line, again, all lowercase, the word for, F-O-R, letter I, in, range, and in parentheses,
the number 9, followed by a colon, next line, all lowercase, the letter F, dot, right, W-R-I-T-E,
and then in parentheses, the following, quotation mark, percent sign, uppercase D, forward slash,
lowercase N, asterisk, percent sign, a left-hand parentheses mark, followed by a lowercase letter
I, the plus sign, and then the number 1, and then follow that with two right-hand parentheses marks.
Next line, again, lowercase, the letter F, dot, close, C-L-O-S-E.
Save all of the information that you wrote down in your plain text to make sure that it is under the
ch8.py file, and that it is able to be run on your program.
Open up Python if it isn't already open and run it.
This should allow you to see the document that you created.
Since you were using the integer way of doing it, and you chose to have the range stop at 9,
you'd be able to make sure that you are seeing all of the numbers that are 1 through 9.
Since you're not using the function, and instead used integers, you will not be able to see 0,
as it is not an integer.
Chapter 10. The Basics of OOP
When programming first became a popular option for people who previously worked in the technology
sector, the codes that were written were essentially written in stone because of the way that they were
used and because the code had to run the entire course before any changes could be made.
Even then, changes were often not able to make a difference with the way that things were going
and the way that the codes were written.
Now, though, you can easily make changes to the way that a program runs and operates.
This is something that will allow you the chance to be able to see that there are major differences
in each of the programs and the way that they're run.
It's a good idea to try new things, but to be able to do that, you need to know more about OOP.
OOP is the acronym for Object-Oriented Programming.
There was a language in the past that was called ADA, A-D-A, and it was used to make the OOP.
This was something that was huge for the programming industry,
and it was able to change the way that people would do programming forever.
When someone created a code, they could now use that code to be able to make changes later on.
They were not limited to the first time that they made a code,
and they no longer had to worry about the problems that would come from using the different options
that were included with the codes.
Thanks to ADA and OOP, programming is now much easier,
and you can make major changes any time that you want to make them.
The idea behind OOP is that it has both classes and objects that are present in it.
What was originally ADA developed into what is now known as Java,
and it was able to grow from that point.
Because of the changes that were made to the programming industry during that time,
OOP became the norm,
and became something that people would be able to do
no matter what they wanted to add into their programming field.
It allowed them the chance to be able to try new things,
and to get what they could out of the different aspects of programming.
We'll take a closer look in a moment at the classes and objects that make up OOP.
In Chapter 11, you'll learn more about the specifics of OOP
and how it can be used with your programming,
which is the last true step to take from a complete beginner
to someone who knows how to do programming with Python.
OOP is basically made up of the following.
Classes.
There are concepts that change the characteristics of a program.
They're the specific little details that can change what you're doing with your programming
and with the different things that you have.
In the next chapter, you'll learn about cars as a class.
This is something that is usually somewhat difficult to learn,
but is also something that will allow you the chance to see what you can do to make changes.
Every car has wheels, a motor, and something that you steer with,
but not all of them are exactly the same.
Think of your data as the car,
and then the other pieces of the car as the pieces that make up the data.
That's the easiest way for you to understand a class and how it relates to OOP.
Objects.
This is the instance of the class that you already created.
While the class defines the data as a whole,
the object defines exactly what the object is.
For example, an object can be the difference between a big car and a little car,
or it could be the difference between your car and my car.
There are many major differences that come along with the objects
and what that means for the objects,
so make sure that you're using that to your advantage
and that you're doing what you can to figure out the instances
that come along with the classes that you have.
When you're able to see the way that you can declare a class by using Python,
you can have a better sense of the way that they work.
When you're just thinking of classes in terms of cars and colors and whose is what,
it can be harder to understand the way that it works
and what it does with the different options.
If you're creating a class in Python,
it will allow you to see the way that it works out
by giving you the information like this.
If you're going to use the example like we're using,
it would be written out like this.
The word definitive, all lowercase, followed by car with a capital C,
and then in closed parentheses, the word object, followed by a colon.
After that, you can make sure that you're using the different terms
that can be adjusted in the classes
and with the options that you'll need in your instances.
As you learn more about vehicle classes
and the options that are included with them,
you can see the different ways that the class works
and the way that they're able to be used
to your own advantage within the class options.
If you use a class to define an object,
you'll need to make sure that you use variables as the objects.
In this line, the word definitive,
underscore, init, I-N-I-T, underscore,
and then a left-hand parenthesis,
the word self, and a comma,
comma, make, model, model with a capital M,
followed by a comma, year with a capital Y,
followed by a comma, and then wheel in lowercase,
and then a right-hand parenthesis mark.
You'll then need to try to define each of the classes
by using self.makemodel, equal sign, make and model,
selfyear, equal sign, year produced,
selfwheels, equals number of wheels.
You can add each of these things,
and it will allow you the chance to see
that you're going to define the specifics
that come along with different vehicle classes
and the way that they work
to make them a part of the coding that you're doing.
Chapter 11. How to use OOP
Now that you know what OOP is
and how it works in accordance with your Python programming,
it's important that you look at all of the concepts
that come along with OOP
and the way that they can be used.
In this chapter, you can expect to learn more
about the way that OOP works
and the way that you can make sure
that you're using different options
for your Python experience.
It will give you a chance to try new things
and to add different elements
to the programming that you created.
It's also something that will give you the ability
to make major changes to the way
that things are done in your Python experience.
Your programs will give you the chance
to see how you can make the coding process easier
and how you can include various options
with the codes that you write.
Inherit.
The inheritance factor is one of the concepts
that you'll learn when you're using OOP.
It's the simplest and most widely used concept
that you can write with on Python.
It also gives you the chance to learn new things
about the programs that you are writing
and gives you the ability to make major changes
with the experience that you have on Python.
By looking at vehicles again,
you can have a better understanding
of how inheritance works.
All SUVs are vehicles.
Not all of the vehicles that are available
are going to be SUVs though.
All vans are vehicles.
And again, not all vehicles are vans.
When you're looking at the different types of vehicles,
you can clearly see that not all vans are SUVs.
And there are actually a lot more vehicles
than just those two that you can use
for different things.
The concept behind OOP is that things can be broken down
into the smallest part possible, like this.
Vehicles, dash, right arrow key, SUVs, dash,
right arrow key, four-wheel drive, dash,
right arrow key, class, then the word seating
in parentheses, that's S-E-A-T-I-N-G, dash,
right arrow sign, the word make, dash,
right arrow sign, the word model, M-O-D-E-L, dash,
right arrow sign, and the word trim, T-R-I-M.
By looking at this, you can see that the vehicle
is the actual parent that is used in the situation
while the trim becomes the child for it.
There can only be one parent for a certain set
of classifications, but there can be many children
that the parent has.
If you were going to use the same sequence
to be able to convert the information
into your own Python codes, and then be able
to put the information out on your site
or wherever you are using your programming for,
it would look like this.
First line, lowercase, class, C-L-A-S-S,
and then a space, and then the word vehicle
with a capital V, immediately followed
by the word object in parentheses, and then a colon.
Next line, indented twice, def, D-E-F, double underscore,
I-N-I-T, double underscore, and then in parentheses
the following, self, comma, make and model, comma,
prod year, comma, air conditioning, and then
after the closed parentheses, a colon.
Next line, indented twice from there,
self.makeandmodel, equal sign, make and model.
Next line, self.prodyear, equal sign, prod year.
Next line, self.air conditioning, equal sign, air conditioning.
Next line, self.doors, equal sign, and the number four.
In another line, def, honk, that's D-E-F, H-O-N-K,
and in parentheses the word self, S-E-L-F, and a colon.
Under that, indented twice, the word print,
and then a quotation mark, percent symbol, lowercase s,
the word says, S-A-Y-S, colon, honk, capital H-O-N-K,
with an exclamation point, then honk again, capital H-O-N-K,
another exclamation point, followed by a close quote,
then a percent symbol, and the words self, S-E-L-F, dot, make and model.
To make sure that you would have everything that you need in the code,
you would actually need to write it this way.
First line, class, sports, car, and in parentheses the word vehicle.
Next line, def, underscore, I-N-I-T, underscore,
and then in parentheses, self, comma, make and model, comma,
prod year, comma, air conditioning, closed parenthesis mark,
and then a colon.
Next line, self, dot, make and model, equal sign, make and model.
Next line, self, dot, prod year, equal sign, prod year.
Next line, self, dot, air conditioning, equal sign, air conditioning.
Next line, self, dot, doors, equal sign, and the number four.
By doing this, you will give yourself the chance to see that there are many different options
that can go into codes, and that will give you the chance to see the different aspects
of each of the codes that you have.
You'll need to make sure that you're doing what you can with the codes that you're working with
so that you'll be able to do more with it and so that you can include everything that
is necessary in the codes that you're using with your Python.
You can test it all out and use the exact code that is included there to be able to bring
it up on the program that you've created with Python.
Polymorph.
With the same idea behind inheritance, polymorphism allows for the changes to be made to the different
aspects that are included with the fares on all of the different changes that you're making.
When you're able to use polymorphism, you'll make sure that you're getting the best experience
possible and that you can make some changes without ever having to go into the code.
If you're going to use it for Python, you'll need to use method overloading or overriding.
When you're able to use overloading to change the way that coding appears, you'll need to
write it so that there is a lot of code in one area.
This will overload the system and will cause it to stop with the changes that you want to make.
There will be too much for it to process and this is something that can completely change
the system.
Either it will not pick up on the information that you put into the code or it will cause it
to become completely deleted within the way that it is done.
If you're going to use overriding, you will need to write a code that is capable of overriding
the entire system.
Just because you get rid of one instance of the code does not mean that you'll be able
to choose the area that you want to get deleted.
It's important that you try to make sure that you're using what you can to be able to make
sure those changes and that each of the changes that you make will depend on the entire system.
After you've overridden the system, you need to add additional information to it and put it
into play so that you can change the way that it functions.
Now that you're aware of all the changes that you can make, after you've written your
code, you'll be able to make the changes that you want.
It won't necessarily mean that you're going to have those changes, but it will give you
a chance to try more and to do more with the areas that you're using.
You should feel less pressure when putting your code together and trying the different files
out since you now know that it is all able to be fixed through either polymorphism or
inheritance.
Chapter 12 What Causes Fatal Errors and How to Fix It
If you encountered fatal exception errors whenever you use your PC, then you're probably wondering
why it happens and also what causes them.
Basically, the fatal exception is an error message that many PC users encounter as they use their
computers. This particular error will indicate that the program you're running and the one
that caused the error will need to be closed. The fatal exception error simply means that the
exception cannot be handled in order for the program to continue running. You need to understand that
software programs need to communicate with the operating system through layers of codes.
When the operating system encounters an invalid code or an illegal software program instruction,
it will usually result in the fatal exception error. Generally, the fatal exception errors are caused by
incompatibility of the programs you're trying to run. It can also be caused by improperly written
programs as well as hardware-related issues, such as overheating of a specific piece of hardware.
There are quite a lot of causes for fatal exception errors, so here are some effective solutions that may
solve this problem. The first is by disabling any programs running which may cause a
conflict between the programs that are already running and the programs that you're trying
to run. By disabling a particular program first, you'll be able to prevent fatal exception errors.
You might also want to delete temporary files, as this is also a common cause for the fatal exception
errors. Defragmenting the hard drive as well as running scan disk will be able to prevent data
corruption, which is also a cause of the fatal exception errors.
Chapter 13. How to Use Your Python Skills
There are many ways that you can use the skills that you've just learned to be able to try Python
and use it for yourself. Once you know how to use Python, you can do all of your own programming,
and that will give you the help that you need to be able to get started with your career
in programming. Gone are the days where you need to rely on programs that are created by other people
or the expert help of people who really can't do much to help you. After listening to this audiobook,
you'll be more than just a beginner, and you'll be able to use that to your benefit so that you can
do everything from providing yourself with a service to making a lucrative income.
Power a Social Media Site
You may be surprised to find out that those Instas you loved earlier today are possible
because of Python. With the capabilities that Python has, you can not only build an entire
social media site, but also power it. While many of the other social media sites have moved on to
bigger languages, they're just a few steps up from Python. Instagram still uses Python to power
everything that they do. You'll be able to do the same, and hopefully one day have a social media
site that is just as famous as Instagram. Create a Fun Game for Friends
Throughout this book, you'll learn the way to make different things and give people choices for
what they're going to put into your input areas. These are all choices that they can make, but you can
benefit by putting them into a game. Whether you want to be a game creator or not is irrelevant.
Building a game for your friends to play, online or off, is a great way to practice your Python skills
and have a better chance at building really cool stuff in the future. In the beginning,
you can start with a very basic game. Users are asked to input questions and the output is all
based on that information. The better you get at writing Python, the more advanced your games can be.
You may even be able to make something that is comparable to your favorite video game.
From there, take your skills to a different place and you'll be a true Python master in no time.
Learn insider secrets. There are no real secrets of Python, but as you begin to work with more codes
and try new things out, you'll be able to learn some of the quirks that the language comes with so
that you can try new things. And you'll be able to find out some of the things that the most advanced
Python users have. This is a great way to learn new things, try out new codes, and give yourself a
chance at doing more with the Python language so that you can take it to the next level. You can also
use Python if you want to enter any program through the back door. While it isn't necessarily the best
hacking language that's available for you to try, it is something that you can get very comfortable
with getting the specifics on other programs with. It will give you a chance to do much more than simply
creating websites, programs, or other things that can sometimes be complicated for you to figure out.
The language of Google. The language that Google uses is the same language that you're beginning
to learn all about. Google is one of the biggest sites on the internet and possibly the most visited
around the world depending on which statistics you look at. If something as big as Google continues to
use Python, then it's a relatively good language to learn. One thing that you can do is teach yourself
how the programming and the codes of Google work. While I wouldn't necessarily suggest trying to compete
with Google, you can try to learn more so that you'll be able to give yourself a better chance
with the options that you have. One of those options would be to try and get a job with Google.
Having Python knowledge will help you get a job at nearly any tech-related industry.
Build on your knowledge. For many people who just want to know the basics, Python is the end of the line.
For others, though, it can be a simple stepping stone to learning more coding language.
The majority of people who know the more complicated methods of writing in different code languages
started with Python and continue to use it while they're working on different languages.
One of the best parts of being able to use Python to build on the knowledge that you have is that
you will always be able to learn more from what you're doing and what you've done with Python.
None of the languages that are present in today's world are exactly the same, but knowing one code
language will often help you to have a better chance at learning a different one.
Make money.
Aside from the already mentioned idea of getting a job with Google or some other industry leader
that uses Google, you can make your own money by yourself. You don't need another company to be
able to show you what to do. This is something that you can do once you master Python, and something
that is going to be very lucrative depending on how you market yourself.
The next chapter will give you all of the ideas that you need to truly make Python your career.
No more begging for jobs and trying to get big-name companies to hire you with your limited knowledge
of Python that, while impressive to you, pales in comparison to some of the biggest programmers
who work with those companies.
Chapter 14. Why Python is Here to Stay
Python was originally conceived by Van Rossum as a hobby language in December 1989. Also,
the major and backward incompatible version of the general-purpose programming language was released
on December 3, 2008. But Python is recently rated by a number of surveyors as the most popular
coding language of 2015. The massive popularity indicates Python's effectiveness as a modern programming
language. At the same time, Python 3 is currently being used by developers across the world for
creating a variety of desktop GUI, web, and mobile applications. There are also a number of reasons
why the huge popularity and market share of Python will remain intact over a longer period of time.
Eight reasons why the massive popularity of Python will remain intact in the future.
One. Supports Multiple Programming Paradigms
Good developers often take advantage of different programming paradigms to reduce the amount of time
and effort required for developing large and complex applications. Like other modern programming
languages, Python also supports a number of commonly used programming styles, including object-oriented,
functional, procedural, and imperative. It further features automatic memory management,
along with a dynamic type system, so programmers can use the language to effectuate development of
large and complex software applications. Number two. It doesn't require programmers to write lengthy
code. Python is designed with a complete focus on code readability, so the programmers can create a
readable code base that can be used by members of distributed teams. At the same time, the simple syntax of the
programming language enables them to express concepts without writing long lines of code. This feature makes
it easier for developers to work on large and complex applications, as they can easily skip certain tasks
required by other programming languages. It becomes easier for developers to maintain and update their applications.
3. Provides a comprehensive standard library. Python further scores
over other programming languages due to its extensive standard library. The programmers can use these libraries
to accomplish a variety of tasks without writing long lines of code. Also, the standard library of
Python is designed with a large number of high-use programming tasks scripted into it. Thus, it helps
programmers to accomplish tasks like string operations, development, and implementation of web services, working with
internet protocols, and handling operating system interface. 4. Effectuates web application development. Python is designed as a
general-purpose programming language and lacks built-in web development features. Web developers use a variety of add-on modules to write
modern web applications in Python. While writing web applications in Python, programmers have the option to use several high-level
web frameworks, including Django, Web2Pi, TurboGears, CubicWeb, and Reel. These web frameworks help programmers to perform a number of
applications without writing additional code like database manipulation, URL routing, session storage and retrieval, and
output template formatting. They can further use the web frameworks to protect the web application from
cross-site scripting attacks, SQL injection, and cross-site request forgery. 5. Facilitates development of high-quality GUI, scientific, and
numeric applications. Python is currently available on major operating systems like Windows, Mac OSX, Linux, and
Unix, so the desktop GUI applications written in the programming language can be deployed on multiple platforms. The
programmers can further speed up cross-platform desktop GUI application development using frameworks like KIVI, WXPython, and PyGTK.
A number of reports have highlighted that Python is used widely for the development of numeric and scientific applications.
While writing scientific and numerical applications in Python, the developers can take advantage of tools like SIPI, Pandas,
IPython, along with the Python imaging library. 6. Simplifies prototyping of applications.
Nowadays, each organization wants to beat the competition by developing software with distinct and
innovative features. That's why prototyping has become an integral part of modern software development
life cycles. Before writing the code, developers have to create a prototype of the application to display
its features and functionality to various stakeholders. As a simple and fast programming language,
Python enables programmers to develop the final system without putting in any extra time and effort.
At the same time, the developers have the option to start developing the system straight from the
prototype simply by refactoring the code. 7. It can also be used for mobile app development.
Frameworks and KIVI also make Python usable for developing mobile apps. As a library,
KIVI can be used for creating both desktop applications and mobile apps, but it allows developers to write
the code once and deploy the same code on multiple platforms. Along with interfacing with the hardware
of the mobile device, KIVI also comes with built-in camera adapters, modules to render and play videos,
and modules to accept user input through multi-touch and gestures. Thus, programmers can use KIVI to create
different versions of the same applications for iOS, Android, and Windows Phone. Also, the framework does
not require developers to write long lines of code while creating KIVI programs. After creating different
versions of the mobile app, they can package the app separately for the individual app store. The option
makes it easier for developers to create different versions of the mobile app without deploying separate
developers. 8. Open Source
Despite being rated as the most popular coding language of 2015, Python is still available as
open source and free software. Along with large IT companies, the startups and freelance software
developers can also use the programming language without paying any fees or royalties. Thus, Python makes it
easier for businesses to reduce development costs significantly. At the same time, the programmers can
also avail the assistance of the large and active community to add out-of-box features to the software
application. Conclusion
Python is a strong programming language and provides an easy use of the code lines. Maintenance can be handled
in a great way, and debugging can be done easily too. It has gained importance across the globe as Google has
made it one of its official programming languages. Python is a popular choice among programmers due to its
simple syntax and its ease in debugging and error fixing. Similar to many other interpretive languages,
Python offers more flexibility than compiled languages, and it can be efficiently used to
integrate disparate systems together. Certainly, Python is a versatile programming language with
several applications that are used in diverse fields. Now that you've reached the end of this
audiobook, you should be able to comprehend the basics of Python and to write simple lines of code.
You should also be able to comprehend the difference between the various types of data,
the syntax in Python, the most important functions and modules. Although the road to becoming a
successful programmer is still long, I hope that this audiobook will pave the path for your success,
and I'm positive that if you use the knowledge contained in it the right way, it will definitely
help you reach your goals. Thanks for reaching the end of this book, and I hope you enjoyed it.
This has been Python, a complete step-by-step beginner's guide to programming with Python. Python
programming language and coding. Written by Leonard Edison. Narrated by Jim Raposa. Copyright 2017 by Leonard
Edison. Production copyright by Leonard Edison.
Audible hoped you've enjoyed this program.
