Welcome to the ACT-INF podcast, where we will present short digestible segments clipped from
the Active Inference Lab weekly live streams. If you like what you hear and you want to learn more,
check out the entire live stream at the Active Inference Lab YouTube channel. The link to the
live stream is provided in the episode description. My name is Blue Knight, and I will be guiding you
through this podcast episode, which is clipped from ACT-INF Lab live stream number 10.1. This
discussion will be loosely structured around the paper, A Variational Approach to Scripts, by
Mau Alboracion, Axel Constant, Carl Friston, and Maxwell Ramstad. In today's episode, Daniel Friedman
is going to start us off facilitating this discussion about active inference in relation to scripts.
The first question is, what interests you or excites you about studying scripts? So kind of what drew
you to this paper, whether from the active inference side or from the social sciences side? And then
what's something that you thought about after reading the paper? So while people are raising
their hand, I'll start. I think what interested me in studying scripts was just addressing all of
these different social contexts with one integrated framework. That's kind of an appealing idea. Mau?
My name is Mau Alboracion. I'm one of the authors on the paper, along with Axel Constant, Maxwell Ramstad,
and Carl Friston. I'm a first year PhD student in Quebec, and I'm working in cognitive computing.
Yeah. And I think it's also, it's sort of a roadmap that links internal and external manifestations
of our general understanding of the world and systems dynamics that get brought together
through these islands of negentropy that become these scripts, if that makes any sense.
Cool. RJ?
RJ? My name is RJ Corday. I'm in New York, and I'm currently researching organizational dynamics,
intelligence analysis, and narrative warfare. After I read the paper, what I ended up thinking about is,
what are the conditions look like for threshold events for changing scripts? That's really
interesting to me. And then what would the metadata be? And this is something we had discussed before,
is what would the metadata be if we wanted to catalog the scripts that are operating in a system?
Cool. And bringing up that negentropic idea, the sort of organizing principle of scripts,
that's pretty interesting too, because in combining what both of you just said, how do we change a script
from one island of stability or organizational attractor to another organizational attractor?
If we go from one organizing principle, maybe we don't like some aspects of it, but if we just go
from order to pure disorder, that's not doing the society a service. So we want to move from order to order,
ideally through order, but how is that actually going to be tracked or designed?
I'm Shannon Brooks. I'm in South Dakota currently, but I'm usually based at the University of California.
Yeah, that's actually exactly the one question I had written on my paper.
What RJ and Daniel mentioned, what can active inference help us to identify when a critical
transition will happen or when we'll switch scripts? It's really easy, I say. But in music,
we have scripts, and it's either written on a piece of paper, or it's the cultural transmission
of how you perform in this genre of music, alone or with others. And as long as you know that that's
the script that you're starting from, you know how the social interaction will transpire.
And then if you want to do an experiment, you know that's the constraints that you have,
and you can pick out the interesting features that you want to empirically measure, like whether it's body sway
or the actual music that's being played. But in the example that runs through the paper of flirting,
you don't necessarily know the goal of the interaction if you're observing it, or the goal of the interaction
if you're in it, because it's not codified in like this very formal or traditional framework in the same way
that like a musical interaction is. So identifying the threshold or identifying how those transitions
happen would be very different in those two types of interactions. Cool. Lou?
Well, so I was excited to really learn more about how scripts can interact in a hierarchical way,
like just the paper kind of mentioned it, but didn't really unpack it thoroughly. And I just would
like to really kind of dive into that. Yeah, and the music and the cultural side, it's maybe with a musical ensemble,
they could agree to play a different song within the same style or agree to play a different style.
And then we could ask the same with culture, but it's a little bit more challenging to simply adopt
a different cultural regime. But maybe within a culture, there's a lot of latitudes. So there's this question of nesting,
and horizontal interactions, and about style, controlled novelty. So I think there's a lot of cool
ideas we'll be bringing up. Any other comments here on these warm up questions? Mau?
So yeah, that's the idea. That's the goal. Eventually measuring where the threshold happens.
We have another paper that's being written, and it's trying to identify how scripts tend to become
overlapping through interaction in society. And when they become overlapping, they become analogical.
So the scripts of femininity and masculinity are not as segregated as they used to be. For instance,
I'm wearing no sleeves in the 1800s, but would definitely have been acceptable for men. Nowadays,
it's not a problem anymore. Both men and women can wear it. So these scripts have tended to overlap. And
we're seeing that because the scripts overlap, they become a little bit meaningless because they're not
allowing us to predict anything. So there's going to be a point, which we're kind of sensing already,
where the concept of gender as a strict binary is just breaking apart. And we're seeing new concepts emerge,
new possibilities. So this is where the threshold can be measured. And I think we can
definitely formalize that. As far as codification, art in general is just a series of codes that once
you have, you get to break. It's just, it's become this sort of script in art where you have to break
the script. You have to use what we know in order to continually create novelty. But think of all of the
Hollywood movies that depict flirting. It's pretty much the same. Like there's a few scripts that are
possible. But if you look at it abstractly, uh, it's basically, you know, you, you don't, you don't
flirt necessarily, uh, with someone you have zero intention of ever, ever becoming with in Hollywood
movies, or, uh, you don't flirt with someone by hitting them on the head with a flounder, you know,
like, like there's some things that you know you're supposed to do and some things, you know,
you're not supposed to do. And the strictness depends on how wide one vision of a script becomes.
Thanks RJ.
I just, uh, something I picked up from what you're saying there, uh, on, um, on flirting in, in,
in, in cinema. Like, I feel like a lot of the comedies I know of are actually about script breaking.
So even, even like outside flirting, like something like, uh, um, there's, there's a
like common category, like in, in, in the UK, it's peep show in the U S it's always sunny. Um,
where it's most of the show is just about failing to adapt to cultural scripts. So I just want to
know, like, I feel like there's, there's some element there where we actually like contrast
like exactly what it is we're not supposed to do as well. Yep. There's the exception that
proves the rule. And then there's the, the chess master who within the structure of the rules
makes an innovation that appears in the short term to be breaking the rules. And then there's
this element of the media, which is showing us, for example, maybe flirting scenes with things
that wouldn't work in real life, uh, whether for anyone or for some set of people, but often
including very, for example, bold maneuvers, they can't, uh, convey in the Hollywood reality,
meeting somebody, getting to know them over years, not as exciting, not as a clear foreshadowing. So
maybe there are sort of rule or script breaking things, but then when we see that representation
and maybe even starting to introduce some of these active ideas, we see them in our sensory states and
therefore we perceive them as likely or plausible. And then we come to embody these beliefs about what
is likely or possible or, uh, preferable in the world. And we see people imitating behavior that they
see in the media. So that can be used for good and for bad. Sasha? Hi, I'm Sasha. I'm based out of
California and I'm also a graduate student studying developmental neuroscience. Yeah,
this kind of loops back to the question that I had after reading the paper, which is, um, how do
individuals convey, um, uh, their true state or, um, their, you know, unique perspective on the script
while conforming to the social script? Because, um, if we all acted like we were in a rom-com,
we would have different lives and relationships, but clearly we all have very unique, um, and
uh, personalized, um, uh, versions of that. And I don't think any of us live in a rom-com, but
you know, please correct me if I'm wrong. Yeah. That's kind of the fun. It's like asking what's
the genre, what scripts will my script, uh, or what genre will my scripts be drawn from? Am I in a tragedy?
Am I in a war movie? Am I in a rom-com? So that's kind of a fun, it's like, what genre would your theme
music be? What kinds of conversants are you going to, um, be interacting with? Um, Mao, did you have
your hand raised? Yeah. Yeah. Go ahead. Yeah. So first thing is, um, I think you mentioned the,
the oppositeness and that's a really interesting idea. Like the, that's also how new scripts emerge is that you
have these, these bubbles of counter discourse that come and that's either embody, um, embody portray
something that is real in society, but often invisibilized or something that, um, wants to
push back on something that feels oppressive to a large swath of society. So for instance,
one great study that I saw, I'm sorry about, I don't have the name of it right now, but I'll send
it to whoever wants it. It was about the portrayal of abject in UK society. And the point was there's
all these makeover shows that show you first all these women, how they are not supposed to be. So they
take a woman and they portray her as very ugly, often, um, lower class. Like they, they give her
all the qualities you're not supposed to have. And then they take her through this transition
and they make over her life. And suddenly at the end of the show, she's happy. Her life is great.
Her children love her. Her husband loves her again. It's great. And it's like this, this movement from
the object that you're not supposed to embody to the, to the ideal that you are supposed to embody.
And on the second note, what you said, I think Sasha is that's exactly right. But the thing is,
you are not the person in the rom-com. You do not perfectly embody what she is. Even if they try
to make her relatable, you are connected through these tendrils of semantics to a variety of things
that make you take what is possible and adapt all of these possible scripts into this new version of
adapted contextual anchored script, which is why there is variety as well.
Cool. RJ?
Um, I was going to say, uh, Mal covered a lot of what I was going to say, actually. So we're, we're,
we're fairly saying, I was just going to say like that. Um, I like, I actually, I like the reference
to like makeover shows. I was going to, I was going to talk about, um, uh, very opposite end, uh, but,
but, uh, Greek art and stories where, where it's, it's very often. And this is where like,
I think Joseph Campbell brings up the hero's journey, um, where it's from some state,
which is objective, negative, not where we want to be to some other state. None of us actually
live in the rom-com like, but, but the, the ideal being presented, um, isn't something we're supposed
to mirror necessarily, but something, something that kind of acts as a strange attractor.
Um, but yeah, but anyway, Mal covered most of what I was going to say there.
Yeah. RJ, I, I wrote down literally hero's journey because the makeover show,
if it's weight loss or about, um, norms for genders or house makeover or chefs,
it's always this hero's journey. And it's a scripted hero's journey, literally designed
journey. And then the interesting part is the policies that they undertake thinking about
active. Those policies are not our affordances. They have a team and they have a camera person
and they have a coach. So then it's like showing you the first point and the last point on the
trajectory and saying, well, now you figure out what policy, but the only example that you've
observed, the only example of what's a plausible affordance is something that is defined as being
inaccessible to basically everyone. So that's just like such a twisted way to play with how
people actually improve themselves. Yeah. Mau and then RJ.
Yeah. So that's it. That's exactly right. You, you touched on a very important point is that
take each script as though it was its own little like mark of blanket, like it's not right, but
imagine, um, there's some parts of the scripts that will interact with one another. And then there's
these like blankets that move a little slower and through the blankets, you can go to another part of
the script and you can do this at all the levers. So this was touching on the idea that someone else
brought earlier that there's layers of scripts and that's absolutely true. You can break down every
script into smaller, smaller scripts. What defines a script is its edges. So entering the script and
leaving the script, what happens in between can also be scripted, but that's on a lower level, right?
So for me to, for me to speak here, I had to go through a series of things, but what really matters
is that I'm here now and that this will be recorded, but, um, getting here, it doesn't
really matter how, right? Unless I'm coming from it as a, as an academic. So I had a series of steps
that I did to get there as an academic, the, the way that you, um, bring these scripts together,
your vectors from where you're coming from, define also what kinds of policies you'll have available
to you inside a given script. Cool. RJ, and then we'll continue.
Yeah. Uh, also, um, real quick. I like that. That's, that's quotable. What defines the script
is its edges. Um, but, uh, I just wanted to add real quick, uh, that it's probably actually dangerous
to optimize too much to say like the rom-com or the ideal, like we, we don't actually want to copy
it exactly. Right. Like, I feel like maybe, maybe, uh, um, uh, there's, there's something there where,
where we're supposed to actually mutate the scripts we're being presented over time. And that like,
if we actually optimize them exactly like a perfect mirror, then we actually get instability.
But anyway, cool. Well, I hope if you're listening, whether from the active inference
side, hearing about scripts for the first time or on script side, hearing about active inference,
you're starting to see where we are all getting excited about at this intersection.
We hope you enjoyed today's podcast. Stay tuned for next time, where we will go
into this paper even more, taking a deeper dive.
