This is the ActInf podcast, and today we will continue the discussion of the paper,
a variational approach to script. So, I'm off script. This episode is clipped from the
Active Inference Lab weekly live stream number 10.2, and you can find the live stream at the
Active Inference Lab YouTube channel. The link is provided down in the episode description.
As you may already know, I'm Blue Knight, and as usual, Daniel Friedman is going to scaffold
this discussion about scripts.
In which settings would an Active Inference script model be valuable? And kind of related
to that would be in that setting, we can already ask, what would the metadata for the script
look like? And also, I'm just curious, like, are there any empirical studies that are being
done in the scripts framework? Or what next steps are you taking in this line of research?
Or what would excite you, Mao, to see, like, done in a hypothetical dream experiment?
Hi. So, yes, my name is Maurel Barrassant. I'm one of the authors on the paper, along with
Axel Constant, Maxwell Ramstead, and Carl Friston.
The first thing that I think of in terms of valuable is something that relates to RJ mentioned.
We can use the scripts idea in Active Inference and the way we modeled it through weak and strong
to understand how social behaviors tend to radicalize or how some policy brought by the
top will be received by the bottom. So, anything related to politics or to social movements would
find such a model valuable. I'm not sure what you mean by metadata. So, could you be a little
more precise about that?
Yeah, RJ, why don't you go for that and maybe give some thoughts? What were you meaning there?
My name is RJ Corday. I'm in New York. I'm currently researching organizational dynamics,
intelligence analysis, and narrative warfare.
So, first, on using this style of model in political atmospheres, talk about organizations
using Active Inference in ways we might not like, is governments watching extremist ideology.
So, I was actually going to say one place where I know it will be of interest to use it,
but I wouldn't love to see it used this way, is to see how people radicalize. Specifically,
the scripts we use to react to extremist content. Because I think that, from my understanding,
that this type of model would be very useful in identifying when a person has become,
we'll call it like extremist ideology friendly, where they're no longer going to call it out and
say, you know, I don't agree with that, or I'm not comfortable with somebody talking about,
say, like domestic terrorism. So, I could see it being extraordinarily useful for governments in
that context. When it comes to metadata for scripts, like this is included. So, the metadata might be,
you know, so, well, the data might describe the script itself. The metadata might describe some key
attributes that aren't directly related. As Dan likes to say, the metadata is the data. And this is
one of these areas where, like, that's definitely, there's no, the blur is definitely large. So, for
me, when I think about how I would try to start describing the metadata for scripts, it would be,
does this, does this script require two people to know that it's happening? So, like, for example,
flirting, it might be, you know, one person can enact their scripts without the other person
enacting it. Whereas, like, a script for swearing in the president of the United States, that is a
script that, it's a strong script with explicit rules that everybody has to be aware of, otherwise
it doesn't work. So, I think that there's, like, categorization values that might be associated with
it. And then, yeah, but anyway, I think there's a lot you could go into in that. So, I won't go
too far down the rabbit hole. Cool. Let's do Blue, then Shannon, then Mal.
So, just to piggyback off of what RJ was saying about radicalization, it's interesting, like,
when did radicalization become a script, right? And, like, this is what we're talking about,
finding the edges. And so, like, where does the script even exist? Is it, like, an external
construct, like a societal construct? This is the battle between internalism and externalism.
But when is there, like, a critical mass of internal scripts that develop that then it becomes
this external script? Like, you can be a radical? Like, the first person to become radicalized, like,
was just radical, right? Like, they just took their own initiative to, you know, it was their own
script. It was, like, an internal construct. And so, where is the, like, the line, really? Like,
when a script becomes an acceptable or even an alternative way? Like, there's some kind of critical mass
that has to accrue before that happens. And it's just something interesting to think about.
Mal, then RJ?
Yeah, so, exactly. So, how do we figure out when someone is going to radicalize, or specifically,
what leads to radicalization? Well, the truth is, radicalization tends to happen within clustering.
So, it's not just someone who, unless this person has specific, like, psychological issues,
which makes them go off on their own tangent away from the cluster. It tends to be that clusters form
around narratives, right? So, what is, let's say, a men in this group. What is a men in this narrative?
Well, women are gaining too many rights, and they're taking the spot of men, and in some men in this group,
this narrative becomes, women are trying to take down men to enslave them, and then the narrative
moves forward, and it moves, women are trying to destroy men, and then what is the acceptable answer
to this? Well, we must destroy women. And this is something you can see happening through the shift
of the narrative. The people inside these clusters start bringing categories together, and then pinging
off each other, and then I'm giving you this narrative, and a lot of people go, oh, yeah,
you're right, this is the right narrative. And then somebody else with a slightly different,
a little bit more narrative, keeps pushing on, and you get this cluster, and then people build on each
other, and the person on top, or at least someone who's believing so much into this narrative, which
also identifies it with potentially violence, which we could measure based on the type of narrative
that's being used, we will possibly be able to identify, okay, well, this cluster of people,
and specifically this type of person in there is more likely to do something really bad really soon.
What that means for our governments, that's not up for me to decide. Ideally, I think it would be
bringing help in these areas, and being like, well, maybe you need to rethink your narratives,
maybe we can help you soften whatever it is you're going through that's pushing you to get towards
these narratives. Thanks. RJ?
Well, Mal covered a lot of what I was going to say. Once again, we're definitely synced. I would just
add that it is definitely one of those areas where I think we, people who are working on the topic
outside of governments, to try to create the speed bumps, so that, like, like, not, not, I don't want
to say speed bumps, it's hard to articulate, like, like, like, clearly express the limitations so that
government doesn't go and take this and then apply it badly, like they've done with, with machine
learning and say, like the judicial system, where trying to predict flight risk and things like that,
they applied it very quickly, and didn't really, weren't really sure of what they were doing, and
they applied it before they really understood what they were working with, and it obviously did a lot
of damage, so. Thanks. Just one last comment on this. Radical doesn't mean divergent or committed.
Radical means from the root. So, I think that radicalization, as a discussion, should refocus us
on the seed memes, the germ memes in the space, and the ways that generative models, modelable by script
and active inference, could understand what leads to the adoption, the phase transition of the seed
memes, and then the policy decisions that someone engages in are probabilistic and can be inferred
downstream of these seed memetics, and so those are the premises of the narrative. So, if someone thinks
that they're in Braveheart, or if they think that they're in Batman, or if they think that they're a
different role in a movie, that's really what we're getting at, is what is the genre of culture?
What kind of movie? Is it a good one? Short one? Long one? What is the cast going to be?
How are they going to treat each other? We can talk about it that way, and that is what has been
distorted in the public eye for too long. Shannon?
I'm Shannon Brooks. I'm in South Dakota currently, but I'm usually based at the University of California.
So, I don't study social interactions on that large of a scale. I bring people in a lab, I look at how
maybe their motor activity coordinates in like postural sway, so something that you're not really
aware of happening, but it's happening all the time. You're swaying, and maybe you're marrying someone
across from you. And you guys have been having a conversation of what the metadata looks like,
but what does the data look like if you were going to use this active inference model
at something as large scale as these social movements that you're talking about,
or at smaller scales? I can see that the kind of data I would look at in very small groups
would be, you know, patterns of motor activity, maybe that I'm measuring from filming the body
or motor activity in a brain. But in a large social group like that, would you be looking at like GPS
tracking a phone? Like we've been doing a lot of modeling of how people interact in this pandemic
and where large clusters of people are interacting, and we might have like super spreading events for
COVID-19? Or would these narratives that you've been talking about sound like they're verbal
narratives? So would you be looking at social media profiles, you know, Twitter, Facebook, and how
honest are those data? So I know that the data I'm measuring, the postural sway data,
my participant, I mean, unless they're actually swaying back and forth intentionally like to a beat of
music, they don't have control over all of these small muscle movements in your body that are
that are controlling your posture. It's really a very embodied behavior. And I know that when I'm
measuring it, I'm getting an honest signal. But if you're looking at even GPS data, or if you're
looking at social media narrative data, the signal could, like people could be intentionally signaling
for others who share their view or others who don't share their view or intentionally not signaling
because they're afraid of a response or all of the various things that could affect and make the
signal that you're measuring not be honest. So what would the data look like in your, that would make
your active inference model of this large social situation be closer to the truth?
Thanks for that. Awesome question. We're going to do Sasha, then RJ.
Hi, my name is Sasha. I'm also in California.
Yeah, I guess continuing the conversation of how I would like to see this used, thinking about scripts
and stereotypes. I guess my hope for seeing active inference as a tool is for people to
think about it, think about their own role in their active inference story. And that instead of just
thinking about machine learning, and like, getting recommendations and ads based on your preferences,
that you actually shape your own story, and that you are building your narrative, which then leads to
the policies and goals. And so taking a more active role in the kinds of things that will be predicted about us
based on our actions, and to try to shape that in a way that signals something deeper, like our values.
Cool. Mau, and on the data question, too.
Yeah, so I'm going to try and, if I forget a question, they were important, so I really don't want to. So if I forget, please remind me.
The first question was, what kind of data? Well, you're right, social media would be super great, because what you said about the honesty of data is that, well, social reality is manifest reality.
Like, if you behave a certain way, because you know your group behaves a certain way, well, it's because you've integrated what the group wants, and that's the script.
The way we could see whether or not this is something that your cognition is entirely geared towards, or is just fulfilling, because XYZ, is how you behave in other groups.
So, one of the things that would be difficult to highlight is if you are, let's say, part of a cult, right?
You're part of a cult, and you are of no contact with anyone else.
It would be difficult for us to figure out whether this type of behavior is also being contested inside.
We could maybe model this by looking at all of the other members and what kinds of interactions some people who tend to disagree a little bit tend to have.
We have no for sure, and that's kind of also, that's, we make inferences about the states of our agents based on what they put out into the world, the observations they put out.
You're right that social media data would not necessarily be enough, though, because you want to have data about what it means to be in the world, even outside of the virtual world.
So, if all you care about is online behavior, then, well, I mean, it doesn't really matter how you move, but if what you care about is scripts as a whole in society, well, we would use narrative data.
So, what are the movies? How do people in the movies behave and talk? What is literature? What are the words that are being used? In what way? With what valence? Is it positive or negative?
Then you would use, you're right, data about how people behave together. We could do experiments by connecting people and doing hyperscanning data.
Like, there's all of the data that would allow us to understand how a specific semantic cluster tends to be grouped and then tends to be connected causally.
All of this would allow us to derive scripts. It all depends on where you want to apply this knowledge.
What was the second question?
Yeah, not so much a question, just a statement for how can people think about applying scripts and active inference to their own behavior and behave in ways that signal that are true goals in ways that are script and socially acceptable?
Okay. Okay. Okay. So, this is the really cool part of having a model that can take both higher level and lower levels. And you're right that giving people power over their data would also help us figure out what their true goal is, right?
So, if you, if you're like, I want to take an active part in shaping my reality, well, essentially you're giving us what your true goal is.
So that's good for everyone. So you're right. Um, it would be great for society. If people had this control, I think that's where we're trying to get towards an ethical circles where we're like, we're not just going to take stuff from you and then model.
And then you won't really have any benefit from it. Or if you have a benefit, we define what that benefit is. It's more like we can show you the data that is yours.
We can show you the data that is aggregated from you as well. And you get to decide what kind of person you want to be based on this.
So we show you the affordance scape around you based on your profile. Well, now you can pick what you want to do with this affordance scape.
Cool. And just so interesting about the inference and then moving towards action and not just targeting the ads or just targeting the consumption, but actually targeting the participation as well.
We hope you enjoyed this episode. Stay tuned for next time when we will move on to the second live stream discussion of this paper.
