Welcome to the ActInf podcast, where we will present short digestible segments clipped
from the Active Inference Lab weekly live streams.
If you like what you hear and you want to learn more, check out the entire live stream at
the Active Inference Lab YouTube channel.
The link to the live stream is provided in the episode description.
My name is Blue Knight and I will be guiding you through this podcast episode, which is
clipped from ActInf Lab live stream number 7.1.
This discussion will be loosely structured around the paper, Variational Ecology and the
Physics of Sentient Systems by Maxwell Ramstad, Axel Constant, Paul Badcock, and Carl Friston.
Daniel Friedman will facilitate this discussion about constructing a multiscale ecological
framework.
The question that almost motivated or seems to motivate this paper is the one I'm curious
about, which is about applying the free energy principles formalisms to larger scale systems
where potentially the stability of the Markov blanket or some of the other dynamics of the
system are so rapidly changing that it really questions how we're going to study it from
this framework.
And I know that's something that we'll return to.
Muddy?
Hi, guys.
My name is Muddy.
So, I was a PhD student with Carl Friston, graduating back in 2016.
But I think what's fascinating from this work that Maxwell has been doing is helping us actually
get really fine-grained detail onto the computational currents of certain problems, such as, you
know, when do I stop modeling my subsystem?
And when do I start representing my subsystem as a parameter?
Sure.
So, when, you know, this transition between a parametric approach and a modeling approach
to then feed into a hierarchical model, that is quite an art and it's an ill-posed sort
of problem.
So, I think this work is really, really fascinating from that perspective, from me personally.
Cool.
Maybe, Maxwell, I'd be curious, what is that relationship with the parametric and the modeling
approaches?
How do we go about exploring that or what does that mean from a modeler's perspective?
I'm not sure I understand your question.
Like Muddy was talking about how this question of modeling, like when to stop and when to
include a parameter at one level versus another, what's an introductory thought or what's the
rationale or the motivation behind doing that kind of a thing?
I mean, so Mel Andrews has thought about this a lot more than I have.
I mean, I wish they were here, but they're sick today.
So, I mean, roughly speaking, the generative models that we employ under active inference,
they harness what Mel has been calling the existential variables of the system.
So, you know, the variables that actually make a difference to survival.
So, you know, you can think of stuff like a core body temperature and so on.
I mean, ultimately, there is always going to be an arbitrariness involved in the modeling
effort because we have to make kind of science side decisions about what are the relevant things
that we're going to model or not.
But that said, there do seem to be some variables that are more critical to the continued existence
of the systems that we're interested in.
So I don't know if that addresses the point.
Cool.
I think we'll return to it, especially as we think about what are the vital signatures
or the vital variables for ecosystems, because we want to be thinking about them in this similar
framework.
Cool.
Here we go.
So the paper that we're going to be discussing in 7.1 today is Variational Ecology in the Physics
of Sentient Systems by Ramstad, Constant, Badcock, and Friston.
And the goal of the paper was stated as reviewing a framework for modeling complex adaptive systems
for multi-scale free energy bounding organism niche dynamics, thereby integrating the modeling
strategies and heuristics of variational neuroethology or VNE with a broader perspective on the ecological
nestedness of biotic systems.
We extend variational neuroethology beyond the action perception loops of individual organisms,
i.e. active inference, by appealing to the variational approach to niche construction
to explain the dynamics of coupled systems constituted by organisms and their ecological niche.
And so I quoted that directly from the paper because I think it's a really direct representation
and foreshadows the fusion of the VNE and the VANC, which we can talk about.
But to kind of rephrase that in non-FEP language, it's a question about how can we make a
multi-level or multi-scale ecology framework that builds upon eco-evo-devo, that's ecology, evolution, and development,
but also adding in insights from physics, mathematics, and complexity or complex adaptive systems.
So it certainly is an ambitious scope and it's kind of linking together this organism and downward story
of the variational neuroethology with the niche construction aspect.
So kind of we have the organism looking downwards, that's the neuromolecular components of behavior,
and then we have the organism looking upwards and outwards with the ecology.
Yeah, if I could comment on that briefly.
Yeah.
Yeah.
So basically, if you're looking at the history of how this came about.
So I was working, I mean, between 2000, I guess, 16 and 18, I was mostly focused on developing
this multi-scale active inference story, in large part with Karl Fristen.
And that resulted in a framework that we call the variational ethology or variational neuroethology
in our 2018 Physics of Life reviews paper, answering Schrodinger's question of free energy formulation.
And so the variational neuroethology is essentially a theory about the kind of, if you want to think
about it, like visually a kind of vertical stack of systems.
We've discussed this on this podcast before, but like this idea that systems are made of
nested systems of systems.
So that essentially, if you look at the ontology of a system, what you have is a stack of segregated
systems at different spatial and temporal scales that effectively compose each other.
So cells composing tissues, composing organs, composing organisms, composing social groups,
and composing species and so on.
And so following the publication of that paper, I started working closely with Axel Constant,
who was riffing off work that Jelle Brineberg had been doing in Amsterdam with his group over there.
And Axel and I developed basically a niche construction account of active inference.
What we highlighted was the fact that active inference is a symmetric formulation in the
sense that it tells a story about how internal and external states attune to each other, internal
states attuning to external ones through things like perception and learning and phenotypic
accommodation and development.
external states attuning to internal states through action, notably making the world more
like the way that we expect it to be.
So that gave us a kind of horizontal dimension where basically at every kind of level of this
vertical stack, which you have is effectively a relationship between an ecological niche and the
denizens or inhabitants of that ecological niche.
So this paper aimed to combine both frameworks.
So the niche construction stuff and the nested systems of systems stuff into a kind of principled approach to biological systems.
And so, you know, moving from an ethology and a theory of niche construction.
So ethology being the study of animal behavior, essentially.
So combining these two things into a bona fide theory of ecology using the variational free energy principle.
I'm sure you're going to mention this after, but the last ingredient that we added to this mix is the skilled intentionality framework from the Amsterdam group.
Eric Goodveld, Julian Kiverstein, Yellow Brinneberg.
What they add to the mix with the skilled intentionality stuff is connecting this predictive processing framework to the ecological psychology notion of affordances.
Yeah, so this paper essentially takes the ecological psychology stuff on affordances, the so-called skilled intentionality framework, the variational ethology and the variational niche construction stuff and proposes this integrative model.
Yeah.
So that's the kind of history.
I agree.
Thanks so much, Maxwell.
And just to kind of restate that in this nested framework, you have the bottom up or emergence features of the system, you have the top down features of the system, and then the lateral are kind of like the collective behavior.
And so we're thinking about all these ingredients that Maxwell just mentioned, especially coming from the skilled intentionality framework and a few other areas, bringing them all together.
So let's check out the abstract.
This paper addresses the challenges faced by multiscale formulations of the variational or free energy approach to dynamics that obtain for large scale ensembles such as ecosystems or groups of organisms.
We review a framework for modeling complex adaptive control systems for multiscale free energy bounding organism niche dynamics, thereby integrating the modeling strategies and heuristics of variational neuroethology, which remember, was really focused on the organism's feedback with its local affordances.
With a broader perspective on the ecological nested systems.
So like a lot of times in this podcast, we've talked about the importance of getting a jacket or of changing the thermostat, but that's actually part of the constructed niche of humans.
It's not just a human in a box.
It's not just a human in a box doesn't find himself without affordance.
Unlike these, some of the biomechanical affordances, perhaps.
We extend the multiscale variational formulation beyond the action perception loops of individual organisms by appealing to the variational approach to niche construction to explain the dynamics of coupled systems constituted by organisms and their ecological niche.
And that relates to the symmetry that was being discussed a few minutes ago.
We suggest that the statistical robustness of living systems is inherited in part from their eco niches as niches help coordinate dynamical patterns across larger spatio temporal scales.
We call this approach variational ecology.
So it's kind of like the affordance of driving in a car is part of the constructed niche of the highway network, and then that shapes the movement patterns.
We argue that when applied to cultural animals such as humans, variational ecology enables us to formulate not just a physics of individual minds, but also a physics of interacting minds across spatial and temporal scales, a physics of sentient systems that range from cells to society.
And this should sort of invoke that warm up discussion about the different kinds of ecosystems, especially when talking about humans and our technologically enabled extended niches.
Part of the ecosystem is informational.
It's symbolic.
And so we also want to be thinking about information ecologies in the way that these dynamics apply not just to the ants on the pebbles, but also to humans and the paths through the parks that are discussed in the paper and also ways that long range technological communication might come into play.
We hope you enjoyed this week's episode.
Stay tuned for next time when we will continue discussions on this paper and constructing a multiscale ecological framework.
