belongs to life. Life and mind share a core set of formal or organizational properties, and the formal or organizational properties distinctive of mind are an enriched version of those fundamental to life. More
precisely, the self-organizing features of mind are an enriched version of
the self-organizing features of life. The self-producing or “autopoietic”
organization of biological life already implies cognition, and this incipient mind finds sentient expression in the self-organizing dynamics of
action, perception, and emotion, as well as in the self-moving flow of
time-consciousness.
From this perspective, mental life is also bodily life and is situated in
the world. The roots of mental life lie not simply in the brain, but
ramify through the body and environment. Our mental lives involve
our body and the world beyond the surface membrane of our organism, and therefore cannot be reduced simply to brain processes inside the head.
The chapters to come elaborate these ideas using material drawn
from three main sources—biology, phenomenological philosophy,
and psychology and neuroscience. The book as a whole is intended to
bring the experimental sciences of life and mind into a closer and
more harmonious relationship with phenomenological investigations
of experience and subjectivity.
The principal motive behind this aim is to make headway on one of
x Preface
the outstanding philosophical and scientific problems of our time—
the so-called explanatory gap between consciousness and nature. Exactly how are consciousness and subjective experience related to the
brain and body? It is one thing to be able to establish correlations between consciousness and brain activity; it is another thing to have an
account that explains exactly how certain biological processes generate and realize consciousness and subjectivity. At the present time,
we not only lack such an account, but also are unsure about the form it
would need to have in order to bridge the conceptual and epistemological gap between life and mind as objects of scientific investigation,
and life and mind as we subjectively experience them.
In this book, I offer no new or original theory or model of consciousness, no new conceptual analysis of physical and phenomenal
concepts, and no new speculative metaphysical synthesis to unify consciousness and nature. My aim and approach are different. To make
real progress on the explanatory gap, we need richer phenomenological accounts of the structure of experience, and we need scientific accounts of mind and life informed by these phenomenological accounts. Phenomenology in turn needs to be informed by psychology,
neuroscience, and biology. My aim is not to close the explanatory gap
in a reductive sense, but rather to enlarge and enrich the philosophical and scientific resources we have for addressing the gap. My approach is thus to bring phenomenological analyses of experience into
a mutually illuminating relationship with scientific analyses of life and
mind.
Acknowledgments
I CANNOT HELP but think of this book as exemplifying what philosophers call the bundle theory of personal identity. According to the
bundle theory, there is no single and permanent self that persists
through time; the self is rather a bundle of constantly changing and
psychologically continuous experiences or mental episodes. Similarly, this book began many years ago and has undergone so many
transformations since its inception that I cannot say with any confi-
dence that it is the “same” book I started work on more than ten
years ago.
Originally, this book (or its textual ancestor) was supposed to be coauthored with Francisco Varela. We had hoped to write a follow-up to
our book (co-authored with Eleanor Rosch), The Embodied Mind: Cognitive Science and Human Experience (MIT Press, 1991). When we began
planning our new book (in 1994), Francisco had just learned that he
was chronically ill with Hepatitis C. Thus, from the beginning, a sense
of urgency lay over this book. Eventually it became clear that Francisco
would need a liver transplant. At this time (in 1998), Francisco decided to step back from the project and encouraged me to continue
on my own. I thus set about to revise the book by myself. After the success of the transplant, Francisco felt new enthusiasm for the project,
and we tried to resume our collaborative efforts. Sadly, his illness returned not long afterward, and Francisco died on May 28, 2001, at his
home in Paris. The obituary I wrote a few days later for the online
journal Psyche can be read at: http://psyche.cs.monash.edu.au/v7/
