xii Acknowledgments
An abridged version was also published in
Journal of Consciousness Studies 8 (2001): 66–69.
After Francisco’s death, I tried to continue writing this book as a coauthored one. But there was still a large amount of writing to be done,
and as time passed it became clear that the book needed to be completely recast and rewritten by me alone. I reorganized and rewrote
the chapters, and changed the title twice, before the book finally took
its present form. Thus, although the enormous influence of Francisco’s thought will be evident to anyone who reads this book, I bear
full responsibility for this work’s contents, and all shortcomings and
errors are mine.
Over the long and difficult time it has taken to produce this book, I
have had the support and encouragement of many people.
No one has given me more encouragement, aid, and love, and
shared more in the tumultuous life of this book, than Rebecca Todd.
The love and gratitude I feel are beyond expression. In addition to
living with my long periods of self-absorption while struggling with this
book, she has read numerous drafts and helped me improve my
thinking and writing immeasurably. I cannot imagine having written
this book without her.
Our sons Maximilian Todd Williams and Gareth Todd Thompson
have had to endure my working on this book for almost their entire
lives. My gratitude to them is boundless. I dedicate this book to them,
and to our dear family friend, Gabriel Cohen Varela, son of Francisco
Varela and Amy Cohen Varela, and the same age as my younger son.
Gail Thompson, William Irwin Thompson, and Hilary Thompson
have given great support in ways too numerous to detail. I am deeply
grateful to them.
I also express deep thanks to John and Nancy Todd for their encouragement over many years.
Amy Cohen Varela’s enthusiasm for this book, and her unhesitating
support and encouragement when I decided to transform it into a
single-authored work after Francisco’s death, are deeply appreciated.
Alva Noë’s friendship and intellectual companionship during the
writing of this book are greatly valued. I express my gratitude to him
also for comments on early versions of several chapters, and for his
reading and commenting on the penultimate version of the entire
manuscript.
Acknowledgments xiii
Many people over the years have read various portions of this book
and given helpful advice along the way: Giovanna Colombetti, Diego
Cosmelli, Isabela Granic, Robert Hanna, Marc Lewis, Antoine Lutz,
Susan Oyama, Michael Silberstein, Dan Zahavi, and Phil Zelazo.
For helpful discussions on a wide variety of topics related to this
book, I thank Lisa Adams, Ralph Adolphs, Michel Bitbol, Maria
Botero, Paul Bourgine, Richie Davidson, Natalie Depraz, Jean-Pierre
Dupuy, Frans de Waal, Adam Engle, Michel Ferrari, Shaun Gallagher,
Vittorio Gallese, Tom Hollenstein, Evelyn Fox Keller, Uriah Kriegel,
Jean-Philippe Lachaux, Connie Lamm, Alex Lamey, Dorothée
Legrand, Michel Le Van Quyen, Luigi Luisi, Jun Luo, Eduard Marbach, Barry McMullin, Bernard Pachoud, Slobodan Perovic, Claire Petitmengin, Jean Petitot, Ljiljana Radenovic, Franz Reichle, Eugenio
Rodriguez, Andreas Roepstorff, Jean-Michel Roy, David Rudrauf,
Brian Cantwell Smith, John Stewart, Steve Torrence, Joel Walmsley,
Mark Wexler, and Arthur Zajonc.
