The penultimate version of this book served as the main text for a
graduate seminar in “Phenomenological Philosophy of Mind” I taught
during the Fall Term 2005, in the Department of Philosophy at the
University of Toronto. I am grateful to everyone who attended that
seminar—especially Ranpal Dosanjh, David Egan, Cathal Ó Madagáin,
Joshua Ben Nichols, Adrienne Prettyman, and Joel Walmsley—for
their critical responses to the text.
Helena De Preester, at short notice, read the penultimate version of
the text and sent me numerous detailed and insightful comments that
helped my final revisions considerably.
Mike Wheeler also read the entire manuscript and helpfully called
attention to several places where my arguments could be improved.
I am particularly thankful for the patience of Lindsay Waters at the
Harvard University Press. His encouragement and speedy efficiency
when the manuscript finally arrived on his desk are much appreciated.
I am grateful to several institutions and individuals for their support.
During March and April 2003, I stayed as a visting Mâitre de Recherche
at the Centre de Recherche en Epistémologie Appliqué (CREA), at the
Ecole Polytechnique, Paris. I wish to thank its director, Jean Petitot, for
this opportunity, which greatly aided me in writing this book. I also
thank Dan Zahavi, director of the Center for Subjectivity Research at
the University of Copenhagen, for inviting me to visit for two weeks in
xiv Acknowledgments
June 2004 and June 2005, and for numerous productive exchanges
during this time. Finally, I am grateful to the McDonnell Project in Philosophy and the Neurosciences, its director, Kathleen Akins, and my
fellow project members, for their interest in and support of my work.
For financial support, I am grateful to the Social Sciences and Humanities Research Council of Canada for a Standard Research Grant
(1998–2001) and a Canada Research Chair (2002–2007); York University for a Faculty of Arts Research Fellowship (2001–2002); the McDonnell Project in Philosophy and Neuroscience; the Center for Consciousness Studies at the University of Arizona, Tucson; and the
University of Toronto for a Connaught Start-up Research Award.
An earlier version of Chapter 9 was published as the article “Sensorimotor Subjectivity and the Enactive Approach to Experience,” in Phenomenology and the Cognitive Sciences 4 (2005): 407–427 (© SpringerVerlag). Chapter 10 is an expanded version of “Look Again:
Phenomenology and Mental Imagery,” in Phenomenology and the Cognitive Sciences (in press; © Springer-Verlag), and of “Representationalism
and the Phenomenology of Mental Imagery,” in Synthese (in press; ©
Springer-Verlag). I am grateful to the editor of these journals for permission to use this material in revised form here.
Finally, I am grateful to my former colleagues at York University and
my new colleagues at the University of Toronto for their encouragement and interest in my work.
PART ONE
◆
The Enactive Approach
ONE
◆ ◆ ◆
Cognitive Science and Human Experience
COGNITIVE SCIENCE—that part of the science of the mind traditionally concerned with cognitive processes—has been described as having
“a very long past but a relatively short history” (Gardner 1985, p. 9).
Scientific concern with the mind can be traced all the way back to
Plato and Aristotle, but the term cognitive science did not arise until the
late twentieth century, as a name for the new, modern, scientific research progam that integrated psychology, neuroscience, linguistics,
computer science, artificial intelligence (AI), and philosophy. What
united these disciplines, and set cognitive science apart from earlier
approaches in psychology and philosophy, was the goal of making explicit the principles and mechanisms of cognition. Cognitive science,
in providing a whole new array of concepts, models, and experimental
