techniques, claimed to be able to provide rigorous scientific knowledge of the mind beyond what earlier forms of psychology and philosophy had offered.
In recent years, however, it has become increasingly clear to many
researchers that cognitive science is incomplete. Cognitive science has
focused on cognition while neglecting emotion, affect, and motivation
(LeDoux 2002, p. 24). In addition, a complete science of the mind
needs to account for subjectivity and consciousness.
With hindsight it has also become evident that, in the passage from
traditional philosophy and psychology to modern-day cognitive science, something was lost that only now is beginning to be reclaimed.
What was lost, in a nutshell, was scientific concern with subjective ex-
3
4 The Enactive Approach
perience. In 1892 William James quoted with approval George Trumball Ladd’s definition of psychology “as the description and explanation of states of consciousness as such” (James 1985, p. xxv; emphasis
omitted). Consciousness was supposed to be the subject matter of psychology, yet cognitive science has had virtually nothing to say about it
until recent years. To understand this neglect we need to consider the
development of cognitive science since the 1950s.
Three major approaches to the study of the mind can be distinguished within cognitive science—cognitivism, connectionism, and
embodied dynamicism. Each approach has its preferred theoretical
metaphor for understanding the mind. For cognitivism, the metaphor
is the mind as digital computer; for connectionism, it is the mind as
neural network; for embodied dynamicism, it is the mind as an embodied dynamic system. Cognitivism dominated the field from the
1950s to the 1970s. In the 1980s, connectionism began to challenge
the cognitivist orthodoxy, followed in the 1990s by embodied dynamicism. In contemporary research, all three approaches coexist, both
separately and in various hybrid forms.1
Cognitivism
Cognitive science came into being in the 1950s with the “cognitive revolution” against behaviorist psychology. At the center of this revolution
was the computer model of mind, now known as the classical conception of cognitive processes. According to this classical model, cognition is information processing after the fashion of the digital computer. Behaviorism had allowed no reference to internal states of the
organism; explanations of behavior had to be formulated in terms of
sensory stimuli and behavioral conditioning (on the input side), and
overt behavioral response (on the output side). The computer model
of the mind not only made reference to internal states legitimate, but
also showed it to be necessary in accounting for the behavior of complex information processing systems. Even more important, the computer model was taken to show how content or meaning could be attributed to states inside the system. A computer is supposed to be a
symbol-manipulating machine.2 A symbol is an item that has a physical
shape or form, and that stands for or represents something. According
to the computer model of the mind, the brain, too, is a computer, a
Cognitive Science and Human Experience 5
“physical symbol system,” and mental processes are carried out by the
manipulation of symbolic representations in the brain (Newell and
Simon 1976; Pylyshyn 1984). A typical cognitivist model takes the form
of a program for solving a problem in some domain. Nonsymbolic sensory inputs are transduced and mapped onto symbolic representations
of the task domain. These representations are then manipulated in a
purely formal or syntactic fashion in order to arrive at a solution to the
problem. Cognitivist explanations focus on the abstract problemsolving characterization of cognitive tasks, the structure and content of
symbolic representations, and the nature of the algorithms for manipulating the representations in order to solve a given problem. Cognitivism goes hand in hand with functionalism in the philosophy of
mind, which in its extreme computational form holds that the embodiment of the organism is essentially irrelevant to the nature of the
mind. It is the software, not the hardware, that matters most for mentality.
Cognitivism made meaning, in the sense of representational semantics, scientifically acceptable, but at the price of banishing consciousness from the science of the mind. (In fact, cognitivism inherited its
consciousness taboo directly from behaviorism.) Mental processes, understood to be computations made by the brain using an inner symbolic language, were taken to be entirely nonconscious. Thus the connection between mind and meaning, on the one hand, and subjectivity
and consciousness, on the other, was completely severed.
Long before cognitivism, Freud had already undermined any simplistic identification of mind and consciousness. According to his early
model, the psyche is composed of three systems, which he called the
