conscious, the preconscious, and the unconscious (Freud 1915, pp.
159–222). The conscious corresponds to the field of awareness, and
the preconscious to what we can recall but are not aware of now. The
unconscious, in contrast, Freud considered to be part of our phylogenetic heritage. It is thoroughly somatic and affective, and its contents
have been radically separated from consciousness by repression and
cannot enter the conscious–preconscious system without distortion.
(Later, Freud introduced a new structural model composed of the ego,
id, and superego; see Freud 1923, pp. 339–407.)
The cognitivist separation of cognition and consciousness, however,
was different from Freud’s model. Mental processes, according to cog-
6 The Enactive Approach
nitivism, are “subpersonal routines,” which by nature are completely
inaccessible to personal awareness under any conditions. The mind
was divided into two radically different regions, with an unbridgeable
chasm between them—the subjective mental states of the person and
the subpersonal cognitive routines implemented in the brain. The radically nonconscious, subpersonal region, the so-called cognitive unconscious, is where the action of thought really happens; personal
awareness has access merely to a few results or epiphenomenal manifestations of subpersonal processing (Jackendoff 1987). Thought corresponds to nonconscious, skull-bound, symbol manipulation. It takes
place in a central cognitive module of the brain separate from the systems for perception, emotion, and motor action. The cognitive unconscious is neither somatic nor affective, and it is lodged firmly within
the head.
This radical separation of cognitive processes from consciousness
created a peculiar “explanatory gap” in scientific theorizing about the
mind.3 Cartesian dualism had long ago created an explanatory gap between mind and matter, consciousness and nature. Cognitivism, far
from closing this gap, perpetuated it in a materialist form by opening a
new gap between subpersonal, computational cognition and subjective
mental phenomena. Simply put, cognitivism offered no account whatsoever of mentality in the sense of subjective experience. Some theorists even went so far as to claim that subjectivity and consciousness do
not fall within the province of cognitive science (Pylyshyn 1984). Not
all theorists shared this view, however. A notable exception was Ray
Jackendoff, who clearly formulated the problem facing cognitivism in
his 1987 book Consciousness and the Computational Mind. According to
Jackendoff, cognitivism, in radically differentiating computational cognition from subjective experience, produced a new “mind-mind”
problem, in addition to the classical mind-body problem. The mindmind problem is the problem of the relation between the computational mind and the phenomenological mind, between subpersonal,
computational, cognitive processes and conscious experience ( Jackendoff 1987, p. 20). Thanks to cognitivism, a new set of mind-body
problems had to be faced:
1. The phenomenological mind-body problem: How can a brain
have experiences?
Cognitive Science and Human Experience 7
2. The computational mind-body problem: How can a brain accomplish reasoning?
3. The mind-mind problem: What is the relation between computational states and experience?
Each problem is a variant of the explanatory gap. The cognitivist
metaphor of the mind as computer, which was meant to solve the computational mind-body problem, thus came at the cost of creating a new
problem, the mind-mind problem. This problem is a version of what is
now known as the “hard problem of consciousness” (Chalmers 1996;
Nagel 1974).
During the heyday of cognitivism in the 1970s and early 1980s, cognitivists liked to proclaim that their view was “the only game in town”
(Fodor 1975, 1981), and they insisted that the computer model of the
mind is not a metaphor but a scientific theory (Pylyshyn 1984), unlike
earlier mechanistic models, such as the brain as a telephone switchboard. The cognitive anthropologist Edwin Hutchins (1995), however,
has argued that a confused metaphorical transference from culture to
individual psychology lies at the very origin of the cognitivist view. Cognitivism derives from taking what is in fact a sociocultural activity—
human computation—and projecting it onto something that goes on
