learning rules and the system’s history of activity.
The network is trained to convert numerical (rather than symbolic)
input representations into numerical output representations. Given
appropriate input and training, the network converges toward some
particular cognitive performance, such as producing speech sounds
from written text (as in the famous NETtalk system of Sejnowski and
Rosenberg 1986), or categorizing words according to their lexical role
(Elman 1991). Such cognitive performances correspond to emergent
patterns of activity in the network. These patterns are not symbols in
the traditional computational sense, although they are supposed to be
approximately describable in symbolic terms (Smolensky 1988). Connectionist explanations focus on the architecture of the neural network (units, layers, and connections), the learning rules, and the distributed subsymbolic representations that emerge from the network’s
activity. According to connectionism, artificial neural networks capture the abstract cognitive properties of neural networks in the brain
and provide a better model of the cognitive architecture of the mind
than the physical symbol systems of cognitivism.
The connectionist movement of the 1980s emphasized perceptual
pattern recognition as the paradigm of intelligence, in contrast to deductive reasoning, emphasized by cognitivism. Whereas cognitivism
firmly lodged the mind within the head, connectionism offered a
more dynamic conception of the relation between cognitive processes
and the environment. For example, connectionists hypothesized that
the structural properties of sequential reasoning and linguistic cognition arise not from manipulations of symbols in the brain, but from
the dynamic interaction of neural networks with symbolic resources in
the external environment, such as diagrams, numerical symbols, and
natural language (Rummelhart et al. 1986).
Despite these advances, connectionist systems did not involve any
sensory and motor coupling with the environment, but instead operated on the basis of artificial inputs and outputs (set initially by the designer of the system). Connectionism also inherited from cognitivism
10 The Enactive Approach
the idea that cognition is basically the solving of predefined problems
(posed to the system from outside by the observer or designer) and
that the mind is essentially the skull-bound cognitive unconscious, the
subpersonal domain of computational representation in the mindbrain. Connectionism’s disagreement with cognitivism was over the
nature of computation and representation (symbolic for cognitivists,
subsymbolic for connectionists).
With regard to the problem of the explanatory gap, connectionism
enlarged the scope of the computational mind but provided little, if
any, new resources for addressing the gap between the computational
mind and the phenomenological mind. Subjectivity still had no place
in the sciences of mind, and the explanatory gap remained unaddressed.
Embodied Dynamicism
The third approach, embodied dynamicism, arose in the 1990s and involved a critical stance toward computationalism in either its cognitivist or connectionist form.6 Cognitivism and connectionism left unquestioned the relation between cognitive processes and the real
world. As a result, their models of cognition were disembodied and abstract. On the one hand, cognitive processes were said to be instantiated (or realized or implemented) in the brain, with little thought
given to what such a notion could mean, given the biological facts of
the brain and its relationship to the living body of the organism and to
the environment. On the other hand, the relationship between the
mind and the world was assumed to be one of abstract representation:
symbolic or subsymbolic representations in the mind-brain stand for
states of affairs in some restricted outside domain that has been speci-
fied in advance and independently of the cognitive system. The mind
and the world were thus treated as separate and independent of each
other, with the outside world mirrored by a representational model inside the head. Embodied dynamicism called into question all of these
assumptions, in particular the conception of cognition as disembodied
