and abstract mental representation. Like connectionism, embodied
dynamicism focuses on self-organizing dynamic systems rather than
physical symbol systems (connectionist networks are examples of selforganizing dynamic systems), but maintains in addition that cognitive
Cognitive Science and Human Experience 11
processes emerge from the nonlinear and circular causality of continuous sensorimotor interactions involving the brain, body, and environment. The central metaphor for this approach is the mind as embodied dynamic system in the world, rather than the mind as neural
network in the head.
As its name suggests, embodied dynamicism combines two main theoretical commitments. One commitment is to a dynamic systems approach to cognition, and the other is to an embodied approach to cognition.
The central idea of the dynamic systems approach is that cognition is
an intrinsically temporal phenomenon and accordingly needs to be understood from the perspective of dynamic systems theory (Port and van
Gelder 1995; van Gelder 1998). A dynamic systems model takes the form
of a set of evolution equations that describe how the state of the system
changes over time. The collection of all possible states of the system corresponds to the system’s “state space” or “phase space,” and the ways that
the system changes state correspond to trajectories in this space.
Dynamic-system explanations focus on the internal and external forces
that shape such trajectories as they unfold in time. Inputs are described
as perturbations to the system’s intrinsic dynamics, rather than as instructions to be followed, and internal states are described as selforganized compensations triggered by perturbations, rather than as representations of external states of affairs.
The central idea of the embodied approach is that cognition is the exercise of skillful know-how in situated and embodied action (Varela,
Thompson, and Rosch 1991). Cognitive structures and processes emerge
from recurrent sensorimotor patterns that govern perception and action
in autonomous and situated agents. Cognition as skillful know-how is not
reducible to prespecified problem solving, because the cognitive system
both poses the problems and specifies what actions need to be taken for
their solution.
Strictly speaking, dynamicism and embodiment are logically independent theoretical commitments. For example, dynamical connectionism incorporates dynamicist ideas into artificial neural networks
(see Port and van Gelder 1995, pp. 32–34), whereas autonomous
agents research in robotics incorporates embodiment ideas without
employing dynamic systems theory (Maes 1990). Nevertheless, dynamicism and embodiment go well together and are intimately related for
12 The Enactive Approach
many theorists. As Randall Beer notes: “Although a dynamical approach can certainly stand alone, it is most powerful and distinctive
when coupled with a situated, embodied perspective on cognition”
(Beer 2000, p. 97).
Embodied dynamicism provides a different perspective on the cognitive unconscious from computationalism. No longer is the cognitive
unconscious seen as disembodied symbol manipulation or pattern
recognition separate from emotion and motor action in the world. Instead, the cognitive unconscious consists of those processes of embodied and embedded cognition and emotion that cannot be made
experientially accessible to the person. This characterization of the
cognitive unconscious is offered not as a hypothetical construct in an
abstract functionalist model of the mind, but rather as a provisional indication of a large problem-space in our attempt to understand
human cognition.
At least four points need emphasizing in this context. First, as a conceptual matter, the relations among what is nonconscious, unconscious, preconscious, and conscious (in any of the innumerable senses
of these words)—or in a different, but not equivalent idiom, what is
subpersonal and personal—remain far from clear. Second, as an empirical matter, the scope and limits of awareness of one’s own psychological and somatic processes have yet to be clearly mapped and undoubtedly vary across subjects. Third, the key point still stands that
most of what we are as psychological and biological beings is in some
sense unconscious. It follows that subjectivity cannot be understood
without situating it in relation to these unconscious structures and processes. Finally, these unconscious structures and processes, including
those describable as cognitive and emotional, extend throughout the
body and loop through the material, social, and cultural environments
in which the body is embedded; they are not limited to neural processes inside the skull.
The emergence of embodied dynamicism in the 1990s coincided
with a revival of scientific and philosophical interest in consciousness,
together with a renewed willingness to address the explanatory gap between scientific accounts of cognitive processes and human subjectivity
