and experience. A number of works on embodied cognition were explicitly concerned with experience and challenged the objectivist assumptions of computationalism.7 Some of these works were also ex-
Cognitive Science and Human Experience 13
plicitly dynamical in orientation.8 In particular, the enactive approach
of Varela, Thompson, and Rosch (1991) aimed to build bridges between embodied dynamicist accounts of the mind and phenomenological accounts of human subjectivity and experience. The present
book continues this project.
The Enactive Approach
Enaction means the action of enacting a law, but it also connotes the
performance or carrying out of an action more generally. Borrowing
the words of the poet Antonio Machado, Varela described enaction
as the laying down of a path in walking: “Wanderer the road is your
footsteps, nothing else; you lay down a path in walking” (Varela 1987,
p. 63).
The term the enactive approach and the associated concept of enaction were introduced into cognitive science by Varela, Thompson, and
Rosch (1991) in their book The Embodied Mind. They aimed to unify
under one heading several related ideas. The first idea is that living beings are autonomous agents that actively generate and maintain themselves, and thereby also enact or bring forth their own cognitive domains. The second idea is that the nervous system is an autonomous
dynamic system: It actively generates and maintains its own coherent
and meaningful patterns of activity, according to its operation as a circular and reentrant network of interacting neurons. The nervous
system does not process information in the computationalist sense, but
creates meaning. The third idea is that cognition is the exercise of
skillful know-how in situated and embodied action. Cognitive structures and processes emerge from recurrent sensorimotor patterns of
perception and action. Sensorimotor coupling between organism and
environment modulates, but does not determine, the formation of endogenous, dynamic patterns of neural activity, which in turn inform
sensorimotor coupling. The fourth idea is that a cognitive being’s
world is not a prespecified, external realm, represented internally by
its brain, but a relational domain enacted or brought forth by that
being’s autonomous agency and mode of coupling with the environment. The fifth idea is that experience is not an epiphenomenal side
issue, but central to any understanding of the mind, and needs to be
investigated in a careful phenomenological manner. For this reason,
14 The Enactive Approach
the enactive approach maintains that mind science and phenomenological investigations of human experience need to be pursued in a
complementary and mutually informing way.9
The conviction motivating the present book is that the enactive approach offers important resources for making progress on the explanatory gap. One key point is that the enactive approach explicates
selfhood and subjectivity from the ground up by accounting for the autonomy proper to living and cognitive beings. The burden of this book
is to show that this approach to subjectivity is a fruitful one.
To make headway on this project, we need to draw from biology,
neuroscience, psychology, philosophy, and phenomenology. In this
book, I try to integrate investigations from all these fields.
One common thread running through the following chapters is a reliance on the philosophical tradition of phenomenology, inaugurated
by Edmund Husserl and developed in various directions by numerous
others, most notably for my purposes by Maurice Merleau-Ponty
(Moran 2000; Sokolowski 2000; Spiegelberg 1994).10 My aim, however,
is not to repeat this tradition’s analyses, as they are found in this or that
author or text, but to present them anew in light of present-day concerns in the sciences of mind. Thus this book can be seen as contributing to the work of a new generation of phenomenologists who
strive to “naturalize” phenomenology (Petitot et al. 1999). The project
of naturalizing phenomenology can be understood in different ways,
and my own way of thinking about it will emerge later in this book. The
basic idea for the moment is that it is not enough for phenomenology
simply to describe and philosophically analyze lived experience; phenomenology needs to be able to understand and interpret its investigations in relation to those of biology and mind science.
Yet mind science has much to learn from the analyses of lived experience accomplished by phenomenologists. Indeed, once science
turns its attention to subjectivity and consciousness, to experience as it
