is lived, then it cannot do without phenomenology, which thus needs
to be recognized and cultivated as an indispensable partner to the experimental sciences of mind and life. As we will see, this scientific turn
to phenomenology leads as much to a renewed understanding of nature, life, and mind as to a naturalization of phenomenology (Zahavi
2004b).
There is also a deeper convergence of the enactive approach and
Cognitive Science and Human Experience 15
phenomenology that is worth summarizing briefly here. Both share a
view of the mind as having to constitute its objects. Here constitution
does not mean fabrication or creation; the mind does not fabricate the
world. “To constitute,” in the technical phenomenological sense,
means to bring to awareness, to present, or to disclose. The mind
brings things to awareness; it discloses and presents the world. Stated
in a classical phenomenological way, the idea is that objects are disclosed or made available to experience in the ways they are thanks to
the intentional activities of consciousness. Things show up, as it were,
having the features they do, because of how they are disclosed and
brought to awareness by the intentional activities of our minds. Such
constitution is not apparent to us in everyday life but requires systematic analysis to disclose. Consider our experience of time (discussed in
Chapter 11). Our sense of the present moment as both simultaneously
opening into the immediate future and slipping away into the immediate past depends on the formal structure of our consciousness of
time. The present moment manifests as a zone or span of actuality, instead of as an instantaneous flash, thanks to the way our consciousness
is structured. As we will see later, the present moment also manifests
this way because of the nonlinear dynamics of brain activity. Weaving
together these two types of analysis, the phenomenological and neurobiological, in order to bridge the gap between subjective experience
and biology, defines the aim of neurophenomenology (Varela 1996),
an offshoot of the enactive approach.
The enactive approach and phenomenology also meet on the
common ground of life or living being. For the enactive approach, autonomy is a fundamental characteristic of biological life, and there is a
deep continuity of life and mind. For phenomenology, intentionality is
a fundamental characteristic of the lived body. The enactive approach
and phenomenology thus converge on the proposition that subjectivity and consciousness have to be explicated in relation to the autonomy and intentionality of life, in a full sense of “life” that encompasses, as we will see, the organism, one’s subjectively lived body, and
the life-world.
It will take some work before these ideas can stand clearly before us
in this book. In the next chapter I introduce phenomenological philosophy in more detail, before returning to the enactive approach in
Chapter 3.
TWO
◆ ◆ ◆
The Phenomenological Connection
THIS CHAPTER INTRODUCES a number of themes from phenomenological philosophy that will appear throughout this book. Phenomenology is important here for two main reasons. First, any attempt to
gain a comprehensive understanding of the human mind must at
some point consider consciousness and subjectivity—how thinking,
perceiving, acting, and feeling are experienced in one’s own case.
Mental events do not occur in a vacuum; they are lived by someone.
Phenomenology is anchored to the careful description, analysis, and
interpretation of lived experience. Second, the enactive approach
puts the organism and the body center-stage in mind science, but the
human body, unless it is dead, is always the lived body. Phenomenology, in one of its strongest currents flowing from Husserl and
Merleau-Ponty, is a philosophy of the lived body. For these reasons,
phenomenology can guide and clarify scientific research on subjectivity and consciousness, and provide a philosophical framework for
assessing the meaning and significance of this research for our selfunderstanding.
This chapter has two purposes. First, it introduces some core ideas
