of Husserl’s phenomenology, in particular the phenomenological
method of investigating the structure of experience, known as the phenomenological reduction, and the phenomenological concept of intentionality. Second, it sketches three phases of phenomenology,
known as static, genetic, and generative phenomenology.
Static phenomenology analyzes the formal structures of conscious-
16
The Phenomenological Connection 17
ness, whereby consciousness is able to constitute (disclose or bring to
awareness) its objects. Static phenomenology takes these intentional
structures and their correlative objects as given and analyzes them statically or synchronically.
Genetic phenomenology is concerned with how these intentional
structures and objects emerge through time; therefore, it cannot take
them as given. Instead, it analyzes how certain types of experience motivate later and more complex types—for example, how implicit and
prereflective experiences motivate attentive and reflective experiences. From the perspective of genetic phenomenology, experience
has a sedimented structure, and the process of sedimentation needs to
be understood in relation to the lived body and time-consciousness.
Some of the key guiding phenomena for genetic phenomenology—affect, motivation, attention, habit—are familiar from the perspective of
mind science, especially developmental psychology, emotion theory,
and affective-cognitive neuroscience. These points of convergence and
mutual illumination will be taken up in later chapters.
Whereas time-consciousness and the lived body are the guiding
threads for genetic phenomenology, for generative phenomenology
the guiding thread is the life-world. The subject matter of generative
phenomenology is the cultural, historical, and intersubjective constitution of our human world. The importance of generative phenomenology for mind science and the enactive approach in particular will
be taken up in the last chapter of this book.
Phenomenology with an Attitude
Phenomenology, in its original Husserlian inspiration, grows out of
the recognition that we can adopt in our own first-person case
different mental attitudes or stances toward the world, life, and experience. In everyday life we are usually straightforwardly immersed in various situations and projects, whether as specialists in scientific, technical, or practical knowledge or as colleagues, friends, and members of
families and communities. Besides being directed toward these moreor-less particular, “thematic” matters, we are also directed at the world
as an unthematic horizon of all our activity (Husserl 1970, p. 281).
Husserl calls this attitude of being straightforwardly immersed in the
world “the natural attitude,” and he thinks it is characterized by a kind
18 The Enactive Approach
of unreflective “positing” of the world as something existing “out
there” more or less independently of us.
In contrast, the “phenomenological attitude,” arises when we step
back from the natural attitude, not to deny it, but in order to investigate the very experiences it comprises. If such an investigation is to be
genuinely philosophical, then it must strive to be critical and not dogmatic, and therefore it cannot take the naïve realism of the natural attitude for granted. Yet to deny this realistic attitude would be equally
dogmatic. Rather, the realistic positing of the natural attitude must be
suspended, neutralized, or put to one side, so that it plays no role in
the investigation. In this way, we can focus on the experiences that sustain and animate the natural attitude, but in an open and nondogmatic manner. We can investigate experience in the natural attitude
without being prejudiced by an unexamined view of things, which is
characteristic of the natural attitude.
Yet how exactly is such an investigation to proceed? What exactly are
we supposed to investigate? Husserl’s answer is that our attention
should be directed toward the world strictly as we experience it. We are
to attend to the world strictly as it appears and as it is phenomenally
manifest. Put another way, we should attend to the modes or ways in
which things appear to us. We thereby attend to things strictly as correlates of our experience, and the focus of our investigation becomes
the correlational structure of our subjectivity and the appearance or
