disclosure of the world.
The philosophical procedure by which this correlational structure is
investigated is known as the phenomenological reduction. “Reduction” in
this context does not mean replacing or eliminating one theory or
model in favor of another taken to be more fundamental. It signifies
rather a “leading back” (reducere) or redirection of thought away from
its unreflective and unexamined immersion in the world to the way in
which the world appears to us. To redirect our interest in this way does
not mean we doubt the things before us or that we somehow try to
turn away from the world to look elsewhere. Things remain before us,
but we envisage them in a new way, namely, strictly as experienced.
Thus, everyday things available for our perception are not doubted or
considered as illusions when they are “phenomenologically reduced,”
but instead are envisaged and examined simply and precisely as perceived. Remembered things are examined strictly and precisely as remembered, imagined things as imagined. In other words, once we adopt
The Phenomenological Connection 19
the phenomenological attitude, we are interested not in what things
are in some naïve, mind-independent or theory-independent sense,
but rather in exactly how they are experienced, and thus as strict relational correlates of our subjectivity.1
As a procedure of working back from the what to the how of experience, the phenomenological reduction has to be performed in the
first person. As is true of any such procedure, it is one thing to describe
its general theoretical character and another to describe it pragmatically, the concrete steps by which it is carried out. The main methodical step crucial for the phenomenological reduction Husserl called
the epoché. This term derives from Greek skepticism, where it means to
suspend or refrain from judgment, but Husserl adopted it as a term for
the “suspension,” “neutralization,” or “bracketing” of both our natural
“positing” attitude and our theoretical beliefs and assertions (whether
scientific or philosophical) about “objective reality.” From a more embodied and situated, first-person perspective, however, the epoché can
be described as the flexible and trainable mental skill of being able
both to suspend one’s inattentive immersion in experience and to
turn one’s attention to the manner in which something appears or is
given to experience (Depraz 1999b; Depraz, Varela, and Vermersch
2000; Steinbock 2004). Suspending one’s inattentive immersion in experience implies the capacity to notice such immersion, and thus implies what psychologists call meta-awareness (awareness of awareness).
Being able to redirect one’s attention to the manner in which something appears implies flexibility of attention; in particular it implies
being able voluntarily to shift one’s attention and stabilize or sustain it
on a given mode of presentation. The ultimate aim is not to break the
flow of experience, but to reinhabit it in a fresh way, namely, with
heightened awareness and attunement.2
Within the phenomenological tradition one can discern a certain
ambivalence regarding these theoretical and practical or existential dimensions of the epoché. On the one hand, Husserl’s great concern
was to establish phenomenology as a new philosophical foundation for
science; thus for him the epoché served largely as a critical tool of theoretical reason.3 On the other hand, because Husserl’s theoretical
project was based on a radical reappraisal of experience as the source
of meaning and knowledge, it necessitated a constant return to the patient, analytic description of lived experience through phenomenological reduction. This impulse generated a huge corpus of careful phe-
20 The Enactive Approach
nomenological analyses of human experience—the perceptual experience of space (Husserl 1997), kinesthesis and the experience of one’s
own body (Husserl 1989, 1997), time-consciousness (Husserl 1991),
affect (Husserl 2001), judgment (Husserl 1975), imagination and
memory (Husserl 2006), and intersubjectivity (Husserl 1973), to name
just a few.
Nevertheless, the epoché as a practical procedure—as a situated
practice carried out in the first person by the phenomenologist—has
