remained strangely neglected in the phenomenological literature,
even by so-called existential phenomenologists such as Heidegger and
Merleau-Ponty. They instead took up and then recast in their own ways
the method of the phenomenological reduction (see Heidegger 1982,
pp.19–23; Merleau-Ponty 1962, pp. xi–xiv). For this reason, one new
current in phenomenology aims to develop more explicitly the pragmatics of the epoché as a first-person method for investigating consciousness (Depraz 1999b; Depraz, Varela, and Vermersch, 2000, 2003;
Varela and Shear 1999b). This pragmatic approach also involves comparing the epoché to first-person methods in other domains, especially
Buddhist philosophy and contemplative mental training (Depraz,
Varela, and Vermersch, 2003; Lutz, Dunne, and Davidson, 2007). In
addition, it explores the relevance of first-person methods for producing more refined first-person reports in experimental psychology
and cognitive neuroscience (Lutz and Thompson 2003). This endeavor is central to the research program known as neurophenomenology, introduced by Francisco Varela (1996) and discussed extensively later in this book.
Let us return to the phenomenological reduction in its original
philosophical context. Here the reduction, in its full sense, is a rich
mode of analysis, comprising two main steps. The first step leads back
from the natural attitude to the phenomenological attitude by neutralizing the realistic positing of the natural attitude and then orienting attention toward the disclosure or appearance of reality to us
(this step corresponds to the epoché). The second step leads from this
phenomenological attitude to a more radical kind of philosophical attitude. More precisely, this step leads from phenomenology as an empirical and psychological attitude (phenomenological psychology) to
phenomenology as a transcendental philosophical attitude (transcendental phenomenology).
The Phenomenological Connection 21
The term transcendental is used here in its Kantian sense to mean an
investigation concerned with the modes or ways in which objects are
experienced and known, and with the a priori conditions for the possibility of such experience and knowledge. Husserl casts these two aspects of transcendental inquiry in a specific form that is clearly related
to but nonetheless different from Kant’s (see Steinbock 1995, pp. 12–
15). First, transcendental phenomenology focuses not on what things
are but on the ways in which things are given. For Husserl, this means focusing on phenomena (appearances) and the senses or meanings they
have for us, and then asking how these meaningful phenomena are
constituted (brought to awareness). Second, to address this constitutional problem, transcendental phenomenology tries to uncover the
essential formal laws under which experience necessarily operates in
order to constitute a meaningful world.
In the natural attitude, reality is taken for granted as being simply
there without any active engagement on the part of consciousness. In
other words, there is no thought that reality involves acts or processes
of constitution. Grasped phenomenologically, in the transcendental
phenomenological attitude, reality is that which is disclosed to us as
real, whether in everyday perception or scientific investigation, and
such disclosure is an achievement of consciousness. The point here is
not that the world would not exist if not for consciousness. Rather, it is
that we have no grip on what reality means apart from what is disclosed
to us as real, and such disclosure necessarily involves the intentional
activity of consciousness. The point of the transcendental phenomenological reduction is to gain access to this activity and the constitutional role it plays.
It is often said that whereas Husserl’s orientation is transcendental in
this way, Heidegger and Merleau-Ponty reject the transcendental standpoint and identify the constitutional structures unearthed by phenomenology with existential structures of “being-in-the-world.” (The hyphens indicate that “being,” “in,” and “world” are not ontologically
separable, but form one irreducible and unified structure.) But this interpretation is simplistic. First, both Heidegger’s “Dasein” (his term for
individual human existence) and Merleau-Ponty’s “lived body” (a concept that comes straight from Husserl) are transcendental in the relevant sense, for they are ways of characterizing that which makes possible the disclosure or manifestation of the world as meaningful.
22 The Enactive Approach
Second, although Husserl in the most well-known portions of his work
(the writings published in his lifetime) did focus largely on the constitutional structures of “egological” consciousness (consciousness at the
level of the individual reflective “I” or “ego”), recent scholarship indicates that these analyses are not fully representative of his mature
philosophical investigations.4 As his thought developed, he greatly expanded his investigations, analyzing constitutional structures belonging to the “nonegological” (or “pre-egological”) depths of the lived
body, time-consciousness, and intersubjectivity, as well as the terrain of
