historical and cultural life.5 The point here is more than an interpretive
or textual one; it is philosophical. Transcendental phenomenology
cannot be limited to—and indeed goes far beyond—a philosophy of
“egological” consciousness or subjectivity. “Transcendental” signifies a
radical attitude, one that aims to regress back to the very roots (conditions of possibility) of our experience of a meaningful world. These
roots ramify far beyond individual consciousness into the depths of our
lived bodies and out into our social and cultural worlds.
The remainder of this chapter sketches a few of these developments
of phenomenological thought. My aim is not to give a detailed scholarly account of any particular aspect of phenomenology, but to set
forth some themes and ideas important for the chapters to come.
Intentionality
A good place to begin is the phenomenological doctrine of the intentionality of consciousness. According to phenomenology, consciousness is intentional, in the sense that it “aims toward” or “intends” something beyond itself. This sense of intentional should not be confused
with the more familiar sense of having a purpose in mind when one
acts, which is only one kind of intentionality in the phenomenological
sense. Rather, intentionality is a generic term for the pointing-beyonditself proper to consciousness. (It comes from the Latin intendere,
which once referred to drawing a bow and aiming at a target.)
Phenomenologists distinguish different types of intentionality. In a
narrow sense, they define intentionality as object-directedness. In a
broader sense, they define it as openness to the world or what is
“other” (“alterity”). In either case, the emphasis is on denying that
consciousness is self-enclosed.6
The Phenomenological Connection 23
Object-directed experiences are those in which we are conscious of
something in a more-or-less determinate sense. When we see, we see
something; when we remember, we remember something; when we
hope or fear, we hope for or fear something. These kinds of “transitive
consciousness” are characterized by the intending of an object (which
need not exist). “Object” in its etymological sense means something
that stands before us. Something standing before us lies beyond, over
against, or outside of us. Object-directed experiences can thus be understood as experiences in which we are conscious of something distinct from ourselves as a present subject, whether it be a past event remembered, something perceived in the settings around us, a future
event feared or hoped for, something imagined, and so on.
Many kinds of everyday experience, however, are not object-directed
in this sense. Such experiences include bodily feelings of pain, moods
such as undirected anxiety, depression, and elation, and absorbed
skillful activity in everyday life. These experiences are not or need not
be “about” any intentional object. They are not directed toward a transcendent object, in the sense of something experienced as standing
over against oneself as a distinct subject. Put another way, they do not
have a clear subject-object structure.7
Philosophers who think of intentionality simply as object-directedness
would deny that experiences like these are intentional. Nevertheless,
such experiences do qualify as intentional in the broader phenomenological sense of being open to what is other or having a world-involving
character. Thus bodily feelings are not self-enclosed without openness to
the world. On the contrary, they present things in a certain affective
light or atmosphere and thereby deeply influence how we perceive and
respond to things. A classic example is Sartre’s discussion of feeling eyestrain and fatigue as a result of reading late into the night (1956, pp.
332–333).8 The feeling first manifests itself not as an intentional object
of transitive consciousness but as a trembling of the eyes and a blurriness
of the words on the page. One’s body and immediate environment disclose themselves in a certain manner through this feeling. In the case of
moods, although they are not object-directed in the same way intentional emotions are—such as a feeling of sympathy for a loved one or a
feeling of envy for a rival—they are nonetheless hardly self-enclosed
