without reference to the world. On the contrary, as Heidegger analyzes
at length in Being and Time, moods reveal our embeddedness in the
24 The Enactive Approach
world and (as he sees it) make possible more circumscribed forms of directedness in everyday life. Finally, in absorbed skillful activities, such as
driving, dancing, or writing, one’s experience is not that of relating to a
distinct intentional object but of being engaged and immersed in a fluid
activity. Such experience takes on a subject-object structure only during
moments of breakdown or disruption (see Dreyfus 1991, 2002; Dreyfus
and Dreyfus 1986).
In phenomenology, intentional experiences are described as mental
acts—acts of perceiving, remembering, imagining, empathizing, and
so on. Phenomenology conceives of mental life as a temporally extended and dynamic process of flowing intentional acts. These acts are
animated by precognitive habits and sensibilities of the lived body. Intentional acts are performances of a person, a living bodily subject of
experience, whose cognitive and affective life is constituted by communal norms, conventions, and historical traditions. Mental life is animated by an intentional striving that aims toward and finds satisfaction
in disclosure of the intentional object. In this way, intentionality is teleological (Held 2003, p. 14).
Given this conception of intentionality, it follows that neither the
mental act nor that which it intends can be understood in isolation.
Every mental act is the very act it is in virtue of that which it intends,
and every object is constituted in and through the temporally extended course of intentional experience. As Donn Welton explains:
There is a genuinely new conception of mental acts here in play . . . On
the one hand, acts do not belong to a closed interior realm available
only to introspection. Rather, they have their being by virtue of their relationship to that which transcends them. On the other hand, the determinations of “the given” can be fully clarified only by seeing them in
relation to certain acts that contribute to their configuration. It is neither the subject nor the object but the relationship that is primary.
(Welton 2000, p. 17)
Phenomenologists call this relation the correlational structure of intentionality. “Correlational” does not mean the constant conjunction
of two terms that could be imagined to exist apart; rather, it refers to
the invariant structure of intentional act/intentional object. Objectdirected intentional experiences necessarily comprise these two inseparable poles. In Husserlian phenomenological language, these two
The Phenomenological Connection 25
poles are known as the “noema” (the object in its givenness) and the
“noesis” (the mental act that intends and discloses the object in a certain manner).9
We need to keep this framework in mind when we think about the
relation between the phenomenological conception of intentionality
and what philosophers of mind today call mental representation. In a
broad and theoretically neutral sense, a mental representation is supposed to be a mental structure (concept, thought, image) with semantic properties (content, truth conditions, reference), or a state or
process involving such a structure. Usually, a mental representation is
not considered to be an object of cognition or awareness, but rather
that by which one cognizes or is aware of something in the world.
Many phenomenologists would agree that intentional experience is
representational in this broad sense of having descriptive content—
that in intentional experience the world is represented in some particular way or other. Nevertheless, the phenomenological conception of
intentional experience has certain other distinctive features. First, in
phenomenology, as mentioned earlier, intentional experiences are
conceptualized not as states having content but as acts having directedness.
These two conceptions are not necessarily incompatible, but their theoretical orientation and emphasis are different. Second, “re-presentation,” in its technical phenomenological sense, applies only to certain
types of intentional acts, namely, those that mentally evoke or bring to
presence something that is not present in its bodily being.
Phenomenologists thus draw a crucial distinction between intentional acts of presentation (Gegenwärtigung) and of re-presentation (Vergegenwärtigung) (see Marbach 1993). On the one hand, perceptual experience is presentational: in this type of experience the object is
given as present in its very being. In memory or imagination, on the
other hand, the object imagined or remembered is not given as
present in its very being, but rather as both phenomenally absent and
