as mentally evoked or called forth. In this way, memory and imagination are said to be re-presentational. Note that the definitive feature
of re-presentational experience is that the object is given as absent
and as mentally evoked, but not necessarily as re-evoked or called
forth again. Re-evoking belongs to memory but not necessarily to visualizing or fantasizing. Note also that re-presentational experiences
do not float freely, as it were, but arise in relation to ongoing presen-
26 The Enactive Approach
tational experiences of one’s surroundings. I discuss this phenomenological conception of mental re-presentation in connection with
mental imagery in Chapter 10.
Let us return to the connection between phenomenology and the
enactive approach. As we will see in Chapter 3, the main explanatory
tool of the enactive approach is the theory of self-organizing and autonomous dynamic systems. Such systems bring forth or enact
meaning in continuous reciprocal interaction with their environments. “Inner” and “outer” are not preexisting separate spheres, but
mutually specifying domains enacted or brought forth by the structural coupling of the system and its environment. This subpersonal account of cognitive systems echoes the personal-level account of the
correlational structure of intentionality.10 As Jean-Pierre Dupuy writes
in his philosophical history of cognitive science, discussing the “missed
encounter” between phenomenology and mind science in the cybernetic era:
A given [autonomous] network usually possesses a multiplicity of selfbehaviors (or, as they are sometimes called, “attractors” . . . ) and converges toward one or another of them depending on the initial conditions of the network. The “life” of a network can thus be conceived as a
trajectory through a “landscape” of attractors, passing from one to another as a result of perturbations or shocks from the external world.
Note that these external events come to acquire meaning in the context
of the network as a result of the network’s own activity: the content—the
meaning—that the network attributes to them is precisely the selfbehavior, or attractor that results from them. Obviously, then, this content is purely endogenous and not the reflection of some external
“transcendent” objectivity.
It should be obvious, too, that this line of argument . . . provides us
with at least the germ of a very satisfactory model of what Brentano
called “immanent objectivity” . . . The attractor is an entity that both
fully participates in the activity of the network and yet in some sense, by
virtue of the fact that it results from a higher level of logical complexity,
transcends the activity of the network. The dynamics of the network
may therefore be said to tend toward an attractor, although the latter is
only a product of these dynamics. The network is thus an intentional
creature in Brentano and Husserl’s sense. Systems theory was to coin
The Phenomenological Connection 27
another term to describe this paradoxical relationship between the dynamics of a system and its attractor, referring to it as “autotranscendence.” This is not very different, really, from Husserl’s notion of “transcendence within immanence.” (Dupuy 2000, pp. 104–105)
Because this notion of transcendence-within-immanence is often
misunderstood, it bears clarification here. It does not mean that what
appears to be beyond or outside the sphere of mental activity is really
contained within the mind (in some idealist or internalist sense).
Rather, the crucial point is that the transcendent is given as such by
virtue of the intentional activities of consciousness. Thus it falls
within the sphere of what is phenomenologically constituted (disclosed or brought to awareness by consciousness). Clearly, this point
makes sense only at a transcendental level, for at this level the transcendent is understood as a mode of givenness or disclosure (one characterizing things in the world, but not one’s own consciousness).
Thus, at a transcendental level, what is really or genuinely transcendent
is also phenomenologically immanent (see Crowell, in press, for further
discussion).
The correspondence between phenomenology and dynamic systems
theory to which Dupuy is pointing should therefore be understood as
follows. External events are really transcendent, for they are certainly not
contained within the system, nor are they a mere product of what goes
inside the system. Nevertheless, they are intentionally immanent, in the
following sense: they do not arrive already labeled, as it were, as external events; instead they are constituted or disclosed as such, and
