with the significance they have, by virtue of the network’s autonomous
(self-organizing) dynamics. In other words, their status as external
events for the system (as opposed to their status for an observer of the
system) is a function of the system’s own activity. Their meaning or significance corresponds to an attractor of the system’s dynamics (a recurrent pattern of activity toward which the system tends), which itself
is an emergent product of that very dynamics. The external world is
constituted as such for the system by virtue of the system’s selforganizing activity. Dupuy’s proposal, in a nutshell, is that constitutional
intentionality corresponds to a kind of self-organization. This proposal, as we
will see in later chapters, is one of the key guiding intuitions of the enactive approach and neurophenomenology.
28 The Enactive Approach
From Static to Genetic Phenomenology
This convergence between phenomenology and the enactive approach can be taken further. The correlational structure of intentionality belongs to what Husserl called static phenomenology. As his
thought progressed, however, Husserl found that he needed to articulate a genetic phenomenology, that is, a phenomenology whose point of
departure is not the explicit correlational structure of intentional act
(noesis) and intentional object (noema), but rather the genesis of intentional experience in time. From the standpoint of genetic phenomenology, we need to account for the correlational structure of intentionality developmentally by understanding how it emerges from
inarticulate experience that does not have a clear subject-object structure. One wellspring of this kind of experience is the lived body (Leib);
another is time-consciousness. The shift from static to genetic phenomenology thus marks a turn toward the lived body and timeconsciousness. Thus it enables us to deepen the connection between
phenomenology and the enactive approach.
Static phenomenology makes use of two methodological strategies
(Steinbock 1995, pp. 38–39). The first is static analysis or the analysis
of invariant formal structures of experience, such as the correlational
structure of intentionality, or the difference between presentational
and re-presentational mental acts and the ways the latter presuppose
the former. The second strategy is constitutional analysis—the analysis
of how things are disclosed or brought to awareness by virtue of the intentional activities of consciousness. From a transcendental perspective, the invariant formal structures of experience uncovered by static
analysis are precisely the essential formal laws under which experience
necessarily operates in order to constitute its objects. An example is
Husserl’s investigation in his 1907 lectures, “Thing and Space,” of the
conditions of possibility for the perceptual experience of things in
space (Husserl 1997). Husserl shows that visual perception depends
constitutively on certain invariant functional interdependencies between visual sensation and the experience of moving one’s body
(which he calls kinesthesis). These analyses anticipate recent enactive
or dynamic sensorimotor accounts of perception (discussed in
Chapter 9). According to these accounts, to perceive is to exercise
one’s skillful mastery of the ways sensory stimulation varies as a result
of bodily movement (Noë 2004; O’Regan and Noë 2001a).
The Phenomenological Connection 29
Unlike static phenomenology, genetic phenomenology does not
take the already disclosed intentional object as its point of departure,
nor is it content to stay at the level of analyzing formal and constitutive
structures of experience. Instead, it investigates the genesis and development of those structures themselves. After all, we do not simply
drop into the world and open our eyes and see. What we see is a function of how we see, and how we see is a function of previous experience. For genetic phenomenology, what we experience is not a fixed
given but something that has come to be given—something emergent—
out of previous experience (Bernet, Kern, and Marbach 1993, pp.
200–201). In Chapters 11 and 12, I discuss phenomenological analyses
of time-consciousness and affect produced from this genetic orientation and relate them to research in psychology and neuroscience.
Genetic phenomenology also brings with it a different way of
thinking about the conscious subject. From a static viewpoint, the “I” is
thought of as a kind of “ego-pole” of the noetic-noematic structure, in
contraposition to the “object-pole.”11 A fuller articulation of the correlational structure of intentionality would thus be [ego] noesis-noema
(I intend the intentional object). From a genetic standpoint, however,
