this way of thinking remains abstract because it ignores the temporal
development and individuation of the subject. The “I” or “ego” is not a
mere “empty pole” of selfhood in experience but a concrete subject
having habits, interests, convictions, and capabilities as a result of accumulated experience. In other words, the subject has to be seen as
having a “life” in all the rich senses of this word—as formed by its individual history, as a living bodily subject of experience (Leib), and as belonging to an intersubjective “life-world” (Lebenswelt).
Genetic phenomenology distinguishes between active genesis and
passive genesis. In active genesis subjects play an active and deliberate,
productive role in the constitution of objects. The products of active
genesis are tools, artworks, scientific theories, experimental interventions, logical judgments, mathematical propositions, and so on. Active
genesis, however, always presupposes a passivity by which one is affected
beforehand. It must be stressed that “passive” in this context does not
mean a state of inactivity, but rather a state of being involuntarily influenced and affected by something. In particular, it means being influenced and affected on an aesthetic level, in the original Greek sense of
aisthesis as sense perception, including especially the perception and
felt experience of what is attractive and unattractive. Thus the thought
30 The Enactive Approach
behind the active / passive distinction is that our active orientation
toward things in practical or theoretical reason, or artistic creation, presupposes a deeper and more fundamental openness to the world. It is
an openness to being sensuously affected and solicited by the world
through the medium of our living body, and responding by attraction
and repulsion. Investigating these sensorimotor and affective depths of
experience leads phenomenology to the notion of passive genesis. In
passive genesis, the lived body constitutes itself and its surrounding environment through the involuntary formation of habits, motor patterns, associations, dispositions, motivations, emotions, and memories.
At this level of “passive synthesis” in experience, the relevant notion
of intentionality is not so much object-directedness as openness to the
world, here in the bodily form of an implicit sensibility or sentience
that does not have any clear subject-object structure. Intentionality at
this level functions anonymously, involuntarily, spontaneously, and receptively. Husserl distinguishes between receptivity and affectivity
(2001, pp. 105, 127). As Dan Zahavi explains, “Receptivity is taken to
be the first, lowest, and most primitive type of intentional activity, and
consists in responding to or paying attention to that which is affecting
us passively. Thus, even receptivity understood as a mere ‘I notice’ presupposes a prior affection” (Zahavi 1999, p. 116; see also the Translator’s Introduction to Husserl 2001). Affection here means being affectively influenced or perturbed. The idea is that whatever comes into
relief in experience must have already been affecting us and must have
some kind of “affective force” or “affective allure” in relation to our attention and motivations. Whatever exercises affective allure without
our turning to it attentively is said to be “pregiven,” and whatever succeeds in gaining attention is said to be “given.” Thus the given—the
mode or way in which something appears to object-directed consciousness—has to be understood dynamically and teleologically as emergent in relation to the pregiven. Object-directed intentional experiences emerge out of the background of a precognitive “operative
intentionality” (Merleau-Ponty 1962, p. xviii) that involves a dynamic
interplay of affective sensibility, motivation, and attention. This affectively “saturated intentionality” (Steinbock 1999) provides our primordial openness to the world.
The phenomenological terrain of “passive synthesis” is rich in potential for illuminating and being illuminated by research in psychology and neuroscience on emotion and cognition. Some of these
The Phenomenological Connection 31
connections are already discernible in Husserl’s description of passive
synthesis as operating according to a principle of association (Husserl
1960, pp. 80–81; 2001, pp. 162–242). For Husserl, association is an intentional process whereby experiences are built up or synthesized into
larger, patterned wholes. Using the terminology of emergence, we
could say that association is the process by which coherent patterns of
experience emerge from conjoined and reciprocally affecting experiences. Here are a few vivid examples given by William James in his
Principles of Psychology:
Let a person enter his room in the dark and grope among the objects
there. The touch of the matches will instantaneously recall their appearance. If his hand comes in contact with an orange on the table, the
golden yellow of the fruit, its savor and perfume will forthwith shoot
through his mind. In passing the hand over the sideboard or in jogging
