the coal-scuttle with the foot, the large glossy dark shape of the one and
the irregular blackness of the other awaken in a flash and constitute
what we call the recognition of objects. The voice of the violin faintly
echoes through the mind as the hand is laid upon it in the dark, and
the feeling of the garments or draperies which may hang about the
room is not understood till the look correlative to the feeling has in
each case been resuscitated . . . But the most notorious and important
case of the mental combination of auditory with optical impressions
originally experienced together is furnished by language. The child is
offered a new and delicious fruit and is at the same time told that it is
called a “fig.” Or looking out of the window he exclaims, “What a funny
horse!” and is told that it is a “piebald” horse. When learning his letters,
the sound of each is repeated to him whilst its shape is before his eye.
Thenceforward, long as he may live, he will never see a fig, a piebald
horse, or a letter of the alphabet without the name which he first heard
in conjunction with each clinging to it in his mind; and inversely he will
never hear the name without the faint arousal of the image of the object. (1981, pp. 524–525)
According to the empiricist philosophers Locke and Hume, such associations happen in a completely mechanical way. Association operates as a kind of connective force in the mind that links impressions
and ideas simply in virtue of their simultaneous occurrence, proximity,
or repeated succession. Hume’s analysis of causation provides a famous example of this way of thinking about association. Hume argued
32 The Enactive Approach
that causal connections are neither directly observable nor provable by
reason, but are objects of mere belief based on habit and custom. The
belief in a causal connection between A and B arises from the association or “constant conjunction” of A and B in past experience: experiences of A constantly conjoined to experiences of B make the mind habitually expect that the occurrence of A will be followed by the
occurrence of B.
For Husserl (and James), however, association is not meaningless
and mechanical, but thoroughly intentional. Association is not the mechanical aggregation of complex experiences out of preexisting
experience-atoms. Husserl, like James, completely rejects this atomistic
conception of experience. Like emergent processes in a self-organizing
system, associated experiences reciprocally strengthen and reinforce
each other and thereby give rise to new formations that supersede their
prior separateness. Association also involves the retention and anticipation of sense or meaning. Earlier experiences are affectively “awakened” by later ones on the basis of their felt similarities, and they motivate the anticipation that what is to come will cohere with the sense or
meaning of experience so far. In Husserl’s terminology, there is an
“analogical transfer of sense” from earlier to later experience: what is
present now is passively apprehended within a sense that has its roots in
earlier experience and that has since become habitual (Bernet, Kern,
and Marbach 1993, p. 202).
The notion of habit is central to Husserl’s conception of passive genesis, as he states explicitly in a lecture from 1927: “As Hume correctly
teaches, habit is not only our nurse, rather it is the function of consciousness that shapes and constantly further shapes the world”
(quoted by Bernet, Kern, and Marbach 1993, p. 203; see also Welton
2000, p. 243). Husserl mentions Hume, but the notion of habit was very
important to James as well. In his Principles of Psychology James declared
that habit is the ground of all association in the stream of consciousness
and in brain activity (thereby anticipating Donald Hebb and connectionism).12 Later, in 1945, Merleau-Ponty introduced his notion of the
habit-body in his Phenomenology of Perception while discussing the experience of the phantom limb: “our body comprises as it were two distinct
layers, that of the habit-body and that of the body at this moment. In
the first appear manipulatory movements which have disappeared from
the second, and the problem how I can have the sensation of still pos-
The Phenomenological Connection 33
sessing a limb which I no longer have amounts to finding out how the
