habitual body can act as guarantee for the body at this moment” (1962,
p. 82). To say that the habitual body acts as guarantee for the body at
this moment is to say that one’s lived body is a developmental being
thick with its own history and sedimented ways of feeling, perceiving,
acting, and imagining. These sedimented patterns are not limited to
the space enclosed by the body’s membrane; they span and interweave
the lived body and its environment, thereby forming a unitary circuit of
lived-body-environment (Gallagher 1986b).
In Part III, I will explore this convergence of genetic phenomenology and enactive cognitive science in greater detail. For now let me
simply point out how important the dynamic coupling between one’s
lived body and the surrounding world is to both perspectives. In this
coupling, the motivating undercurrent is the habitual and associative
linkage of affective, sensorimotor, and imaginative bodily experiences.
From Genetic to Generative Phenomenology
Late in his life Husserl began to move in still another direction—from
genetic phenomenology to generative phenomenology. Already in genetic
phenomenology intersubjectivity had arisen as an important theme, in
the form of the dynamic coupling between self and other on the basis
of their lived bodily presence to one another. Generative phenomenology, however, widened the scope of this genetic analysis beyond the
self-other relation to include the parameters of birth and death as well
as the interconnectedness of generations.
In this context, the term generative has a double meaning: it means
both the process of becoming and the process of occurring over the
generations (Steinbock 1995, p. 3). Generative phenomenology concerns the historical, social, and cultural becoming of human experience. If static phenomenology is restricted in scope with respect to genetic phenomenology, then genetic phenomenology is restricted in
scope with respect to generative phenomenology: the subject matter of
generative phenomenology is the historical and intersubjective becoming of human experience, whereas genetic phenomenology focuses on individual development without explicit analysis of its generational and historical embeddedness.
In shifting from a genetic to a generative register, the notion of the
34 The Enactive Approach
lived body is complemented with that of the life-world (Husserl 1970;
Steinbock 1995, pp. 86–122; Welton 2000, pp. 331–346). The life-world
is the everyday world in which we live. It is “always already pregiven,”
serving as the horizon of all our activities, practical and theoretical.
Two important aspects of this rich and multifaceted notion need to be
mentioned here—the back-and-forth circulation or exchange within
the life-world between empirical science and everyday human life, and
the life-world as the pregiven horizon and ground of all human activity.
The life-world comprises the everyday world and the things that can
be directly experienced within the everyday world—our living bodies,
our natural surroundings, and our cultural creations (tools, artworks,
and so on). The life-world is subject-relative in the sense that it is relationally bound to human subjectivity. This is in contrast to “objective
nature” as conceived by science, which is arrived at through logical
and theoretical abstraction. Nature so construed is an objectification
and has as its cognitive correlate the objectifying intentional attitude
adopted by a community of theorizing subjects. Objective nature presupposes the life-world as its evidential source and ground. In principle it
cannot be experienced directly because it is the product of abstraction
and idealization. Nevertheless, the propositions, models, logical constructs, and experimental techniques of the sciences are clearly experienceable in another sense: they are human accomplishments that have
experiential validity for members of the scientific community, and
their effects flow into the everyday world and become tangibly experienced in the form of technology and social practice. Our life-world encompasses science, in addition to other spheres of experience such as
art, philosophy, and religion. Hence, there is a necessary “circulation”
between everyday experience and scientific experience (Varela,
