Thompson, and Rosch 1991, pp. 10–14). On the one hand, everyday
experience provides the sensuous, material contents from which and
with which science must work. On the other hand, the scientific
analyses built from these contents contribute to the formation of our
life-world and provide important leading clues for phenomenological
analyses of how our experience of the world is genetically and generatively constituted.
In taking up these phenomenological analyses, Husserl initially conceived of the life-world as a synthetic totality. Hence he treated it on
The Phenomenological Connection 35
the model of an object, albeit a peculiar all-encompassing one (see
Steinbock 1995, pp. 98–102; Welton 2000, pp. 336–346). Eventually,
however, it became clear to him that the life-world cannot be given as
any kind of intentional object, for it is always already there, pregiven
rather than given.13 Thus, in a crucial and famous passage from his last
work, The Crisis of European Sciences and Transcendental Phenomenology
(1970, §37, pp. 142–143), he wrote that the world is always already
there, existing in advance for us, as the “ground” and “horizon” of any
human activity. He then asserted that the way we are conscious of the
world and the way we are conscious of things or objects, though inseparably united, are fundamentally different. We can be conscious of
things only as things within the world horizon, and we can be conscious of the world horizon only as a horizon for existing objects. Yet
the world is not any kind of entity, nor is it simply the totality of entities, precisely because it is the horizon presupposed by any entity or
any totality. It is tempting to say “the world is one,” except that, as
Husserl puts it, the world “exists with such uniqueness that the plural
makes no sense when applied to it.” In other words, the world is not
one in any sense in which it could have been two. To put it another
way, to describe the world as “unique,” such that “every singular and
every plural drawn from it, presupposes the world horizon,” means
that the notion of counting makes no sense or has no application
here.14 Given this difference between the manner in which any object
is given and the manner in which the world horizon is given (namely,
as always already pregiven), it follows that there must be “fundamentally different correlative types of consciousness for them.”
Husserl’s terms horizon and ground are metaphorical, at once visual
and geological. A horizon is not a thing “out there” but rather a structure of appearance. It therefore implicates or points back to the perceiver for whom appearances are so structured. In phenomenological
language, “horizon” taken noematically as a structure of appearance
necessarily implicates “horizon” taken noetically as a structure of consciousness. One could say that a horizon is the precondition for the appearance of anything, except that “precondition” is too static. Stated
in a genetic register, a horizon is a dynamic structure of disclosure in
which both the object (noema) and consciousness (noesis) partake
(Steinbock 1995, p. 107). Anything that comes forth, manifests, or
emerges does so in an open clearing or expanse, delimited by a
36 The Enactive Approach
horizon. The horizon of every possible horizon is the world. Yet the
world-horizon cannot be the synthesis, totality, or mereological sum of
all these possible horizons because it is pregiven or a priori with respect
to any of them and thus is sui generis. Similarly, to describe the lifeworld as ground (Boden) is not to say that it is a static foundation;
rather, it is the pregiven soil out of which everything is generated and
nourished. This soil includes one’s forebears and culture. We human
beings constitute and reconstitute ourselves through cultural traditions, which we experience as our own development in a historical
time that spans the generations. To investigate the life-world as
horizon and ground of all experience therefore requires investigating
none other than generativity—the processes of becoming, of making
and remaking, that occur over the generations and within which any
