individual genesis is always already situated.
Generative phenomenology brings to the fore the intersubjective,
social, and cultural aspects of our radical embodiment. Individuals are
born and die, they develop and constantly change, and they emerge
from their forebears and perpetuate themselves in generations to
come. Individual subjectivity is from the outset intersubjectivity, originally engaged with and altered by others in specific geological and cultural environments (Depraz 1999c, p. 482; Steinbock 1995). Individual
subjectivity is intersubjectively and culturally embodied, embedded,
and emergent.
Classical cognitive science, to the extent that it operated under the
assumption that the individual self comes first and the other second,
simply left out intersubjectivity and culture. Indeed, it had no real
means to analyze their contributions to the “cognitive architecture” of
the human mind. As a result, classical cognitive science has offered abstract and reified models of the mind as a disembodied and cultureless
physical symbol system or connectionist neural network in the head of
a solitary individual. As we will see in the last chapter of this book,
however, the enactive approach, particularly when guided by genetic
and generative phenomenologies of the lived body, intersubjectivity,
and the life-world, offers a different vision. I will argue that self and
other enact each other reciprocally through empathy and that human
subjectivity emerges from developmental processes of enculturation
and is configured by the distributed cognitive web of symbolic culture.
THREE
◆ ◆ ◆
Autonomy and Emergence
ACCORDING TO THE ENACTIVE APPROACH, the human mind emerges
from self-organizing processes that tightly interconnect the brain, body,
and environment at multiple levels. The key ideas on which this proposition is based are those of autonomous systems and emergence or emergent
processes. In this chapter, I explain these ideas. In the next chapter, I explore some connections between these ideas and phenomenological
ideas about form, in particular forms or structures of behavior. These
two chapters will lay the groundwork for the enactive strategy of addressing the explanatory gap by going back to the roots of mind in life
and then working forward to subjectivity and consciousness.
In the first section of this chapter, I review some basic ideas about dynamic systems that form a background for the enactive approach. In
the second section, I explain the notion of an autonomous system. A
distinctive feature of the enactive approach is the emphasis it gives to
autonomy. In brief, an autonomous system is a self-determining
system, as distinguished from a system determined from the outside,
or a heteronomous system. On the one hand, a living cell, a multicellular animal, an ant colony, or a human being behaves as a coherent,
self-determining unity in its interactions with its environment. An automatic bank machine, on the other hand, is determined and controlled from the outside, in the realm of human design. The paradigm
for interaction with a heteronomous system is input/processing/
output, in which deviations from desired outputs are seen as system errors. The paradigm for interaction with an autonomous system is a
37
38 The Enactive Approach
conversation, in which unsatisfactory outcomes are seen as breaches of
understanding (Varela 1979, p. xii). According to the enactive approach, living beings and cognitive agents need to be understood as
autonomous systems. I discuss the implications of this autonomy perspective for how we think about information in the third section.
In the fourth section, I turn to emergence, a now familiar notion that
describes the arising of large-scale, collective patterns of behavior in complex systems as diverse as cells, brains, ecosystems, cities, and economies.
Emergence is closely related to self-organization and circular causality,
both of which involve the reciprocal influence of “bottom-up” and “topdown” processes. For example, a tornado emerges through the selforganization of circulating air and water particles; it reciprocally sucks
those particles into a particular macroscopic configuration, with devastating effect for anything in its path. In this section, I sketch a way of
