thinking about emergence that I call dynamic co-emergence. Dynamic
co-emergence means that a whole not only arises from its parts, but the
parts also arise from the whole. Part and whole co-emerge and mutually
specify each other. A whole cannot be reduced to its parts, for the parts
cannot be characterized independently of the whole; conversely, the
parts cannot be reduced to the whole, for the whole cannot be characterized independently of the parts. I discuss philosophical issues related
to this conception of emergence in Appendix B.
Dynamic Systems
In recent years growing interest in the dynamics of cognition and emotion has given rise to a distinct dynamical approach in mind science
(Kelso 1995; Lewis and Granic 2000; Port and van Gelder 1995; Thelen
and Smith 1994). The central idea of the dynamical approach is that
natural cognition—cognition in evolved, living agents—is a dynamic
phenomenon and accordingly needs to be understood from the perspective of the science of dynamic systems. This perspective includes
dynamic-systems theory (a branch of pure mathematics), dynamicsystems modeling (mathematical modeling of empirical systems), and
experimental investigations of biological and psychological phenomena
informed by these tools.
The first important concept we need to introduce in this context is
that of a dynamic system.1 In simple terms a dynamic system is one that
Autonomy and Emergence 39
changes over time. The term system, however, is ambiguous, in that it
can refer either to an actual system in the world, such as the solar
system, or to a mathematical model of an actual system. In the case of
the actual world, the term system does not admit of precise definition.
In general, a system is a collection of related entities or processes that
stands out from a background as a single whole, as some observer sees
and conceptualizes things. The classic example from the history of science is the solar system. Its components are the sun, moon, and
planets, and its states are their possible configurations. What changes
over time is the state of the system. A dynamic system in the sense of a
model, however, is a mathematical construction that aims to describe
and predict the way an actual system changes over time (the paths of
the planets, and events such as eclipses, in the case of the solar
system). To this end, some aspects of the actual system are singled out
as being especially important and are mathematically represented by
quantitative variables. Specifying the numerical values of all the variables at a given time indicates the state of the system at that time. A dynamic system includes a procedure for producing such a description
of the state of the system and a rule for transforming the current statedescription into another state-description for some future time. A dynamic system is thus a mathematical model for the way that a system
changes or behaves as time passes.
If the passage of time is considered to be continuous (like the
sweeping second hand of an analogue clock), then the dynamic system
is a differentiable one: the variables change in a smooth and continuous way, and the rules or “evolution equations” that govern the
changing state of the system take the form of differential equations. If
time is considered to pass in evenly spaced, discrete jumps (like a digital clock), then the system is described by a difference equation or a
mapping (a function repeatedly applied or iterated in discrete time
steps). Some differential equations have an analytical solution, which
means they can be exactly solved by mathematical formulas. Given the
starting values of the variables (the initial conditions), then all future
states of the system can be known without recalculating the state of the
system for each time increment. Most differential equations, however,
cannot be solved in this way. When the equations contain nonlinear
terms—functions in which the value of the output is not directly proportional to the sum of the inputs—then such a solution is impossible.
40 The Enactive Approach
