Therefore a different mathematical approach has to be taken from
that of finding a formula that makes possible the prediction of a future
state from a present one.
This other approach, introduced by Henri Poincaré in the nineteenth century, is known as the qualitative study of differential equations (or of nonlinear differentiable dynamic systems). One thinks of
the space of all possible states of the system as a geometric space,
known as state space or phase space, and the way that the system
changes or behaves over time as curves or trajectories in this space. Instead of seeking a formula for each solution as a function of time, one
studies the collection of all solutions (corresponding to trajectories in
phase space) for all times and initial conditions at once (Norton 1995,
p. 46). This approach is said to be qualitative because it uses topological and geometrical techniques to study the general or global character of the system’s long-term behavior (its behavior in phase space),
instead of seeking to predict the system’s exact future state (the specific values of its variables at a future time). It is precisely this qualitative approach to dynamics that goes by the name of dynamic systems
theory.
We need to introduce one more related notion—that of complexity.
The term complexity describes behavior that is neither random nor ordered and predictable; rather, it is in between, exhibiting changing
and unstable patterns. Of particular importance in the context of recent nonlinear dynamic-systems approaches to the brain and behavior
is the notion of complexity as dynamic instability or metastability—“the successive expression of different transient dynamics with stereotyped
temporal patterns being continuously created and destroyed and reemerging again” (Friston 2000b, p. 238). Recent science indicates that
complexity of this sort can be found at numerous scales and levels,
from the molecular and organismic to the ecological and evolutionary,
as well as the neural and behavioral.2 In every case the message seems
to be that complexity, instability, or metastability is necessary for selforganization and adaptive behavior.
We can now return to the dynamical approach in mind science. The
fundamental dynamical hypothesis of this approach is that natural
cognitive agents (people and other animals) are dynamic systems (or,
more precisely, that the cognitive systems agents instantiate are dynamic systems), and that accordingly action, perception, and cogni-
Autonomy and Emergence 41
tion should be explained in dynamic terms (van Gelder 1998). Proponents of the dynamical hypothesis contrast it with the cognitivist hypothesis, which states that cognitive agents (or the cognitive systems
they instantiate), whether natural or artificial, are digital computers or
physical symbol systems and that accordingly cognition should be explained in symbol-processing terms.
To illustrate these ideas, we can turn to research on neural and behavioral coordination dynamics by Haken, Kelso, and colleagues
(Bressler and Kelso 2001; Kelso 1995). One case they have studied is
rhythmic finger movement (Haken, Kelso, and Bunz 1985). The experimental task was to move the two index fingers at the same frequency from side to side. At low speeds, there are two comfortable coordination patterns (the system is bistable): either the fingers move
in-phase (equivalent muscle groups in each hand contract simultaneously) or anti-phase (equivalent muscle groups alternate in their contraction and expansion). As the speed gradually increases, the inphase pattern becomes unstable, and eventually at a certain critical
frequency the fingers spontaneously switch to an anti-phase pattern
(the system undergoes a bifurcation). As the speed decreases, the inphase pattern becomes stable again, but it does so below the original
switching point (this delayed return to a previous state is known as hysteresis).
Haken, Kelso, and colleagues devised a dynamic-systems model to
describe and predict these properties of motor behavior. The model
describes how the relative phase relation between the two fingers
evolves over time. Relative phase is an example of a “collective variable”—one whose value is set by the relation between the values of
other variables, in this case those describing the individual finger
movements. A collective variable describes a high-level or global characteristic of a system that emerges as a coherent and ordered pattern
from the interactions of the system’s components. This macrolevel pattern is also known as an order parameter because it reduces the degrees of freedom of the system’s components by organizing them into
a coherent and ordered pattern. When the fingers move in-phase, the
collective variable or order parameter of relative phase is zero; once
the critical transition or bifurcation to anti-phase happens, the relative
phase becomes nonzero up to some maximum value. Because the
phase transition occurs at a certain critical frequency of finger oscilla-
42 The Enactive Approach
tion, the frequency acts as a “control parameter” for the system. The
