sense, and determines the cognitive domain in which it operates
(Varela 1979; Varela and Bourgine 1991).
44 The Enactive Approach
In general, to specify any system one needs to describe its organization—the set of relations that defines it as the system it is. In complex
systems theory, the term autonomous refers to a generic type of organization. The relations that define the autonomous organization hold
between processes (such as metabolic reactions in a cell or neuronal
firings in a cell assembly) rather than static entities. In an autonomous
system, the constituent processes (i) recursively depend on each other
for their generation and their realization as a network, (ii) constitute
the system as a unity in whatever domain they exist, and (iii) determine a domain of possible interactions with the environment (Varela
1979, p. 55). The paradigm is a living cell. The constituent processes in
this case are chemical; their recursive interdependence takes the form
of a self-producing, metabolic network that also produces its own
membrane; and this network constitutes the system as a unity in the
biochemical domain and determines a domain of possible interactions
with the environment. This kind of autonomy in the biochemical domain is known as autopoiesis (Maturana and Varela 1980). Figure 3.1 illustrates the basic organization required for autopoietic autonomy.
Autopoiesis is the paradigm case of biological autonomy for two reasons. It is empirically the best understood case, and it provides the
core “biologic” of all life on Earth. To qualify as autonomous, however,
a system does not have to be autopoietic in the strict sense (a selfproducing bounded molecular system). An autopoietic system dynamically produces its own material boundary or membrane, but a system
can be autonomous without having this sort of material boundary. The
members of an insect colony, for example, form an autonomous social
network, but the boundary is social and territorial, not material.
In exploring the notion of autonomy, we can take two complementary approaches—a top-down approach and a bottom-up one (RuizMirazo and Moreno 2004). Both approaches see autonomy as a relational, system-level property, but there is a critical difference between
the two. Whereas the top-down approach focuses on the relational organization proper to autonomy, the bottom-up approach emphasizes
the energetic and thermodynamic requirements for autonomy.
Varela takes the top-down approach in his 1979 book, Principles of Biological Autonomy.3 In this work he defines an autonomous system as a
system that has organizational closure (later called operational closure)
(Varela 1979, pp. 55–60). Here closure does not mean that the system is
Autonomy and Emergence 45
Figure 3.1. The basic autopoietic organization.
materially and energetically closed to the outside world (which of course
is impossible). On the contrary, autonomous systems must be thermodynamically far-from-equilibrium systems, which incessantly exchange
matter and energy with their surroundings. Organizational closure refers
to the self-referential (circular and recursive) network of relations that
defines the system as a unity, and operational closure to the reentrant and
recurrent dynamics of such a system.4 An autonomous system is always
structurally coupled to its environment. Two or more systems are
coupled when the conduct of each is a function of the conduct of the
other. (In dynamic-systems language, the state variables of one system
are parameters of the other system, and vice versa.) “Structural coupling” refers to the history of recurrent interactions between two or
more systems that leads to a structural congruence between them (Maturana 1975; Maturana and Varela 1987, p. 75). Thus the state changes of
an autonomous system result from its operational closure and structural
coupling. The result of any state change is always further self-organized
activity within the system, unless its closure is disrupted and it is no
46 The Enactive Approach
longer able to carry on its coupling, in which case it disintegrates. Systems described as autonomous in this sense abound throughout the
living world—single cells, microbial communities, nervous systems, immune systems, multicellular organisms, ecosystems, and so on. Such systems need to be seen as sources of their own activity, specifying their
own domains of interaction, not as transducers or functions for converting input instructions into output products. In other words, the autonomous character of these systems needs to be recognized.
The second, bottom-up approach to autonomy builds on these notions of organizational and operational closure, but tries to work out
the energetic and thermodynamic requirements for the instantiation
