of “basic autonomy” in the physical world. From this perspective, basic
autonomy is “the capacity of a system to manage the flow of matter and
energy through it so that it can, at the same time, regulate, modify, and
control: (i) internal self-constructive processes and (ii) processes of exchange with the environment” (Ruiz-Mirazo and Moreno 2004, p.
240). This capacity brings with it specific and demanding physicalimplementation requirements: the system must have certain types of
components, specifically a semipermeable active boundary (a membrane), an energy transduction/conversion apparatus (an energy currency such as adenosine triphosphate (ATP) in living cells, which
transfers energy from chemical bonds to energy-absorbing reactions
within the cell), and at least one type of component that controls and
facilitates the self-construction processes (catalysts) (Ruiz-Mirazo and
Moreno 2004, p. 252).
Figure 3.1 depicts the basic autopoietic organization for a living cell.
A cell stands out of a molecular soup by creating the boundaries that
set it apart from what it is not and that actively regulate its interactions
with the environment. Metabolic processes within the cell construct
these boundaries, but the metabolic processes themselves are made
possible by those very boundaries. In this way, the cell emerges as a
figure out of a chemical background. Should this process of selfproduction be interrupted, the cellular components no longer form a
unity, gradually diffusing back into a molecular soup.
Figure 3.1 can be compared with Figure 3.2, which depicts the minimal form of organizational closure for a nervous system. Any nervous
system operates according to a basic “neurologic,” a pattern that continues and elaborates the biologic of autopoiesis. The fundamental
Autonomy and Emergence 47
Figure 3.2. Organizational closure of the nervous system.
logic of the nervous system is to couple movement and a stream of sensory activity in a continuous circular fashion (Maturana and Varela
1987, pp. 142–176). Wherever movement is essential to a multicellular
organism’s mode of life, there is the corresponding development of a
nervous system. A nervous system links sensory surfaces (sense organs
and nerve endings) and effectors (muscles, glands) within the body. In
this way it integrates the organism, holding it together as a mobile
unity, as an autonomous sensorimotor agent.
This neurologic underlies all the variations on sensorimotor coordination found in the animal kingdom. In all animals, neuronal networks establish and maintain a sensorimotor cycle through which what
the animal senses depends directly on how it moves, and how it moves
depends directly on what it senses. No animal is a mere passive respondent; every animal meets the environment on its own sensorimotor terms. Merleau-Ponty recognized this crucial point in his first
work, The Structure of Behavior:
The organism cannot properly be compared to a keyboard on which
the external stimuli would play and in which their proper form would
be delineated for the simple reason that the organism contributes to
the constitution of that form. When my hand follows each effort of a
48 The Enactive Approach
struggling animal while holding an instrument for capturing it, it is
clear that each of my movements responds to an external stimulation;
but it is also clear that these stimulations could not be received without
the movements by which I expose my receptors to their influence . . .
When the eye and the ear follow an animal in flight, it is impossible to
say “which started first” in the exchange of stimuli and responses. Since
all movements of the organism are always conditioned by external in-
fluences, one can, if one wishes, readily treat behavior as an effect of
the milieu. But in the same way, since all the stimulations which the organism receives have in turn been possible only by its preceding movements which have culminated in exposing the receptor organ to the external influences, one could also say that the behavior is the first cause
of the stimulations.
Thus the form of the excitant is created by the organism itself, by its
proper manner of offering itself to actions from outside. Doubtless, in
