order to be able to subsist, it must encounter a certain number of physical and chemical agents in its surroundings. But it is the organism itself—according to the proper nature of its receptors, the thresholds of
its nerve centers and the movements of the organs—which chooses the
stimuli in the physical world to which it will be sensitive. “The environment (Umwelt) emerges from the world through the actualization or the
being of the organism—[granted that] an organism can exist only if it
succeeds in finding in the world an adequate environment.” This would
be a key board which moves itself in such a way as to offer—and according to variable rhythms—such or such of its keys to the in itself monotonous action of an external hammer. (1963, p. 13)5
This passage clearly expresses an autonomy perspective. Organisms
display patterns of behavior that require us to see them as autonomous. Varela tries to characterize this autonomy at an abstract
level in terms of a generic dynamic pattern or form, namely, organizational and operational closure. Hence Varela gives us his “Closure
Thesis,” which states, “Every autonomous system is organizationally
closed” (Varela 1979, p. 58).6
Figure 3.1 illustrates the minimal form this closure takes for life at
the single-cell level, and Figure 3.2 illustrates the minimal form it takes
for the nervous system. Whereas autopoietic closure brings forth a
minimal “bodily self” at the level of cellular metabolism, sensorimotor
Autonomy and Emergence 49
closure produces a “sensorimotor self” at the level of perception and
action. In the one case the passage from network closure to selfhood
(and correlative otherness) happens at the level of an active semipermeable boundary or membrane, which regulates interaction with the
outside environment. In the other case it happens at the level of behavior and intentional action. In both cases we see the co-emergence
of inside and outside, of selfhood and a correlative world or environment of otherness, through the generic mechanism of network closure
(autonomy) and its physical embodiment (Varela 1997a; see also
Moreno and Barandiaran 2004).7
In addition to these cellular and sensorimotor forms of selfhood,
other forms of selfhood arise from other organizationally and operationally closed systems. The immune system, for instance—understood
as an autonomous immune network that establishes a coherent somatic identity for the organism, rather than as a mere mechanism of
defense—brings forth a dynamic, somatic identity at a distributed cellular and molecular level (Coutinho 2003; Varela and Coutinho 1991).
The animate form of our living body is thus the place of intersection
for numerous emergent patterns of selfhood and coupling. Whether
cellular, somatic, sensorimotor, or neurocognitive, these patterns derive not from any homuncular self or agent inside the system organizing it or directing it, but from distributed networks with operational closure. In Varela’s image, our organism is a meshwork of
“selfless selves,” and we are and live this meshwork (Varela 1991; Varela
and Cohen 1989).
Let me forestall an objection that might arise at this point. The
nervous system is clearly embedded in the body of the organism, and
the organism in its environment (Chiel and Beer 1997). This fact
seemingly contradicts the statement that the nervous system is an autonomous system and that the organism is an autonomous agent. The
thought here would be that the operation of the nervous system loops
through the body (via sensory and motor surfaces), and therefore it is
not possible that the nervous system has operational closure (that the
product of every process within the system stays within that system).
Similarly, because the bodily activity of the organism loops through the
environment (motor activity affects the sensory stimulation one receives back from the environment), the organism cannot have an operationally closed dynamics.
50 The Enactive Approach
A number of points, both methodological and epistemological, need
to be made in reply. The first point is that, strictly speaking, system, autonomy, and heteronomy are heuristic notions—they are cognitive aids
or guides in the scientific investigation and characterization of observable phenomena and patterns of behavior. As heuristic notions, they
(implicitly) refer back to and implicate the interpretive and explanatory stance of an observer (or observer community). What counts as the
system in any given case, and hence whether it is autonomous or heteronomous, is context-dependent and interest-relative. For any system
it is always possible to adopt a heteronomy or external-control perspective, and this can be useful for many purposes. Nevertheless, this stance
does not illuminate—and indeed can obscure—certain observable patterns of behavior, namely, patterns arising from the system’s internal dynamics rather than external parameters. An organism dynamically produces and maintains its own organization as an invariant through
