phase space toward which all nearby trajectories converge). In either
case there is a strong tendency to adopt an objectivist conception of
representation: representations are internal structures that encode
context-independent information about the world, and cognition is
the processing of such information.
This objectivist notion of information presupposes a heteronomy
perspective in which an observer or designer stands outside the system
and states what is to count as information (and hence what is to count
as error or success in representation). Information looks different
from an autonomy perspective. Here the system, on the basis of its operationally closed dynamics and mode of structural coupling with the
environment, helps determine what information is or can be.
A neurobiological example can help to illustrate these ideas.9 Certain
kinds of cortical neurons are often described as feature detectors because they respond preferentially (fire above their base rate) to various
types of stimuli, such as edges, lines, and moving spots. Such neurons
are identified by recording their individual activity with a microelectrode and determining the sensory stimulus to which the neuron is
most sensitive. Such neurons are said to “represent” features of objects
and to make that information available for futher processing by various
systems in the brain. This view lies behind the standard formulation of
the so-called binding problem. This problem concerns how distinct features (shape, color, motion), as represented by cell populations in spatially distributed and functionally segregated neural pathways, can be
bound together to form a complete and accurate representation of the
object (so that the right shapes go with the right colors and motions).
This way of thinking about the brain treats it as a heteronomous system:
object features outside the organism provide informational inputs to
the brain, and the brain’s information processing task is to arrive at an
Autonomy and Emergence 53
accurate representation of the objective world and produce an adaptive
motor output.
From an autonomy perspective, it is crucial to distinguish between information about stimuli as they are defined by an observer and information in the sense of what meanings the stimuli have for the animal.
Only the latter play a significant role in the brain’s operation. The notion of an object “feature” is defined by an observer who stands outside
the system, has independent access to the environment, and establishes
correlations between environmental features and neuronal responses.
The animal’s brain has no access to features in this sense (and a fortiori
has no access to any mapping from features to neuronal responses). As
Freeman explains, “In the view from neurodynamics, neurons that respond to edges, lines, and moving spots are manifesting the local topological properties of neuronal maps, which extract local time and space
derivatives in automatic preprocessing for spatial and temporal contrast enhancement. No objects or features are manifested at the level of
the single neuron, assuredly not those used by an observer” (Freeman
1995, p. 54). From an autonomy perspective, individual neurons do not
detect objectively defined features. Rather, assemblies of neurons make
sense of stimulation by constructing meaning, and this meaning arises
as a function of how the brain’s endogenous and nonlinear activity
compensates for sensory perturbations. From this perspective, the
feature-binding problem is not the brain’s problem, but the brain theorist’s problem; it is an artifact of a certain way of looking at the brain.
Freeman’s description of the alternative view, based on looking at the
brain as an autonomous system operating according to nonlinear
causality, is well worth quoting here:
In this view the experimenter trains a subject to co-operate through the
use of positive and negative reinforcement, thereby inducing a state of
expectancy and search for a stimulus, as it is conceived by the subject.
When the expected stimulus arrives, the activated receptors transmit
pulses to the sensory cortex, where they elicit the construction by nonlinear dynamics of a macroscopic, spatially coherent oscillatory pattern
