that covers an entire area of sensory cortex . . . It is observed by means
of the electroencephalogram (EEG) from electrode arrays on all the
sensory cortices . . . It is not seen in recordings from single neuron action potentials, because the fraction of the variance in the single neu-
54 The Enactive Approach
ronal pulse train that is covariant with the neural mass is far too small,
on the order of 0.1 percent.
The emergent pattern is not a representation of a stimulus . . . It is a
state transition that is induced by a stimulus, followed by a construction
of a pattern that is shaped by the synaptic modification among cortical
neurons from prior learning. It is also dependent on the brain stem nuclei that bathe the forebrain in neuromodulatory chemicals. It is a dynamic action pattern that creates and carries the meaning of the stimulus for the subject. It reflects the individual history, present context,
and expectancy, corresponding to the unity and wholeness of intentionality. Owing to dependence on history, the patterns created in each
cortex are unique to each subject. (Freeman 1999b, pp. 149–150)
The distinction between autonomous meaning-construction and
heteronomous information processing needs to be placed in the
broader context of the embodied dynamicist way of thinking about information. To explain this way of thinking, it will be helpful to go back
to ideas introduced by Howard Pattee (1977). Pattee made an important distinction between two modes of description of a complex
system—the linguistic mode, which describes the system in terms of discrete, rate-independent, symbolic elements, and the dynamical mode,
which describes the system in terms of continuous, rate-dependent
processes, and thus explicitly includes the flow of time. Pattee raised
the following question: “How do we know we are not intepreting certain structures as descriptions, only because we recognize them as consistent with rules of one of our own languages?” (1977, p. 262). In
other words, how do we know our linguistic descriptions are not simply
observer-relative, but rather correspond to symbolic structures that belong to the system itself and play a role in its operation? And he answered: “we must further restrict our model of a complex system to remove the case of the external observer reading a message that is not
really in the system itself. This restriction is achieved by requiring that
a complex system must read and write its own messages” (1977, p.
262).
Pattee’s example is a living cell. When we describe DNA triplets as
“coding for” amino acids, we employ the linguistic mode of description. Which amino acid a given DNA triplet specifies is supposed to be
rate-independent—it does not matter how fast the triplet is “read” in
Autonomy and Emergence 55
the course of protein synthesis. It is also supposed to be arbitrary, in
the sense that “[i]t is hard to see why a code in which GGC means
glycine and AAG means lycine is either better or worse than one in
which the meanings are reservsed” (Maynard Smith 1986, p. 19). According to Pattee, the linguistic mode of description in this case is not
observer-relative because the cell is a self-describing system that “reads
and writes its own messages.” The writing of its own messages corresponds to DNA replication (the production of a complement of the
original DNA molecule through a template); the reading of its own
messages corresponds to protein synthesis (DNA “transcription” to
RNA and RNA “translation” to protein).
Pattee then makes a number of crucial points. First, for the code to
be read there must ultimately be a transduction or conversion within
the cell from the linguistic mode to the dynamical mode. This conversion occurs when the rate-independent linear array of amino acids
folds to become a three-dimensional enzyme. Within the life cycle of
the cell, there is thus a transformation from the enzyme as something
designated in the genome to the enzyme as an operational component
of metabolism. Second, this transformation (the protein folding) is
not itself linguistically described in the cell, but rather happens according to physical law (under the higher-order constraint of the
DNA-specificed amino acid sequence). Third, if the transformation
were linguistically described, the speed and precision with which it is
accomplished would be considerably compromised. Pattee’s conclusion is that “we would not expect a complete formal description or simulation of a complex system to adapt or function as rapidly or reliably
as the partially self-describing, tacit dynamic system it simulates” (1977,
