p. 264).
Pattee emphasizes the complementarity of the linguistic and dynamical modes of description, but also suggests that symbolic information emerges from and acts as a constraint on dynamics. This idea
is important for embodied dynamicism and the enactive approach.
Let us return to the example of the cell. In general, nucleotide
triplets are capable of predictably specifying an amino acid if and only
if they are properly embedded in the cell’s metabolism, that is, in a
multitude of enyzmatic regulations in a complex biochemical network. This network has a chicken-and-egg character at several levels.
First, proteins can arise only from a DNA/RNA “reading” process, but
56 The Enactive Approach
this process cannot happen without proteins. Second, the DNA
“writing” and “reading” processes must be properly situated within
the intracellular environment, but this environment is a result of
those very processes. Finally, the entire cell is an autopoietic system—
that is, an autonomous system defined by an operationally closed network of molecular processes that simultaneously both produces and
realizes the cell concretely in the physical space of its biochemical
components.
Now, when we employ the linguistic mode of description and state
that DNA/RNA “codes” for proteins, we restrict our focus to one particular sequence of this overall circular causality. We abstract away
from the many intervening and necessary causal steps in the actual dynamic process of protein synthesis, and we bracket out the essential
participation of many other molecular elements (such as RNA polymerase enzymes, and positive and negative regulatory proteins). We
“thus reduce our description to a skeleton that associates a certain part
of a nucleic acid with a certain protein segment. Next we observe that
this kind of simplified description of an actual dynamic process is a
useful one in following the sequences of reproductive steps from one
generation to the other, to the extent that the dynamic process stays
stable (i.e., the kinds of dynamics responsible for bonding, folding,
and so on) . . . A symbolic explanation, such as the description of some
cellular components as genes, betrays the emergence of certain coherent patterns of behavior to which we choose to pay attention” (Varela 1979,
p. 75). It is the emergence of such coherent dynamic patterns that underwrites the symbolic informational level of description: “An object
or event is a symbol only if it is a token for an abbreviated nomic chain
that occurs within the bounds of the system’s organizational closure. In other
words, whenever the system’s closure determines certain regularities
in the face of internal or external interactions and perturbations, such
regularities can be abbreviated as a symbol, usually the initial or terminal element in the nomic chain” (Varela 1979, pp. 79–80). Thus,
when we talk about DNA “coding” for proteins we are not referring to
a special type of symbolic causal relation or a special type of intrinsically informational molecule that rises above the dynamic fray. Rather,
we are abbreviating a lengthy but remarkably stable dynamic pattern
of biochemical events. It is precisely the stability and predictability of
the entire pattern that allows us to telescope it in a linguistic mode of
Autonomy and Emergence 57
description by treating nucleotide triplets as in effect “standing for”
amino acids.
This mode of description is unobjectionable (and has heuristic
value) as long as it is remembered that the genetic code is no more
than a rule of causal specificity based on the fact that cells use nucleic
acids as templates for the primary structure (amino acid sequence) of
proteins (Godfrey-Smith 2000b; Thompson 1997). Yet it is unacceptable to say that DNA contains the information for phenotypic design,
because this statement attributes an intrinsic semantic-informational
status to one particular type of component and thereby divests this
component of its necessary embedding in the dynamics of the autopoietic network. It is this network in its entirety that specifies the
