phenotypic characteristics of a cell, not one of its components, and it is
this network as a whole that serves as the precondition and causal basis
of DNA replication (“writing”) and protein synthesis (“reading”) (see
Moss 1992). Information is not intrinsic to the static linear array of the
DNA sequence, but is rather dynamically constituted in and by the cell
as an autopoietically organized, three-dimensional entity—by the cell
as a body. In summary, the linguistic mode is emergent from the dynamical mode, and information exists only as dynamically embodied.
With these points having been made, we return to the difference between autonomous meaning-construction and heteronomous information processing. Information is formed within a context rather than
imposed from without. Gregory Bateson used to say, “information is a
difference that makes a difference” (Bateson 1972, p. 315). We could
elaborate this insight by saying that information, dynamically conceived, is the making of a difference that makes a difference for somebody somewhere (see Oyama 2000b). Information here is understood
in the sense of informare, to form within (Varela 1979, p. 266). An autonomous system becomes informed by virtue of the meaning formation in which it participates, and this meaning formation depends on
the way its endogenous dynamics specifies things that make a difference to it (Kelso and Kay 1987; Turvey and Shaw 1999).
For another example we can return to the finger coordination study
of Haken, Kelso, and Bunz (1985). There the switching from in-phase
to anti-phase happens without any command from a motor program;
rather, it occurs spontaneously as an emergent property of the system’s
self-organizing dynamics. The collective variable or order parameter
58 The Enactive Approach
of relative phase is informational in the sense that it specifies coherent
patterns or relations that inform the system and that can be physically
or physiologically realized in multiple ways. As Kelso explains:
Instead of treating dynamics as ordinary physics using standard biophysical quantities such as mass, length, momentum, and energy, our coordination or pattern dynamics is informational from the very start. The order
parameter, f [relative phase], captures the coherent relations among
different kinds of things. Unlike ordinary physics, the pattern dynamics
is context dependent: the dynamics are valid for a given biological function or task, but largely independent of how this function is physiologically implemented. Thus, if we accept that the same order parameter, f,
captures coherent spatiotemporal relations among different kinds of
things, and the same equations of motion describe how different coordination patterns form, coexist, and change, it seems justified to conclude that order parameters in biological systems are functionally specific, context-sensitive informational variables; and that the coordination
dynamics are more general than the particular structures that instantiate them.
Notice, coordination dynamics is not trapped (like ordinary physics)
by its (purely formal) syntax. Order parameters are semantic, relational
quantities that are intrinsically meaningful to system functioning. What
could be more meaningful to an organism than information that speci-
fies the coordinative relations among its parts or between itself and the
environment? This view turns the mind-matter, information-dynamics
interaction on its head. Instead of treating dynamics as ordinary physics
and information as a symbolic code acting in the way that a program relates to a computer, dynamics is cast in terms that are semantically
meaningful. (Kelso 1995, p. 145)
Let me connect these points to the autonomy perspective. As we
have seen, from the autonomy perspective a natural cognitive agent—
an organism, animal, or person—does not process information in a
context-independent sense. Rather, it brings forth or enacts meaning
in structural coupling with its environment. The meanings of an autonomous system’s states are formed within (informare) the context of
the system’s dynamics and structural coupling. Therefore, if we wish to
continue using the term representation, then we need to be aware of
Autonomy and Emergence 59
what sense this term can have for the enactive approach. Representational “vehicles” (the structures or processes that embody meaning)
are temporally extended patterns of activity that can crisscross the
brain-body-world boundaries, and the meanings or contents they embody are brought forth or enacted in the context of the system’s structural coupling with its environment.
Another way to make this point would be to say that autonomous systems do not operate on the basis of internal representations in the subjectivist/objectivist sense. Instead of internally representing an external world in some Cartesian sense, they enact an environment
