inseparable from their own structure and actions (Varela, Thompson,
and Rosch 1991, p. 140). In phenomenological language, they constitute (disclose) a world that bears the stamp of their own structure. As
Merleau-Ponty puts it, quoting Goldstein, in the passage cited earlier:
“the environment emerges from the world through the being or actualization of the organism.” In the case of animal life, the environment
emerges as a sensorimotor world through the actualization of the organism as a sensorimotor being. The organism is a sensorimotor being
thanks to its nervous system. The nervous system connects anatomically distant sensory and motor processes, subsuming them in operationally closed sensorimotor networks. Through their coherent, largescale patterns of activity these networks establish a sensorimotor
identity for the animal—a sensorimotor self. In the same stroke, they
specify what counts as “other,” namely, the animal’s sensorimotor
world.
This idea of a sensorimotor world—a body-oriented world of perception and action—is none other than von Uexküll’s original notion
of an Umwelt. An Umwelt is an animal’s environment in the sense of its
lived, phenomenal world, the world as it presents itself to that animal
thanks to its sensorimotor repertoire: “all that a subject perceives becomes his perceptual world and all that he does, his effector-world.
Perceptual and effector worlds together form a closed unit, the
Umwelt” (von Uexküll 1957, p. 6). The logic of this co-emergence is
depicted in Figure 3.3.
In this figure, information is the intentional relation of the system to
its milieu, established on the basis of the system’s autonomy (organizational-operational closure). One of the main scientific tasks for embodied dynamicism and the enactive approach is to explain how the
60 The Enactive Approach
Figure 3.3. Co-emergence of autonomous selfhood and world.
pattern dynamics of brain, body, and behavior are informational in
this sense (see Kelso 1995, p. 288).
Emergent Processes
Another key idea of the enactive approach that needs elaboration here
is the idea of emergence or emergent processes. In complex systems theory,
an emergent process is one that results from collective selforganization. An emergent process belongs to an ensemble or network
of elements, arises spontaneously or self-organizes from the locally de-
fined and globally constrained or controlled interactions of those elements, and does not belong to any single element. The enactive approach builds on this notion of emergence but reformulates it as
“dynamic co-emergence,” in which part and whole co-emerge and mutually specify each other.
Let me first introduce emergence in the complex systems sense. A
standard example of this kind of emergence is the formation of “Bé-
Autonomy and Emergence 61
nard cells,” a dynamic geometrical pattern of fluid flow, in liquids or
gases subject to an imposed temperature gradient (see Kelso 1995, pp.
7–8; Solé and Goodwin 2000, pp. 13–17). The emergence of Bénard
cells can be seen in the behavior of cooking oil in a frying pan. Applying heat to the pan increases the temperature difference between
the cooler layer of oil at the top and the hotter layer of oil at the
bottom. When the temperature difference between top and bottom is
small, there is no large-scale or global motion of the oil, but eventually
when the difference becomes large enough instability occurs and the
liquid starts to roll in an orderly fashion known as convection rolls. In
other words, the system undergoes a state transition, described mathematically as a bifurcation, as the new self-organizing behavior and spatial structures of convection rolls emerge. As the temperature gradient
is increased still further, the convection rolls undergo another transition or bifurcation and give rise to an array of hexagonal up-and-down
flow patterns called Bénard cells.
This example illustrates several basic points about collective selforganization and dynamic emergence. The temperature gradient is
the control parameter for the transitions or bifurcations. It leads the
system through a variety of possible states but does not dictate, prescribe, or code for the emerging flow patterns. Nor is there any homunculus or program inside the system determining those patterns.
In Kelso’s words: “Such spontaneous pattern formation is exactly what
we mean by self-organization: the system organizes itself, but there is
no ‘self,’ no agent inside the system doing the organizing” (Kelso
