1995, p. 8). The order parameter of the system is the amplitude of the
convection rolls. It is created by the interactions of the fluid molecules, but at the same time it governs or constrains their behavior by
drastically reducing the immense number of degrees of freedom of
motion that the individual molecules would otherwise have.
Emergence through collective self-organization thus has two aspects. One is local-to-global determination, as a result of which novel
macrolevel structures and processes emerge. The other is global-tolocal determination whereby global structures and processes constrain
local interactions. These global-to-local influences do not take the
same form as the local-to-global ones: they typically manifest themselves through changes in control parameters (the temperature gradient in the example above) and boundary conditions rather than
62 The Enactive Approach
through changes to the individual elements (the fluid molecules). Coherent and ordered global behaviors, which are described by collective
variables or order parameters, constrain or govern the behavior of the
individual components, entraining them so that they no longer have
the same behavioral alternatives open to them as they would if they
were not interdependently woven into the coherent and ordered
global pattern. At the same time, the behavior of the components generates and sustains the global order. This two-sided or double determination is known as circular causality (Haken 1983).
Emergence and circular causality are crucially important in the context of neurodynamics. Neuroscience indicates that cognition, emotion, and action require the transient integration of numerous, widely
distributed, and constantly interacting brain regions and areas. An
outstanding question for neuroscience today is to determine the
mechanisms of this large-scale integration. From a dynamic-systems
perspective, large-scale integration corresponds to the formation of
transient dynamic links between widespread neural populations
(Varela et al. 2001). On the one hand, large-scale dynamic patterns
emerge from distributed local neuronal activities. On the other hand,
large-scale patterns constrain these local activities. According to a
number of theorists, dynamic instability or metastability is crucial to
large-scale integration because it permits a flexible repertoire of global
states without the system becoming trapped in any one particular
state.10
Emergence and circular causality can also be illustrated by neurodynamical studies of epilepsy (Thompson and Varela 2001). Focal
epileptic seizures originate in specific parts of the cortex; they can remain confined to those areas or spread to other parts of the brain.
Their clinical manifestations depend on the cortical area in which they
originate, how widely they spread, and how long they last. Local
epileptic activity can modify the subject’s mental competencies and
give rise to various kinds of mental experiences, such as visual or auditory illusions and hallucinations, and memory phenomena involving
the vivid actual recall of a past event or déjà-vu illusions. These mental
phenomena can also be induced by direct electrical stimulation of the
temporal lobe in epileptic patients, as classically described by Wilder
Penfield (1938). Thus local neuronal activity at the level of an epileptogenic zone can produce large-scale effects, eventually influencing
Autonomy and Emergence 63
the global level of a moment of consciousness. This is a case of local-toglobal emergence in the brain.
The converse—global-to-local influence—though less documented
and more controversial, seems also to be the case. The basic idea is
that cognitive activity, which reflects large-scale integration in the
brain, can affect local activity. For example, the subject can voluntarily
affect local epileptic activity, as indicated by numerous patient reports
and a few clinically reported cases (see Le Van Quyen and Petitmengin
2002). As long ago as 1954, Penfield and Jasper described the blocking
of a parietal seizure by the initiation of a complex mathematical calculation (Penfield and Jasper 1954), and recently more extensive observations have confirmed such cognitive influences (Schmid-Schonbein
1998). We can assume that such intervention is possible because the
epileptogenic zones are embedded in a complex network of other
