brain regions that actively participate in the large-scale integration underlying cognitive acts. It also seems reasonable to assume that these
global patterns of integration can influence local events, including
eventually the local epileptogenic zones, whose activity can thus be
taken as an indication of the global influence.
Experimental work by Michel Le Van Quyen, Francisco Varela, and
their colleagues provides evidence for such global-to-local influence in
the case of a patient with an unusually focal and stable occipitotemporal epileptic discharge.11 This patient showed no evidence of cognitive impairment and was willing to participate in simple cognitive tasks
of visual and auditory discrimination. For the visual task, he was asked
to press a button when the target stimulus appeared, but not when the
two other nontarget stimuli were shown. The temporal intervals between successive discharges of the epileptic spike pattern were analyzed. Dynamical inspection (in the form of a phase space known as a
first-return map) showed that the distribution of the intervals followed
a particular kind of unstable dynamic pattern. The spikes displayed a
distinct periodic activity for a short time before they diverged away
along another unstable direction, a kind of dynamic pattern known as
an unstable periodic orbit. Furthermore, this activity covaried with the
specific mental state of the patient during the perceptual task and appeared to be modulated by the gamma frequency (30–70 Hertz) activity associated with his cognitive states. (Gamma frequency activity is
widely reported to be associated with a variety of cognitive processes,
64 The Enactive Approach
including attention, perception, and memory.) These findings suggest
that the patient’s act of perception contributed in a highly specific way
to “pulling” the epileptic activities toward particular unstable periodic
orbits. Such global-to-local influence mobilized by cognitive activity
might open up possibilities for cognitive strategies of control of
epileptic seizures (Le Van Quyen and Petitmengin 2002).
Let me conclude this chapter by linking these ideas about circular
causality and emergence back to autonomy. An autonomy perspective
brings with it a certain way of thinking about emergence. What
emerges in the case of an autonomous system such as a cell is a selfproducing entity that also brings forth its own domain of interactions
(see Figure 3.3). This sort of emergence takes a major step beyond dynamic pattern formation in physical dissipative systems:
[A]lthough the phenomenon of self-organization always involves the
generation and maintenance of a global (or high-level) pattern or correlation that constrains the (low-level) dynamics of the components of
the system, in standard dissipative structures this occurs only provided
that the system is put under the appropriate boundary conditions. If
those (externally controlled) conditions are changed (in particular, if
the input of matter or energy is outside a certain range), the selforganizing dynamic vanishes. Therefore, there is an important difference between the typical examples of “spontaneous” dissipative structures and real autonomous systems: in the former case, the flow of
energy and/or matter that keeps the system away from equilibrium is
not controlled by the organization of the system (the key boundary conditions are externally established, either by the scientist in the lab or by
some natural phenomenon that is not causally dependent on the selforganizing one), whereas in the latter case, the constraints that actually
guide energy/matter flows from the environment through the constitutive processes of the system are endogenously created and maintained.
(Ruiz-Mirazo and Moreno 2004, p. 238)
An autonomous system, such as a cell or multicellular organism, is
not merely self-maintaining, like a candle flame; it is also selfproducing and thus produces its own self-maintaining processes, including an active topological boundary that demarcates inside from
outside and actively regulates interaction with the environment. In the
single-cell, autopoietic form of autonomy, a membrane-bounded,
Autonomy and Emergence 65
metabolic network produces the metabolites that constitute both the
network itself and the membrane that permits the network’s bounded
dynamics. Other autonomous systems have different sorts of selfconstructing processes and network topologies. Whether the system is
a cell, immune network, nervous system, insect colony, or animal society, what emerges is a unity with its own self-producing identity and
domain of interactions or milieu, be it cellular (autopoiesis), somatic
