Willkommen bei Audible. Gute Unterhaltung.
Harari brings us a detailed life of the humans before us, the Homo sapiens, and provides
us with a look at how the world came to be as it is now. He gives us his view, backed
up by facts found through research, on how our ancestors managed to survive while others
did not and makes us think of how things would be if things had gone differently. With thrilling
stories and photos, he gives us a world that many of us never think about, but should.
The Big Bang occurred around 13.5 billion years ago, which created matter, energy, time,
and space. We call this physics. 300,000 years later, matter began to coalesce into atoms,
then molecules. This is called chemistry. Biology followed billions of years later when certain
molecules combine to form organisms. It was about 70,000 years ago when Homo sapiens began
forming cultures. This has become our history. Modern humans appeared about 2.5 million years
ago, but did not stand out from other animals at the time. Species that evolved from a common
ancestor are bunched as genios, plural genera. Genera are then grouped into families such as
cats, which includes lions and cheetahs, or dogs, which includes foxes and wolves.
Homo sapiens are in a family with apes and gorillas. The first evolution was from a genus known as
Australopithecus, southern ape. The term Homo stands for man and sapiens for wise.
Modern human began to spread across the world and, due to environmental conditions, evolved
in different directions. There were six different kinds of species of Homo. Homo sapiens, who
we evolved from. Homo neandertholinus, originated from Europe and Western Asia. They were bulkier
and more muscular and adapted well to cold climates. Homo erectus, were common in the eastern region
of Asia. Homo salensis, found in Indonesia on the island of Java. Homo floresiensis, also
found in Indonesia on the island of Flores. Homo denisova, discovered in 2010 in Siberia.
There were many differences between the species, but all humans share several characteristics.
Most notably, larger brains compared to other animals. Of course, this did not mean that we
were better off than other animals. A jumbo brain is a jumbo strain on the body. The mind
consumes 25% of the body's energy, even at rest. Unlike other animals, human babies are
very helpless and dependent. Lone mothers could hardly forage enough food and often needed help
from other family members and neighbors. This has provided humans with articulate social
abilities. Another attribute that sets us apart from other animals is the ability to use fire. Fire
was used as early as 800,000 years ago, but contributed more to humans living 300,000 years ago. It was used
to keep warm, keep away predators and cook food, making it easier to eat. Another trait that separates
humans from other animals is the elimination of their own. With there being six or more types of humans
roaming the earth at the same time, it's a wonder that sapiens are the only ones left. There is a
couple of theories as to why that is. There is the interbreeding theory, where sapiens bred with other
species, such as the Neanderthals, and the two populations emerged. There is also the theory that as the
sapiens moved into Neanderthals territory as more proficient hunters and gatherers, the Neanderthals found it
difficult to feed themselves and died off, or they were killed. Takeaways from this chapter. The Big Bang
occurred around 13.5 billion years ago, creating matter, energy, time, and space. 300,000 years later,
matter coalesced into atoms and then molecules. Billions of years later, certain molecules combined to form
organisms. Modern humans appeared about 2.5 million years ago. Homo sapiens began forming cultures about
70,000 years ago. The term Homo stands for man, and sapiens for wise. There were six different kinds of
species of Homo. Sapiens, Neanderthalinesis, Erectus, Solionesis, Floriosinus, and Denisova. Fire was used as
early as 800,000 years ago, but contributed more to humans living 300,000 years ago. Fire was used to
keep warm, keep away predators, and cook food. Out of the six different species of Homo, Homo sapiens are
the only ones left. Chapter 2. The Tree of Knowledge
Around 70,000 years ago, Homo sapiens began doing something special. They began traveling farther,
even managing to travel across the water and into Australia. Genetic mutation changed the wiring in
the sapiens' brains, enabling them to think more and communicate in a new type of language.
This new language was not just used to communicate about an enemy or a good hunting spot. It was used
to share information on everything and everyone. Kind of like gossiping. However, it was key to their
survival and reproduction. Along with sharing knowledge, they also spoke of things they didn't
know. These are considered fictions. During the Cognitive Revolution, legends, myths, gods, and
religions began to appear. As bands began to grow larger, more than the average 150 members, things
began to get chaotic. It was these fictions that allowed millions of people to cooperate and work
together, especially when everyone believed it. The fictions allowed one to have common ground with
another, establishing trust which in turn helped the sapiens in trade. Significant changes in social
behavior cannot occur without genetic mutation. However, ever since the Cognitive Revolution,
Homo sapiens have been able to quickly change behavior without genetic or environmental change.
This was the key to their success. Neanderthals lacked the ability to compose fiction, cooperate
effectively in large numbers, or adapt their social behavior to rapidly changing challenges like the
sapiens were. This may have been the key to their extinction. Takeaways from this chapter.
Around 70,000 years ago, Homo sapiens began traveling farther, even managing to travel across the
water and into Australia. Genetic mutation changed the wiring in the sapiens' brains, enabling them to
think more and communicate in a new type of language. During the Cognitive Revolution, legends, myths,
gods, and religions began to appear. The fictions allowed one to have common ground with another,
establishing trust which in turn helped the sapiens in trade and cooperate in large groups.
Homo sapiens have been able to quickly change behavior without genetic or environmental change.
Neanderthals lacked the ability to compose fiction, cooperate effectively in large numbers,
or adapt their social behavior to rapidly changing challenges.
Sapiens lived as foragers, then as farmers and herders, then as hunters. Even now, as their
descendants, our minds have adapted to a life of hunting and gathering. Our minds are wired to
gorge when it finds food, especially sweets and high-calorie foods. This is because of something
named the gorging gene. Unfortunately, in our time, this tends to bring about obesity,
causing other health problems. Evidence from fossilized skeletons indicate that the ancient
foragers were generally healthier than people now when it comes to nutrition. They had wholesome food
and a varied diet, which helped them avoid being dependent on any one food if there were to be a
shortage. However, life expectancy was only to about 30 or 40, although about 5 to 8 percent to live to be
over 60. However, it's not always health that forced someone to die so young.
The Ach people report stories such as when a man became ill and they left him for dead or how young
men killed old women when they became a burden. The stories were brutal. The killing of sick people,
the death of a baby girl because the family already had one. Vast majorities of people lived in bands
ranging from several dozen to several hundred members. Most members of agricultural and industrial
societies were domesticated animals. The dog was the first domesticated animal. They were used for
hunting and as alarms. Eventually, a bond grew between the two species that still holds even today.
Members of a band knew each other very intimately. Close neighbor bands would compete for resources,
but hunted together and exchanged members. Because of fiction, people with the same genetic makeup and
living in similar ecological conditions created different imagined realities with different norms
and values. Most scholars believe that animistic spirit beliefs were common among ancient foragers,
that everything on the planet, plant, animal, place, has awareness and feelings and that they can
communicate with humans. They even believed in immaterial entities like fairies, demons and angels.
Takeaways from this chapter. Sapiens lived as foragers, then as farmers and herders, then as hunters.
Even now our minds have adapted to a life of hunting and gathering. Evidence indicates that the ancient
foragers were generally healthier than people now. A sapien's life expectancy was only to about 30 or 40,
although about 5 to 8 percent to live to be over 60. Vast majorities of people lived in bands
ranging from several dozen to several hundred members. The dog was the first domesticated animal.
Members of a band knew each other very intimately. Because of fiction, people with the same genetic
makeup and living in similar ecological conditions created different imagined realities with different
norms and values.
Chapter 4 The Flood
Prior to the Cognitive Revolution, all human species lived on Afro-Asian landmass, some eventually
settling on a few islands, but never venturing far like America or Australia. Following the Cognitive
Revolution, sapiens became the first to travel by sea and settled in Australia, where they witnessed
animal they had never seen before. Within a few thousand years, 23 out of Australia's 24 megafauna
became extinct. What could have been the cause of this? Some try to blame it on climate change. However,
there is reason to believe it was our ancestors. These animals went through constant weather changes,
including the Ice Age, and still survive. Climate change also affects ocean life, but there was no mass
extinction of marine life. Every time a new part of the world was colonized, there was a mass extinction
in that location. Even with sapiens hunting these animals, how could they have gone extinct so quickly?
Larger animal breeds slowly, have long pregnancies, and only a few children. Also, with millions of years
without the presence of humans, the animals did not know what to expect. Therefore, they did not fear or
run from humans. Also, with the tool of fire, humans often used it to burn through shrubbery and lure prey
in. The animals were either slaughtered or starved. Lastly, a combination of the arrival of humans and
climate change did not allow the animals to adapt. The first significant mark of Homo sapiens was the
extinction of Australian megafauna. The second was arriving on the Western Hemisphere by foot about 16,000
years ago. Sea level was low enough that there was a bridge between northeastern Siberia and northwestern
Alaska. No other animal had moved into a huge variety of habitats and so quickly. American fauna was
far richer 14,000 years ago than today. Within 2,000 years of arriving, most of the unique species—mammoths,
mastodons, and 16-ton sloths—were gone. Even smaller species had disappeared by the thousands.
If only we were aware of the loss caused by our ancestors, we would be more motivated to protect
the creatures we have today. Takeaways from this chapter. Following the cognitive revolution,
sapiens became the first to travel by sea and settled in Australia. Every time a new part of
the world was colonized, there was a mass extinction in that location. Australia's megafauna had never seen
humans before and did not see them as a threat. A combination of the arrival of humans and climate
change did not allow the animals to adapt. About 16,000 years ago, sapiens arrived on the
Western Hemisphere by foot. No other animal had moved into a huge variety of habitats and so quickly.
American fauna was far richer 14,000 years ago than today.
Part 2. The Agricultural Revolution
Chapter 5. History's Biggest Fraud
Around 9,500–8,000 BC, sapiens began the agricultural revolution by manipulating the lives of animals and
plants. They sowed seeds, watered plants, and led sheep to prime pastures. Scholars once deemed the
agricultural revolution as a great leap for humanity that it fueled brain power and made humans smarter.
This was false, though. The agricultural revolution actually made the lives of farmers more difficult
and less satisfying than the lives of foragers. It did produce more food, but that did not mean a
healthier diet. Also, it was more work because wheat took a lot to care for and it was everywhere.
Besides an improper diet, the labor caused ailments like aching joints and arthritis. There were so
many problems and challenges that it was not worth it for an individual, although as a species,
cultivating wheat provided enough food per territory and enabled homo sapiens to greatly multiply.
The essence of this was to keep more people alive and avoid extinction. No one was really aware of what
was happening, though. No one paid much attention to the full consequences of their decisions. By
focusing on a particular food source, they were not prepared if something happened to it. When they
had more children, they often did not have enough to feed them, and when they did flourish, it often
brought thieves. But the true victims of the agricultural revolution were not the sapiens, but the livestock.
The animals were used as food, clothes, and labor. Domestication of animals was found a brutal
practice. Chickens and cattle may be a revolutionary success, but they were the most miserable creatures.
One of history's few iron laws is that luxuries tend to become necessities. Once people get used to a
luxury, they begin counting on it to a point where they can't live without it. Because once you experience
something like a luxury, you can't go back to your old life. Takeaways from this chapter. The agricultural
revolution began around 9500 to 8000 BC when sapiens began manipulating the lives of animals and plants.
The agricultural revolution made the lives of farmers more difficult and less satisfying.
There were a lot of problems and challenges. It was not worth it for an individual, although as a
species, cultivating wheat provided enough food per territory and enabled homo sapiens to greatly multiply.
No one paid much attention to the full consequences of their decisions. The true victims of the agricultural
revolution were the livestock. Domestication of animals was founded on brutal practice. Luxuries tend to
become necessities.
Chapter 6. Building pyramids. Farmers lived in artificial human islands. They cut down forests,
built houses, cleared fields, planted fruit trees, and built fences and walls to keep their animals
in and intruders out. The agricultural revolution made the future more important than before. Farmers focused
on the years ahead, unlike foragers who lived from hand to mouth and didn't think much of the future.
They had to think of future disasters that could ruin crops and decrease food gathering,
so that they could plan now. Even if they had enough food for a month, they were thinking about the year.
The food surpluses and new transportation technology brought more and more people together to form larger
villages, then towns and then cities. This was a problem. What caused the Civil War was not a lack of food,
but the inability to get along in such a big group. Humans evolved in small bands of a few dozen.
The time of the agricultural revolution to the appearance of cities, kingdoms and empires was not
enough to allow the evolution of instinct for mass cooperation. Myths, imagined order, helped bring these
groups together, although cooperation wouldn't be quite the word. Most human cooperation networks had
been geared towards oppression and exploitation. Taxes kept hard-working peasants from a distant life.
Roman amphitheaters were built by slaves so that the Roman wealthy could watch other slaves battle one
another. If humans act accordingly to the principle taught, they can all cooperate effectively,
living safely and peacefully. Imagined order, if we believe in essence,
enables us to create a stable and prosperous society. We believe in a particular order not
because it is objectively true, but because believing it enables us to cooperate effectively
and forge a better society. We don't want to hear that human rights are a myth. There could be danger
to our society if people found out. Such fears can be justified. An imagined order is always in danger of
collapsing because it depends on others believing it and it can vanish once people stop believing in it.
In order to get people to believe in imagined order, you never admit it is imagined and educate them
constantly from birth of its principles. There are three main factors that keep people from realizing the
imagined order. The imagined order is embedded in the material world. A child with his own room and privacy when
the door is shut thinks of himself as independent. The imagined order shapes our desire. Commercials are
little legends about buying products or service to make life better. It is intersubjective, not just in
one mind, but in many minds. There is no way out of the imagined order. Takeaways from this chapter.
The agricultural revolution made the future more important than before. The food surpluses and new
transportation technology brought more and more people together to form larger villages, then towns,
and then cities. This was a problem. What caused the Civil War was not lack of food, but the inability to
get along in such a big group. Myths, imagined order, helped bring these groups together to cooperate.
Most human cooperation networks had been geared towards oppression and exploitation. If humans act
according to the principle taught, they can all cooperate effectively, living safely and peacefully.
Imagined order, if we believe in essence, enables us to create a stable and prosperous society.
It could be dangerous to our society if people find out human rights is just a myth.
An imagined order is always in danger of collapsing because it depends on others believing it,
and it can vanish once people stop believing in it. The imagined order is embedded in the material world.
The imagined order shapes our desire. It is intersubjective. There is no way out of the imagined order.
Beehives have certain behaviors wired in their genes. Beehives can be very complex social structures.
However, they will never violate the hive constitution. The queen bee does not cheat the worker bees of food,
and they never go on strike. Because sapiens social order is imagined and not buried in their genes,
they do such things as cheat and strike. That is why rules are made and passed down.
Rules, as well as other information, transactions, supplies, celebrations, are kept in records because
our genes, very much our minds, cannot hold them. Between 3500 and 3000 BC, Sumerian geniuses invented
writing, a method for storing information through material signs, which they did on clay tablets.
Our minds capacity is limited, and due to evolutionary pressures, has been adapted to store and process
only particular types of information like botanical, zoological, topographical, social, and now numbers.
Another reason for writing was to make it possible for memories and ideas to be passed down,
whereas kept in the mind and repeated throughout the generations enabled them to get lost in translation
or just forgotten. Writing was limited to facts and figures. It was time consuming and the reading public
was tiny. The only reason to use writing was for essential record keeping. The earliest Sumerian writing
was a partial script rather than a full script. Another form of writing was invented by the Andeans, but it was
not writing at all. Instead, it was a system of tying knots on colorful cords called kippas. This method was
also used for mathematical data. Unfortunately, the art of reading kippas is lost. Between 3000 and 2500 BC,
more signs were added to the Sumerian system, turning it into full script. Around the same time,
Egyptians created hieroglyphics, which was another full script. China, around 1200 BC and Central America,
1000 to 500 BC, also created their own full scripts. Arabic numerals, originally invented by the Hindus,
were signs representing the numbers zero through nine. Later on, other signs were added to represent
addition, subtraction, and multiplication, and the basis of modern mathematical notation was created.
These scripts were no longer just for date keeping. With them, people began to write poetry, history
books, prophecies, and cookbooks. With all the different types of writing going on, there needed
to be a way to keep track of all of them. Faryonic Egypt, China, and the Inca Empire created techniques
to catalog all the tablets and trained scribes, clerks, librarians, and accountants with this info.
Takeaways from this chapter. Rules, as well as other information, are kept in records because our
genes, very much our minds, cannot hold them. Between 3500 and 3000 BC, Sumerian geniuses invented
writing, which they did on clay tablets. Writing was limited to facts and figures. The only reason to
use writing was for essential record keeping. Another form of writing was invented by the Andeans using a
system of tying knots on colorful cords called kippus. Between 3000 and 2500 BC, Egyptians created
hieroglyphics. China, around 1200 BC, and Central America, 1000 to 500 BC, also created their own full
scripts. Arabic numerals, originally invented by the Hindus, were signs that created the modern mathematical
notation. Faryonic Egypt, China, and the Inca Empire created techniques to catalog all the tablets and
trained scribes, clerks, librarians, and accountants with this info.
Chapter 8. There is no justice in history. The imagined orders were neither neutral nor fair.
People were divided into make-believe groups, upper, middle, and lower levels, class, and arranged in
a hierarchy. The rich have more money because they are more capable and diligent, while the poor simply
are not. Even gender and race were discriminated against in the imagined order. White supremacists
claimed their genes made them more intelligent and hardworking than African Americans. Of course,
these hierarchies are from the human imagination. Unfortunately, complex human societies seem to
require imagined hierarchies and unjust discrimination. Hierarchies serve to enable complete strangers to
know how to treat each other without wasting the time and energy to become acquainted. This process can
help a salesperson determine what product to sell a buyer. However, if there were two people with a similar
talent but of different race or level, the more privileged would prosper from it. The people
deemed lesser were women, Jews, gays, and blacks, and were considered pollution. From the 16th to 18th
century, the European conquerors imported millions of slaves from Africa to America to work mines and
plantations. They chose these people simply because Africa was closer and already had slave trade.
Also, American plantations were plagued by illness that Africans grew to be partially immune to.
There was no racism behind this action. However, because of their stance among the people already,
even after slavery was abolished, they were still considered pollution. They were believed to be
unintelligent and coming from poor families, they were less privileged. Culture forbids anything that seems
unnatural and although biology enables men to have sexual relations with one another, culture sees it
as unnatural and forbids it. At least since the agricultural revolution, men everywhere have gotten
the better deal. In China, boys are preferred and often girls are killed. In many societies,
women were simply property of men. Even though there have been female rulers, all those who held high
positions in military or in careers such as writers, doctors and professors were men. Over the last
century, gender roles have undergone a tremendous revolution. More and more societies give women just
as much opportunity as men. Takeaways from this chapter. People were divided into make-believe groups,
upper, middle and lower levels, class, and arranged in a hierarchy. Even gender and race were discriminated
against against in the imagined order. Hierarchy served to enable complete strangers to know how
to treat each other without wasting the time and energy to become acquainted. The people deemed lesser were
women, Jews, gays and blacks and were considered pollution. African Americans were believed to be
unintelligent and coming from poor families. They were less privileged. Biology enables while culture forbids.
At least since the agricultural revolution, men everywhere have gotten the better deal. Over the last
century, more and more societies give women just as much opportunity as men.
Part 3. The Unification of Humankind
Chapter 9. The Arrow of History
After the agricultural revolution, human societies grew larger and more complex,
and the imagined constructs became more elaborate. Today, most scholars of culture have observed that
every culture has its typical beliefs, norms, and values, but that they may transform in response to
changes in its environment or through interaction with neighboring cultures. Small and simple cultures gradually
coalesce into bigger and more complex civilizations, making it clear that history is moving towards unity.
By 1450 A.D., the number of cultures had decreased dramatically. Close to 90 percent lived in a single mega-world known as Afro-Asia. Over the next 400 years, the other worlds also became a part of Afro-Asia.
The most important stage in the process of global unification occurred in the last few centuries when empires grew and trade intensified. Links were formed between the Afro-Asia, America, Australia, and Oceania.
Homo sapiens evolved. Homo sapiens evolved thinking people as us and them. Us was the group immediately around you, and them was everyone else.
It was the appearance of three potential universal orders that would have people seeing the entire race as us. The monetary order, the imperial order, order of universal religions.
Homo sapiens
Takeaways from this chapter
After the agricultural revolution, human societies grew larger and more complex, and the imagined constructs became more elaborate.
By 1450 A.D.
By 1450 A.D., the number of cultures had decreased dramatically. Homo sapiens evolved thinking people as us and them.
It was the appearance of the monetary order, the imperial order, and order of universal religions that would have people seeing the entire race as us.
In the Afro-Asia world, gold had become an obsession. Even when countries couldn't stand one another, they all favored money.
Without money, commercial networks and markets would remain very limited in size, complexity, and dynamism.
Bartering systems were used before money was created to achieve the things needed.
A person would offer their commodity in exchange for another. However, this posed a problem.
If all the person had was apples and needed a pair of shoes, they would offer the cobbler a sack of apples.
But what if the cobbler did not like apples? How many apples would equal a new pair of shoes?
Money was created many times and in many places.
Sumerian barley was the first type of money around 3000 B.C. used to buy things.
They would designate a certain weight of barley for their products.
In the middle of the third millennium B.C., ancient Mesopotamia invented the silver shekel.
It was not a coin, but 0.3 ounces of silver.
If someone owed another 20 shekels, then they owed 6 ounces of silver.
Set weights of precious metals eventually gave birth to coins.
Money is not always a coin or banknote, but anything people are willing to use in order to represent the value of things.
For about 4000 years, cowrie shells were used as money all over Africa, South Asia, East Asia, and Oceania.
POW camps and modern prisons use cigarettes as currency.
The first coins were made in 640 B.C. by King Elates of Lydia, who imprinted them with identification marks.
It indicated how much precious metal was in the coin and identified the authority that issued it, guaranteeing its contents.
Counterfeiting money was not just cheating, but a breach of sovereignty, an act of subversion against the king.
People all over the world speak different languages and believe in different gods, but all believe in gold and silver.
Without this shared belief, it would have been hard to trade globally.
Money is the most universal and efficient system of mutual trust ever devised,
and it is the only thing that can bring complete strangers to cooperate effectively.
However, it can also corrode local traditions, intimate relationships, and human values.
It can turn people against one another.
It is not that we trust the other person, but the coin, and once the coin is gone, there is no trust at all.
Takeaways from this chapter.
Without money, commercial networks and markets would remain very limited in size, complexity, and dynamism.
Bartering systems were used before money was created to achieve the things needed.
Money was created many times and in many places.
Sumerian barley was the first type of money around 3000 BC.
In the middle of the third millennium BC, ancient Mesopotamia invented the silver shekel.
It was not a coin, but 0.3 ounces of silver.
Set weights of precious metals eventually gave birth to coins.
Money is anything people are willing to use in order to represent the value of things.
The first coins were made in 640 BC by King Alatius of Lydia, who imprinted them with identification marks.
Without the belief in gold and silver, it would have been hard to trade globally.
Money is the most universal and efficient system of mutual trust ever devised,
and it is the only thing that can bring complete strangers to cooperate effectively.
Money can turn people against one another.
Chapter 11 Imperial Visions
Most past cultures have sooner or later fallen prey to armies of ruthless empires.
There is no justice in history.
An empire is a political order with two important characteristics.
It has to rule over a significant number of distinct people with different cultural identities and separate territories.
It has flexible borders and a potentially unlimited appetite.
Because of this, empires manage to unite diverse ethnic groups and reduce human diversity.
Empires have been the world's most common form of political organization for the last 2500 years.
When an empire collapses, it doesn't mean there will be independence for its subjects.
Instead, a new empire replaces it.
Building and maintaining an empire usually required the vicious slaughter of large populations and brutal oppression of anyone left.
Oddly enough, beautiful things come from such exploitation like the Taj Mahal by Mughal's Indian subjects.
Empires deliberately spread ideas, institutions, and norms to make life easier and gain legitimacy.
They claim the actions taken were necessary to spread a superculture from which the conquered will benefit more.
The process of assimilation was often painful and traumatic.
It was not easy to give up a loved tradition and difficult and stressful to adopt a new culture.
Even if the subjects successfully adopted the imperial culture, it would still take time to be accepted as us.
In some cases, the barrier between the newcomers and old elite were broken down and the conquerors began seeing the subjects as equal.
The subjects accepted much of the imperial culture of their conquerors while trying to mold it to their needs and traditions.
As the 21st century unfolds, nationalism is losing ground fast.
More and more people believe more in mankind than in the members of a particular nationality.
Takeaways from this chapter
Most past cultures have sooner or later fallen prey to armies of ruthless empires.
Empires managed to unite diverse ethnic groups and reduce human diversity.
Empires have been the world's most common form of political organization for the last 2500 years.
When an empire collapses, a new empire replaces it.
Beautiful things can come from exploitation.
Empires deliberately spread ideas, institutions, and norms to make life easier and gain legitimacy.
It was not easy to give up a loved tradition and difficult and stressful to adopt a new culture.
Even if the subjects successfully adopted the imperial culture, it would still take time to be accepted as us.
More and more people believe more in mankind than in members of a particular nationality.
Chapter 12
The Law of Religion
Religion is the third great unifier, alongside money and empires.
They assert that our laws are ordained by a supreme authority.
There are two distinct criteria for a religion.
The superhuman order is not the product of human agreements.
The religion establishes norms and values the superhuman order deems binding.
When animism was the dominant belief system, human norms and values had to consider the interest of other beings, such as animals, plants, ghosts, etc.
An animal would be considered equal to humans if it held some spiritual value.
Farmers didn't see themselves equal to their livestock, which they considered a possession.
Therefore, the first effect of the agricultural revolution was to turn plant and animal into property.
To keep livestock flourishing, farmers tried to appease gods with gifts and sacrifices in hope for things like rain and wealth.
Subjects were expected to respect the empire's god and ritual since they protected and legitimized the empire.
However, they were not required to give up their local gods, and in many cases imperial elite even adopted those gods and rituals.
Since monotheists have usually believed they have the one and only true god, they discredit all other religions.
Different beliefs in the same god even caused wars.
In the 16th and 17th century, hundreds of thousands of people died among the Protestants and the Catholics because of their different views of God.
The big breakthrough of monotheist religions came with Christianity.
Their mission was to spread the gospel about Jesus throughout the world.
They began organizing widespread missionary activism aimed at all humans.
Today, most people adhere to one monotheist religion, and the global political order is built on monotheistic foundations.
People question why bad things happen to good people, and if God can see what happens, why is there so much suffering?
One answer is that God granted humans free will.
However, others believe in another answer, that there is another force that is evil, devil, and it battles with good, God.
A new kind of religion began to spread through Afro-Asia during the first millennium BC, such as Buddhism, Taoism, and Stoicism, which were characterized by their disregard of gods.
These religions believed that the superhuman order governing the world was the product of natural laws rather than a divine being.
Theist religions focus on the worship of gods, while humanist religions worship humanity, homo sapiens.
It is believed that homo sapiens have a unique and a different nature, more so than any other animal or phenomena, that they are the most important thing in the world, and they determine the meaning of everything that happens in the universe.
Scientists studying the inner workings of the human organisms have found no soul, and that our human behaviors are determined by hormones, genes, and synapses, and not free will.
Takeaways from this chapter.
Religion is the third great unifier.
The superhuman order is not the product of human agreements.
The religion establishes norms and values the superhuman order deems binding.
When animism was the dominant belief system, human norms and values had to consider the interest of other beings, such as animals, plants, ghosts, etc.
To keep livestock flourishing, farmers tried to appease gods with gifts and sacrifices in hope for things like rain and wealth.
Subjects were expected to respect the empire's god and ritual since they protected and legitimized the empire, but were not required to give up their own beliefs.
Different beliefs in the same god even caused wars.
Today, most people adhere to one monotheist religion, and the global political order is built on monotheistic foundations.
God grants free will.
There is another force that is evil, devil, and it battles with good, God.
Buddhism, Taoism, and Stoicism were characterized by their disregard of gods.
Scientists have found no soul, and that our human behaviors are determined by hormones, genes, and synapses, and not free will.
Chapter 13 The Secret of Success
Commerce, empires, and universal religion helped bring the sapiens where they are today.
However, it is hard to say all that really happened to allow the sapiens to succeed when no other species of human had.
Most historians state that the better you know a particular history period, the harder it is to explain why things turned out the way they did.
History cannot be explained deterministically or be predicted because it's Level 2 chaotic, meaning it reacts to prediction and therefore cannot be predicted correctly.
Level 1 does not react to predictions.
Studying history is not a means for making accurate predictions, and it's not to know the future, but to realize that our current situation is not natural or inevitable and that there are more possibilities.
The dynamics of history were not directed at enhancing human well-being.
Takeaways from this chapter
Part 4
The Scientific Revolution
Chapter 14
The Discovery of Ignorance
The last 5,000 years witnessed an unprecedented growth in human power.
A modern computer today can store every piece of information in all the codex books and scrolls in a medieval library.
In 1873, Jules Verne could imagine Phileas Fogg going around the world in 80 days. Now it takes us only 48 hours.
On July 16, 1945, American scientists detonated the first atom bomb in Almogordo, New Mexico. From then on, mankind was capable of changing the course of history.
Through the Scientific Revolution, humankind has obtained enormous new powers by investing resources in scientific research. The more proof we have in scientific research success, the more people are willing to invest.
Without investments, humans would have never split an atom or sent a man to the moon.
Science depends on political and economic institutions to provide resources and, in return, provides now usable power to obtain new resources and continue research.
The Scientific Revolution is a revolution of ignorance. It was discovered through the fact that humans don't have all the answers to important questions.
Modern day science openly admits collective ignorance for the most important questions. The belief in technology and the methods of scientific research have replaced, to some extent, the belief in absolute truths and allowed modern social orders to hold together.
In order to gain knowledge, we need to connect observations to comprehend theories.
In 1687, Isaac Newton came up with three mathematical laws to explain and predict movement.
Around the end of the 19th century, scientists observed some miscalculations in Newton's laws leading to the next revolution in physics, the theory of relativity and quantum mechanics.
Probability calculation became the foundation not just for actuarial science, but the science demography.
Science enjoys eminent prestige because of the power it gives us.
In 1620, Francis Bacon wrote, knowledge is power, in his manifesto, The New Instrument.
The real test of knowledge isn't if it is true, but if it empowers us.
Over centuries, science has given us many tools, including technological tools.
These led to weaponry, which led to war.
The reason countries kept fighting was hope in the weapon technology scientists were creating.
Science, industry and military technology intertwined only with the advent of the capitalist system and the Industrial Revolution.
Until the Scientific Revolution, most human cultures didn't believe in progress.
Then, science began to solve unsolvable problem after problem and many began believing that humankind could overcome anything by applying new knowledge, even death.
Today's scientists are finding ways to cure ailments that may cause death.
The life expectancy before the scientific revolution and discovery of medicines went from 25 to 40 to around 67 for the entire world and 80 in developed worlds.
Infant and child deaths decreased with medicines to fight illnesses like diphtheria and measles.
Science is a very expensive affair, but with the billions from government, businesses, foundations and private donors, science moves further toward reaching a goal, whether it be political, economic or religious.
Takeaways from this chapter
The last 5,000 years witnessed an unprecedented growth in human power.
During the Scientific Revolution, humankind has obtained enormous new powers by investing resources in scientific research.
Science depends on political and economic institutions to provide resources and, in return, provides now usable power to obtain new resources and continue research.
The Scientific Revolution is a revolution of ignorance.
In order to gain knowledge, we need to connect observations to comprehend theories.
Science enjoys eminent prestige because of the power it gives us.
Knowledge is power.
Over centuries, science has given us many tools, including technological tools which have led to weaponry and wars.
Science began to solve unsolvable problem after problem, causing many to believe that humankind could overcome anything by applying new knowledge.
Today's scientists are finding ways to cure ailments that may cause death.
Science is a very expensive affair.
Chapter 15 The Marriage of Science and Empire
With the help of Captain James Cook and James Lind, a British physician, they were able to find a cure for scurvy, which resulted in less deaths of sailors and passengers.
Because of this, Cook was able to travel farther on his expeditions, allowing them to claim many islands and lands for Britain.
Europe was such a success, even against bigger economies like India and Asia, because of their military, industrial, and scientific technology.
They had manufactured machine guns, engineered steam engines, and laid down railroads.
Europeans were so used to thinking and behaving in scientific and capitalist ways that when the technological bonanza began, they could harness it better than anyone.
Modern science flourished thanks to European empires.
Even before technology, it was Linds and Cook's interest in knowing what was out there that allowed Europe to master other worlds.
While other empires set out to discover new territories, European imperialists also sought knowledge.
European scholars began drawing maps with spaces to fill in.
It was the blank spaces that prompted their expeditions to explore.
When the Spaniards invaded the Aztec Empire, the Aztecs never saw it coming.
These humans, who looked and smelled different, had giant ships and terrifyingly large animals they had never seen before.
Some believed them to be gods, while others believed demons.
It's hard to think of empires as good or evil.
You can fill a whole encyclopedia with the horrible things empires have done, but you can also fill up the same size encyclopedia with all the good they have done.
Takeaways from this chapter.
Europe was such a success because of their military, industrial, and scientific technology.
Modern science flourished thanks to European empires.
While other empires set out to discover new territories, European imperialists also sought knowledge.
European scholars began drawing maps with spaces to fill in.
It was the blank spaces that prompted their expeditions to explore.
It's hard to think of empires as good or evil.
Chapter 16. The Capitalist Creed
Money has been essential for building empires and promoting science.
It is astounding because it can represent many different objects and convert a product into another product.
Credit allows us to build things in the present with the expense of the future.
Credit goes back to ancient Sumer, but no one trusted it because no one believed the future would be better.
Because credit was limited, people had trouble financing new business.
With few new businesses, the economy was unable to grow, and without growth, people assumed there never would be.
Then came the scientific revolution and the idea of progress that if resources were invested in research, then things could improve.
Over the last 500 years, the idea of progress convinced people to put more trust in the future by creating credit, which brought real economic growth and in turn strengthened trust in the future and opened the way for more credit.
Capitalism states that when resources are put into actual use, there will be more production of other resources.
There was also the idea of stock. If a company was doing well, you could buy shares from them.
If the shares were already bought, you could try to buy from an owner, although it cost more.
If the company was not doing well, you could sell the shares, however, probably for less.
The free market doctrine is the most common and influential variant of capitalist creed.
Politics keep out of the economy, reduce taxation, and government regulation to a minimum, and markets are free to take their own course.
However, there is no such thing as a market free of all political bias.
Markets alone offer no protection against fraud or theft.
The job of political systems is to ensure trust by legislating sanctions against cheats and establishing law enforcement.
The bad thing about free market capitalism is that you can't ensure that profits are gained in a fair way or distributed fairly.
There were no improvements in ethics of capitalism in the 19th century.
The industrial revolution in Europe enriched banks and capital owners, but left millions of workers to live in poverty.
We can fix our ways of capitalizing, we have learned from our mistakes, and if we wait longer, the division of spoils will be enough for everyone.
Takeaways from this chapter
Money has been essential for building empires and promoting science.
Credit allows us to build things in the present with the expense of the future.
With few new businesses, the economy was unable to grow, and without growth, people assumed there never would be.
Capitalism states that when resources are put into actual use, there will be more production of other resources.
Stock
Buy when a company is successful, and sell when it's not.
The free market doctrine is the most common and influential variant of capitalist creed.
Politics keep out of the economy, reduce taxation, and government regulation to a minimum, and markets are free to take their own course.
There were no improvements in ethics of capitalism in the 19th century.
We can fix our ways of capitalizing, and if we wait longer, the division of spoils will be enough for everyone.
Chapter 17 The Wheels of Industry
Thanks to our trust in the future and willingness of capitalists to reinvest their profits in production, the modern economy grows.
As we continue to grow, science and technology allows it by providing new resources.
Prior to the Industrial Revolution, there were limited amounts of energy resources.
People depended on nature, winds to pull ships and burned wood to smelt iron and heat houses.
But what if there was no wind, and trees weren't everywhere for wood?
Heat was known for cooking and keeping us warm, but now we can use heat to make weapons fire.
And by heating water and causing steam, we can make engines and other vehicles move.
Today, only 2% of the U.S. population makes their living from agriculture,
but they produce enough to feed the entire U.S. population and export surpluses to the rest of the world.
However, it's not enough to produce.
Someone must buy.
Consumerism is a new kind of ethic where it sees consumption of more services and products as a good thing.
It encourages people to treat and spoil themselves.
Throughout most history, indulgence was branded as selfish and morally corrupt.
Consumerism has worked hard to convince us that it's good for you.
Shopping has become a favorite pastime among family and friends and with holidays like Christmas to shop for.
One big consumption is food.
We tend to overindulge, which leads to obesity.
Then we spend money on diet, substances, and gyms, etc.
This contributes to economic growth twice.
Most people live up to the capitalist consumerism ideal.
Takeaways from this chapter.
Thanks to our trust in the future and willingness of capitalists to reinvest their profits in production,
the modern economy grows.
Prior to the Industrial Revolution, there were limited amounts of energy resources.
It's not enough to produce.
Someone must buy.
Consumerism is a new kind of ethic where it sees consumption of more services and products as a good thing.
Most people live up to the capitalist consumerism ideal.
Chapter 18. A Permanent Revolution
The Industrial Revolution opened up new ways to convert energy to produce goods.
Despite us finding new resources, we are destroying the natural habitats and driving species to extinction.
One day, we may even drive ourselves to extinction with global warming, rising oceans, and widespread pollution.
Around 1820, the first commercial train service began operating between Liverpool and Manchester.
Ten years later, the first train timetable was issued.
This spawned a global network of timetables synchronized to the tiniest fraction of a second.
Almost everything we do now has to do with time.
Prior to the Industrial Revolution, a family worked together in everything they did,
including taking care of one another and helping the neighbors.
Kingdoms and empires rarely intervened.
Instead of putting money into welfare and education, they were left up to the families and communities.
Instead of a police force, families were allowed to handle any violence on their own as long as it was limited.
After the Industrial Revolution, states and markets used their growing power to weaken the traditional bonds of family and community.
They sent police to stop family vendettas and replace them with court decisions.
They approached people and told them to be individuals, to marry who they want and live where they want.
The state would provide.
They no longer needed to be dependent on the family and community.
Markets and states provide tribal bonds through imagined communities,
which are communities of people who don't know each other but act like they do.
They usually have common interests, such as consumers or vegetarians, etc.
Most people don't appreciate how peaceful our era actually is.
As wars become rarer than eras before, they attract more attention.
However, there is no real reason for war.
War is expensive and non-profitable today.
Peace is more prosperous.
As long as China and the U.S. are at peace, China can prosper by selling products in the U.S.
Takeaways from this chapter.
The Industrial Revolution opened up new ways to convert energy to produce goods.
Despite us finding new resources, we are destroying the natural habitats and driving species to extinction.
One day, we may even drive ourselves to extinction.
Almost everything we do now has to do with time.
Prior to the Industrial Revolution, a family worked together in everything they did,
and kingdoms and empires rarely intervened.
After the Industrial Revolution, states and markets used their growing power
to weaken the traditional bonds of family and community.
They approached people and told them to be individuals.
Imagined communities are communities of people who don't know each other but act like they do.
Most people don't appreciate how peaceful our era actually is.
Chapter 19.
And they lived happily ever after.
The economy has grown exponentially with science and the Industrial Revolution,
but does this make us happier than our ancestors?
When humans learned to farm during the Agricultural Revolution,
it actually made life harsher with longer and harder working hours
and less varied and nutritious food, along with exposure to disease and exploitation.
You could say it has made us a little happier with modern medicine
and the number of mass famines decreasing.
However, over the last decade, disturbing the ecological equilibrium of the planet
has resulted in horrible consequences.
Countless lives of animals have been destroyed for our success as well as the planet itself.
Even if we were to claim we were happy, how do you properly evaluate that happiness?
And shouldn't we consider the happiness of creatures other than ourselves?
What makes us happy in the first place?
Is it money, our health, or even our families?
Some say that happiness depends on the correlation between objective conditions and subjective expectations.
It is also argued that we can only enjoy momentary rushes of pleasant sensations and then the happiness subsides.
Daniel Kahneman found that happiness consists of one seeing their life in entirety meaningful and worthwhile.
A meaningful life can be very satisfying.
According to Buddhism, most people identify happiness with pleasant feelings,
and when that pleasant feeling is gone, they continue to look for it.
Their advice is to stop pursuing happiness.
When you stop looking for it, you will find it.
Takeaways from this chapter
The economy has grown exponentially with science and the industrial revolution,
but does this make us happier?
When humans learned to farm during the agricultural revolution, it actually made life harsher.
Over the last decade, disturbing the ecological equilibrium of the planet has resulted in horrible consequences.
Happiness depends on the correlation between objective conditions and subjective expectations.
It is also argued that we can only enjoy momentary rushes of pleasant sensations and then the happiness subsides.
Daniel Kahneman found that happiness consists of one seeing their life in entirety meaningful and worthwhile.
According to Buddhism, when you stop looking for happiness, you will find it.
Chapter 20 The End of Homo Sapiens
Close to four billion years ago, every single organism on the planet evolved because of natural selection.
Now, scientists are doing their own natural selection by experimentation.
They are taking genes from one animal and placing it in another.
In the year 2000, a Brazilian bio-artist by the name of Eduardo Kack asked a group of French scientists to make a green fluorescent rabbit.
The replacement of natural selection by intelligent design can happen in three ways.
Biological engineering, cyborg engineering, and engineering of inorganic life.
Biological engineering is human intervention on the biological level aimed at modifying an organism.
This is how French scientists were able to create Alba, the fluorescent rabbit.
It goes further, though.
Through this process, geneticists want to try and revive some lost species, including the Neanderthals, by implanting Neanderthal DNA into a sapiens ovum.
Cyborg engineering includes combining organic and inorganic parts.
This process has already begun with pacemakers and orthotics.
In the case of Jesse Sullivan, it has gone even further.
In 2000, Sullivan lost both his arms up to the shoulder in an accident.
With cyborg engineering, he is able to use bionic arms operated by thought.
The third way to change the laws of life is by engineering completely inorganic beings.
The most obvious examples are computer programs and viruses.
Only a tiny fraction of these new opportunities have been revealed, but they are moving forward at breakneck speed.
However, we should keep in mind Mary Shelley's Frankenstein.
Despite it being a fictional story, it comes with quite the moral that by playing God and engineering life, we will be punished.
The fact is, through technological development, we can see our last days nearing as we could possibly be replaced with something else.
If possible, we should try to persuade the direction that scientists are taking.
In order to do that, we should first ask the question, what do we want?
What do we want to become?
Takeaways from this chapter.
Close to 4 billion years ago, every single organism on the planet evolved because of natural selection.
Now, scientists are doing their own natural selection by experimentation.
The replacement of natural selection by intelligent design can happen in three ways.
Biological engineering, cyborg engineering, and engineering of inorganic life.
Biological engineering is human intervention on the biological level aimed at modifying an organism.
Cyborg engineering includes combining organic and inorganic parts.
The third way to change the laws of life is by engineering completely inorganic beings.
Only a tiny fraction of these new opportunities have been revealed, but they are moving forward at breakneck speed.
Keep in mind, Mary Shelley's Frankenstein, by playing God, we will be punished.
We could possibly be replaced with something else.
We should first ask the question, what do we want to become?
The Book at a Glance
The Big Bang occurred around 13.5 billion years ago, creating matter, energy, time, and space.
300,000 years later, matter coalesced into atoms and then molecules.
Billions of years later, certain molecules combined to form organisms.
Modern humans appeared about 2.5 million years ago.
Homo sapiens
Homo sapiens began forming cultures about 70,000 years ago.
The term Homo stands for man and sapiens for wise.
There were six different kinds of species of Homo.
Sapiens, Neanderthalensis, Erectus, Solensis, Floresiensis, and Denisova.
Out of the six different species of Homo, Homo sapiens are the only ones left.
During the cognitive revolution, legends, myths, gods, and religions began to appear.
The fictions allowed one to have common ground with another, establishing trust which in turn helped the sapiens in trade and cooperate in large groups.
Following the cognitive revolution, sapiens became the first to travel by sea and settled in Australia.
Every time a new part of the world was colonized, there was a mass extinction in that part.
The agricultural revolution began around 9500 to 8000 BC when sapiens began manipulating the lives of animals and plants.
The agricultural revolution made the future more important than before.
What caused the civil war was not lack of food, but the inability to get along in such a big group.
Myths, imagined order, helped bring these groups together to cooperate.
Most human cooperation networks had been geared towards oppression and exploitation.
There is no way out of the imagined order.
Between 3500 and 3000 BC, Sumerian geniuses invented writing, which they did on clay tablets.
Another form of writing was invented by Andeans using a system of tying knots on colorful cords called kripis.
Between 3000 and 2500 BC, Egyptians created hieroglyphics.
Arabic numerals originally invented by the Hindus were signs that created modern mathematical notation.
People were divided into make-believe groups, upper, middle and lower levels, class, and arranged in a hierarchy.
The people deemed lesser were women, Jews, gays and blacks, and were considered pollution.
Biology enables, while culture forbids.
By 1450 AD, the number of cultures had decreased dramatically.
Without money, commercial networks and markets would remain very limited in size, complexity, and dynamism.
Bartering systems were used before money was created to achieve the things needed.
Money was created many times and in many places.
Money is anything people are willing to use in order to represent the value of things.
Money is the most universal and efficient system of mutual trust ever devised,
and it is the only thing that can bring complete strangers to cooperate effectively.
Money can turn people against one another.
Empires have been the world's most common form of political organization for the last 2500 years.
Religion is the third great unifier.
When animism was the dominant belief system, human norms and values had to consider the interest of other beings,
such as animals, plants, ghosts, etc.
Subjects were expected to respect the empire's god and ritual since they protected and legitimized the empire,
but not required to give up their own beliefs.
Different beliefs in the same god even caused wars.
Buddhism, Taoism, and Stoicism were characterized by their disregard of gods.
Scientists have found no soul in that our human behaviors are determined by hormones, genes, and synapses, and not free will.
History cannot be explained deterministically or be predicted.
The last 5000 years witnessed an unprecedented growth in human power.
Science enjoys eminent prestige because of the power it gives us.
Knowledge is power.
Credit allows us to build things in the present with the expense of the future.
With few new businesses, the economy was unable to grow and without growth, people assumed that there never would be.
Capitalism states that when resources are put into actual use, there will be more production of other resources.
The free market doctrine is the most common and influential variant of capitalist creed.
Politics keep out of the economy, reduce taxation and government regulation to a minimum, and markets are free to take their own course.
Thanks to our trust in the future and willingness of capitalists to reinvest their profits in production, the modern economy grows.
Prior to the Industrial Revolution, there were limited amounts of energy resources.
It's not enough to produce. Someone must buy.
Consumerism is a new kind of ethic where it sees consumption of more services and products as a good thing.
The Industrial Revolution opened up new ways to convert energy to produce goods.
Despite us finding new resources, we are destroying the natural habitats and driving species to extinction.
One day, we may even drive ourselves to extinction.
Imagined communities are communities of people who don't know each other but act like they do.
Over the last decade, disturbing the ecological equilibrium of the planet has resulted in horrible consequences.
Happiness depends on the correlation between objective conditions and subjective expectations.
When you stop looking for happiness, you will find it.
Close to 4 billion years ago, every single organism on the planet evolved because of natural selection.
Scientists are doing their own natural selection by experimentation.
The replacement of natural selection by intelligent design can happen in three ways.
Biological engineering, cyborg engineering and engineering of inorganic life.
Biological engineering is human intervention on the biological level aimed at modifying an organism.
Cyborg engineering includes combining organic and inorganic parts.
The third way to change the laws of life is by engineering completely inorganic beings.
We could possibly be replaced with something else.
Conclusion
If this book has changed your opinion of the world, then hopefully it is for the better.
Now you have a better understanding about what your great ancestors endured and accomplished to bring us the life we have now.
Of course, some of you will be in disagreement with the things Harari states in this book, usually due to religious beliefs.
Surely it was not Harari's intention to challenge anyone when he wrote this book, but to merely give us a history lesson like we've never had before.
To find out more about our most popular summary books, go to www.amazon.com forward slash author forward slash summary.
There you'll find our best sellers, special offers and much, much more.
Search for www.amazon.com forward slash author forward slash summary and find out now.
Auf Wiederhören bei Audible.
