This is Audible.
Since the beginning of history, humanity has considered itself to be more special than the rest of the entire world.
And in many ways, the last few centuries of technological progress have only cemented our dominance over everything else.
Yet, the future of humanity is anything but clear.
Because humans have essentially tackled the long-enduring problems of hunger, global plague, and war,
science and technological interest will soon need to focus on new challenges.
And based on the predictions of author Yuval Noah Harari, the future will not look anything like the world we know today.
Harari actually wrote Homo Deus, A Brief History of Tomorrow, as a sequel to his earlier book, Sapiens, A Brief History of Humanity.
Now, after looking at the traits that made humans stand out in the first place, which is what he did with his first book, Sapiens,
Harari now turns his attention to the future and the highly likely attempts of human beings to upgrade ourselves into gods.
What might seem impossible today, things like immortality, complete control over mood, emotion, happiness, things of that nature,
might become far more plausible in the coming decades.
The pace of technology and the increasing prevalence of immersive data systems like Google
is changing the way that human beings relate with the world,
and it's also challenging long-held beliefs about the value of humans in the first place.
Will all human jobs soon be replaced by robots?
Will the world be run by an elite class of upgraded human beings, superhumans?
Will AI just take over and wipe everybody out?
And what will we, as human beings, do if this happens?
By looking through the course of history to predict future trends,
these are the questions that Harari's tribes to answer in this book.
Here's what you'll learn about in this book summary.
We'll talk about the three challenges that humanity has been fighting against since the beginning of time
and the likely challenges that will begin to fill our time instead.
We'll discuss the reasons why humans are more like machines than the special beings with souls and free will that we believe we are.
We'll talk about what it will mean for the importance of individual humans as technology and data systems continue to take over daily life.
And we'll talk about what will come after humanism and what it might mean for human society.
Crucial Quotes
Like firefighters in a world without fire, so humankind in the 21st century needs to ask itself an unprecedented question.
What are we going to do with ourselves?
In a healthy, prosperous, and harmonious world, what will demand our attention and ingenuity?
Quote
For the first time in history, more people die today from eating too much than from eating too little.
More people die from old age than from infectious diseases.
And more people commit suicide than are killed by soldiers, terrorists, and criminals combined.
Quote
This is the paradox of historical knowledge.
Knowledge that does not change behavior is useless.
But knowledge that changes behavior quickly loses its relevance.
The more data we have and the better we understand history, the faster history alters its course, and the faster our knowledge becomes outdated.
Quote
Yet in fact, modernity is a surprisingly simple deal.
The entire contract can be summarized in a single phrase.
Humans agree to give up meaning in exchange for power.
Tweetable Summary
Big idea number one, the human agenda is changing.
Throughout history, three main issues have plagued humans.
Famine, plague, and war.
However, for the first time, the 21st century has solved all three of these problems to the point that they're no longer forces for extreme damage to humanity.
In 2014, more than 2.1 billion people were overweight, while just 850 million suffered from malnutrition.
While famines used to be frequent and disastrous occurrences in the pre-modern world, mass famines only occur today because of political reasons, not natural ones.
This means that every famine that still occurs could technically be prevented and is instead the decision of a political leader somewhere.
In the same way, global child mortality and overall risk of dying from disease is at an all-time low.
Even though the world is more interconnected than ever before, and the likelihood of spreading horrible diseases around the globe seems like it should be higher than ever,
seeing as though we now have the capability to get on an airplane and travel from country to country and continent to continent.
Yet, the kinds of diseases that ravaged the pre-modern world, like the black plague, smallpox, and the Spanish flu,
seem far less likely to cause global damage because of the rise of antibiotics, vaccines, and improved hygiene.
Even death due to war is quickly becoming a reality of the past.
While war used to be so common that most humans took it for granted, today war is considered the exception rather than the norm.
In fact, nuclear weapons have made the stakes of modern war so high that fewer countries are willing to risk waging it.
While human violence once caused 15% of all deaths, it's now responsible for less than 1%.
Today, 800,000 people commit suicide every single year, while less than 620,000 die of human violence.
While 120,000 die from war.
In the ancient world, famine, plague, and death were considered unavoidable and even an essential part of God's plan for the world.
Today, now that we are free from many of these atrocities on a grand scale,
Harari tells us that it's time to change the narrative about the forces that control human life.
Even more important, now that many of these problems have been solved,
a gradual shift may arise with regard to the goals and ideas that humanity will work towards in the future.
What will humanity work towards once the curses of famine, plague, and war have been resolved entirely?
According to Harari's predictions, the next big breakthroughs for humanity will come from achieving constant happiness and immortality.
Yep, you heard it right.
Immortality.
Part 1. Homo sapiens conquer the world.
Big idea number 2.
The importance of the Anthropocene period.
The glass ceiling of happiness is held in place by two stout pillars.
One psychological, the other biological.
On the psychological level, happiness depends on expectations rather than objective conditions.
We don't become satisfied by leading a peaceful and prosperous existence.
Rather, we become satisfied when reality matches our expectations.
The bad news is that as conditions improve, expectations balloon.
To understand where humanity is now, it's essential to look at where it's come.
Compared to other animals, humans have long had the abilities of gods.
This behavioral trend started in the Holocene epoch, which might be better labeled the Anthropocene epoch, or the epoch of humanity.
In short, humans have quickly conquered the world, to the point that our actions might have a bigger impact than the asteroid that killed the dinosaurs.
Within 70,000 years, an African ape managed to change the global ecosystem in ways that suited it best,
which involved domesticating some animal species while allowing others to be hunted, eaten, or to go extinct.
Today, for instance, there are 200,000 wild wolves and 40,000 lions, compared to 400 million domestic dogs and 600 million house cats.
Even so, early humans didn't consider themselves separate from the rest of the natural world.
The first cultures were all animists, and it wasn't until the start of the agricultural revolution that humans began to change the narrative
to better justify their ability to subjugate other creatures to serve their will.
Ancient religious texts reveal this shifting mindset, starting with the snake that talks to Eve in the Garden of Eden, in the Book of Genesis.
By villainizing some animals and making them seem as thoroughly other, humans began to think of themselves as specially created by God.
However, recent decades have been slowly tearing apart this ancient belief by revealing the ways that other animals are exactly like humans.
Scientists have demonstrated that emotions are not limited to just human beings, but rather are biochemical algorithms that are essential components of all mammals.
In essence, all animals are biological machines, as Harari tells us, and humans are just another type of design.
Big idea number three, the spark of humanity.
While all living creatures might be biological machines, there's no doubt that Homo sapiens are the most powerful species in the world.
This makes many people believe that human life is more valuable than animal life.
But this view is full of inconsistencies.
For instance, one look at the financial investments in the modern world reveals that an American life is considered more valuable than an Iraqi one.
Even so, this is often blamed on geopolitical differences, not differences in value.
Part of the reason why people are valued over pigs, for instance, is because of a belief that humans have traits that are unique to humans, unique to us as a species.
Namely, an eternal soul and a consciousness.
However, scientific evidence, Harari points out, has shown that neither humans nor animals possess any kind of soul.
Because having a soul develop in its entirety at some point in the biological process doesn't make any sense, from what he tells us.
In the same way, the idea that only humans have a conscious mind fails to stand up to scientific scrutiny.
What feels like consciousness and independent decision making is really the result of an electric storm of neurons in your brain that lights up different regions and causes you to think and feel different emotions.
Triggering these parts of the brain artificially would actually give your body the same response, meaning that you have less control over your consciousness than you may think.
For these reasons, modern science has revealed that the key differences between humans and the rest of the animal kingdom are surprisingly smaller than what you might expect.
Part 2. Homo Sapiens Give Meaning to the World
Big Idea No. 4. The Storytellers
Quote
Fiction isn't bad. It's vital.
Without commonly accepted stories about things like money, states, or corporations, no complex human society can function.
Unquote
When early humans needed stories to justify their place in the world, they relied on gods.
In many ways, ancient gods were both as real and abstract in their daily lives as corporations like Google or Microsoft are for us today.
We believe that they exist and they influence our lives because they own an enormous amount of resources.
Yet, it's impossible to directly pinpoint what exactly makes them exist.
The ancient Sumerian gods, for example, were managed by their human priests, who took in their taxes and managed their orchards for them on their behalf.
Meaning that Sumerian commoners were well used to seeing extensive fields that belonged only to the gods.
But there were human beings controlling all of that stuff.
Ancient Egypt provides examples of the modern idea of branding.
While the pharaoh was a flesh and blood ruler of the country, his importance extended far beyond his physical body and didn't end once he died.
In the same way, that the brand of Elvis didn't stop making money once he passed away.
A dead pharaoh still had significance for Egyptians.
His body would be mummified and his legacy would go on because his workers would go on collecting taxes and building pyramids.
While the powers attributed to the Sumerian gods and Egyptian pharaohs were fiction, they nonetheless had powerful impacts on society.
Because people believed fully in the power of the pharaoh, millions of Egyptian peasants gave up their time working to fulfill his decrees,
which is how the pyramids and canals came into existence in the first place.
Without a powerful narrative, a story, truth or fiction was unimportant, that aimed to pull people together under a common goal,
the great building projects of the ancient world could never have been accomplished.
Big Idea Number Five
The Modern Covenant
The modern deal thus offers humans an enormous temptation, coupled with a colossal threat.
Omnipotence is in front of us, almost within our reach, but below us yawns the abyss of complete nothingness.
Choosing to live a modern life comes with some stipulations, and it controls almost every part of our lives,
from our careers and leisure time to food choices and dreams.
However, to enjoy the perks of modern life, we all agree to give up meaning in our lives in exchange for power.
The reason for this compromise is that modern culture rejects the idea of a grand cosmic plan that we all have any greater meaning in our lives.
Instead of being directed by any all-knowing gods of any kind, life has no script, director, producer, or even ending.
Instead, existence is blind and purposeless, Harari tells us, so there is no reason to think that everything will work out a certain way.
However, having no overall plan for our lives gives us humans the power to create the life that we want, provided we can find a way.
As every decade produces new technology that continues to advance beyond our wildest dreams,
the potential for humans to find new ways to live longer and happier lives is becoming greater than ever before in history.
Big Idea 6. The Humanist Revolution
While modern life provides power at the expense of overall meaning in life,
it is still possible to create your own life's meaning, even if it isn't part of a larger cosmic plan.
It turns out that the antidote to meaningless existence comes from humanism,
which is a way of thinking that revolutionized the world several centuries ago.
Instead of celebrating the powers of a distant god,
Humanism is an appreciation of human power and worships their accomplishments.
Rather than finding meaning for humanity in the cosmos,
humanism believes that the power of humans comes from giving the cosmos meaning.
Instead of looking to holy scriptures for advice for worldly problems,
humanism looks first to human emotion and experience.
In this way, something is valued only if it makes us think it has value.
And things are bad only if they make someone feel bad.
The belief structure in humanism turned fields that once had been objective,
like art, to become subjective instead.
Meaning that you can look at it and have a totally different perspective
of something that Picasso created versus the guy sitting right next to you looking at it,
having a totally different experience based on his perception, the lens he's looking at it through.
Now, after the humanist revolution, ordinary artifacts, like a urinal, for instance,
can even be considered high art.
True story.
So long as someone finds beauty and meaning in it.
Part 3. Homo Sapiens Loses Control
Big Idea No. 7
The Laboratory Time Bomb
Part of the humanist revolution was the mentality of liberalism,
a package of human rights, democracy, individualism, and a free market economy.
Even so, recent scientific advances are only working to undermine the roots of liberal order
because they challenge the very premise that liberalism is based on, free will.
Science experiments have shown that the emotions we prize and depend upon to guide our decision-making
are simply the results of neural synapses that can be easily manipulated to achieve specific outcomes.
For example, probing electrodes in mouse brains can trigger feelings of euphoria, pain, or depression
without them having any concept that they are not in control.
In the same way, what we perceive as the ability to make decisions in our own lives
is also a fiction of believing we have control when we don't.
Without free will, there is no value in things like individualism or democracy
because it implies that decisions are not made consciously but rather a product of neural synapses.
Liberalism is based on the premise that every person can find truth within themselves
and trust their intuition when it comes to important decisions.
But science is increasingly showing that the electrochemical brain processes
that dictate behavior like murder or compassion are either random or deterministic,
but in no way free.
In this way, the idea of humans having freedom
becomes as meaningless as the belief in a soul or true consciousness.
The author's words, not ours.
Just like the ancient Sumerian gods, free will is only a human invention
that helps create order in the world.
Big idea number eight.
The Great Decoupling
As science increasingly unravels the concept of human free will,
it seems inevitable that human society will continue to follow where the evidence leads.
Liberalism values free markets and democratic elections
because it believes that every human is a valuable individual
with the power of free choice, free will.
And the disillusion of this belief is likely to lead to three main developments.
Number one, human beings will become less useful for the economy,
the political system, and the military,
meaning that these systems will stop attaching as much value to humans.
Number two, individual people will no longer be considered uniquely valuable,
and the focus will turn towards humans collectively.
And number three, some humans will still be valued by the system,
but these will only be upgraded superhumans,
not the general population.
Now, if it seems too scary, too far-fetched that ordinary humans could lose their value
and become superfluous to the functioning of society,
think of what happened to horses during the Industrial Revolution.
While horses were beings that could smell and recognize faces
and do hundreds of things besides pull wagons,
they were quickly replaced with engines that were superior
at the single task of moving people from place to place.
In the same way, increasingly advanced robots will continue to take over human jobs
because they will be able to better perform specialized tasks.
For example, as autonomous cars become more popular,
it's highly likely that taxi drivers will someday be replaced just like horses were.
And if you've been paying any attention to the news lately,
then you know that they're already testing self-driving autonomous cars
in places like in companies such as Uber
and different transport companies like large truck companies
transporting various goods of different types,
just self-driving trucks.
And so this is going to become more prevalent in the future.
It might sound cold to replace human beings with data systems and robots
and artificial intelligence, but if humans lack free will
and are systems and algorithms in the same way that robots are,
what difference does it really make, Harari says?
Big idea, number nine, the ocean of consciousness.
The future of data systems is full of potential,
but many of the paths it could take might not be ideal for most of humanity.
A techno-religion of algorithms and genes is beginning to take over the world
with promises of salvation through increased lifespans
and almost infinite amounts of data.
There are two main types of techno-religions today.
There is techno-humanism, and then there is data-religion.
Data-religion believes that humans will soon be unable to compete
with the power of automation and data
and that they should step aside for new entities to take over.
In contrast, techno-humanism believes that humans will always have a role
in the workings of the world, but that the human mind will be upgraded
to provide currently unknown experiences in states of consciousness.
In this view, medicine will increasingly be focused on upgrading the healthy
rather than treating the sick.
However, the implications of techno-humanism can be frightening.
I mean, this is scary stuff.
A likely outcome is the formation of different classes of people,
split by their levels of upgraded abilities
and with increasingly fewer ways to relate to each other.
It's also possible that the modifications will move in the opposite direction
and downgrade humans instead,
getting rid of traits that are unnecessary
or distracting for the jobs that they are designed to do.
The future of humanity may be unknown,
but there is a strong likelihood that the role of technology
will become increasingly connected with the future of our species.
Whether these changes will be for the overall betterment of the entire world
or simply a select few is yet to be seen.
Closing notes.
The key takeaway from Homo Deus is this.
The history of humankind has revealed that we are at a unique turning point
in history at this current moment.
More people are dying from being overweight than from starvation.
Widespread disease outbreaks have essentially been eliminated
and more people die every year from suicide than violence or war.
Humanity can now pursue other things, Harari tells us,
like happiness and eternal life.
Through Homo Deus, Harari explores what that process might actually look like in the future
and what amount of our humanity will be given up in the process.
And although we've done our very best, by the way,
to extract and condense only the biggest ideas from this book for you
in this audiobook summary,
it's worth pointing out that this is indeed a large and detailed book.
That said, if you're interested in gaining a deeper insight and understanding of Harari's concepts,
it might be worth your time to pick up the full book.
Here are some actionable insights before we close out the summary.
Elimination of hunger, plagues, and war
will push human energies towards new goals in the future,
which might include the quest for happiness and immortality.
As data begins to play a bigger role in modern life,
the unique role of Homo sapiens is likely to diminish in importance.
Humankind has long given meaning to its actions,
even with a lack of free will,
and this has been essential for many of its achievements.
Just as the formation of humanism pulled humankind away from the worship of God
to the worship of humanity,
the increasing relevance of dataism is likely to challenge the underlying premises of dataism.
While technology will threaten the sanctity of human life,
it also provides meaning to it
through the eventual replacement of humans
by superhumans and unimaginable abilities.
About the author
Yuval Noah Harari is a professor of history
at the Hebrew University of Jerusalem.
His first book, Sapiens,
is an international bestseller
and inspired the sequel, Homo Deus.
You can find Yuval online at
ynharari.com
Thank you for listening to this Flashbooks audio summary on
Homo Deus.
Written and published by
getflashbooks.com
Narrated by Dean Bukhari
Original author
Yuval Noah Harari
For more great non-fiction book summaries
you can read or listen to
anytime, anywhere
visit us at
getflashbooks.com
Audible hopes you have enjoyed this program.
