not a place of things. It was understood as something more akin to story or drama.
That story or drama was lived, subjective experience as it manifested itself,
moment to moment, in the consciousness of every living person. It was something similar to the
stories we tell each other about our lives and their personal significance. Something similar
to the happenings that novelists describe when they capture existence in the pages of their books.
Subjective experience. That includes familiar objects such as trees and clouds, primarily
objective in their existence, but also, and more importantly, such things as emotions and dreams,
as well as hunger, thirst, and pain. It is such things, experienced personally, that are the most
fundamental elements of human life from the archaic, dramatic perspective, and they are not easily
reducible to the detached and objective, even by the modern reductionist materialist mind.
Take pain, for example. Subjective pain. That's something so real, no argument can stand against
it. Everyone acts as if their pain is real, ultimately, finally real. Pain matters. More
than matter matters. It is for this reason, I believe, that so many of the world's traditions
regard the suffering attendant upon existence as the irreducible truth of being.
In any case, that which we subjectively experience can be likened much more to a novel or a movie
than to a scientific description of physical reality. It is the drama of lived experience,
the unique, tragic, personal death of your father compared to the objective death listed in the hospital
records. The pain of your first love, the despair of dashed hopes, the joy attendant upon a child's
success. The domain not of matter, but of what matters. The scientific world of matter can be
reduced, in some sense, to its fundamental constituent elements, molecules, atoms, even quarks.
However, the world of experience has primal constituents as well. These are the necessary
elements whose interactions define drama and fiction. One of these is chaos. Another is order.
The third, as there are three, is the process that mediates between the two, which appears identical
to what modern people call consciousness. It is our eternal subjugation to the first two that makes us
doubt the validity of existence, that makes us throw up our hands in despair and fail to care for
ourselves properly. It is proper understanding of the third that allows us the only real way out.
Chaos is the domain of ignorance itself. It's unexplored territory. Chaos is what extends,
eternally and without limit, beyond the boundaries of all states, all ideas, and all disciplines.
It's the foreigner, the stranger, the member of another gang, the rustle in the bushes in the
nighttime, the monster under the bed, the hidden anger of your mother, and the sickness of your
child. Chaos is the despair and horror you feel when you've been profoundly betrayed. It's the place
you end up when things fall apart, when your dreams die, your career collapses, or your marriage ends.
Chaos is the underworld of fairy tale and myth, where the dragon and the gold it guards eternally
coexist. Chaos is where we are when we don't know where we are and what we are doing when we don't
know what we are doing. It is, in short, all those things and situations we neither know nor understand.
Chaos is also the formless potential from which the god of Genesis 1 called forth order,
using language at the beginning of time. It's the same potential from which we, made in that image,
call forth the novel and ever-changing moments of our lives. And chaos is freedom, dreadful freedom,
too. Order, by contrast, is explored territory. That's the hundreds of millions of years old hierarchy
of place, position, and authority. That's the structure of society. It's the structure provided
by biology, too, particularly insofar as you are adapted, as you are, to the structure of society.
Order is tribe, religion, hearth, home, and country. It's the warm, secure living room where the fireplace
glows and the children play. It's the flag of the nation. It's the value of the currency.
Order is the floor beneath your feet and your plan for the day. It's the greatness of tradition,
the rows of desks in a school classroom, the trains that leave on time, the calendar and the clock.
Order is the public facade we're called upon to wear, the politeness of a gathering of civilized
strangers, and the thin ice on which we all skate. Order is the place where the behavior of the world
matches our expectations and our desires, the place where all things turn out the way we want them
to. But order is sometimes tyranny and stultification as well, when the demand for certainty and uniformity
and purity becomes too one-sided. Where everything is certain, we're in order. We're there when things
are going according to plan, and nothing is new and disturbing. In the domain of order, things behave
as God intended. We like to be there. Familiar environments are congenial. In order, we're able
to think about things in the long term. There, things work, and we're stable, calm, and competent.
We seldom leave places we understand, geographical or conceptual, for that reason, and we certainly do
not like it, when we are compelled to, or when it happens accidentally. You're in order when you
have a loyal friend, a trustworthy ally. When the same person betrays you, sells you out, you move from
the daytime world of clarity and light to the dark underworld of chaos, confusion, and despair.
That's the same move you make, and the same place you visit, when the company you work for starts
to fail and your job is placed in doubt. When your tax return has been filed, that's order. When you're
audited, that's chaos. Most people would rather be mugged than audited. Before the Twin Towers fell,
that was order. Chaos manifested itself afterward. Everyone felt it. The very air became uncertain.
What exactly was it that fell? Wrong question. What exactly remained standing? That was the issue
at hand. When the ice you're skating on is solid, that's order. When the bottom drops out and things
fall apart and you plunge through the ice, that's chaos. Order is the shire of Tolkien's hobbits,
peaceful, productive, and safely inhabitable, even by the naive. Chaos is the underground kingdom of
the dwarves, usurped by Smaug, the treasure-hoarding serpent. Chaos is the deep ocean bottom to which
Pinocchio voyaged to rescue his father from Monstro, whale and fire-breathing dragon. That journey into
darkness and rescue is the most difficult thing a puppet must do if he wants to be real, if he wants to
extract himself from the temptations of deceit and acting and victimization and impulsive pleasure
and totalitarian subjugation, if he wants to take his place as a genuine being in the world.
Order is the stability of your marriage. It's buttressed by the traditions of the past and by
your expectations, grounded often invisibly in those traditions. Chaos is that stability crumbling
under your feet when you discover your partner's infidelity. Chaos is the experience of reeling
unbound and unsupported through space when your guiding routines and traditions collapse.
Order is the place in time where the oft-invisible axioms you live by organize your experience and
your actions so that what should happen does happen. Chaos is the new place in time that emerges when
tragedy strikes suddenly or malevolence reveals its paralyzing visage, even in the confines of your
own home. Something unexpected or undesired can always make its appearance when a plan is being laid out,
regardless of how familiar the circumstances. When that happens, the territory has shifted.
Make no mistake about it. The space, the apparent space, may be the same.
But we live in time as well as space. In consequence, even the oldest and most familiar places retain an
ineradicable capacity to surprise you. You may be cruising happily down the road in the automobile
you have known and loved for years. But time is passing. The brakes could fail. You might be walking
down the road in the body you've always relied on. If your heart malfunctions, even momentarily,
everything changes. Friendly old dogs can still bite. Old and trusted friends can still deceive.
New ideas can destroy old and comfortable certainties. Such things matter. They're real.
Our brains respond instantly when chaos appears, with simple, hyper-fast circuits maintained from the
ancient days when our ancestors dwelled in trees and snakes struck in a flash. After that nigh-instantaneous,
deeply reflexive bodily response comes the later evolving, more complex but slower responses of
emotions. And after that comes thinking of the higher order, which can extend over seconds, minutes,
or years. All that response is instinctive in some sense. But the faster the response, the more instinctive.
Chaos and order. Personality. Female and male.
Chaos and order are two of the most fundamental elements of lived experience.
Two of the most basic subdivisions of being itself.
But they're not things or objects. And they're not experienced as such.
Things or objects are part of the objective world. They're inanimate, spiritless. They're dead.
This is not true of chaos and order.
Those are perceived, experienced, and understood, to the degree that they're understood at all,
as personalities. And that is just as true of the perceptions, experiences, and understanding of
modern people, as their ancient forebears. It's just that moderners don't notice.
Order and chaos are not understood first, objectively, as things or objects, and then personified.
That would only be the case if we perceived objective reality first, and then inferred intent and purpose.
But that isn't how perception operates, despite our preconceptions.
Perception of things as tools, for example, occurs before or in concert with perception of things as
objects. We see what things mean just as fast or faster than we see what they are.
Perception of things as entities with personality also occurs before perception of things as things.
This is particularly true of the action of others, living others. But we also see the non-living,
objective world as animated, with purpose and intent. This is because of the operation of what
psychologists have called the hyperactive agency detector within us. We evolved over millennia
within intensely social circumstances. This means that the most significant elements of our
environment of origin were personalities, not things, objects, or situations.
The personalities we have evolved to perceive have been around in predictable form and in typical
hierarchical configurations forever, for all intents and purposes. They have been male and female,
for example, for a billion years. That's a long time. The division of life into its twin sexes
occurred before the evolution of multicellular animals. It was in a still respectable one-fifth of
that time that mammals, who take extensive care of their young, emerged. Thus, the category of parent
and or child has been around for 200 million years. That's longer than birds have existed. That's longer
than flowers have grown. It's not a billion years, but it's still a very long time. It's plenty long
enough for male and female and parent and child to serve as vital and fundamental parts of the
environment to which we have adapted. This means that male and female and parent and child are categories
for us—natural categories—deeply embedded in our perceptual, emotional, and motivational structures.
Our brains are deeply social. Other creatures, particularly other humans, were crucially important
to us as we lived, mated, and evolved. Those creatures were literally our natural habitat,
our environment. From a Darwinian perspective, nature, reality itself, the environment itself,
is what selects. The environment cannot be defined in any more fundamental manner. It is not mere inert
matter. Reality itself is whatever we contend with when we are striving to survive and reproduce. A lot
of that is other beings, their opinions of us, and their communities. And that's that.
Over the millennia, as our brain capacity increased and we developed curiosity to spare,
we became increasingly aware of and curious about the nature of the world—what we eventually
conceptualized as the objective world—outside the personalities of family and troop. And outside
is not merely unexplored physical territory. Outside is outside of what we currently understand,
and understanding is dealing with, and coping with, and not merely representing objectively.
But our brains had been long concentrating on other people. Thus, it appears that we first began to
perceive the unknown, chaotic, non-human world with the innate categories of our social brain.
And even this is a misstatement. When we first began to perceive the unknown, chaotic, non-animal world,
we used categories that had originally evolved to represent the pre-human, animal social world.
Our minds are far older than mere humanity. Our categories are far older than our species.
Our most basic category—as old in some sense as the sexual act itself—appears to be that of sex,
male and female. We appear to have taken that primordial knowledge of structured,
creative opposition, and begun to interpret everything through its lens.
Order, the known, appears symbolically associated with masculinity, as illustrated in the aforementioned
Yang of the Taoist yin-yang symbol. This is perhaps because the primary hierarchical structure of human
society is masculine, as it is among most animals, including the chimpanzees who are our closest genetic
and arguably behavioral match. It is because men are, and throughout history have been, the builders of
towns and cities, the engineers, stonemasons, bricklayers, and lumberjacks, the operators of heavy machinery.
Order is God the Father, the eternal judge, ledger keeper, and dispenser of rewards and punishments.
Order is the peacetime army of policemen and soldiers. It's the political culture,
the corporate environment, and the system. It's the they-in, you-know-what-they-say.
It's credit cards, classrooms, supermarket checkout lineups, turn-taking, traffic lights, and the
familiar routes of daily commuters. Order, when pushed too far, when imbalanced, can also manifest
itself destructively and terribly. It does so as the forced migration, the concentration camp,
and the soul-devouring uniformity of the goose step. Chaos, the unknown, is symbolically associated
with the feminine. This is partly because all the things we have come to know were born originally
of the unknown, just as all beings we encounter were born of mothers. Chaos is mater, origin, source,
mother, materia, the substance from which all things are made. It is also what matters, or what is the
matter, the very subject matter of thought and communication. In its positive guise, chaos is
possibility itself, the source of ideas, the mysterious realm of gestation and birth. As a negative force,
it's the impenetrable darkness of a cave, and the accident by the side of the road. It's the mother
grizzly, all compassion to her cubs, who marks you as potential predator and tears you to pieces.
Chaos, the eternal feminine, is also the crushing force of sexual selection. Women are choosy
maters, unlike female chimps, their closest animal counterparts. Most men do not meet female human
standards. It is for this reason that women on dating sites rate 85% of men as below
average in attractiveness. It is for this reason that we all have twice as many female ancestors
as male. Imagine that all the women who have ever lived have averaged one child. Now imagine that half
the men who have ever lived have fathered two children, if they had any, while the other half
fathered none. It is woman as nature who looks at half of all men and says, No. For the men, that's a direct
encounter with chaos, and it occurs with devastating force every time they are turned down for a date.
Human female choosiness is also why we are very different from the common ancestor we shared with
our chimpanzee cousins, while the latter are very much the same. Women's proclivity to say No more than
any other force has shaped our evolution into the creative, industrious, upright, large-brained,
competitive, aggressive, domineering, creatures that we are. It is nature as woman who says,
Well, bucko, you're good enough for a friend, but my experience of you so far has not indicated
the suitability of your genetic material for continued propagation.
The most profound religious symbols rely for their power in large part on this underlying
fundamentally-bipartisan conceptual subdivision. The Star of David is, for example, the downward-pointing
triangle of femininity and the upward-pointing triangle of the male. It's the same for the
Yonian lingam of Hinduism, which come covered with snakes, our ancient adversaries and provocateurs.
The Shiva Linga is depicted with snake deities called the Nagas. The ancient Egyptians represented
Osiris, god of the state, and Isis, goddess of the underworld, as twin cobras with their tails
knotted together. The same symbol was used in China to portray Fuxi and Nuwa, creators of humanity and of
writing. The representations in Christianity are less abstract, more like personalities, but the
familiar western images of the Virgin Mary with the Christ child and the Paeta both express the female-male
dual unity as does the traditional insistence on the androgyny of Christ.
It should also be noted, finally, that the structure of the brain itself at a gross morphological level
appears to reflect this duality. This, to me, indicates the fundamental, beyond the metaphorical
reality of this symbolically feminine-masculine divide, since the brain is adapted, by definition,
to reality itself. That is, reality conceptualized in this quasi-Darwinian manner.
Alkonen Goldberg, student of the great Russian neuropsychologist Alexander Luria, has proposed,
quite lucidly and directly, that the very hemispheric structure of the cortex reflects the fundamental
division between novelty, the unknown or chaos, and routinization, the known, order. He doesn't make
reference to the symbols representing the structure of the world in reference to this theory, but that's
all the better. An idea is more credible when it emerges as a consequence of investigations in different
realms. We already know all this, but we don't know we know it. But we immediately comprehend it when
it's articulated in a manner such as this. Everyone understands order and chaos, world and
underworld, when it's explained using these terms. We all have a palpable sense of the chaos lurking
under everything familiar. That's why we understand the strange, surreal stories of Pinocchio, and
Sleeping Beauty, and The Lion King, and The Little Mermaid, and Beauty and the Beast, with their eternal
landscapes of known and unknown, world and underworld. We've all been in both places many times, sometimes
by happenstance, sometimes by choice. Many things begin to fall into place when you begin to consciously
understand the world in this manner. It's as if the knowledge of your body and soul falls into alignment
with the knowledge of your intellect. And there's more. Such knowledge is proscriptive as well as
descriptive. This is the kind of knowing what that helps you know how. This is the kind of is from
which you can derive an ought. The Taoist juxtaposition of yin and yang, for example, doesn't simply portray
chaos and order as the fundamental elements of being. It also tells you how to act. The way,
the Taoist path of life, is represented by, or exists on, the border between the twin serpents.
The way is the path of proper being. It's the same way as that referred to by Christ in John 14, 6.
I am the way, and the truth, and the life. The same idea is expressed in Matthew 7, 14.
Because straight is the gate, and narrow is the way, which leadeth unto life,
and few there be that find it. We eternally inhabit order, surrounded by chaos. We eternally occupy
known territory, surrounded by the unknown. We experience meaningful engagement when we mediate
appropriately between them. We are adapted in the deepest Darwinian sense, not to the world of objects,
but to the meta-realities of order and chaos, yang and yin. Chaos and order make up the eternal,
transcendent environment of the living. To straddle that fundamental duality is to be balanced.
To have one foot firmly planted in order and security, and the other in chaos, possibility,
growth and adventure. When life suddenly reveals itself as intense, gripping, and meaningful. When
time passes, and you're so engrossed in what you're doing you don't notice, it is there and then that
you are located precisely on the border between order and chaos. The subjective meaning that we encounter
there is the reaction of our deepest being, our neurologically and evolutionarily grounded
instinctive self, indicating that we are ensuring the stability but also the expansion of habitable,
productive territory, of space that is personal, social, and natural. It's the right place to be in
every sense. You are there when and where it matters. That's what music is telling you too when you're
listening. Even more perhaps when you're dancing, when its harmonious layered patterns of predictability
and unpredictability make meaning itself well up from the most profound depths of your being.
Chaos and order are fundamental elements because every lived situation, even every conceivable lived
situation is made up of both. No matter where we are, there are some things we can identify,
make use of, and predict. And some things we neither know nor understand. No matter who we are,
Kalahari desert dweller or Wall Street banker, some things are under our control and some things are not.
That's why both can understand the same stories and dwell within the confines of the same eternal truths.
Finally, the fundamental reality of chaos and order is true for everything alive, not only for us.
Living things are always to be found in places they can master, surrounded by things and situations that
make them vulnerable. Order is not enough. You can't just be stable and secure and unchanging, because there are
still vital and important new things to be learned. Nonetheless, chaos can be too much. You can't long
tolerate being swamped and overwhelmed beyond your capacity to cope while you are learning what you
still need to know. Thus, you need to place one foot in what you have mastered and understood, and the other
in what you are currently exploring and mastering. Then you have positioned yourself, where the terror of
existence is under control and you are secure, but where you are also alert and engaged. That is where
there is something new to master and some way that you can be improved. That is where meaning is to be found.
The Garden of Eden
Remember, as discussed earlier, that the Genesis stories were amalgamated from several sources.
After the newer priestly story, Genesis 1, recounting the emergence of order from chaos, comes the second,
even more ancient, Yahwist part, beginning essentially with Genesis 2.
The Yahwist account, which uses the name YHWH or Yahweh to represent God, contains the story of Adam and
Eve, along with a much fuller explication of the events of the sixth day, alluded to in the previous
priestly story. The continuity between the stories appears to be the result of careful editing by the
person or persons known singly to biblical scholars as the redactor, who wove the stories together.
This may have occurred when the peoples of two traditions united, for one reason or another,
and the subsequent illogic of their melded stories, growing together over time in an ungainly fashion,
bothered someone conscious, courageous, and obsessed with coherence.
According to the Yahwist creation story, God first created a bounded space known as Eden, which,
in Aramaic, Jesus' putative language, means well-watered place, or paradise, paradeza in old
Iranian or avastad, which means walled or protected enclosure or garden. God placed Adam in there,
along with all manner of fruit-bearing trees, two of which were marked out. One of these was the tree
of life, the other the tree of knowledge of good and evil. God then told Adam to have his fill of fruit
as he wished, but added that the fruit of the tree of the knowledge of good and evil was forbidden.
After that, he created Eve as a partner for Adam. Adam and Eve don't seem very conscious at the
beginning when they are first placed in paradise, and they were certainly not self-conscious. As the
story insists, the original parents were naked, but not ashamed. Such phrasing implies first that it's
perfectly natural and normal for people to be ashamed of their nakedness, otherwise nothing
would have to be said about its absence. And second, that there was something amiss,
for better or worse, with our first parents. Although there are exceptions, the only people
around now who would be unashamed if suddenly dropped naked into a public place, excepting the
odd exhibitionist, are those younger than three years of age. In fact, a common nightmare involves the
sudden appearance of the dreamer naked on a stage in front of a packed house.
In the third verse of Genesis, a serpent appears, first apparently in legged form.
God only knows why he allowed or placed such a creature in the garden.
I've long puzzled over the meaning of this. It seems to be a reflection in part of the order-chaos
dichotomy characterizing all of experience, with paradise serving as habitable order, and the
serpent playing the role of chaos. The serpent in Eden therefore means the same thing as the black
dot in the yin side of the Taoist yin-yang symbol of totality, that is, the possibility of the unknown
and revolutionary suddenly manifesting itself, where everything appears calm.
It just does not appear possible, even for God himself, to make a bounded space, completely
protected from the outside, not in the real world, with its necessary limitations, surrounded by the
transcendent. The outside, chaos, always sneaks into the inside, because nothing can be completely walled
off from the rest of reality. So even the ultimate in safe spaces inevitably harbors a snake.
There were, forever, genuine, quotidian, reptilian snakes in the grass and in the trees of our
original African paradise. Even had all of these been banished, however, in some inconceivable manner,
by some primordial Saint George, snakes would have still remained in the form of our primordial human
rivals, at least when they were acting like enemies from our limited, in-group, kin-bonded perspectives.
There was, after all, no shortage of conflict and warfare among our ancestors, tribal and otherwise.
And even if we had defeated all the snakes that beset us from without, reptilian and human alike,
we would still not have been safe. Nor are we now. We have seen the enemy, after all, and he is us.
The snake inhabits each of our souls. This is the reason, as far as I can tell, for the strange Christian
insistence made most explicit by John Milton, that the snake in the Garden of Eden was also Satan,
the spirit of evil itself. The importance of this symbolic identification, its staggering brilliance,
can hardly be overstated. It is through such millennia-long exercise of the imagination that
the idea of abstracted moral concepts themselves, with all they entail, develop. Work beyond
comprehension was invested into the idea of good and evil, and its surrounding dreamlike metaphor.
The worst of all possible snakes is psychological, spiritual, personal, internal. No walls, however
tall, will keep that out. Even if the fortress were thick enough, in principle, to keep everything bad
whatsoever outside, it would immediately appear again within. As the great Russian writer,
Alexander Solzhenitsyn, insisted, the line dividing good and evil cuts through the heart of every human
being. There is simply no way to wall off some isolated portion of the greater surrounding reality,
and make everything permanently predictable and safe within it. Some of what has been, no matter how
carefully excluded, will always sneak back in. A serpent, metaphorically speaking, will inevitably appear.
Even the most assiduous of parents cannot fully protect their children, even if they lock them in
the basement, safely away from drugs, alcohol, and internet porn. In that extreme case, the too cautious,
too caring parent merely substitutes him or herself for the other terrible problems of life.
This is the great Freudian Oedipal nightmare. It is far better to render beings in your care competent
than to protect them. And even if it were possible to permanently banish everything threatening,
everything dangerous, and therefore everything challenging and interesting, that would mean only
that another danger would emerge. That of permanent human infantilism and absolute uselessness.
How could the nature of man ever reach its full potential, without challenge and danger? How dull and
contemptible would we become if there was no longer reason to pay attention? Maybe God thought his new
creation would be able to handle the serpent, and considered its presence the lesser of two evils.
Question for parents. Do you want to make your children safe or strong?
In any case, there's a serpent in the garden, and he's a subtle beast, according to the ancient story.
Difficult to see, vaporous, cunning, deceitful, and treacherous. It therefore comes as no surprise when he
decides to play a trick on Eve. Why Eve instead of Adam? It could just be chance. It was 50-50 for
Eve, statistically speaking, and those are pretty high odds. But I have learned that these old stories
contain nothing superfluous. Anything accidental, anything that does not serve the plot, has long been
forgotten in the telling. As the Russian playwright Anton Chekhov advised, if there is a rifle hanging
on the wall in Act I, it must be fired in the next act. Otherwise, it has no business being there.
Perhaps Primordial Eve had more reason to attend to serpents than Adam. Maybe they were more likely,
for example, to prey on her tree-dwelling infants. Perhaps it is for this reason that Eve's daughters are
more protective, self-conscious, fearful, and nervous to this day, even and especially in the
most egalitarian of modern human societies. In any case, the serpent tells Eve that if she eats the
forbidden fruit, she won't die. Instead, her eyes will be opened. She will become like God, knowing good
from evil. Of course, the serpent doesn't let her know she will be like God in only that one way.
But he is a serpent, after all. Being human, and wanting to know more, Eve decides to eat the fruit.
Poof! She wakes up. She's conscious, or perhaps self-conscious, for the first time.
Now no clear-seeing conscious woman is going to tolerate an unawakened man.
So Eve immediately shares the fruit with Adam. That makes him self-conscious.
Little has changed. Women have been making men self-conscious since the beginning of time.
They do this primarily by rejecting them, but they also do it by shaming them if men do not
take responsibility. Since women bear the primary burden of reproduction, it's no wonder. It's very
hard to see how it could be otherwise. But the capacity of women to shame men and render them
self-conscious is still a primal force of nature. Now you may ask, what in the world have snakes got
to do with vision? Well, first, it's clearly of some importance to see them, because they might prey on
you, particularly when you're little and live in trees like our arboreal ancestors. Dr. Lynn Isbell,
Professor of Anthropology and Animal Behavior at the University of California,
has suggested that the stunningly acute vision, almost uniquely possessed by human beings,
was an adaptation forced on us tens of millions of years ago by the necessity of detecting and avoiding
the terrible danger of snakes with whom our ancestors co-evolved. This is perhaps one of the
reasons the snake features in the garden of paradise as the creature who gave us the vision of God,
in addition to serving as the primordial and eternal enemy of mankind. This is perhaps one of the
reasons why Mary, the eternal archetypal mother, Eve perfected, is so commonly shown in medieval and
renaissance iconography holding the Christ child in the air, as far away as possible from a predatory
reptile, which she has firmly pinned under her foot. And there's more. It's fruit that the snake offers,
and fruit is also associated with the transformation of vision, in that our ability to see color is an
adaptation that allows us to rapidly detect the ripe and therefore edible bounty of trees.
Our primordial parents hearkened to the snake. They ate the fruit. Their eyes opened. They both awoke.
You might think, as Eve did initially, that this would be a good thing. Sometimes, however, half a gift
is worse than none. Adam and Eve wake up all right, but only enough to discover some terrible things.
First, they noticed that they're naked. The naked ape. My son figured out that he was naked well before
he was three. He wanted to dress himself. He kept the washroom door firmly shut. He didn't appear in
public without his clothes. I couldn't for the life of me see how this had anything to do with his
upbringing. It was his own discovery, his own realization, and his own choice of reactions.
It looked built in to me. What does it mean to know yourself naked? Or, potentially worse,
to know yourself and your partner naked? All manner of terrible things. Naked means vulnerable and easily
damaged. Naked means subject to judgment for beauty and health. Naked means unprotected and unarmed in
the jungle of nature and man. This is why Adam and Eve became ashamed immediately after their eyes were
opened. They could see, and what they first saw was themselves. Their faults stood out. Their vulnerability
was on display. Unlike other mammals, whose delicate abdomens are protected by the armor-like expanse of
their backs, they were upright creatures, with the most vulnerable parts of their body presented to the
world. And worse was to come. Adam and Eve made themselves loincloths in the International Standard
version, aprons in the King James version, right away to cover up their fragile bodies and to protect
their egos. Then they promptly skittered off and hid. In their vulnerability, now fully realized,
they felt unworthy to stand before God. If you can't identify with that sentiment, you're just not
thinking. Beauty shames the ugly. Strength shames the weak. Death shames the living. And the ideal shames us
all. Thus, we fear it, resent it, even hate it. And of course, that's the theme next examined in Genesis
in the story of Cain and Abel. What are we to do about that? Abandon all ideals of beauty, health,
brilliance, and strength? That's not a good solution. That would merely ensure that we would feel ashamed
all the time. And that we would even more justly deserve it. I don't want women who can stun by their
mere presence to disappear just so that others can feel unselfconscious. I don't want intellects such as
John von Neumann's to vanish just because of my barely grade 12 grasp of mathematics. By the time he
was 19, he had redefined numbers. Numbers! Thank God for John von Neumann. Thank God for Grace Kelly
and Anita Eckberg and Monica Bellucci. I'm proud to feel unworthy in the presence of people like that.
It's the price we all pay for aim, achievement, and ambition. But it's also no wonder that Adam and Eve
covered themselves up. The next part of the story is downright farcical, in my opinion, although it's
also tragic and terrible. That evening, when Eden cools down, God goes out for his evening stroll.
But Adam is absent. This puzzles God, who is accustomed to walking with him.
Adam calls God, apparently forgetting that he can see through bushes. Where are you? Adam immediately
reveals himself, but badly. First as a neurotic, then as a rat-fink. The creator of all the
universe calls, and Adam replies, I heard you, God, but I was naked and hid. What does this mean?
It means that people, unsettled by their vulnerability, eternally fear to tell the truth,
to mediate between chaos and order, and to manifest their destiny. In other words, they are afraid to
walk with God. That's not particularly admirable, perhaps, but it's certainly understandable. God's a
judgmental father. His standards are high. He's hard to please. God says, who told you that you were naked?
Did you eat something you weren't supposed to? And Adam, in his wretchedness, points right at Eve,
his love, his partner, his soul mate, and snitches on her. And then he blames God. He says,
the woman whom you gave to me, she gave it to me, and then I ate it. How pathetic, and how accurate.
The first woman made the first man self-conscious and resentful. Then the first man blamed the woman,
and then the first man blamed God. This is exactly how every spurned male feels to this day.
First, he feels small, in front of the potential object of his love, after she denigrates his
reproductive suitability. Then he curses God for making her so bitchy, himself so useless, if he has
any sense, and being itself so deeply flawed. Then he turns to thoughts of revenge. How thoroughly
contemptible, and how utterly understandable. At least the woman had the serpent to blame,
and it later turns out that the snake is Satan himself, unlikely as that seems. Thus we can
understand and sympathize with Eve's error. She was deceived by the best. But Adam? No one forced
his words from his mouth. Unfortunately, the worst isn't over, for man or beast. First, God curses
the serpent, telling him that he will now have to slither around, legless, forever in peril of being
stomped on by angry humans. Second, he tells the woman that she will now bring forth children in
sorrow and desire an unworthy, sometimes resentful man, who will in consequence lord her biological fate
over her permanently. What might this mean? It could just mean that God is a patriarchal tyrant,
as politically motivated interpretations of the ancient story insist. I think it's merely descriptive.
Merely. And here is why. As human beings evolved, the brains that eventually gave rise to self-consciousness
expanded tremendously. This produced an evolutionary arms race between fetal head and female pelvis.
The female graciously widened her hips, almost to the point where running would no longer be possible.
The baby, for his part, allowed himself to be born more than a year early compared to other mammals of
his size, and evolved a semi-collapsible head. This was, and is, a painful adjustment for both.
The essentially fetal baby is almost completely dependent on his mother for everything during
that first year. The programmability of his massive brain means that he must be trained until he is 18,
or 30, before being pushed out of the nest. This is to say nothing of the woman's consequential pain
in childbirth and high risk of death for mother and infant alike. This all means that women pay a high
price for pregnancy and child-rearing, particularly in the early stages, and that one of the inevitable
consequences is increased dependence upon the sometimes unreliable and always problematic good
graces of men. After God tells Eve what is going to happen, now that she is awakened, he turns to Adam,
who, along with his male descendants, doesn't get off any easier. God says something akin to this.
Man, because you attended to the woman, your eyes have been opened. Your godlike vision,
granted to you by snake, fruit, and lover, allows you to see far, even into the future.
But those who see into the future can also eternally see trouble coming, and must then prepare for all
contingencies and possibilities. To do that, you will have to eternally sacrifice the present
for the future. You must put aside pleasure for security. In short, you will have to work,
and it's going to be difficult. I hope you're fond of thorns and thistles, because you're going to grow
a lot of them. And then God banishes the first man and the first woman from paradise, out of infancy,
out of the unconscious animal world, into the horrors of history itself. And then he puts cherubim and a
flaming sword at the gate of Eden, just to stop them from eating the fruit of the tree of life.
That, in particular, appears rather mean-spirited. Why not just make the poor humans immortal,
right away? Particularly if that is your plan for the ultimate future, anyway, as the story goes.
But who would dare to question God? Perhaps heaven is something you must build,
and immortality something you must earn. And so we return to our original query.
Why would someone buy prescription medication for his dog, and then so carefully administer it,
when he would not do the same for himself? Now you have the answer, derived from one of the
foundational texts of mankind. Why should anyone take care of anything as naked, ugly, ashamed,
frightened, worthless, cowardly, resentful, defensive, and accusatory, as a descendant of Adam?
Even if that thing, that being, is himself. And I do not mean at all to exclude women with this phrasing.
All the reasons we have discussed so far for taking a dim view of humanity are applicable to others as
much as to the self. There are generalizations about human nature, nothing more specific.
But you know so much more about yourself. You're bad enough as other people know you. But only you know
the full range of your secret transgressions, insufficiencies, and inadequacies. No one is more
familiar than you with all the ways your mind and body are flawed. No one has more reason to hold you in
contempt, to see you as pathetic. And by withholding something that might do you good, you can punish
yourself for all your failings. A dog, a harmless, innocent, unself-conscious dog, is clearly more
deserving. But if you are not yet convinced, let us consider another vital issue. Order, chaos, life,
death, sin, vision, work, and suffering, that is not enough for the authors of Genesis, nor for humanity
itself. The story continues in all its catastrophe and tragedy. And the people involved, that's us,
must contend with yet another painful awakening. We are next fated to contemplate morality itself.
Good and Evil
When their eyes are opened, Adam and Eve realize more than just their nakedness and the necessity
of toil. They also come to know good and evil. The serpent says, referring to the fruit,
For God doth know that in the day ye eat thereof, then your eyes shall be opened, and ye shall be as gods,
knowing good and evil. What could that possibly mean? What could be left to explore and relate
after the vast ground already covered? Well, simple context indicates that it must have something to do
with gardens, snakes, disobedience, fruit, sexuality, and nakedness. It was the last item,
nakedness, that finally clued me in. It took years.
Dogs are predators. So are cats. They kill things and eat them. It's not pretty. But we'll take them
as pets and care for them and give them their medication when they're sick, regardless. Why?
They're predators. But it's just their nature. They do not bear responsibility for it. They're hungry,
not evil. They don't have the presence of mind, the creativity, and above all the self-consciousness,
necessary for the inspired cruelty of man.
Why not? It's simple. Unlike us, predators have no comprehension of their fundamental weakness,
their fundamental vulnerability, their own subjugation to pain and death. But we know exactly
how and where we can be hurt, and why. That is as good a definition as any of self-consciousness.
We are aware of our own defenselessness, finitude, and mortality. We can feel pain, and self-disgust,
and shame, and horror. And we know it. We know what makes us suffer. We know how dread and pain can be
inflicted on us. And that means we know exactly how to inflict it on others. We know how we are naked,
and how that nakedness can be exploited. And that means we know how others are naked, and how they
can be exploited. We can terrify other people, consciously. We can hurt and humiliate them for
faults we understand only too well. We can torture them, literally, slowly, artfully, and terribly.
That's far more than predation. That's a qualitative shift in understanding.
That's a cataclysm as large as the development of self-consciousness itself.
That's the entry of the knowledge of good and evil into the world.
That's a second as yet unhealed fracture in the structure of existence.
That's the transformation of being itself into a moral endeavor, all attendant on the development
of sophisticated self-consciousness. Only man could conceive of the rack, the iron maiden,
and the thumbscrew. Only man will inflict suffering for the sake of suffering. That is the best definition
of evil I have been able to formulate. Animals can't manage that, but humans, with their excruciating,
semi-divine capacities, most certainly can. And with this realization, we have well-nigh full
legitimization of the idea, very unpopular in modern intellectual circles, of original sin.
And who would dare to say that there was no element of voluntary choice in our evolutionary individual
and theological transformation? Our ancestors chose their sexual partners, and they selected for
consciousness? And self-consciousness? And moral knowledge? And who can deny the sense of existential
guilt that pervades human experience? And who could avoid noting that without that guilt, that sense of
inbuilt corruption and capacity for wrongdoing, a man is one step from psychopathy?
Human beings have a great capacity for wrongdoing. It's an attribute that is unique in the world of life.
We can, and do, make things worse, voluntarily, with full knowledge of what we are doing,
as well as accidentally and carelessly and in a manner that is willfully blind. Given that terrible
capacity, that proclivity for malevolent actions, is it any wonder we have a hard time taking care of
ourselves or others, or even that we doubt the value of the entire human enterprise? And we've suspected
ourselves for good reason for a very long time. Thousands of years ago, the ancient Mesopotamians
believed, for example, that mankind itself was made from the blood of Kingu, the single most terrible
monster that the great goddess of chaos could produce in her most vengeful and destructive moments.
After drawing conclusions such as that, how could we not question the value of our being, and even of
being itself? Who then could be faced with illness in himself or another, without doubting the moral
utility of prescribing a healing medicament? And no one understands the darkness of the individual
better than the individual himself? Who then, when ill, is going to be fully committed to his own care?
Perhaps man is something that should never have been. Perhaps the world should even be cleansed of all
human presence so that being and consciousness could return to the innocent brutality of the animal.
I believe that the person who claims never to have wished for such a thing has neither consulted
his memory nor confronted his darkest fantasies. What then is to be done?
A Spark of the Divine
In Genesis 1, God creates the world with the divine, truthful word, generating habitable,
paradisal order from the pre-cosmogonic chaos. He then creates man and woman in his image,
imbuing them with the capacity to do the same, to create order from chaos, and continue his work.
At each stage of creation, including that involving the formation of the first couple,
God reflects upon what has come to be, and pronounces it good.
The juxtaposition of Genesis 1 with Genesis 2 and 3, the latter two chapters outlining the fall of man,
describing why our lot is so tragedy-ridden and ethically torturous, produces a narrative sequence
almost unbearable in its profundity. The moral of Genesis 1 is that being brought into existence
through true speech is good. This is true even of man himself, prior to his separation from God.
This goodness is terribly disrupted by the events of the fall, and of Cain and Abel, and the flood,
and the Tower of Babel. But we retain an intimation of the pre-lapsarian state.
We remember, so to speak. We remain eternally nostalgic for the innocence of childhood,
the divine unconscious being of the animal, and the untouched cathedral-like old-growth forest.
We find respite in such things. We worship them, even if we are self-proclaimed
atheistic environmentalists of the most anti-human sort. The original state of nature conceived in
this manner is paradisal. But we are no longer one with God and nature, and there is no simple turning
back. The original man and woman, existing in unbroken unity with their Creator, did not appear
conscious, and certainly not self-conscious. Their eyes were not open. But in their perfection,
they were also less, not more, than their post-fall counterparts. Their goodness was something bestowed,
rather than deserved or earned. They exercised no choice. God knows that's easier. But maybe it's
not better than, for example, goodness genuinely earned. Maybe even in some cosmic sense, assuming that
consciousness itself is a phenomenon of cosmic significance. Free choice matters. Who can
speak with certainty about such things? I am unwilling to take these questions off the table,
however, merely because they are difficult. So, here's a proposition. Perhaps it is not simply the
emergence of self-consciousness and the rise of our moral knowledge of death and the fall that besets us,
and makes us doubt our own worth. Perhaps it is instead our unwillingness,
reflected in Adam's shamed hiding, to walk with God, despite our fragility and propensity for evil.
The entire Bible is structured so that everything after the fall—the history of Israel, the prophets,
the coming of Christ—is presented as a remedy for that fall, a way out of evil. The beginning of
conscious history, the rise of the state and all its pathologies of pride and rigidity, the emergence of
great moral figures who try to set things right, culminating in the Messiah himself. That is all part of
humanity's attempt, God willing, to set itself right. And what would that mean? And this is an amazing thing.
The answer is already implicit in Genesis 1, to embody the image of God, to speak out of chaos the
being that is good, but to do so consciously of our own free choice. Back is the way forward,
as T.S. Eliot so rightly insisted, but back as awake beings, exercising the proper choice of awake beings,
instead of back to sleep. We shall not cease from exploration, and the end of all our exploring will
be to arrive where we started, and know the place for the first time. Through the unknown remembered gate,
when the last of earth left to discover, is that which was the beginning. At the source of the longest river,
the voice of the hidden waterfall, and the children in the apple tree. Not known, because not looked for,
but heard, half heard, in the stillness between two waves of the sea. Quick now, here, now, always.
A condition of complete simplicity, costing not less than everything. And all shall be well, and all manner of
things shall be well, when the tongues of flames are infolded into the crowned knot of fire, and the fire
and the rose are one. Little Gidding, T.S. Eliot, Four Quartets, 1943.
If we wished to take care of ourselves properly, we would have to respect ourselves. But we don't,
because we are, not least in our own eyes, fallen creatures. If we lived in truth, if we spoke the
truth, then we could walk with God once again, and respect ourselves, and others, and the world.
Then we might treat ourselves like people we cared for. We might strive to set the world straight.
We might orient it toward heaven, where we would want people we cared for to dwell,
instead of hell, where our resentment and hatred would eternally sentence everyone.
In the areas where Christianity emerged 2,000 years ago, people were much more barbaric than they are today.
Conflict was everywhere. Human sacrifice, including that of children, was a common occurrence,
even in technologically sophisticated societies, such as that of ancient Carthage. In Rome,
arena sports were competitions to the death, and the spilling of blood was a common place.
The probability that a modern person, in a functional democratic country, will now kill or be killed,
is infinitesimally low compared to what it was in previous societies, and still is in the
unorganized and anarchic parts of the world. Then, the primary moral issue confronting society was
control of violent, impulsive selfishness, and the mindless greed and brutality that accompanies it.
People with those aggressive tendencies still exist. At least now they know that such behavior is
suboptimal, and either try to control it, or encounter major social obstacles if they don't.
But now, also, another problem has arisen, which was perhaps less common in our harsher past.
It is easy to believe that people are arrogant, and egotistical, and always looking out for
themselves. The cynicism that makes that opinion a universal truism is widespread and fashionable.
But such an orientation to the world is not at all characteristic of many people.
They have the opposite problem. They shoulder intolerable burdens of self-disgust,
self-contempt, shame, and self-consciousness. Thus, instead of narcissistically inflating their
own importance, they don't value themselves at all, and they don't take care of themselves with
attention and skill. It seems that people often don't really believe that they deserve the best care,
personally speaking. They are excruciatingly aware of their own faults and inadequacies,
real and exaggerated, and ashamed and doubtful of their own value. They believe that other people
shouldn't suffer, and they will work diligently and altruistically to help them alleviate it.
They extend the same courtesy even to the animals they are acquainted with, but not so easily to
themselves. It is true that the idea of virtuous self-sacrifice is deeply embedded in Western culture.
At least insofar as the West has been influenced by Christianity, which is based on the imitation of
someone who performed the ultimate act of self-sacrifice. Any claim that the golden rule
does not mean sacrifice yourself for others might therefore appear dubious. But Christ's archetypal
death exists as an example of how to accept finitude, betrayal, and tyranny heroically, how to walk with
God despite the tragedy of self-conscious knowledge, and not as a directive to victimize ourselves in the
service of others. To sacrifice ourselves to God, to the highest good if you like, does not mean to suffer
silently and willingly when some person or organization demands more from us consistently than is offered in return.
That means we are supporting tyranny and allowing ourselves to be treated like slaves.
It is not virtuous to be victimized by a bully, even if that bully is oneself.
I learned two very important lessons from Carl Jung, the famous Swiss depth psychologist, about
doing unto others as you would have them do unto you, or loving your neighbor as yourself.
The first lesson was that neither of these statements has anything to do with being nice.
The second was that both are equations rather than injunctions. If I am someone's friend, family
member, or lover, then I am morally obliged to bargain as hard on my own behalf as they are on theirs.
If I fail to do so, I will end up a slave and the other person a tyrant. What good is that?
It is much better for any relationship when both partners are strong.
Furthermore, there is little difference between standing up and speaking for yourself when you are
being bullied or otherwise tormented and enslaved, and standing up and speaking for someone else.
As Jung points out, this means embracing and loving the sinner who is yourself as much as forgiving and
aiding someone else who is stumbling and imperfect. As God himself claims, so goes the story.
Vengeance is mine. I will repay, saith the Lord.
According to this philosophy, you do not simply belong to yourself. You are not simply your own
possession to torture and mistreat. This is partly because your being is inexorably tied up with that
of others. And your mistreatment of yourself can have catastrophic consequences for others.
This is most clearly evident, perhaps, in the aftermath of suicide, when those left behind are
often both bereft and traumatized. But metaphorically speaking, there is also this.
You have a spark of the divine in you, which belongs not to you, but to God. We are, after all, according
to Genesis, made in his image. We have this semi-divine capacity for consciousness. Our consciousness
participates in this speaking forth of being. We are low resolution, canotic, versions of God.
God. We can make order from chaos, and vice versa, in our way, with our words. So we may not exactly be
God, but we're not exactly nothing, either. In my own periods of darkness, in the underworld of the
soul, I find myself frequently overcome and amazed by the ability of people to befriend each other,
to love their intimate partners and parents and children, and to do what they must do to keep the
machinery of the world running. I knew a man, injured and disabled by a car accident, who was
employed by a local utility. For years after the crash, he worked side by side with another man,
who, for his part, suffered with a degenerative neurological disease. They cooperated while repairing
the lines, each making up for the other's inadequacy. This sort of everyday heroism is the rule,
I believe, rather than the exception. Most individuals are dealing with one or more
serious health problems while going productively and uncomplainingly about their business.
If anyone is fortunate enough to be in a rare period of grace and health personally,
then he or she typically has at least one close family member in crisis.
Yet people prevail, and continue to do difficult and effortful tasks to hold themselves and their
families and society together. To me, this is miraculous, so much so that a dumbfounded gratitude
is the only appropriate response. There are so many ways that things can fall apart or fail to work
altogether, and it is always wounded people who are holding it together. They deserve some genuine and
heartfelt admiration for that. It's an ongoing miracle of fortitude and perseverance.
In my clinical practice, I encourage people to credit themselves and those around them for acting
productively and with care, as well as for the genuine concern and thoughtfulness they manifest toward others.
People are so tortured by the limitations and constraint of being that I am amazed they ever act properly or
look beyond themselves at all. But enough do so that we have central heat and running water and infinite
computational power and electricity and enough for everyone to eat and even the capacity to
contemplate the fate of broader society and nature, terrible nature itself. All that complex machinery
that protects us from freezing and starving and dying from lack of water tends unceasingly towards
malfunction through entropy. And it is only the constant attention of careful people that keeps it working
so unbelievably well. Some people degenerate into the hell of resentment and the hatred of being,
but most refuse to do so despite their suffering and disappointments and losses and inadequacies and
ugliness. And again, that is a miracle for those with the eyes to see it. Humanity in toto, and those who
compose it as identifiable people deserve some sympathy for the appalling burden under which the human
individual genuinely staggers, some sympathy for subjugation to mortal vulnerability, tyranny of the
state and the depredations of nature. It is an existential situation that no mere animal encounters or endures,
and one of severity such that it would take a god to fully bear it. It is this sympathy
that should be the proper medicament for self-conscious self-contempt which has its justification,
but is only half the full and proper story. Hatred for self and mankind must be balanced with
gratefulness for tradition and the state and astonishment at what normal everyday people accomplish,
to say nothing of the staggering achievements of the truly remarkable.
We deserve some respect. You deserve some respect. You're important to other people as much as to
yourself. You have some vital role to play in the unfolding destiny of the world. You are therefore
morally obliged to take care of yourself. You should take care of, help, and be good to yourself the
same way you would take care of, help, and be good to someone you loved and valued. You may therefore
have to conduct yourself habitually in a manner that allows you some respect for your own being,
and fair enough. But every person is deeply flawed. Everyone falls short of the glory of God.
If that stark fact meant, however, that we had no responsibility to care for ourselves as much as
others, everyone would be brutally punished all the time. That would not be good. That would make
the shortcomings of the world, which can make everyone who thinks honestly question the very
propriety of the world worse in every way. That simply cannot be the proper path forward.
To treat yourself as if you were someone you were responsible for helping is, instead,
to consider what would be truly good for you. This is not what you want. It is also not what would
make you happy. Every time you give a child something sweet, you make that child happy. That does not
mean that you should do nothing for children except feed them candy. Happy is by no means synonymous with
good. You must get children to brush their teeth. They must put on their snowsuits when they go outside
in the cold, even though they might object strenuously. You must help a child become a
virtuous, responsible, awake being, capable of full reciprocity, able to take care of himself and others,
and to thrive while doing so. Why would you think it acceptable to do anything less for yourself?
You need to consider the future and think, what might my life look like if I were caring for myself
properly? What career would challenge me and render me productive and helpful so that I could shoulder my
share of the load and enjoy the consequences? What should I be doing when I have some freedom to
improve my health, expand my knowledge and strengthen my body? You need to know where you are so you can
start to chart your course. You need to know who you are so that you can understand your armament and
bolster yourself in respect to your limitations. You need to know where you are going so that you can limit the
extent of chaos in your life, restructure order, and bring the divine force of hope to bear on the
world. You must determine where you are going so that you can bargain for yourself so that you don't
end up resentful, vengeful, and cruel. You have to articulate your own principles so that you can
defend yourself against others taking inappropriate advantage of you, and so that you are secure and
safe while you work and play. You must discipline yourself carefully. You must keep the promises you
make to yourself and reward yourself so that you can trust and motivate yourself. You need to determine
how to act toward yourself so that you are most likely to become and to stay a good person. It would be
good to make the world a better place. Heaven, after all, will not arrive of its own accord. We will have
to work to bring it about and strengthen ourselves so that we can withstand the deadly angels and flaming
sword of judgment that God used to bar its entrance. Don't underestimate the power of vision and
direction. These are irresistible forces, able to transform what might appear to be unconquerable
obstacles into traversable pathways and expanding opportunities. Strengthen the individual. Start with
yourself. Take care with yourself. Define who you are. Refine your personality. Choose your destination and
articulate your being. As the great 19th century German philosopher Friedrich Nietzsche so brilliantly
noted, he whose life has a why can bear almost any how. You could help direct the world on its careening
trajectory a bit more toward heaven and a bit more away from hell. Once having understood hell, researched it,
so to speak, particularly your own individual hell, you could decide against going there or creating
that. You could aim elsewhere. You could, in fact, devote your life to this. That would give you a
meaning with a capital M. That would justify your miserable existence. That would atone for your sinful
nature and replace your shame and self-consciousness with the natural pride and forthright confidence of
someone who has learned once again to walk with God in the garden. You could begin by treating
yourself as if you were someone you were responsible for helping.
Rule 3. Make friends with people who want the best for you.
Fairview. The old hometown. The town I grew up in had been scraped only 50 years earlier out of the
endless flat northern prairie. Fairview, Alberta was part of the frontier and had the cowboy bars to prove
it. The Hudson's Bay Company department store on Main Street still bought beaver, wolf, and coyote furs
directly from the local trappers. 3,000 people lived there, 400 miles away from the nearest city.
Cable TV, video games, and internet did not exist. It was no easy matter to stay innocently amused in
Fairview, particularly during the five months of winter when long stretches of 40 below days
and even colder nights were the norm. The world is a different place when it's cold like that.
The drunks in our town ended their sad lives early. They passed out in snow banks at three in the
morning and froze to death. You don't go outside casually when it's 40 below. On first breath,
the arid desert air constricts your lungs. Ice forms on your eyelashes and they stick together. Long hair,
wet from the shower, freezes solid, and then stands on end, wraith-like of its own accord later in a warm
house when it thaws bone dry, charged with electricity. Children only put their tongues
on steel playground equipment once. Smoke from house chimneys doesn't rise. Defeated by the cold,
it drifts downwards and collects like fog on snow-covered rooftops and yards. Cars must be plugged
in at night, their engines warmed by block heaters, or oil will not flow through them in the morning,
and they won't start. Sometimes they won't anyway. Then you turn the engine over pointlessly until the
starter clatters and falls silent. Then you remove the frozen battery from the car, loosening bolts with
stiffening fingers in the intense cold, and bring it into the house. It sits there, sweating for hours,
until it warms enough to hold a decent charge. You are not going to see out of the back window of your
car, either. It frosts over in November and stays that way until May. Scraping it off just dampens the
upholstery. Then it's frozen, too. Late one night going to visit a friend, I sat for two hours on the
edge of the passenger seat in a 1970 Dodge Challenger, jammed up against the stick shift, using a vodka-soaked
rag to keep the inside of the front windshield clear in front of the driver because the car heater had
quit. Stopping wasn't an option. There was nowhere to stop. And it was hell on house cats. Felines in
Fairview had short ears and tails because they had lost the tips of both to frostbite. They came to
resemble arctic foxes, which evolved those features to deal proactively with the intense cold.
One day our cat got outside and no one noticed. We found him, later, fur frozen fast to the cold,
hard backdoor cement steps where he sat. We carefully separated cat from concrete,
with no lasting damage, except to his pride. Fairview cats were also at great risk in the
winter from cars, but not for the reasons you think. It wasn't automobiles sliding on icy roads and
running them over. Only loser cats died that way. It was cars parked immediately after being driven
that were dangerous. A frigid cat might think highly of climbing up under such a vehicle and
sitting on its still warm engine block. But what if the driver decided to use the car again before the
engine cooled down and cat departed? Let's just say that heat-seeking house pets and rapidly rotating
radiator fans do not coexist happily. Because we were so far north, the bitterly cold winters
were also very dark. By December the sun didn't rise until 9 30 a.m. We trudged to school in the
pitch black. It wasn't much lighter when we walked home just before the early sunset. There wasn't much
for young people to do in Fairview, even in the summer. But the winters were worse. Then your friends
mattered. More than anything. My friend Chris and his cousin. I had a friend at that time. We'll call
him Chris. He was a smart guy. He read a lot. He liked science fiction of the kind I was attracted to.
Bradbury, Heinlein, Clark. He was inventive. He was interested in electronic kits and gears and motors.
He was a natural engineer. All this was overshadowed, however, by something that had gone wrong in his
family. I don't know what it was. His sisters were smart and his father was soft-spoken and his mother was
kind. The girls seemed okay. But Chris had been left unattended to in some important way. Despite his
intelligence and curiosity, he was angry, resentful, and without hope. All this manifested itself in
material form in the shape of his 1972 blue Ford pickup truck. That notorious vehicle had at least
one dent in every quarter panel of its damaged external body. Worse, it had an equivalent number
of dents inside. Those were produced by the impact of the body parts of Friends against the internal
surfaces during the continual accidents that resulted in the outer dents. Chris's truck was
the exoskeleton of a nihilist. It had the perfect bumper sticker. Be alert. The world needs more alerts.
The irony it produced in combination with the dents elevated it nicely to theater of the absurd.
Very little of that was, so to speak, accidental. Every time Chris crashed his truck, his father
would fix it and buy him something else. He had a motorbike and a van for selling ice cream. He did
not care for his motorbike. He sold no ice cream. He often expressed dissatisfaction with his father
in their relationship. But his dad was older and unwell, diagnosed with an illness only after many years.
He didn't have the energy he should have. Maybe he couldn't pay enough attention to his son.
Maybe that's all it took to fracture their relationship. Chris had a cousin, Ed, who was
about two years younger. I liked him as much as you can like the younger cousin of a teenage friend.
He was a tall, smart, charming, good-looking kid. He was witty, too. You would have predicted a
good future for him had you met him when he was 12. But Ed drifted slowly downhill into a dropout,
semi-drifting mode of existence. He didn't get as angry as Chris, but he was just as confused.
If you knew Ed's friends, you might say that it was peer pressure that set him on his downward path.
But his peers weren't obviously any more lost or delinquent than he was, although they were generally
somewhat less bright. It was also the case that Ed's and Chris's situation did not appear particularly
improved by their discovery of marijuana. Marijuana isn't bad for everyone, any more than alcohol is
bad for everyone. Sometimes it even appears to improve people. But it didn't improve Ed.
Didn't improve Chris, either. To amuse ourselves in the long nights, Chris and I and Ed and the rest
of the teenagers drove around and around in our 1970s cars and pickup trucks. We cruised down Main
Street, along Railroad Avenue, up past the high school, around the north end of town, over to the
west, or up Main Street, around the north end of town, over to the east, and so on, endlessly repeating
the theme. If we weren't driving in town, we were driving in the countryside. A century earlier,
surveyors had laid out a vast grid across the entire 300,000 square mile expanse of the Great
Western Prairie. Every two miles north, a plowed gravel road stretched forever, east to west.
Every mile west, another traveled north and south. We never ran out of roads.
Teenage Wasteland
If we weren't circling around town and countryside, we were at a party. Some relatively young adult,
or some relatively creepy older adult, would open his house to friends. It would then become
temporary home to all manner of party crashers, many of whom started out seriously undesirable,
or quickly become that way when drinking. A party might also happen accidentally, when some
teenager's unwitting parents had left town. In that case, the occupants of the cars or trucks always
cruising around would notice house lights on, but household car absent. This was not good. Things
could get seriously out of hand. I did not like teenage parties. I do not remember them nostalgically.
They were dismal affairs. The lights were kept low. That kept self-consciousness to a minimum.
The over-loud music made conversation impossible. There was little to talk about in any case.
There were always a couple of the town's psychopaths attending. Everybody drank and smoked too much.
A dreary and oppressive sense of aimlessness hung over such occasions, and nothing ever happened.
Unless you count the time my too quiet classmate drunkenly began to brandish his fully loaded 12-gauge
shotgun. Or the time the girl I later married contemptuously insulted someone while he threatened
her with a knife. Or the time another friend climbed a large tree, swung out on a branch, and crashed flat
onto his back, half dead, right beside the campfire we had started at its base, followed precisely one
minute later by his half-wit sidekick. No one knew what the hell they were doing at those parties.
Hoping for a cheerleader? Waiting for Godot? Although the former would have been immediately preferred,
although cheerleading squads were scarce in our town, the latter was closer to the truth.
It would be more romantic, I suppose, to suggest that we would have all jumped at the chance for
something more productive, bored out of our skulls as we were. But it's not true.
We were all too prematurely cynical and world-weary and leery of responsibility to stick to the
debating clubs and air cadets and school sports that the adults around us tried to organize.
Doing anything wasn't cool. I don't know what teenage life was like before the revolutionaries of the
late 60s advised everyone young to tune in, turn on, and drop out. Was it okay for a teenager to belong
wholeheartedly to a club in 1955? Because it certainly wasn't 20 years later. Plenty of us turned on and
dropped out, but not so many tuned in. I wanted to be elsewhere. I wasn't the only one. Everyone who
eventually left the Fairview I grew up in knew they were leaving by the age of 12. I knew. My wife, who grew
up with me, on the street our family shared, knew. The friends I had who did and didn't leave also knew,
regardless of which track they were on. There was an unspoken expectation in the families of those
who were college-bound that such a thing was a matter of course. For those from less educated families,
a future that included university was simply not part of the conceptual realm. It wasn't for lack of money, either.
Tuition for advanced education was very low at that time, and jobs in Alberta were plentiful and high
paying. I earned more money in 1980 working at a plywood mill than I would again doing anything else
for 20 years. No one missed out on university because of financial need in oil-rich Alberta in the 1970s.
Some different friends and some more of the same.
In high school, after my first group of cronies had all dropped out, I made friends with a couple
of newcomers. They came to Fairview as boarders. There was no school after ninth grade in their even
more remote and aptly named hometown, Bear Canyon. They were an ambitious duo, comparatively speaking.
Straightforward and reliable, but also cool and very amusing. When I left town to attend Grand
Prairie Regional College 90 miles away, one of them became my roommate. The other went off elsewhere
to pursue further education. Both were aiming upward. Their decisions to do so bolstered mine.
I was a happy clam when I arrived at college. I found another expanded group of like-minded companions,
whom my Bear Canyon comrade also joined. We were all captivated by literature and philosophy.
We ran the student union. We made it profitable for the first time in its history, hosting college dances.
How can you lose money selling beer to college kids?
We started a newspaper. We got to know our professors of political science and biology
and English literature in the tiny seminars that characterized even our first year.
The instructors were thankful for our enthusiasm and taught us well. We were building a better life.
I sloughed off a lot of my past. In a small town, everyone knows who you are. You drag your years behind
you like a running dog with tin cans tied to its tail. You can't escape who you have been.
Everything wasn't online then, and thank God for that. But it was stored equally indelibly in everyone's
spoken and unspoken expectations and memory.
When you move, everything is up in the air, at least for a while. It's stressful, but in the
chaos there are new possibilities. People, including you, can't hem you in with their old notions.
You get shaken out of your ruts. You can make new, better ruts with people aiming at better things.
I thought this was just a natural development. I thought that every person who moved would have
and want the same Phoenix-like experience. But that wasn't always the case.
One time when I was about 15, I went with Chris and another friend, Carl, to Edmonton,
a city of 600,000. Carl had never been to a city. This was not uncommon. Fairview to Edmonton was an
800-mile round trip. I had done it many times, sometimes with my parents, sometimes without.
I liked the anonymity that the city provided. I liked the new beginnings. I liked the escape from
the dismal, cramped adolescent culture of my hometown. So I convinced my two friends to make
the journey. But they did not have the same experience. As soon as we arrived, Chris and Carl
wanted to buy some pot. We headed for the parts of Edmonton that were exactly like the worst of
Fairview. We found the same furtive street-vending marijuana providers. We spent the weekend drinking
in the hotel room. Although we had traveled a long distance, we had gone nowhere at all.
I saw an even more egregious example of this a few years later. I had moved to Edmonton to finish my
undergraduate degree. I took an apartment with my sister, who was studying to be a nurse.
She was also an up-and-out-of-there person. Not too many years later, she would plant strawberries
in Norway and run safaris through Africa and smuggle trucks across the Tuareg-menaced Sahara Desert and
babysit orphan gorillas in the Congo. We had a nice place in the new high-rise, overlooking the broad
valley of the North Saskatchewan River. We had a view of the city skyline in the background.
I bought a beautiful new Yamaha upright piano in a fit of enthusiasm. The place looked good.
I heard through the grapevine that Ed, Chris's younger cousin, had moved to the city. I thought
that was a good thing. One day he called. I invited him over. I wanted to see how he was faring.
I hoped he was achieving some of the potential I once saw in him. That is not what happened.
Ed showed up, older, balder, and stooped. He was a lot more not-doing-so-well young adult and a lot
less youthful possibility. His eyes were the telltale red slits of the practiced stoner.
Ed had taken some job, lawn mowing and casual landscaping, which would have been fine for a
part-time university student or for someone who could not do better, but which was wretchedly low-end as a
career for an intelligent person. He was accompanied by a friend. It was his friend,
I really remember. He was spaced. He was baked. He was stoned out of his gourd. His head in our nice
civilized apartment did not easily occupy the same universe. My sister was there. She knew Ed.
Ed? She'd seen this sort of thing before. But I still wasn't happy that Ed had brought this
character into our place. Ed sat down. His friend sat down too, although it wasn't clear he noticed.
It was tragicomedy. Stoned as he was, Ed still had the sense to be embarrassed.
We sipped our beer. Ed's friend looked upwards.
My particles are scattered all over the ceiling, he managed. Truer words were never spoken.
I took Ed aside and told him politely that he had to leave.
I said that he shouldn't have brought his useless bastard of a companion.
He nodded. He understood. That made it even worse.
His older cousin Chris wrote me a letter much later about such things.
I included it in my first book, Maps of Meaning, the Architecture of Belief, published in 1999.
I had friends, he said, before. Anyone with enough self-contempt that they could forgive me mine.
What was it that made Chris and Carl and Ed unable, or worse, perhaps unwilling, to move or to change their
friendships and improve the circumstances of their lives? Was it inevitable? A consequence of their own
limitations, nascent illnesses and traumas of the past? After all, people vary significantly,
in ways that seem both structural and deterministic. People differ in intelligence, which is in large
part the ability to learn and transform. People have very different personalities as well.
Some are active, and some passive. Others are anxious or calm. For every individual driven to
achieve, there is another who is indolent. The degree to which these differences are immutably
part and parcel of someone is greater than an optimist might presume or desire. And then there is
illness, mental and physical, diagnosed or invisible, further limiting or shaping our lives.
Chris had a psychotic break in his thirties, after flirting with insanity for many years.
Not long afterward, he committed suicide. Did his heavy marijuana use play a magnifying
role? Or was it understandable self-medication? Use of physician-prescribed drugs for pain has,
after all, decreased in marijuana-legal states such as Colorado. Maybe the pot made things better for
Chris, not worse. Maybe it eased his suffering instead of exacerbating his instability.
Was it the nihilistic philosophy he nurtured that paved the way to his eventual breakdown?
Was that nihilism in turn a consequence of genuine ill health, or just an intellectual
rationalization of his unwillingness to dive responsibly into life? Why did he, like his cousin,
like my other friends, continually choose people who and places that were not good for him?
Sometimes, when people have a low opinion of their own worth, or perhaps when they refuse responsibility
for their lives, they choose a new acquaintance of precisely the type who proved troublesome in the
past. Such people don't believe that they deserve any better, so they don't go looking for it. Or
perhaps they don't want the trouble of better. Freud called this a repetition compulsion. He thought of
it as an unconscious drive to repeat the horrors of the past, sometimes perhaps to formulate those
horrors more precisely, sometimes to attempt more active mastery, and sometimes perhaps because no
alternatives beckon. People create their worlds with the tools they have directly at hand. Faulty tools
produce faulty results. Repeated use of the same faulty tools produces the same faulty results.
It is in this manner that those who fail to learn from the past doom themselves to repeat it.
It's partly fate. It's partly inability. It's partly unwillingness to learn. Refusal to learn. Motivated
refusal to learn. Rescuing the damned. People choose friends who aren't good for them for other reasons,
too. Sometimes it's because they want to rescue someone. This is more typical of young people,
although the impetus still exists among older folks who are too agreeable or have remained naive or who
are willfully blind. Someone might object. It is only right to see the best in people. The highest virtue
is the desire to help. But not everyone who is failing is a victim, and not everyone at the bottom wishes to
rise, although many do, and many manage it. Nonetheless, people will often accept or even amplify their own
suffering as well as that of others if they can brandish it as evidence of the world's injustice.
There is no shortage of oppressors among the downtrodden, even if, given the
