even though she has avoided doing so until now and is all the weaker and more confused for it.
Perhaps the effort will nearly kill her, but she is now on a path worse than death in any case.
To re-emerge, to escape, to be reborn, she must thoughtfully articulate the reality she
comfortably but dangerously left hidden behind a veil of ignorance and the pretense of peace.
She must separate the particular details of her specific catastrophe from the intolerable
general condition of being in a world where everything has fallen apart. Everything. That's
far too much. It was specific things that fell apart, not everything. Identifiable beliefs failed.
Particular actions were false and inauthentic. What were they? How can they be fixed now?
How can she be better in the future? She will never return to dry land if she refuses or is unable to
figure it all out. She can put the world back together by some precision of thought, some
precision of speech, some reliance on her word, some reliance on the word. But perhaps it's better
to leave things in the fog. Perhaps by now there just isn't enough left of her. Perhaps too much of
her has been left unrevealed, undeveloped. Maybe she simply no longer has the energy.
Some earlier care and courage and honesty and expression might have saved her from all this
trouble. What if she had communicated her unhappiness with the decline of her romantic life
right when it started to decline? Precisely, exactly when that decline first bothered her.
Or, if it didn't bother her, what if she had instead communicated the fact it didn't bother her as
much as it perhaps should have? What if she had clearly and carefully confronted the fact of her
husband's contempt for her household efforts? Would she have discovered her resentment of her father
and society itself and the consequent contamination of her relationships? What if she had fixed all that?
how much stronger would she then have become? How much less likely to avoid facing up to difficulties
in consequence? How might she then have served herself, her family, and the world? What if she
had continually and honestly risked conflict in the present, in the service of longer-term truth and
peace? What if she had treated the micro-collapses of her marriage as evidence of an underlying instability
eminently worthy of attention, instead of ignoring them, putting up with them, or smiling through them
in such a nice, agreeable manner? Maybe she would be different, and her husband different too.
Maybe they would still be married formally and in spirit. Maybe they would both be much younger,
physically and mentally, than they are now. Maybe her house would have been founded more on rock and
less on sand. When things fall apart and chaos re-emerges, we can give structure to it and re-establish
order through our speech. If we speak carefully and precisely, we can sort things out and put them in
their proper place and set a new goal and navigate to it. Often, communally, if we negotiate, if we reach
consensus, if we speak carelessly and imprecisely, however, things remain vague. The destination remains
unproclaimed. The fog of uncertainty does not lift, and there is no negotiating through the world.
The construction of soul and world. The psyche, the soul, and the world are both organized at the
highest level of human existence with language through communication. Things are not as they appear
when the outcome has been neither intended nor desired. Being has not been sorted into its proper
categories when it is not behaving. When something goes wrong, even perception itself must be questioned,
along with evaluation, thought, and action. When error announces itself, undifferentiated chaos is at hand.
Its reptilian form paralyzes and confuses. But dragons, which do exist, perhaps more than anything else
exists, also hoard gold. In that collapse, into the terrible mess of uncomprehended being, lurks the
possibility of new and benevolent order. Clarity of thought, courageous clarity of thought, is necessary
to call it forth. The problem itself must be admitted to as close to the time of its emergence as possible.
I'm unhappy is a good start. Not, I have a right to be unhappy, because that is still questionable at
the beginning of the problem-solving process. Perhaps your unhappiness is justified under the
current circumstances. Perhaps any reasonable person would be displeased and miserable to be where you
are. Alternatively, perhaps, you are just whiny and immature. Consider both at least equally probable,
as terrible as such consideration might appear. Just exactly how immature might you be? There's a
potentially bottomless pit, but at least you might rectify it, if you can admit to it.
We parse the complex, tangled chaos and specify the nature of things, including ourselves. It is in this
way that our creative, communicative exploration continually generates and regenerates the world.
We are shaped and informed by what we voluntarily encounter, and we shape what we inhabit as well
in that encounter. This is difficult. But the difficulty is not relevant, because the alternative is worse.
Maybe our errant husband ignored the dinner conversation of his wife because he hated his job and was tired
and resentful. Maybe he hated his job because his career was forced on him by his father and he was
too weak or loyal to object. Maybe she put up with his lack of attention because she believed that
forthright objection itself was rude and immoral. Maybe she hated her own father's anger and decided,
when very young, that all aggression and assertiveness were morally wrong. Maybe she thought her husband
wouldn't love her if she had any opinions of her own. It is very difficult to put such things in order,
but damaged machinery will continue to malfunction if its problems are neither diagnosed nor fixed.
Wheat from Chaff
Precision specifies. When something terrible happens, it is precision that separates the unique terrible
thing that has actually happened from all the other equally terrible things that might have happened,
but did not. If you wake up in pain, you might be dying. You might be dying slowly and terribly from
one of a diverse number of painful, horrible diseases. If you refuse to tell your doctor about your pain,
then what you have is unspecified. It could be any of those diseases, and it certainly, since you have
avoided the diagnostic conversation, the act of articulation, is something unspeakable. But if you talk to your
doctor, all those terrible possible diseases will collapse with luck into just one terrible or not so
terrible disease, or even into nothing, then you can laugh at your previous fears. And if something really
is wrong, well, you're prepared. Precision may leave the tragedy intact, but it chases away the ghouls and the
demons. What you hear in the forest, but cannot see, might be a tiger. It might even be a conspiracy of
tigers, each hungrier and more vicious than the other, led by a crocodile. But it might not be, too. If you turn
and look, perhaps you'll see that it's just a squirrel. I know someone who is actually chased by a squirrel.
Something is out there in the woods. You know that with certainty. But often, it's only a squirrel.
If you refuse to look, however, then it's a dragon, and you're no knight. You're a mouse confronting a
lion, a rabbit paralyzed by the gaze of a wolf. And I am not saying that it's always a squirrel. Often,
it's something truly terrible. But even what is terrible in actuality often pales in significance
compared to what is terrible in imagination. And often, what cannot be confronted because
of its horror in imagination can in fact be confronted when reduced to its still admittedly
terrible actuality. If you shirk the responsibility of confronting the unexpected, even when it appears
in manageable doses, reality itself will become unsustainably disorganized and chaotic. Then it will
grow bigger and swallow all order, all sense, and all predictability. Ignored reality transforms itself,
reverts back into the great goddess of chaos, the great reptilian monster of the unknown,
the great predatory beast against which mankind has struggled since the dawn of time.
If the gap between pretense and reality goes unmentioned, it will widen, you will fall into it,
and the consequences will not be good. Ignored reality manifests itself in an abyss of confusion and
suffering. Be careful with what you tell yourself and others about what you have done, what you are
doing, and where you are going. Search for the correct words. Organize those words into the correct
sentences and those sentences into the correct paragraphs. The past can be redeemed when reduced
by precise language to its essence. The present can flow by without robbing the future if its realities
are spoken out clearly. With careful thought and language, the singular stellar destiny that justifies
existence can be extracted from the multitude of murky and unpleasant futures that are far more likely to
manifest themselves of their own accord. This is how the eye and the word make habitable order.
Don't hide baby monsters under the carpet. They will flourish. They will grow large in the dark.
Then, when you least expect it, they will jump out and devour you. You will descend into an
indeterminate, confusing hell instead of ascending into the heaven of virtue and clarity. Courageous and
truthful words will render your reality simple, pristine, well-defined, and habitable.
If you identify things with careful attention and language, you bring them forward as viable,
obedient objects, detaching them from their underlying near-universal interconnectedness.
You simplify them. You make them specific and useful and reduce their complexity. You make it possible
to live with them and use them without dying from that complexity with its attendant uncertainty and
anxiety. If you leave things vague, then you'll never know what is one thing and what is another.
Everything will bleed into everything else. This makes the world too complex to be managed.
You have to consciously define the topic of a conversation, particularly when it is difficult,
or it becomes about everything, and everything is too much. This is so frequently why couples cease
communicating. Every argument degenerates into every problem that ever emerged in the past,
every problem that exists now, and every terrible thing that is likely to happen in the future.
No one can have a discussion about everything. Instead, you can say,
this exact, precise thing, that is what is making me unhappy. This exact, precise thing,
that is what I want as an alternative, although I am open to suggestions if they are specific. This exact,
precise thing. That is what you could deliver so that I will stop making your life and mind miserable.
But to do that, you have to think. What is wrong? Exactly. What do I want? Exactly.
You must speak forthrightly and call forth the habitable world from chaos. You must use honest,
precise speech to do that. If, instead, you shrink away and hide what you are hiding from will transform
itself into the giant dragon that lurks under your bed and in your forest and in the dark recesses of
your mind, and it will devour you. You must determine where you have been in your life so that you can know
where you are now. If you don't know where you are precisely, then you could be anywhere. Anywhere is
too many places to be, and some of those places are very bad. You must determine where you have been
in your life because otherwise you can't get to where you're going. You can't get from point A to point B
unless you are already at point A, and if you're just anywhere, the chances you are at point A are very
small indeed. You must determine where you are going in your life because you cannot get there unless you
move in that direction. Random wandering will not move you forward. It will, instead, disappoint and
frustrate you and make you anxious and unhappy and hard to get along with, and then resentful, and then
vengeful, and then worse. Say what you mean so that you can find out what you mean. Act out what you say
so you can find out what happens. Then pay attention. Note your errors. Articulate them. Strive to correct
them. That is how you discover the meaning of your life. That will protect you from the tragedy of your
life. How could it be otherwise? Confront the chaos of being. Take aim against a sea of troubles. Specify
your destination and chart your course. Admit to what you want. Tell those around you who you are. Narrow
and gaze attentively and move forward, forthrightly. Be precise in your speech.
Rule 11. Do not bother children when they are skateboarding.
Danger and mastery. There was a time when kids skateboarded on the west side of Sydney
Smith Hall at the University of Toronto, where I work. Sometimes I stood there and watched them.
There are rough, wide, shallow concrete steps there, leading up from the street to the front entrance,
accompanied by tubular iron handrails about two and a half inches in diameter and 20 feet long.
The crazy kids, almost always boys, would pull back about 15 yards from the top of the steps.
Then they would place a foot on their boards and skate like mad to get up some speed.
Just before they collided with the handrail, they would reach down, grab their board with a single
hand and jump onto the top of the rail, boards sliding their way down its length, propelling themselves
off and landing, sometimes gracefully still atop their boards, sometimes painfully off them.
Either way, they were soon back at it. Some might call that stupid. Maybe it was. But it was brave,
too. I thought those kids were amazing. I thought they deserved a pat on the back and some honest
admiration. Of course it was dangerous. Danger was the point. They wanted to triumph over danger.
They would have been safer in protective equipment, but that would have ruined it.
They weren't trying to be safe. They were trying to become competent. And it's competence that makes
people as safe as they can truly be.
I wouldn't dare do what those kids were doing. Not only that, I couldn't. I certainly couldn't climb
a construction crane like a certain type of modern daredevil evident on YouTube and, of course,
people who work on construction cranes. I don't like heights, although the 25,000 feet to which airliners
ascend is so high that it doesn't bother me. I have flown several times in a carbon fiber stunt plane,
even doing a hammerhead roll. And that was okay, although it's very physically and mentally demanding.
To perform a hammerhead roll, you pilot the plane straight up vertically until the force of gravity
makes it stall. Then it falls backwards, corkscrewing, until eventually it flips and noses straight down,
after which you pull out of the dive. Or you don't do another hammerhead roll.
But I can't skateboard, especially down handrails. And I can't climb cranes.
Sydney Smith Hall faces another street on the east side. Along that street, named St. George,
ironically enough, the university installed a series of rough, hard-edged concrete plant boxes,
sloping down to the roadway. The kids used to go out there, too, and board slide along the box edges,
as they did along the concrete surround of a sculpture adjacent to the building.
That didn't last very long. Little steel brackets known as skate stoppers soon appeared every two or
three feet along those edges. When I first saw them, I remembered something that happened in Toronto
several years previously. Two weeks before elementary school classes started, throughout the city,
all the playground equipment disappeared. The legislation governing such things had changed,
and there was a panic about insurability. The playgrounds were hastily removed, even though they
were sufficiently safe, grandfathered re-either insurability, and often paid for, and quite
recently, by parents. This meant no playgrounds at all for more than a year. During this time,
I often saw bored but admirable kids charging around on the roof of our local school. It was that or
scrounge about in the dirt with the cats and the less adventurous children.
I say sufficiently safe about the demolished playgrounds because when playgrounds are made
too safe, kids either stop playing in them or start playing in unintended ways. Kids need playgrounds
dangerous enough to remain challenging. People, including children, who are people too after all,
don't seek to minimize risk. They seek to optimize it. They drive and walk,
and love and play so that they achieve what they desire, but they push themselves a bit at the same time,
too, so they continue to develop. Thus, if things are made too safe, people, including children,
start to figure out ways to make them dangerous again. When untrammeled and encouraged, we prefer to
live on the edge. There, we can still be both confident in our experience and confronting the
chaos that helps us develop. We're hardwired for that reason, to enjoy risk, some of us more than
others. We feel invigorated and excited when we work to optimize our future performance while playing in
the present. Otherwise, we lumber around, sloth-like, unconscious, unformed, and careless.
Overprotected, we will fail when something dangerous, unexpected, and full of opportunity
suddenly makes its appearance, as it inevitably will.
The skate-stoppers are unattractive. The surround of the nearby sculpture would have to have been
badly damaged by diligent board sliders before it would look as mean as it does now, studded with
metal like a pit bull's collar. The large plant boxes have metal guards placed at irregular intervals
across their tops, and this, in addition to the wear caused by the skateboarders, produces a dismal
impression of poor design, resentment, and badly executed afterthoughts. It gives the area, which
was supposed to be beautified by the sculpture and vegetation, a generic industrial-slash-prison-slash-mental
institution-slash-work-camp look of the kind that appears when builders and public officials do not
like or trust the people they serve. The sheer harsh ugliness of the solution makes a lie of the
reasons for its implementation. Success and resentment
If you read the depth psychologists, Freud and Jung for example, as well as their precursor Friedrich
Nietzsche, you learn that there is a dark side to everything. Freud delved deeply into the latent
implicit content of dreams, which were often aimed, in his opinion, at the expression of some improper
wish. Jung believed that every act of social propriety was accompanied by its evil twin,
its unconscious shadow. Nietzsche investigated the role played by what he termed
ressentiment in motivating what were ostensibly selfless actions, and often exhibited all too publicly.
For that man be delivered from revenge, that is for me the bridge to the highest hope and a rainbow
after long storms. The tarantulas, of course, would have it otherwise. What justice means to us is
precisely that the world be filled with the storms of our revenge. Thus they speak to each other.
We shall wreak vengeance and abuse on all whose equals we are not. Thus do the tarantula hearts
vow. And will to equality shall henceforth be the name for virtue. And against all that has power,
we want to raise our clamor. You preachers of equality, the tyrant mania of impotence clamors
thus out of you for equality. Your most secret ambitions to be tyrants thus shroud themselves in
words of virtue. The incomparable English essayist George Orwell knew this sort of thing well.
In 1937, he wrote The Road to Wigan Pier, which was in part a scathing attack on upper-class British
socialists. This, despite being inclined towards socialism himself. In the first half of this book,
Orwell portrays the appalling conditions faced by UK miners in the 1930s.
Several dentists have told me that in industrial districts, a person over 30 with any of his or her
own teeth is coming to be an abnormality. In Wigan, various people gave me their opinion that it is best
to get shut of your teeth as early in life as possible. Teeth is just a misery, one woman said to me.
A Wigan Pier coal miner had to walk, crawl would be a better word given the height of the mineshafts,
up to three miles underground in the dark, banging his head and scraping his back just to get to his
seven and a half hour shift of back-breaking work. After that, he crawled back. It is comparable,
perhaps, to climbing a smallish mountain before and after your day's work, stated Orwell. None of the
time spent crawling was paid. Orwell wrote The Road to Wigan Pier for the Left Book Club,
a socialist publishing group that released a select volume every month. After reading the first half of
his book, which deals directly with the miners' personal circumstances, it is impossible not to feel
sympathy for the working poor. Only a monster could keep his heart hardened through the accounts of
the lives Orwell describes. It is not long since conditions in the mines were worse than they are
now. There are still living. A few very old women who in their youth have worked underground, crawling on
all fours and dragging tubs of coal. They used to go on doing this even when they were pregnant.
In the book's second half, however, Orwell turned his gaze to a different problem. The comparative
unpopularity of socialism in the UK at the time, despite the clear and painful inequity observable
everywhere. He concluded that the tweed-wearing, armchair-philosophizing, victim-identifying,
pity-and-contempt-dispensing social reformer types frequently did not like the poor as they claimed.
Instead, they just hated the rich. They disguised their resentment and jealousy with piety,
sanctimony, and self-righteousness. Things in the unconscious, or on the social justice-dispensing
leftist front, haven't changed much today. It is because of Freud, Jung, Nietzsche, and Orwell
that I always wonder. What, then, do you stand against whenever I hear someone say too loudly,
I stand for this? The question seems particularly relevant if the same someone is complaining,
criticizing, or trying to change someone else's behavior. I believe it was Jung who developed the
most surgically wicked of psychoanalytic dicta. If you cannot understand why someone did something,
look at the consequences and infer the motivation. This is a psychological scalpel. It's not always a
suitable instrument. It can cut too deeply or in the wrong places. It is, perhaps, a last resort option.
Nonetheless, there are times when its application proves enlightening.
If the consequences of placing skate-stoppers on plant boxes and sculpture bases, for example, is
unhappy adolescent males and brutalist aesthetic disregard of beauty, then perhaps that was the aim.
When someone claims to be acting from the highest principles for the good of others,
there is no reason to assume that the person's motives are genuine. People motivated to make things
better usually aren't concerned with changing other people. Or, if they are, they take responsibility for
making the same changes to themselves. And first, beneath the production of rules stopping the
skateboarders from doing highly skilled, courageous and dangerous things, I see the operation of an
insidious and profoundly anti-human spirit. More about Chris
My friend Chris, whom I wrote about earlier, was possessed by such a spirit, to the serious detriment of
his mental health. Part of what plagued him was guilt. He attended elementary and junior high
school in a number of towns, up in the frigid expanses of the northernmost Alberta prairie, prior to ending
up in the Fairview I wrote about earlier. Fights with native kids were a too common part of his experience
during those moves. It's no overstatement to point out that such kids were, on average, rougher than the
white kids, or that they were touchier. And they had their reasons. I knew this well from my own experience.
I had a rocky friendship with a Métis kid, René Heck, when I was in elementary school.
It was rocky because the situation was complex. There was a large cultural divide between René and me.
His clothes were dirtier. He was rougher in speech and attitude. I had skipped a grade in school and was,
in addition, small for my age. René was a big, smart, good-looking kid, and he was tough.
We were in grade six together in a class taught by my father. René was caught chewing gum.
René, said my father, spit that gum out. You look like a cow.
Ha-ha, I laughed under my breath. René the cow. René might have been a cow, but there was nothing
wrong with his hearing. Peterson, he said. After school, you're dead.
Earlier in the morning, René and I had arranged to see a movie that night at the local movie theater,
The Gem. It looked like that was off. In any case, the rest of the day passed quickly and unpleasantly,
as it does when threat and pain lurk. René was more than capable of giving me a good pounding.
After school, I took off for the bike stands outside the school as fast as I could, but René beat me
there. We circled around the bikes, him on one side, me on the other. We were characters in a
Keystone Copse short. As long as I kept circling, he couldn't catch me, but my strategy couldn't work
forever. I yelled out that I was sorry, but he wasn't mollified. His pride was hurt and he wanted me to pay.
I crouched down and hid behind some bikes, keeping an eye on René.
René, I yelled. I'm sorry I called you a cow. Let's quit fighting. He started to approach me again.
I said, René, I'm sorry I said that, really, and I still want to go to the movie with you.
This wasn't just a tactic. I meant it. Otherwise, what happened next would not have happened.
René stopped circling. Then he stared at me. Then he broke into tears. Then he ran off.
That was Native white relationships in a nutshell in our hard little town. We never did go to a movie
together. When my friend Chris got into it with Native kids, he wouldn't fight back. He didn't feel
that his self-defense was morally justified, so he took his beatings. We took their land, he later wrote.
That was wrong. No wonder they're angry. Over time, step by step, Chris withdrew from the world.
It was partly his guilt. He developed a deep hatred for masculinity and masculine activity.
He saw going to school or working or finding a girlfriend as part of the same process that had
led to the colonization of North America, the horrible nuclear stalemate of the Cold War and the
despoiling of the planet. He had read some books about Buddhism and felt that negation of his own
being was ethically required in the light of the current world situation. He came to believe that the
same applied to others. When I was an undergraduate, Chris was, for a while, one of my roommates.
One late night, we went to a local bar. We walked home afterward. He started to snap the side-view
mirrors off parked cars, one after the other. I said, quit that, Chris. What possible good is it going to do
to make the people who own these cars miserable? He told me that they were all part of the frenetic
human activity that was ruining everything and that they deserved whatever they got. I said that
taking revenge on people who were just living normal lives was not going to help anything.
Years later, when I was in graduate school in Montreal, Chris showed up for what was supposed
to be a visit. He was aimless, however, and lost. He asked if I could help. He ended up moving in.
I was married by then, living with my wife Tammy and our year-old daughter, Michaela. Chris had also
been friends with Tammy back in Fairview and held out hopes of more than friendship. That complicated
the situation even more, but not precisely in the manner you might think. Chris started by hating men,
but he ended by hating women. He wanted them, but he had rejected education and career and desire.
He smoked heavily and was unemployed. Unsurprisingly, therefore, he was not of much interest to women.
That made him bitter. I tried to convince him that the path he had chosen was only going to lead to
further ruin. He needed to develop some humility. He needed to get a life. One evening, it was Chris's
turn to make dinner. When my wife came home, the apartment was filled with smoke. Hamburgers were burning
furiously in the frying pan. Chris was on his hands and knees, attempting to repair something that had
come loose on the legs of the stove. My wife knew his tricks. She knew he was burning dinner on purpose.
He resented having to make it. He resented the feminine role, even though the household duties were
split in a reasonable manner, even though he knew that perfectly well. He was fixing the stove to provide a
plausible, even creditable excuse for burning the food. When she pointed out what he was doing,
he played the victim, but he was deeply and dangerously furious. Part of him, and not the good
part, was convinced that he was smarter than anyone else. It was a blow to his pride that she could see
through his tricks. It was an ugly situation. Tammy and I took a walk up towards a local park the next
day. We needed to get away from the apartment, although it was 35 below, bitterly, frigidly cold,
humid, and foggy. It was windy. It was hostile to life. Living with Chris was too much, Tammy said.
We entered the park. Trees forked their bare branches upward through the damp gray air.
A black squirrel, tail hairless from mange, gripped a leafless branch, shivered violently,
struggling to hold on against the wind. What was it doing out there in the cold?
Squirrels are partial hibernators. They only come out in the winter when it's warm.
Then we saw another, and another, and another, and another, and another. There were squirrels all
around us in the park, all partially hairless, tails and bodies alike, all wind-blown on their branches,
all shaking and freezing in the deathly cold. No one else was around. It was impossible. It was
inexplicable. It was exactly appropriate. We were on the stage of an absurdist play.
It was directed by God. Tammy left soon after with our daughter for a few days elsewhere.
Near Christmas time that same year, my younger brother and his new wife came out to visit from
Western Canada. My brother also knew Chris. They all put on their winter clothes in preparation for a
walk around downtown Montreal. Chris put on a long, dark winter coat. He pulled a black toque,
a brimless knitted cap, far down over his head. His coat was black, as were his pants and boots.
He was very tall and thin and somewhat stooped. Chris, I joked, you look like a serial killer.
Ha, bloody ha. The three came back from their walk. Chris was out of sorts. There were strangers in
his territory. Another happy couple. It was salt in his wounds. We had dinner, pleasantly enough.
We talked and ended the evening. But I couldn't sleep. Something wasn't right. It was in the air.
At four in the morning I had had enough. Crawled out of bed. I knocked quietly on Chris's door
and went, without waiting for an answer, into his room. He was awake on the bed,
staring at the ceiling as I knew he would be. I sat down beside him. I knew him very well.
I talked him down from his murderous rage. Then I went back to bed and slept. The next morning my
brother pulled me aside. He wanted to speak with me. We sat down. He said,
What the hell was going on last night? I couldn't sleep at all. Was something wrong?
I told my brother that Chris wasn't doing so well. I didn't tell him that he was lucky to be alive,
that we all were. The spirit of Cain had visited our house, but we were left unscathed.
Maybe I picked up some change in scent that night when death hung in the air. Chris had a very bitter
odor. He showered frequently, but the towels and the sheets picked up the smell. It was impossible
to get them clean. It was the product of a psyche and a body that did not operate harmoniously.
A social worker I knew, who also knew Chris, told me of her familiarity with that odor. Everyone at
her workplace knew of it, although they only discussed it in hushed tones. They called it
the smell of the unemployable. Soon after this, I finished my postdoctoral studies. Tammy and I moved
away from Montreal to Boston. We had our second baby. Now and then, Chris and I talked on the phone.
He came to visit once. It went well. He had found a job at an auto parts place. He was trying to make
things better. He was okay at that point. But it didn't last. I didn't see him in Boston again.
Almost 10 years later, the night before Chris's 40th birthday, as it happened, he called me again.
By this time, I had moved my family to Toronto. He had some news. A story he had written was going to
be published in a collection put together by a small but legitimate press. He wanted to tell me that.
He wrote good short stories. I had read them all. We had discussed them at length. He was a good
photographer, too. He had a good creative eye. The next day, Chris drove his old pickup,
the same battered beast from Fairview into the bush. He ran a hose from the exhaust pipe into the front cab.
I can see him there, looking through the cracked windshield, smoking, waiting.
They found his body a few weeks later. I called his dad. My beautiful boy, he sobbed.
Recently, I was invited to give a TEDx talk at a nearby university. Another professor talked first.
He had been invited to speak because of his work, his genuinely fascinating technical work with
computationally intelligent surfaces, like computer touchscreens, but capable of being placed everywhere.
He spoke, instead, about the threat human beings pose to the survival of the planet.
Like Chris, like far too many people, he had become anti-human to the core.
He had not walked as far down that road as my friend, but the same dread spirit animated them both.
He stood in front of a screen displaying an endless slow pan of a blocks-long Chinese high-tech factory.
Hundreds of white-suited workers stood like sterile inhuman robots behind their assembly lines,
soundlessly inserting piece A into slot B. He told the audience, filled with bright
young people, of the decision he and his wife had made to limit their number of children to one.
He told them it was something they should all consider if they wanted to regard themselves as ethical people.
I felt that such a decision was properly considered, but only in his particular case,
where less than one might have even been better.
The many Chinese students in attendance sat stolidly through his moralizing.
They thought, perhaps, of their parents' escape from the horrors of Mao's cultural revolution and its one-child policy.
They thought, perhaps, of the vast improvement in living standard and freedom provided by the very same factories.
A couple of them said as much in the question period that followed.
What if the professor reconsidered his opinions if he knew where such ideas can lead?
I would like to say yes, but I don't believe it.
I think he could have known, but refused to.
Worse, perhaps, he knew, but didn't care, or knew, and was headed there voluntarily in any case.
Self-Appointed Judges of the Human Race
It has not been long since the Earth seemed infinitely larger than the people who inhabited it.
It was only in the late 1800s that the brilliant biologist Thomas Huxley, 1825-95,
staunch defender of Darwin and Eldus Huxley's grandfather, told the British Parliament that it was literally impossible for mankind to exhaust the oceans.
Their power of generation was simply too great, as far as he could determine, compared to even the most assiduous human predations.
It's been an even shorter 50 years since Rachel Carson's Silent Spring ignited the environmental movement.
50 years.
That's nothing.
That's not even yesterday.
We've only just developed the conceptual tools and technologies that allow us to understand the web of life, however imperfectly.
We deserve a bit of sympathy, in consequence, for the hypothetical outrage of our destructive behavior.
Sometimes we don't know any better.
Sometimes we do know better, but haven't yet formulated any practical alternatives.
It's not as if life is easy for human beings, after all, even now.
And it's only a few decades ago that the majority of human beings were starving, diseased, and illiterate.
Wealthy as we are, increasingly everywhere, we still only live decades that can be counted on our fingers.
Even at present, it is the rare and fortunate family that does not contain at least one member with a serious illness,
and all will face that problem eventually.
We do what we can to make the best of things in our vulnerability and fragility,
and the planet is harder on us than we are on it.
We could cut ourselves some slack.
Human beings are, after all, seriously remarkable creatures.
We have no peers, and it's not clear that we have any real limits.
Things happen now that appeared humanly impossible,
even at the same time in the recent past when we began to wake up to our planet-size responsibilities.
A few weeks before writing this, I happened across two videos juxtaposed on YouTube.
One showed the Olympic gold medal vault from 1956.
The other, the Olympic silver medal vault from 2012.
It didn't even look like the same sport, or the same animal.
What Michaela Maroney did in 2012 would have been considered superhuman in the 50s.
Parkour, a sport derived from French military obstacle course training, is amazing, as is free running.
I watched compilations of such performances with unabashed admiration.
Some of the kids jump off three-story buildings without injury.
It's dangerous and amazing.
Crane climbers are so brave it rattles the mind.
The same goes for extreme mountain bikers, freestyle snowboarders,
surfers of 50-foot waves, and skateboarders.
The boys who shot up Columbine High School, whom we discussed earlier,
had appointed themselves judges of the human race,
like the TEDx professor, although much more extreme,
like Chris, my doomed friend.
For Eric Harris, the more literate of the two killers,
human beings were a failed and corrupt species.
Once a presupposition such as that is accepted,
its inner logic will inevitably manifest itself.
If something is a plague, as David Attenborough has it,
or a cancer, as the Club of Rome claimed,
the person who eradicates it is a hero,
a veritable planetary savior in this case.
A real messiah might follow through with his rigorous moral logic
and eliminate himself as well.
This is what mass murderers, driven by near-infinite resentment,
typically do.
Even their own being does not justify the existence of humanity.
In fact, they kill themselves precisely to demonstrate the purity of their commitment
to annihilation.
No one in the modern world may, without objection,
express the opinion that existence would be bettered by the absence of Jews,
blacks, Muslims, or Englishmen.
Why, then, is it virtuous to propose that the planet might be better off
if there were fewer people on it?
I can't help but see a skeletal, grinning face,
gleeful at the possibility of the apocalypse,
hiding not so very far behind such statements.
And why does it so often seem to be the very people standing so visibly against prejudice
who so often appear to feel obligated to denounce humanity itself?
I have seen university students, particularly those in the humanities,
suffer genuine declines in their mental health
from being philosophically berated by such defenders of the planet
for their existence as members of the human species.
It's worse, I think, for young men.
As privileged beneficiaries of the patriarchy,
their accomplishments are considered unearned.
As possible adherents of rape culture, they're sexually suspect.
Their ambitions make them plunderers of the planet.
They're not welcome.
At the junior high, high school, and university level,
they're falling behind educationally.
When my son was 14, we discussed his grades.
He was doing very well, he said, matter-of-factly, for a boy.
I inquired further.
Everyone knew, he said, that girls do better in school than boys.
His intonation indicated surprise at my ignorance of something so self-evident.
While writing this, I received the latest edition of The Economist.
The cover story?
The Weaker Sex, meaning males.
In modern universities, women now make up more than 50% of the students
in more than two-thirds of all disciplines.
Boys are suffering in the modern world.
They are more disobedient, negatively, or more independent, positively, than girls,
and they suffer for this throughout their pre-university educational career.
They are less agreeable, agreeableness being a personality trait associated with compassion,
empathy, and avoidance of conflict, and less susceptible to anxiety and depression,
at least after both sexes hit puberty.
Boys' interests tilt towards things.
Girls' interests tilt towards people.
Strikingly, these differences, strongly influenced by biological factors,
are most pronounced in the Scandinavian societies where gender equality has been pushed hardest.
This is the opposite of what would be expected by those who insist,
ever more loudly, that gender is a social construct.
It isn't.
This isn't a debate.
The data are in.
Boys like competition, and they don't like to obey, particularly when they are adolescents.
During that time, they are driven to escape their families and establish their own independent
existence.
There is little difference between doing that and challenging authority.
Schools, which were set up in the late 1800s precisely to inculcate obedience,
do not take kindly to provocative and daring behavior,
no matter how tough-minded and competent it might show a boy, or a girl, to be.
Other factors play the role in the decline of boys.
Girls will, for example, play boys' games,
but boys are much more reluctant to play girls' games.
This is, in part, because it is admirable for a girl to win when competing with a boy.
It is also okay for her to lose to a boy.
For a boy to beat a girl, however, it is often not okay,
and just as often it is even less okay for him to lose.
Imagine that a boy and girl, age nine, get into a fight.
Just for engaging, the boy is highly suspect.
If he wins, he is pathetic.
If he loses, well, his life might as well be over.
Beat up by a girl.
Girls can win by winning in their own hierarchy,
by being good at what girls value, as girls.
They can add to this victory by winning in the boys' hierarchy.
Boys, however, can only win by winning in the male hierarchy.
They will lose status among girls and boys by being good at what girls value.
It costs them in reputation among the boys and in attractiveness among the girls.
Girls aren't attracted to boys who are their friends,
even though they might like them, whatever that means.
They are attracted to boys who win status contests with other boys.
If you're male, however, you just can't hammer a female as hard as you would a male.
Boys can't, won't, play truly competitive games with girls.
It isn't clear how they can win.
As the game turns into a girls' game, therefore, the boys leave.
Are the universities, particularly the humanities, about to become a girls' game?
Is this what we want?
The situation in the universities and in educational institutions in general
is far more problematic than the basic statistics indicate.
If you eliminate the so-called STEM, science, technology, engineering, and mathematics programs,
excluding psychology, the female-to-male ratio is even more skewed.
Almost 80% of students majoring in the fields of health care, public administration,
psychology, and education, which comprise one-quarter of all degrees, are female.
The disparity is still rapidly increasing.
At this rate, there will be very few men in most university disciplines in 15 years.
This is not good news for men.
It might even be catastrophic news for men.
But it's also not good news for women.
Career and Marriage
The women at female-dominated institutes of higher education
are finding it increasingly difficult to arrange a dating relationship of even moderate duration.
In consequence, they must settle, if inclined, for a hookup or sequential hookups.
Perhaps this is a move forward in terms of sexual liberation.
But I doubt it.
I think it's terrible for the girls.
A stable, loving relationship is highly desirable for men as well as women.
For women, however, it is often what is most wanted.
From 1997 to 2012, according to the Pew Research Center,
the number of women aged 18 to 34 who said that a successful marriage is one of the most important things in life
rose from 28 to 37 percent, an increase of more than 30 percent.
The number of young men who said the same thing declined 15 percent over the same period,
from 35 to 29 percent.
During that time, the proportion of married people over 18 continued to decline,
down from three-quarters in 1960 to half now.
Finally, among never-married adults aged 30 to 59,
men are three times as likely as women to say they do not ever want to marry.
27 versus 8 percent.
Who decided, anyway, that career is more important than love and family?
Is working 80 hours a week at a high-end law firm truly worth the sacrifices required for that kind of success?
And if it is worth it, why is it worth it?
A minority of people, mostly men who score low in the trade of agreeableness, again,
are hyper-competitive and want to win at any cost.
A minority will find the work intrinsically fascinating, but most aren't, and most won't.
And money doesn't seem to improve people's lives once they have enough to avoid the bill collectors.
Furthermore, most high-performing and high-earning females have high-performing and high-earning partners,
and that matters more to women.
The Pew data also indicate that a spouse with a desirable job is a high priority
for almost 80 percent of never-married-but-marriage-seeking women,
but for less than 50 percent of men.
When they hit their 30s, most of the top-rate female lawyers bail out of their high-pressure careers.
Only 15 percent of equity partners at the 200 biggest U.S. law firms are women.
This figure hasn't changed much in the last 15 years,
even though female associates and staff attorneys are plentiful.
It also isn't because the law firms don't want the women to stay around and succeed.
There is a chronic shortage of excellent people, regardless of sex,
and law firms are desperate to retain them.
The women who leave want a job and a life that allows them some time.
After law school and articling and the few first years of work,
they develop other interests.
This is common knowledge in the big firms,
although it is not something that people are comfortable articulating in public,
men and women alike.
I recently watched a McGill University professor,
female, lecture a room full of female law partners or near partners
about how lack of child care facilities and male definitions of success
impeded their career progress and caused women to leave.
I knew most of the women in the room.
We had talked at great length.
I knew, they knew, that none of this was at all the problem.
They had nannies and they could afford them.
They had already outsourced all their domestic obligations and necessities.
They understood as well and perfectly well that it was the market that defined success,
not the men they worked with.
If you are earning $650 an hour in Toronto as a top lawyer
and your client in Japan phones you at 4 a.m. on a Sunday,
you answer now.
You answer now even if you have just gone back to sleep after feeding the baby.
You answer because some hyper-ambitious legal associate in New York
would be happy to answer if you don't.
And that's why the market defines the work.
The increasingly short supply of university-educated men poses a problem of increasing severity
for women who want to marry as well as date.
First, women have a strong proclivity to marry across or up the economic dominance hierarchy.
They prefer a partner of equal or greater status.
This holds true cross-culturally.
The same does not hold, by the way, for men,
who are perfectly willing to marry across or down, as the Pew data indicate,
although they show a preference for somewhat younger mates.
The recent trend towards the hollowing out of the middle class
has also been increasing as resource-rich women tend more and more
to partner with resource-rich men.
Because of this, and because of the decline in high-paying manufacturing jobs for men,
one of six men of employable age is currently without work in the U.S.,
marriage is now something increasingly reserved for the rich.
I can't help finding that amusing in a blackly ironic manner.
The oppressive patriarchal institution of marriage has now become a luxury.
Why would the rich tyrannize themselves?
Why do women want an employed partner and, preferably, one of higher status?
In no small part, it's because women become more vulnerable when they have children.
They need someone competent to support mother and child when that becomes necessary.
It's a perfectly rational, compensatory act,
although it may also have a biological basis.
Why would a woman who decides to take responsibility for one or more infants want an adult to look after as well?
So, the unemployed working man is an undesirable specimen,
and single motherhood an undesirable alternative.
Children in father-absent homes are four times as likely to be poor.
That means their mothers are poor, too.
Fatherless children are at much greater risk for drug and alcohol abuse.
Children living with married, biological parents are less anxious, depressed, and delinquent
than children living with one or more non-biological parent.
Children in single-parent families are also twice as likely to commit suicide.
The strong turn towards political correctness in universities has exacerbated the problem.
The voices shouting against oppression have become louder, it seems,
in precise proportion to how equal, even now increasingly skewed against men, the schools have become.
There are whole disciplines in universities, forthrightly hostile towards men.
These are the areas of study dominated by the post-modern slash neo-Marxist claim
that Western culture in particular is an oppressive structure created by white men to dominate and exclude women
and other select groups, successful only because of that domination and exclusion.
The Patriarchy.
Hindrance or help?
Of course, culture is an oppressive structure.
It's always been that way.
It's a fundamental, universal, existential reality.
The tyrannical king is a symbolic truth, an archetypal constant.
What we inherit from the past is willfully blind and out of date.
It's a ghost, a machine, and a monster.
It must be rescued, repaired, and kept at bay by the attention and effort of the living.
It crushes as it hammers us into socially acceptable shape, and it wastes great potential.
But it offers great gain, too.
Every word we speak is a gift from our ancestors.
Every thought we think was thought previously by someone smarter.
The highly functional infrastructure that surrounds us, particularly in the West, is a gift from our ancestors.
The comparatively uncorrupt political and economic systems, the technology, the wealth, the lifespan, the freedom, the luxury, and the opportunity.
Culture takes with one hand, but in some fortunate places, it gives more with the other.
To think about culture only as oppressive is ignorant and ungrateful, as well as dangerous.
This is not to say, as I am hoping the content of this book has made abundantly clear so far,
that culture should not be subject to criticism.
Consider this, as well, in regard to oppression.
Any hierarchy creates winners and losers.
The winners are, of course, more likely to justify the hierarchy, and the losers to criticize it.
But, number one, the collective pursuit of any valued goal produces a hierarchy,
as some will be better and some worse at that pursuit, no matter what it is.
And, number two, it is the pursuit of goals that in large part lends life its sustaining meaning.
We experience almost all the emotions that make life deep and engaging
as a consequence of moving successfully towards something deeply desired and valued.
The price we pay for that involvement is the inevitable creation of hierarchies of success,
while the inevitable consequence is difference in outcome.
Absolute equality would therefore require the sacrifice of value itself,
and then there would be nothing worth living for.
We might instead note with gratitude that a complex, sophisticated culture
allows for many games and many successful players,
and that a well-structured culture allows the individuals that compose it
to play and to win in many different fashions.
It is also perverse to consider culture the creation of men.
Culture is symbolically, archetypally, mythically male.
That's partly why the idea of the patriarchy is so easily swallowed.
But it is certainly the creation of humankind, not the creation of men,
let alone white men who nonetheless contributed their fair share.
European culture has only been dominant, to the degree that it is dominant at all,
for about 400 years.
On the timescale of cultural evolution, which is to be measured at minimum in thousands of years,
such a time span barely registers.
Furthermore, even if women contributed nothing substantial to art, literature,
and the sciences prior to the 1960s and the feminist revolution,
which is not something I believe,
then the role they played raising children and working on the farms
was still instrumental in raising boys and freeing up men,
a very few men, so that humanity could propagate itself and strive forward.
Here's an alternative theory.
Throughout history, men and women both struggled terribly for freedom
from the overwhelming horrors of privation and necessity.
Women were often at a disadvantage during that struggle,
as they had all the vulnerabilities of men,
with the extra reproductive burden and less physical strength.
In addition to the filth, misery, disease, starvation, cruelty, and ignorance
that characterized the lives of both sexes back before the 20th century,
when even people in the Western world typically existed
on less than a dollar a day in today's money,
women also had to put up with the serious practical inconvenience of menstruation,
the high probability of unwanted pregnancy,
the chance of death or serious damage during childbirth,
and the burden of too many young children.
Perhaps that is sufficient reason for the different legal and practical treatment
of men and women that characterized most societies
prior to the recent technological revolutions,
including the invention of the birth control pill.
At least such things might be taken into account
before the assumption that men tyrannized women is accepted as a truism.
It looks to me like the so-called oppression of the patriarchy
was instead an imperfect collective attempt by men and women
stretching over millennia to free each other
from privation, disease, and drudgery.
The recent case of Arunachala Morugan anthem
provides a salutary example.
This man, the tampon king of India,
became unhappy because his wife had to use dirty rags
during her menstrual period.
She told him it was either expensive sanitary napkins
or milk for the family.
He spent the next 14 years in a state of insanity
by his neighbor's judgment,
trying to rectify the problem.
Even his wife and his mother abandoned him briefly,
terrified as they became of his obsession.
When he ran out of female volunteers to test his product,
he took to wearing a bladder of pig's blood as a replacement.
I can't see how this behavior would have improved
his popularity or status.
Now, his low-cost and locally-made napkins
are distributed across India,
manufactured by women-run self-help groups.
His users have been provided with freedom
they never previously experienced.
In 2014, this high school dropout
was named one of Time magazine's
100 Most Influential People in the World.
I am unwilling to consider personal gain
Moruganantham's primary motivation.
Is he part of the patriarchy?
In 1847, James Young Simpson used ether
to help a woman who had a deformed pelvis give birth.
Afterwards, he switched to the better-performing chloroform.
The first baby delivered under its influence
was named Anesthesia.
By 1853, chloroform was esteemed enough
to be used by Queen Victoria,
who delivered her seventh baby under its influence.
Remarkably soon afterward,
the option of painless childbirth
was available everywhere.
A few people warned of the danger
of opposing God's pronouncement to women
in Genesis 3.16.
I will greatly multiply thy sorrow
and thy conception.
In sorrow thou shalt bring forth children.
Some also opposed its use among males.
Young, healthy, courageous men
simply did not need Anesthesia.
Such opposition was ineffectual.
Use of Anesthesia spread with extreme rapidity
and far faster than would be possible today.
Even prominent churchmen supported its use.
The first practical tampon, Tampax,
didn't arrive until the 1930s.
It was invented by Dr. Earl Cleveland Haas.
He made it of compressed cotton
and designed an applicator from paper tubes.
This helped lessen resistance to the products
by those who objected to the self-touching
that might otherwise occur.
By the early 1940s,
25% of women were using them.
30 years later, it was 70%.
Now, it's four out of five,
with the remainder relying on pads,
which are now hyper-absorbent
and held in place by effective adhesives,
opposed to the awkwardly placed,
bulky, belted, diaper-like
sanitary napkins of the 1970s.
Did Murugan Anthem, Simpson, and Haas
oppress women or free them?
What about Gregory Goodwin Pincus,
who invented the birth control pill?
In what manner were these practical,
enlightened, persistent men part of a constricting patriarchy?
Why do we teach our young people that our incredible culture
is the result of male oppression?
Blinded by this central assumption,
disciplines as diverse as education,
social work, art history,
gender studies, literature,
sociology, and, increasingly, law,
actively treat men as oppressors
and men's activity as inherently destructive.
They also often directly promote radical political action,
radical by all the norms of the societies
within which they are situated,
which they do not distinguish from education.
The Pauline Jewett Institute of Women's and Gender Studies
at Ottawa's Carleton University, for example,
encourages activism as part of their mandate.
The Gender Studies Department at Queen's University
in Kingston, Ontario,
quote,
teaches feminist, anti-racist, and queer theories and methods
that center activism for social change,
end quote,
indicating support for the supposition
that university education should, above all,
foster political engagement of a particular kind.
Postmodernism and the Long Arm of Marx
These disciplines draw their philosophy
from multiple sources.
All are heavily influenced by the Marxist humanists.
One such figure is Max Horkheimer,
who developed critical theory in the 1930s.
Any brief summary of his ideas
is bound to be oversimplified,
but Horkheimer regarded himself as a Marxist.
He believed that Western principles
of individual freedom or the free market
were merely masks that served to disguise
the true conditions of the West,
inequality, domination, and exploitation.
He believed that intellectual activity
should be devoted to social change
instead of mere understanding,
and hoped to emancipate humanity
from its enslavement.
Horkheimer and his Frankfurt School
of Associated Thinkers,
first in Germany and later in the U.S.,
aimed at a full-scale critique
and transformation of Western civilization.
More important in recent years
has been the work of French philosopher
Jacques Derrida,
leader of the postmodernists,
who came into vogue in the late 1970s.
Derrida described his own ideas
as a radicalized form of Marxism.
Marx attempted to reduce history
and society to economics,
considering culture,
the oppression of the poor,
by the rich.
When Marxism was put into practice
in the Soviet Union,
China, Vietnam, Cambodia, and elsewhere,
economic resources
were brutally redistributed.
Private property was eliminated
and rural people forcibly collectivized.
The result?
Tens of millions of people died.
Hundreds of millions more
were subject to oppression
rivaling that still operative
in North Korea,
the last classic communist holdout.
The resulting economic systems
were corrupt and unsustainable.
The world entered a prolonged
and extremely dangerous Cold War.
The citizens of those societies
lived the life of the lie,
betraying their families,
informing on their neighbors,
existing in misery
without complaint,
or else.
Marxist ideas were very attractive
to intellectual utopians.
One of the primary architects
of the horrors of the Khmer Rouge,
Q. Samfan,
received a doctorate
at the Sorbonne
before he became
the nominal head of Cambodia
in the mid-1970s.
In his doctoral thesis,
written in 1959,
he argued that the work done
by non-farmers
in Cambodia's cities
was unproductive.
Bankers,
bureaucrats,
and businessmen
added nothing to society.
Instead,
they parasitized
the genuine value
produced through agriculture,
small industry,
and craft.
Samfan's ideas
were favorably looked upon
by the French intellectuals
who granted him his PhD.
Back in Cambodia,
he was provided
with the opportunity
to put his theories
into practice.
The Khmer Rouge
evacuated Cambodia's cities,
drove all the inhabitants
into the countryside,
closed the banks,
banned the use of currency,
and destroyed all the markets.
A quarter of the Cambodian population
were worked to death
in the countryside,
in the killing fields.
Lest we forget,
ideas have consequences.
When the communists
established the Soviet Union
after the First World War,
people could be forgiven
for hoping
that the utopian collectivist dreams
their new leaders pervade
were possible.
The decayed social order
of the late 19th century
produced the trenches
and mass slaughters
of the Great War.
The gap between rich and poor
was extreme,
and most people
slaved away in conditions
worse than those later
described by Orwell.
Although the West
received word
of the horror
perpetrated by Lenin
after the Russian Revolution,
it remained difficult
to evaluate his actions
from afar.
Russia was in
post-monarchical chaos,
and the news
of widespread
industrial development
and redistribution
of property
to those who had
so recently been serfs
provided reason for hope.
To complicate things further,
the USSR
and Mexico
supported the Democratic
Republicans
when the Spanish Civil War
broke out in 1936.
They were fighting
against the essentially
fascist nationalists
who had overthrown
the fragile democracy
established only five years
previously,
and who found support
with the Nazis
and Italian fascists.
The intelligentsia
in America,
Great Britain,
and elsewhere
were severely frustrated
by their home country's
neutrality.
Thousands of foreigners
streamed into Spain
to fight for the Republicans,
serving in the
international brigades.
George Orwell
was one of them.
Ernest Hemingway
served there as a journalist
and was a supporter
of the Republicans.
Politically concerned
young Americans,
Canadians,
and Brits
felt a moral obligation
to stop talking
and start fighting.
All of this
drew attention away
from concurrent events
in the Soviet Union.
In the 1930s,
during the Great Depression,
the Stalinist Soviets
sent two million kulaks,
their richest peasants,
to Siberia,
those with a small number
of cows,
a couple of hired hands,
or a few acres
more than was typical.
From the Communist viewpoint,
these kulaks
had gathered their wealth
by plundering those around them
and deserved their fate.
Wealth signified oppression
and private property
was theft.
It was time
for some equity.
More than 30,000 kulaks
were shot on the spot.
Many more met their fate
at the hands
of their most jealous,
resentful,
and unproductive neighbors
who used the high ideals
of communist collectivization
to mask
their murderous intent.
The kulaks were,
quote,
enemies of the people,
unquote,
apes,
scum,
vermin,
filth,
and swine.
We will make soap
out of the kulak,
claimed one particularly
brutal cadre
of city dwellers,
mobilized by party
and Soviet executive committees
and sent out
into the countryside.
The kulaks were driven
naked into the streets,
beaten and forced
to dig their own graves.
The women were raped.
Their belongings
were expropriated,
which in practice
meant that their houses
were stripped down
to the rafters
and ceiling beams
and everything
was stolen.
In many places,
the non-kulak peasants
resisted,
particularly the women
who took to surrounding
the persecuted families
with their bodies.
Such resistance
proved futile.
The kulaks
who didn't die
were exiled
to Siberia,
often in the middle
of the night.
The trains started
in February
in the bitter
Russian cold.
Housing of the most
substandard kind
awaited them
upon arrival
on the desert taiga.
Many died,
particularly children,
from typhoid,
measles,
and scarlet fever.
The parasitical kulaks
were, in general,
the most skillful
and hard-working farmers.
A small minority
of people
are responsible
for most of the production
in any field,
and farming
proved no different.
Agricultural output
crashed.
What little remained
was taken by force
out of the countryside
and into the cities.
Rural people
who went out
into the fields
after the harvest
to glean
single grains of wheat
for their hungry families
risked execution.
Six million people
died of starvation
in Ukraine,
the breadbasket
of the Soviet Union
in the 1930s.
To eat your own children
is a barbarian act,
declared posters
of the Soviet regime.
Despite more than mere
rumors of such atrocities,
attitudes towards communism
remained consistently
positive among many
Western intellectuals.
There were other things
to worry about,
and the Second World War
allied the Soviet Union
with the Western countries
opposing Hitler,
Mussolini,
and Hirohito.
Certain watchful eyes
remained open,
nonetheless.
Malcolm Muggeridge
published a series
of articles
describing Soviet
demolition of the peasantry
as early as 1933
for the Manchester Guardian.
George Orwell
understood what was
going on under Stalin,
and he made it
widely known.
He published Animal Farm,
a fable satirizing
the Soviet Union,
in 1945,
despite encountering
serious resistance
to the book's release.
Many who should have
known better
retained their blindness
for long after this.
Nowhere was this
truer than France,
and nowhere truer in France
than among the intellectuals.
France's most famous
mid-century philosopher,
Jean-Paul Sartre,
was a well-known communist,
although not a card carrier,
until he denounced
the Soviet incursion
into Hungary in 1956.
He remained an advocate
for Marxism, nonetheless,
and did not finally break
with the Soviet Union
until 1968,
when the Soviets
violently suppressed
the Czechoslovakians
during the Prague Spring.
Not long after
came the publication
of Alexander Solzhenitsyn's
The Gulag Archipelago,
which we have discussed
rather extensively
in previous chapters.
As noted,
and is worth noting again,
this book utterly demolished
communism's moral credibility,
first in the West,
and then in the Soviet system itself.
It circulated in underground
samizdat format.
Russians had 24 hours
to read their rare copy
before handing it
to the next waiting mind.
A Russian language reading
was broadcast
into the Soviet Union
by Radio Liberty.
Solzhenitsyn argued
that the Soviet system
could have never survived
without tyranny
and slave labor,
that the seeds
of its worst exorcist
were definitively sowed
in the time of Lenin,
for whom the Western communists
still served as apologists,
and that it was propped up
by endless lies,
both individual and public.
Its sins could not be blamed
on a simple cult of personality,
as its supporters
continued to claim.
Solzhenitsyn documented
the Soviet Union's
extensive mistreatment
of political prisoners,
its corrupt legal system,
and its mass murderers,
and showed
in painstaking detail
how these were not
aberrations,
but direct expressions
of the underlying
communist philosophy.
No one could stand up
for communism
after the gulag archipelago,
not even the communists
themselves.
This did not mean
that the fascination
Marxist ideas had
for intellectuals,
particularly French intellectuals,
disappeared.
It merely transformed.
Some refused outright to learn.
Sartre denounced Solzhenitsyn
as a, quote,
dangerous element, end quote.
Derrida, more subtle,
substituted the idea of power
for the idea of money
and continued on his merry way.
Such linguistic sleight of hand
gave all the barely
repentant Marxists
still inhabiting
the intellectual pinnacles
of the West
the means
to retain
their worldview.
Society was no longer
repression of the poor
by the rich.
It was oppression
of everyone
by the powerful.
According to Derrida,
hierarchical structures
emerged only to include
the beneficiaries
of that structure
and to exclude
everyone else
who were therefore
oppressed.
Even that claim
wasn't sufficiently radical.
Derrida claimed
that divisiveness
and oppression
were built right
into language,
built into the very
categories we use
to pragmatically simplify
and negotiate
the world.
There are
women
only because
men gain
by excluding them.
There are
males and females
only because
members of that
more heterogeneous group
benefit
by excluding
the tiny minority
of people
whose biological
sexuality
is amorphous.
Science
only benefits
the scientists.
Politics
only benefits
the politicians.
In Derrida's view,
hierarchies exist
because they gain
from oppressing
those who are omitted.
It is this
ill-gotten gain
that allows them
to flourish.
Derrida famously said,
although he denied it
later,
often translated as
there is nothing
outside the text.
His supporters
say that is a
mistranslation
and that the English
equivalent should have
been
there is no
outside text.
It remains difficult
either way
to read the statement
as saying anything
other than
everything is
interpretation
and that is how
Derrida's work
has generally
been interpreted.
It is almost
impossible
to overestimate
the nihilistic
and destructive
nature of this
philosophy.
It puts the
act of
categorization
itself in doubt.
It negates
the idea
that distinctions
might be drawn
between things
for any reasons
other than
that of raw
power.
Biological
distinctions
between men
and women?
Despite the
existence
of an
overwhelming
multidisciplinary
scientific literature
indicating that
sex differences
are powerfully
influenced by
biological factors,
science is just
another game
of power
for Derrida
and his
postmodern
Marxist
acolytes,
making claims
to benefit
those at the
pinnacle of
the scientific
world.
There are
no facts.
Hierarchical
position and
reputation as a
consequence of
skill and
competence?
All definitions
of skill and
of competence
are merely
made up by
those who
benefit from
them to
exclude others
and to
benefit
personally and
selfishly.
There is
sufficient truth
to Derrida's
claims to
account in
part for
their insidious
nature.
Power is a
fundamental
motivational force.
Ah, not
the.
People compete
to rise to
the top and
they care where
they are in
dominance
hierarchies.
But, and
this is where
you separate the
metaphorical boys
from the men
philosophically,
the fact that
power plays a
role in
human motivation
does not mean
that it plays
the only role
or even the
primary role.
Likewise, the
fact that we
can never know
everything does
make all our
observations and
utterances dependent
on taking some
things into
account and
leaving other
things out, as
we discussed
extensively in
Rule 10.
That does not
justify the claim
that everything is
interpretation or
that categorization
is just
exclusion.
Beware of
single-cause
interpretations and
beware the people
who purvey
them.
Although the
facts cannot
speak for
themselves, just
as an expanse of
land spread out
before a voyager
cannot tell him
how to journey
through it, and
although there are
a myriad ways to
interact with, even
to perceive, even a
small number of
objects, that does
not mean that all
interpretations are
equally valid.
Some hurt yourself
and others.
Others put you on a
collision course with
society.
Some are not
sustainable across
time.
Others do not get
you where you want
to go.
Many of these
constraints are built
into us as a
consequence of
billions of years of
evolutionary processes.
Others emerge as we
are socialized into
cooperating and
competing peacefully
and productively with
others.
Still more
interpretations emerge
as we discard
counterproductive
strategies through
learning.
An endless number of
interpretations,
certainly.
That is not
different than saying
an endless number
of problems.
But a seriously
bounded number of
viable solutions.
Otherwise, life would
be easy.
And it's not.
Now, I have some
beliefs that might be
regarded as left
leaning.
I think, for example,
that the tendency for
valuable goods to
distribute themselves
with pronounced
inequality constitutes
an ever-present
threat to the
stability of society.
I think there is good
evidence for that.
That does not mean that
the solution to the
problem is self-evident.
We don't know how to
redistribute wealth
without introducing a
whole host of other
problems.
Different Western
societies have tried
different approaches.
The Swedes, for
example, push equality
to its limit.
The U.S. takes the
opposite tack, assuming
that the net wealth
creation of a more
free-for-all capitalism
constitutes the rising
tide that lifts all
boats.
The results of these
experiments are not all
in, and countries
differ very much in
relevant ways.
Differences in history,
geographic area,
population size, and
ethnic diversity make
direct comparisons very
difficult.
But it certainly is the
case that forced
redistribution in the
name of utopian
equality is a cure to
shame the disease.
I think as well, on what
might be considered the
leftish side, that the
incremental remake of
university administrations
into analogs of private
corporations is a mistake.
I think that the science
of management is a
pseudo-discipline.
I believe that government
can sometimes be a force
for good, as well as the
necessary arbiter of a
small set of necessary
rules.
Nonetheless, I do not
understand why our society
is providing public
funding to institutions
and educators whose
stated, conscious, and
explicit aim is the
demolition of the culture
that supports them.
Such people have a
perfect right to their
opinions and actions if
they remain lawful, but
they have no reasonable
claim to public funding.
If radical right-wingers
were receiving state
funding for political
operations disguised as
university courses, as
the radical left-wingers
clearly are, the uproar
from progressives across
North America would be
deafening.
There are other serious
problems lurking in the
radical disciplines, apart
from the falseness of their
theories and methods, and
their insistence that
collective political
activism is morally
obligatory.
There isn't a shred of
hard evidence to support
any of their central
claims.
That Western society is
pathologically patriarchal,
that the prime lesson of
history is that men, rather
than nature, were the
primary source of the
oppression of women, rather
than, as in most cases,
their partners and
supporters, that all
hierarchies are based on
power and aimed at
exclusion.
Hierarchies exist for many
reasons, some arguably
valid, some not, and are
incredibly ancient,
evolutionarily speaking.
Do male crustaceans
oppress female crustaceans?
Should their hierarchies be
upended?
In societies that are well
functioning, not in
comparison to a hypothetical
utopia, but contrasted with
other existing or
historical cultures,
competence, not power, is
a prime determiner of
status.
Competence, ability, skill,
not power.
This is obvious, both
anecdotally and factually.
No one with brain cancer is
equity-minded enough to
refuse the service of the
surgeon with the best
education, the best
reputation, and perhaps the
highest earnings.
Furthermore, the most valid
personality trait predictors of
long-term success in Western
countries are
intelligence, as measured with
cognitive ability or IQ tests,
and conscientiousness, a trait
characterized by
industriousness and
orderliness.
There are exceptions.
Entrepreneurs and artists are
higher in openness to
experience another cardinal
personality trait than in
conscientiousness.
But openness is
associated with verbal
intelligence and creativity, so
that exception is
appropriate and
understandable.
The predictive power of
these traits, mathematically
and economically speaking, is
exceptionally high, among the
highest in terms of power, of
anything ever actually
measured at the harder ends of
the social sciences.
A good battery of
personality-slash-cognitive tests
can increase the probability of
employing someone more competent
than average
from 50-50
to 85-15.
These are the facts
as well supported as
anything in the social sciences.
And this is saying more than you might
think, as the social sciences are
more effective disciplines than their
cynical critics appreciate.
Thus, not only is the state supporting
one-sided radicalism, it is also
supporting indoctrination.
We do not teach our children that
the world is flat, neither should we
teach them unsupported, ideologically
predicated theories about the nature
of men and women, or the nature of
hierarchy.
It is not unreasonable to note, if the
deconstructionists would leave it at
that, that science can be biased by the
interests of power, and to warn against
that, or to point out that evidence is
too often what powerful people,
including scientists, decide it is.
After all, scientists are people too,
and people like power, just like
lobsters like power, just like
deconstructionists like to be known
for their ideas and strive rightly to
sit atop their academic hierarchies.
But that doesn't mean that science,
or even deconstructionism, is only
about power.
Why believe such a thing?
Why insist upon it?
Perhaps it's this.
If only power exists, then the use of
power becomes fully justifiable.
There is no bounding such use by
evidence, method, logic, or even the
necessity for coherence.
There is no bounding by anything
outside the text.
That leaves opinion and force, and the
use of force is all too attractive under
such circumstances, just as its
employment in the service of that
opinion is all too certain.
The insane and incomprehensible
postmodern insistence that all gender
differences are socially constructed, for
example, becomes all too
understandable when its moral
imperative is grasped, when its
justification for force is once and for
all understood.
Society must be altered, or bias
eliminated, until all outcomes are
equitable.
But the bedrock of the social
constructionist position is the wish
for the latter, not belief in the
justice of the former.
Since all outcome inequalities must be
eliminated, inequality being the heart
of all evil, then all gender
differences must be regarded as socially
constructed.
Otherwise, the drive for equality would be
too radical, and the doctrine too
blatantly propagandistic.
Thus, the order of logic is reversed,
so that the ideology can be
camouflaged.
The fact that such statements lead
immediately to internal inconsistencies
within the ideology is never
addressed.
Gender is constructed, but an individual
who desires gender reassignment surgery
is to be unarguably considered a man
trapped in a woman's body, or vice
versa.
The fact that both of these cannot
logically be true simultaneously is
just ignored, or rationalized away with
another appalling postmodern claim,
that logic itself, along with the
techniques of science, is merely part of
the oppressive patriarchal system.
It is also the case, of course, that all
outcomes cannot be equalized.
First, outcomes must be measured.
Comparing the salaries of people who
occupy the same position is relatively
straightforward, although complicated
significantly by such things as date of
hire, given the difference in demand for
workers, for example, at different time
periods.
But there are other dimensions of comparison
that are arguably equally relevant, such as
tenure, promotion rate, and social influence.
The introduction of the equal pay for equal work
argument immediately complicates even celery
comparison beyond practicality, for one
simple reason.
Who decides what work is equal?
It's not possible.
That's why the marketplace exists.
Worse is the problem of group comparison.
Women should make as much as men.
Okay.
Black women should make as much as white women.
Okay.
Should celery then be adjusted for all
parameters of race?
At what level of resolution?
What racial categories are real?
The U.S. National Institute of Health, to
take a single bureaucratic example, recognizes
American Indian or Alaska Native, Asian, Black,
Hispanic, Native Hawaiian or other Pacific
Islander, and white.
But there are more than 500 separate American
Indian tribes.
By what possible logic should American Indian
therefore stand as a canonical category?
Osage tribal members have a yearly average income
of $30,000, while Tohono Oodhams make $11,000.
Are they equally oppressed?
What about disabilities?
Disabled people should make as much as
non-disabled people.
Okay.
On the surface, that's a noble, compassionate,
fair claim.
But who is disabled?
Is someone living with a parent with Alzheimer's
disabled?
If not, why not?
What about someone with a lower IQ?
Someone less attractive?
Someone overweight?
Some people...
