in the story. Where, exactly, is the border between events? The sexual abuse of children
is distressingly common. However, it's not as common as poorly trained psychotherapists think,
and it also does not always produce terribly damaged adults. People vary in their resilience.
An event that will wipe one person out can be shrugged off by another. But therapists with a
little second-hand knowledge of Freud often axiomatically assume that a distressed adult
in their practice must have been subject to childhood sexual abuse. Why else would they be
distressed? So they dig and infer and intimate and suggest and overreact and bias and tilt.
They exaggerate the importance of some events and downplay the importance of others. They trim the
facts to fit their theory, and they convince their clients that they were sexually abused,
if they could only remember. And then the clients start to remember. And then they start to accuse.
Sometimes what they remember never happened, and the people accused are innocent.
The good news? At least the therapist's theory remains intact. That's good, for the therapist.
But there's no shortage of collateral damage. However, people are often willing to produce a lot of
collateral damage if they can retain their theory. I knew about all this when Miss S came to talk to me
about her sexual experiences. When she recounted her trips to the singles bars and their recurring
aftermath, I thought a bunch of things at once. I thought, you're so vague and so non-existent.
You're a denizen of chaos and the underworld. You are going ten different places at the same time.
Anyone can take you by the hand and guide you down the road of their choosing. After all,
if you're not the leading man in your own drama, you're a bit player in someone else's.
And you might well be assigned to play a dismal, lonely, and tragic part.
After Miss S recounted her story, we sat there. I thought, you have normal sexual desires.
You're extremely lonely. You're unfulfilled sexually. You're afraid of men and ignorant of
the world and know nothing of yourself. You wander around like an accident waiting to happen.
And the accident happens. And that's your life. I thought, part of you wants to be taken.
Part of you wants to be a child. You were abused by your brothers and ignored by your father.
And so part of you wants revenge upon men. Part of you is guilty. Another part is ashamed.
Another part is thrilled and excited. Who are you? What did you do? What happened?
What was the objective truth? There was no way of knowing the objective truth. And there never would
be. There was no objective observer. And there never would be. There was no complete and accurate
story. Such a thing did not and could not exist. There were and are only partial accounts and
fragmentary viewpoints. But some are still better than others. Memory is not a description of the
objective past. Memory is a tool. Memory is the past's guide to the future. If you remember that
something bad happened, and you can figure out why, then you can try to avoid that bad thing happening
again. That's the purpose of memory. It's not to remember the past. It's to stop the same damn thing
from happening over and over. I thought I could simplify Miss S.'s life. I could say that her
suspicions of rape were fully justified, and that her doubt about the events was nothing but additional
evidence of her thorough and long-term victimization. I could insist that her sexual partners had a legal
obligation to ensure that she was not too impaired by alcohol to give consent. I could tell her that
she had indisputably been subject to violent and illicit acts unless she had consented to each sexual
move explicitly and verbally. I could tell her that she was an innocent victim. I could have told her all
that, and it would have been true, and she would have accepted it as true and remembered it for the rest
of her life. She would have been a new person with a new history and a new destiny. But I also thought
I could tell Miss S. that she is a walking disaster. I could tell her that she wanders into a bar like a
courtesan in a coma, that she's a danger to herself and others, that she needs to wake up, and that if she
goes to singles bars and drinks too much and is taken home and has rough violent sex or even tender
caring sex, then what the hell does she expect? In other words, I could have told her in more
philosophical terms that she was Nietzsche's pale criminal, the person who at one moment dares to
break the sacred law and at the next shrinks from paying the price. And that would have been true too,
and she would have accepted it as such and remembered it. If I had been the adherent of a left-wing
social justice ideology, I would have told her the first story. If I had been the adherent of a
conservative ideology, I would have told her the second. And her responses, after having been told
either the first or second story, would have proved to my satisfaction and hers that the story I had told
was true, completely, irrefutably true. And that would have been advice.
Figure it out for yourself. I decided instead to listen. I have learned not to steal my clients'
problems from them. I don't want to be the redeeming hero or the deus ex machina,
not in someone else's story. I don't want their lives. So I asked her to tell me what she thought,
and I listened. She talked a lot. When we were finished, she still didn't know if she had been
raped. And neither did I. Life is very complicated. Sometimes you have to change the way you understand
everything to properly understand a single something. Was I raped? Can be a very complicated
question. The mere fact that the question would present itself in that form indicates the existence
of infinite layers of complexity, to say nothing of five times. There are a myriad of questions hidden
inside. Was I raped? What is rape? What is consent? What constitutes appropriate sexual caution? How should
a person defend herself? Where does the fault lie? Was I raped? Is a hydra? If you cut off the head of a
hydra, seven more grow. That's life. Miss S would have had to talk for 20 years to figure out whether she had
been raped and someone would have had to be there to listen. I started the process, but circumstances
made it impossible for me to finish. She left therapy with me, only somewhat less ill-formed and vague than
when she first met me. But at least she didn't leave as the living embodiment of my damned ideology.
The people I listen to need to talk, because that's how people think. People need to think.
Otherwise, they wander blindly into pits. When people think, they simulate the world and plan
how to act in it. If they do a good job of simulating, they can figure out what stupid things
they shouldn't do. Then they cannot do them. Then they don't have to suffer the consequences.
That's the purpose of thinking. But we can't do it alone. We simulate the world and plan our actions in
it. Only human beings do this. That's how brilliant we are. We make little avatars of ourselves.
We place those avatars in fictional worlds. Then we watch what happens. If our avatar thrives,
then we act like he does in the real world. Then we thrive, we hope. If our avatar fails,
we don't go there, if we have any sense. We let him die in the fictional world,
so that we don't have to really die in the present. Imagine two children talking. The younger
one says, wouldn't it be fun to climb up on the roof? He has just placed a little avatar of himself
in a fictional world. But his older sister objects. She chimes in. That's stupid, she says. What if you
fall off the roof? What if dad catches you? The younger child can then modify the original simulation,
draw the appropriate conclusion, and let the whole fictional world wither on the vine? Or not. Maybe
the risk is worth it. But at least now it can be factored in. The fictional world is a bit more
complete, and the avatar a bit wiser. People think they think. But it's not true. It's mostly
self-criticism that passes for thinking. True thinking is rare, just like true listening. Thinking
is listening to yourself. It's difficult. To think, you have to be at least two people at the same time.
Then you have to let those people disagree. Thinking is an internal dialogue between two or more
different views of the world. Viewpoint one is an avatar in a simulated world. It has its own
representations of past, present, and future, and its own ideas about how to act. So do viewpoints
two, and three, and four. Thinking is the process by which these internal avatars imagine and articulate
their worlds to one another. You can't set straw men against one another when you're thinking either,
because then you're not thinking. You're rationalizing post hoc. You're matching what you want
against a weak opponent, so that you don't have to change your mind. You're propagandizing.
You're using doublespeak. You're using your conclusions to justify your proofs. You're hiding from the truth.
True thinking is complex and demanding. It requires you to be articulate speaker and careful,
judicious listener at the same time. It involves conflict. So you have to tolerate conflict.
conflict involves negotiation and compromise. So you have to learn to give and take and to modify
your premises and adjust your thoughts, even your perceptions of the world. Sometimes it results
in the defeat and elimination of one or more internal avatar. They don't like to be defeated or eliminated
either. They're hard to build. They're valuable. They're alive. They like to stay alive. They'll fight
to stay alive. You better listen to them. If you don't, they'll go underground and turn into devils
and torture you. In consequence, thinking is emotionally painful as well as physiologically demanding,
more so than anything else, except not thinking. But you have to be very articulate and sophisticated
to have all of this occur inside your own head. What are you to do then if you aren't very good at
thinking, at being two people at one time? That's easy. You talk, but you need someone to listen.
A listening person is your collaborator and your opponent. A listening person tests your talking
and your thinking without having to say anything. A listening person is a representative of common
humanity. He stands for the crowd. Now, the crowd is by no means always right, but it's commonly right.
It's typically right. If you say something that takes everyone aback, therefore, you should reconsider
what you said. I say that knowing full well that controversial opinions are sometimes correct,
sometimes so much so that the crowd will perish if it refuses to listen. It is for this reason,
among others, that the individual is morally obliged to stand up and tell the truth of his or her own
experience. But something new and radical is still almost always wrong. You need good,
even great, reasons to ignore or defy general public opinion. That's your culture. It's a mighty oak.
You perch on one of its branches. If the branch breaks, it's a long way down, farther, perhaps,
than you think. If you're reading this book, there's a strong probability that you're a privileged person.
You can read. You have time to read. You're perched high in the clouds. It took untold generations to
get you where you are. A little gratitude might be in order. If you're going to insist on bending the
world to your way, you better have your reasons. If you're going to stand your ground, you better have
your reasons. You better have thought them through. You might otherwise be in for a very hard landing.
You should do what other people do, unless you have a very good reason not to. If you're in a rut,
at least you know that other people have traveled that path. Out of the rut is too often off the
road. And in the desert that awaits off the road, there are highwaymen and monsters. So speaks wisdom.
A listening person can reflect the crowd. He can do that without talking. He can do that merely by
letting the talking person listen to himself. That is what Freud recommended. He had his patients lay on
a couch, look at the ceiling, let their minds wander, and say whatever wandered in. That's his method of
free association. That's the way the Freudian psychoanalyst avoids transferring his or her own
personal biases and opinions into the internal landscape of the patient. It was for such reasons
that Freud did not face his patients. He did not want their spontaneous meditations to be altered by
his emotional expressions, no matter how slight. He was properly concerned that his own opinions,
and, worse, his own unresolved problems, would find themselves uncontrollably reflected in his
responses and reactions, conscious and unconscious alike. He was afraid that he would in such a manner
detrimentally affect the development of his patients. It was for such reasons as well that Freud
insisted that psychoanalysts be analyzed themselves. He wanted those who practiced his method to uncover
and eliminate some of their own worst blind spots and prejudices, so they would not practice corruptly.
Freud had a point. He was, after all, a genius. You can tell that because people still hate him.
But there are disadvantages to the detached and somewhat distant approach recommended by Freud.
Many of those who seek therapy desire and need a closer, more personal relationship,
although that also has its dangers. This is in part why I have opted in my practice for the conversation
instead of the Freudian method, as have most clinical psychologists.
It can be worthwhile for my clients to see my reactions. To protect them from the undue influence
that might produce, I attempt to set my aim properly so that my responses emerge from the appropriate
motivation. I do what I can to want the best for them, whatever that might be. I do my best to want the
best, period, as well, because that is part of wanting the best for my clients. I try to clear my mind and to
leave my own concerns aside. That way, I am concentrating on what is best for my clients, while I am simultaneously
alert to any cues that I might be misunderstanding what that best is. That's something that has to be
negotiated, not assumed on my part. It's something that has to be managed very carefully to mitigate the risks of
close personal interaction. My clients talk. I listen. Sometimes I respond. Often the response is subtle. It's not even
verbal. My clients and I face each other. We make eye contact. We can see each other's expressions. They can observe the
effects of their words on me, and I can observe the effects of mine on them. They can respond to my
responses. A client of mine might say, I hate my wife. It's out there, once said. It's hanging in the air.
It has emerged from the underworld, materialized from chaos, and manifested itself. It is perceptible and
concrete, and no longer easily ignored. It's become real. The speaker has even startled himself.
He sees the same thing reflected in my eyes. He notes that, and continues on the road to sanity.
Hold it, he says. Back up. That's too harsh. Sometimes I hate my wife. I hate her when she won't tell me
what she wants. My mom did that all the time, too. It drove dad crazy. It drove all of us crazy,
to tell you the truth. It even drove mom crazy. She was a nice person, but she was very resentful.
Well, at least my wife isn't as bad as my mother. Not at all. Wait. I guess my wife is actually pretty
good at telling me what she wants, but I get really bothered when she doesn't, because mom tortured us all
half to death being a martyr. That really affected me. Maybe I overreact now, when it happens even a bit.
Hey, I'm acting just like dad did when mom upset him. That isn't me. That doesn't have anything to
do with my wife. I better let her know. I observe from all this that my client had failed previously
to properly distinguish his wife from his mother. And I see that he was possessed unconsciously by
the spirit of his father. He sees all of that, too. Now he is a bit more differentiated, a bit less
an uncarved block, a bit less hidden in the fog. He has sewed up a small tear in the fabric of his
culture. He says, that was a good session, Dr. Peterson. I nod. You can be pretty smart if you can
just shut up. I'm a collaborator and opponent, even when I'm not talking. I can't help it. My
expressions broadcast my response, even when they're subtle. So I'm communicating, as Freud so rightly
stressed, even when silent. But I also talk in my clinical sessions. How do I know when to say
something? First, as I said, I put myself in the proper frame of mind. I aim properly. I want things
to be better. My mind orients itself, given this goal. It tries to produce responses to the therapeutic
dialogue that furthers that aim. I watch what happens internally. I reveal my responses.
That's the first rule. Sometimes, for example, a client will say something, and a thought will
occur to me or a fantasy flit through my mind. Frequently, it's about something that was said by
the same client earlier that day or during a previous session. Then I tell my client that thought or
fantasy. Disinterestedly, I say, you said this, and I noticed that I then became aware of this.
Then we discuss it. We try to determine the relevance of meaning of my reaction.
Sometimes, perhaps, it's about me. That was Freud's point. But sometimes, it is just the reaction of a
detached but positively inclined human being to a personally revealing statement by another human
being. It's meaningful. Sometimes, even corrective. Sometimes, however, it's me that gets corrected.
You have to get along with other people. A therapist is one of those other people. A good therapist will
tell you the truth about what he thinks. That is not the same thing as telling you that what he thinks
is the truth. Then at least you have the honest opinion of at least one person. That's not so easy
to get. That's not nothing. That's key to the psychotherapeutic process. Two people tell each
other the truth and both listen. How should you listen? Carl Rogers, one of the 20th century's
great psychotherapists, knew something about listening. He wrote,
the great majority of us cannot listen. We find ourselves compelled to evaluate because listening
is too dangerous. The first requirement is courage, and we do not always have it. He knew that listening
could transform people. On that, Rogers commented, some of you may be feeling that you listen well to
people and that you have never seen such results. The chances are very great indeed that your
listening has not been of the type I have described. He suggested that his readers conduct a short
experiment when they next found themselves in a dispute. Stop the discussion for a moment and
institute this rule. Each person can speak up for himself only after he has first restated the ideas
and feelings of the previous speaker accurately and to that speaker's satisfaction. I have found this
technique very useful in my private life and in my practice. I routinely summarize what people have
said to me and ask them if I've understood properly. Sometimes they accept my summary. Sometimes I'm offered a
small correction. Now and then I'm wrong completely. All of that is good to know. There are several
primary advantages to this process of summary. The first advantage is that I genuinely come to
understand what the person is saying. Of this, Rogers notes, sounds simple, doesn't it? But if you try
it, you will discover it is one of the most difficult things you've ever tried to do. If you really
understand a person in this way, if you are willing to enter his private world and see the way life
appears to him, you run the risk of being changed yourself. You might see it his way. You might find
yourself influenced in your attitudes or personality. This risk of being changed is one of the most frightening
prospects most of us can face. More salutary words have rarely been written. The second advantage
to the act of summary is that it aids the person in consolidation and utility of memory.
Consider the following situation. A client in my practice recounts a long, meandering, emotion-laden
account of a difficult period in his or her life. We summarize back and forth. The account becomes
shorter. It is now summed up in the client's memory and in mine in the form we discussed.
It is now a different memory in many ways. With luck, a better memory. It is now less weighty.
It has been distilled, reduced to the gist. We have extracted the moral of the story.
It becomes a description of the cause and the result of what happened, formulated such that repetition of
the tragedy and pain becomes less likely in the future. This is what happened. This is why. This
is what I have to do to avoid such things from now on. That's a successful memory. That's the purpose of
memory. You remember the past not so that it is accurately recorded to say it again, but so that you
are prepared for the future. The third advantage to employing the Rogerian method is the difficulty
it poses to the careless construction of straw-man arguments. When someone opposes you, it is very
tempting to oversimplify, parody, or distort his or her position. This is a counterproductive game,
designed both to harm the dissenter and to unjustly raise your personal status. By contrast,
if you are called upon to summarize someone's position so that the speaking person agrees with
that summary, you may have to state the argument even more clearly and succinctly than the speaker
has even yet managed. If you first give the devil his due, looking at his arguments from his perspective,
you can, number one, find the value in them and learn something in the process, or number two,
hone your positions against them, if you still believe they are wrong, and strengthen your
arguments further against challenge. This will make you much stronger. Then you will no longer have
to misrepresent your opponent's position and may well have bridged at least part of the gap between
the two of you. You will also be much better at withstanding your own doubts.
Sometimes it takes a long time to figure out what someone genuinely means when they are talking.
This is because often they are articulating their ideas for the first time.
They can't do it without wandering down blind alleys or making contradictory or even nonsensical
claims. This is partly because talking and thinking is often more about forgetting than about
remembering. To discuss an event, particularly something emotional like a death or serious
illness, is to slowly choose what to leave behind. To begin, however, much that is not necessary
must be put into words. The emotion-laden speaker must recount the whole experience in detail. Only then
can the central narrative, cause and consequence, come into focus or consolidate itself. Only then
can the moral of the story be derived. Imagine that someone holds a stack of hundred-dollar bills,
some of which are counterfeit. All the bills might have to be spread on a table so that each can be seen
and any difference is noted before the genuine can be distinguished from the false. This is the sort of
methodical approach you have to take when really listening to someone trying to solve a problem
or communicate something important. If upon learning that some of the bills are counterfeit,
you too casually dismiss all of them, as you would if you were in a hurry or otherwise unwilling to put
in the effort, the person will never learn to separate wheat from chaff. If you listen instead,
without premature judgment, people will generally tell you everything they are thinking, and with
very little deceit. People will tell you the most amazing, absurd, interesting things. Very few of
your conversations will be boring. You can, in fact, tell whether or not you are actually listening
in this manner. If the conversation is boring, you probably aren't.
Primate dominance hierarchy maneuvers, and wit.
Not all talking is thinking. Nor does all listening foster transformation. There are other
motives for both, some of which produce much less valuable, counterproductive, and even dangerous
outcomes. There is the conversation, for example, where one participant is speaking merely to establish
or confirm his place in the dominance hierarchy. One person begins by telling a story about some
interesting occurrence, recent or past, that involved something good, bad, or surprising enough to make
the listening worthwhile. The other person, now concerned with his or her potentially substandard
status as less interesting individual, immediately thinks of something better, worse, or more surprising
to relate. This isn't one of those situations where two conversational participants are genuinely
playing off each other, riffing on the same themes, for the mutual enjoyment of both and everyone else.
This is jockeying for position, pure and simple. You can tell when one of those conversations is
occurring. They are accompanied by a feeling of embarrassment among speakers and listeners alike,
all who know that something false and exaggerated has just been said.
There is another closely allied form of conversation where neither speaker is listening in the least to
the other. Instead, each is using the time occupied by the current speaker to conjure up what he or she
will say next, which will often be something off-topic because the person anxiously waiting to speak
has not been listening. This can and will bring the whole conversational train to a shuddering halt.
At this point, it is usual for those who are on board during the crash to remain silent and
look occasionally and in a somewhat embarrassed manner at each other until everyone leaves, or someone
thinks of something witty and puts Humpty Dumpty together again. Then there is the conversation
where one participant is trying to attain victory for his point of view. This is yet another variant
of the dominance hierarchy conversation. During such a conversation, which often tends towards the
ideological, the speaker endeavors to, number one, denigrate or ridicule the viewpoint of anyone holding
a contrary position, number two, use selective evidence while doing so, and finally, number three,
impress the listeners, many of whom are already occupying the same ideological space, with the
validity of his assertions. The goal is to gain support for a comprehensive, unitary, oversimplified
worldview. Thus, the purpose of the conversation is to make the case that not thinking is the correct
tack. The person who is speaking in this manner believes that winning the argument makes him right,
and that doing so necessarily validates the assumption structure of the dominance hierarchy
he most identifies with. This is often, and unsurprisingly, the hierarchy within which he has
achieved the most success, or the one with which he is most temperamentally aligned. Almost all
discussions involving politics or economics unfold in this manner, with each participant attempting to
justify fixed, a priori positions, instead of trying to learn something or to adopt a different frame,
even for the novelty. It is for this reason that conservatives and liberals alike believe their
positions to be self-evident, particularly as they become more extreme. Given certain temperamentally
based assumptions, a predictable conclusion emerges, but only when you ignore the fact that the assumptions
themselves are mutable. These conversations are very different from the listening type. When a genuine
listening conversation is taking place, one person at a time has the floor, and everyone else is
listening. The person speaking is granted the opportunity to seriously discuss some event,
usually unhappy or even tragic. Everyone else responds sympathetically. These conversations are
important because the speaker is organizing the troublesome event in his or her mind while recounting
the story. The fact is important enough to bear repeating. People organize their brains with conversation.
If they don't have anyone to tell their story to, they lose their minds. Like hoarders,
they cannot unclutter themselves. The input of the community is required for the integrity of the
individual psyche. To put it another way, it takes a village to organize a mind. Much of what we
consider healthy mental function is the result of our ability to use the reactions of others to keep
our complex selves functional. We outsource the problem of our sanity. This is why it is the
fundamental responsibility of parents to render their children socially acceptable. If a person's
behavior is such that other people can tolerate him, then all he has to do is place himself in a social
context. Then people will indicate by being interested in or bored by what he says, or laughing or not
laughing at his jokes, or teasing or ridiculing, or even by lifting an eyebrow, whether his actions and
statements are what they should be. Everyone is always broadcasting to everyone else their desire to
encounter the ideal. We punish and reward each other precisely to the degree that each of us behaves in
in keeping with that desire. Except, of course, when we are looking for trouble.
The sympathetic responses offered during a genuine conversation indicate that the teller is valued,
and that the story being told is important, serious, deserving of consideration, and understandable.
Men and women often misunderstand each other when these conversations are focused on a specified
problem. Men are often accused of wanting to fix things too early on in a discussion. This frustrates
men who like to solve problems and to do it efficiently, and who are in fact called upon
frequently by women for precisely that purpose. It might be easier for my male readers to understand
why this does not work, however, if they could realize, and then remember, that before a problem can be
solved. It must be formulated precisely. Women are often intent on formulating the problem when they
are discussing something, and they need to be listened to, even questioned, to help ensure clarity in the
formulation. Then, whatever problem is left, if any, can be helpfully solved. It should also be noted
first that too early problem-solving may also merely indicate a desire to escape from the effort of the
problem-formulating conversation. Another conversational variant is the lecture. A lecture is,
somewhat surprisingly, a conversation. The lecturer speaks, but the audience communicates with him or her
non-verbally. A surprising amount of human interaction, much of the delivery of emotional information, for
example, takes place in this manner, through postural display and facial emotion, as we noted in our
discussion of Freud. A good lecturer is not only delivering facts, which is perhaps the least important part of a
lecture, but also telling stories about those facts, pitching them precisely to the level of the audience's
comprehension, gauging that by the interest they are showing. The story he or she is telling conveys to
the members of the audience not only what the facts are, but why they are relevant, why it is important
to know certain things about which they are currently ignorant. To demonstrate the importance of some set of
facts is to tell those audience members how such knowledge could change their behavior or influence the
way they interpret the world, so that they will now be able to avoid some obstacles and progress more rapidly to some
better goals. A good lecturer is thus talking with and not at or even to his or her listeners. To manage this, the
lecturer needs to be closely attending to the audience's every move, gesture, and sound. Perversely, this cannot be done by
by watching the audience as such. A good lecturer speaks directly to and watches the response of single
identifiable people instead of doing something cliched, such as presenting a talk to an audience. Everything about that
phrase is wrong. You don't present, you talk. There is no such thing as a talk unless it's canned, and it shouldn't be.
There is also no audience. There are individuals who need to be included in the conversation.
A well-practiced and competent public speaker addresses a single identifiable person, watches that individual
nod, shake his head, frown, or look confused, and responds appropriately and directly to those gestures and expressions.
Then, after a few phrases, rounding out some idea, he switches to another audience member and does the same thing.
In this manner, he infers and reacts to the attitude of the entire group, insofar as such a thing exists.
There are still other conversations that work primarily as demonstrations of wit. These also have a dominance element,
but the goal is to be the most entertaining speaker, which is an accomplishment that everyone participating will also enjoy.
The purpose of these conversations, as a witty friend of mine once observed, was to say anything that was either true or funny.
As truth and humor are often close allies, that combination worked fine.
I think that this might be the intelligent blue-collar workers' conversation.
I participated in many fine bouts of sarcasm, satire, insult, and generally over-the-top comedic exchange among people I grew up with in Northern Alberta,
and, later, among some Navy SEALs I met in California, who were friends of an author I know who writes somewhat horrifying popular fiction.
They were all perfectly happy to say anything, no matter how appalling, as long as it was funny.
I attended this writer's 40th birthday celebration not too long ago in LA.
He had invited one of the aforementioned SEALs.
A few months beforehand, however, his wife had been diagnosed with a serious medical condition, necessitating brain surgery.
He called up his SEAL friend, informed him of the circumstances, and indicated that the event might have to be cancelled.
You think you guys have a problem, responded his friend.
I just bought non-refundable airline tickets to your party.
It's not clear what percentage of the world's population would find that response amusing.
I retold the story recently to a group of newer acquaintances, and they were more shocked and appalled than amused.
I tried to defend the joke as an indication of the SEAL's respect for the couple's ability to withstand and transcend tragedy.
But I wasn't particularly successful.
Nonetheless, I believe that he did intend exactly that respect, and I think he was terrifyingly witty.
His joke was daring, anarchic to the point of recklessness, which is exactly the point where serious funny occurs.
My friend and his wife recognized the compliment.
They saw that their friend knew they were tough enough to withstand that level of, well, let's call it competitive humor.
It was a test of character, which they passed with flying colors.
I found that such conversations occurred less and less frequently as I moved from university to university, up the educational and social ladder.
Maybe it wasn't a class thing, although I have my suspicions it was.
Maybe it's just that I'm older or that the friends a person makes later in life after adolescence lack the insane competitive closeness and perverse playfulness of those early tribal bonds.
When I went back up north to my hometown for my 50th birthday party, however, my old friends made me laugh so hard I had to duck into a different room several times to catch my breath.
Those conversations are the most fun and I miss them.
You have to keep up or risk severe humiliation, but there's nothing more rewarding than topping the last comedian's story, joke, insult or curse.
Only one rule really applies.
Do not be boring, although it is also very bad form to actually put someone down when you are only pretending to put them down.
Conversation on the way
The final type of conversation, akin to listening, is a form of mutual exploration.
It requires true reciprocity on the part of those listening and speaking.
It allows all participants to express and organize their thoughts.
A conversation of mutual exploration has a topic, generally complex, of genuine interest to the participants.
Everyone participating is trying to solve a problem, instead of insisting on the a priori validity of their own positions.
All are acting on the premise that they have something to learn.
This kind of conversation constitutes active philosophy, the highest form of thought, and the best preparation for proper living.
The people involved in such a conversation must be discussing ideas they genuinely use to structure their perceptions and guide their actions and words.
They must be existentially involved with their philosophy.
That is, they must be living it, not merely believing or understanding it.
They also must have inverted, at least temporarily, the typical human preference for order over chaos.
And I don't mean the chaos typical of mindless anti-social rebellion.
Other conversational types, except for the listening type, all attempt to buttress some existing order.
The conversation of mutual exploration, by contrast, requires people who have decided that the unknown makes a better friend than the known.
You already know what you know, after all, and unless your life is perfect, what you know is not enough.
You remain threatened by disease, and self-deception, and unhappiness, and malevolence, and betrayal, and corruption, and pain, and limitation.
You are subject to all these things in the final analysis, because you are just too ignorant to protect yourself.
If you just knew enough, you could be healthier, and more honest.
You would suffer less.
You could recognize, resist, and even triumph over malevolence and evil.
You would neither betray a friend, nor deal falsely and deceitfully in business, politics, or love.
However, your current knowledge has neither made you perfect, nor kept you safe.
So, it is insufficient, by definition, radically, fatally insufficient.
You must accept this before you can converse philosophically, instead of convincing, oppressing, dominating, or even amusing.
You must accept this before you can tolerate a conversation where the word that eternally mediates between order and chaos is operating, psychologically speaking.
To have this kind of conversation, it is necessary to respect the personal experience of your conversational partners.
You must assume that they have reached careful, thoughtful, genuine conclusions.
And, perhaps, they must have done the work that justifies this assumption.
You must believe that if they shared their conclusions with you, you could bypass at least some of the pain of personally learning the same things,
as learning from the experience of others can be quicker and much less dangerous.
You must meditate, too, instead of strategizing towards victory.
If you fail or refuse to do so, then you merely and automatically repeat what you already believe, seeking its validation and insisting on its rightness.
But, if you are meditating as you converse, then you listen to the other person and say the new and original things that can rise from deep within of their own accord.
It's as if you are listening to yourself during such a conversation, just as you are listening to the other person.
You are describing how you are responding to the new information imparted by the speaker.
You are reporting what that information has done to you, what new things it made appear within you, how it has changed your presuppositions, how it has made you think of new questions.
You tell the speaker these things directly.
Then they have the same effect on him.
In this manner, you both move towards somewhere newer and broader and better.
You both change, as you let your old presuppositions die, as you shed your skins and emerge renewed.
A conversation such as this is one where it is the desire for truth itself, on the part of both participants, that is truly listening and speaking.
That's why it's engaging, vital, interesting and meaningful.
That sense of meaning is a signal from the deep, ancient parts of your being.
You're where you should be, with one foot in order and the other tentatively extended into chaos and the unknown.
You're immersed in the Tao, following the great way of life.
There, you're stable enough to be secure, but flexible enough to transform.
There, you're allowing new information to inform you, to permeate your stability, to repair and improve its structure and expand its domain.
There, the constituent elements of your being can find their more elegant formation.
A conversation like that places you in the same place that listening to great music places you, and for much the same reason.
A conversation like that puts you in the realm where souls connect.
And that's a real place.
It leaves you thinking, that was really worthwhile.
We really got to know each other.
The masks came off and the searchers were revealed.
So, listen, to yourself and to those with whom you are speaking.
Your wisdom then consists not of the knowledge you already have, but of the continual search for knowledge, which is the highest form of wisdom.
It is for this reason that the priestess of the Delphic Oracle in ancient Greece spoke most highly of Socrates, who always sought the truth.
She described him as the wisest living man, because he knew that what he knew was nothing.
Assume that the person you are listening to might know something you don't.
Rule 10. Be precise in your speech.
Why is my laptop obsolete?
What do you see when you look at a computer?
At your own laptop, more precisely.
You see a flat, thin, grey and black box.
Less evidently, you see something to type on and look at.
Nonetheless, even with the second perceptions included, what you are seeing is hardly the computer at all.
That grey and black box happens to be a computer right now, right here and now, and maybe even an expensive computer.
Nevertheless, it will soon be something so unlike a computer that it will be difficult even to give away.
We will all discard our laptops within the next five years, even though they may still work perfectly,
even though the screens, keyboards, mice and internet connections may still flawlessly perform their tasks.
Fifty years from now, early 21st century laptops will be oddities like the brass scientific tools of the late 19th century.
The latter now appear more like the arcane accoutrements of alchemy designed to measure phenomena whose existence we no longer even recognize.
How can high-tech machines, each possessing more computing power than the entire Apollo space program, lose their value in such a short period of time?
How can they transform so quickly from exciting, useful and status-enhancing machines to complex pieces of junk?
It's because of the nature of our perceptions themselves, and the oft-invisible interaction between those perceptions and the underlying complexity of the world.
Your laptop is a note in a symphony currently being played by an orchestra of incalculable size.
It's a very small part of a much greater whole.
Most of its capacity resides beyond its hard shell.
It maintains its function only because a vast array of other technologies are currently and harmoniously at play.
It is fed, for example, by a power grid whose function is invisibly dependent on the stability of a myriad of complex physical, biological, economic and interpersonal systems.
The factories that make its parts are still in operation.
The operating system that enables its function is based on those parts and not on others yet to be created.
Its video hardware runs the technology expected by the creative people who post their content on the web.
Your laptop is in communication with a certain, specified ecosystem of other devices and web servers.
And, finally, all this is made possible by an even less visible element.
The social contract of trust.
The interconnected and fundamentally honest political and economic systems that make the reliable electrical grid a reality.
This interdependency of part on whole, invisible in systems that work, becomes starkly evident in systems that don't.
The higher order surrounding systems that enable personal computing hardly exist at all in corrupt third world countries.
So that the power lines, electrical switches, outlets and all the other entities so hopefully and concretely indicative of such a grid are absent or compromised.
And, in fact, make little contribution to the practical delivery of electricity to people's homes and factories.
This makes perceiving the electronic and other devices that electricity theoretically enables as separate functional units frustrating at minimum and impossible at worst.
This is partly because of technical insufficiency.
The systems simply don't work.
But it is also in no small part because of the lack of trust characteristic of systemically corrupt societies.
To put it another way, what you perceive as your computer is like a single leaf on a tree in a forest.
Or even more accurately, like your fingers rubbing briefly across that leaf.
A single leaf can be plucked from a branch.
It can be perceived, briefly, as a single self-contained entity.
But that perception misleads more than clarifies.
In a few weeks the leaf will crumble and dissolve.
It would not have been there at all without the tree.
It cannot continue to exist in the absence of the tree.
This is the position of our laptops in relation to the world.
So much of what they are resides outside their boundaries that the screened devices we hold on our laps can only maintain their computer-like façade for a few short years.
Almost everything we see and hold is like that, although often not so evidently.
Tools, obstacles, and extension into the world.
We assume that we see objects or things when we look at the world.
But that's not really how it is.
Our evolved perceptual systems transform the interconnected, complex, multilevel world that we inhabit, not so much into things, per se, as into useful things, or their nemeses, things that get in the way.
This is the necessary, practical reduction of the world.
This is the transformation of the near-infinite complexity of things through the narrow specification of our purpose.
This is how precision makes the world sensibly manifest.
That is not at all the same as perceiving objects.
We don't see valueless entities and then attribute meaning to them.
We perceive the meaning directly.
We see floors to walk on and doors to duck through and chairs to sit on.
It's for this reason that a beanbag and a stump both fall into the latter category, despite having little objectively in common.
We see rocks because we can throw them, and clouds because they can rain on us, and apples to eat, and the automobiles of other people to get in our way and annoy us.
We see tools and obstacles, not objects or things.
Furthermore, we see tools and obstacles at the handy level of analysis that makes them most useful, or dangerous, given our needs, abilities, and perceptual limitations.
The world reveals itself to us as something to utilize and something to navigate through, not as something that merely is.
We see the faces of the people we are talking to because we need to communicate with those people and cooperate with them.
We don't see their microcosmic substructures, their cells or the subcellular organelles, molecules, and atoms that make up those cells.
We don't see, as well, the macrocosm that surrounds them, the family members and friends that make up their immediate social circles, the economies they are embedded within, or the ecology that contains all of them.
Finally, and equally importantly, we don't see them across time.
We see them in the narrow, immediate, overwhelming now, instead of surrounded by the yesterdays and tomorrows, that may be a more important part of them than whatever is currently and obviously manifest.
And we have to see in this way, or be overwhelmed.
When we look at the world, we perceive only what is enough for our plans and actions to work and for us to get by.
What we inhabit, then, is this enough.
That is a radical, functional, unconscious simplification of the world.
And it's almost impossible for us not to mistake it for the world itself.
But the objects we see are not simply there in the world for our simple, direct perceiving.
They exist in a complex, multidimensional relationship to one another, not as self-evidently separate, bounded, independent objects.
We perceive not them, but their functional utility.
And in doing so, we make them sufficiently simple for sufficient understanding.
It is for this reason that we must be precise in our aim.
Absent that, we drown in the complexity of the world.
This is true even for our perceptions of ourselves, of our individual persons.
We assume that we end at the surface of our skin because of the way that we perceive.
But we can understand with a little thought the provisional nature of that boundary.
We shift what is inside our skin, so to speak, as the context we inhabit changes.
Even when we do something as apparently simple as picking up a screwdriver, our brain automatically adjusts what it considers body to include the tool.
We can literally feel things with the end of the screwdriver.
When we extend a hand holding the screwdriver, we automatically take the length of the ladder into account.
We can probe nooks and crannies with its extended end and comprehend what we are exploring.
Furthermore, we instantly regard the screwdriver we are holding as our screwdriver and get possessive about it.
We do the same with the much more complex tools we use in much more complex situations.
The cars we pilot instantaneously and automatically become ourselves.
Because of this, when someone bangs his fist on our car's hood after we have irritated him at a crosswalk, we take it personally.
This is not always reasonable.
Nonetheless, without the extension of self into machine, it would be impossible to drive.
The extensible boundaries of ourselves also expand to include other people, family members, lovers and friends.
A mother will sacrifice herself for her children.
Is our father or son or wife or husband more or less integral to us than an arm or a leg?
We can answer in part by asking, which would we rather lose?
Which loss would we sacrifice more to avoid?
We practice for such permanent extension, such permanent commitment, by identifying with the fictional characters of books and movies.
Their tragedies and triumphs rapidly and convincingly become ours.
Sitting still in our seats, we nonetheless act out a multitude of alternate realities, extending ourselves experimentally, testing multiple potential paths, before specifying the one we will actually take.
Engrossed in a fictional world, we can even become things that don't really exist.
In the blink of an eye, in the magic hall of a movie theatre, we can become fantastical creatures.
We sit in the dark, before rapidly flickering images, and become witches, superheroes, aliens, vampires, lions, elves, or wooden marionettes.
We feel everything they feel, and are peculiarly happy to pay for the privilege, even when what we experience is sorrow, fear, or horror.
Something similar, but more extreme, happens when we identify, not with a character in a fictional drama, but with a whole group in a competition.
Think of what happens when a favourite team wins or loses an important game against an arch-rival.
The winning goal will bring the whole network of fans to their feet, before they think, in unscripted unison.
It is as if their many nervous systems are directly wired to the game unfolding in front of them.
Fans take the victories and defeats of their teams very personally, even wearing the jerseys of their heroes,
often celebrating their wins and losses more than any such events that actually occur in their day-to-day lives.
This identification manifests itself deeply, even biochemically and neurologically.
Vicarious experiences of winning and losing, for example, raise and lower testosterone levels among fans participating in the contest.
Our capacity for identification is something that manifests itself at every level of our being.
To the degree that we are patriotic, similarly, our country is not just important to us. It is us.
We might even sacrifice our entire smaller individual selves in battle to maintain the integrity of our country.
For much of history, such willingness to die has been regarded as something admirable and courageous as a part of human duty.
Paradoxically, that is a direct consequence not of our aggression, but of our extreme sociability and willingness to cooperate.
If we can become not only ourselves, but our families, teams and countries, cooperation comes easily to us,
relying on the same deeply innate mechanisms that drive us and other creatures to protect our very bodies.
The world is simple only when it behaves.
It is very difficult to make sense of the interconnected chaos of reality just by looking at it.
It's a very complicated act requiring, perhaps, half our brains.
Everything shifts and changes in the real world.
Each hypothetically separate thing is made up of smaller hypothetically separate things,
and is simultaneously part of larger hypothetically separate things.
The boundaries between the levels, and between different things themselves at a given level,
are neither clear nor self-evident objectively.
They must be established practically, pragmatically, and they retain their validity only under very narrow and specified conditions.
The conscious illusion of complete and sufficient perception only sustains itself, for example,
only remains sufficient for our purposes, when everything goes according to plan.
Under such circumstances, what we see is accurate enough, so that there is no utility in looking farther.
To drive successfully, we don't have to understand or even perceive the complex machinery of our automobiles.
The hidden complexities of our private cars only intrude on our consciousness when that machinery fails,
or when we collide unexpectedly with something, or something with us.
Even in the case of mere mechanical failure to say nothing of a serious accident,
such intrusion is always felt, at least initially, as anxiety-provoking.
That's a consequence of emergent uncertainty.
A car, as we perceive it, is not a thing or an object.
It is, instead, something that takes us somewhere we want to go.
It is only when it stops taking us and going, in fact, that we perceive it much at all.
It is only when a car quits suddenly, or is involved in an accident and must be pulled over to the side of the road,
that we are forced to apprehend and analyze the myriad of parts that car, as thing that goes, depends on.
When our car fails, our incompetence with regards to its complexity is instantly revealed.
That has practical consequences.
We don't get to go where we were going, as well as psychological.
Our peace of mind disappears along with our functioning vehicle.
We must generally turn to the experts who inhabit garages and workshops
to restore both functionality to our vehicle and simplicity to our perceptions.
That's mechanic as psychologist.
It is precisely then that we can understand, although we seldom deeply consider,
the staggeringly low-resolution quality of our vision and the inadequacy of our corresponding understanding.
In a crisis, when our thing no longer goes, we turn to those whose expertise far transcends ours
to restore the match between our expectant desire and what actually happens.
This all means that the failure of our car can also force us to confront the uncertainty of the broader social context,
which is usually invisible to us, in which the machine and mechanic are mere parts.
Betrayed by our car, we come up against all the things we don't know.
Is it time for a new vehicle?
Did I err in my original purchase?
Is the mechanic competent, honest, and reliable?
Is the garage he works for trustworthy?
Sometimes, too, we must contemplate something worse, something broader and deeper.
Have the roads now become too dangerous?
Have I become, or always been, too incompetent, too scattered and inattentive, too old?
The limitations of all our perceptions of things and selves manifest themselves
when something we can usually depend on in our simplified world breaks down.
Then, the more complex world that was always there, invisible and conveniently ignored,
makes its presence known.
It is then that the walled garden we archetypally inhabit reveals its hidden but ever-present snakes.
You and I are simple only when the world behaves.
When things break down, what has been ignored rushes in.
When things are no longer specified with precision, the walls crumble and chaos makes its presence known.
When we have been careless and let things slide, what we have refused to attend to gathers itself up,
adopts a serpentine form, and strikes, often at the worst possible moment.
It is then that we see what focused intent, precision of aim and careful attention protects us from.
Imagine a loyal and honest wife, suddenly confronted by evidence of her husband's infidelity.
She has lived alongside him for years.
She saw him as she assumes he is, reliable, hard-working, loving, dependable.
In her marriage, she is standing on a rock, or so she believes.
But he becomes less attentive and more distracted.
He begins, in the cliched manner, to work longer hours.
Small things she says and does irritate him unjustifiably.
One day she sees him in a downtown café with another woman, interacting with her in a manner difficult to rationalize and ignore.
The limitations and inaccuracy of her former perceptions become immediately and painfully obvious.
Her theory of her husband collapses.
What happens, in consequence?
First, something, someone, emerges in his stead, a complex, frightening stranger.
That's bad enough.
But it's only half the problem.
Her theory of herself collapses, too, in the aftermath of the betrayal.
So that it's not one stranger that's the problem.
It's two.
Her husband is not who she perceived him to be.
But neither is she, the betrayed wife.
She is no longer the well-loved, secure wife and valued partner.
Strangely enough, despite our belief in the permanent immutability of the past, she may never have been.
The past is not necessarily what it was, even though it has already been.
The present is chaotic and indeterminate.
The ground shifts continually around her feet and ours.
Equally, the future, not yet here, changes into something it was not supposed to be.
Is the once reasonably content wife now a deceived innocent or a gullible fool?
Should she view herself as victim or as co-conspirator in a shared delusion?
Her husband is what?
An unsatisfied lover?
A target of seduction?
A psychopathic liar?
The very devil himself?
How could he be so cruel?
How could anyone?
What is this home she has been living in?
How could she be so naive?
How could anyone?
She looks in the mirror.
She looks in the mirror.
Who is she?
What's going on?
Are any of her relationships real?
Have any of them ever been?
What has happened to the future?
Everything is up for grabs when the deeper realities of the world unexpectedly manifest themselves.
Everything is intricate beyond imagining.
Everything is affected by everything else.
We perceive a very narrow slice of a causally interconnected matrix,
although we strive with all our might to avoid being confronted by knowledge of that narrowness.
The thin veneer of perceptual sufficiency cracks, however, when something fundamental goes wrong.
The dreadful inadequacy of our senses reveals itself.
Everything we hold dear crumbles to dust.
We freeze.
We turn to stone.
What then do we see?
Where can we look when it is precisely what we see that has been insufficient?
What do we see when we don't know what we're looking at?
What is it that is the world after the twin towers disintegrate?
What, if anything, is left standing?
What dread beast rises from the ruins when the invisible pillars supporting the world's financial system tremble and fall?
What do we see when we are swept up in the fire and drama of a national socialist rally,
or cower paralyzed with fear in the midst of a massacre in Rwanda?
What is it that we see when we cannot understand what is happening to us,
cannot determine where we are, know no longer who we are, and no longer understand what surrounds us?
What we don't see is the well-known and comforting world of tools, of useful objects, of personalities.
We don't even see familiar obstacles, sufficiently troubling though they are in normal times,
already mastered, that we can simply step around.
What we perceive, when things fall apart, is no longer the stage and settings of habitable order.
It's the eternal, watery, tohu-va-bohu, formless emptiness,
and the teom, the abyss, to speak biblically,
the chaos forever lurking beneath our thin surfaces of security.
It's from that chaos that the holy word of God himself extracted order at the beginning of time,
according to the oldest opinions expressed by mankind.
And it is in the image of that same word that we were made, male and female, according to the same opinions.
It's from that chaos that whatever stability we had the good fortune to experience emerged originally,
for some limited time, when we first learned to perceive.
It's chaos that we see, when things fall apart, even though we cannot truly see it.
What does all this mean?
EMERGENCY
EMERGENCE
E
This is the sudden manifestation from somewhere unknown, of some previously unknown phenomenon,
from the Greek phenesthi, to shine forth.
EMERGENCY
This is the reappearance of the eternal dragon, from its eternal cavern, from its now disrupted slumber.
EMERGENCY
This is the underworld, with its monsters rising from the depths.
EMERGENCY
How do we prepare for an emergency, when we do not know what has emerged, or from where?
EMERGENCY
How do we prepare for catastrophe, when we do not know what to expect, or how to act?
EMERGENCY
We turn from our minds, so to speak, too slow, too ponderous, to our bodies.
EMERGENCY
Our bodies react much faster than our minds.
EMERGENCY
When things collapse around us, our perception disappears, and we act.
EMERGENCY
Ancient, reflexive responses, rendered automatic and efficient over hundreds of millions of years,
protect us in those dire moments, when not only thought, but perception itself, fails.
EMERGENCY
Under such circumstances, our bodies ready themselves for all possible eventualities.
EMERGENCY
First, we freeze.
EMERGENCY
The reflexes of the body then shade into emotion, the next stage of perception.
EMERGENCY
Is this something scary?
Something useful?
Something that must be fought?
Something that can be ignored?
EMERGENCY
How will we determine this?
EMERGENCY
And when?
We don't know.
EMERGENCY
Now, we are in a costly and demanding state of readiness.
EMERGENCY
Our bodies are flooded with cortisol and adrenaline.
EMERGENCY
Our hearts beat faster.
EMERGENCY
The breath quickens.
EMERGENCY
We realize painfully that our sense of competence and completeness is gone.
EMERGENCY
It was just a dream.
EMERGENCY
We draw on physical and psychological resources saved carefully for just this moment,
if we are fortunate enough to have them.
EMERGENCY
We prepare for the worst or the best.
EMERGENCY
We push the gas pedal furiously to the floor and slam on the brakes at the same time.
EMERGENCY
We scream or laugh.
EMERGENCY
We look disgusted or terrified.
EMERGENCY
We cry.
EMERGENCY
And then we begin to parse apart the chaos.
EMERGENCY
And so the deceived wife, increasingly unhinged, feels the motivation to reveal all to herself,
her sister, her best friend, to a stranger on a bus.
EMERGENCY
EMERGENCY
EMERGENCY
EMERGENCY
EMERGENCY
EMERGENCY
EMERGENCY
EMERGENCY
EMERGENCY
EMERGENCY
EMERGENCY
EMERGENCY
EMERGENCY
EMERGENCY
EMERGENCY
EMERGENCY
EMERGENCY
EMERGENCY
EMERGENCY
EMERGENCY
EMERGENCY
EMERGENCY
EMERGENCY
EMERGENCY
EMERGENCY
EMERGENCY
EMERGENCY
EMERGENCY
EMERGENCY
EMERGENCY
EMERGENCY
EMERGENCY
EMERGENCY
EMERGENCY
EMERGENCY
EMERGENCY
EMERGENCY
EMERGENCY
EMERGENCY
EMERGENCY
EMERGENCY
EMERGENCY
EMERGENCY
and exhilarated by the possibilities of her newfound freedom her last place of bedrock security
was in fact not stable not certain not bedrock at all her house was built on a foundation of sand
the ice she was skating on was simply too thin she fell through into the water below and is
drowning she has been hit so hard that her anger terror and grief consume her her sense of betrayal
widens until the whole world caves in where is she in the underworld with all its terrors how did she
get there this experience this voyage into the substructure of things this is all perception too
in its nascent form this preparation this consideration of what might have been and what
could still be this emotion and fantasy this is all the deep perception now necessary before the
familiar objects that she once knew reappear if they ever do in their simplified and comfortable form
this is perception before the chaos of possibility is re-articulated into the functional realities of
order was it really so unexpected she asks herself she asks others thinking back should she now feel
guilty about ignoring the warning signs subtle though they may have been encouraged though she was to
avoid them she remembers when she first married eagerly joining her husband every single night to make love
perhaps that was too much to expect or even too much to cope with but once in the last six months
once every two or three months for years before that would anyone she could truly respect
including herself put up with such a situation there is a story for children there's no such thing as a
dragon by jack kent that i really like it's a very simple tale at least on the surface i once read its few
pages to a group of retired university of toronto alumni and explained its symbolic meaning it's about
a small boy billy bixby who spies a dragon sitting on his bed one morning it's about the size of a house
cat and friendly he tells his mother about it but she tells him that there's no such thing as a dragon
so it starts to grow it eats all of billy's pancakes soon it fills the whole house mom tries to vacuum but
she has to go in and out of the house through the windows because of the dragon everywhere it takes her
forever then the dragon runs off with the house billy's dad comes home and there's just an empty space
where he used to live the mailman tells him where the house went he chases after it climbs up the
dragon's head and neck now sprawling out into the street and rejoins his wife and son mom still insists
that the dragon does not exist but billy who's pretty much had it by now insists there is a dragon mom
instantly it starts to shrink soon it's cat sized again everyone agrees that dragons of that size
number one exist and number two are much preferable to their gigantic counterparts mum eyes reluctantly
open by this point asks somewhat plaintively why it had to get so big billy quietly suggests
maybe it wanted to be noticed maybe that's the moral of many many stories chaos emerges in a household
bit by bit mutual unhappiness and resentment pile up everything untidy is swept under the rug
where the dragon feasts on the crumbs but no one says anything as the shared society and negotiated
order of the household reveals itself as inadequate or disintegrates in the face of the unexpected and
threatening everybody whistles in the dark instead communication would require admission of terrible
emotions resentment terror loneliness despair jealousy frustration hatred boredom moment by moment it's
easier to keep the peace but in the background in billy bixby's house and in all that are like it
dragon grows one day it bursts forth in a form that no one can ignore it lifts the very household from
its foundations then it's an affair or a decades-long custody dispute of ruinous economic and psychological
proportions then it's the concentrated version of the acrimony that could have been spread out tolerably
issue by issue over the years of the pseudo paradise of the marriage every one of the 300 000 unrevealed
issues which have been lied about avoided rationalized away hidden like an army of skeletons in some great
horrific closet bursts forth like noah's flood drowning everything there's no ark because no one built one
even though everyone felt the storm gathering don't ever underestimate the destructive power of sins of
omission maybe the demolished couple could have had a conversation or two or two hundred about their sex lives maybe the
physical intimacy they undoubtedly shared should have been matched as it often is not by a corresponding psychological intimacy
maybe they could have fought through their roles in many households in recent decades the traditional household
division of labor has been demolished not least in the name of liberation and freedom that demolition
however has not left so much glorious lack of restriction in its wake as chaos conflict and indeterminacy
the escape from tyranny is often followed not by paradise but by a sojourn in the desert aimless
confused and deprived furthermore in the absence of agreed upon tradition and the constraints often
uncomfortable often even unreasonable that it imposes there exist only three difficult options
slavery
slavery
tyranny
or negotiation
the slave merely does what he or she is told happy perhaps to shed the responsibility and solves the
problem of complexity in that manner
but it's a temporary solution
the spirit of the slave rebels
the tyrant
merely tells the slave what to do
and solves the problem of complexity
in that manner
there's nothing and no one there except for predictable and sullen obedience
who can live forever with that
but negotiation
that requires forthright admission on the part of both players that the dragon exists
that's a reality difficult to face even when it's still too small to simply devour the knight
who dares confront it
maybe the demolished couple could have more precisely specified their desired manner of being
maybe in that manner they could have jointly prevented the waters of chaos from springing
uncontrollably forth and drowning them
maybe they could have done that instead of saying in the agreeable lazy and cowardly way
it's okay
it's not worth fighting about
there is little in a marriage that is so little that it is not worth fighting about
you're stuck in a marriage like the two proverbial cats in a barrel
bound by the oath that lasts in theory until one or both of you die
that oath is there to make you take the damn situation seriously
do you really want the same petty annoyance tormenting you every single day of your marriage
for the decades of its existence
oh i can put up with it you think
and maybe you should
you're no paragon of genuine tolerance
and maybe if you brought up how your partner's giddy laugh is beginning to sound like nails on a blackboard
he or she would tell you quite properly to go to hell
and maybe the fault is with you
and you should grow up
get yourself together
and keep quiet
but perhaps braying like a donkey in the midst of a social gathering
is not reflecting well on your partner
and you should stick to your guns
under such circumstances
there is nothing but a fight
a fight with peace as the goal
that will reveal the truth
but you remain silent
and you convince yourself
it's because you are a good peace-loving patient person
and nothing could be further from the truth
and the monster under the rug gains a few more pounds
maybe a forthright conversation about sexual dissatisfaction
might have been the proverbial stitch in time
not that it would be easy
perhaps madame desired the death of intimacy
clandestinely because she was deeply and secretly ambivalent about sex
god knows there's reason to be
perhaps monsieur was a terrible selfish lover
maybe they both were
sorting that out is worth a fight isn't it
that's a big part of life
isn't it
perhaps addressing that
and you never know
solving the problem
would be worth two months of pure misery
just telling each other the truth
not with intent to destroy or attain victory
because that's not the truth
that's just all-out war
maybe it wasn't sex
maybe every conversation between husband and wife
had deteriorated into boring routine
as no shared adventure animated the couple
maybe that deterioration was easier
moment by moment
day by day
than bearing the responsibility
of keeping the relationship alive
living things die after all without attention
life is indistinguishable from effortful maintenance
no one finds a match so perfect
that the need for continued attention and work vanishes
and besides
if you found the perfect person
he or she would run away from ever so imperfect you
in justifiable horror
in truth what you need
what you deserve after all
is someone exactly as imperfect as you
maybe the husband who betrayed his wife
was appallingly immature and selfish
maybe that selfishness got the upper hand
maybe she did not oppose this tendency
with enough force and vigor
maybe she could not agree with him
on the proper disciplinary approach to the children
and shut him out of their lives in consequence
maybe that allowed him to circumvent
what he saw as an unpleasant responsibility
maybe hatred brewed in the hearts of the children
watching this underground battle
punished by the resentment of their mother
and alienated bit by bit
from good old dad
maybe the dinners she prepared for him
or he for her
were cold and bitterly eaten
maybe all that unaddressed conflict
left both resentful
in a manner unspoken
but effectively enacted
maybe all that unspoken trouble
started to undermine the invisible networks
that supported the marriage
maybe respect slowly turned into contempt
and no one deigned to notice
maybe love slowly turned into hate
without mention
everything clarified and articulated
becomes visible
maybe neither wife nor husband
wished to see or understand
maybe they left things purposefully in the fog
maybe they generated the fog
to hide what they did not want to see
what did Mrs. gain
when she turned from mistress
to maid or mother
was it a relief when her sex life disappeared
could she complain more profitably
to the neighbors and her mother
when her husband turned away
maybe that was more gratifying
secretly
than anything good
that could be derived from any marriage
no matter how perfect
what can possibly compare
to the pleasures of sophisticated
and well-practiced martyrdom
she's such a saint
and married to such a terrible man
she deserved much better
that's a gratifying myth to live by
even if unconsciously chosen
the truth of the situation be damned
maybe she never really liked her husband
maybe she never really liked men
and still doesn't
maybe that was her mother's fault
or her grandmother's
maybe she mimicked their behavior
acting out their trouble
transmitted unconsciously
implicitly
down the generations
maybe she was taking revenge
on her father
or her brother
or society
what did her husband gain
for his part
when his sex life at home died
did he willingly play along as martyr
and complain bitterly to his friends
did he use it as the excuse he wanted
anyway to search for a new lover
did he use it to justify the resentment
he still felt towards women
in general
for the rejections he had faced
so continuously
before falling into his marriage
did he seize the opportunity
to get effortlessly fat and lazy
because he wasn't desired
in any case
maybe both
wife and husband alike
used the opportunity
to mess up their marriage
to take revenge upon God
perhaps the one being
who could have sorted through the mess
here's the terrible truth
about such matters
every single
voluntarily unprocessed
and uncomprehended
and ignored reason
for marital failure
will compound
and conspire
and will then
plague that betrayed
and self-betrayed woman
for the rest of her life
the same goes for her husband
all she
he
they
or we
must do
to ensure such an outcome
is nothing
don't notice
don't react
don't attend
don't discuss
don't consider
don't work for peace
don't take responsibility
don't confront the chaos
and turn it into order
just wait
anything but naive and innocent
for the chaos to rise up
and engulf you instead
why avoid
when avoidance
necessarily and inevitably
poisons the future
because the possibility
of a monster
lurks underneath
all disagreements
and errors
maybe the fight
you are having
or not having
with your wife
or your husband
signifies the beginning
of the end of your relationship
maybe your relationship
is ending
because you
are a bad person
it's likely
least in part
isn't it
having the argument
necessary to solve
a real problem
therefore necessitates
willingness to confront
two forms of miserable
and dangerous potential
simultaneously
chaos
the potential fragility
of the relationship
of all relationships
of life itself
and hell
the fact that you
and your partner
could each be the person
bad enough
to ruin everything
with your laziness
and spite
there's every motivation
to avoid
but it doesn't help
why remain vague
when it renders life
stagnant and murky
well
if you don't know
who you are
you can hide
in doubt
maybe you're not
a bad
careless
worthless person
who knows
not you
particularly if you
refuse to think
about it
and you have
every reason
not to
but not thinking
about something
you don't want
to know about
doesn't make it
go away
you are merely
trading specific
particular
pointed knowledge
of the likely
finite list
of your real
faults and flaws
for a much
longer list
of undefined
potential
inadequacies
and insufficiencies
why refuse
to investigate
when knowledge
of reality
enables mastery
of reality
and if not
mastery
at least
the stature
of an honest
amateur
well
what if there
truly is
something rotten
in the state
of Denmark
then what
isn't it better
under such conditions
to live in willful
blindness
and enjoy
the bliss
of ignorance
well
not if the monster
is real
do you truly
think it is a good
idea to retreat
to abandon
the possibility
of arming yourself
against the rising
sea of troubles
and to thereby
diminish yourself
in your own eyes
do you truly
think it wise
to let the
catastrophe
grow in the shadows
while you shrink
and decrease
and become
ever more afraid
isn't it better
to prepare
to sharpen
your sword
to peer
into the darkness
and then to beard
the lion
in its den
maybe you'll get hurt
probably
you'll get hurt
life after all
is suffering
but maybe the wound
won't be fatal
if you wait
instead
until what you are
refusing to investigate
comes a knocking
at your door
things will certainly
not go so well
for you
what you least
want will
inevitably happen
and when you
are least prepared
what you least
want to encounter
will make itself
manifest when you
are weakest
and it is strongest
and you will be
defeated
turning and turning
in the widening gyre
the falcon
cannot hear
the falconer
things fall apart
the center
cannot hold
mere anarchy
is loosed
upon the world
the blood-dimmed
tide is loosed
and everywhere
the ceremony
of innocence
is drowned
the best
lack all conviction
while the worst
are full
of passionate
intensity
William Butler
Yates
The Second Coming
Why refuse
to specify
when specifying
the problem
would enable
its solution
because to
specify the
problem
is to admit
that it
exists
because to
specify the
problem
is to allow
yourself to
know what
you want
say from
friend or
lover
and then you
will know
precisely and
cleanly when
you don't get
it
and that will
hurt sharply
and specifically
but you will
learn something
from that
and use what
you learn in
the future
and the alternative
to that single
sharp pain
is the dull
ache of
continued
hopelessness
and vague
failure
and the sense
that time
precious time
is slipping
by
why
refuse
to
specify
because
while you
are failing
to define
success
and thereby
rendering it
impossible
you are also
refusing to
define failure
to yourself
so that if
and when you
fail
you won't
notice
and it won't
hurt
but that won't
work
you cannot
be fooled
so easily
unless you
have gone
very far
down the
road
you will
instead
carry with
you a
continual
sense of
disappointment
in your
own being
and the
self-contempt
that comes
along with
that
and the
increasing
hatred
for the
world
that all
of that
generates
or
degenerates
surely
some revelation
is at hand
surely the
second coming
is at hand
the second
coming
hardly are
those words
out
when a
vast image
out of
spiritus
mundi
troubles
my sight
somewhere
in sands
of the
desert
a shape
with lion
body
and the
head
of a
man
a gaze
blank
and pitiless
as the
sun
is moving
its slow
thighs
while all
about it
real shadows
of the
indignant
desert
birds
the darkness
drops again
but now
I know
the twenty
centuries
of stony
sleep
were vexed
to nightmare
by a rocking
cradle
and what
rough beast
its hour
come round
at last
slouches
towards
Bethlehem
to be
born
what if
she who
has been
betrayed
now driven
by desperation
is now
determined
to face
all the
incoherence
of past
present
and future
what if
she decided
to sort
through the
mess
