clearly move through life markedly overburdened with problems that are beyond their control.
But it is a rare person indeed who isn't suffering from at least one serious catastrophe at any given
time, particularly if you include their family in the equation. And why shouldn't you? Here's
the fundamental problem. Group identity can be fractionated right down to the level of the
individual. That sentence should be written in capital letters. Every person is unique, and not
just in a trivial manner. Importantly, significantly, meaningfully unique. Group membership cannot capture
that variability. Period. None of this complexity is ever discussed by the postmodern Marxist thinkers.
Instead, their ideological approach fixes a point of truth like the North Star and forces
everything to rotate around it. The claim that all gender differences are a consequence of
socialization is neither provable nor disprovable in some sense, because culture can be brought to
bear with such force on groups or individuals that virtually any outcome is attainable if we are
willing to bear the cost. We know, for example, from studies of adopted-out identical twins,
that culture can produce a 15-point, or one-standard deviation, increase in IQ, roughly the difference
between the average high school student and the average state college student, at the cost of a
three-standard deviation increase in wealth. What this means, approximately, is that two identical
twins separated at birth will differ in IQ by 15 points if the first twin is raised in a family
that is poorer than 85% of families, and the second is raised in a family richer than 95% of families.
Something similar has recently been demonstrated with education rather than wealth. We don't know what
it would cost in wealth or differential education to produce a more extreme transformation.
What such studies imply is that we could probably minimize the innate differences between boys and
girls if we were willing to exert enough pressure. This would in no way ensure that we were freeing
people of either gender to make their own choices. But choice has no place in the ideological picture.
If men and women act voluntarily to produce gender unequal outcomes, those very choices must have been
determined by cultural bias. In consequence, everyone is a brainwashed victim, wherever gender differences
exist, and the rigorous critical theoretician is morally obligated to set them straight. This means that
those already equity-minded Scandinavian males who aren't much into nursing require even more retraining.
The same goes, in principle, for Scandinavian females who aren't much into engineering. What might such
retraining look like? Where might its limits lie? Such things are often pushed past any reasonable limit
before they are discontinued. Mao's murderous cultural revolution should have taught us that.
Boys into girls
It has become a tenet of a certain kind of social constructionist theory that the world would be
much improved if boys were socialized like girls. Those who put forward such theories assume first
that aggression is a learned behavior, and can therefore simply not be taught. And second,
to take a particular example, that boys should be socialized the way girls have been traditionally
socialized, and they should be encouraged to develop socially positive qualities such as tenderness,
sensitivity to feelings, nurturance, cooperative and aesthetic appreciation.
In the opinions of such thinkers, aggression will only be reduced when male adolescents and
young adults subscribe to the same standards of behavior as have been traditionally encouraged for women.
There are so many things wrong with this idea that it is difficult to know where to start.
First, it is not the case that aggression is merely learned. Aggression is there at the beginning.
There are ancient biological circuits, so to speak, that underlie defensive and predatory aggression.
They are so fundamental that they still operate in what are known as decorticate cats,
animals that have had the largest and most recently evolved parts of their brain,
an overwhelmingly large percentage of the total structure, entirely removed.
This suggests not only that aggression is innate, but that it is a consequence of activity in
extremely fundamental basic brain areas. If the brain is a tree, then aggression, along with hunger,
thirst and sexual desire, is there in the very trunk.
And in keeping with this, it appears that a subset of two-year-old boys, about five percent,
are quite aggressive by temperament. They take other kids' toys, kick, bite and hit. Most are
nonetheless socialized effectively by the age of four. This is not, however, because they have been
encouraged to act like little girls. Instead, they are taught or otherwise learned in early childhood
to integrate their aggressive tendencies into more sophisticated behavioral routines.
Aggression underlies the drive to be outstanding, to be unstoppable, to compete, to win, to be actively
virtuous, at least along one dimension. Determination is its admirable pro-social face. Aggressive young
children, who don't manage to render their temperaments sophisticated by the end of infancy, are doomed to
unpopularity as their primordial antagonism no longer serves them socially at later ages. Rejected by their
peers, they lack further socialization opportunities and tend towards outcast status.
These are the individuals who remain much more inclined towards anti-social and criminal behavior
when adolescent and adult. But this does not at all mean that the aggressive drive
lacks either utility or value. At a minimum, it is necessary for self-protection.
Compassion as a Vice
Many of the female clients, perhaps even a majority, that I see in my clinical practice have trouble in
their jobs and family lives not because they are too aggressive, but because they are not aggressive
enough. Cognitive behavioral therapists call the treatment of such people generally characterized by the
more feminine traits of agreeableness, politeness and compassion, and neuroticism, anxiety and emotional
pain, assertiveness training. Insufficiently aggressive women and men, although more rarely, do too much for
others. They tend to treat those around them as if they were distressed children. They tend to be naive.
They assume that cooperation should be the basis of all social transactions, and they avoid conflict,
which means they avoid confronting problems in their relationships as well as at work.
They continually sacrifice for others. This may sound virtuous, and it is definitely an attitude that has
certain social advantages, but it can and often does become counter-productively one-sided. Because
two agreeable people bend over backwards for other people, they do not stand up properly for themselves.
Assuming that others think as they do, they expect, instead of ensuring, reciprocity for their thoughtful
actions. When this does not happen, they don't speak up. They do not or cannot straightforwardly demand
recognition. The dark side of their characters emerges because of their subjugation, and they become resentful.
I teach excessively agreeable people to note the emergence of such resentment, which is a very important,
although very toxic, emotion. There are only two major reasons for resentment. Being taken advantage of, or allowing
yourself to be taken advantage of, or whiny refusal to adopt responsibility and grow up. If you're resentful, look for the
reasons. Perhaps discuss the issue with someone you trust. Are you feeling hard done by in an immature manner?
If, after some honest consideration, you don't think it's that, perhaps someone is taking advantage of you.
This means that you now face a moral obligation to speak up for yourself. This might mean confronting
your boss, or your husband, or your wife, or your child, or your parents. It might mean gathering some evidence
strategically, so that when you confront that person, you can give them several examples of their misbehavior,
at least three, so they can't easily weasel out of your accusations.
It might mean failing to concede when they offer you their counter-arguments.
People rarely have more than four at hand.
If you remain unmoved, they get angry, or cry, or run away. It's very useful to attend to tears in such
situations. They can be used to motivate guilt on the part of the accuser due, theoretically, to having
caused hurt feelings and pain. But tears are often shed in anger. A red face is a good cue. If you can
push your point past the first four responses, and stand fast against the consequent emotion,
you will gain your target's attention, and, perhaps, their respect. This is genuine conflict,
however, and it's neither pleasant nor easy. You must also know clearly what you want out of the
situation, and be prepared to clearly articulate your desire. It's a good idea to tell the person you
are confronting exactly what you would like them to do, instead of what they have done or currently
are doing. You might think, if they loved me, they would know what to do. That's the voice of resentment.
Assume ignorance before malevolence. No one has a direct pipeline to your wants and needs,
not even you. If you try to determine exactly what you want, you might find that it is more
difficult than you think. The person oppressing you is likely no wiser than you, especially about you.
Tell them directly what would be preferable, instead, after you have sorted it out. Make your
request as small and reasonable as possible, but ensure that its fulfillment would satisfy you. In that
manner, you come to the discussion with a solution, instead of just a problem.
Agreeable, compassionate, empathic, conflict-averse people, all these traits grouped together, let
people walk on them, and they get bitter. They sacrifice themselves for others, sometimes excessively,
and cannot comprehend why that is not reciprocated. Agreeable people are compliant, and this robs them of
their independence. The danger associated with this can be amplified by high trait neuroticism.
Agreeable people will go along with whoever makes a suggestion, instead of insisting,
at least sometimes, on their own way. So, they lose their way and become indecisive and too easily swayed.
If they are, in addition, easily frightened and hurt, they have even less reason to strike out on their own,
as doing so exposes them to threat and danger, at least in the short term. That's the pathway to
dependent personality disorder, technically speaking. It might be regarded as the polar opposite of
antisocial personality disorder, the set of traits characteristic of delinquency in childhood and
adolescence and criminality in adulthood. It would be lovely if the opposite of a criminal
was a saint, but it's not the case. The opposite of a criminal is an Oedipal mother, which is its own
type of criminal. The Oedipal mother, and fathers can play this role too, but it's comparatively rare,
says to her child, I only live for you. She does everything for her children. She ties their shoes and
cuts up their food and lets them crawl into bed with her and her partner far too often. That's a good
and conflict avoidant method for avoiding unwanted sexual attention as well.
The Oedipal mother makes a pact with herself, her children, and the devil himself. The deal is this.
Above all, never leave me. In return, I will do everything for you. As you age, without maturing,
you will become worthless and bitter, but you will never have to take any responsibility,
and everything you do that's wrong will always be someone else's fault. The children can accept
or reject this, and they have some choice in the matter.
The Oedipal mother is the witch in the story of Hansel and Gretel. The two children in that fairy
tale have a new stepmother. She orders her husband to abandon his children in the forest,
as there is a famine, and she thinks they eat too much. He obeys his wife, takes his children deep into
the woods, and leaves them to their fate. Wandering, starving, and lonely, they come across a miracle.
A house. And not just any house. A candy house. A gingerbread house.
A person who had not been rendered too caring, empathic, sympathetic, and cooperative, might be
skeptical, and ask, is this too good to be true? But the children are too young and too desperate.
Inside the house is a kind old woman, rescuer of distraught children, kind patter of heads and
wiper of noses, all bosom and hips, ready to sacrifice herself to their every wish at a moment's notice.
She feeds the children anything they want, anytime they want, and they never have to do anything.
But provision of that kind of care makes her hungry. She puts Hansel into a cage to fatten
him up ever more efficiently. He fools her into thinking he's staying thin by offering her an old
bone when she tries to test his leg for the desired tenderness. She gets too desperate to wait
eventually and stokes the oven, preparing to cook and eat the object of her doting. Gretel,
who has apparently not been lulled into full submission, waits for a moment of carelessness,
and pushes the kind old woman into the oven. The kids run away and rejoin their father,
who has thoroughly repented of his evil actions. In a household like that, the choicest cut of child
is the spirit, and it's always consumed first. Too much protection devastates the developing soul.
The witch in the Hansel and Gretel tale is the terrible mother, the dark half of the symbolically
feminine. Deeply social as we are in our essence, we tend to view the world as a story, the characters
of which are mother, father, and child. The feminine, as a whole, is unknown nature outside the bounds of
culture, creation, and destruction. She is the protective arms of mother, and the destructive
element of time. The beautiful virgin mother, and the swamp-dwelling hag. This archetypal entity was
confused with an objective historical reality, back in the late 1800s, by a Swiss anthropologist named
Johann Jacob Bakofen. Bakofen proposed that humanity had passed through a series of developmental stages
in its history. The first, roughly speaking, after a somewhat anarchic and chaotic beginning,
was Das Materecht, a society where women held the dominant positions of power, respect, and honor,
where polyamory and promiscuity ruled, and where any certainty of paternity was absent. The second,
the Dionysian, was a phase of transition, during which these original matriarchal foundations were
overturned, and power was taken by men. The third phase, the Apollonian, still reigns today. The
patriarchy rules, and each woman belongs exclusively to one man. Bakofen's ideas became profoundly
influential in certain circles, despite the absence of any historical evidence to support them. One
Maria Gembutis, for example, an archaeologist, famously claimed in the 1980s and 1990s that a
peaceful goddess and woman-centered culture once characterized Neolithic Europe. She claimed that it
was supplanted and suppressed by an invasive hierarchical warrior culture, which laid the basis for modern
society. Art historian Merlin Stone made the same argument in his book When God Was a Woman. This whole
series of essentially archetypal slash mythological ideas became touchstones for the theology of the
women's movement and the matriarchal studies of 1970s feminism. Cynthia Eller, who wrote a book
criticizing such ideas, The Myth of Matriarchal Prehistory, called this theology,
An Ennobling Lie. Carl Jung had encountered Bakofen's ideas of primordial matriarchy decades earlier.
Jung soon realized, however, that the developmental progression described by the earlier Swiss thinker
represented a psychological rather than a historical reality. He saw in Bakofen's thought the same
processes of projection of imaginative fantasy onto the external world that had led to the population of the cosmos with
constellations and gods. In The Origins and History of Consciousness and The Great Mother,
Jung's collaborator, Erich Neumann, extended his colleague's analysis. Neumann traced the emergence of consciousness,
symbolically masculine, and contrasted it with its symbolically feminine, material, mother, matrix, origins,
subsuming Freud's theory of Oedipal parenting into a broader archetypal model.
For Neumann and for Jung, consciousness, always symbolically masculine even in women,
struggles upwards toward the light. Its development is painful and anxiety-provoking as it carries with it
the realization of vulnerability and death. It is constantly tempted to sink back down into
dependency and unconsciousness and to shed its existential burden. It is aided in that pathological
desire by anything that opposes enlightenment, articulation, rationality, self-determination,
strength, and competence, by anything that shelters too much and therefore smothers and devours.
Such overprotection is Freud's Oedipal familial nightmare which we are rapidly transforming into social
policy. The terrible mother is an ancient symbol. It manifests itself, for example, in the form of
Tiamat in the earliest written story we have recovered, the Mesopotamian Enuma Elish. Tiamat is the mother of all
things, gods and men alike. She is the unknown and chaos and the nature that gives rise to all forms.
But she is also the female dragon deity who moves to destroy her own children when they carelessly kill
their father and attempt to live on the corpse that remains. The terrible mother is the spirit of
careless unconsciousness, tempting the ever-striving spirit of awareness and enlightenment down into the
protective womb-like embrace of the underworld. It's the terror young men feel towards attractive women
who are nature itself, ever ready to reject them intimately at the deepest possible level.
Nothing inspires self-consciousness, undermines courage, and fosters feelings of nihilism and hatred
more than that, except, perhaps, the too-tight embrace of too-caring mum.
The terrible mother appears in many fairy tales and in many stories for adults. In Sleeping Beauty,
she is the evil queen, dark nature herself, Maleficent in the Disney version. The royal parents of
Princess Aurora failed to invite this force of the night to their baby daughter's christening.
Thus, they shelter her too much from the destructive and dangerous side of reality, preferring that she
grow up untroubled by such things. Their reward? At puberty, she is still unconscious. The masculine
spirit, her prince, is both a man who could save her by tearing her from her parents and her own
consciousness trapped in a dungeon by the machinations of the dark side of femininity.
When that prince escapes and presses the evil queen too hard, she turns into the dragon of chaos itself.
The symbolic masculine defeats her with truth and faith and finds the princess, whose eyes he opens with a kiss.
It might be objected, as it was with Disney's more recent and deeply propagandistic Frozen,
that a woman does not need a man to rescue her. That may be true, and it may not.
It may be that only the woman who wants or has a child needs a man to rescue her, or at least to support
and aid her. In any case, it is certain that a woman needs consciousness to be rescued. And, as noted above,
consciousness is symbolically masculine and has been since the beginning of time, in the guise both of
order and of the logos, the mediating principle. The prince could be a lover, but could also be a woman's
own attentive wakefulness, clarity of vision, and tough-minded independence. Those are masculine traits,
in actuality as well as symbolically, as men are actually less tender-minded and agreeable than women,
on average, and are less susceptible to anxiety and emotional pain.
And, to say it again, number one, this is most true in those Scandinavian nations where the most
steps towards gender equality have been taken. And, number two, the differences are not small
by the standards whereby such things are measured. The relationship between the masculine and
consciousness is also portrayed symbolically in the Disney movie, The Little Mermaid. Ariel,
the heroine, is quite feminine, but she also has a strong spirit of independence. For this reason,
she is her father's favorite, although she also causes him the most trouble. Her father, Triton,
is the king, representing the known, culture, and order, with a hint of the oppressive rule-giver and tyrant.
Because order is always opposed by chaos, Triton has an adversary, Ursula, a tentacled octopus,
a serpent, a gorgon, a hydra. Thus, Ursula is in the same archetypal category as the dragon-slash-queen
Maleficent in Sleeping Beauty, or the jealous older queen in Snow White, Lady Tremaine in Cinderella,
the Red Queen in Alice in Wonderland, Cruella de Vil in 101 Dalmatians, Miss Medusa in The Rescuers,
and Mother Gothel entangled. Ariel wants to kindle a romance with Prince Eric, whom she previously
rescued from a shipwreck. Ursula tricks Ariel into giving up her voice so that she can have three
days as a human being. Ursula knows full well, however, that a voiceless Ariel will not be able to
establish a relationship with the prince. Without her capacity to speak, without the logos, without
the divine word, she will remain underwater, unconscious, forever. When Ariel fails to form
a union with Prince Eric, Ursula steals her soul and places it in her large collection of shriveled
and warped semi-beings, well protected by her feminine graces. When King Triton shows up to
demand the return of his daughter, Ursula makes him a terrible offer. He can take Ariel's place.
Of course, the elimination of the wise king, who represents, to say it again, the benevolent side
of the patriarchy, has been Ursula's nefarious plan all along. Ariel is released, but Triton is now reduced
to a pathetic shadow of his former self. More importantly, Ursula now has Triton's magic trident,
the source of his godlike power. Fortunately for everyone concerned, except Ursula,
Prince Eric returns, distracting the evil queen of the underworld with a harpoon. This opens an
opportunity for Ariel to attack Ursula, who grows in response to monstrous proportions,
in the same manner as Maleficent, Sleeping Beauty's evil queen. Ursula creates a huge storm and raises a
whole navy of sunken ships from the ocean floor. As she prepares to kill Ariel, Eric commandeers a wrecked
ship and rams her with its broken bowsprit. Triton and the other captured souls are released. The
rejuvenated Triton then transforms his daughter into a human being so she can remain with Eric.
For a woman to become complete, such stories claim, she must form a relationship with masculine
consciousness and stand up to the terrible world, which sometimes manifests itself primarily in the
form of her too present mother. An actual man can help her do that to some degree, but it is better for
everyone concerned when no one is too dependent. One day when I was a kid, I was out playing softball
with some friends. The teams were a mixture of boys and girls. We were all old enough so that the boys
and girls were starting to become interested in one another in an unfamiliar way. Status was becoming
more relevant and important. My friend Jake and I were about to come to blows, pushing each other around
near the pitching mound when my mum walked by. She was a fair distance away, about thirty yards,
but I could immediately see by the change in her body language that she knew what was going on.
Of course, the other kids saw her as well. She walked right by. I knew that hurt her. Part of her was
worried that I would come home with a bloody nose and a black eye. It would have been easy enough for her
just to yell, hey you kids, quit that, or even to come over and interfere. But she didn't. A few years
later, when I was having teenage trouble with my dad, my mum said, if it was too good at home, you'd never
leave. My mum is a tender-hearted person. She's empathetic and cooperative and agreeable. Sometimes she
lets people push her around. When she went back to work after being at home with her young kids,
she found it challenging to stand up to the men. Sometimes that made her resentful, something she
also feels sometimes in relationship to my father, who is strongly inclined to do what he wants when he
wants to. Despite all that, she's no Oedipal mother. She fostered the independence of her children,
even though doing so was often hard on her. She did the right thing, even though it caused her emotional
distress. Toughen up, you weasel. I spent one youthful summer on the prairie of central Saskatchewan
working on a railway line crew. Every man in that all-male group was tested by the others during the
first two weeks or so of their hiring. Many of the other workers were northern Cree Indians,
quiet guys for the most part, easygoing, until they drank too much and the chips on their shoulders
started to show. They had been in and out of jail, as had most of their relatives. They didn't attach
much shame to that, considering it just another part of the white man's system. It was also warm in jail
in the winter, and the food was regular and plentiful. I lent one of the Cree guys 50 bucks at one point.
Instead of paying me back, he offered me a pair of bookends cut from some of the original rail laid
across western Canada, which I still own. That was better than the 50 bucks.
When a new guy first showed up, the other workers would inevitably provide him with an insulting nickname.
They called me Howdy Doody after I was accepted as a crew member, something I am still slightly embarrassed
to admit. When I asked the originator why he chose that moniker, he said, wittily and absurdly,
because you look nothing like him. Working men are often extremely funny in a caustic, biting, insulting manner,
as discussed in Rule 9. They're always harassing each other, partly for amusement, partly to score points
in the eternal dominance battle between them, but also partly to see what the other guy will do
if he's subjected to social stress. It's part of the process of character evaluation as well as camaraderie.
When it works well, when everybody gets and gives as good as they get and can give and take,
it's a big part of what allows men who work for a living to tolerate or even enjoy laying pipe and working
on oil rigs and lumberjacking and working in restaurant kitchens and all the other hot, dirty,
physically demanding and dangerous work that is still done almost totally by men.
Not too long after I started on the rail crew, my name was changed to Howdy.
This was a great improvement as it had a good western connotation and was not obviously linked to that stupid puppet.
The next man hired was not so fortunate. He carried a fancy lunch bucket, which was a mistake,
as brown paper bags were the proper, non-pretentious convention.
It was a little too nice and too new. It looked like maybe his mother had bought it and packed it for him.
Thus, it became his name.
Lunch Bucket was not a good-humoured guy. He bitched about everything and had a bad attitude.
Everything was someone else's fault. He was touchy and none too quick on the draw.
Lunch Bucket couldn't accept his name or settle into his job. He adopted an attitude of condescending
irritation when addressed and reacted to the work in the same manner. He was not fun to be around and
he couldn't take a joke. That's fatal on a work crew. After about three days of carrying on with his
ill-humour and general air of hard-done-by superiority, Lunch Bucket started to experience harassment
extending well beyond his nickname. He would be peevishly working away on the line, surrounded by about
70 men, spread out over a quarter-mile. Suddenly, a pebble would appear out of nowhere, flying through
the air, aimed at his hard hat. A direct hit would produce a thunking sound, deeply satisfying to all
the quietly attending onlookers. Even this failed to improve his humour. So, the pebbles got larger.
Lunch Bucket would involve himself in something and forget to pay attention. Then, thunk! A well-aimed
stone would nail him on the noggin, producing a burst of irritated and ineffectual fury. Quiet
amusement would ripple down the rail line. After a few days of this, no wiser, and carrying a few bruises,
Lunch Bucket vanished. Men enforce a code of behaviour on each other when working together.
Do your work. Pull your weight. Stay awake and pay attention. Don't whine or be touchy. Stand up for
your friends. Don't suck up and don't snitch. Don't be a slave to stupid rules. Don't, in the immortal
words of Arnold Schwarzenegger, be a girly man. Don't be dependent. At all. Ever. Period.
The harassment that is part of acceptance on a working crew is a test. Are you tough, entertaining,
competent and reliable? If not, go away. Simple as that. We don't need to feel sorry for you.
We don't want to put up with your narcissism, and we don't want to do your work.
There was a famous advertisement in the form of a comic strip issued a few decades ago by the
bodybuilder Charles Atlas. It was titled, The Insult That Made a Man Out of Mac, and could be found in
almost every comic book, most of which were read by boys. Mac, the protagonist, is sitting on a beach
blanket with an attractive young woman. A bully runs by and kicks sand in both their faces.
Mac objects. The much larger man grabs him by the arm and says, Listen here. I'd smash your face.
Only you're so skinny, you might dry up and blow away. The bully departs. Mac says to the girl,
The big bully. I'll get even someday. She adopts a provocative pose and says, Oh, don't let it bother you,
little boy. Mac goes home, considers his pathetic physique, and buys the Atlas program.
Soon he has a new body. The next time he goes to the beach, he punches the bully in the nose.
The now admiring girl clings to his arm. Oh, Mac, she says, you're a real man after all.
That ad is famous for a reason. It summarizes human sexual psychology in seven straightforward panels.
The too weak young man is embarrassed and self-conscious, as he should be. What good is he?
He gets put down by other men and worse by desirable women. Instead of drowning in resentment and skulking
off to his basement to play video games in his underwear covered with Cheetos dust, he presents
himself with what Alfred Adler, Freud's most practical colleague, called a compensatory fantasy.
The goal of such a fantasy is not so much wish fulfillment as illumination of a genuine path
forward. Mac takes serious note of his scarecrow-like build and decides that he should develop a stronger
body. More importantly, he puts his plan into action. He identifies with the part of himself that
could transcend his current state and becomes the hero of his own adventure. He goes back to the
beach and punches the bully in the nose. Mac wins. So does his eventual girlfriend. So does everybody
else. It is to women's clear advantage that men do not happily put up with dependency among themselves.
Part of the reason that so many a working-class woman does not marry now as we have alluded to
is because she does not want to look after a man struggling for employment as well as her children.
And fair enough. A woman should look after her children, although that is not all she should do.
And a man should look after a woman and children, although that is not all he should do. But a woman
should not look after a man because she must look after children and a man should not be a child.
This means that he must not be dependent. This is one of the reasons that men have little patience
for dependent men. And let us not forget, wicked women may produce dependent sons, may support and even
marry dependent men. But awake and conscious women want an awake and conscious partner.
It is for this reason that Nelson Muntz of the Simpsons is so necessary to the small social group that
surrounds Homer's anti-hero son, Bart. Without Nelson, king of the bullies, the school would soon be
overrun by resentful, touchy millhouses, narcissistic, intellectual Martin princes, soft, chocolate-gorging
German children, and infantile Ralph Wiggums. Muntz is a corrective, a tough, self-sufficient kid who uses
his own capacity for contempt to decide what line of immature and pathetic behavior simply cannot be crossed.
Part of the genius of the Simpsons is its writer's refusal to simply write Nelson off as an irredeemable
bully. Abandoned by his worthless father, neglected, thankfully, by his thoughtless slut of a mother,
Nelson does pretty well everything considered. He's even of romantic interest to the thoroughly
progressive Lisa, much to her dismay and confusion, for much the same reasons that Fifty Shades of Grey
became a worldwide phenomenon. When softness and harmlessness become the only consciously
acceptable virtues, then hardness and dominance will start to exert an unconscious fascination.
Partly what this means for the future is that if men are pushed too hard to feminize,
they will become more and more interested in harsh fascist political ideology.
Fight Club, perhaps the most fascist popular film made in recent years by Hollywood, with the possible
exception of the Iron Man series, provides a perfect example of such inevitable attraction.
The populist groundswell of support for Donald Trump in the US is part of the same process,
as is, in far more sinister form, the recent rise of far-right political parties,
even in such moderate and liberal places as Holland, Sweden and Norway.
Men have to toughen up. Men demand it and women want it,
even though they may not approve of the harsh and contemptuous attitude that is part and parcel of
the socially demanding process that fosters and then enforces that toughness. Some women don't like
losing their baby boys, so they keep them forever. Some women don't like men and would rather have a
submissive mate, even if he is useless. This also provides them with plenty to feel sorry for themselves,
about as well. The pleasures of such self-pity should not be underestimated.
Men toughen up by pushing themselves and by pushing each other. When I was a teenager,
the boys were much more likely to get into car accidents than the girls, as they still are.
This was because they were out spinning doughnuts at night in icy parking lots.
They were drag racing and driving their cars over the roadless hills extending from the nearby river
up to the level land hundreds of feet higher. They were more likely to fight physically and to skip
class and to tell the teachers off and to quit school because they were tired of raising their hands for
permission to go to the bathroom when they were big and strong enough to work on the oil rigs.
They were more likely to race their motorbikes on frozen lakes in the winter. Like the skateboarders and
crane climbers and free runners, they were doing dangerous things trying to make themselves useful.
When this process goes too far, boys and men drift into the antisocial behavior which is far more
prevalent in males than in females. That does not mean that every manifestation of daring and courage
is criminal. When the boys were spinning doughnuts, they were also testing the limits of their cars,
their ability as drivers, and their capacity for control in an out-of-control situation. When they told
off the teachers, they were pushing against authority to see if there was any real authority there,
the kind that could be relied on in principle in a crisis. When they quit school, they went to work
as rig roughnecks when it was forty bloody degrees below zero. It wasn't weakness that propelled so many
out of the classroom where a better future arguably awaited. It was strength.
If they're healthy, women don't want boys. They want men. They want someone to contend with, someone to grapple with.
If they're tough, they want someone tougher. If they're smart, they want someone smarter.
They desire someone who brings to the table something they can't already provide.
This often makes it hard for tough, smart, attractive women to find mates. There just
aren't that many men around who can outclass them enough to be considered desirable, who are higher,
as one research publication put it, in income, education, self-confidence, intelligence, dominance,
and social position. The spirit that interferes when boys are trying to become men is,
therefore, no more friend to woman than it is to man. It will object just as vociferously and
self-righteously. You can't do it. It's too dangerous when little girls try to stand on their own two feet.
It negates consciousness. It's anti-human, desirous of failure, jealous, resentful, and destructive.
No one truly on the side of humanity would ally him or herself with such a thing. No one aiming at
moving up would allow him or herself to become possessed by such a thing. And if you think tough
men are dangerous, wait until you see what weak men are capable of. Leave children alone when they are
skateboarding. Rule 12. Pet a cat when you encounter one on the street.
Dogs are okay, too. I am going to start this chapter by stating directly that I own a dog,
an American Eskimo, one of the many variants of the basic Spitz type. They were known as German Spitzes
until the First World War made it verboten to admit that anything good could come from Germany.
American Eskimos are among the most beautiful of dogs, with a pointed, classic wolf face, upright ears,
a long, thick coat, and a curly tail. They are also very intelligent. Our dog, whose name is Siko,
which means ice in an Inuit language according to my daughter, who named him, learns tricks very
rapidly and can do so even now that he's old. I taught him a new stunt recently when he turned 13.
He already knew how to shake a paw and to balance a treat on his nose. I taught him to do both at the
same time. However, it's not at all clear he enjoys it. We bought Siko for my daughter,
Michaela, when she was about 10 years old. He was an unbearably cute pup. Small nose and ears, rounded
face, big eyes, awkward movements. These features automatically elicit caretaking behavior from humans,
male and female alike. This was certainly the case with Michaela, who was also occupied with the care
of bearded dragons, geckos, ball pythons, chameleons, iguanas, and a 20-pound, 32-inch long
Flemish giant rabbit named George, who nibbled on everything in the house and frequently escaped,
to the great consternation of those who then spied his improbably large form in their tiny mid-city
gardens. She had all these animals because she was allergic to the more typical pets,
excepting Siko, who had the additional advantage of being hypoallergenic.
Siko garnered 50 nicknames, we counted, which varied broadly in their emotional tone
and reflected both the affection in which he was held and our occasional frustration with his beastly
habits. Scumdog was probably my favorite, but I also held Rathound, Furball, and Suckdog in rather
high esteem. The kids used Sneak and Squeak, sometimes with an appended O, most frequently,
but accompanied it with Snooki, Ugdog, and Snorphalopagus, horrible though it is to admit.
Snorbs is Michaela's current moniker of choice. She uses it to greet him after a prolonged absence.
For full effect, it must be uttered in a high-pitched and surprised voice.
Siko also happens to have his own Instagram hashtag, Judgmental Siko.
I'm describing my dog instead of writing directly about cats, because I don't wish to run afoul of
a phenomenon known as minimal group identification, discovered by the social psychologist Henri Typhel.
Typhel brought his research subjects into his lab,
and sat them down in front of a screen, on to which he flashed a number of dots.
The subjects were asked to estimate their quantity. Then he categorized his subjects as
over-estimators versus under-estimators, as well as accurate versus inaccurate,
and put them into groups corresponding to their performance.
Typhel found that his subjects displayed a marked preference for their own group members,
rejecting an egalitarian distribution strategy and disproportionately rewarding those with whom
they now identified. Other researchers have assigned people to different groups using ever more arbitrary
strategies, such as flipping a coin. It didn't matter, even when the subjects were informed of the way the groups were composed.
People still favored the co-members of their personal group.
Typhel's studies demonstrated two things. First, that people are social. Second, that people are anti-social.
People are social because they like the members of their own group. People are anti-social because they
don't like the members of other groups. Exactly why this is so has been the subject of continual debate.
I think it might be a solution to a complex problem of optimization. Such problems arise, for example,
when two or more factors are important, but none can be maximized without diminishing the others.
A problem of this sort emerges, for example, because of the antipathy between cooperation and competition,
both of which are socially and psychologically desirable. Cooperation is for safety, security,
and companionship. Competition is for personal growth and status. However, if a given group is too small,
it has no power or prestige and cannot fend off other groups. In consequence, being one of its members
is not that useful. If the group is too large, however, the probability of climbing near or to the top
declines, so it becomes too hard to get ahead. Perhaps people identify with groups at the flip of a coin
because they deeply want to organize themselves, protect themselves, and still have some reasonable
probability of climbing the dominance hierarchy. Then they favor their own group because favoring it
helps it thrive. And climbing something that is failing is not a useful strategy.
In any case, it is because of Typhel's minimal conditions discovery that I began this cat-related chapter
with a description of my dog. Otherwise, the mere mention of a cat in the title would be enough to turn many
dog people against me, just because I didn't include canines in the group of entities that should be petted.
Since I also like dogs, there is no reason for me to suffer such a fate. So, if you like to pet dogs
when you meet them on the street, don't feel obliged to hate me. Rest assured instead that this is also
an activity of which I approve. I would also like to apologize to all the cat people who now feel slighted
because they were hoping for a cat story but had to read all this dog-related material.
Perhaps they might be satisfied by some assurance that cats do illustrate the point I want to make
better and that I will eventually discuss them. First, however, to other things.
Suffering and the Limitations of Being
The idea that life is suffering is a tenet, in one form or another, of every major religious doctrine,
as we have already discussed. Buddhists state it directly. Christians illustrate it with the cross.
Jews commemorate the suffering endured over centuries. Such reasoning universally characterizes the great
creeds because human beings are intrinsically fragile. We can be damaged, even broken, emotionally and
physically. And we are all subject to the depredations of aging and loss. This is a dismal set of facts,
and it is reasonable to wonder how we can expect to thrive and be happy, or even to want to exist
sometimes under such conditions. I was speaking recently with a client whose husband had been
engaging in a successful battle with cancer for an agonizing period of five years. They had both held up
remarkably and courageously over this period. However, he fell prey to the tendency of that
dread condition to metastasize and, in consequence, had been given very little time to live.
It is perhaps hardest to hear terrible news like this when you are still in the fragile post-recovery
state that occurs after dealing successfully with previous bad news. Tragedy at such a time seems
particularly unfair. It is the sort of thing that can make you distrust even hope itself. It's frequently
sufficient to cause genuine trauma. My client and I discussed a number of issues, some philosophical and
abstract, some more concrete. I shared with her some of the thoughts that I had developed about the
whys and wherefores of human vulnerability. When my son Julian was about three, he was particularly
cute. He's twenty years older than that now, but still quite cute, a compliment I'm sure he'll
particularly enjoy reading. Because of him, I thought a lot about the fragility of small children. A three-year-old
is easily damaged. Dogs can bite him. Cars can hit him. Mean kids can push him over. He can get sick.
And sometimes did. Julian was prone to high fevers and the delirium they sometimes produce.
Sometimes I had to take him into the shower with me and cool him off when he was hallucinating or even
fighting with me in his feverish state. There are few things that make it harder to accept the
fundamental limitations of human existence than a sick child. Michaela, a year and a few months older
than Julian, also had her problems. When she was two, I would lift her up on my shoulders and carry her
around. Kids enjoy that. Afterwards, however, when I put her feet back on the ground,
she would sit down and cry. So I stopped doing it. That seemed to be the end of the problem,
with a seemingly minor exception. My wife, Tammy, told me that something was wrong with Michaela's gait.
I couldn't see it. Tammy thought it might be related to her reaction to being carried on my shoulders.
Michaela was a sunny child and very easy to get along with. One day, when she was about 14 months old,
I took her along with Tammy and her grandparents to Cape Cod when we lived in Boston. When we got there,
Tammy and her mum and dad walked ahead and left me with Michaela in the car.
We were in the front seat. She was lying there in the sun, babbling away.
I leaned over to hear what she was saying. Happy, happy, happy, happy, happy. That's what she was like.
When she turned six, however, she started to get mopey. It was hard to get her out of bed in the morning.
She put on her clothes very slowly. When we walked somewhere, she lagged behind.
She complained that her feet hurt and that her shoes didn't fit. We bought her 10 different pairs,
but it didn't help. She went to school and held her head up and behaved properly. But when she came
home and saw her mum, she would break into tears. We had recently moved from Boston to Toronto and
attributed these changes to the stress of the move. But it didn't get better. Michaela began to walk up and
down stairs one step at a time. She began to move like someone much older. She complained if you
held her hand. One time, much later, she asked me, Dad, when you played this little piggy with me when
I was little, was it supposed to hurt? Things you learned too late. A physician at our local medical
clinic told us, sometimes children have growing pains. They're normal. But you could think about
taking her to see a physiotherapist. So we did. The physiotherapist tried to rotate Michaela's heel.
It didn't move. That was not good. The physio told us, your daughter has juvenile rheumatoid arthritis.
This was not what we wanted to hear. We did not like that physiotherapist. We went back to the
medical clinic. Another physician there told us to take Michaela to the hospital for sick children.
The doctor said, take her to the emergency room. That way you will be able to see a rheumatologist
quickly. Michaela had arthritis all right. The physio, bearer of unwelcome news, was correct. 37 affected
joints. Severe polyarticular juvenile idiopathic arthritis. JIA. Cause? Unknown. Prognosis? Multiple early
joint replacements. What sort of god would make a world where such a thing could happen at all?
Much less to an innocent and happy little girl. It's a question of absolutely fundamental import
for believer and non-believer alike. It's an issue addressed, as are so many difficult matters,
in The Brothers Karamazov, the great novel by Dostoevsky we began to discuss in Rule 7.
Dostoevsky expresses his doubts about the propriety of being through the character of Ivan, who, if you
remember, is the articulate, handsome, sophisticated brother and greatest adversary of the monastic
novitiate, Alyosha. It's not god I don't accept. Understand this, says Ivan. I do not accept the world
that he created, this world of gods, and cannot agree with it. Ivan tells Alyosha a story about a
small girl whose parents punished her by locking her in a freezing outhouse overnight, a story Dostoevsky
culled from a newspaper of the time. Can you just see those two snoozing away while their daughter was
crying all night, says Ivan. And imagine this little child, unable to understand what was happening to her,
beating her frozen little chest and crying meek little tears, begging gentle Jesus to get her out of
that horrible place. Alyosha, if you were somehow promised that the world could finally have
complete and total peace, but only on the condition that you tortured one little child to death.
Say, that girl who was freezing in the outhouse. Would you do it? Alyosha demurs. No, I would not,
he says softly. He would not do what God seems to freely allow. I had realized something relevant to
this years before about three-year-old Julian. Remember him? I thought, I love my son. He's three,
and cute, and little, and comical. But I'm also afraid for him because he could be hurt. If I had the power to
change that, what might I do? I thought, he could be 20 feet tall instead of 40 inches. Nobody could
push him over then. He could be made of titanium instead of flesh and bone. Then, if some brat
bounced a toy truck off his noggin, he wouldn't care. He could have a computer-enhanced brain. And,
even if he was damaged somehow, his parts could be immediately replaced. Problem solved. But no,
not problem solved. And not just because such things are currently impossible. Artificially
fortifying Julian would have been the same as destroying him. Instead of his little three-year-old
self, he would be a cold, steel-hard robot. That wouldn't be Julian. It would be a monster.
I came to realize through such thoughts that what can be truly loved about a person is inseparable from
their limitations. Julian wouldn't have been little and cute and lovable if he wasn't also prone to
illness and loss and pain and anxiety. Since I loved him a lot, I decided that he was all right the way he
was, despite his fragility. It's been harder with my daughter. As her disease progressed, I began to
piggyback her around, not on my shoulders, when we went for walks. She started taking oral naproxen and
methotrexate, the latter a powerful chemotherapy agent. She had a number of cortisol injectionswrists,
shoulders, ankles, elbows, knees, hips, fingers, toes, and tendonsall under general anesthetic.
This helped, temporarily. But her decline continued. One day, Tammy took Michaela to the zoo.
She pushed her around in a wheelchair. That was not a good day.
Her rheumatologist suggested prednisone, a corticosteroid, long used to fight inflammation.
But prednisone has many side effects, not the least of which is severe facial swelling.
It wasn't clear that this was better than the arthritis, not for a little girl. Fortunately,
if that is the right word, the rheumatologist told us of a new drug.
It had been used previously, but only on adults. So Michaela became the first Canadian child to
receive etanercept, a biological specifically designed for autoimmune diseases. Tammy accidentally
administered ten times the recommended dose the first few injections. Poof! Michaela was fixed.
A few weeks after the trip to the zoo, she was zipping around, playing little league soccer. Tammy
spent all summer just watching her run. We wanted Michaela to control as much of her life as she could.
She had always been strongly motivated by money. One day, we found her outside,
surrounded by the books of her early childhood, selling them to passers-by. I sat her down one
evening and told her that I would give her fifty dollars if she could do the injection herself.
She was eight. She struggled for thirty-five minutes, holding the needle close to her thigh.
Then she did it. Next time, I paid her twenty dollars, but only gave her ten minutes.
Then it was ten dollars and five minutes. We stayed at ten for quite a while. It was a bargain.
After a few years, Michaela became completely symptom-free. The rheumatologist suggested that we
start we start weaning her off her medications. Some children grow out of JIA when they hit puberty.
No one knows why. She began to take methotrexate in pill form instead of injecting it.
Things were good for four years. Then, one day, her elbow started to ache.
We took her back to the hospital. You only have one actively arthritic joint,
said the rheumatologist's assistant. It wasn't only. Two isn't much more than one.
But one is a lot more than zero. One meant she hadn't grown out of her arthritis, despite the hiatus.
The news demolished her for a month. But she was still in dance class and playing ball games with
her friends on the street in front of our house. The rheumatologist had some more unpleasant things
to say the next September, when Michaela started grade eleven. An MRI revealed joint deterioration at
the hip. She told Michaela, your hip will have to be replaced before you turn thirty. Perhaps the
damage had been done before the etanercept worked its miracle? We didn't know. It was ominous news.
One day, a few weeks after, Michaela was playing ball hockey in her high school gym. Her hip locked up.
She had to hobble off the court. It started to hurt more and more. The rheumatologist said,
some of your femur appears to be dead. You don't need a hip replacement when you're 30. You need one now.
As I sat with my client, as she discussed her husband's advancing illness, we discussed the
fragility of life, the catastrophe of existence, and the sense of nihilism evoked by the specter of death.
I started with my thoughts about my son. She had asked, like everyone in her situation,
why my husband? Why me? Why this? My realization of the tight interlinking between vulnerability
and being was the best answer I had for her. I told her an old Jewish story, which I believe is part of
the commentary on the Torah. It begins with a question structured like a Zen cone. Imagine a being
who is omniscient, omnipresent, and omnipotent. What does such a being lack? The answer? Limitation.
If you are already everything, everywhere, always, there is nowhere to go and nothing to be.
Everything that could be, already is. And everything that could happen, already has.
And it is for this reason, so the story goes, that God created man. No limitation, no story. No story,
no being. That idea has helped me deal with the terrible fragility of being. It helped my client,
too. I don't want to overstate the significance of this. I don't want to claim that this somehow
makes it all okay. She still faced the cancer afflicting her husband, just as I still faced my
daughter's terrible illness. But there's something to be said for recognizing that existence and
limitation are inextricably linked. Though thirty spokes may form the wheel, it is the hole within the hub
which gives the wheel utility. It is not the clay the potter throws which gives the pot its usefulness,
but the space within the shape from which the pot is made. Without a door the room cannot be entered,
and without its windows it is dark. Such is the utility of non-existence.
A realization of this sort emerged more recently in the pop culture world during the evolution of
the DC Comics cultural icon Superman. Superman was created in 1938 by Jerry Siegel and Joe Shuster.
In the beginning, he could move cars, trains, and even ships. He could run faster than a locomotive.
He could leap over tall buildings in a single bound. As he developed over the next four decades,
however, Superman's power began to expand. By the late sixties, he could fly faster than light.
He had super hearing and x-ray vision. He could blast heat rays from his eyes. He could freeze objects and
generate hurricanes with his breath. He could move entire planets. Nuclear blasts didn't faze him.
And if he did get hurt somehow, he would immediately heal. Superman became invulnerable.
Then a strange thing happened. He got boring. The more amazing his abilities became,
the harder it was to think up interesting things for him to do. D.C. first overcame this problem in the
1940s. Superman became vulnerable to the radiation produced by kryptonite, a material remnant of his
shattered home planet. Eventually, more than two dozen variants emerged. Green kryptonite weakened
Superman. In sufficient dosage, it could even kill him. Red caused him to behave strangely. Red green
caused him to mutate. He once grew a third eye in the back of his head. Other techniques were necessary
to keep Superman's story compelling. In 1976, he was scheduled to battle Spider-Man. It was the first
superhero crossover between Stan Lee's upstart Marvel Comics, with its less idealized characters,
and D.C., the owner of Superman and Batman. But Marvel had to augment Spider-Man's powers for the
battle to remain plausible. That broke the rules of the game. Spider-Man is Spider-Man because he has the
powers of a spider. If he is suddenly granted any old power, he's not Spider-Man. The plot falls apart.
By the 1980s, Superman was suffering from terminal deus ex machina, a Latin term meaning God from a
machine. The term described the rescue of the imperiled hero in ancient Greek and Roman plays by the sudden
and miraculous appearance of an all-powerful god. In badly written stories to this very day, a character
in trouble can be saved, or a failing plot redeemed, by a bit of implausible magic or other chicanery not
in keeping with the reader's reasonable expectations. Sometimes Marvel Comics, for example, saves a failing
story in exactly this manner. Lifeguard, for example, is an ex-man character who can develop whatever power
is necessary to save a life. He's very handy to have around. Other examples abound in popular culture.
At the end of Stephen King's The Stand, for example, spoiler alert, God himself destroys the novel's evil characters.
The entire ninth season, 1985-86, of the primetime soap Dallas was later revealed as a dream.
Fans object to such things, and rightly so. They've been ripped off. People following a story are willing
to suspend disbelief as long as the limitations making the story possible are coherent and consistent.
Writers, for their part, agree to abide by their initial decisions. When writers cheat, fans get annoyed.
They want to toss the book in the fireplace and throw a brick through the TV.
And that became Superman's problem. He developed powers so extreme that he could deus himself out of
anything at any time. In consequence, in the 1980s, the franchise nearly died. Artist-writer John Byrne
successfully rebooted it, rewriting Superman, retaining his biography, but depriving him of many of his new
powers. He could no longer lift planets or shrug off an H-bomb. He also became dependent on the sun for his
power, like a reverse vampire. He gained some reasonable limitations. A superhero who can do
anything turns out to be no hero at all. He's nothing specific, so he's nothing. He has nothing to strive
against, so he can't be admirable. Being of any reasonable sort appears to require limitation.
Perhaps this is because being requires becoming, as well as mere static existence. And to become
is to become something more, or at least something different. That is only possible for something
limited. Fair enough. But what about the suffering caused by such limits? Perhaps the limits required by
being are so extreme that the whole project should just be scrapped. Dostoevsky expresses this idea very
clearly in the voice of the protagonist of Notes from Underground. So, you see, you can say anything about
world history. Anything and everything that the most morbid imagination can think up. Except one thing,
that is, it cannot be said that world history is reasonable. The word sticks in one's throat.
Goethe's Mephistopheles, the adversary of being, announces his opposition explicitly to God's creation
in Faust, as we have seen. Years later, Goethe wrote Faust, part two. He has the devil repeat his credo
in a slightly different form, just to hammer home the point. Gone, to sheer nothing. Past with null,
made one. What matters our creative endless toil, when at a snatch oblivion ends the coil? It is bygone.
How shall this riddle run? As good as if things never had begun. Yet, circle back, existence to possess.
I'd rather have eternal emptiness. Anyone can understand such words when a dream collapses,
a marriage ends, or a family member is struck down by a devastating disease.
How can reality be structured so unbearably? How can this be? Perhaps, as the Columbine boys suggested,
see Rule 6, it would be better not to be at all. Perhaps it would even be better if there was no
being at all. But people who come to the former conclusion are flirting with suicide,
and those who come to the latter with something worse, something truly monstrous. They're consorting
with the idea of the destruction of everything. They are toying with genocide, and worse. Even the
darkest regions have still darker corners. And what is truly horrifying is that such conclusions are
understandable, maybe even inevitable, although not inevitably acted upon.
What is a reasonable person to think when faced, for example, with a suffering child? Is it not
precisely the reasonable person, the compassionate person, who would find such thoughts occupying his
mind? How could a good God allow such a world as this to exist? Logical, they might be.
Understandable, they might be. But there is a terrible catch to such conclusions.
Acts undertaken in keeping with them, if not the thoughts themselves, inevitably serve to make a bad
situation even worse. Hating life, despising life, even for the genuine pain that life inflicts,
merely serves to make life itself worse, unbearably worse. There is no genuine protest in that.
There is no goodness in that. Only the desire to produce suffering for the sake of suffering.
That is the very essence of evil. People who come to that kind of thinking are one step
from total mayhem. Sometimes they merely lack the tools. Sometimes, like Stalin, they have their finger
on the nuclear button. But is there any coherent alternative, given the self-evident horrors of
existence? Can being itself, with its malarial mosquitoes, child soldiers, and degenerative
neurological diseases, truly be justified? I'm not sure I could have formulated a proper answer to
such a question in the 19th century, before the totalitarian horrors of the 20th were monstrously
perpetrated on millions of people. I don't know that it's possible to understand why such doubts are
morally impermissible, without the fact of the Holocaust and the Stalinist purges and Mao's catastrophic
great leap forward. And I also don't think it is possible to answer the question by thinking. Thinking
leads inexorably to the abyss. It did not work for Tolstoy. It might not even have worked for
Nietzsche, who arguably thought more clearly about such things than anyone in history. But if it is
not thinking that can be relied upon in the direst of situations, what is left? Thought, after all,
is the highest of human achievements. Is it not? Perhaps not. Something supersedes thinking,
despite its truly awesome power. When existence reveals itself as existentially intolerable,
thinking collapses in on itself. In such situations, in the depths, it's noticing, not thinking,
that does the trick. Perhaps you might start by noticing this. When you love someone,
it's not despite their limitations. It's because of their limitations. Of course, it's complicated.
You don't have to be in love with every shortcoming and merely accept. You shouldn't stop trying to make
life better or let suffering just be. But there appear to be limits on the path to improvement,
beyond which we might not want to go, lest we sacrifice our humanity itself. Of course,
it's one thing to say. Being requires limitation. And then to go about happily when the sun is shining
and your father is free of Alzheimer's disease and your kids are healthy and your marriage happy.
But when things go wrong, disintegration and pain. Michaela stayed awake many nights when she was in pain.
When her grandfather came to visit, he gave her a few of his Tylenol 3's, which contained codeine.
Then she could sleep, but not for long. A rheumatologist instrumental in producing Michaela's remission,
hit the limit of her courage when dealing with our child's pain. She had once prescribed opiates to a
young girl who became addicted. She swore never to do so again. She said,
have you tried ibuprofen? Michaela learned then that doctors don't know everything.
Ibuprofen for her was a crumb of bread for a starving man.
We talked to a new doctor. He listened carefully. Then he helped Michaela. First,
he prescribed T3's, the same medication her grandfather had briefly shared. This was brave.
Physicians face a lot of pressure to avoid the prescription of opiates, not least to children.
But opiates work. Soon, however, the Tylenol was insufficient. She started taking OxyContin,
an opioid known pejoratively as hillbilly heroin. This controlled her pain, but produced other problems.
Tammy took Michaela out for lunch a week after the prescription started. She could have been
drunk. Her speech was slurred. Her head nodded. This was not good. My sister-in-law is a palliative
care nurse. She thought we could add ritalin, an amphetamine often used for hyperactive kids,
to the OxyContin. The ritalin restored Michaela's alertness and had some pain-suppressing qualities of its
own. This is a very good thing to know if you are ever faced with someone's intractable suffering.
But her pain became increasingly excruciating. She started to fall. Then her hip seized up on her again,
this time in the subway on a day when the escalator was not working. Her boyfriend carried her up the
stairs. She took a cab home. The subway was no longer a reliable form of transportation.
That March, we bought Michaela a 50cc motor scooter. It was dangerous to let her ride it. It was also
dangerous for her to lack all freedom. We chose the former danger. She passed her learner's exam,
which allowed her to pilot the vehicle during the day. She was given a few months to progress towards
her permanent license. In May, her hip was replaced. The surgeon was even able to adjust for a pre-existent
half-centimeter difference in leg length. The bone hadn't died either. That was only a shadow on the x-ray.
Her aunt and her grandparents came to see her. We had some better days. Immediately after the
surgery, however, Michaela was placed in an adult rehabilitation center. She was the youngest person
in the place by about 60 years. Her aged roommate, very neurotic, wouldn't allow the lights to be off,
even at night. The old woman couldn't make it to the toilet and had to use a bedpan.
She couldn't stand to have the door to her room closed. But it was right beside the nurse's
station with its continual alarm bells and loud conversations. There was no sleeping there where
sleeping was required. No visitors were allowed after 7 pm. And the physio, the very reason for her
placement, was on vacation. The only person who helped her was the janitor who volunteered to move
her to a multi-bed ward when she told the on-duty nurse that she couldn't sleep. This was the same
nurse who had laughed when she had found out which room Michaela had been assigned to.
She was supposed to be there for six weeks. She was there three days. When the vacationing physio
returned, Michaela climbed the rehab center stairs and immediately mastered her additional required
exercises. While she was doing that, we outfitted our home with the necessary hand rails. Then we took her
home. All that pain and surgery? She handled that fine. The appalling rehab center? That produced
post-traumatic stress symptoms. Michaela enrolled in a full-fledged motorcycle
course in June so she could continue legally using her scooter. We were all terrified by this necessity.
What if she fell? What if she had an accident? On the first day, Michaela trained on a real motorcycle.
It was heavy. She dropped it several times. She saw another beginning rider tumble and roll across the
parking lot where the course was held. On the morning of the second day of the course, she was afraid to
return. She didn't want to leave her bed. We talked for a good while and jointly decided that she should
at least drive back with Tammy to the site where the training took place. If she couldn't manage it,
she could stay in the car until the course finished. En route, her courage returned. When she received her
certificate, everyone else enrolled stood and applauded. Then her right ankle disintegrated.
Her doctors wanted to fuse the large affected bones into one piece, but that would have caused the
other smaller bones in her foot to deteriorate. That's not so intolerable, perhaps, when you're 80,
although it's no picnic then either. But it's no solution when you're in your teens. We insisted upon
an artificial replacement, although the technology was new. There was a three-year waiting list.
This was simply not manageable. The damaged ankle produced much more pain than her previously failing
hip. One bad night, she became erratic and illogical. I couldn't calm her down. I knew she was at her
breaking point. To call that stressful is to say almost nothing. We spent weeks and then months
desperately investigating all sorts of replacement devices trying to assess their suitability.
We looked everywhere for quicker surgery. India, China, Spain, the UK, Costa Rica, Florida.
We contacted the Ontario Provincial Ministry of Health. They were very helpful. They located a
specialist across the country in Vancouver. Michaela's ankle was replaced in November. Post-surgery,
she was in absolute agony. Her foot was mispositioned. The cast was compressing skin against bone. The clinic
was unwilling to give her enough OxyContin to control her pain. She had built up a high level of tolerance
because of her previous use. When she returned home in less pain, Michaela started to taper off the opiates.
She hated OxyContin despite its evident utility. She said it turned her life grey. Perhaps that was a good
thing under the circumstances. She stopped using it as soon as possible. She suffered through withdrawal for
months with night sweating and formication, the sensation of ants crawling upside down under her skin.
She became unable to experience any pleasure. That was another effect of opiate withdrawal.
During much of this period, we were overwhelmed. The demands of everyday life don't stop just because
you have been laid low by a catastrophe. Everything that you always do still has to be done. So how do you
manage? Here are some things we learned. Set aside some time to talk and to think about the illness or other
crisis and how it should be managed every day. Do not talk or think about it otherwise. If you do not limit its
effect, you will become exhausted and everything will spiral into the ground. This is not helpful.
Conserve your strength. You are in a war, not a battle. And a war is composed of many battles. You must stay
functional through all of them. When worries associated with the crisis arise at other times, remind yourself
that you will think them through during the scheduled period. This usually works. The parts of your brain
that generate anxiety are more interested in the fact that there is a plan than in the details of the plan.
Don't schedule your time to think in the evening or at night. Then you won't be able to sleep.
If you can't sleep, then everything will go rapidly downhill.
Shift the unit of time you use to frame your life. When the sun is shining and times are good and the
crops are bountiful, you can make your plans for the next month and the next year and the next five years.
You can even dream a decade ahead. But you can't do that when your leg is clamped firmly in a crocodile's
jaws. Sufficient unto the day are the evils thereof. That is Matthew 6.34. It is often interpreted as
live in the present without a care for tomorrow. This is not what it means. That injunction must be
interpreted in the context of the Sermon on the Mount, of which it is an integral part. That sermon distills
the ten thou shalt nots of the commandments of Moses into a single prescriptive thou shalt. Christ
enjoins his followers to place faith in God's heavenly kingdom and the truth. That's a conscious decision
to presume the primary goodness of being. That's an act of courage.
Aim high like Pinocchio's Geppetto. Wish upon a star and then act properly in accordance with that aim.
Once you are aligned with the heavens, you can concentrate on the day.
Be careful. Put the things you can control in order. Repair what is in disorder and make what is
already good better. It is possible that you can manage if you are careful. People are very tough.
People can survive through much pain and loss. But to persevere, they must see the good in being. If they lose
that, they are truly lost. Dogs again. But finally, cats. Dogs are like people. They are the friends and
allies of human beings. They are social, hierarchical, and domesticated. They are happy at the bottom of
the family pyramid. They pay for the attention they receive with loyalty, admiration, and love. Dogs are great.
Cats, however, are their own creatures. They aren't social or hierarchical, except in passing.
They are only semi-domesticated. They don't do tricks. They are friendly on their own terms. Dogs have been
tamed, but cats have made a decision. They appear willing to interact with people for some strange
reasons of their own. To me, cats are a manifestation of nature, of being, in an almost pure form.
Furthermore, they are a form of being that looks at human beings and approves.
When you meet a cat on a street, many things can happen. If I see a cat at a distance, for example,
the evil part of me wants to startle it with a loud pfft sound, front teeth over bottom lip.
That will make a nervous cat puff up its fur and stand sideways so it looks larger.
Maybe I shouldn't laugh at cats, but it's hard to resist. The fact that they can be startled is one of the
best things about them, along with the fact that they are instantly disgruntled and embarrassed by their
overreaction. But when I have myself under proper control, I'll bend down and call the cat over so I
can pet it. Sometimes it will run away. Sometimes it will ignore me completely. Because it's a cat.
But sometimes the cat will come over to me, push its head against my waiting hand, and be pleased about it.
Sometimes it will even roll over and arch its back against the dusty concrete, although cats positioned
in that manner will often bite and claw even a friendly hand. Across the street on which I live
is a cat named Ginger. Ginger is a Siamese, a beautiful cat, very calm and self-possessed.
She is low in the big five personality trait of neuroticism, which is an index of anxiety,
fear, and emotional pain. Ginger is not at all bothered by dogs. Our dog, Siko, is her friend.
Sometimes when you call her, sometimes of her own accord, Ginger will trot across the street,
tail held high, with a little kink at the end. Then she will roll on her back in front of Siko,
who wags his tail happily as a consequence. Afterward, if she feels like it,
she might come visit you for half a minute. It's a nice break. It's a little extra light
on a good day, and a tiny respite on a bad day.
If you pay careful attention, even on a bad day, you may be fortunate enough to be confronted with
small opportunities of just that sort. Maybe you will see a little girl dancing on the street
because she's all dressed up in a ballet costume. Maybe you will have a particularly good cup of coffee
in a cafe that cares about their customers. Maybe you can steal 10 or 20 minutes to do some little
ridiculous thing that distracts you or reminds you that you can laugh at the absurdity of existence.
Personally, I like to watch a Simpsons episode at 1.5 times regular speed. All the laughs, two-thirds
of the time. And maybe when you are going for a walk and your head is spinning, a cat will show up,
and if you pay attention to it, then you will get a reminder for just 15 seconds that the wonder of
being might make up for the ineradicable suffering that accompanies it. Pet a cat when you encounter one
on the street. P.S. Soon after I wrote this chapter, Michaela's surgeon told her that her artificial
ankle would have to be removed and her ankle fused. Amputation waited down that road. She had been in
pain for eight years since the replacement surgery, and her mobility remained significantly impaired,
although both were much better than before. Four days later, she happened upon a new physiotherapist.
He was a large, powerful, attentive person. He had specialized in ankle treatment in the UK,
in London. He placed his hands around her ankle and compressed it for 40 seconds while Michaela moved
her foot back and forth. A mispositioned bone slipped back where it belonged. Her pain disappeared.
She never cries in front of medical personnel, but she burst into tears. Her knee straightened up.
Now she can walk long distances and traipse around in her bare feet. The calf muscle on her damaged
