The belief that children have an intrinsically unsullied spirit damaged only by culture and
society is derived in no small part from the 18th century Genevan French philosopher Jean-Jacques
Rousseau. Rousseau was a fervent believer in the corrupting influence of human society and
private ownership alike. He claimed that nothing was so gentle and wonderful as man in his pre-civilized
state. At precisely the same time, noting his inability as a father, he abandoned five of his
children to the tender and fatal mercies of the orphanages of the time. The noble savage Rousseau
described, however, was an ideal, an abstraction, archetypal and religious, and not the flesh and
blood reality he supposed. The mythologically perfect divine child permanently inhabits our
imagination. He's the potential of youth, the newborn hero, the wronged innocent, and the long-lost
son of the rightful king. He's the intimations of immortality that accompany our earliest experiences.
He's Adam, the perfect man, walking without sin with God in the garden before the fall.
But human beings are evil as well as good, and the darkness that dwells forever in our souls is also
there in no small part in our younger selves. In general, people improve with age rather than
worsening, becoming kinder, more conscientious, and more emotionally stable as they mature.
Bullying at the sheer and often terrible intensity of the schoolyard rarely manifests itself in grown-up
society. William Golding's dark and anarchistic Lord of the Flies is a classic for a reason.
Furthermore, there is plenty of direct evidence that the horrors of human behavior cannot be so
easily attributed to history and society. This was discovered most painfully, perhaps, by the
primatologist Jane Goodall, beginning in 1974, when she learned that her beloved chimpanzees were capable
of and willing to murder each other, to use the terminology appropriate to humans. Because of its shocking
nature and great anthropological significance, she kept her observations secret for years, fearing that
her contact with the animals had led them to manifest unnatural behavior. Even after she published her
account, many refused to believe it. It soon became obvious, however, that what she observed was by no means
rare. Bluntly put, chimpanzees conduct intertribal warfare. Furthermore, they do it with almost
unimaginable brutality. The typical full-grown chimp is more than twice as strong as a comparable human
being, despite their smaller size. Goodall reported with some terror the proclivity of the chimps she
studied to snap strong steel cables and levers. Chimps can literally tear each other to pieces,
and they do. Human societies and their complex technologies cannot be blamed for that.
Often, when I woke in the night, she wrote, horrific pictures sprang unbidden to my mind.
Satan, a long-observed chimp, cupping his hand below Sniff's chin to drink the blood that
welled from a great wound in his face. Jomeo tearing a strip of skin from Day's thigh.
Figgin, charging and hitting again and again the stricken, quivering body of Goliath, one of his
childhood heroes. Small gangs of adolescent chimps, mostly male, roam the borders of their territory.
If they encounter foreigners, even chimps they once knew who had broken away from the now too
large group, and if they outnumber them, the gang will mob and destroy them without mercy.
Chimps don't have much of a superego, and it is prudent to remember that the human capacity for
self-control may also be overestimated. Careful perusal of a book as shocking and horrific as
Iris Chang's The Rape of Nanking, which describes the brutal decimation of that Chinese city by the
invading Japanese, will disenchant even a committed romantic. And the less said about Unit 731,
a covert Japanese biological warfare research unit established at that time, the better.
Hunter-gatherers, too, are much more murderous than their urban industrialized counterparts,
despite their communal lives and localized cultures. The yearly rate of homicide in the modern UK is
about 1 per 100,000. It's 4 to 5 times higher in the US, and about 90 times higher in Honduras,
which has the highest rate recorded of any modern nation. But the evidence strongly suggests that
human beings have become more peaceful rather than less so as time has progressed and societies
became larger and more organized. The Kung Bushmen of Africa, romanticized in the 1950s by Elizabeth
Marshall Thomas as The Harmless People, had a yearly murder rate of 40 per 100,000, which declined by more
than 30% once they became subject to state authority. This is a very instructive example of complex social
structures serving to reduce, not exacerbate, the violent tendencies of human beings. Yearly rates of
300 per 100,000 have been reported for the Yanamami of Brazil, famed for their aggression, but the stats
don't max out there. The denizens of Papua New Guinea kill each other at yearly rates ranging from 140 to 1,000
per 100,000. However, the record appears to be held by the Cato, an indigenous people of California,
1,450 of whom per 100,000 met a violent death circa 1840.
Because children, like other human beings, are not only good, they cannot simply be left to their own
devices, untouched by society, and bloom into perfection. Even dogs must be socialized if they
are to become acceptable members of the pack, and children are much more complex than dogs.
This means that they are much more likely to go complexly astray if they are not trained,
disciplined, and properly encouraged. This means that it is not just wrong to attribute all the
violent tendencies of human beings to the pathologies of social structure. It's wrong enough to be
virtually backward. The vital process of socialization prevents much harm and fosters much good. Children
must be shaped and informed, or they cannot thrive. This fact is reflected starkly in their behavior.
Kids are utterly desperate for attention from both peers and adults, because such attention,
which renders them effective and sophisticated communal players, is vitally necessary.
Children can be damaged as much or more by a lack of incisive attention as they are by abuse,
mental or physical. This is damaged by omission rather than commission, but it is no less severe
and long-lasting. Children are damaged when their mercifully inattentive parents fail to make them
sharp and observant and awake and leave them instead in an unconscious and undifferentiated state.
Children are damaged when those charged with their care, afraid of any conflict or upset,
no longer dare to correct them and leave them without guidance. I can recognize such children
on the street. They are doughy and unfocused and vague. They are leaden and dull instead of golden and
bright. They are uncarved blocks trapped in a perpetual state of waiting to be. Such children are
chronically ignored by their peers. This is because they are not fun to play with. Adults tend to
manifest the same attitude, although they will deny it desperately when pressed. When I worked in daycare
centers early in my career, the comparatively neglected children would come to me desperately
in their fumbling, half-formed manner, with no sense of proper distance and no attentive playfulness.
They would flop nearby or directly on my lap no matter what I was doing, driven inexorably by the
powerful desire for adult attention, the necessary catalyst for further development. It was very
difficult not to react with annoyance, even disgust, to such children and their too-prolonged
infantilism. Difficult not to literally push them aside, even though I felt very badly for them and
understood their predicament well. I believe that response, harsh and terrible though it may be,
was an almost universally experienced internal warning signal indicating the comparative danger
of establishing a relationship with a poorly socialized child. The likelihood of immediate and
inappropriate dependence, which should have been the responsibility of the parent, and the tremendous
demand of time and resources that accepting such dependence would necessitate. Confronted with such a
situation, potentially friendly peers and interested adults are much more likely to turn their
attention to interacting with other children whose cost-benefit ratio, to speak bluntly, would be much
lower. Parent or Friend
The neglect and mistreatment that is part and parcel of poorly structured or even entirely absent
disciplinary approaches can be deliberate, motivated by explicit, conscious, if misguided, parental
motives. But more often than not, modern parents are simply paralyzed by the fear that they will no
longer be liked or even loved by their children if they chastise them for any reason. They want their
children's friendship above all and are willing to sacrifice respect to get it. This is not good.
A child will have many friends, but only two parents, if that. And parents are more, not less,
than friends. Friends have very limited authority to correct. Every parent, therefore, needs to learn
to tolerate the momentary anger or even hatred directed towards them by their children, after
necessary corrective action has been taken, as the capacity of children to perceive or care about
long-term consequences is very limited. Parents are the arbiters of society. They teach children how to
behave so that other people will be able to interact meaningfully and productively with them.
It is an act of responsibility to discipline a child. It is not anger at misbehavior. It's not
revenge for a misdeed. It is instead a careful combination of mercy and long-term judgment.
Proper discipline requires effort. Indeed, it is virtually synonymous with effort. It is difficult to pay
careful attention to children. It is difficult to figure out what is wrong and what is right and why.
It is difficult to formulate just and compassionate strategies of discipline and to negotiate their
application with others deeply involved in a child's care. Because of this combination of
responsibility and difficulty, any suggestion that all constraints placed on children are damaging
can be perversely welcome. Such a notion, once accepted, allows adults who should know better to
abandon their duty to serve as agents of enculturation and pretend that doing so is good for children.
It's a deep and pernicious act of self-deception. It's lazy, cruel, and inexcusable. And our proclivity
to rationalize does not end there. We assume that rules will irremediably inhibit what would otherwise
be the boundless and intrinsic creativity of our children, even though the scientific literature
clearly indicates, first, that creativity beyond the trivial is shockingly rare, and second, that strict
limitations facilitate rather than inhibit creative achievement. Belief in the purely destructive
element of rules and structure is frequently conjoined with the idea that children will
make good choices about when to sleep and what to eat if their perfect natures are merely allowed
to manifest themselves. These are equally ungrounded assumptions. Children are perfectly capable of
attempting to subsist on hot dogs, chicken fingers, and fruit loops if doing so will attract attention,
provide power, or shield them from trying anything new. Instead of going to bed wisely and peacefully,
children will fight nighttime unconsciousness until they are staggered by fatigue.
They are also perfectly willing to provoke adults while exploring the complex contours of the social
environment, just like juvenile chimps harassing the adults in their troops. Observing the consequences
of teasing and taunting enables chimp and child alike to discover the limits of what might otherwise be
a too unstructured and terrifying freedom. Such limits, when discovered, provide security, even if their
detection causes momentary disappointment or frustration.
I remember taking my daughter to the playground once when she was about two. She was playing on the
monkey bars, hanging in mid-air. A particularly provocative little monster of about the same age
was standing above her on the same bar she was gripping. I watched him move towards her, our eyes locked.
He slowly and deliberately stepped on her hands with increasing force over and over as he stared me down.
He knew exactly what he was doing. Up yours, Daddy-o. That was his philosophy. He had already concluded that
adults were contemptible and that he could safely defy them. Too bad, then, that he was destined to become
one. That was the hopeless future his parents had saddled him with. To his great and salutary shock,
I picked him bodily off the playground structure and threw him thirty feet down the field.
No, I didn't. I just took my daughter somewhere else. But it would have been better for him if I had.
Imagine a toddler repeatedly striking his mother in the face. Why would he do such a thing? It's a stupid
question. It's unacceptably naive. The answer is obvious. To dominate his mother. To see if he can get
away with it. Violence, after all, is no mystery. It's peace that's the mystery. Violence is the
default. It's easy. It's peace that is difficult. Learned, inculcated, earned. People often get basic
psychological questions backwards. Why do people take drugs? Not a mystery. It's why they don't take
them all the time. That's the mystery. Why do people suffer from anxiety? That's not a mystery.
How is it that people can ever be calm? There's the mystery. We're breakable and mortal. A million
things can go wrong in a million ways. We should be terrified out of our skulls at every second.
But we're not. The same can be said for depression, laziness, and criminality.
If I can hurt and overpower you, then I can do exactly what I want, when I want, even when you're
around. I can torment you to appease my curiosity. I can take the attention away from you and dominate
you. I can steal your toy. Children hit first because aggression is innate, although more dominant
in some individuals and less in others, and second, because aggression facilitates desire.
It's foolish to assume that such behavior must be learned. A snake does not have to be taught to
strike. It's in the nature of the beast. Two-year-olds, statistically speaking, are the most violent of
people. They kick, hit, and bite, and they steal the property of others. They do so to explore, to express
outrage and frustration, and to gratify their impulsive desires. More importantly, for our
purposes, they do so to discover the true limits of permissible behavior. How else are they ever going
to puzzle out what is acceptable? Infants are like blind people searching for a wall. They have to push
forward and test to see where the actual boundaries lie, and those are too seldom where they are said to be.
Consistent correction of such action indicates the limits of acceptable aggression to the child.
Its absence merely heightens curiosity. So the child will hit and bite and kick if he is aggressive
and dominant until something indicates a limit. How hard can I hit mommy? Until she objects.
Given that, correction is better sooner than later if the desired end result of the parent is not to be
hit. Correction also helps the child learn that hitting others is a sub-optimal social strategy.
Without that correction, no child is going to undergo the effortful process of organizing and
regulating their impulses so that those impulses can coexist without conflict within the psyche of
the child and in the broader social world. It is no simple matter to organize a mind.
My son was particularly ornery when he was a toddler. When my daughter was little,
I could paralyze her into immobility with an evil glance. Such an intervention had no effect at all
on my son. He had my wife, who is no pushover, stymied at the dinner table by the time he was nine
months of age. He fought her for control over the spoon. Good, we thought. We didn't want to feed him
one more minute than necessary anyway. But the little blighter would only eat three or four
mouthfuls. Then he would play. He would stir his food around in his bowl. He would drop bits of it
over the high-chair tabletop and watch as it fell on the floor below. No problem. He was exploring,
but then he wasn't eating enough. Then, because he wasn't eating enough, he wasn't sleeping enough.
Then his midnight crying was waking his parents. Then they were getting grumpy and out of sorts.
He was frustrating his mother, and she was taking it out on me. The trajectory wasn't good.
After a few days of this degeneration, I decided to take the spoon back. I prepared for war. I set
aside sufficient time. A patient adult can defeat a two-year-old, hard as that is to believe. As the
saying goes, old age and treachery can always overcome youth and skill. This is partly because time
lasts forever when you're two. Half an hour for me was a week for my son. I assured myself of victory.
He was stubborn and horrible, but I could be worse. We sat down, face to face, bowl in front of him.
It was high noon. He knew it, and I knew it. He picked up the spoon. I took it from him and spooned up a
delicious mouthful of mush. I moved it deliberately towards his mouth. He eyed me in precisely the same
manner as the playground foot monster. He curled his lips downward into a tight frown, rejecting all
entry. I chased his mouth around with a spoon as he twisted his head around in tight circles.
But I had more tricks up my sleeve. I poked him in the chest with my free hand, in a manner calculated
to annoy. He didn't budge. I did it again, and again, and again. Not hard, but not in a manner
to be ignored either. Ten or so pokes later, he opened his mouth, planning to emit a sound of outrage.
Ha! His mistake. I deftly inserted the spoon. He tried gamely to force out the offending food with his
tongue. But I know how to deal with that, too. I just placed my forefinger horizontally across his
lips. Some came out, but some was swallowed, too. Score, one for Dad. I gave him a pat on the head and
told him that he was a good boy, and I meant it. When someone does something you are trying to get
them to do, reward them. No grudge after victory. An hour later, it was all over. There was outrage.
There was some wailing. My wife had to leave the room. The stress was too much, but food was eaten by
child. My son collapsed, exhausted on my chest. We had a nap together, and he liked me a lot better
when he woke up than he had before he was disciplined. This was something I commonly observed
when we went head to head, and not only with him. A little later, we entered into a babysitting swap
with another couple. All the kids would get together at one house. Then one pair of parents would go out
to dinner or a movie and leave the other pair to watch the children, who were all under three.
One evening, another set of parents joined us. I was unfamiliar with their son, a large, strong boy of
two. He won't sleep, said his father. After you put him to bed, he will crawl out of his bed and come
downstairs. We usually put on an Elmo video and let him watch it. There's no damn way I'm rewarding a
recalcitrant child for unacceptable behavior, I thought, and I'm certainly not showing anyone any
Elmo video. I always hated that creepy, whiny puppet. He was a disgrace to Jim Henson's legacy.
So reward by Elmo was not on the table. I didn't say anything, of course. There's just no talking to
parents about their children until they are ready to listen. Two hours later, we put the kids to bed.
Four of the five went promptly to sleep, but not the Muppet aficionado. I'd placed him in a crib,
however, so he couldn't escape. But he could still howl, and that's exactly what he did.
That was tricky. It was good strategy on his part. It was annoying, and it threatened to wake up all the
other kids, who would then also start to howl. Score one for the kid. So I journeyed into the bedroom.
Lie down, I said. That produced no effect. Lie down, I said, or I will lay you down.
Reasoning with kids isn't often of too much use, particularly under such circumstances,
but I believe in fair warning. Of course, he didn't lie down. He howled again, for effect.
Kids do this frequently. Scared parents think that a crying child is always sad or hurt.
This is simply not true. Anger is one of the most common reasons for crying.
Careful analysis of the musculature patterns of crying children has confirmed this.
Anger crying and fear or sadness crying do not look the same. They also don't sound the same,
and can be distinguished with careful attention. Anger crying is often an act of dominance and should
be dealt with as such. I lifted him up and laid him down. Gently, patiently, but firmly. He got up.
I laid him down. He got up. I laid him down. He got up. This time I laid him down and kept my hand on
his back. He struggled mightily, but ineffectually. He was, after all, only one-tenth my size. I could
take him with one hand. So I kept him down and spoke calmly to him and told him he was a good boy
and that he should relax. I gave him a soother and pounded gently on his back. He started to relax.
His eyes began to close. I removed my hand. He promptly got to his feet. I was impressed.
The kid had spirit. I lifted him up and laid him back down again. Lie down, monster, I said.
I pounded his back gently some more. Some kids find that soothing. He was getting tired. He was ready
to capitulate. Closed his eyes. I got to my feet and headed quietly and quickly to the door.
I glanced back to check his position one last time. He was back on his feet. I pointed my finger at him.
Down, monster, I said. And I meant it. He went down like a shot. I closed the door. We liked each other.
Neither my wife nor I heard a peep out of him for the rest of the night.
How was the kid? His father asked me when he got home, much later that night. Good, I said. No problem at all.
He's asleep right now. Did he get up? said his father. No, I said. He slept the whole time.
Dad looked at me. He wanted to know. But he didn't ask. And I didn't tell.
Don't cast pearls before swine, as the old saying goes. And you might think that's harsh.
But training your child not to sleep and rewarding him with the antics of a creepy puppet?
That's harsh, too. You pick your poison, and I'll pick mine.
Discipline and punish
Modern parents are terrified of two frequently juxtaposed words.
Discipline and punish.
They evoke images of prisons, soldiers, and jackboots.
The distance between disciplinarian and tyrant, or punishment and torture, is, indeed, easily traversed.
Discipline and punish must be handled with care.
The fear is unsurprising.
But both are necessary.
They can be applied unconsciously or consciously, badly or well.
But there is no escaping their use.
It's not that it's impossible to discipline with reward.
In fact, rewarding good behavior can be very effective.
The most famous of all behavioral psychologists, B.F. Skinner, was a great advocate of this approach.
He was an expert at it.
He taught pigeons to play ping-pong.
Although they only rolled the ball back and forth by pecking it with their beaks.
But they were pigeons!
So even though they played badly, it was still pretty good.
Skinner even taught his birds to pilot missiles during the Second World War,
in Project Pigeon, later Orcon.
He got a long way before the invention of electronic guidance systems rendered his efforts obsolete.
Skinner observed the animals he was training to perform such acts with exceptional care.
Any actions that approximated what he was aiming at were immediately followed by a reward of just the right size,
not small enough to be inconsequential, and not so large that it devalued future rewards.
Such an approach can be used with children and works very well.
Imagine that you would like your toddler to help set the table.
It's a useful skill.
You'd like him better if he could do it.
It would be good for his shudder, self-esteem.
So you break the target behavior down into its component parts.
One element of setting the table is carrying a plate from the cupboard to the table.
Even that might be too complex.
Perhaps your child has only been walking a few months.
He's still wobbly and unreliable.
So you start his training by handing him a plate and having him hand it back.
A pat on the head could follow.
You might turn it into a game.
Pass with your left.
Switch to your right.
Circle around your back.
Then you might give him a plate and take a few steps backwards
so that he has to traverse a few steps before giving it back.
Train him to become a plate-handling virtuoso.
Don't leave him trapped in his klutzdom.
You can teach virtually anyone anything with such an approach.
First, figure out what you want.
Then, watch the people around you like a hawk.
Finally, whenever you see anything a bit more like what you want,
swoop in, hawk, remember, and deliver a reward.
Your daughter has been very reserved since she became a teenager.
You wish she would talk more.
That's the target.
More communicative daughter.
One morning over breakfast, she shares an anecdote about school.
That's an excellent time to pay attention.
That's the reward.
Stop texting and listen.
Unless you don't want her to tell you anything ever again.
Parental interventions that make children happy
clearly can and should be used to shape behavior.
The same goes for husbands, wives, co-workers, and parents.
Skinner, however, was a realist.
He noted that use of reward was very difficult.
The observer had to attend patiently until the target spontaneously manifested the desired behavior
and then reinforce.
This required a lot of time and a lot of waiting, and that's a problem.
He also had to starve his animals down to three quarters of their normal body weight
before they would become interested enough in food reward to truly pay attention.
But these are not the only shortcomings of the purely positive approach.
Negative emotions, like their positive counterparts, help us learn.
We need to learn, because we're stupid and easily damaged.
We can die.
That's not good, and we don't feel good about it.
If we did, we would seek death, and then we would die.
We don't even feel good about dying if it only might happen.
And that's all the time.
In that manner, negative emotions, for all their unpleasantness, protect us.
We feel hurt and scared and ashamed and disgusted, so we can avoid damage.
And we're susceptible to feeling such things a lot.
In fact, we feel more negative about a loss of a given size than we feel good about the
same-sized gain.
Pain is more potent than pleasure, and anxiety more than hope.
Emotions, positive and negative, come in two usefully differentiated variants.
Satisfaction, technically satiation, tells us that what we did was good, while hope,
technically incentive-reward, indicates that something pleasurable is on the way.
Pain hurts us, so we won't repeat actions that produce personal damage or social isolation,
as loneliness is also, technically, a form of pain.
Anxiety makes us stay away from hurtful people and bad places, so we don't have to feel pain.
All these emotions must be balanced against each other and carefully judged in context,
but they're all required to keep us alive and thriving.
We therefore do our children a disservice by failing to use whatever is available to help
them learn, including negative emotions, even though such use should occur in the most
merciful possible manner.
Skinner knew that threats and punishments could stop unwanted behaviors, just as reward reinforces
what is desirable.
In a world paralyzed at the thought of interfering with the hypothetically pristine path of natural
child development, it can be difficult even to discuss the former techniques.
However, children would not have such a lengthy period of natural development prior to maturity
if their behavior did not have to be shaped.
They would just leap out of the womb, ready to trade stocks.
Children also cannot be fully sheltered from fear and pain.
They are small and vulnerable.
They don't know much about the world.
Even when they are doing something as natural as learning to walk, they're constantly being
walloped by the world.
And this is to say nothing of the frustration and rejection they inevitably experience when
dealing with siblings and peers and uncooperative, stubborn adults.
Given this, the fundamental moral question is not how to shelter children completely from
misadventure and failure so they never experience any fear or pain, but how to maximize their
learning so that useful knowledge may be gained with minimal cost.
In the Disney movie Sleeping Beauty, the king and queen have a daughter, the princess Aurora,
after a long wait.
They plan a great christening to introduce her to the world.
They welcome everyone who loves and honors their new daughter.
But they fail to invite Maleficent, malicious, malevolent, who is essentially queen of the underworld,
or nature in her negative guise.
This means, symbolically, that the two monarchs are overprotecting their beloved daughter by
setting up a world around her that has nothing negative in it.
But this does not protect her.
It makes her weak.
Maleficent curses the princess, sentencing her to death at the age of 16, caused by the
prick of a spinning wheel's needle.
The spinning wheel is the wheel of fate.
The prick, which produces blood, symbolizes the loss of virginity, a sign of the emergence
of the woman from the child.
Fortunately, a good fairy, the positive element of nature, reduces the punishment to unconsciousness,
redeemable with love's first kiss.
The panicked king and queen get rid of all the spinning wheels in the land and turn their
daughter over to the much-too-nice good fairies, of whom there are three.
They continue with their strategy of removing all dangerous things, but in doing so, they
leave their daughter naive, immature, and weak.
One day, just before Aurora's 16th birthday, she meets a prince in the forest and falls in
love the same day.
By any reasonable standard, that's a bit much.
Then she loudly bemoans the fact that she is to be wed to Prince Philip, to whom she was
betrothed as a child, and collapses emotionally when she is brought back to her parents' castle
for her birthday.
It is at that moment that Maleficent's curse manifests itself.
A portal opens up in the castle.
A spinning wheel appears, and Aurora pricks her finger and falls unconscious.
She becomes Sleeping Beauty.
In doing so, again, symbolically speaking, she chooses unconsciousness over the terror
of adult life.
Something existentially similar to this occurs very frequently with overprotected children
who can be brought low and then desire the bliss of unconsciousness by their first real
contact with failure, or worse, genuine malevolence, which they do not or will not understand,
and against which they have no defense.
Take the case of the three-year-old who has not learned to share.
She displays her selfish behavior in the presence of her parents, but they are too nice to intervene.
More truthfully, they refuse to pay attention, admit to what is happening, and teach her how
to act properly.
They're annoyed, of course, when she won't share with her sister, but they pretend everything
is okay.
It's not okay.
They'll snap at her later for something totally unrelated.
She will be hurt by that and confused, but learn nothing.
Worse, when she tries to make friends, it won't go well, because of her lack of social
sophistication.
Children her own age will be put off by her inability to cooperate.
They'll fight with her, or wander off and find someone else to play with.
The parents of those children will observe her awkwardness and misbehavior, and won't invite
her back to play with their kids.
She will be lonely and rejected.
That will produce anxiety, depression, and resentment.
That will produce the turning from life that is equivalent to the wish for unconsciousness.
Parents who refuse to adopt the responsibility for disciplining their children think they can
just opt out of the conflict necessary for proper child-rearing.
They avoid being the bad guy, in the short term, but they do not at all rescue or protect
their children from fear and pain.
Quite the contrary.
The judgmental and uncaring broader social world will mete out conflict and punishment
far greater than that which would have been delivered by an awake parent.
You can discipline your children, or you can turn that responsibility over to the harsh,
uncaring, judgmental world.
And the motivation for the latter decision should never be confused with love.
You might object, as modern parents sometimes do.
Why should a child even be subject to the arbitrary dictates of a parent?
In fact, there is a new variant of politically correct thinking that presumes that such an
idea is adultism, a form of prejudice and oppression analogous to, say, sexism or racism.
The question of adult authority must be answered with care.
That requires a thorough examination of the question itself.
Accepting an objection as formulated is halfway to accepting its own.
It's validity, and that can be dangerous if the question is ill-posed.
Let's break it down.
First, why should a child be subject?
That's easy.
Every child must listen to and obey adults, because he or she is dependent on the care
that one or more imperfect grown-ups is willing to bestow.
Given this, it is better for the child to act in a manner that invites genuine affection
and goodwill.
Something even better might be imagined.
The child could act in a manner that simultaneously ensures optimal adult attention, in a manner
that benefits his or her present state of being and future development.
That's a very high standard, but it's in the best interest of the child, so there is every
reason to aspire to it.
Every child should also be taught to comply gracefully with the expectations of civil society.
This does not mean crushed into mindless ideological conformity.
It means, instead, that parents must reward those attitudes and actions that will bring their child's
success in the world outside the family, and use threat and punishment when necessary
to eliminate behaviors that will lead to misery and failure.
There's a tight window of opportunity for this as well, so getting it right quickly matters.
If a child has not been taught to behave properly by the age of four, it will forever be difficult
for him or her to make friends.
The research literature is quite clear on this.
This matters, because peers are the primary source of socialization after the age of four.
Rejected children cease to develop because they are alienated from their peers.
They fall further and further behind as the other children continue to progress.
Thus, the friendless child too often becomes the lonely, antisocial, or depressed teenager
and adult.
This is not good.
Much more of our sanity than we commonly realize is a consequence of our fortunate immersion
in a social community.
We must be continually reminded to think and act properly.
When we drift, people that care for and love us nudge us in small ways and large back on track.
So we better have some of those people around.
It's also not the case, back to the question, that adult dictates are all arbitrary.
That's only true in a dysfunctional totalitarian state.
But in civilized open societies, the majority abide by a functional social contract aimed at
mutual betterment, or at least at existence in close proximity without too much violence.
Even a system of rules that allows for only that minimum contract is by no means arbitrary,
given the alternatives.
If a society does not adequately reward productive pro-social behavior, insists upon distributing
resources in a markedly arbitrary and unfair manner, and allows for theft and exploitation,
it will not remain conflict-free for long.
If its hierarchies are based only, or even primarily, on power, instead of the competence
necessary to get important and difficult things done, it will be prone to collapse as well.
This is even true in simpler form of the hierarchies of chimpanzees, which is an indication
of its fundamental, biological, and non-arbitrary emergent truth.
Poorly socialized children have terrible lives.
Thus, it is better to socialize them optimally.
Some of this can be done with reward, but not all of it.
The issue is therefore not whether to use punishment and threat.
The issue is whether to do it consciously and thoughtfully.
How, then, should children be disciplined?
This is a very difficult question, because children and parents differ vastly in their temperaments.
Some children are agreeable.
They deeply want to please, but pay for that with a tendency to be conflict-averse and dependent.
Others are tougher-minded and more independent.
Those kids want to do what they want, when they want, all the time.
They can be challenging, non-compliant, and stubborn.
Some children are desperate for rules and structure, and are content even in rigid environments.
Others, with little regard for predictability and routine, are immune to demands for even
minimal necessary order.
Some are wildly imaginative and creative, and others more concrete and conservative.
These are all deep, important differences, heavily influenced by biological factors, and difficult
to modify socially.
It is fortunate, indeed, that in the face of such variability,
we are the beneficiaries of much thoughtful meditation on the proper use of social control.
Minimum Necessary Force
Here's a straightforward initial idea.
Rules should not be multiplied beyond necessity.
Alternatively stated, bad laws drive out respect for good laws.
This is the ethical, even legal, equivalent of Occam's razor, the scientist's conceptual guillotine,
which states that the simplest possible hypothesis is preferable.
So don't encumber children or their disciplinarians with too many rules.
That path leads to frustration.
Limit the rules.
Then figure out what to do when one of them gets broken.
A general context-independent rule for punishment severity is hard to establish.
However, a helpful norm has already been enshrined in English common law, one of the great products
of Western civilization.
English common law allows you to defend your rights, but only in a reasonable manner.
Someone breaks into your house.
You have a loaded pistol.
You have a right to defend yourself, but it's better to do it in stages.
What if it's a drunk and confused neighbor?
Shoot him, you think.
But it's not that simple.
So you say instead, stop, I have a gun.
If that produces neither explanation nor retreat, you might consider a warning shot.
Then if the perpetrator still advances, you might take aim at his leg.
Don't mistake any of this for legal advice.
It's an example.
A single, brilliantly practical principle can be used to generate all these incrementally
more severe reactions, that of minimum necessary force.
So now we have two general principles of discipline.
The first, limit the rules.
The second, use the least force necessary to enforce those rules.
About the first principle, you might ask, limit the rules to what exactly?
Here are some suggestions.
Do not bite, kick, or hit, except in self-defense.
Do not torture and bully other children, so you don't end up in jail.
Eat in a civilized and thankful manner, so that people are happy to have you at their house,
and pleased to feed you.
Learn to share, so other kids will play with you.
Pay attention when spoken to by adults, so they don't hate you,
and might therefore deign to teach you something.
Go to sleep properly and peaceably, so that your parents can have a private life,
and not resent your existence.
Take care of your belongings, because you need to learn how,
and because you're lucky to have them.
Be good company when something fun is happening, so that you're invited for the fun.
Act so that other people are happy you're around, so that people will want you around.
A child who knows these rules will be welcome everywhere.
About the second, equally important principle, your question might be,
what is minimum necessary force?
This must be established experimentally, starting with the smallest possible intervention.
Some children will be turned to stone by a glare.
A verbal command will stop another.
A thumb-cocked flick of the index finger on a small hand might be necessary for some.
Such a strategy is particularly useful in public places such as restaurants.
It can be administered suddenly, quietly, and effectively, without risking escalation.
What's the alternative?
A child who is crying angrily, demanding attention, is not making himself popular.
A child who is running from table to table and disrupting everyone's peace is bringing disgrace,
an old word, but a good one, on himself and his parents.
Such outcomes are far from optimal, and children will definitely misbehave more in public,
because they are experimenting, trying to establish if the same old rules also apply in the new place.
They don't sort that out verbally, not when they are under three.
When our children were little and we took them to restaurants, they attracted smiles.
They sat nicely and ate politely.
They couldn't keep it up for long, but we didn't keep them there too long.
When they started to get antsy, after sitting for 45 minutes, we knew it was time to go.
That was part of the deal.
Nearby diners would tell us how nice it was to see a happy family.
We weren't always happy, and our children weren't always properly behaved.
But they were most of the time, and it was wonderful to see people responding so positively to their presents.
It was truly good for the kids.
They could see that people liked them.
This also reinforced their good behavior.
That was the reward.
People will really like your kids if you give them the chance.
This is something I learned as soon as we had our first baby, our daughter, Michaela.
When we took her down the street in her little fold-up stroller in our French Montreal working-class neighborhood, rough-looking, heavy-drinking lumberjack types would stop in their tracks and smile at her.
They would coo and giggle and make stupid faces.
Watching people respond to children restores your faith in human nature.
All that's multiplied when your kids behave in public.
To ensure that such things happen, you have to discipline your children carefully and effectively.
And to do that, you have to know something about reward and about punishment, instead of shying away from the knowledge.
Part of establishing a relationship with your son or daughter is learning how that small person responds to disciplinary intervention and then intervening effectively.
It's very easy to mouth cliches instead such as, there is no excuse for physical punishment, or hitting children merely teaches them to hit.
Let's start with the former claim.
There is no excuse for physical punishment.
First, we should note the widespread consensus around the idea that some forms of misbehavior,
particularly those associated with theft and assault, are both wrong and should be subject to sanction.
Second, we should note that almost all those sanctions involve punishment in its many psychological and more directly physical forms.
Deprivation of liberty causes pain in a manner essentially similar to that of physical trauma.
The same can be said of the use of social isolation, including time out.
We know this neurobiologically.
The same brain areas mediate response to all three, and all are ameliorated by the same class of drugs.
Opiates.
Jail is clearly physical punishment, particularly solitary confinement, even when nothing violent happens.
Third, we should note that some misbegotten actions must be brought to a halt both effectively and immediately,
not least so that something worse doesn't happen.
What's the proper punishment for someone who will not stop poking a fork into an electrical socket,
or who runs away laughing in a crowded supermarket parking lot?
The answer is simple.
Whatever will stop it fastest, within reason, because the alternative could be fatal.
That's pretty obvious in the case of parking lot or outlet.
But the same thing applies in the social realm,
and that brings us to the fourth point regarding excuses for physical punishment.
The penalties for misbehavior, of the sort that could have been effectively halted in childhood,
become increasingly severe as children get older,
and it is disproportionately those who remain unsocialized effectively by age four
who end up punished explicitly by society in their later youth and early adulthood.
Those unconstrained four-year-olds, in turn, are often those who are unduly aggressive, by nature, at age two.
They were statistically more likely than their peers to kick, hit, bite, and take away toys,
later known as stealing.
They comprise about five percent of boys and a much smaller percentage of girls.
To unthinkingly parrot the magic line,
there is no excuse for physical punishment,
is also to foster the delusion that teenage devils magically emerge from once innocent little child angels.
You're not doing your child any favors by overlooking any misbehavior,
particularly if he or she is temperamentally more aggressive.
To hold the no excuse for physical punishment theory is also,
fifth, to assume that the word no can be effectively uttered to another person
in the absence of the threat of punishment.
A woman can say no to a powerful narcissistic man
only because she has social norms, the law, and the state backing her up.
A parent can only say no to a child who wants a third piece of cake
because he or she is larger, stronger, and more capable than the child
and is additionally backed up in his authority by law and state.
What no means in the final analysis is always,
if you continue to do that, something you do not like will happen to you.
Otherwise it means nothing.
Or worse, it means another nonsensical nothing muttered by ignorable adults.
Or worse, still, it means all adults are ineffectual and weak.
This is a particularly bad lesson when every child's destiny is to become an adult
and when most things that are learned without undue personal pain
are modeled or explicitly taught by adults.
What does a child who ignores adults and holds them in contempt have to look forward to?
Why grow up at all?
And that's the story of Peter Pan,
who thinks all adults are variants of Captain Hook,
tyrannical and terrified of his own mortality.
Think hungry crocodile with clock in his stomach.
The only time no ever means no in the absence of violence
is when it is uttered by one civilized person to another.
And what about the idea that hitting a child merely teaches them to hit?
First, no, wrong, too simple.
For starters, hitting is a very unsophisticated word
to describe the disciplinary act of an effective parent.
If hitting accurately described the entire range of physical force,
then there would be no difference between rain droplets and atom bombs.
Magnitude matters, and so does context,
if we're not being willfully blind and naive about the issue.
Every child knows the difference between being bitten by a mean, unprovoked dog
and being nipped by his own pet when he tries playfully but too carelessly to take its bone.
How hard someone is hit and why they are hit
cannot merely be ignored when speaking of hitting.
Timing, part of context, is also of crucial importance.
If you flick your two-year-old with your finger
just after he smacks the baby on the head with a wooden block,
he will get the connection
and be at least somewhat less willing to smack her again in the future.
That seems like a good outcome.
He certainly won't conclude that he should hit her more
using the flick of his mother's finger as an example.
He's not stupid.
He's just jealous, impulsive, and not very sophisticated.
And how else are you going to protect his younger sibling?
If you discipline ineffectively, then the baby will suffer.
Maybe for years.
The bullying will continue because you won't do a damn thing to stop it.
You'll avoid the conflict that's necessary to establish peace.
You'll turn a blind eye.
And then, later, when the younger child confronts you,
maybe even in adulthood,
you'll say,
I never knew it was like that.
You just didn't want to know.
So you didn't.
You just rejected the responsibility of discipline
and justified it with a continual show of your niceness.
Every gingerbread house has a witch inside it that devours children.
So where does that all leave us?
With the decision to discipline effectively
or to discipline ineffectively?
But never the decision to forego discipline altogether
because nature and society will punish in a draconian manner
whatever errors of childhood behavior remain uncorrected.
So here are a few practical hints.
Time out can be an extremely effective form of punishment,
particularly if the misbehaving child is welcome
as soon as he controls his temper.
An angry child should sit by himself until he calms down.
Then he should be allowed to return to normal life.
That means the child wins instead of his anger.
The rule is,
come be with us as soon as you can behave properly.
This is a very good deal for child, parent, and society.
You'll be able to tell if your child has really regained control.
He'll like him again, despite his earlier misbehavior.
If you're still mad, maybe he hasn't completely repented.
Or maybe you should do something about your tendency to hold a grudge.
If your child is the kind of determined varmint who simply runs away laughing when placed on the steps or in his room,
physical restraint might have to be added to the time-out routine.
A child can be held carefully but firmly by the upper arms until he or she stops squirming and pays attention.
If that fails, being turned over a parent's knee might be required.
For the child who is pushing the limits in a spectacularly inspired way,
a swat across the backside can indicate requisite seriousness on the part of a responsible adult.
There are some situations in which even that will not suffice,
partly because some children are very determined, exploratory, and tough,
or because the offending behavior is truly severe.
And if you're not thinking such things through, then you're not acting responsibly as a parent.
You're leaving the dirty work to someone else who will be much dirtier doing it.
A summary of principles.
Disciplinary principle one.
Limit the rules.
Principle two.
Use minimum necessary force.
Here's a third.
Parents should come in pairs.
Raising young children is demanding and exhausting.
Because of this, it's easy for a parent to make a mistake.
Insomnia, hunger, the aftermath of an argument, a hangover, a bad day at work.
Any of these things singly can make a person unreasonable,
while in combination they can produce someone dangerous.
Under such circumstances, it is necessary to have someone else around
to observe and step in and discuss.
This will make it less likely that a whiny, provocative child
and her fed-up, cranky parent will excite each other to the point of no return.
Parents should come in pairs,
so the father of a newborn can watch the new mother,
so she won't get worn out and do something desperate
after hearing her colicky baby wail
from eleven in the evening until five in the morning
for thirty nights in a row.
I'm not saying we should be mean to single mothers,
many of whom struggle impossibly and courageously,
and a proportion of whom have had to escape singly from a brutal relationship.
But that doesn't mean we should pretend that all family forms are equally viable.
They're not.
Period.
Here's a fourth principle,
one that is more particularly psychological.
Parents should understand their own capacity to be harsh,
vengeful, arrogant, resentful, angry, and deceitful.
Very few people set out consciously to do a terrible job as father or mother,
but bad parenting happens all the time.
This is because people have a great capacity for evil as well as good,
and because they remain willfully blind to that fact.
People are aggressive and selfish,
as well as kind and thoughtful.
For this reason,
no adult human being,
no hierarchical, predatory ape,
can truly tolerate being dominated by an upstart child.
Revenge will come.
Ten minutes after a pair of all too nice and patient parents
have failed to prevent a public tantrum at the local supermarket,
they will pay their toddler back with the cold shoulder
when he runs up,
excited to show mom and dad his newest accomplishment.
Enough embarrassment,
disobedience,
and dominance challenge,
and even the most hypothetically selfless parent will become resentful.
And then the real punishment will begin.
Resentment breeds the desire for vengeance.
Fewer spontaneous offers of love will be offered,
with more rationalizations for their absence.
Fewer opportunities for the personal development of the child will be sought out.
A subtle turning away will begin.
And this is only the beginning of the road to total familial warfare,
conducted mostly in the underworld,
underneath the false facade of normality and love.
This frequently traveled path is much better avoided.
A parent who is seriously aware of his or her limited tolerance
and capacity for misbehavior when provoked,
can therefore seriously plan a proper disciplinary strategy,
particularly if monitored by an equally awake partner,
and never let things degenerate to the point where genuine hatred emerges.
Beware.
There are toxic families everywhere.
They make no rules and limit no misbehavior.
The parents lash out randomly and unpredictably.
The children live in that chaos and are crushed if they're timid,
or rebel counterproductively if they're tough.
It's not good.
It can get murderous.
Here's a fifth and final and most general principle.
Parents have a duty to act as proxies for the real world.
Merciful proxies, caring proxies, but proxies nonetheless.
This obligation supersedes any responsibility to ensure happiness,
foster creativity, or boost self-esteem.
It is the primary duty of parents to make their children socially desirable.
That will provide the child with opportunity, self-regard, and security.
It's more important even than fostering individual identity.
That holy grail can only be pursued in any case
after a high degree of social sophistication has been established.
The good child and the responsible parent
A properly socialized three-year-old is polite and engaging.
She's also no pushover.
She evokes interest from other children and appreciation from adults.
She exists in a world where other kids welcome her and compete for her attention,
and where adults are happy to see her,
instead of hiding behind false smiles.
She will be introduced to the world by people who are pleased to do so.
This will do more for her eventual individuality
than any cowardly parental attempt to avoid day-to-day conflict and discipline.
Discuss your likes and dislikes with regards to your children with your partner,
or, failing that, a friend.
But do not be afraid to have likes and dislikes.
You can judge suitable from unsuitable, and wheat from chaff.
You realize the difference between good and evil.
Having clarified your stance,
having assessed yourself for pettiness, arrogance, and resentment,
you take the next step, and you make your children behave.
You take responsibility for their discipline.
You take responsibility for the mistakes you will inevitably make while disciplining.
You can apologize when you're wrong, and learn to do better.
You love your kids, after all.
If their actions make you dislike them,
think what an effect they will have on other people,
who care much less about them than you.
Those other people will punish them severely,
by omission or commission.
Don't allow that to happen.
Better to let your little monsters know what is desirable and what is not,
so they become sophisticated denizens of the world outside the family.
A child who pays attention instead of drifting,
and can play,
and does not whine,
and is comical but not annoying,
and is trustworthy,
that child will have friends wherever he goes.
His teachers will like him,
and so will his parents.
If he attends politely to adults,
he will be attended to,
smiled at,
and happily instructed.
He will thrive in what can so easily be a cold,
unforgiving,
and hostile world.
Clear rules make for secure children,
and calm,
rational parents.
Clear principles of discipline and punishment
balance mercy and justice,
so that social development and psychological maturity
can be optimally promoted.
Clear rules,
and proper discipline
help the child and the family and society
establish,
maintain,
and expand the order
that is all that protects us
from chaos and the terrors of the underworld,
where everything is uncertain,
anxiety-provoking,
hopeless,
and depressing.
There are no greater gifts
that a committed and courageous parent can bestow.
Do not let your children do anything
that makes you dislike them.
Rule 6.
Set your house in perfect order
before you criticize the world.
A religious problem.
It does not seem reasonable
to describe the young man
who shot 20 children
and six staff members
at Sandy Hook Elementary School
in Newtown, Connecticut,
in 2012,
as a religious person.
This is equally true
for the Colorado Theater gunmen
and the Columbine High School killers.
But these murderous individuals
had a problem with reality
that existed at a religious depth.
As one of the members
of the Columbine duo wrote,
People who think such things
view being itself
as inequitable and harsh
to the point of corruption
and human being, in particular,
as contemptible.
They appoint themselves
supreme adjudicators of reality,
find it wanting.
They are the ultimate critics.
The deeply cynical writer continues,
If you recall your history,
the Nazis came up
with a final solution
to the Jewish problem.
Kill them all.
Well, in case you haven't
figured it out,
I say, kill mankind.
No one should survive.
For such individuals,
the world of experience
is insufficient and evil.
So to hell with everything.
What is happening
when someone comes to think
in this manner?
A great German play,
Faust, a tragedy,
written by Johann Wolfgang von Goethe,
addresses that issue.
The play's main character,
a scholar named Heinrich Faust,
trades his immortal soul
to the devil, Mephistopheles.
In return, he receives
whatever he desires
while still alive on earth.
In Goethe's play,
Mephistopheles is the eternal
adversary of being.
He has a central defining credo.
I am the spirit who negates,
and rightly so,
for all that comes to be
deserves to perish wretchedly.
It were better,
nothing would begin.
Thus, everything that your terms,
sin, destruction, evil,
represent,
that is my proper element.
Gerta considered this hateful sentiment
so important,
so key to the central element
of vengeful human destructiveness,
that he had Mephistopheles say it
a second time,
phrased somewhat differently,
in part two of the play,
written many years later.
People think often
in the Mephistophelian manner,
although they seldom act upon
their thoughts as brutally
as the mass murderers
of school, college, and theater.
Whenever we experience injustice,
real or imagined,
whenever we encounter tragedy
or fall prey to the machinations
of others,
whenever we experience
the horror and pain
of our own apparently
arbitrary limitations,
the temptation to question being
and then to curse it
rises foully from the darkness.
Why must innocent people
suffer so terribly?
What kind of bloody,
horrible planet is this, anyway?
Life is, in truth, very hard.
Everyone is destined for pain
and slated for destruction.
Sometimes suffering is clearly
the result of a personal fault,
such as willful blindness,
poor decision-making,
or malevolence.
In such cases,
when it appears to be self-inflicted,
it may even seem just.
People get what they deserve,
you might contend.
That's cold comfort, however,
even when true.
Sometimes, if those who are suffering
changed their behavior,
then their lives would unfold
less tragically.
But human control is limited.
Susceptibility to despair,
disease, aging, and death
is universal.
In the final analysis,
we do not appear to be
the architects of our own fragility.
Whose fault is it, then?
People who are very ill,
or worse, who have a sick child,
will inevitably find themselves
asking this question,
whether they are religious believers or not.
The same is true of someone
who finds his shirt sleeve
caught in the gears of a giant bureaucracy,
who is suffering through a tax audit,
or fighting an interminable lawsuit
or divorce.
And it's not only the obviously suffering
who are tormented by the need
to blame someone or something
for the intolerable state of their being.
At the height of his fame,
influence, and creative power,
for example,
the towering Leo Tolstoy himself
began to question the value
of human existence.
He reasoned in this way.
My position was terrible.
I knew that I could find nothing
in the way of rational knowledge
except a denial of life.
And in faith,
I could find nothing
except a denial of reason.
And this was even more impossible
than a denial of life.
According to rational knowledge,
it followed that life is evil
and people know it.
They do not have to live,
yet they have lived,
and they do live,
just as I myself had lived,
even though I had known for a long time
that life is meaningless and evil.
Try as he might,
Tolstoy could identify
only four means of escaping
from such thoughts.
One was retreating
into childlike ignorance
of the problem.
Another was pursuing
mindless pleasure.
The third was
continuing to drag out a life
that is evil and meaningless,
knowing beforehand
that nothing can come of it.
He identified that particular
form of escape with weakness.
The people in this category
know that death
is better than life,
but they do not have
the strength to act rationally
and quickly put an end
to the delusion
by killing themselves.
Only the fourth
and final mode of escape
involved strength and energy.
It consists of destroying life
once one has realized
that life is evil
and meaningless.
Tolstoy relentlessly
followed his thoughts.
Only unusually strong
and logically consistent people
act in this manner.
Having realized
all the stupidity
of the joke
that is being played on us
and seeing that
the blessings of the dead
are greater than
those of the living
and that it is better
not to exist,
they act and put an end
to this stupid joke.
And they use any means
of doing it.
A rope around the neck,
water,
a knife in the heart,
a train.
Tolstoy wasn't
pessimistic enough.
The stupidity of the joke
being played on us
does not merely
motivate suicide.
It motivates murder.
Mass murder,
often followed by suicide.
That is a far more effective
existential protest.
By June of 2016,
unbelievable as it may seem,
there had been
1,000 mass killings,
defined as four or more people
shot in a single incident,
excluding the shooter,
in the U.S.
in 1,260 days.
That's one such event
on five of every six days
for more than three years.
Everyone says,
we don't understand.
How can we still pretend that?
Tolstoy understood
more than a century ago.
The ancient authors
of the biblical story
of Cain and Abel
understood as well,
more than 20 centuries ago.
They describe murder
as the first act
of post-identic history.
And not just murder,
but fratricidal murder.
Murder not only
of someone innocent,
but of someone ideal and good.
And murder done consciously
to spite the creator
of the universe.
Today's killers tell us
the same thing
in their own words.
Who would dare say
that this is not the worm
at the core of the apple?
But we will not listen
because the truth
cuts too close to the bone.
Even for a mind
as profound as that
of the celebrated
Russian author,
there is no way out.
How can the rest of us manage
when a man of Tolstoy's stature
admits defeat?
For years,
he hid his guns from himself
and would not walk
with a rope in hand
in case he hanged himself.
How can a person
who is awake
avoid outrage at the world?
Vengeance or Transformation
A religious man
might shake his fist
in desperation
at the apparent injustice
and blindness of God.
Even Christ himself
felt abandoned
before the cross,
or so the story goes.
A more agnostic
or atheistic individual
might blame fate
or meditate bitterly
on the brutality of chance.
Another might tear himself apart,
searching for the character flaws
underlying his suffering
and deterioration.
These are all variations
on a theme.
The name of the target changes,
but the underlying psychology
remains constant.
Why?
Why is there so much
suffering and cruelty?
Well, perhaps it really is
God's doing,
or the fault of blind,
pointless fate
if you're inclined
to think that way.
And there appears to be
every reason to think that way.
But what happens if you do?
Mass murderers believe
that the suffering attendant
upon existence
justifies judgment
and revenge,
as the Columbine boys
so clearly indicated.
I will sooner die
than betray my own thoughts.
Before I leave
this worthless place,
I will kill
whoever I deem
unfit for anything,
especially life.
If you pissed me off
in the past,
you will die
if I see you.
You might be able
to piss off others
and have it eventually
all blow over,
but not me.
I don't forget people
who wronged me.
One of the most
vengeful murderers
of the 20th century,
the terrible Carl Panzram,
was raped,
brutalized,
and betrayed
in the Minnesota institution
responsible for his
rehabilitation
when he was
a delinquent juvenile.
He emerged
enraged beyond measure
as burglar,
arsonist,
rapist,
and serial killer.
He aimed
consciously
and consistently
at destruction,
even keeping track
of the dollar value
of the property
he burned.
He started by hating
the individuals
who had hurt him.
His resentment grew
until his hatred
encompassed
all of mankind,
and he didn't stop there.
His destructiveness
was aimed
in some fundamental manner
at God himself.
There is no other way
of phrasing it.
Panzram raped,
murdered,
and burned
to express
his outrage
at being.
He acted
as if someone
was responsible.
The same thing
happens in the story
of Cain and Abel.
Cain's sacrifices
are rejected.
He exists
in suffering.
He calls out God
and challenges
the being he created.
God refuses
his plea.
He tells Cain
that his trouble
is self-induced.
Cain,
in his rage,
kills Abel,
God's favorite,
and truth be known,
Cain's idol.
Cain is jealous,
of course,
of his successful brother,
but he destroys Abel
primarily to spite God.
This is the truest version
of what happens
when people take
their vengeance
to the ultimate extreme.
Hansram's response
was,
and this is what
was so terrible,
perfectly understandable.
The details
of his autobiography
reveal that he was
one of Tolstoy's
strong and logically
consistent people.
He was a powerful,
consistent,
fearless actor.
He had the courage
of his convictions.
How could someone
like him be expected
to forgive and forget,
given what had happened
to him?
Truly terrible things
happen to people.
It's no wonder
they're out for revenge.
Under such conditions,
vengeance seems
a moral necessity.
How can it be distinguished
from the demand
for justice?
After the experience
of terrible atrocity,
isn't forgiveness
just cowardice
or lack of willpower?
Such questions
torment me.
But people emerge
from terrible pasts
to do good
and not evil,
although such an accomplishment
can seem superhuman.
I have met people
who managed to do it.
I know a man,
a great artist,
who emerged
from just such a school
as the one described
by Hansram.
Only this man
was thrown into it
as an innocent five-year-old,
fresh from a long stretch
in a hospital,
where he had suffered
measles, mumps,
and chickenpox
simultaneously.
Incapable of speaking
the language of the school,
deliberately isolated
from his family,
abused, starved,
and otherwise tormented,
he emerged an angry,
broken young man.
He hurt himself badly
in the aftermath
with drugs and alcohol
and other forms
of self-destructive behavior.
He detested everyone,
God, himself,
and blind fate included.
But he put an end
to all of that.
He stopped drinking.
He stopped hating,
although it still
emerges in flashes.
He revitalized
the artistic culture
of his native tradition
and trained young men
to continue in his footsteps.
He produced
a 50-foot totem pole
memorializing
the events of his life
and a canoe
40 feet long
from a single log
of a kind
rarely if ever
produced now.
He brought his family together
and held a great potlatch
with 16 hours of dancing
and hundreds of people
in attendance
to express his grief
and make peace
with the past.
He decided to be
a good person
and then did the impossible
things required
to live that way.
I had a client
who did not have
good parents.
Her mother died
when she was very young.
Her grandmother
who raised her
was a heredan,
bitter and over-concerned
with appearances.
She mistreated
her granddaughter,
punishing her
for her virtues,
creativity,
sensitivity,
intelligence,
unable to resist
acting out
her resentment
for an admittedly
hard life
on her granddaughter.
She had a better
relationship with her father
but he was an addict
who died badly
while she cared for him.
My client had a son.
She perpetuated
none of this
with him.
He grew up truthful
and independent
and hard-working
and smart.
Instead of widening
the tear
in the cultural fabric
she inherited
and transmitting it,
she sewed it up.
She rejected
the sins
of her forefathers.
Such things
can be done.
Distress,
whether psychic,
physical or intellectual,
need not at all
produce nihilism.
That is,
the radical rejection
of value,
meaning and desirability.
Such distress
always permits
a variety
of interpretations.
Nietzsche wrote
those words.
What he meant
was this.
People who experience
evil may certainly
desire to perpetuate it,
to pay it forward.
But it is also possible
to learn good
by experiencing evil.
A bullied boy
can mimic his tormentors.
But he can also learn
from his own abuse
that it is wrong
to push people around
and make their lives miserable.
Someone tormented
by her mother
can learn
from her terrible experiences
how important it is
to be a good parent.
Many,
perhaps even most,
of the adults
who abuse children
were abused themselves
as children.
However,
the majority
of people
who were abused
as children
do not abuse
their own children.
This is a well-established fact
which can be demonstrated
simply,
arithmetically,
in this way.
If one parent
abused three children
and each of those children
had three children
and so on,
then there would be
three abusers
the first generation,
nine the second,
27 the third,
81 the fourth,
and so on,
exponentially.
After 20 generations,
more than 10 billion
would have suffered
childhood abuse.
More people
than currently
inhabit the planet.
But instead,
abuse disappears
across generations.
People constrain
its spread.
That's a testament
to the genuine dominance
of good over evil
in the human heart.
The desire for vengeance,
however justified,
also bars the way
to other productive thoughts.
The American-English poet
T.S. Eliot
explained why
in his play
The Cocktail Party.
One of his characters
is not having
a good time of it.
She speaks of her
profound unhappiness
to a psychiatrist.
She says she hopes
that all her suffering
is her own fault.
The psychiatrist
is taken aback.
He asks why.
She has thought
long and hard
about this,
she says,
and has come
to the following conclusion.
If it's her fault,
she might be able
to do something about it.
If it's God's fault,
however,
if reality itself
is flawed,
hell-bent on
ensuring her misery,
then she is doomed.
She couldn't change
the structure
of reality itself.
But maybe she could
change her own life.
Alexander Solzhenitsyn
had every reason
to question
the structure of existence
when he was imprisoned
in a Soviet labor camp
in the middle
of the terrible
20th century.
He had served
as a soldier
on the ill-prepared
Russian front lines
in the face
of a Nazi invasion.
He had been arrested,
beaten,
and thrown into prison
by his own people.
Then he was struck
by cancer.
He could have become
resentful and bitter.
His life
had been rendered
miserable
by both Stalin
and Hitler,
two of the worst
tyrants in history.
He lived
in brutal conditions.
Vast stretches
of his precious time
were stolen from him
and squandered.
He witnessed
the pointless
and degrading
suffering and death
of his friends
and acquaintances.
Then he contracted
an extremely serious disease.
Solzhenitsyn had cause
to curse God.
Job himself
barely had it as hard.
But the great writer,
the profound,
spirited defender
of truth,
did not allow
his mind
to turn towards
vengeance
and destruction.
He opened
his eyes instead.
During his many trials,
Solzhenitsyn
encountered people
who comported
themselves nobly
under horrific circumstances.
He contemplated
their behavior deeply.
Then he asked himself
the most difficult
of questions.
Had he personally
contributed
to the catastrophe
of his life?
If so,
how?
He remembered
his unquestioning support
of the Communist Party
in his early years.
He reconsidered
his whole life.
He had plenty
of time in the camps.
How had he missed
the mark
in the past?
How many times
had he acted
against his own conscience,
engaging in actions
that he knew
to be wrong?
How many times
had he betrayed himself
and lied?
Was there any way
that the sins
of his past
could be rectified,
atoned for,
in the muddy hell
of a Soviet gulag?
Solzhenitsyn
poured over
the details
of his life
with a fine-toothed comb.
He asked himself
a second question
and a third.
Can I stop
making such mistakes
now?
Can I repair
the damage
done by my past failures
now?
He learned
to watch
and to listen.
He found people
he admired
who were honest
despite everything.
He took himself
apart,
piece by piece,
let what was
unnecessary
and harmful
die,
and resurrected
himself.
Then he wrote
The Gulag Archipelago,
a history
of the Soviet
prison camp system.
It's a forceful,
terrible book
written with
the overwhelming
moral force
of unvarnished truth.
Its sheer outrage
screamed unbearably
across hundreds
of pages.
Banned,
and for good reason,
in the USSR,
it was smuggled
to the West
in the 1970s
and burst
upon the world.
Solzhenitsyn's
writing utterly
and finally
demolished
the intellectual
credibility
of communism
as ideology
or society.
He took an axe
to the trunk
of the tree
whose bitter fruits
had nourished him
so poorly
and whose planting
he had witnessed
and supported.
One man's decision
to change his life
instead of cursing fate
shook the whole
pathological system
of communist tyranny
to its core.
It crumbled entirely,
not so many years later,
and Solzhenitsyn's
courage was not
the least
of the reasons why.
He was not
the only such person
to perform
such a miracle.
Vaclav Havel,
the persecuted writer
who later,
impossibly,
became the president
of Czechoslovakia,
then of the new
Czech Republic,
comes to mind,
as does Mahatma Gandhi.
Things Fall Apart
Whole peoples
have adamantly
refused to judge reality,
to criticize being,
to blame God.
It's interesting
to consider
the Old Testament
Hebrews in this regard.
Their travails
followed a consistent pattern.
The stories of Adam and Eve
and Cain and Abel
and Noah
and the Tower of Babel
are truly ancient.
Their origins
vanish into
the mysteries of time.
It's not until
after the flood story
in Genesis
that something like history,
as we understand it,
truly starts.
It starts with Abraham.
Abraham's descendants
become the Hebrew people
of the Old Testament,
also known as
the Hebrew Bible.
They enter a covenant
with Yahweh,
with God,
and begin their
recognizably historical
adventures.
Under the leadership
of a great man,
the Hebrews
organize themselves
into a society,
and then an empire.
As their fortunes rise,
success breeds
pride and arrogance.
Corruption raises
its ugly head.
The increasingly
hubristic state
becomes obsessed
with power,
begins to forget
its duty to the widows
and orphans,
and deviates from
its age-old agreement
with God.
A prophet arises.
He brazenly
and publicly
reviles the authoritarian
king and faithless country
for their failures
before God,
an act of blind courage,
telling them
of the terrible judgment
to come.
When his wise words
are not completely ignored,
they are heeded too late.
God smites
his wayward people,
dooming them
to abject defeat
in battle
and generations
of subjugation.
The Hebrews
repent at length,
blaming their misfortune
on their own failure
to adhere
to God's word.
They insist to themselves
that they could have
done better.
They rebuild their state,
and the cycle
begins again.
This is life.
We build structures
to live in.
We build families
and states
and countries.
We abstract the principles
upon which those structures
are founded
and formulate systems
of belief.
At first,
we inhabit those structures
and beliefs like Adam
and Eve in Paradise,
but success makes us
complacent.
We forget to pay attention.
We take what we have
for granted.
We turn a blind eye.
We fail to notice
that things are changing
or that corruption
is taking root,
and everything
falls apart.
Is that the fault
of reality?
Of God?
Or do things fall apart
because we have not
paid sufficient attention?
When the hurricane
hit New Orleans
and the town sank
under the waves,
was that a natural disaster?
The Dutch prepare
their dikes
for the worst storm
in 10,000 years.
Had New Orleans
followed that example,
no tragedy
would have occurred.
It's not that
no one knew.
The Flood Control Act
of 1965
mandated improvements
in the levee system
that held back
Lake Pontchartrain.
The system was to be
completed by 1978.
Forty years later,
only 60% of the work
had been done.
Willful blindness
and corruption
took the city down.
A hurricane
is an act of God,
but failure to prepare
when the necessity
for preparation
is well known.
That's sin.
That's failure
to hit the mark.
And the wages of sin
is death.
Romans 6.23
The ancient Jews
always blamed themselves
when things fell apart.
They acted as if
God's goodness,
the goodness of reality,
was axiomatic
and took responsibility
for their own failure.
That's insanely responsible.
But the alternative
is to judge reality
as insufficient,
to criticize being itself
and to sink into resentment
and the desire for revenge.
If you are suffering,
well, that's the norm.
People are limited
and life is tragic.
If your suffering
is unbearable, however,
and you are starting
to become corrupted,
here's something
to think about.
Clean up your life.
Consider your circumstances.
Start small.
Have you taken full advantage
of the opportunities
offered to you?
Are you working hard
on your career
or even your job?
Or are you letting
bitterness and resentment
hold you back
and drag you down?
Have you made peace
with your brother?
Are you treating
your spouse and your children
with dignity and respect?
Do you have habits
that are destroying
your health and well-being?
Are you truly shouldering
your responsibilities?
Have you said
what you need to say
to your friends
and family members?
Are there things
that you could do
that you know
you could do
that would make things
around you better?
Have you cleaned up
your life?
If the answer is no,
here's something to try.
Start to stop doing
what you know
to be wrong.
Start stopping today.
Don't waste time
questioning how you know
that what you're doing
is wrong
if you are certain
that it is.
Inopportune questioning
can confuse
without enlightening
as well as deflecting
you from action.
You can know
that something is wrong
or right
without knowing why.
Your entire being
can tell you something
that you can neither
explain nor articulate.
Every person
is too complex
to know themselves
completely
and we all contain
wisdom that we
cannot comprehend.
So,
simply stop
when you apprehend,
however dimly
that you should stop.
Stop acting
in that particular
despicable manner.
Stop saying
those things
that make you
weak and ashamed.
Say only those things
that make you strong.
Do only those things
that you could speak of
with honor.
You can use
your own standards
of judgment.
You can rely on yourself
for guidance.
You don't have to adhere
to some external
arbitrary code of behavior,
although you should not
overlook the guidelines
of your culture.
Life is short
and you don't have time
to figure everything
out on your own.
The wisdom of the past
was hard-earned
and your dead ancestors
may have something
useful to tell you.
Don't blame capitalism,
the radical left,
or the iniquity
of your enemies.
Don't reorganize
the state
until you have ordered
your own experience.
Have some humility.
If you cannot bring
peace to your household,
how dare you
try to rule a city?
Let your own soul
guide you.
Watch what happens
over the days and weeks.
When you are at work,
you will begin to say
what you really think.
You will start to tell
your wife,
or your husband,
or your children,
or your parents,
what you really want
and need.
When you know
that you have left
something undone,
you will act
to correct the omission.
Your head will start
to clear up
as you stop
filling it with lies.
Your experience
will improve
as you stop
distorting it
with inauthentic actions.
You will then
begin to discover
new, more subtle
things that you
are doing wrong.
Stop doing those, too.
After some months
and years
of diligent effort,
your life will become
simpler and less complicated.
Your judgment
will improve.
You will untangle
your past.
You will become
stronger and less bitter.
You will move
more confidently
into the future.
You will stop
making your life
unnecessarily difficult.
You will then
be left
with the inevitable
bare tragedies
of life,
but they will
no longer be
compounded
with bitterness
and deceit.
Perhaps you will
discover that
your now
less corrupted soul,
much stronger
than it might
otherwise have been,
is now able
to bear those
remaining,
necessary,
minimal,
inescapable
tragedies.
Perhaps you will
even learn
to encounter them
so that they stay
tragic,
merely tragic,
instead of
degenerating
into outright
hellishness.
Maybe your anxiety
and hopelessness
and resentment
and anger,
however murderous
initially,
will recede.
Perhaps your
uncorrupted soul
will then see
its existence
as a genuine good,
as something
to celebrate,
even in the face
of your own
vulnerability.
Perhaps you will
become an ever
more powerful
force for peace
and whatever
is good.
Perhaps you will
then see that
if all people
did this
in their own
lives,
the world
might stop
being an evil
place.
After that,
with continued
effort,
perhaps it could
even stop
being a tragic
place.
Who knows
what existence
might be like
if we all
decided to
strive for the
best?
Who knows
what eternal
heavens might
be established
by our spirits,
purified by truth,
aiming skyward,
right here
on the fallen
earth.
Set your
house in
perfect order
before you
criticize the
world.
Rule 7.
Pursue what
is meaningful,
not what
is expedient.
Get while
the getting's
good.
Life is
suffering.
That's clear.
There is no
more basic
irrefutable
truth.
It's
basically
what God
tells Adam
and Eve
immediately
before he
kicks them
out of
paradise.
Unto the
woman he
said,
I will
greatly
multiply
thy sorrow
and thy
conception.
In sorrow
thou shalt
bring forth
children,
and thy
desire shall
be to thy
husband,
and he
shall rule
over thee.
And unto
Adam he
said,
Because thou
hast hearkened
unto the
voice of thy
wife,
and hast
eaten of
the tree
of which I
commanded
thee,
saying,
Thou shalt
not eat
of it.
Cursed
is the
ground
for thy
sake.
In
sorrow
shalt thou
eat of
it all
the days
of thy
life.
Thorns
also,
and thistles
shall it
bring forth
to thee,
and thou
shalt eat
the herb
of the
field.
By the
sweat of
your brow
you will
eat your
food until
you return
to the
ground,
since from
it you
were taken,
for dust
you are,
and to dust
you will
return.
Genesis 3
16-19
King James
Version
What in
the world
should be
done about
that?
The simplest,
most obvious,
and most
direct answer?
Pursue
pleasure.
Follow
your impulses.
Live for
the moment.
Do what's
expedient.
Lie,
cheat,
steal,
deceive,
manipulate,
but don't
get caught.
In an
ultimately
meaningless
universe,
what possible
difference
could it
make?
And this
is by no
means a
new idea.
The fact
of life's
tragedy and
the suffering
that is part
of it has
been used
to justify
the pursuit
of immediate
selfish
gratification
for a very
long time.
Short and
sorrowful is
our life,
and there is
no remedy
when a man
comes to
his end,
and no one
has been
known to
return from
Hades.
Because we
were born by
mere chance
and hereafter
we shall be
as though we
had never
been,
because the
breath in
our nostrils
is smoke,
and reason
is a spark
kindled by
the beating
of our
hearts.
When it
is extinguished,
the body
will turn
to ashes,
and the
spirit will
dissolve like
empty air.
Our name
will be
forgotten in
time,
and no one
will remember
our works.
Our life
will pass
away like
the traces
of a cloud,
and be
scattered like
mist that
is chased
by the rays
of the sun,
and overcome
by its heat.
For our
allotted
time is
the passing
of a shadow,
and there
is no return
from our
death,
because it
is sealed
up and
no one
turns back.
Come,
therefore,
let us
enjoy the
good things
that exist,
and make
use of the
creation to
the full,
as in
youth.
Let us
take our
fill of
costly wine
and perfumes,
and let
no flower
of spring
pass by
us.
Let us
crown ourselves
with rosebuds
before they
wither.
Let none
of us
fail to
share in
our revelry.
Everywhere let
us leave
signs of
enjoyment,
because this
is our
portion,
and this
our lot.
Let us
oppress the
righteous
poor man.
Let us
not spare
the widow,
nor regard
the gray
hairs of
the aged.
But let
our might
be our
law of
right,
for what
is weak
proves itself
to be
useless.
Wisdom
2.1-11
Revised
Standard
Version
The
pleasure of
expediency
may be
fleeting,
but it's
pleasure
nonetheless,
and that's
something to
stack up
against the
terror and
pain of
existence.
Every man
for himself,
and the
devil take
the hindmost,
as the
old proverb
has it.
Why not
simply take
everything you
can get
whenever the
opportunity
arises?
Why not
determine to
live in
that manner?
Or is
there an
alternative,
more powerful
and more
compelling?
Our
ancestors
worked out
very
sophisticated
answers to
such questions,
but we still
don't understand
them very well.
This is because
they are in
large part
still implicit,
manifest primarily
in ritual and
myth, and as
of yet,
incompletely
articulated.
We act them
out and
represent them
in stories,
but we're not
yet wise enough
to formulate
them explicitly.
We're still
chimps in a
troop, or
wolves in a
pack.
We know
how to
behave.
We know
who's who
and why.
We've learned
that through
experience.
Our knowledge
has been
shaped by our
interaction with
others.
We've established
predictable
routines and
patterns of
behavior, but
we don't
really understand
them or know
where they
originated.
They've
evolved over
great expanses
of time.
No one was
formulating them
explicitly, at
least not in the
dimmest reaches of
the past, even
though we've been
telling each other
how to act
forever.
One day, however,
not so long ago,
we woke up.
We were already
doing, but we
started noticing
what we were
doing.
We started using
our bodies as
devices to
represent their
own actions.
We started
imitating and
dramatizing.
We invented
ritual.
We started
acting out our
own experiences.
Then we started
to tell stories.
We coded
our observations
of our own
drama in
these stories.
In this
manner, the
information that
was first only
embedded in our
behavior became
represented in
our stories.
But we
didn't, and
still don't,
understand what
it all means.
The biblical
narrative of
Paradise and
the Fall is
one such
story, fabricated
by our collective
imagination, working
over the
centuries.
It provides a
profound account
of the nature
of being and
points the way
to a mode of
conceptualization
and action well
matched to that
nature.
In the Garden of
Eden, prior to
the dawn of
self-consciousness,
so goes the
story, human
beings were
sinless.
Our primordial
parents, Adam
and Eve, walked
with God, then
tempted...
