This is Audible. Penguin Random House Canada Audio presents
Twelve Rules for Life, An Antidote to Chaos by Jordan B. Peterson. Read for you by the author.
Overture
This book has a short history and a long history. We'll begin with the short history.
In 2012, I started contributing to a website called Quora. On Quora, anyone can ask a question
of any sort, and anyone can answer. Readers upvote those answers they like and downvote
those they don't. In this manner, the most useful answers rise to the top, while the others sink
into oblivion. I was curious about the site. I liked its free-for-all nature. The discussion
was often compelling, and it was interesting to see the diverse range of opinions generated
by the same question. When I was taking a break, or avoiding work, I often turned to Quora, looking
for questions to engage with. I considered, and eventually answered, such questions as,
what's the difference between being happy and being content? What things get better as you
age? And what makes life more meaningful? Quora tells you how many people have viewed
your answer, and how many upvotes you received. Thus, you can determine your reach, and see
what people think of your ideas. Only a small minority of those who view an answer upvote it.
As of July 2017, as I write this, and five years after I addressed, what makes life more meaningful?
My answer to that question has received a relatively small audience, 14,000 views, and 133 upvotes,
while my response to the question about aging has been viewed by 7,200 people, and received 36 upvotes.
Not exactly home runs. However, it's to be expected. On such sites, most answers receive very little
attention, while a tiny minority become disproportionately popular. Soon after, I answered
another question. What are the most valuable things everyone should know? I wrote a list of rules or
maxims, some dead serious, some tongue-in-cheek. Be grateful in spite of your suffering. Do not do
things that you hate. Do not hide things in the fog, and so on. The Quora readers appeared pleased with
this list. They commented on and shared it. They said such things as, I'm definitely printing this
list out and keeping it as a reference. Simply phenomenal. And you win Quora. We can just close
the site now. Students at the University of Toronto, where I teach, came up to me and told me how much
they liked it. To date, my answer to what are the most valuable things has been viewed by 120,000 people
and been upvoted 2,300 times. Only a few hundred of the roughly 600,000 questions on Quora have cracked
the 2,000 upvote barrier. My procrastination-induced musings hit a nerve. I had written a 99.9 percentile
answer. It was not obvious to me when I wrote the list of rules for living that it was going to perform
so well. I'd put a fair bit of care into all the 60 or so answers I submitted in the few months
surrounding that post. Nonetheless, Quora provides market research at its finest. The respondents are
anonymous. They're disinterested, in the best sense. Their opinions are spontaneous and unbiased.
So, I paid attention to the results and thought about the reasons for that answer's disproportionate
success. Perhaps I struck the right balance between the familiar and the unfamiliar while
formulating the rules. Perhaps people were drawn to the structure that such rules imply.
Perhaps people just like lists. A few months earlier, in March of 2012, I had received an email
from a literary agent. She had heard me speak on CBC radio during a show entitled Just Say No to Happiness,
where I had criticized the idea that happiness was the proper goal for life.
Over the previous decades, I had read more than my share of dark books about the 20th century,
focusing particularly on Nazi Germany and the Soviet Union.
Alexander Solzhenitsyn, the great documenter of the slave labor camp horrors of the latter,
once wrote that the pitiful ideology holding that human beings are created for happiness was an
ideology done in by the first blow of the work assigner's cudgel. In a crisis, the inevitable
suffering that life entails can rapidly make a mockery of the idea that happiness is the proper
pursuit of the individual. On the radio show, I suggested instead that a deeper meaning was
required. I noted that the nature of such meaning was constantly represented in the great stories of
the past, and that it had more to do with developing character in the face of suffering than with
happiness. This is part of the long history of the present work. From 1985 until 1999, I worked for
about three hours a day on the only other book I have ever published, Maps of Meaning, The Architecture
of Belief. During that time, and in the years since, I also taught a course on the material in that book,
first at Harvard and now at the University of Toronto. In 2013, observing the rise of YouTube,
and because of the popularity of some work I had done with TVO, a Canadian public TV station,
I decided to film my university and public lectures and place them online. They attracted an increasingly
large audience, more than a million views by April 2016. The number of views has risen very dramatically
since then, up to 18 million as I write this, but that is in part because I became embroiled in a
political controversy that drew an inordinate amount of attention. That's another story. Maybe
even another book. I proposed in Maps of Meaning that the great myths and religious stories of the
past, particularly those derived from an earlier oral tradition, were moral in their intent rather
than descriptive. Thus, they did not concern themselves with what the world was, as a scientist might have
it, but with how a human being should act. I suggested that our ancestors portrayed the world
as a stage, a drama, instead of a place of objects. I described how I had come to believe that the
constituent elements of the world as drama were order and chaos, and not material things.
Order is where the people around you act according to well-understood social norms,
and remain predictable and cooperative. It's the world of social structure, explored territory,
and familiarity. The state of order is typically portrayed, symbolically, imaginatively, as masculine.
It's the wise king and the tyrant, forever bound together, as society is simultaneously structure
and oppression. Chaos, by contrast, is where, or when, something unexpected happens. Chaos emerges in
trivial form when you tell a joke at a party with people you think you know, and a silent and
embarrassing chill falls over the gathering. Chaos is what emerges more catastrophically when you
suddenly find yourself without employment, or are betrayed by a lover. As the antithesis of
symbolically masculine order, it's presented imaginatively as feminine. It's the new and unpredictable
suddenly emerging in the midst of the commonplace familiar. It's creation and destruction, the source
of new things and the destination of the dead, as nature, as opposed to culture, is simultaneously
birth and demise. Order and chaos are the yang and yin of the famous Taoist symbol, two serpents head to tail.
Order is the white, masculine serpent. Chaos, its black, feminine counterpart. The black dot in the white
and the white in the black indicate the possibility of transformation. Just when things seem secure, the
unknown can loom unexpectedly and large. Conversely, just when everything seems lost, new order can emerge from
catastrophe and chaos. For the Taoists, meaning is to be found on the border between the ever-entwined
pair. To walk that border is to stay on the path of life, the divine way. And that's much better than
happiness. The literary agent I referred to listened to the CBC radio broadcast where I discussed such
issues. It left her asking herself deeper questions. She emailed me, asking if I had considered writing a
book for a general audience. I had previously attempted to produce a more accessible version
of Maps of Meaning, which is a very dense book. But I found that the spirit was neither in me during
that attempt nor in the resultant manuscript. I think this was because I was imitating my former self
and my previous book, instead of occupying the place between order and chaos and producing something
new. I suggested that she watch four of the lectures I had done for a TVO program called Big Ideas on my
YouTube channel. I thought if she did that, we could have a more informed and thorough discussion about
what kind of topics I might address in a more publicly accessible book. She contacted me a few weeks
later after watching all four lectures and discussing them with a colleague. Her interest had been further
heightened as had her commitment to the project. That was promising and unexpected. I'm always surprised when
people respond positively to what I am saying, given its seriousness and strange nature. I'm amazed I've been
allowed, even encouraged, to teach what I taught first in Boston and now in Toronto. I've always thought if people
really noticed what I was teaching, there would be hell to pay. You can decide for yourself what truth there might be
in that concern after reading this book. She suggested that I write a guide of sorts to what a person needs
to live well, whatever that might mean. I thought immediately about my Quora list. I had in the meantime
written some further thoughts about some of the rules I had posted. People had responded positively toward
those new ideas as well. It seemed to me, therefore, that there might be a nice fit between the Quora list
and my new agent's ideas. So I sent her the list. She liked it. At about the same time, a friend and
former student of mine, the novelist and screenwriter Greg Hurwitz, was considering a new book, which would
become the best-selling thriller Orphan X. He liked the rules, too. He had Mia, the book's female lead,
post a selection of them, one by one, on her fridge, at points in the story where they seemed apropos.
That was another piece of evidence supporting my supposition of their attractiveness. I suggested
to my agent that I write a brief chapter on each of the rules. She agreed. So I wrote a book proposal
suggesting as much. When I started writing the actual chapters, however, they weren't at all brief.
I had much more to say about each rule than I originally envisioned. This was partly because I had
spent a very long time researching my first book, studying history, mythology, neuroscience,
psychoanalysis, child psychology, poetry, and large sections of the Bible. I read, and perhaps even
understood, much of Milton's Paradise Lost, Goethe's Faust, and Dante's Inferno. I integrated all of that
for better or worse, trying to address a perplexing problem, the reason or reasons for the nuclear
standoff of the Cold War. I couldn't understand how belief systems could be so important to people
that they were willing to risk the destruction of the world to protect them. I came to realize that
shared belief systems made people intelligible to one another, and that the systems weren't just
about belief. People who live by the same code are rendered mutually predictable to one another.
They act in keeping with each other's expectations and desires. They can cooperate. They can even
compete peacefully because everyone knows what to expect from everyone else. A shared belief system,
partly psychological, partly acted out, simplifies everyone, in their own eyes and in the eyes of
others. Shared beliefs simplify the world as well, because people who know what to expect from one
another can act together to tame the world. There is perhaps nothing more important than the maintenance
of this organization, this simplification. If it's threatened, the great ship of state rocks.
It isn't precisely that people will fight for what they believe. They will fight instead to maintain
the match between what they believe, what they expect, and what they desire. They will fight to maintain
the match between what they expect and how everyone is acting. It is precisely the maintenance of that
match that enables everyone to live together peacefully, predictably, and productively. It reduces
uncertainty and the chaotic mix of intolerable emotions that uncertainty inevitably produces.
Imagine someone betrayed by a trusted lover. The sacred social contract obtaining between the two has
been violated. Actions speak louder than words, and an act of betrayal disrupts the fragile and carefully
negotiated peace of an intimate relationship. In the aftermath of disloyalty, people are seized by
terrible emotions. Disgust, contempt for self and traitor, guilt, anxiety, rage, and dread. Conflict is inevitable,
sometimes with deadly results. Shared belief systems. Shared systems of agreed upon conduct and expectation
regulate and control all those powerful forces. It's no wonder that people will fight to protect
something that saves them from being possessed by emotions of chaos and terror, and after that from
degeneration into strife and combat. There's more to it, too. A shared cultural system stabilizes human
interaction, but is also a system of value, a hierarchy of value, where some things are given
priority and importance, and others are not. In the absence of such a system of value, people simply
cannot act. In fact, they can't even perceive, because both action and perception require a goal,
and a valid goal is, by necessity, something valued. We experience much of our positive emotion in
relation to goals. We are not happy, technically speaking, unless we see ourselves progressing,
and the very idea of progression implies value. Worse yet is the fact that the meaning of life without
positive value is not simply neutral. Because we are vulnerable and mortal, pain and anxiety are an
integral part of human existence. We must have something to set against the suffering that is intrinsic to
being. We must have the meaning inherent in a profound system of value, or the horror of existence rapidly
becomes paramount. Then nihilism beckons with its hopelessness and despair. So, no value, no meaning.
Between value systems, however, there's the possibility of conflict. We are thus eternally caught between the
most diamantine rock and the hardest of places. Loss of group-centered belief renders life chaotic,
miserable, intolerable. Presence of group-centered belief makes conflict with other groups inevitable.
In the West, we have been withdrawing from our tradition, religion, and even nation-centered cultures,
partly to decrease the danger of group conflict. But we are increasingly falling prey to the desperation
of meaninglessness, and that is no improvement at all. While writing maps of meaning, I was also
driven by the realization that we can no longer afford conflict, certainly not on the scale of the
world conflagrations of the 20th century. Our technologies of destruction have become too powerful.
The potential consequences of war are literally apocalyptic. But we cannot simply abandon our systems
of value, our beliefs, our cultures, either. I agonized over this apparently intractable problem
for months. Was there a third way, invisible to me? I dreamt one night during this period that I was
suspended in mid-air, clinging to a chandelier many stories above the ground, directly under the dome of
a massive cathedral. The people on the floor below were distant and tiny. There was a great expanse
between me and any wall, and even the peak of the dome itself. I have learned to pay attention to
dreams, not least because of my training as a clinical psychologist. Dreams shed light on the
dim places where reason itself has yet to voyage. I have studied Christianity a fair bit, too, more than
other religious traditions, although I am always trying to redress this lack. Like others, therefore,
I must and do draw more from what I do know than from what I do not. I knew that cathedrals were
constructed in the shape of a cross, and that the point under the dome was the center of the cross.
I knew that the cross was simultaneously the point of greatest suffering, the point of death and
transformation, and the symbolic center of the world. That was not somewhere I wanted to be.
I managed to get down out of the heights, out of the symbolic sky, back to safe, familiar,
anonymous ground. I don't know how. Then, still in my dream, I returned to my bedroom and my bed,
and tried to return to sleep in the peace of unconsciousness. As I relaxed, however, I could
feel my body transported. A great wind was dissolving me, preparing to propel me back to the cathedral,
to place me once again at that central point. There was no escape. It was a true nightmare.
I forced myself awake. The curtains behind me were blowing in over my pillows. Half asleep,
I looked at the foot of the bed. I saw the great cathedral doors. I shook myself completely awake,
and they disappeared. My dream placed me at the center of being itself, and there was no escape.
It took me months to understand what this meant. During this time, I came to a more complete,
personal realization of what the great stories of the past continually insist upon. The center is
occupied by the individual. The center is marked by the cross, as X marks the spot. Existence at that
cross is suffering and transformation, and that fact, above all, needs to be voluntarily accepted.
It is possible to transcend slavish adherence to the group and its doctrines, and, simultaneously,
to avoid the pitfalls of its opposite extreme, nihilism. It is possible, instead, to find sufficient
meaning in individual consciousness and experience. How could the world be freed from the terrible
dilemma of conflict on the one hand, and psychological and social dissolution on the other? The answer was
this. Through the elevation and development of the individual, and through the willingness of
everyone to shoulder the burden of being and to take the heroic path, we must each adopt as much
responsibility as possible for individual life, society, and the world. We must each tell the truth
and repair what is in disrepair, and break down and recreate what is old and outdated. It is in this
manner that we can and must reduce the suffering that poisons the world. It's asking a lot. It's asking
for everything. But the alternative? The horror of authoritarian belief? The chaos of the collapsed
state? The tragic catastrophe of the unbridled natural world? The existential angst and weakness of
the purposeless individual? It's clearly worse. I have been thinking and lecturing about such ideas for
decades. I've built up a large corpus of stories and concepts pertaining to them. I'm not for a moment
claiming, however, that I am entirely correct or complete in my thinking. Being is far more complicated
than one person can know, and I don't have the whole story. I'm simply offering the best I can manage.
In any case, the consequence of all that previous research and thinking was the new essays, which
eventually became this book. My initial idea was to write a short essay on all 40 of the answers I
provided to Quora. That proposal was accepted by Penguin Random House Canada. While writing, however,
I cut the essay number to 25, and then to 16, and then finally to the current 12. I've been editing that
remainder with the help and care of my official editor, and with the vicious and horribly accurate
criticism of Hurwitz mentioned previously, for the past three years. It took a long time to settle
on a title, Twelve Rules for Life, an Antidote to Chaos. Why did that one rise up above all others?
First and foremost, because of its simplicity. It indicates clearly that people need ordering
principles, and that chaos otherwise beckons. We require rules, standards, values, alone and together.
We're pack animals, beasts of burden. We must bear a load to justify our miserable existence.
We require routine and tradition. That's order. Order can become excessive, and that's not good.
But chaos can swamp us, so we drown, and that is also not good. We need to stay on the straight and
narrow path. Each of the twelve rules of this book, and their accompanying essays, therefore provide a
guide to being there. There is the dividing line between order and chaos. That's where we are
simultaneously stable enough, exploring enough, transforming enough, repairing enough, and
cooperating enough. It's there we find the meaning that justifies life and its inevitable suffering.
Perhaps if we lived properly, we would be able to tolerate the weight of our own self-consciousness.
Perhaps if we lived properly, we could withstand the knowledge of our own fragility and mortality
without the sense of a grieved victimhood that produces first resentment, then envy, and then the
desire for vengeance and destruction. Perhaps if we lived properly, we wouldn't have to turn to
totalitarian certainty to shield ourselves from the knowledge of our own insufficiency and ignorance.
Perhaps we could come to avoid those pathways to hell, and we have seen in the terrible 20th century
just how real hell can be. I hope that these rules and their accompanying essays will help people
understand what they already know, that the soul of the individual eternally hungers for the heroism
of genuine being, and that the willingness to take on that responsibility is identical to the decision
to live a meaningful life. If we each live properly, we will collectively flourish.
Best wishes to you all as you proceed through this book.
Rule 1. Stand up straight with your shoulders back.
Lobsters and Territory. If you're like most people, you don't often think about lobsters,
unless you're eating one. However, these interesting and delicious crustaceans are very
much worth considering. Their nervous systems are comparatively simple, with large, easily
observable neurons, the magic cells of the brain. Because of this, scientists have been able to map the
neural circuitry of lobsters very accurately. This has helped us understand the structure and function
of the brain and behavior of more complex animals, including human beings. Lobsters have more in
common with you than you might think, particularly when you're feeling crabby. Ha ha.
Lobsters live on the ocean floor. They need a home base down there, a range within which they hunt
for prey and scavenge around for stray edible bits and pieces of whatever rains down from the continual
chaos of carnage and death far above. They want somewhere secure, where the hunting and the gathering is
good. They want a home. This can present a problem, since there are many lobsters.
What if two of them occupy the same territory, at the bottom of the ocean, at the same time,
and both want to live there? What if there are hundreds of lobsters, all trying to make a living
and raise a family in the same crowded patch of sand and refuse?
Other creatures have this problem, too. When songbirds come north in the spring, for example,
they engage in ferocious territorial disputes. The songs they sing, so peaceful and beautiful to
human ears, are siren calls and cries of domination. A brilliantly musical bird is a small warrior
proclaiming his sovereignty. Take the wren, for example, a small, feisty, insect-eating songbird
common in North America. A newly arrived wren wants a sheltered place to build a nest away from the wind
and rain. He wants it close to food and attractive to potential mates. He also wants to convince
competitors for that space to keep their distance. Birds and Territory
My dad and I designed a house for a wren family when I was ten years old. It looked like a Conestoga
wagon and had a front entrance about the size of a quarter. This made it a good house for wrens who
were tiny and not so good for other larger birds who couldn't get in. My elderly neighbour had a bird
house, too, which we built for her at the same time from an old rubber boot. It had an opening large
enough for a bird the size of a robin. She was looking forward to the day it was occupied.
A wren soon discovered our bird house and made himself at home there. We could hear his lengthy,
trilling song, repeated over and over during the early spring. Once he'd built his nest in the
covered wagon, however, our new avian tenant started carrying small sticks to our neighbour's nearby boot.
He packed it so full that no other bird, large or small, could possibly get in. Our neighbour was not
pleased by this pre-emptive strike, but there was nothing to be done about it. If we take it down,
said my dad, clean it up and put it back in the tree, the wren will just pack it full of sticks again.
Wrens are small and they're cute, but they're merciless. I had broken my leg skiing the previous
winter, first time down the hill, and had received some money from a school insurance policy designed to
reward unfortunate clumsy children. I purchased a cassette recorder, a high-tech novelty at the time,
with the proceeds. My dad suggested that I sit on the back lawn, record the wren's song, play it back,
and watch what happened. So I went out into the bright spring sunlight and taped a few minutes of
the wren laying furious claim to his territory with song. Then I let him hear his own voice.
That little bird, one-third the size of a sparrow, began to dive-bomb me and my cassette recorder,
swooping back and forth inches from the speaker. We saw a lot of that sort of behaviour,
even in the absence of the tape recorder. If a larger bird ever dared to sit and rest in any of
the trees near our birdhouse, there was a good chance he would get knocked off his perch by a
kamikaze wren. Now, wrens and lobsters are very different. Lobsters do not fly, sing, or perch in
trees. Wrens have feathers, not hard shells. Wrens can't breathe underwater and are seldom served with
butter. However, they are also similar in important ways. Both are obsessed with status and position,
for example, like a great many creatures. The Norwegian zoologist and comparative psychologist
Tudlef Sheldarup Ebba observed back in 1921 that even common barnyard chickens establish a pecking order.
The determination of who's who in the chicken world has important implications for each individual
bird's survival, particularly in times of scarcity. The birds that always have priority access to
whatever food is sprinkled out in the yard in the morning are the celebrity chickens. After them
come the second stringers, the hangers-on and wannabes. Then the third-rate chickens have their turn,
and so on, down to the bedraggled, partially feathered, and badly pecked wretches who occupy
the lowest untouchable stratum of the chicken hierarchy. Chickens, like suburbanites, live
communally. Songbirds such as wrens do not, but they still inhabit a dominance hierarchy. It's just
spread out over more territory. The wiliest, strongest, healthiest, and most fortunate birds occupy prime
territory and defend it. Because of this, they are more likely to attract high-quality mates and to hatch
chicks who survive and thrive. Protection from wind, rain, and predators, as well as easy access
to superior food, makes for a much less stressed existence. Territory matters, and there is little
difference between territorial rights and social status. It is often a matter of life and death.
If a contagious avian disease sweeps through a neighborhood of well-stratified songbirds,
it is the least dominant and most stressed birds, occupying the lowest rungs of the bird world,
who are most likely to sicken and die. This is equally true of human neighborhoods. When bird flu
viruses and other illnesses sweep across the planet, the poor and stressed always die first and in greater
numbers. They are also much more susceptible to non-infectious diseases such as cancer, diabetes,
and heart disease. When the aristocracy catches a cold, as it is said, the working class dies of
pneumonia. Because territory matters, and because the best locales are always in short supply,
territory seeking among animals produces conflict. Conflict, in turn, produces another problem. How to
win or lose without the disagreeing parties incurring too great a cost. This latter point is particularly
important. Imagine that two birds engage in a squabble about a desirable nesting area. The interaction can
easily degenerate into outright physical combat. Under such circumstances, one bird, usually the
largest, will eventually win. But even the victor may be hurt by the fight. That means a third bird, an
undamaged canny bystander can move in opportunistically and defeat the now crippled victor. That is not at all
a good deal for the first two birds. Conflict and territory. Over the millennia, animals who must cohabit
with others in the same territories have in consequence learned many tricks to establish dominance while
risking the least amount of possible damage. A defeated wolf, for example, will roll over on its back,
exposing its throat to the victor, who will then not deign to tear it out. The now dominant wolf may
still require a future hunting partner, after all, even one as pathetic as his now defeated foe.
Bearded dragons, remarkable social lizards, wave their front legs peaceably at one another to indicate
their wish for continued social harmony. Dolphins produce specialized sound pulses while hunting and
during other times of high excitement to reduce potential conflict among dominant and subordinate
group members. Such behavior is endemic in the community of living things. Lobsters, scuttling around
on the ocean floor, are no exception. If you catch a few dozen and transport them to a new location,
you can observe their status-forming rituals and techniques. Each lobster will first begin to
explore the new territory, partly to map its details and partly to find a good place for shelter.
Lobsters learn a lot about where they live and they remember what they learn. If you startle one near
its nest, it will quickly zip back and hide there. If you startle it some distance away, however,
it will immediately dart towards the nearest suitable shelter previously identified and now remembered.
A lobster needs a safe hiding place to rest, free from predators and the forces of nature.
Furthermore, as lobsters grow, they molt or shed their shells, which leaves them soft and vulnerable
for extended periods of time. A burrow under a rock makes a good lobster home, particularly if it is
located where shells and other detritus can be dragged into place to cover the entrance once the
lobster is snugly ensconced inside. However, there may be only a small number of high-quality shelters or
hiding places in each new territory. They're scarce and valuable. Other lobsters continually seek them out.
This means that lobsters often encounter one another when out exploring.
Researchers have demonstrated that even a lobster raised in isolation knows what to do when such a thing happens.
It has complex defensive and aggressive behaviors built right into its nervous system.
It begins to dance around like a boxer, opening and raising its claws, moving backward, forward and side to side,
mirroring its opponent, waving its opened claws back and forth. At the same time, it employs special jets
under its eyes to direct streams of liquid at its opponent. The liquid spray contains a mix of chemicals that
tell the other lobster about its size, sex, health and mood. Sometimes one lobster can tell immediately
from the display of claw size that it is much smaller than its opponent and will back down without a fight.
The chemical information exchange in the spray can have the same effect, convincing a less healthy or less
aggressive lobster to retreat. That's dispute resolution level one. If the two lobsters are very close in size and
apparent ability, however, or if the exchange of liquid has been insufficiently informative,
they will proceed to dispute resolution level two. With antennae whipping madly and claws folded downward,
one will advance and the other retreat. Then the defender will advance and the aggressor retreat.
After a couple of rounds of this behavior, the more nervous of the lobsters may feel that continuing
is not in his best interest. He will flick his tail reflexively, dart backwards and vanish to try his
luck elsewhere. If neither blinks, however, the lobsters move to level three, which involves genuine combat.
This time the now enraged lobsters come at each other viciously with their claws extended to grapple.
Each tries to flip the other on its back. A successfully flipped lobster will conclude
that its opponent is capable of inflicting serious damage, generally gives up and leaves,
although it harbors intense resentment and gossips endlessly about the victor behind its back.
If neither can overturn the other, or if one will not quit despite being flipped, the lobsters move to level
four. Doing so involves extreme risk and is not something to be engaged in without forethought.
One or both lobsters will emerge damaged from the ensuing fray, perhaps fatally.
The animals advance on each other with increasing speed. Their claws are open so they can grab a
leg or antenna or an eye stalk or anything else exposed and vulnerable. Once a body part has been
successfully grabbed, the grabber will tail flick backwards sharply, with claw clamped firmly shut,
and try to tear it off. Disputes that have escalated to this point typically create a clear winner and
loser. The loser is unlikely to survive, particularly if he or she remains in the territory occupied by the
winner, now a mortal enemy. In the aftermath of a losing battle, regardless of how aggressively a lobster
has behaved, it becomes unwilling to fight further, even against another previously defeated opponent.
A vanquished competitor loses confidence, sometimes for days. Sometimes the defeat can have even more
severe consequences. If a dominant lobster is badly defeated, its brain basically dissolves.
Then it grows a new subordinate's brain, one more appropriate to its new lowly position.
Its original brain just isn't sophisticated enough to manage the transformation from king to bottom
dog without virtually complete dissolution and regrowth. Anyone who has experienced a painful
transformation after a serious defeat in romance or career may feel some sense of kinship with the
once successful crustacean. The neurochemistry of defeat and victory.
A lobster loser's brain chemistry differs importantly from that of a lobster winner.
This is reflected in their relative postures. Whether a lobster is confident or cringing depends on the
ratio of two chemicals that modulate communication between lobster neurons, serotonin and octopamine.
Winning increases the ratio of the former to the latter. A lobster with high levels of serotonin and low
levels of octopamine is a cocky, strutting sort of shellfish, much less likely to back down when challenged.
This is because serotonin helps regulate postural flexion. A flexed lobster extends its appendages so that
it can look tall and dangerous, like Clint Eastwood in a spaghetti western. When a lobster that has just
lost a battle is exposed to serotonin, it will stretch itself out, advance even on former victors, and fight
longer and harder. The drugs prescribed to depressed human beings, which are selective serotonin reuptake
inhibitors, have much the same chemical and behavioral effect. In one of the more staggering demonstrations of the
evolutionary continuity of life on Earth, Prozac even cheers up lobsters.
High serotonin, low octopamine characterizes the victor. The opposite neurochemical configuration, a high ratio of
octopamine to serotonin, produces a defeated looking, scrunched up, inhibited, drooping, skulking sort of lobster,
very likely to hang around street corners and to vanish at the first hint of trouble.
Serotonin and octopamine also regulate the tail flick reflex, which serves to propel a lobster rapidly
backwards when it needs to escape. Less provocation is necessary to trigger that reflex in a defeated
lobster. You can see an echo of that in the heightened startle reflex characteristic of the
soldier or battered child with post-traumatic stress disorder.
The Principle of Unequal Distribution
When a defeated lobster regains its courage and dares to fight again, it is more likely to lose
again than you would predict statistically from a telly of its previous fights. Its victorious
opponent, on the other hand, is more likely to win. It's winner-take-all in the lobster world,
just as it is in human societies, where the top 1% have as much loot as the bottom 50%,
and where the richest 85 people have as much as the bottom 3.5 billion.
That same brutal principle of unequal distribution applies outside the financial domain,
indeed, anywhere that creative production is required. The majority of scientific papers are
published by a very small group of scientists. A tiny proportion of musicians produces almost all
the recorded commercial music. Just a handful of authors sell all the books. A million and a half
separately titled books sell each year in the US. However, only 500 of these sell more than a hundred
thousand copies. Similarly, just four classical composers, Bach, Beethoven, Mozart and Tchaikovsky,
wrote almost all the music played by modern orchestras. Bach, for his part, composed so prolifically that it
would take decades of work merely to hand-copy his scores. Yet only a small fraction of this prodigious
output is commonly performed. The same thing applies to the output of the other three members of this group
of hyper-dominant composers. Only a small fraction of their work is still widely played. Thus, a small
fraction of the music composed by a small fraction of all the classical composers who have ever composed,
makes up almost all the classical music that the world knows and loves.
This principle is sometimes known as Price's Law, after Derek J. DeSoya Price,
the researcher who discovered its application in science in 1963.
It can be modeled using an approximately L-shaped graph, with number of people on the vertical axis,
and productivity or resources on the horizontal. The basic principle had been discovered much earlier.
Valfredo Pareto, 1848 to 1923, an Italian polymath, noticed its applicability to wealth
distribution in the early 20th century, and it appears true for every society ever studied, regardless of
governmental form. It also applies to the population of cities, a very small number have almost all the
people, the mass of heavenly bodies, a very small number hoard all the matter, and the frequency of
words in a language. Ninety percent of communication occurs using just five hundred words, among many other
things. Sometimes it is known as the Matthew Principle, Matthew 25 29, derived from what might be the
harshest statement ever attributed to Christ. To those who have everything, more will be given.
From those who have nothing, everything will be taken. You truly know you are the Son of God,
when your dicta apply even to crustaceans. Back to the fractious shellfish. It doesn't take that long
before lobsters, testing each other out, learn who can be messed with, and who should be given a wide
berth. And once they have learned, the resultant hierarchy is exceedingly stable. All a victor needs
to do, once he is one, is wiggle his antennae in a threatening manner, and a previous opponent will
vanish in a puff of sand before him. A weaker lobster will quit trying, accept his lowly status, and keep his
legs attached to his body. The top lobster, by contrast, occupying the best shelter, getting some
good rest, finishing a good meal, parades his dominance around his territory, rousting subordinate
lobsters from their shelters at night, just to remind them who's their daddy.
All the Girls
The female lobsters, who also fight hard for territory during the explicitly maternal stages of their
existence, identify the top guy quickly, and become irresistibly attracted to him.
This is brilliant strategy, in my estimation. It's also one used by females of many different
species, including humans. Instead of undertaking the computationally difficult task of identifying
the best man, the females outsource the problem to the machine-like calculations of the dominance hierarchy.
They let the males fight it out, and peel their paramours from the top. This is very much what
happens with stock market pricing, where the value of any particular enterprise is determined through
the competition of all. When the females are ready to shed their shells and soften up a bit, they become
interested in mating. They start hanging around the dominant lobster's pad, spraying attractive scents and
aphrodisiacs towards him, trying to seduce him. His aggression has made him successful, so he's likely to
react in a dominant, irritable manner. Furthermore, he's large, healthy, and powerful. It's no easy task to
switch his attention from fighting to mating. If properly charmed, however, he will change his behaviour
towards the female. This is the lobster equivalent of Fifty Shades of Grey, the fastest-selling paperback of all
time, and the eternal beauty and the beast plot of archetypal romance. This is the pattern of behaviour
continually represented in the sexually explicit literary fantasies that are as popular among women
as provocative images of naked women are among men. It should be pointed out, however, that sheer
physical power is an unstable basis on which to found lasting dominance, as the Dutch primatologist
Franz Duval has taken pains to demonstrate. Among the chimp troops he studied, males who were successful
in the longer term had to buttress their physical prowess with more sophisticated attributes. Even the
most brutal chimp despot can be taken down, after all, by two opponents, each three quarters as mean.
In consequence, males who stay on top longer are those who form reciprocal coalitions with their lower
status compatriots, and who pay careful attention to the troops' females and their infants. The
political ploy of baby kissing is literally millions of years old. But lobsters are still comparatively
primitive, so the bare plot elements of beast and beauty suffice for them. Once the beast has been
successfully charmed, the successful female, lobster, will disrobe, shedding her shell, making herself
dangerously soft, vulnerable, and ready to mate. At the right moment, the male, now converted into a
careful lover, deposits a packet of sperm into the appropriate receptacle. Afterward, the female hangs
around and hardens up for a couple of weeks, another phenomenon not entirely unknown among human beings.
At her leisure, she returns to her own domicile, laden with fertilized eggs. At this point,
another female will attempt the same thing, and so on. The dominant male, with his upright and confident
posture, not only gets the prime real estate and easiest access to the best hunting grounds, he also
gets all the girls. It is exponentially more worthwhile to be successful if you are a lobster and male.
Why is all this relevant? For an amazing number of reasons apart from those that are comically obvious.
First, we know that lobsters have been around in one form or another for more than 350 million years.
This is a very long time. 65 million years ago there were still dinosaurs.
That is the unimaginably distant past to us. To the lobsters, however, dinosaurs were the nouveau riche,
who appeared and disappeared in the flow of near eternal time. This means that dominance
hierarchies have been an essentially permanent feature of the environment to which all complex
life has adapted. A third of a billion years ago, brains and nervous systems were comparatively simple.
Nonetheless, they already had the structure and neurochemistry necessary to process information
about status and society. The importance of this fact can hardly be overstated.
The nature of nature. It is a truism of biology that evolution is conservative. When something evolves,
it must build upon what nature has already produced. New features may be added and old features may undergo
some alteration, but most things remain the same. It is for this reason that the wings of bats,
the hands of human beings and the fins of whales look astonishingly alike in their skeletal form.
They even have the same number of bones. Evolution laid down the cornerstones for basic physiology long ago.
Now evolution works in large part through variation and natural selection.
Variation exists for many reasons, including gene shuffling, to put it simply, and random mutation.
Individuals vary within a species for such reasons. Nature chooses from among them across time.
That theory, as stated, appears to account for the continual alteration of life forms over the eons.
But there's an additional question lurking under the surface. What exactly is the nature in natural
selection? What exactly is the environment to which animals adapt? We make many assumptions about nature,
about the environment, and these have consequences. Mark Twain once said,
it's not what we don't know that gets us in trouble. It's what we know for sure that just ain't so.
First, it is easy to assume that nature is something with a nature, something static. But it's not,
at least not in any simple sense. It's static and dynamic at the same time. The environment,
the nature that selects, itself transforms. The famous yin and yang symbols of the Taoists capture
this beautifully. Being, for the Taoists, reality itself, is composed of two opposing principles,
often translated as feminine and masculine, or even more narrowly, as female and male. However,
yin and yang are more accurately understood as chaos and order. The Taoist symbol is a circle enclosing
twin serpents, head to tail. The black serpent, chaos, has a white dot in its head. The white
serpent, order, has a black dot in its head. This is because chaos and order are interchangeable,
as well as eternally juxtaposed. There is nothing so certain that it cannot vary. Even the sun itself
has its cycles of instability. Likewise, there is nothing so mutable that it cannot be fixed. Every
revolution produces a new order. Every death is simultaneously a metamorphosis.
Considering nature as purely static produces serious errors of apprehension.
Nature selects. The idea of selects contains implicitly nested within it the idea of fitness.
It is fitness that is selected. Fitness, roughly speaking, is the probability that a given organism
will leave offspring or will propagate its genes through time. The fit in fitness is therefore the
matching of organismal attribute to environmental demand. If that demand is conceptualized as static,
if nature is conceptualized as eternal and unchanging, then evolution is a never-ending
series of linear improvements, and fitness is something that can be ever more closely approximated
across time. The still powerful Victorian idea of evolutionary progress, with man at the pinnacle,
is a partial consequence of this model of nature. It produces the erroneous notion that there is a
destination of natural selection, increasing fitness to the environment, and that it can be conceptualized
as a fixed point. But nature, the selecting agent, is not a static selector, not in any simple sense.
Nature dresses differently for each occasion. Nature varies, like a musical score, and that in part
explains why music produces its deep intimations of meaning. As the environment supporting a species
transforms and changes, the features that make a given individual successful in surviving and reproducing
also transform and change. Thus, the theory of natural selection does not posit creatures matching
themselves ever more precisely to a template specified by the world. It is more that creatures are in a
dance with nature, albeit one that is deadly. In my kingdom, as the Red Queen tells Alice in Wonderland,
you have to run as fast as you can just to stay in the same place. No one standing still can triumph,
no matter how well constituted. Nature is not simply dynamic, either. Some things change quickly,
but they are nested within other things that change less quickly. Music frequently models this, too.
Leaves change more quickly than trees, and trees more quickly than forests. Weather changes faster than climate.
If it wasn't this way, then the conservatism of evolution would not work, as the basic morphology
of arms and hands would have to change as fast as the length of arm bones and the function of fingers.
It's chaos, within order, within chaos, within higher order. The order that is most real is the order
that is most unchanging, and that is not necessarily the order that is most easily seen. The leaf, when
perceived, might blind the observer to the tree. The tree can blind him to the forest. And some things
that are most real, such as the ever-present dominance hierarchy, cannot be seen at all.
It is also a mistake to conceptualize nature romantically.
Rich, modern city-dwellers, surrounded by hot, baking concrete, imagine the environment as something
pristine and paradisal, like a French Impressionist landscape. Eco-activists, even more idealistic in
their viewpoint, envision nature as harmoniously balanced and perfect, absent the disruptions and
depredations of mankind. Unfortunately, the environment is also elephantiasis and guinea worms. Don't ask.
Anopheles, mosquitoes and malaria, starvation-level droughts, AIDS and the Black Plague. We don't
fantasize about the beauty of these aspects of nature, although they are just as real as their
Edenic counterparts. It is because of the existence of such things, of course, that we attempt to modify
our surroundings, protecting our children, building cities and transportation systems, and growing food
in generating power. If Mother Nature wasn't so hell-bent on our destruction, it would be easier for us to
exist in simple harmony with her dictates. And this brings us to a third erroneous concept, that nature is
something strictly segregated from the cultural constructs that have emerged within it. The order within the
chaos and order of being is all the more natural, the longer it has lasted. This is because nature is
what selects, and the longer a feature has existed, the more time it has had to be selected and to shape
life. It does not matter whether that feature is physical and biological or social and cultural.
All that matters from a Darwinian perspective is permanence. And the dominance hierarchy,
however social or cultural it might appear, has been around for some half a billion years.
It's permanent. It's real. The dominance hierarchy is not capitalism. It's not communism either,
for that matter. It's not the military-industrial complex. It's not the patriarchy, that disposable,
malleable, arbitrary cultural artifact. It's not even a human creation, not in the most profound sense.
It is instead a near eternal aspect of the environment. And much of what is blamed on these
more ephemeral manifestations is a consequence of its unchanging existence. We, the sovereign we,
the we that has been around since the beginning of life, have lived in a dominance hierarchy for a long,
long time. We were struggling for position before we had skin or hands or lungs or bones. There is
little more natural than culture. Dominance hierarchies are older than trees.
The part of our brain that keeps track of our position in the dominance hierarchy is therefore
exceptionally ancient and fundamental. It is a master control system, modulating our perceptions,
values, emotions, thoughts, and actions. It powerfully affects every aspect of our being,
conscious and unconscious alike. This is why, when we are defeated, we act very much like lobsters who
have lost a fight. Our posture droops. We face the ground. We feel threatened, hurt, anxious, and weak.
If things do not improve, we become chronically depressed. Under such conditions, we can't easily
put up the kind of fight that life demands, and we become easy targets for harder-shelled bullies.
And it's not only the behavioral and experiential similarities that are striking. Much of the basic
neurochemistry is the same. Consider serotonin, the chemical that governs posture and escape in the
lobster. Low-ranking lobsters produce comparatively low levels of serotonin. This is also true of low-ranking
human beings. And those low levels decrease more with each defeat. Low serotonin means decreased
confidence. Low serotonin means more response to stress and costlier physical preparedness for
emergency, as anything whatsoever may happen at any time at the bottom of the dominance hierarchy,
and rarely something good. Low serotonin means less happiness, more pain and anxiety, more illness,
and a shorter lifespan, among humans, just as among crustaceans. Higher spots in the dominance hierarchy,
and the higher serotonin levels typical of those who inhabit them, are characterized by less illness,
misery, and death, even when factors such as absolute income or number of decaying food scraps
are held constant. The importance of this can hardly be overstated.
Top and bottom. There is an unspeakably primordial calculator deep within you, at the very foundation
of your brain, far below your thoughts and feelings. It monitors exactly where you are positioned in
society, on a scale of one to ten for the sake of argument. If you're a number one, the highest level
of status, you're an overwhelming success. If you're male, you have preferential access to the best places
to live and the highest quality food. People compete to do you favors. You have limitless opportunity for
romantic and sexual contact. You're a successful lobster, and the most desirable females line up
and vie for your attention. If you're female, you have access to many high-quality suitors. Tall, strong,
and symmetrical. Creative, reliable, honest, and generous. And like your dominant male counterpart,
you will compete ferociously, even pitilessly, to maintain or improve your position in the equally
competitive female mating hierarchy. Although you are less likely to use physical aggression to do so,
there are many effective verbal tricks and strategies at your disposal, including the
disparaging of opponents, and you may well be expert at their use. If you're a low-status ten,
by contrast, male or female, you have nowhere to live or nowhere good. Your food is terrible when you're
not going hungry. You're in poor physical and mental condition. You're of minimal romantic interest to
anyone unless they're as desperate as you. You're more likely to fall ill, age rapidly, and die young,
with few, if any, to mourn you. Even money itself may prove of little use. You won't know how to use it,
because it's difficult to use money properly, particularly if you are unfamiliar with it.
Money will make you liable to the dangerous temptations of drugs and alcohol, which are much
more rewarding if you've been deprived of pleasure for a long period. Money will also make you a target
for predators and psychopaths who thrive on exploiting those who exist on the lower rungs of society.
The bottom of the dominance hierarchy is a terrible, dangerous place to be.
The ancient part of your brain specialized for assessing dominance watches how you are treated by
other people. On that evidence, it renders a determination of your value and assigns you a
status. If you are judged by your peers as of little worth, the counter restricts serotonin availability.
That makes you much more physically and psychologically reactive to any circumstance or event that might
produce emotion, particularly if it is negative. You need that reactivity. Emergencies are common at the
bottom, and you must be ready to survive. Unfortunately, that physical hyper-response,
that constant alertness, burns up a lot of precious energy and physical resources.
This response is really what everyone calls stress, and it is by no means only or even primarily
psychological. It's a reflection of the genuine constraints of unfortunate circumstances.
When operating at the bottom, the ancient brain counter assumes that even the smallest unexpected
impediment might produce an uncontrollable chain of negative events, which will have to be handled
alone, as useful friends are rare indeed on society's fringes. You will therefore continually sacrifice
what you could otherwise physically store for the future, using it up on heightened readiness and the
possibility of immediate panicked action in the present. When you don't know what to do, you must be
prepared to do anything and everything, in case it becomes necessary. You're sitting in your car,
with the gas and brake pedals both punched to the mat. Too much of that and everything falls apart.
The ancient counter will even shut down your immune system, expending the energy and resources required
for future health now, during the crisis of the present. It will render you impulsive, so that you
will jump, for example, at any short-term mating opportunities or any possibilities of pleasure,
no matter how sub-par, disgraceful or illegal. It will leave you far more likely to live or die
carelessly for a rare opportunity at pleasure when it manifests itself. The physical demands of emergency
preparedness will wear you down in every way. If you have a high status, on the other hand, the counter's
cold, pre-reptilian mechanics assume that your niche is secure, productive and safe, and that you are well
buttressed with social support. It thinks the chance that something will damage you is low and can be
safely discounted. Change might be opportunity instead of disaster. The serotonin flows plentifully.
This renders you confident and calm, standing tall and straight, and much less on constant alert.
Because your position is secure, the future is likely to be good for you. It's worthwhile to think
in the long term and plan for a better tomorrow. You don't need to grasp impulsively at whatever
crumbs come your way, because you can realistically expect good things to remain available. You can delay
gratification without foregoing it forever. You can afford to be a reliable and thoughtful citizen.
Malfunction
Sometimes, however, the counter-mechanism can go wrong. Erratic habits of sleeping and eating can
interfere with its function. Uncertainty can throw it for a loop. The body, with its various parts,
needs to function like a well-rehearsed orchestra. Every system must play its role properly, and at
exactly the right time, or noise and chaos ensue. It is for this reason that routine is so necessary.
The acts of life we repeat every day need to be automatized. They must be turned into stable and
reliable habits so they lose their complexity and gain predictability and simplicity. This can be
perceived most clearly in the case of small children, who are delightful and comical and playful when
their sleeping and eating schedules are stable, and horrible and whiny and nasty when they are not.
It is for such reasons that I always ask my clinical clients first about sleep. Do they wake up in the
morning at approximately the time the typical person wakes up and at the same time every day? If the answer
is no, fixing that is the first thing I recommend. It doesn't matter so much if they go to bed at the
same time each evening, but waking up at a consistent hour is a necessity. Anxiety and depression cannot be
easily treated if the sufferer has unpredictable daily routines. The systems that mediate negative emotion
are tightly tied to the properly cyclical circadian rhythms. The next thing I ask about is breakfast.
I counsel my clients to eat a fat and protein heavy breakfast as soon as possible after they awaken.
No simple carbohydrates, no sugars, as they are digested too rapidly and produce a blood sugar spike
and rapid dip. This is because anxious and depressed people are already stressed, particularly if their
lives have not been under control for a good while. Their bodies are therefore primed to hypersecrete
insulin if they engage in any complex or demanding activity. If they do so after fasting all night and
before eating, the excess insulin in their bloodstream will mop up all their blood sugar. Then they become
hypoglycemic and psychophysiologically unstable. All day. Their systems cannot be reset until after more sleep.
I have had many clients whose anxiety was reduced to subclinical levels merely because they started to
sleep on a predictable schedule and eat breakfast. Other bad habits can also interfere with the counter's
accuracy. Sometimes this happens directly for poorly understood biological reasons and sometimes it happens
because those habits initiate a complex positive feedback loop. A positive feedback loop requires an input
detector, an amplifier, and some form of output. Imagine a signal picked up by the input detector, amplified,
and then emitted in amplified form. So far so good. The trouble starts when the input detector detects
that output and runs it through the system again, amplifying and emitting it again. A few rounds of
intensification and things get dangerously out of control. Most people have been subject to the deafening
howling of feedback at a concert when the sound system squeals painfully. The microphone sends a
signal to the speakers. The speakers emit the signal. The signal can be picked up by the microphone and sent
through the system again if it's too loud or too close to the speakers. The sound rapidly amplifies to unbearable
levels, sufficient to destroy the speakers if it continues. The same destructive loop happens within
people's lives. Much of the time when it happens we label it mental illness even though it's not only
or even at all occurring inside people's psyches. Addiction to alcohol or another mood-altering drug is a
common positive feedback process. Imagine a person who enjoys alcohol, perhaps a bit too much. He has a quick
three or four drinks. His blood alcohol level spikes sharply. This can be extremely exhilarating,
particularly for someone who has a genetic predisposition to alcoholism. But it only occurs
while blood alcohol levels are actively rising, and that only continues if the drinker keeps drinking.
When he stops, not only does his blood alcohol level plateau and then start to sink, but his body
begins to produce a variety of toxins as it metabolizes the ethanol already consumed. He also starts to
experience alcohol withdrawal as the anxiety systems that were suppressed during intoxication start to
hyper-respond. A hangover is alcohol withdrawal, which quite frequently kills withdrawing alcoholics,
and it starts all too soon after drinking ceases to continue the warm glow and stave off the unpleasant
aftermath. The drinker may just continue to drink until all the liquor in his house is consumed, the bars are closed, and his
money is spent. The next day the drinker wakes up badly hungover. So far this is just unfortunate.
The real trouble starts when he discovers that his hangover can be cured with a few more drinks the
morning after. Such a cure is, of course, temporary. It merely pushes the withdrawal symptoms a bit further
into the future, but that might be what is required in the short term if the misery is sufficiently acute.
So now he has learned to drink to cure his hangover. When the medication causes the disease, a positive
feedback loop is being established. Alcoholism can quickly emerge under such conditions.
Something similar often happens to people who develop an anxiety disorder such as agoraphobia.
People with agoraphobia can become so overwhelmed with fear that they will no longer leave their homes.
Agoraphobia is the consequence of a positive feedback loop. The first event that precipitates the
disorder is often a panic attack. The sufferer is typically a middle-aged woman who has been too
dependent on other people. Perhaps she went immediately from over-reliance on her father to a relationship
with an older and comparatively dominant boyfriend or husband with little or no break for independent
existence. In the weeks leading up to the emergence of her agoraphobia, such a woman typically experiences
something unexpected and anomalous. It might be something physiological, such as heart palpitations,
which are common in any case and whose likelihood is increased during menopause, when the hormonal
processes regulating a woman's psychological experience fluctuate unpredictably. Any perceptible alteration
in heart rate can trigger thoughts both of heart attack and an all-too-public and embarrassing display
of post-heart attack distress and suffering, death and social humiliation constituting the two most basic
fears. The unexpected occurrence might instead be conflict in the sufferer's marriage or the illness
or death of a spouse, might be a close friend's divorce or hospitalization. Some real event typically
precipitates the initial increase in fear of mortality and social judgment. After the shock, perhaps,
the pre-agoraphobic woman leaves her house and makes her way to the shopping mall. It's busy and difficult
to park. This makes her even more stressed. The thoughts of vulnerability occupying her mind since her recent
unpleasant experience rise close to the surface. They trigger anxiety. Her heart rate rises.
She begins to breathe shallowly and quickly.
She feels her heart racing and begins to wonder if she's suffering a heart attack.
This thought triggers more anxiety.
She breathes even more shallowly, increasing the levels of carbon dioxide in her blood.
Her heart rate increases again because of her additional fear. She detects that and her heart
rate rises again. Poof! Positive feedback loop. Soon the anxiety transforms into panic,
regulated by a different brain system designed for the severest of threats which can be triggered by too
much fear. She's overwhelmed by her symptoms and heads for the emergency room, where after an anxious
weight, her heart function is checked. There's nothing wrong. But she is not reassured.
It takes an additional feedback loop to transform even that unpleasant experience into full-blown agoraphobia.
The next time she needs to go to the mall, the pre-agoraphobic becomes anxious, remembering what
happened last time. But she goes anyway. On the way, she can feel her heart pounding. That triggers another
cycle of anxiety and concern. To forestall panic, she avoids the stress of the mall and returns home.
But now the anxiety systems in her brain note that she ran away from the mall and conclude that the
journey there was truly dangerous. Our anxiety systems are very practical. They assume that anything you
run away from is dangerous. The proof of that is, of course, the fact you ran away.
So now the mall is tagged, too dangerous to approach. Or the budding agoraphobic has labelled herself,
too fragile to approach the mall. Perhaps that is not yet taking things far enough to cause her real
trouble. There are other places to shop. But maybe the nearby supermarket is mall-like enough to trigger a
similar response when she visits it instead and then retreats. Now the supermarket occupies the same
category. Then it's the corner store. Then it's buses and taxis and subways. Soon it's everywhere. The
agoraphobic will even eventually become afraid of her house and would run away from that if she could.
But she can't. Soon she's stuck in her home. Anxiety induced retreat makes everything retreated from
more anxiety inducing. Anxiety induced retreat makes the self smaller and the ever more dangerous world
larger. There are many systems of interaction between brain, body and social world that can get caught in
positive feedback loops. Depressed people, for example, can start feeling useless and burdensome,
as well as grief-stricken and pained. This makes them withdraw from contact with friends and family.
Then the withdrawal makes them more lonesome and isolated and more likely to feel useless and
burdensome. Then they withdraw more. In this manner, depression spirals and amplifies.
If someone is badly hurt at some point in life, traumatized, the dominance counter can transform
in a manner that makes additional hurt more rather than less likely. This often happens in the case of
people, now adults, who were viciously bullied during childhood or adolescence. They become anxious
and easily upset. They shield themselves with a defensive crouch and avoid the direct eye contact
interpretable as a dominance challenge. This means that the damage caused by the bullying,
the lowering of status and confidence, can continue even after the bullying has ended.
In the simplest of cases, the formerly lowly persons have matured and moved to new and more successful
places in their lives. But they don't fully notice. Their now counterproductive physiological
adaptations to earlier reality remain, and they are more stressed and uncertain than is necessary.
In more complex cases, a habitual assumption of subordination renders the person more stressed
and uncertain than necessary, and their habitually submissive posturing continues to attract genuine
negative attention from one or more of the fewer and generally less successful bullies still extant in
the adult world. In such situations, the psychological consequence of the previous bullying increases the
likelihood of continued bullying in the present, even though, strictly speaking, it wouldn't have to
because of maturation or geographical relocation or continued education or improvement in objective status.
Rising up
Sometimes people are bullied because they can't fight back. This can happen to people who are weaker physically than
their opponents. This is one of the most common reasons for the bullying experienced by children.
Even the toughest of six-year-olds is no match for someone who is nine. A lot of that power differential
disappears in adulthood, however, with the rough stabilization and matching of physical size,
with the exception of that pertaining to men and women, with the former typically larger and stronger,
particularly in the upper body, as well as the increased penalties generally applied in adulthood
to those who insist upon continuing with physical intimidation. But just as often, people are bullied
because they won't fight back. This happens, not infrequently, to people who are by temperament
compassionate and self-sacrificing, particularly if they are also high in negative emotion and make a
lot of gratifying noises of suffering when someone sadistic confronts them. Children who cry more
easily, for example, are more frequently bullied. It also happens to people who have decided,
for one reason or another, that all forms of aggression, including even feelings of anger,
are morally wrong. I have seen people with a particularly acute sensitivity to petty tyranny
and over-aggressive competitiveness restrict within themselves all the emotions that might give rise
to such things. Often they are people whose fathers were excessively angry and controlling.
Psychological forces are never unidimensional in their value, however, and the truly appalling potential of
anger and aggression to produce cruelty and mayhem are balanced by the ability of those primordial
forces to push back against oppression, speak truth, and motivate resolute movement forward in times of
strife, uncertainty, and danger. With their capacity for aggression straight-jacketed within a too narrow morality,
those who are only or merely compassionate and self-sacrificing, and naive and exploitable,
cannot call forth the genuinely righteous and appropriately self-protective anger necessary to
defend themselves. If you can bite, you generally don't have to. When skillfully integrated, the ability
to respond with aggression and violence decreases rather than increases the probability that actual
aggression will become necessary. If you say no early in the cycle of oppression, and you mean what you say,
which means you state your refusal in no uncertain terms and stand behind it, then the scope for oppression
on the part of oppressor will remain properly bounded and limited. The forces of tyranny expand inexorably
to fill the space made available for their existence. People who refuse to muster appropriately
self-protective territorial responses are laid open to exploitation, as much as those who genuinely can't
stand up for their own rights because of a more essential inability or a true imbalance in power.
Naive, harmless people usually guide their perceptions and actions with a few simple axioms.
People are basically good. No one really wants to hurt anyone else. The threat, and certainly the use of
force, physical or otherwise, is wrong. These axioms collapse or worse in the presence of individuals who are
genuinely malevolent. Worse means that naive beliefs can become a positive invitation to abuse because
those who aim to harm have become specialized to prey on people who think precisely such things.
Under such conditions, the axioms of harmlessness must be retooled. In my clinical practice,
I often draw the attention of my clients who think that good people never become angry to the stark
realities of their own resentments. No one likes to be pushed around, but people often put up with it
for too long. So I get them to see their resentment first as anger, and then as an indication that
something needs to be said if not done. Not least because honesty demands it. Then I get them to see
such action as part of the force that holds tyranny at bay at the social level as much as the individual.
Many bureaucracies have petty authoritarians within them, generating unnecessary rules and procedures
simply to express and cement power. Such people produce powerful undercurrents of resentment around
them, which if expressed would limit their expression of pathological power. It is in this manner that the
willingness of the individual to stand up for him or herself protects everyone from the corruption of society.
When naive people discover the capacity for anger within themselves, they are shocked, sometimes severely.
A profound example of that can be found in the susceptibility of new soldiers to post-traumatic stress
disorder, which often occurs because of something they watch themselves doing, rather than because of
something that has happened to them. They react like the monsters they can truly be in extreme battlefield
conditions, and the revelation of that capacity undoes their world. And no wonder. Perhaps they assumed that
all of history's terrible perpetrators were people totally unlike themselves. Perhaps they were never
able to see within themselves the capacity for oppression and bullying, and perhaps not their capacity for
assertion and success as well. I have had clients who were terrified into literally years of daily hysterical
convulsions by the sheer look of malevolence on their attackers' faces. Such individuals typically
come from hyper-sheltered families, where nothing terrible is allowed to exist, and everything is fairyland
wonderful or else. When awakening occurs, when once-naive people recognize in themselves the seeds of evil
and monstrosity, and see themselves as dangerous, at least potentially, their fear decreases, they develop
more self-respect. Then, perhaps, they begin to resist oppression. They see that they have the ability to
withstand, because they are terrible too. They see they can and must stand up, because they begin to
understand how genuinely monstrous they will become otherwise, feeding on their resentment, transforming
it into the most destructive of wishes. To say it again, there is very little difference between the
capacity for mayhem and destruction, integrated, and strength of character. This is one of the most difficult
lessons of life. Maybe you are a loser, and maybe you're not. But if you are, you don't have to continue
in that mode. Maybe you just have a bad habit. Maybe you're even just a collection of bad habits.
Nonetheless, even if you came by your poor posture honestly, even if you were unpopular or bullied at
home or in grade school, it's not necessarily appropriate now. Circumstances change. If you slump
around with the same bearing that characterizes a defeated lobster, people will assign you a lower
status, and the old counter that you share with crustaceans, sitting at the very base of your brain,
will assign you a low dominance number. Then your brain will not produce as much serotonin.
This will make you less happy, and more anxious and sad, and more likely to back down when you should
stand up for yourself. It will also decrease the probability that you will get to live in a good
neighborhood, have access to the highest quality resources, and obtain a healthy, desirable mate.
It will render you more likely to abuse cocaine and alcohol as you live for the present in a world
full of uncertain futures. It will increase your susceptibility to heart disease, cancer, and dementia.
All in all, it's just not good. Circumstances change, and so can you. Positive feedback loops,
adding effect to effect, can spiral counter-productively in a negative direction,
but can also work to get you ahead. That's the other, far more optimistic lesson of Price's Law
and the Pareto distribution. Those who start to have will probably get more. Some of these upwardly moving
loops can occur in your own private subjective space. Alterations in body language offer an important
example. If you are asked by a researcher to move your facial muscles, one at a time, into a position
that would look sad to an observer, you will report feeling sadder. If you are asked to move the muscles
one by one into a position that looks happy, you will report feeling happier. Emotion is partly bodily
expression and can be amplified or dampened by that expression. Some of the positive feedback loops
instantiated by body language can occur beyond the private confines of subjective experience,
in the social space you share with other people. If your posture is poor, for example, if you slump,
shoulders forward and rounded, chest tucked in, head down, looking small, defeated, and ineffectual,
protected in theory against attack from behind, then you will feel small, defeated, and ineffectual.
The reactions of others will amplify that. People, like lobsters, size each other up, partly in
consequence of stance. If you present yourself as defeated, then people will react to you as if you
are losing. If you start to straighten up, then people will look at and treat you differently.
You might object. The bottom is real. Being at the bottom is equally real. A mere transformation of
posture is insufficient to change anything that fixed. If you're a number 10 position, then standing up
straight and appearing dominant might only attract the attention of those who want, once again, to put
you down. And fair enough. But standing up straight with your shoulders back is not something that is
only physical, because you're not only a body. You're a spirit, so to speak. A psyche, as well.
Standing up physically also implies and invokes and demands standing up metaphysically. Standing up means
you're a person who is voluntarily accepting the burden of being. Your nervous system responds in an
entirely different manner when you face the demands of life voluntarily. You respond to a challenge instead
of bracing for a catastrophe. You see the gold the dragon hoards instead of shrinking in terror from the
all-too-real fact of the dragon. You step forward to take your place in the dominance hierarchy and occupy
your territory. Manifesting your willingness to defend, expand and transform it. That can all occur
practically or symbolically, as a physical or as a conceptual restructuring. To stand up straight with
your shoulders back is to accept the terrible responsibility of life with eyes wide open. It means
deciding to voluntarily transform the chaos of potential into the realities of habitable order. It means
adopting the burden of self-conscious vulnerability and accepting the end of the unconscious paradise
of childhood where finitude and mortality are only dimly comprehended. It means willingly undertaking the
sacrifices necessary to generate a productive and meaningful reality. It means acting to please God in the
ancient language. To stand up straight with your shoulders back means building the ark that protects the
world from the flood, guiding your people through the desert after they have escaped tyranny, making
your way away from comfortable home and country, and speaking the prophetic word to those who ignore the
widows and children. It means shouldering the cross that marks the X, the place where you and being intersect
so terribly. It means casting dead, rigid, and too tyrannical order back into the chaos in which it was generated.
It means withstanding the ensuing uncertainty and establishing in consequence a better,
more meaningful, and more productive order. So attend carefully to your posture. Quit drooping and
hunching around. Speak your mind. Put your desires forward as if you had a right to them, at least the same right as
others. Walk tall and gaze forthrightly ahead. Dare to be dangerous. Encourage the serotonin to flow
plentifully through the neural pathways desperate for its calming influence. People, including yourself,
will start to assume that you are competent and able, or at least they will not immediately conclude the
reverse. Emboldened by the positive responses you are now receiving, you will begin to be less anxious.
You will then find it easier to pay attention to the subtle social clues that people exchange when
they are communicating. Your conversations will flow better, with fewer awkward pauses.
This will make you more likely to meet people, interact with them, and impress them. Doing so will not
only genuinely increase the probability that good things will happen to you, it will also make those
good things feel better when they do happen. Thus, strengthened and emboldened, you may choose to embrace
being and work for its furtherance and improvement. Thus, strengthened, you may be able to stand even
during the illness of a loved one, even during the death of a parent, and allow others to find strength
alongside you when they would otherwise be overwhelmed with despair. Thus, emboldened, you will embark on the
voyage of your life. Let your light shine, so to speak, on the heavenly hill and pursue your rightful
destiny. Then, the meaning of your life may be sufficient to keep the corrupting influence of
mortal despair at bay. Then, you may be able to accept the terrible burden of the world and find joy.
Look for your inspiration to the victorious lobster with its 350 million years of practical wisdom.
Stand up straight with your shoulders back.
Rule 2. Treat yourself like someone you are responsible for helping.
Why won't you just take your damn pills?
Imagine that a hundred people are prescribed a drug. Consider what happens next.
One third of them won't fill the prescription.
Half of the remaining 67 will fill it, but won't take the medication correctly.
They'll miss doses. They'll quit taking it early. They might not even take it at all.
Physicians and pharmacists tend to blame such patients for their non-compliance, inaction and error.
You can lead a horse to water, they reason. Psychologists tend to take a dim view of such judgments.
We are trained to assume that the failure of patients to follow professional advice is the
fault of the practitioner, not the patient. We believe the healthcare provider has a responsibility
to prefer advice that will be followed, offer interventions that will be respected, plan with the
patient or client until the desired result is achieved, and follow up to ensure that everything
is going correctly. This is just one of the many things that makes psychologists so wonderful.
Of course, we have the luxury of time with our clients, unlike other more beleaguered professionals
who wonder why sick people won't take their medication.
What's wrong with them? Don't they want to get better?
Here's something worse. Imagine that someone receives an organ transplant.
Imagine it's a kidney. A transplant typically occurs only after a long period of anxious waiting on the
part of the recipient. Only a minority of people donate organs when they die, and even fewer when
they are still alive. Only a small number of donated organs are a good match for any hopeful recipient.
This means that the typical kidney transplantee has been undergoing dialysis, the only alternative, for
years. Dialysis involves passing all the patient's blood out of his or her body through a machine and
back in. It's an unlikely and miraculous treatment, so that's all good, but it's not pleasant. It must happen
five to seven times a week for eight hours a time. It should happen every time the patient sleeps.
That's too much. No one wants to stay on dialysis.
Now, one of the complications of transplantation is rejection.
Your body does not like it when parts of someone else's body are stitched into it.
Your immune system will attack and destroy such foreign elements, even when they are crucial to your
survival. To stop this from happening, you must take anti-rejection drugs, which weaken immunity, increasing
your susceptibility to infectious disease. Most people are happy to accept the trade-off.
Recipients of transplants still suffer the effects of organ rejection, despite the existence and utility
of these drugs. It's not because the drugs fail, although they sometimes do. It's more often because
those prescribed the drugs do not take them. This beggars belief. It is seriously not good to have
your kidneys fail. Dialysis is no picnic. Transplantation surgery occurs after long waiting,
at high risk and great expense. To lose all that because you don't take your medication?
How could people do that to themselves? How could this possibly be?
It's complicated, to be fair. Many people who receive a transplanted organ are isolated or beset by
multiple physical health problems, to say nothing of problems associated with unemployment or family
crisis. They may be cognitively impaired or depressed. They may not entirely trust their doctor or
understand the necessity of the medication. Maybe they can barely afford the drugs and ration them,
desperately and unproductively. But, and this is the amazing thing, imagine that it isn't you who feels
sick. It's your dog. So you take him to the vet. The vet gives you a prescription. What happens then?
You have just as many reasons to distrust a vet as a doctor. Furthermore, if you cared so little for your
pet that you weren't concerned with what improper, substandard or error-ridden prescription he might be
given, you wouldn't have taken him to the vet in the first place. Thus, you care. Your actions prove it.
In fact, on average, you care more. People are better at filling and properly administrating
prescription medication to their pets than to themselves. That's not good. Even from your pet's
perspective, it's not good. Your pet probably loves you and would be happier if you took your medication.
It is difficult to conclude anything from this set of facts, except that people appear to love their
dogs, cats, ferrets and birds, and maybe even their lizards, more than themselves. How horrible is that?
How much shame must exist for something like that to be true? What could it be about people that makes
them prefer their pets to themselves? It was an ancient story in the book of Genesis, the first
book in the Old Testament, that helped me find an answer to that perplexing question.
The Oldest Story and the Nature of the World
Two stories of creation from two different Middle Eastern sources appear to be woven together in the
Genesis account. In the chronologically first, but historically more recent account, known as the
Priestly, God created the cosmos using his divine word, speaking light, water, and land into existence,
following that with the plants and the heavenly bodies. Then he created birds and animals and fish,
again employing speech, and ended with man, male and female, both somehow formed in his image.
That all happens in Genesis 1. In the second, older, Yahwist account, we find another origin
account, involving Adam and Eve, where the details of creation differ somewhat, as well as the stories
of Cain and Abel, Noah, and the Tower of Babel. That is Genesis 2 to 11. To understand Genesis 1,
the Priestly story, with its insistence on speech as the fundamental creative force,
it is first necessary to review a few fundamental, ancient assumptions. These are markedly different
in type and intent from the assumptions of science, which are, historically speaking, quite novel.
Scientific truths were made explicit a mere 500 years ago with the work of Francis Bacon,
Ren Descartes, and Isaac Newton. In whatever manner our forbearers viewed the world prior to that,
it was not through a scientific lens, any more than they could view the moon and the stars through the
glass lenses of the equally recent telescope. Because we are so scientific now, and so
determinedly materialistic, it is very difficult for us even to understand that other ways of seeing
can and can and do exist. But those who existed during the distant time in which the foundational
epics of our culture emerged were much more concerned with the actions that dictated survival,
and with interpreting the world in a manner commensurate with that goal, than with anything
approximating what we now understand as objective truth. Before the dawn of the scientific worldview,
reality was construed differently. Being was understood as a place of action.
