lowly positions, many of them are only tyrannical wannabes. It's the easiest path to choose,
moment to moment, although it's nothing but hell in the long run.
Imagine someone not doing well. He needs help. He might even want it. But it is not easy to
distinguish between someone truly wanting and needing help and someone who is merely exploiting
a willing helper. The distinction is difficult even for the person who is wanting and needing
and possibly exploiting. The person who tries and fails and is forgiven and then tries again and
fails and is forgiven is also too often the person who wants everyone to believe in the authenticity
of all that trying. When it's not just naivety, the attempt to rescue someone is often fueled by
vanity and narcissism. Something like this is detailed in the incomparable Russian author
Fyodor Dostoevsky's bitter classic, Notes from Underground, which begins with these famous lines,
I am a sick man. I am a spiteful man. I am an unattractive man. I believe my liver is diseased.
It is the confession of a miserable, arrogant sojourner in the underworld of chaos and despair.
He analyzes himself mercilessly, but only pays in this manner for a hundred sins, despite committing
a thousand. Then, imagining himself redeemed, the underground man commits the worst transgression
of the lot. He offers aid to a genuinely unfortunate person, Liza, a woman on the desperate 19th century
road to prostitution. He invites her for a visit, promising to set her life back on the proper course.
While waiting for her to appear, his fantasies spin increasingly messianic.
One day passed, however, another and another. She did not come, and I began to grow calmer.
I felt particularly bold and cheerful after nine o'clock. I even sometimes began dreaming,
and rather sweetly. I, for instance, became the salvation of Liza, simply through her coming to
me and my talking to her. I develop her, educate her. Finally, I notice that she loves me, loves me
passionately. I pretend not to understand. I don't know, however, why I pretend. Just for effect, perhaps.
At last, all confusion, transfigured, trembling and sobbing, she flings herself at my feet and says
that I am her savior and that she loves me better than anything in the world. Nothing but the
narcissism of the underground man is nourished by such fantasies. Liza herself is demolished by them.
The salvation he offers to her demands far more in the way of commitment and maturity than the
underground man is willing or able to offer. He simply does not have the character to see it through,
something he quickly realizes and equally quickly rationalizes. Liza eventually arrives at his shabby
apartment, hoping desperately for a way out, staking everything she has on the visit.
She tells the underground man that she wants to leave her current life. His response?
Why have you come to me? Tell me that. Please, I began, gasping for breath and regardless of logical
connection in my words. I longed to have it all out at once, at one burst. I did not even trouble how to
begin. Why have you come? Answer! Answer! I cried, hardly knowing what I was doing. I'll tell you,
my good girl, why you have come. You've come because I talked sentimental stuff to you then,
so now you're as soft as butter and longing for fine sentiments again. So you may as well know that
I was laughing at you then, and I'm laughing at you now. Why are you shuddering? Yes, I was laughing
at you. I had been insulted just before at dinner by the fellows who came that evening before me.
I came to you, meaning to thrash one of them, an officer. But I didn't succeed. I didn't find him.
I had to avenge the insult on someone to get back my own again. You turned up. I vented my spleen on
you and laughed at you. I had been humiliated, so I wanted to humiliate. I had been treated like a rag,
so I wanted to show my power. That's what it was. And you imagined I had come there on purpose to
save you? Yes, you imagined that? You imagined that? I knew that she would perhaps be muddled and
not take it all in exactly, but I knew too that she would grasp the gist of it very well indeed.
And so indeed she did. She turned white as a handkerchief, tried to say something,
and her lips worked painfully. But she sank on a chair as though she had been felled by an axe.
And all the time afterwards she listened to me with her lips parted and her eyes wide open,
shuddering with awful terror. The cynicism, the cynicism of my words overwhelmed her.
The inflated self-importance, carelessness, and sheer malevolence of the underground man
dashes Lysa's last hopes. He understands this well. Worse, something in him was aiming at this
all along, and he knows that too. But a villain who despairs of his villainy has not become a hero.
A hero is something positive, not just the absence of evil.
But Christ himself, you might object, befriended tax collectors and prostitutes.
How dare I cast dispersions on the motives of those who are trying to help?
But Christ was the archetypal perfect man. And you're you. How do you know that your
attempts to pull someone up won't instead bring them or you further down?
Imagine the case of someone supervising an exceptional team of workers,
all of them striving towards a collectively held goal. Imagine them hardworking, brilliant,
creative, and unified. But the person supervising is also responsible for someone
troubled, who's performing poorly, elsewhere. In a fit of inspiration, the well-meaning manager
moves that problematic person into the midst of his stellar team, hoping to improve him by example.
What happens? And the psychological literature is clear on this point.
Does the errant interloper immediately straighten up and fly right? No. Instead, the entire team
degenerates. The newcomer remains cynical, arrogant, and neurotic. He complains. He shirks. He misses
important meetings. His low-quality work causes delays and must be redone by others. He still gets
paid, however, just like his teammates. The hard workers who surround him start to feel betrayed.
Why am I breaking myself into pieces, striving to finish this project, each thinks,
when my new team member never breaks a sweat? The same thing happens when well-meaning counsellors
place a delinquent teen among comparatively civilized peers. The delinquency spreads, not the
stability. Down is a lot easier than up. Maybe you are saving someone because you're a strong,
generous, well-put-together person who wants to do the right thing. But it's also possible,
and perhaps more likely, that you just want to draw attention to your inexhaustible reserves of
compassion and goodwill. Or maybe you're saving someone because you want to convince yourself
that the strength of your character is more than just a side effect of your luck and birthplace.
Or maybe it's because it's easier to look virtuous when standing alongside someone utterly irresponsible.
Assume first that you're doing the easiest thing and not the most difficult.
Your raging alcoholism makes my binge drinking appear trivial. My long, serious talks with you
about your badly failing marriage convince both of us that you are doing everything possible and
that I am helping you to my utmost. It looks like effort. It looks like progress.
But real improvement would require far more from both of you.
Are you so sure the person crying out to be saved has not decided a thousand times to accept his lot
of pointless and worsening suffering simply because it is easier than shouldering any true responsibility?
Are you enabling a delusion? Is it possible that your contempt would be more salutary than your pity?
Or maybe you have no plan, genuine or otherwise, to rescue anybody.
You're associating with people who are bad for you, not because it's better for anyone,
but because it's easier. You know it. Your friends know it. You're all bound by an implicit contract,
one aimed at nihilism and failure and suffering of the stupidest sort. You've all decided to
sacrifice the future to the present. You don't talk about it. You don't all get together and say,
let's take the easier path. Let's indulge in whatever the moment might bring.
And let's agree further not to call each other on it. That way we can more easily forget what we are
doing. You don't mention any of that. But you all know what's really going on.
Before you help someone, you should find out why that person is in trouble.
You shouldn't merely assume that he or she is a noble victim of unjust circumstances and
exploitation. It's the most unlikely explanation, not the most probable. In my experience, clinical and
otherwise, it's just never been that simple. Besides, if you buy the story that everything
terrible just happened on its own with no personal responsibility on the part of the victim,
you deny that person all agency in the past, and by implication, in the present and future as well.
In this manner, you strip him or her of all power. It is far more likely that a given individual has
just decided to reject the path upward because of its difficulty. Perhaps that should even be your
default assumption when faced with such a situation. That's too harsh, you think. You might be right.
Maybe that's a step too far. But consider this. Failure is easy to understand. No explanation for
its existence is required. In the same manner, fear, hatred, addiction, promiscuity, betrayal, and
deception require no explanation. It's not the existence of vice or the indulgence in it that requires
explanation. Vice is easy. Failure is easy too. It's easier not to shoulder a burden. It's easier
not to think and not to do and not to care. It's easier to put off until tomorrow what needs to be
done today and drown the upcoming months and years in today's cheap pleasures. As the infamous father of
the Simpson clan puts it, immediately prior to downing a jar of mayonnaise and vodka, that's a problem for
future Homer. Man, I don't envy that guy. How do I know that your suffering is not the demand of
martyrdom for my resources so that you can oh so momentarily stave off the inevitable? Maybe you have
even moved beyond caring about the impending collapse, but don't yet want to admit it. Maybe my help won't
rectify anything. Can't rectify anything. But it does keep that too terrible, too personal realization
temporarily at bay. Maybe your misery is a demand placed on me so that I fail too, so that the gap you
so painfully feel between us can be reduced while you degenerate and sink. How do I know that you would
refuse to play such a game? How do I know that I am not myself merely pretending to be responsible
while pointlessly helping you so that I don't have to do something truly difficult and genuinely
possible? Maybe your misery is the weapon you brandish in your hatred for those who rose upward
while you waited and sank. Maybe your misery is your attempt to prove the world's injustice instead of the
evidence of your own sin, your own missing of the mark, your conscious refusal to strive and to live.
Maybe your willingness to suffer in failure is inexhaustible, given what you use that suffering
to prove. Maybe it's your revenge on being. How exactly should I befriend you when you're in such
a place? How exactly could I? Success. That's the mystery. Virtue. That's what's inexplicable.
To fail, you merely have to cultivate a few bad habits. You just have to bide your time.
And once someone has spent enough time cultivating bad habits and biding their time,
they're much diminished. Much of what they could have been has dissipated,
and much of the less that they have become is now real. Things fall apart of their own accord,
but the sins of men speed their degeneration. And then comes the flood.
I'm not saying that there's no hope of redemption. But it is much harder to extract someone from a
chasm than to lift them from a ditch. And some chasms are very deep, and there's not much left
of the body at the bottom. Maybe I should at least wait to help you until it's clear that you want to
be helped. Carl Rogers, the famous humanistic psychologist, believed it was impossible to
start a therapeutic relationship if the person seeking help did not want to improve.
Rogers believed it was impossible to convince someone to change for the better.
The desire to improve was instead the precondition for progress.
I've had court-mandated psychotherapy clients. They did not want my help. They were forced to
seek it. It did not work. It was a travesty.
If I stay in an unhealthy relationship with you, perhaps it's because I'm too weak-willed and
indecisive to leave. But I don't want to know it. Thus, I continue helping you and console myself
with my pointless martyrdom. Maybe I can then conclude about myself. Someone that self-sacrificing,
that willing to help someone, that has to be a good person. Not so. It might be just a person
trying to look good, pretending to solve what appears to be a difficult problem, instead of
actually being good and addressing something real. Maybe instead of continuing our friendship,
I should just go off somewhere, get my act together, and lead by example.
And none of this is a justification for abandoning those in real need to pursue your narrow,
blind ambition, in case it has to be said.
A Reciprocal Arrangement
Here's something to consider.
If you have a friend whose friendship you wouldn't recommend to your sister or your father
or your son, why would you have such a friend for yourself? You might say, out of loyalty.
Well, loyalty is not identical to stupidity. Loyalty must be negotiated fairly and honestly.
Friendship is a reciprocal arrangement. You are not morally obliged to support someone who is making
the world a worse place. Quite the opposite. You should choose people who want things to be better,
not worse. It's a good thing, not a selfish thing, to choose people who are good for you.
It's appropriate and praiseworthy to associate with people whose lives would be improved if they saw
your life improve. If you surround yourself with people who support your upward aim, they will not
tolerate your cynicism and destructiveness. They will instead encourage you when you do
good for yourself and others and punish you carefully when you do not. This will help bolster
your resolve to do what you should do in the most appropriate and careful manner. People who are not
aiming up will do the opposite. They will offer a former smoker a cigarette and a former alcoholic a
beer. They will become jealous when you succeed or do something pristine. They will withdraw their
presence or support or actively punish you for it. They will override your accomplishment
with a past action, real or imaginary, of their own. Maybe they are trying to test you, to see if
your resolve is real, to see if you are genuine. But mostly they are dragging you down because your
new improvements cast their faults in an even dimmer light. It is for this reason that every good
example is a fateful challenge and every hero a judge. Michelangelo's great perfect marble David
cries out to its observer, you could be more than you are. When you dare aspire upward, you reveal the
inadequacy of the present and the promise of the future. Then you disturb others in the depths of
their souls where they understand that their cynicism and immobility are unjustifiable.
You play able to their cane. You remind them that they ceased caring not because of life's horrors,
which are undeniable, but because they do not want to lift the world up onto their shoulders
where it belongs. Don't think that it's easier to surround yourself with good, healthy people than
with bad, unhealthy people. It's not. A good, healthy person isn't ideal. It requires strength and
daring to stand up near such a person. Have some humility. Have some courage. Use your judgment
and protect yourself from too uncritical compassion and pity. Make friends with people who want the best
for you. Rule four. Compare yourself to who you were yesterday, not to who someone else is today.
The internal critic. It was easier for people to be good at something when more of us lived in small,
rural communities. Someone could be homecoming queen. Someone else could be spelling bee champ,
math whiz or basketball star. There were only one or two mechanics and a couple of teachers.
In each of their domains, these local heroes had the opportunity to enjoy the serotonin-fueled
confidence of the victor. It may be for that reason that people who were born in small towns
are statistically over-represented among the eminent. If you're one in a million now, but originated in
modern New York, there's 20 of you, and most of us now live in cities. What's more, we've become
digitally connected to the entire seven billion. Our hierarchies of accomplishment are now dizzyingly
vertical. No matter how good you are at something or how you rank your accomplishments, there is someone
out there who makes you look incompetent. You're a decent guitar player, but you're not Jimmy Page or Jack
White. You're almost certainly not even going to rock your local pub. You're a good cook, but there
are many great chefs. Your mother's recipe for fish heads and rice, no matter how celebrated in her
village of origin, doesn't cut it in these days of grapefruit foam and scotch tobacco ice cream.
Some mafia don has a tackier yacht. Some obsessive CEO has a more complicated self-winding watch,
kept in his more valuable mechanical hardwood and steel automatic self-winding watch case.
Even the most stunning Hollywood actress eventually transforms into the evil queen
on eternal paranoid watch for the new Snow White. And you? Your career is boring and pointless.
Your housekeeping skills are second rate. Your taste is appalling. You're fatter than your friends.
And everyone dreads your parties. Who cares if you are Prime Minister of Canada when someone else
is the President of the United States? Inside us dwells a critical internal voice and spirit that
knows all this. It's predisposed to make its noisy case. It condemns our mediocre efforts.
It can be very difficult to quell. Worse, critics of its sort are necessary. There's no shortage of
tasteless artists, tuneless musicians, poisonous cooks, bureaucratically personality-disordered
middle managers, hack novelists, and tedious ideology-ridden professors. Things and people
differ importantly in their qualities. Awful music torments listeners everywhere. Poorly designed
buildings crumble in earthquakes. Substandard automobiles kill their drivers when they crash.
Failure is the price we pay for standards. And because mediocrity has consequences both real and
harsh standards are necessary. We are not equal in ability or outcome, and never will be.
A very small number of people produce very much of everything. The winners don't take all,
but they take most, and the bottom is not a good place to be. People are unhappy at the bottom.
They get sick there and remain unknown and unloved. They waste their lives there. They die there.
In consequence, the self-denigrating voice in the minds of people weaves a devastating tale.
Life is a zero-sum game. Worthlessness is the default condition. What but willful blindness could
possibly shelter people from such withering criticism? It is for such reasons that a whole
generation of social psychologists recommended positive illusions as the only reliable route to
mental health. Their credo? Let a lie be your umbrella. A more dismal, wretched, pessimistic
philosophy can hardly be imagined. Things are so terrible that only delusion can save you.
Here's an alternative approach, and one that requires no illusions. If the cards are always stacked
against you, perhaps the game you are playing is somehow rigged. Perhaps by you, unbeknownst to
yourself. If the internal voice makes you doubt the value of your endeavors, or your life, or life
itself, perhaps you should stop listening. If the critical voice within says the same denigrating
things about everyone, no matter how successful, how reliable can it be? Maybe its comments are chatter,
not wisdom. There will always be people better than you. That's a cliche of nihilism, like the phrase,
in a million years, who's going to know the difference? The proper response to that statement
is not, well then, everything is meaningless. It's, any idiot can choose a frame of time within which
nothing matters. Talking yourself into irrelevance is not a profound critique of being. It's a cheap trick
of the rational mind. Many good games. Standards of better or worse are not illusory or unnecessary.
If you hadn't decided that what you were doing right now was better than the alternatives,
you wouldn't be doing it. The idea of a value-free choice is a contradiction in terms.
Value judgments are a precondition for action. Furthermore, every activity, once chosen,
comes with its own internal standards of accomplishment, if something can be done at all,
it can be done better or worse. To do anything at all is, therefore, to play a game with a defined
and valued end, which can always be reached more or less efficiently and elegantly. Every game comes
with its chance of success or failure. Differentials in quality are omnipresent. Furthermore, if there was
no better and worse, nothing would be worth doing. There would be no value and, therefore, no meaning.
Why make an effort if it doesn't improve anything? Meaning itself requires the difference between
better and worse. How, then, can the voice of critical self-consciousness be stilled?
Where are the flaws in the apparently impeccable logic of its message?
We might start by considering the all-too-black-and-white words themselves,
success or failure. You are either a success, a comprehensive, singular, overall good thing,
or its opposite, a failure, a comprehensive, singular, irredeemably bad thing.
The words imply no alternative and no middle ground. However, in a world as complex as ours,
such generalizations, really such failure to differentiate, are a sign of naive, unsophisticated,
or even malevolent analysis. There are vital degrees and gradations of value obliterated by this
binary system, and the consequences are not good. To begin with, there's not just one game at which
to succeed or fail. There are many games, and more specifically, many good games. Games that match
your talents, involve you productively with other people, and sustain and even improve themselves
across time. Lawyer is a good game. So is plumber, physician, carpenter, or school teacher. The world
allows for many ways of being. If you don't succeed at one, you can try another. You can pick something
better match to your unique mix of strengths, weaknesses, and situation. Furthermore, if changing
games does not work, you can invent a new one. I recently watched a talent show featuring a mime
who taped his mouth shut and did something ridiculous with oven mitts. That was unexpected.
That was original. Seemed to be working for him.
It's also unlikely that you're playing only one game. You have a career, and friends, and family
members, and personal projects, and artistic endeavors, and athletic pursuits. You might consider
judging your success across all the games you play. Imagine that you're very good at some, middling at
others, and terrible at the remainder. Perhaps that's how it should be. You might object. I should be
winning at everything. But winning at everything might only mean that you're not doing anything new
or difficult. You might be winning, but you're not growing. And growing might be the most important
form of winning. Should victory in the present always take precedence over trajectory across time?
Finally, you might come to realize that the specifics of the many games you are playing are so unique to
you, so individual, that comparison to others is simply inappropriate. Perhaps you are overvaluing
what you don't have, and undervaluing what you do. There's some real utility in gratitude.
It's also good protection against the dangers of victimhood and resentment.
Your colleague outperforms you at work. His wife, however, is having an affair, while your marriage is
stable and happy. Who has it better? The celebrity you admire is a chronic drunk driver and bigot.
Is his life truly preferable to yours? When the internal critic puts you down using such comparisons,
here's how it operates. First, it selects a single arbitrary domain of comparison. Fame, maybe, or power.
Then it acts as if that domain is the only one that is relevant. Then it contrasts you unfavorably
with someone truly stellar within that domain. It can take that final step even further, using the
unbridgeable gap between you and its target of comparison as evidence for the fundamental injustice
of life. That way, your motivation to do anything at all can be most effectively undermined. Those who
accept such an approach to self-evaluation certainly can't be accused of making things too easy for
themselves. But it's just as big a problem to make things too difficult. When we are very young, we are
neither individual nor informed. We have not had the time nor gained the wisdom to develop our own
standards. In consequence, we must compare ourselves to others because standards are necessary. Without
them, there's nowhere to go and nothing to do. As we mature, we become, by contrast, increasingly individual
and unique. The conditions of our lives become more and more personal and less and less comparable with
those of others. Symbolically speaking, this means we must leave the house ruled by our father and
confront the chaos of our individual being. We must take note of our disarray without completely
abandoning that father in the process. We must then rediscover the values of our culture, veiled from
us by our ignorance, hidden in the dusty treasure trove of the past. Rescue them and integrate them
into our own lives. This is what gives existence its full and necessary meaning. Who are you? You think
you know, but maybe you don't. You are, for example, neither your own master nor your own slave. You cannot
easily tell yourself what to do and compel your own obedience any more than you can easily tell your
husband, wife, son or daughter what to do and compel theirs. You're interested in some things and not in
others. You can shape that interest. But there are limits. Some activities will always engage you and
others simply will not. You have a nature. You can play the tyrant to it, but you will certainly rebel.
How hard can you force yourself to work and sustain your desire to work? How much can you sacrifice to
your partner before generosity turns to resentment? What is it that you actually love? What is it that
you genuinely want? Before you can articulate your own standards of value, you must see yourself as a
stranger and then you must get to know yourself. What do you find valuable or pleasurable? How much
leisure, enjoyment and reward do you require so that you feel like more than a beast of burden? How must
you treat yourself so you won't kick over the traces and smash up your corral? You could force yourself
through your daily grind and kick your dog in frustration when you come home. You could watch
the precious days tick by. Or you could learn how to entice yourself into sustainable, productive
activity. Do you ask yourself what you want? Do you negotiate fairly with yourself? Or are you a tyrant
with yourself as slave? When do you dislike your parents, your spouse, or your children? And why?
What might be done about that? What do you need and want from your friends and your business partners?
This is not a mere matter of what you should want. I'm not talking about what other people require from
you or your duties to them. I'm talking about determining the nature of your moral obligation
to yourself. Should might enter into it, because you're nested within a network of social obligations.
Should is your responsibility, and you should live up to it. But this does not mean you must take the
role of lapdog, obedient and harmless. That's how a dictator wants his slaves.
Dare instead to be dangerous. Dare to be truthful. Dare to articulate yourself and express, or at least
become aware of, what would really justify your life. If you allowed your dark and unspoken desires
for your partner, for example, to manifest themselves, if you were even willing to consider
them, you might discover that they were not so dark given the light of day. You might discover instead
that you were just afraid, and so, pretending to be moral. You might find that getting what you
actually desire would stop you from being tempted and straying. Are you so sure that your partner
would be unhappy if more of you rose to the surface? The femme fatale and the anti-hero are sexually
attractive for a reason. How do you need to be spoken to? What do you need to take from people?
What are you putting up with, or pretending to like, from duty or obligation? Consult your
resentment. It's a revelatory emotion for all its pathology. It's part of an evil triad. Arrogance,
deceit, and resentment. Nothing causes more harm than this underworld trinity. But resentment always
means one of two things. Either the resentful person is immature, in which case he or she should
shut up, quit whining, and get on with it. Or there is tyranny afoot, in which case the person
subjugated has a moral obligation to speak up. Why? Because the consequence of remaining silent is
worse. Of course, it's easier in the moment to stay silent and avoid conflict. But in the long term,
that's deadly. When you have something to say, silence is a lie, and tyranny feeds on lies. When
should you push back against oppression, despite the danger? When you start nursing secret fantasies
of revenge. When your life is being poisoned, and your imagination fills with the wish to devour and
destroy. I had a client decades ago who suffered from severe obsessive-compulsive disorder.
He had to line up his pajamas just right before he could go to sleep at night. Then he had to fluff
his pillow. Then he had to adjust the bed sheets over and over and over and over. I said, maybe that
part of you, that insanely persistent part, wants something, inarticulate though it may be. Let it have
its say. What could it be? He said, control. I said, close your eyes and let it tell you what it wants.
Don't let fear stop you. You don't have to act it out just because you're thinking it. He said,
it wants me to take my stepfather by the collar, put him up against the door, and shake him like a rat.
Maybe it was time to shake someone like a rat, although I suggested something a bit less primal.
But God only knows what battles must be fought forthrightly, voluntarily, on the road to peace.
What do you do to avoid conflict, necessary though it may be? What are you inclined to lie about,
assuming that the truth might be intolerable? What do you fake?
The infant is dependent on his parents for almost everything he needs. The child, the successful
child, can leave his parents at least temporarily and make friends. He gives up a little of himself
to do that, but gains much in return. The successful adolescent must take that process to its logical
conclusion. He has to leave his parents and become like everyone else. He has to integrate with the
group so he can transcend his childhood dependency. Once integrated, the successful adult then must
learn how to be just the right amount different from everyone else. Be cautious when you're comparing
yourself to others. You're a singular being once you're an adult. You have your own particular,
specific problems, financial, intimate, psychological, and otherwise. Those are embedded in the unique,
broader context of your existence. Your career or job works for you in a personal manner, or it does
not, and it does so in a unique interplay with the other specifics of your life. You must decide how
much of your time to spend on this and how much on that. You must decide what to let go and what to pursue.
The point of our eyes, or take stock. Our eyes are always pointing at things we are interested in
approaching, or investigating, or looking for, or having. We must see, but to see, we must aim. So we are
always aiming. Our minds are built on the hunting and gathering platforms of our bodies. To hunt is to
specify a target, track it, and throw at it. To gather is to specify and to grasp. We fling stones
and spears and boomerangs. We toss balls through hoops and hit pucks into nets and curl carved granite
rocks down the ice onto horizontal bullseyes. We launch projectiles at targets with bows, guns, rifles,
and rockets. We hurl insults, launch plans, and pitch ideas. We succeed when we score a goal or hit a
target. We fail or sin when we do not, as the word sin means to miss the mark. We cannot navigate without
something to aim at, and while we are in this world, we must always navigate. We are always and
simultaneously at point A, which is less desirable than it could be, moving towards point B, which we
deem better in accordance with our explicit and implicit values. We always encounter the world in
a state of insufficiency and seek its correction. We can imagine new ways that things could be set
right and improved, even if we have everything we thought we needed. Even when satisfied temporarily,
we remain curious. We live within a framework that defines the present as eternally lacking
and the future as eternally better. If we did not see things this way, we would not act at all.
We wouldn't even be able to see, because to see we must focus, and to focus we must pick one thing
above all else on which to focus. But we can see. We can even see things that aren't there.
We can envision new ways that things could be better. We can construct new hypothetical worlds
where problems we weren't even aware of can now show themselves and be addressed. The advantages
of this are obvious. We can change the world so that the intolerable state of the present can be
rectified in the future. The disadvantage to all this foresight and creativity is chronic unease and
discomfort. Because we always contrast what is with what could be, we have to aim at what could be.
But we can aim too high, or too low, or too chaotically. So we fail and live in disappointment,
even when we appear to others to be living well. How can we benefit from our imaginativeness,
our ability to improve the future, without continually denigrating our current,
insufficiently successful and worthless lives? The first step, perhaps, is to take stock.
Who are you? When you buy a house and prepare to live in it, you hire an inspector to list all its
faults. As it is, in reality, now. Not as you wish it could be. You'll even pay them for the bad news.
You need to know. You need to discover the home's hidden flaws. You need to know whether they are
cosmetic imperfections or structural inadequacies. You need to know. Because you can't fix something
if you don't know it's broken. And you're broken. You need an inspector. The internal critic,
it could play that role. If you could get it on track. If you and it could cooperate. It could help
you take stock. But you must walk through your psychological house with it, and listen judiciously
to what it says. Maybe you're a handyman's dream, a real fixer-upper. How can you start your
renovations without being demoralized, even crushed, by your internal critic's lengthy and painful report
of your inadequacies? Here's a hint. The future is like the past. But there's a crucial difference.
The past is fixed. But the future? It could be better. It could be better some precise amount.
The amount that can be achieved, perhaps in a day, with some minimal engagement. The present
is eternally flawed. But where you start might not be as important as the direction you are heading.
Perhaps happiness is always to be found in the journey uphill, and not in the fleeting sense of
satisfaction awaiting at the next peak. Much of happiness is hope, no matter how deep the underworld
in which that hope was conceived. Called upon properly, the internal critic will suggest something
to set in order, which you could set in order, which you would set in order, voluntarily, without
resentment, even with pleasure. Ask yourself, is there one thing that exists in disarray in your life
for your situation that you could and would set straight? Could you, and would you, fix that one
thing that announces itself humbly in need of repair? Could you do it now? Imagine that you are someone
with whom you must negotiate. Imagine further that you're lazy, touchy, resentful, and hard to get along
with. With that attitude, it's not going to be easy to get you moving. You might have to use a little
charm and playfulness. Excuse me, you might say to yourself, without irony or sarcasm. I'm trying
to reduce some of the unnecessary suffering around here. I could use some help. Keep the derision at
bay. I'm wondering if there's anything that you would be willing to do. I'd be very grateful for
your service. Ask honestly and with humility. That's no simple matter. You might have to negotiate
further, depending on your state of mind. Maybe you don't trust yourself. You think that you'll ask
yourself for one thing, and having delivered, immediately demand more. And you'll be punitive
and hurtful about it, and you'll denigrate what was already offered. Who wants to work for a tyrant
like that? Not you. That's why you don't do what you want yourself to do. You're a bad employee,
but a worse boss. Maybe you need to say to yourself, okay, I know we haven't gotten along
very well in the past. Sorry about that. I'm trying to improve. I'll probably make some more
mistakes along the way, but I'll try to listen if you object. I'll try to learn. I noticed just now
today that you weren't really jumping at the opportunity to help when I asked, is there something
I could offer in return for your cooperation? Maybe if you did the dishes, we could go for
coffee. You like espresso. How about an espresso? Maybe a double shot. Or is there something else
you want? Then you could listen. Maybe you'll hear a voice inside. Maybe it's even the voice of a long
lost child. Maybe it will reply. Really? You really want to do something nice for me? You really do it?
It's not a trick? This is where you must be careful. That little voice, that's the voice of
someone once burnt and twice shy. So you could say very carefully, really, I might not do it very well
and I might not be great company, but I will do something nice for you. I promise. A little careful
kindness goes a long way. And judicious reward is a powerful motivator. Then you could take that small
bit of yourself by the hand and do the damn dishes. And then you better not go clean the bathroom and
forget about the coffee or the movie or the beer, or it will be even harder to call those forgotten
parts of yourself forth from the nooks and crannies of the underworld. You might ask yourself,
what could I say to someone else, my friend, my brother, my boss, my assistant, that would set
things a bit more right between us tomorrow? What bit of chaos might I eradicate at home, on my desk,
in my kitchen, tonight, so that the stage could be set for a better play? What snakes might I banish
from my closet? And my mind? Five hundred small decisions, five hundred tiny actions compose your day,
today and every day. Could you aim one or two of those at a better result? Better in your own private
opinion, by your own individual standards? Could you compare your specific personal tomorrow with your
specific personal yesterday? Could you use your own judgment and ask yourself what that better tomorrow
might be? Aim small. You don't want to shoulder too much to begin with, given your limited talents,
tendency to deceive, burden of resentment, and ability to shirk responsibility. Thus, you set the following
goal. By the end of the day, I want things in my life to be a tiny bit better than they were this
morning. Then you ask yourself, what could I do that I would do that would accomplish that? And what small
thing would I like is a reward? Then you do what you have decided to do, even if you do it badly.
Then you give yourself that damn coffee in triumph. Maybe you feel a bit stupid about it, but you do it
anyway. And you do the same thing tomorrow, and the next day, and the next. And with each day,
your baseline of comparison gets a little higher. And that's magic. That's compound interest.
Do that for three years, and your life will be entirely different. Now you're aiming for something
higher. Now you're wishing on a star. Now the beam is disappearing from your eye, and you're learning
to see. And what you aim at determines what you see. That's worth repeating. What you aim at determines
what you see. What you want, and what you see. The dependency of sight on aim, and therefore on value,
because you aim at what you value, was demonstrated unforgettably by the cognitive psychologist Daniel
Simons more than 15 years ago. Simons was investigating something called sustained
inattentional blindness. He would sit his research subjects in front of a video monitor and show them,
for example, a field of wheat. Then he would transform the photo slowly, secretly, while they
watched. He would slowly fade in a road cutting through the wheat. He didn't insert some little
easy-to-miss footpath either. It was a major trail, occupying a good third of the image. Remarkably,
the observers would frequently fail to take notice. The demonstration that made Dr. Simons famous
was of the same kind, but more dramatic, even unbelievable. First, he produced a video of two
teams of three people. One team was wearing white shirts, the other black. The two teams were not
off in the distance either, or in any way difficult to see. The six of them filled much of the video
screen, and their facial features were close enough to see clearly. Each team had its own ball,
which they bounced or threw to their other team members, as they moved and fainted in the small
space in front of the elevators where the game was filmed. Once Dan had his video, he showed it to his
study participants. He asked each of them to count the number of times the white shirts threw the ball
back and forth to one another. After a few minutes, his subjects were asked to report the number of
passes. Most answered, 15. That was the correct answer. Most felt pretty good about that. Ha! They
passed the test. But then Dr. Simons asked, Did you see the gorilla? Was this a joke? What gorilla?
So he said, Watch the video again. But this time, don't count. Sure enough, a minute or so in,
a man dressed in a gorilla suit waltzes right into the middle of the game for a few long seconds,
stops, and then beats his chest in the manner of stereotyped gorillas everywhere, right in the
middle of the screen. Large as life, painfully and irrefutably evident. But one out of every two of
his research subjects missed it the first time they saw the video. It gets worse. Dr. Simons did another
study. This time he showed his subjects a video of someone being served at a counter.
The server dips behind the counter to retrieve something and pops back up. So what? Most of
his participants don't detect anything amiss. But it was a different person who stood up in the
original server's place. No way, you think. I'd notice. But it's yes way. There's a high probability
you wouldn't detect the change, even if the gender or race of the person is switched at the
same time. You're blind too. This is partly because vision is expensive. Psychophysiologically
expensive. Neurologically expensive. Very little of your retina is high-resolution fovea, the very
central high-resolution part of the eye, used to do such things as identify faces. Each of the scarce
foveal cells needs 10,000 cells in the visual cortex merely to manage the first part of the
multi-stage process of seeing. Then each of those 10,000 requires 10,000 more just to get to stage 2.
If all your retina was fovea, you would require the skull of a B-movie alien to house your brain.
In consequence, we triage when we see. Most of our vision is peripheral and low-resolution.
We save the fovea for things of importance. We point our high-resolution capacities at the few
specific things we are aiming at. We let everything else, which is almost everything, fade unnoticed into
the background. If something you're not attending to pops its ugly head up in a manner that directly
interferes with your narrowly focused current activity, you will see it. Otherwise, it's just not
there. The ball on which Simon's research subjects were focused was never obscured by the gorilla or by
any of the six players. Because of that, because the gorilla did not interfere with the ongoing
narrowly defined task, it was indistinguishable from everything else the participants didn't see
when they were looking at the ball. The big ape could be safely ignored. That's how you deal with
the overwhelming complexity of the world. You ignore it, while you concentrate minutely on your
private concerns. You see things that facilitate your movement forward toward your desired goals.
You detect obstacles when they pop up in your path. You're blind to everything else, and there's a lot
of everything else, so you're very blind. And it has to be that way, because there is much more of the
world than there is of you. You must shepherd your limited resources carefully. Seeing is very
difficult, so you must choose what to see and let the rest go. There's a profound idea in the ancient
Vedic texts, the oldest scriptures of Hinduism and part of the bedrock of Indian culture. The world,
as perceived, is Maya, appearance or illusion. This means in part that people are blinded by their desires,
as well as merely incapable of seeing things as they truly are. This is true in a sense that
transcends the metaphorical. Your eyes are tools. They are there to help you get what you want.
The price you pay for that utility, that specific focused direction, is blindness to everything else.
This doesn't matter so much when things are going well and we are getting what we want, although it can be
a problem even then because getting what we currently want can make us blind to higher callings. But all
that ignored world presents a truly terrible problem when we're in crisis and nothing whatsoever is
turning out the way we want it to. Then there can be far too much to deal with. Happily, however, that
problem contains within it the seeds of its own solution. Since you've ignored so much, there is plenty of
possibility left where you have not yet looked. Imagine that you're unhappy. You're not getting
what you need. Perversely, this may be because of what you want. You are blind because of what you
desire. Perhaps what you really need is right in front of your eyes, but you cannot see it because
of what you are currently aiming for. And that brings us to something else. The price that must be paid
before you or anyone can get what they want, or better yet, what they need. Think about it this way.
You look at the world in your particular idiosyncratic manner. You use a set of tools to screen most
things out and let some things in. You've spent a lot of time building those tools. They've become
habitual. They're not mere abstract thoughts. They're built right into you. They orient you in the world.
They're your deepest and often implicit and unconscious values. They've become part of your biological
structure. They're alive. And they don't want to disappear or transform or die. But sometimes their time
has come and new things need to be born. For this reason, although not only for this reason, it is necessary
to let things go during the journey uphill. If things are not going well for you, well, that might be
because, as the most cynical of aphorisms has it, life sucks and then you die. Before your crisis impels
you to that hideous conclusion, however, you might consider the following. Life doesn't have the
problem. You do. At least that realization leaves you with some options. If your life is not going well,
perhaps it is your current knowledge that is insufficient, not life itself. Perhaps your
value structure needs some serious retooling. Perhaps what you want is blinding you to what
else could be. Perhaps you are holding on to your desires in the present so tightly that you cannot
see anything else, even what you truly need. Imagine that you're thinking enviously,
I should have my boss's job. If your boss sticks to his posts stubbornly and competently,
thoughts like that will lead you into a state of irritation, unhappiness, and disgust. You might realize
this. You think, I'm unhappy. However, I could be cured of this unhappiness if I could just fulfill
my ambition. But then you might think further. Wait, you think, maybe I'm not unhappy because I don't
have my boss's job. Maybe I'm unhappy because I can't stop wanting that job. That doesn't mean you can
just simply and magically tell yourself to stop wanting that job and then listen and transform.
You won't, can't in fact, just change yourself that easily. You have to dig deeper. You must change
what you are after more profoundly. So you might think, I don't know what to do about this stupid
suffering. I can't just abandon my ambitions. That would leave me nowhere to go. But my longing for a
job that I can't have isn't working. You might decide to take a different tack. You might ask instead
for the revelation of a different plan, one that would fulfill your desires and gratify your ambitions
in a real sense, but that would remove from your life the bitterness and resentment with which you
are currently affected. You might think, I will make a different plan. I will try to want whatever it is
that would make my life better, whatever that might be, and I will start working on it now. If that turns
out to mean something other than chasing my boss's job, I will accept that and I will move forward.
Now you're on a whole different kind of trajectory. Before what was right, desirable and worthy of
pursuit was something narrow and concrete. But you became stuck there, tightly jammed and unhappy.
So you let go. You make the necessary sacrifice and allow a whole new world of possibility, hidden from
you because of your previous ambition, to reveal itself. And there's a lot there. What would your life
look like if it were better? What would life itself look like? What does better even mean? You don't know.
And it doesn't matter that you don't know exactly, right away, because you will start to slowly see
what is better once you have truly decided to want it. You will start to perceive what remained hidden
from you by your presuppositions and preconceptions, by the previous mechanisms of your vision.
You will begin to learn. This will only work, however, if you genuinely want your life to improve.
You can't fool your implicit perceptual structures. Not even a bit. They aim where you point them.
To retool. To take stock. To aim somewhere better. You have to think it through, bottom to top. You have
to scour your psyche. You have to clean the damn thing up. And you must be cautious, because making your
life better means adopting a lot of responsibility. And that takes more effort and care than living
stupidly in pain and remaining arrogant, deceitful and resentful. What if it was the case that the
world revealed whatever goodness it contains in precise proportion to your desire for the best? What if
the more your conception of the best has been elevated, expanded and rendered sophisticated, the more
possibility and benefit you could perceive? This doesn't mean that you can have what you want
merely by wishing it, or that everything is interpretation, or that there is no reality.
The world is still there with its structures and limits. As you move along with it, it cooperates or
objects. But you can dance with it, if your aim is to dance. And maybe you can even lead if you have
enough skill and enough grace. This is not theology. It's not mysticism. It's empirical knowledge.
There's nothing magical here, or nothing more than the already present magic of consciousness.
We only see what we aim at. The rest of the world, and that's most of it, is hidden. If we start aiming
at something different, something like, I want my life to be better, our minds will start presenting
us with new information, derived from the previously hidden world to aid us in that pursuit. Then we can
put that information to use, and move, and act, and observe, and improve. And after doing so, after
improving, we might pursue something different or higher. Something like, I want whatever might be
better than just my life being better. And then we enter a more elevated and more complete reality.
In that place, what might we focus on? What might we see? Think about it like this.
Start from the observation that we indeed desire things, even that we need them. That's human nature.
We share the experience of hunger, loneliness, thirst, sexual desire, aggression, fear, and pain.
Such things are elements of being, primordial, axiomatic elements of being. But we must sort and
organize these primordial desires, because the world is a complex and obstinately real place.
We can't just get the one particular thing we especially just want now, along with everything else we
usually want, because our desires can produce conflict with our other desires, as well as with
other people, and with the world. Thus, we must become conscious of our desires, and articulate
them, and prioritize them, and arrange them into hierarchies. That makes them sophisticated.
That makes them work with each other, and with the desires of other people, and with the world.
It is in that manner that our desires elevate themselves. It is in that manner that they
organize themselves into values, and become moral. Our values, our morality, they are indicators of our
sophistication. The philosophical study of morality, of right and wrong, is ethics. Such study can render us
more sophisticated in our choices. Even older and deeper than ethics, however, is religion.
Religion concerns itself not with mere right and wrong, but with good and evil themselves,
with the archetypes of right and wrong. Religion concerns itself with domain of value, ultimate value.
That is not the scientific domain. It's not the territory of empirical description.
The people who wrote and edited the Bible, for example, weren't scientists. They couldn't have been
scientists even if they had wanted to be. The viewpoints, methods, and practices of science
hadn't been formulated when the Bible was written. Religion is instead about proper behavior. It's about
what Plato called the good. A genuine religious acolyte isn't trying to formulate accurate ideas about the
objective nature of the world, although he may be trying to do that too. He's striving, instead,
to be a good person. It may be the case that to him, good means nothing but obedient, even blindly
obedient. Hence, the classic liberal western enlightenment objection to religious belief.
Obedience is not enough, but it's at least a start, and we have forgotten this. You cannot aim yourself at
anything if you're completely undisciplined and untutored. You will not know what to target, and you won't fly
straight even if you somehow get your aim right. And then you will conclude, there is nothing to aim
for. And then you will be lost. It is therefore necessary and desirable for religions to have a
dogmatic element. What good is a value system that does not provide a stable structure? What good is a
value system that does not point the way to a higher order? And what good can you possibly be if you
cannot or do not internalize that structure or accept that order? Not as a final destination
necessarily, but at least as a starting point? Without that, you're nothing but an adult two-year-old
without the charm or the potential. That is not to say, to say it again, that obedience is sufficient.
But a person capable of obedience, let's say instead a properly disciplined person,
is at least a well-forged tool. At least that. And that is not nothing. Of course,
there must be vision beyond discipline, beyond dogma. A tool still needs a purpose. It is for
such reasons that Christ said in the Gospel of Thomas, the kingdom of the Father is spread out
upon the earth, but men do not see it. Does that mean that what we see is dependent on our religious
beliefs? Yes. And what we don't see is well. You might object. But I'm an atheist. No, you're not.
And if you want to understand this, you could read Dostoevsky's Crime and Punishment, perhaps the
greatest novel ever written, in which the main character Raskolnikov decides to take his atheism
with true seriousness, commits what he has rationalized as a benevolent murder, and pays the price.
You're simply not an atheist in your actions. And it is your actions that most accurately reflect
your deepest beliefs, those that are implicit, embedded in your being, underneath your conscious
apprehensions and articulable attitudes and surface-level self-knowledge. You can only find
out what you actually believe, rather than what you think you believe, by watching how you act.
You simply don't know what you believe before that. You are too complex to understand yourself.
It takes careful observation, and education, and reflection, and communication with others,
just to scratch the surface of your beliefs. Everything you value is a product of unimaginably
lengthy developmental processes, personal, cultural, and biological. You don't understand how what you
want, and therefore what you see, is conditioned by the immense, abysmal, profound past. You simply don't
understand how every neural circuit through which you peer at the world has been shaped, and painfully,
by the ethical aims of millions of years of human ancestors, and all of the life that was lived for
the billions of years before that. You don't understand anything. You didn't even know that you were blind.
Some of our knowledge of our beliefs has been documented.
We've been watching ourselves act, reflecting on that watching, and telling stories distilled through
that reflection for tens and perhaps hundreds of thousands of years.
That is all part of our attempts, individual and collective, to discover and articulate what it is that we believe.
Part of the knowledge so generated is what is encapsulated in the fundamental teachings of our cultures.
In ancient writings such as the Tao Te Ching, or the aforementioned Vedic scriptures, or the Biblical stories.
The Bible is, for better or worse, the foundational document of Western civilization,
of Western values, Western morality, and Western conceptions of good and evil.
It's the product of processes that remain fundamentally beyond our comprehension.
The Bible is a library composed of many books, each written and edited by many people.
It's a truly emergent document, a selected, sequenced, and finally coherent story written by no one and
everyone over many thousands of years. The Bible has been thrown up out of the deep by the collective
human imagination, which is itself a product of unimaginable forces operating over unfathomable
spans of time. Its careful, respectful study can reveal things to us about what we believe,
and how we do and should act, that can be discovered in almost no other manner.
Old Testament God and New Testament God
The God of the Old Testament can appear harsh, judgmental, unpredictable, and dangerous, particularly on
cursory reading. The degree to which this is true has arguably been exaggerated by Christian commentators,
intent on magnifying the distinction between the older and newer divisions of the Bible.
There's been a price paid, however, for such plotting, and I mean that in both senses of the word.
The tendency for modern people to think, when confronted with Jehovah,
I would never believe in a God like that. But Old Testament God doesn't much care what modern
people think. He often didn't care what Old Testament people thought either, although he
could be bargained with to a surprising degree, as is particularly evident in the Abrahamic stories.
Nonetheless, when his people strayed from the path, when they disobeyed his injunctions,
violated his covenants, and broke his commandments, trouble was certain to follow.
If you did not do what Old Testament God demanded, whatever that might have been,
and however you might have tried to hide from it, you and your children and your children's
children were in terrible, serious trouble. It was realists who created, or noticed,
Old Testament God. When the denizens of those ancient societies wandered carelessly down the wrong path,
they ended up enslaved and miserable, sometimes for centuries, when they were not obliterated completely.
Was that reasonable? Was that just? Was that fair? The authors of the Old Testament asked such
questions with extreme caution and under very limited conditions. They assumed instead that the
creator of being knew what he was doing, that all power was essentially with him, and that his dictates
should be carefully followed. They were wise. He was a force of nature. Is a hungry lion reasonable,
fair, or just? What kind of nonsensical question is that? The Old Testament Israelites and their
forebears knew that God was not to be trifled with, and that whatever hell the angry deity might allow to
be engendered if he was crossed was real. Having recently passed through a century defined by the
bottomless horrors of Hitler, Stalin, and Mao, we might realize the same thing.
New Testament God is often presented as a different character, although the Book of Revelation,
with its final judgment, warns against any excessively naive complacency. He is more the kindly Geppetto,
master craftsman and benevolent father. He wants nothing for us but the best. He is all-loving and all-forgiving.
Sure, he'll send you to hell if you misbehave badly enough. Fundamentally, however, he's the God of
love. That seems more optimistic, more naively welcoming, but, in precise proportion to that,
less believable. In a world such as this, this hothouse of doom, who could buy such a story? The all-good
God in a post-Auschwitz world? It was for such reasons that the philosopher Nietzsche,
perhaps the most astute critic ever to confront Christianity, considered New Testament God the
worst literary crime in Western history. In Beyond Good and Evil, he wrote,
In the Jewish Old Testament, the Book of Divine Justice, there are men, things, and speeches on
such a grand style that Greek and Indian literature has nothing to compare with it. One stands with fear
and reverence before those stupendous remains of what man was formerly, and one has sad thoughts
about old Asia and its little outpushed peninsula Europe. To have bound up this New Testament,
a kind of rococo of taste in every respect, along with the Old Testament into one book,
as the Bible, as the book in itself, is perhaps the greatest audacity and sin against the spirit
which literary Europe has on its conscience. Who but the most naive among us could posit that such an
all-good, merciful being ruled this so terrible world? But something that seems incomprehensible
to someone unseeing might be perfectly evident to someone who had opened his eyes.
Let's return to the situation where your aim is being determined by something petty,
your aforementioned envy of your boss. Because of that envy, the world you inhabit reveals itself
as a place of bitterness, disappointment, and spite. Imagine that you come to notice,
and contemplate and reconsider your unhappiness. Further, you determine to accept responsibility
for it, and dare to posit that it might be something at least partly under your control.
You crack open one eye for a moment, and look. You ask for something better. You sacrifice your
pettiness, repent of your envy, and open your heart. Instead of cursing the darkness, you let in a
little light. You decide to aim for a better life instead of a better office. But you don't stop
there. You realize that it's a mistake to aim for a better life if it comes at the cost of worsening
someone else's. So you get creative. You decide to play a more difficult game. You decide that you want
a better life in a manner that will also make the life of your family better, or the life of your family
and your friends, or the life of your family and your friends, and the strangers who surround them.
What about your enemies? Do you want to include them too? You bloody well don't know how to manage that.
But you've read some history. You know how enmity compounds. So you start to wish even your enemies
well, at least in principle. Although you are by no means yet a master of such sentiments.
And the direction of your sight changes. You see past the limitations that hemmed you in unknowingly.
New possibilities for your life emerge, and you work toward their realization. Your life indeed improves.
And then you start to think further. Better? Perhaps that means better for me, and my family,
and my friends, even for my enemies. But that's not all it means. It means better today, in a manner that
makes everything better tomorrow, and next week, and next year, and a decade from now, and a hundred years
from now, and a thousand years from now, and forever. And then better means to aim at the improvement of
being, with a capital I and a capital B. Thinking all of this, realizing all of this, you take a risk.
You decide that you will start treating Old Testament God, with all his terrible and oft-arbitrary seeming
power, as if he could also be New Testament God, even though you understand the many ways in which
that is absurd. In other words, you decide to act as if existence might be justified by its goodness,
if only you behave properly. And it is that decision, that declaration of existential faith,
that allows you to overcome nihilism, and resentment, and arrogance. It is that declaration
of faith that keeps hatred of being, with all its attendant evils, at bay. And as for such faith,
it is not at all the will to believe things that you know perfectly well to be false. Faith is not the
childish belief in magic. That is ignorance, or even willful blindness. It is instead the realization
that the tragic irrationalities of life must be counterbalanced by an equally irrational commitment
to the essential goodness of being. It is simultaneously the will to dare set your sights at the unachievable,
and to sacrifice everything, including, and most importantly, your life. You realize that you
have, literally, nothing better to do. But how can you do all this, assuming you are foolish enough
to try? You might start by not thinking, or, more accurately, but less trenchantly, by refusing to
subjugate your faith to your current rationality and its narrowness of view. This doesn't mean make
yourself stupid. It means the opposite. It means instead that you must quit maneuvering, and calculating,
and conniving, and scheming, and enforcing, and demanding, and avoiding, and ignoring, and punishing.
It means you must place your old strategies aside. It means instead that you must pay attention,
as you may have never paid attention before. Pay attention. Pay attention. Focus on your
surroundings, physical and psychological. Notice something that bothers you, that concerns you,
that will not let you be, which you could fix, that you would fix. You can find such some things
by asking yourself, as if you genuinely want to know, three questions. What is it that is bothering
me? Is that something I could fix? And would I actually be willing to fix it? If you find that the
answer is no to any or all of the questions, then look elsewhere. Aim lower. Search until you find
something that bothers you, that you could fix, that you would fix, and then fix it. That might be
enough for the day. Maybe there is a stack of paper on your desk, and you have been avoiding it. You
won't even really look at it when you walk into your room. There are terrible things lurking there. Tax
forms, and bills, and letters from people wanting things you aren't sure you can deliver. Notice your fear,
and have some sympathy for it. Maybe there are snakes in that pile of paper. Maybe you'll get bitten.
Maybe there are even hydras lurking there. You'll cut off one head and seven more will grow. How could
you possibly cope with that? You could ask yourself, is there anything at all that I might be willing to
do about that pile of paper? Would I look, maybe, at one part of it, for twenty minutes? Maybe the answer
will be no. But you might look for ten, or even for five. And if not that, for one. Start there.
You will soon find that the entire pile shrinks in significance, merely because you have looked at
part of it. And you'll find that the whole thing is made of parts. What if you allowed yourself a glass
of wine with dinner, or curled up on the sofa and read, or watched a stupid movie as a reward?
What if you instructed your wife or your husband to say, good job, after you fixed whatever you fixed?
Would that motivate you? The people from whom thanks you want might not be very proficient in offering it
to begin with, but that shouldn't stop you. People can learn, even if they're very unskilled at the
beginning. Ask yourself what you would require to be motivated to undertake the job, honestly,
and listen to the answer. Don't tell yourself, I shouldn't need to do that to motivate myself.
What do you know about yourself? You are, on the one hand, the most complex thing in the entire
universe, and on the other, someone who can't even set the clock on your microwave. Don't overestimate
yourself knowledge. Let the tasks for the day announce themselves for your contemplation.
Maybe you can do this in the morning as you sit on the edge of your bed.
Maybe you can try the night before when you're preparing to sleep. Ask yourself for a voluntary
contribution. If you ask nicely, and listen carefully, and don't try any treachery, you might be offered one.
Do this every day for a while. Then do it for the rest of your life. Soon you will find yourself in
a different situation. Now you will be asking yourself habitually, what could I do that I would do to make
life a little better? You are not dictating to yourself what better must be. You're not being a
totalitarian or a utopian, even to yourself, because you have learned from the Nazis and the Soviets and the
Maoists, and from your own experience that being a totalitarian is a bad thing. Aim high. Set your
sights on the betterment of being. Align yourself in your soul with truth and the highest good. There is
habitable order to establish and beauty to bring into existence. There is evil to overcome, suffering to
ameliorate, and yourself to better. It is this in my reading that is the culminating ethic of the canon of
the West. And it is this, furthermore, that is communicated by those eternally confusing, glowing
stanzas from Christ's Sermon on the Mount, the essence, in some sense, of the wisdom of the New
Testament. This is the attempt of the spirit of mankind to transform the understanding of ethics
from the initial, necessary, thou shalt not of the child and the Ten Commandments into the fully
articulated, positive vision of the true individual. This is the expression, not merely of admirable
self-control and self-mastery, but of the fundamental desire to set the world right.
This is not the cessation of sin, but sin's opposite, good itself. The Sermon on the Mount outlines the true
nature of man and the proper aim of mankind. Concentrate on the day, so that you can live in the present and
attend completely and properly to what is right in front of you. But do that only after you have
decided to let what is within shine forth, so that it can justify being and illuminate the world. Do that
only after you have determined to sacrifice whatever it is that must be sacrificed, so that you can pursue
the highest good. Consider the lilies of the field, how they grow. They toil not, neither do they spin.
And yet I say unto you that even Solomon in all his glory was not arrayed like one of these.
Wherefore, if God so clothed the grass of the field, which to-day is, and to-morrow is cast into the
oven, shall he not much more clothe you, O ye of little faith? Therefore take no thought, saying,
what shall we eat, or what shall we drink, or wherewithal shall we be clothed? For after all
these things do the Gentiles seek. For your heavenly Father knoweth that ye have need of all these things.
But seek ye first the kingdom of God, and his righteousness, and all these things shall be
added unto you. Take therefore no thought for the moral, for the moral shall take thought for the
things of itself. Sufficient unto the day is the evil thereof. Luke 12, 22-34
Realization is dawning. Instead of playing the tyrant, therefore, you're paying attention.
You're telling the truth instead of manipulating the world. You're negotiating instead of playing
the martyr or the tyrant. You no longer have to be envious because you no longer know that someone
else truly has it better. You no longer have to be frustrated because you've learned to aim low
and to be patient. You're discovering who you are, what you want, what you are willing to do.
You're finding that the solutions to your particular problems have to be tailored to you,
personally and precisely. You're less concerned with the actions of other people because you have
plenty to do yourself. Attend to the day, but aim at the highest good. Now your trajectory is heavenward.
That makes you hopeful. Even a man on a sinking ship can be happy when he clambers aboard a lifeboat,
and who knows where he might go in the future. To journey happily may well be better than to arrive
successfully. Ask, and ye shall receive. Knock, and the door will open. If you ask as if you want,
and knock as if you want to enter, you may be offered the chance to improve your life, a little,
a lot, completely. And with that improvement, some progress will be made in being itself.
Compare yourself to who you were yesterday, not to who someone else is today.
Rule 5. Do not let your children do anything that makes you dislike them.
Actually, it's not okay. Recently, I watched a three-year-old boy trail his mother and father
slowly through a crowded airport. He was screaming violently at five-second intervals.
And more important, he was doing it voluntarily. He wasn't at the end of his tether. As a parent,
I could tell from the tone. He was irritating his parents and hundreds of other people to gain
attention. Maybe he needed something. But that was no way to get it, and his parents should have let him
know that. You might object that perhaps they were worn out and jet-lagged after a long trip.
But thirty seconds of carefully directed problem solving would have brought the shameful episode
to a halt. More thoughtful parents would not have let someone they truly cared for become the object
of a crowd's contempt. I've also watched a couple, unable or unwilling to say no to their two-year-old,
obliged to follow closely behind him everywhere he went, every moment of what was supposed to be an
enjoyable social visit, because he misbehaved so badly when not micromanaged that he could not be
given a second of genuine freedom without risk. The desire of his parents to let their child act
without correction on every impulse perversely produced precisely the opposite effect. They
deprived him instead of every opportunity to engage in independent action. Because they did not dare to
teach him what no means, he had no conception of the reasonable limits enabling maximal toddler
autonomy. It was a classic example of too much chaos breeding too much order, and the inevitable
reversal. I have, similarly, seen parents rendered unable to engage in adult conversation at a dinner party
because their children, four and five, dominated the social scene, eating the centers out of all the
sliced bread, subjecting everyone to their juvenile tyranny, while Mum and Dad watched, embarrassed,
and bereft of the ability to intervene. When my now adult daughter was a child, another child once hit
her on the head with a metal toy truck. I watched that same child, one year later, viciously push his
younger sister backwards over a fragile glass-surfaced coffee table. His mother picked him up immediately
afterward, but not her frightened daughter, and told him in hushed tones not to do such things.
Well, she patted him comfortingly in a manner clearly indicative of approval. She was out to
produce a little god-emperor of the universe. That's the unstated goal of many a mother, including
many who consider themselves advocates for full gender equality. Such women will object vociferously to
any command uttered by an adult male, but will trot off in seconds to make their progeny a peanut
butter sandwich if he demands it while immersed self-importantly in a video game. The future
mates of such boys have every reason to hate their mothers-in-law. Respect for women? That's for
other boys, other men, not for their dear sons. Something of the same sort may underlie, in part,
the preference for male children seen most particularly in places such as India, Pakistan, and China,
where sex-selective abortion is widely practiced. The Wikipedia entry for that practice attributes
its existence to cultural norms favoring male over female children. I cite Wikipedia because it is
collectively written and edited and, therefore, the perfect place to find accepted wisdom.
But there's no evidence that such ideas are strictly cultural. There are plausible psychobiological
reasons for the evolution of such an attitude, and they're not pretty from a modern egalitarian
perspective. If circumstances force you to put all your eggs into one basket, so to speak,
a son is a better bet by the strict standards of evolutionary logic, where the proliferation of your
genes is all that matters. Why? Well, a reproductively successful
daughter might gain you eight or nine children. The Holocaust survivor Yitta Schwartz, a star in this
regard, had three generations of direct descendants who matched such performance. She was the ancestor of
almost 2,000 people by the time of her death in 2010. But the sky is truly the limit with a
reproductively successful son. Sex with multiple female partners is his ticket to exponential
reproduction, given our species' practical limitation to single births. Rumor has it that the actor
Warren Beatty and the athlete Wilt Chamberlain each bedded multiple thousands of women, something not
unknown as well among rock stars. They didn't produce children in those numbers. Modern birth control limits
that. But similar celebrity types in the past have done so. The forefather of the Qing dynasty,
Jiokanga, circa 1550, for example, is the male line ancestor of a million and a half people in
northeastern China. The medieval Enel dynasty produced up to three million male descendants, localized mainly
in northwestern Ireland and the U.S. through Irish emigration. And the king of them all, Genghis Khan,
conqueror of much of Asia, is forefather of eight percent of the men in Central Asia, 16 million male
descendants, 34 generations later. So, from a deep biological perspective, there are reasons why
parents might favor sons sufficiently to eliminate female fetuses, although I am not claiming direct
causality, nor suggesting a lack of other, more culturally dependent reasons. Preferential treatment
awarded a son during development might even help produce an attractive, well-rounded, confident man.
This happened in the case of the father of psychoanalysis, Sigmund Freud, by his own account.
A man who has been the indisputable favorite of his mother keeps for life the feeling of a conqueror,
that confidence of success that often induces real success. Fair enough.
But feeling of a conqueror can all too easily become actual conqueror. Genghis Khan's outstanding
reproductive success certainly came at the cost of any success whatsoever for others, including the
dead millions of Chinese, Persians, Russians, and Hungarians. Spoiling a son might therefore work well
from the standpoint of the selfish gene, allowing the favored child's genes to replicate themselves in
innumerable offspring, to use the evolutionary biologist Richard Dawkins' famous expression.
But it can make for a dark, painful spectacle in the here and now, and mutate into something
indescribably dangerous. None of this means that all mothers favor all sons over their daughters,
or that daughters are not sometimes favored over sons, or that fathers don't sometimes favor their sons.
Other factors can clearly dominate. Sometimes, for example, unconscious hatred, sometimes not so
unconscious either, overrides any concern a parent might have for any child, regardless of gender,
or personality, or situation. I saw a four-year-old boy allowed to go hungry on a regular basis.
His nanny had been injured, and he was being cycled through the neighbors for temporary care.
When his mother dropped him off at our house, she indicated that he wouldn't eat at all, all day.
That's okay, she said. It wasn't okay, in case that's not obvious.
This was the same four-year-old boy who clung to my wife for hours in absolute desperation and total
commitment, when she tenaciously, persistently, and mercifully managed to feed him an entire lunchtime
meal, rewarding him throughout for his cooperation, and refusing to let him fail.
He started out with a closed mouth, sitting with all of us at the dining room table, my wife and I,
our two kids, and two neighborhood kids we looked after during the day.
She put the spoon in front of him, waiting patiently, persistently, while he moved his head back and
forth, refusing at entry, using defensive methods typical of a recalcitrant and none-too-well-attended
two-year-old. She didn't let him fail. She patted him on the head every time he managed a mouthful,
telling him sincerely that he was a good boy when he did so. She did think he was a good boy. He was a
cute, damaged kid. Ten, not too painful minutes later, he finished his meal. We were all watching
intently. It was a drama of life and death. Look, she said, holding up his bowl. You finished all of
it. This boy, who was standing in the corner voluntarily and unhappily when I first saw him,
who wouldn't interact with the other kids, who frowned chronically, who wouldn't respond to me
when I tickled and prodded him, trying to get him to play. This boy broke immediately into a wide,
radiant smile. Brought joy to everyone at the table. Twenty years later, writing it down today,
it still brings me to tears. Afterward, he followed my wife around like a puppy for the rest of the day,
refusing to let her out of his sight. When she sat down, he jumped in her lap, cuddling in,
opening himself back up to the world, searching desperately for the love he had been continually
denied. Later in the day, but far too soon, his mother reappeared.
She came down the stairs into the room we all occupied.
Oh, super mom, she uttered resentfully, seeing her son curled up in my wife's lap.
Then she departed, black, murderous heart unchanged, doomed child in hand. She was a psychologist.
The things you can see with even a single open eye. It's no wonder that people want to stay blind.
Everybody hates arithmetic.
My clinical clients frequently come to me to discuss their day-to-day familial problems.
Such quotidian concerns are insidious. Their habitual and predictable occurrence makes them
appear trivial. But that appearance of triviality is deceptive. It is the things that occur every
single day that truly make up our lives. And time spent the same way over and again adds up at an
alarming rate. One father recently spoke with me about the trouble he was having putting his son to
sleep at night, a ritual that typically involved about three-quarters of an hour of fighting.
We did the arithmetic.
45 minutes a day, seven days a week, that's 300 minutes, or five hours a week.
Five hours for each of the four weeks of a month, that's 20 hours per month.
20 hours a month for 12 months is 240 hours a year.
That's a month and a half of standard 40-hour work weeks.
My client was spending a month and a half of work weeks per year fighting ineffectually and miserably
with his son. Needless to say, both were suffering for it. No matter how good your intentions, or how
sweet and tolerant your temperament, you will not maintain good relations with someone you fight with
for a month and a half of work weeks per year. Resentment will inevitably build.
Even if it doesn't, all that wasted, unpleasant time could clearly be spent in more productive
and useful and less stressful and more enjoyable activity. How are such situations to be understood?
Where does the fault lie? In child or in parent? In nature or society? And what, if anything, is to be done?
Some localize all such problems in the adult, whether in the parent or broader society.
There are no bad children, such people think, only bad parents.
When the idealized image of an unsullied child is brought to mind, this notion appears fully justified.
The beauty, openness, joy, trust, and capacity for love characterizing children
makes it easy to attribute full culpability to the adults on the scene.
But such an attitude is dangerously and naively romantic.
It's too one-sided in the case of parents granted a particularly difficult son or daughter.
It's also not for the best that all human corruption is uncritically laid at society's feet.
That conclusion merely displaces the problem back in time.
It explains nothing and solves no problems.
If society is corrupt but not the individuals within it, then where did the corruption originate?
How is it propagated?
It's a one-sided, deeply ideological theory.
Even more problematic is the insistence logically stemming from this presumption of social corruption
that all individual problems, no matter how rare, must be solved by cultural restructuring,
no matter how radical.
Our society faces the increasing call to deconstructed, stabilizing traditions
to include smaller and smaller numbers of people who do not or will not
fit into the categories upon which even our perceptions are based.
This is not a good thing.
Each person's private trouble cannot be solved by a social revolution
because revolutions are destabilizing and dangerous.
We have learned to live together and organize our complex societies
slowly and incrementally over vast stretches of time
and we do not understand with sufficient exactitude why what we are doing works.
Thus, altering our ways of social being carelessly in the name of some ideological shibboleth,
diversity springs to mind,
is likely to produce far more trouble than good,
given the suffering that even small revolutions generally produce.
Was it really a good thing, for example,
to so dramatically liberalize the divorce laws in the 1960s?
It's not clear to me that the children whose lives were destabilized
by the hypothetical freedom this attempt at liberation introduced would say so.
Horror and terror lurk behind the walls provided so wisely by our ancestors.
We tear them down at our peril.
We skate unconsciously on thin ice with deep cold waters below
where unimaginable monsters lurk.
I see today's parents as terrified by their children,
not least because they have been deemed the proximal agents of this hypothetical social tyranny
and simultaneously denied credit for their role as benevolent and necessary agents of discipline,
order, and conventionality.
They dwell uncomfortably and self-consciously in the all-too-powerful shadow of the adolescent ethos
of the 1960s, a decade whose excesses led to a general denigration of adulthood,
an unthinking disbelief in the existence of competent power,
and the inability to distinguish between the chaos of immaturity and responsible freedom.
This has increased parental sensitivity to the short-term emotional suffering of their children,
while heightening their fear of damaging their children to a painful and counterproductive degree.
Better this than the reverse, you might argue.
But there are catastrophes lurking at the extremes of every moral continuum.
The ignoble savage
It has been said that every individual is the conscious or unconscious follower of some influential philosopher.
The ignoble Fox
The
The ignoble
The aw
The ignoble
As
