Welcome to the Actins Podcast, where we will present short, digestible segments clipped
from Teamcom's weekly active inference livestreams.
If you like what you hear and want to learn more, check out the entire livestream on the
Active Inference Lab YouTube channel.
My name is Blue Knight, and I will be guiding you through this podcast, which is clipped
from Active Inference Lab livestream number 3.1.
Daniel Friedman, who is based out of Davis, California, is going to introduce the paper
and facilitate the discussion for all of the livestream participants.
So the paper that we are here to talk about today, and lucky enough to have Jared, the
first author here for a little bit longer, is A World Unto Itself, Human Communication
as Active Inference.
And what I sketched the two goals of the paper down as were to formalize cooperative communication
as a process of active inference under the free energy principle.
And to link the mechanistic, developmental, and evolutionary perspectives on communication
by using active inference as a process theory.
Here, Daniel asks the participants, what is communication?
Hi everyone, my name is Jared Vazel.
I'm in North Carolina, in the United States of America.
Yeah, for me, communication is just a kind of set of behaviors and inferences that people
use to align their mental states.
It's kind of like an abstract, I think, kind of way to think about it, but it narrates from
my advisor's line of thought that communication is a sort of tool for people aligning their
mental states to a degree good enough for their purposes.
Yeah.
That's, that's it.
I'd like to think of it as a behavior that's extended, that is like a sort of continuous
extension of behaviors that species across the animal kingdom use.
I'm trying not to think of it in a way that's anything too, too special, i.e. in linguistics,
for instance, thought of something very, very special and unique.
And it is in a certain way, but the way that I've found it useful to think about communication
is as a, another sort of behavior in people's toolkits.
The next speaker to share their thoughts is Steven Sillit, who is based out of Toronto.
Yeah, I would say that I agree with what was just said there actually, and if you take like
an active embodied approach, you could say that the, it's an extension, communication
is an extension of the organism into the environment, but one which can happen with interactions with
other organisms also extends into their environment and their niche.
And that kind of presages this second question, which is what is special, interesting, or important
about human communication? And could be nothing, could be everything. Any thoughts on that one?
Yeah, so I have a thought that it's maybe not super special, anything about human communication.
My name is Shannon. I'm at the University of California in Merced, but because of the pandemic,
I'm at home in South Dakota for the foreseeable future. But yeah, I think what is special about
human communication is that it's the point of view that we're coming from. So when we're like
studying communication across the animal kingdom, it's always the point of comparison,
either implicitly or explicitly. But you can look at like anything from nonverbal communicative
behaviors of like our primate relatives or even of our pets with us, like outside of their species,
or even of like chemical signals and plants. So maybe there's just a question of how much
of something that we want to call agency or intentionality is necessary to call communication
important in a specific like niche or specific animal or plant kingdom or something like that.
Very nice. And science as a special form of human communication, it's the one that we have,
if nothing else. And so as we kind of continue to build towards the paper, how do prior beliefs,
so beliefs that communicators have about identity, narrative, or culture play into communication in
human or non-human systems? Sasha?
Sasha? Yeah, just building on these really great previous answers. I'm Sasha. I'm in Davis, California.
But I just wanted to say that, yeah, communication is highly culture and context dependent. And in
thinking about how to align different peoples or organisms kind of views of the world, culture
and context plays a big role in deciding on how much to align and whether or not that's important at all.
Cool. Jared?
Yeah, so I wanted to briefly say something about the second point as well. For me, real quick,
something that's maybe the main point of interest for me in terms of human communication, specifically
human communication, is the goals of communicators in the human case tend to be or seem to be based on
on a lot of, for instance, developmental and comparative research, seem to be unique in that
the goal is the alignment of mental states per se. So that turns on gathering evidence for that in
terms of our interaction. So I have to get certain cues from you that you understand what I'm saying.
And so it's not, you know, if you grab the thing for me that I'm asking you to get by accident,
say, accidentally, you get the thing that I wanted you to get, but you're also giving me cues that you
misunderstood what I said. And so it was just, you know, fortuitous circumstance that you happened
to get what I wanted. Even in like young kids, you'll see them try to correct that and say,
no, you got the right thing. This is really what I wanted. And so those sorts of, that sort of result,
for instance, suggests that something that's unique is the alignment of mental states per se,
rather than just having some functional outcome, which is often the case in, for instance, other
non-human primates forms of communication. And then that turns into prior beliefs, for instance,
how does that play an important role in communication? For me, that's building on what
the previous speaker just said. Your prior beliefs are the way, or an important part of your prior
beliefs are the set of cultural conventions that you learn, i.e. how a phrase or a mental state,
how a mental state or intention should be made manifest in the environment for others to pick up
on. That's a set of prior beliefs. How do I best do this? Something that your culture installs in you
through all sorts of joint attentional practices earlier in development. And that's also something that
species unique that other species don't seem to engage in, is the installation of these kinds of
culturally acquired patterns and practices for communicating one's mental states in a way that
everyone deems good enough or sufficient for current purposes, I guess.
Our last warm-up question is, for you, what might a satisfying formal framework for communication
look like? And that might include human and non-human. It might include all these features
that people are talking about. But what would be the attributes of a comprehensive or a formal
framework for thinking about all this diversity of communication styles in humans and non-humans?
What features would that kind of a model be expected or desired to have?
I think one of the key things is it would have a spatial component in terms of how the dynamics
happen in space and around space, particularly the peripersonal space around the organism.
One of the key things about humans is that we can also enfold narrative within itself. In
story, we can, and we spatially arrange things. So we often say, like, that's right. What's left?
What's ahead? What's behind? So that ability to somehow tag or embed within the niche is key.
And then the actual language part is somehow tied to that rather than the other way around,
which is what a lot of the kind of mind-based approaches it tends to be.
Shannon?
I think I'm touching up on that. So having this account of how we use space in conversation,
it also needs to be flexible enough to account what Sasha was talking about, the way different
cultures use space, like putting the past in front of you, which is awkward to me, but makes a lot
of sense to other cultures. And also aspects of communication that aren't linguistic. So
nonverbal would be obvious, but communication and like a musical situation where no, not necessarily
any semantic reference is being called upon, but all the same, we know that we're feeling the same beat
or like we're really in the same abstract space of interacting with each other.
Cool. I agree about that aspect where linguistics are one of the modes of communication,
yet there's this spatial element. And sometimes they blur when you say, do you grasp it? Or can
you see what I'm talking about? It's very cross sensory and you can type out what you mean to say,
yet we're sometimes talking about specific things, sometimes not.
This includes our first episode on the introduction to communication by TeamCom,
which is short for team communication. We hope you enjoyed it and stay tuned for
more on this topic in our next episode.
