Welcome to the ACT-INF podcast, where we will present short, digestible segments clipped from Teamcom's weekly Active Inference live streams.
If you like what you hear and you want to learn more, check out the entire live stream on the Active Inference Lab YouTube channel.
My name is Blue Knight, and I will be guiding you through this podcast, which is clipped from Active Inference Lab live stream number 3.2.
This week's episode is a discussion that is loosely structured around the paper, A World Unto Itself, Human Communication as Active Inference, by Jared Vassell, Paul Badcock, Axel Constant, Carl Friston, and Maxwell Ramstead.
Daniel Friedman, who is based out of Davis, California, is facilitating this live stream discussion about attention.
So here's another quote from the paper, and I really like this because it brought a connection from so-called folk psychology or just everyday discussions of topics that are neurophysiological into what is going to be bringing us towards a more formal phrasing of the question.
They wrote, in Active Inference, the folk psychological term attention refers to two distinct but closely related phenomena.
The first one is epistemic value, and the second one is precision weighting.
There's a citation there.
Epistemic value, salience, or affordance is the component of policy selection just discussed.
It is the component of the value of policies that tracks how much a policy reduces uncertainty about the state of the world.
It provides a description of the folk psychological phenomena of actively orienting towards or turning one's attention to a certain modality or part of the sensory field.
For example, there's visual saccades that sample particular locations in visual space.
In short, salience, or epistemic affordance, is an attribute of how we sample the world, in the sense that actively sampling sensory information will reduce uncertainty in relation to our current beliefs.
In contrast, this is the second type of attention, precision is an attribute of sensory data per se, of itself.
Imprecise sensory data should have less effect on Bayesian belief updating relative to precise information.
It is therefore important to afford the right precision to each sensory sample via precision weighting.
So, here's the two questions I asked about this quote.
People can answer one of the questions, or ask a further question about this paragraph, or bring up their own interpretation.
How is this idea of attention related to ostentive cues, and how is this idea of attention related to culture as an informational niche?
So, first we can think about what are these two different kinds of attention, because they talk about how there's two distinct but closely related phenomena.
So, we're going to reduce our uncertainty about this term, attention.
And it's broken down into two categories, the epistemic value, which relates to the value of knowledge, and then precision weighting, which is like the value of the sensory data itself.
And we can go to this last sentence to look at how they differ pretty specifically.
Imprecise sensory data should have less effect on Bayesian belief updating relative to precise information.
So, let's imagine if someone says, okay, I'm going to turn on this TV, and it's going to have the results of the election, and you turn on the TV, and it's just static.
Now, there's many kinds of static, but the point is, with respect to the question that you want to reduce your uncertainty about,
imprecise sensory data, or if your eyes are very blurry, or if you can't hear what the speaker is saying,
this kind of sensory data that's garbled shouldn't be used to update your beliefs about the world at a deep level.
So, this is kind of getting to this question of the syntactic versus the semantic attunement,
because in the sense of precision weighting, if you're paying attention to a stimulus in free energy,
that means that that stimulus is rising all the way up to the top of the attentional salience hierarchy, in a sense.
It's touching your deep priors in a way that's influencing them meaningfully,
whereas things that aren't being paid attention to, in the sense of precision weighting,
are the sensory inputs that don't make a difference for your deep priors.
So, I'm not paying attention to how my sock feels in my shoe until I am,
but I'm not paying attention to it in the sense that the precision weighting is very low.
Even though it's a valid sensory input, it's just the attention being paid to that stimuli is low.
But the value of that information about the foot can also be thought of as relatively low
within this epistemic value sense of attention.
So, if someone says, pay attention, 50% of this is like that.
It's like saying, this is an important piece of knowledge.
So, yes, you also need to have the epistemic content.
It's not just enough to get the JPEG across completely or to have somebody hear your words.
There's this epistemic value to certain things that are said.
And a way that this is related to ostentive cues is just with the simple phrase,
hey, pay attention or listen up.
The next thing I'm going to say is important.
These are broad ways that are ostentive cues.
They're demonstrated cues that people can use linguistically or non-linguistically,
like waving or things like that.
These are cues that say, hey, if you can make out this signal,
if you can hear my SOS, if you can see me waving,
then please pay attention because this next thing I'm about to convey
is not just syntactically important, but it's actually epistemically important.
Thoughts on this?
Hello, everyone.
I'm Alex.
I'm in Moscow, Russia.
I'm a researcher in System Management School.
Yeah, it's interesting because when I read this paper,
I also use red highlight to this part about folk differences between folk psychology term
and because usually I use yellow and for this part I decided to use red one
because it's really, it looks like very important for communication and understanding it.
And as we know from figures and from this paper about regimes of attention,
which are very important to have, to really have generation and synchronization of mental states.
So, and if you want to speak about how to set up this regime of attention
and maybe as it's usually discussed in psychology, like how to train attention
and to manage attention, we should to see this difference because between epistemic part
and this precision weight weightening.
Very nice.
And so if we, how it could relate it to ostensives cues, I think about, I don't know how is a concept
about attention governance.
So some kind of rules to manage attention and some kind of proofs, which ostensives cues is really important
and which one is not important or maybe wrong, for example.
Yep.
And special signs that say, hey, I didn't hear what you said.
You lagged out.
Could you repeat that?
I needed, I needed a more precision weighting on what you said
because I couldn't even get to your epistemic content.
And then, oh, wait, I heard you on what the name was.
I just, I don't know who that author is.
So that's the epistemic level or, okay, I know that author,
but I still don't understand how this is fitting into the narrative of why we're in this conversation.
It's another level saying, I got you epistemically, but now narratively, I'm a bit lost.
And so these are different levels that could be quantified and could be formalized and de-risked as well.
Anything else?
Go ahead, Sasha.
Hi, everyone.
I'm Sasha, and I'm in California.
Yeah.
Another thing to add about ostensive cues, I think this answers the, one of the questions posed in the paper,
which is how might an individual recognize another's intention to generate an active communication intended for oneself in the first place?
And that was another question that I had written out as interesting, and it seems like kind of comes back full circle to answer it,
that ostensive cues are a way to let our, to let other people know that we're intending to communicate with them in a more multi-level way,
like to focus their attention first before we communicate the important information.
And then to the point about rules of attention, at least from a neuroscience background, which I think shies away a bit from understanding the psychology of the human experience,
and tries to have a more deflationary account of what's happening.
The rules I, as I've heard them, at least of attention, is to try to unpack and understand why a human is attending to a certain stimulus or not,
versus how a human can modulate their attention so that they can better attend or pay attention based on what they want to accomplish.
So it's a bit of internal versus external perception of what human attention is.
So I like that point about the psychology perspective on this, because ultimately that's a bit more useful for individuals making choices
understand what's happening from the outside.
We hope you enjoyed this episode of the podcast where we discussed attention,
and stay tuned for next week's episode where we will elaborate on the active inference framework and free energy principle.
