Welcome to the ActInf podcast, where we will present short, digestible segments clipped from TeamCom's weekly active inference live streams.
If you like what you hear and you want to learn more, check out the entire live stream on the Active Inference Lab YouTube channel.
My name is Blue Knight and I will be guiding you through this podcast, which is clipped from Active Inference Lab live stream number 3.2.
This week's episode is a discussion that is loosely structured around the paper, A World Unto Itself, Human Communication as Active Inference, by Jared Vassell, Paul Badcock, Axel Constant, Carl Friston, and Maxwell Ramstead.
Daniel Friedman, who is based out of Davis, California, is facilitating this live stream discussion about communicative systems and developmental communication.
There was a note about diversification of communicative systems across time, space, and speaker communities, as well as species, we could add.
Which communication systems can be identified in relationship to teams and organizations?
Hello, everyone. I'm Alex. I'm in Moscow, Russia. I'm a researcher in System Management School.
And again, for me, it's open question and trying to see a perspective to have this approach to describe possible way and possible communication systems, what could be useful for teams and organization.
And here, as we see, is related to time and space, and so it could be about timescales and organization also could be possible like space and could be present in different countries.
So we still need to have options to communicate and so define system in use for it.
So it's directions for future development of our work.
Cool. Any other notes on that?
Just from the chat, and this was in response, I believe, to something that Sasha mentioned about how good is good enough for the team.
RJ wrote, because there are opportunities for signal error, can the longevity of cooperation be assessed by goodness of fit between self-reporting of participants' concerns about risk of miscommunication?
And so this is a pretty meta comment.
It's asking, instead of a, let's say, an annual progress checkup on how happy or how satisfied, and if the satisfaction is going up, then it's getting better.
If the satisfaction is going down, it's getting worse.
This is like asking the participants to self-report on their perception of the risk of miscommunication.
And so you could ask the employee, how well do you think the communication channel is between you and your supervisor or vice versa?
And then by potentially maintaining the longevity of the group, which is a success in and of itself because of the many opportunities for failure of groups, beyond longevity, we could actually improve the self-report of the precision of the communication rather than trying to do this ultimately futile optimization on satisfaction because that's a moving target.
But something that we can latch on to is precise communication, and precise communication within the context of an aligned narrative for the team or the organization would ultimately potentially lead to satisfaction.
So interesting point by RJ.
Here's a quote from the paper to get us thinking about development.
They wrote,
Human infants only appear satisfied following a communicative bid when their own communicative partner has aligned their mental states with their own with respect to the infant's intended reference, and some citations there to follow.
Here's the questions that we can ask about development.
The first question is how or when does a child learn to align mental states to satisfy communicative bids?
Hi, everyone.
I'm Sasha, and I'm in California.
Yeah, as I was reading it, I was really trying to parse through the development of this process, like the ontogeny of it, and because there is a maturation of how cooperative communication happens, that there should also be a start when you learn to align your mental states.
But, of course, upon reading the paper again and working through all the baby references, the author states that you never actually learn to do this process.
It's part of the adaptive priors for alignment that humans are endowed with.
So, perhaps I can already answer that first question.
So, the answer is how or when.
The when, it sounds like it's continuous.
It's always a continuous process.
And then how is kind of the broad topic of development.
How does language develop?
How does culture develop?
And then I thought the point that you made about an evolutionary prior is very good, and it's also a challenging question to ask what exactly this prior is.
And that's why so much of the paper is about it, because it's pretty clear that we don't have a prior for any specific language in the sense that a baby who is growing up around no language will fail to develop linguistic capabilities in the same way, whereas any child raised in a different linguistic setting will take on that language.
So, there's a prior that language will be communicated, but it's almost a prior that's above the level of the specific language, yet there seem to be things about our evolutionary prior like grammar or structure or certain types of logical relationships that are harder to change.
Shannon?
Hi, guys.
I'm Shannon.
I'm usually in Merced, California, but I'm in South Dakota for the pandemic.
Not to be contrarian, but I'm going to be a little contrarian, is we talk a lot about language or maybe there's some innate prior that will develop language, but there's something that happens even before language, and that's the rhythm of development, like in the womb.
So, you have these bipedal rhythms of the mother's walking, you have rhythms of the heartbeat, breathing rhythms, and these are these like very embodied forms of
not necessarily communication at that stage, but it is signaling to the infant in the womb, like whether the situation is stressful or not for the mother and thus for the not yet born infant.
And then once you're born, you're holding the infant, there's a lot of, you know, skin-to-skin contact, so you're still maintaining this, not quite communication, but this balance of the mother's heart rhythms or breathing rhythms to the infants,
and then slowly externalizing that to gaze relationships, or to like when you're playing with the baby's hands, you know, you're holding their hands, maybe moving them, and then slowly just externalizing these rhythms into more and more communicative acts and less sort of direct embodied relationships.
Cool.
Cool.
Ivan?
Ivan?
Hi, everyone.
My name is Ivan.
I'm from Moscow, Russia.
I wanted to say that toddlers have very limited set of mental states and to align with the
state.
It's a state there vis-a-vis can't do this alignment more simple rather than we talk about all the people who has more broad mental states.
more broad set of their internal states.
Yep.
And we can come back to that when we get to the attunement question.
Shannon, I really liked how you described the continuum from the, really, the communication that is related to rhythm of the heart and the maybe circadian rhythms in the blood.
So very slow rhythms and rhythms that are transmitted through tactile stimulus through the womb, as well as chemical or neural type relationships.
And then it's like this gradual disconnection where as the physical touch is replaced by the gaze and then adults tend to have more of a barrier physically between them.
At least that's coming from a culturally specific place, but maybe it still does hold.
It's rare to see adults touching each other as much as, for example, a mother and an infant.
And so the second question, how does it relate this development of communication through these different modalities and from things that barely seem communicative, things that almost seem physiological.
But then in the end, if we're communicating about what's for dinner, isn't that also a physiological communication that reduces our uncertainty about where nutrition is coming from?
So is it that different than a pre-linguistic cry for milk?
And then how does it relate to this way in which adults understand each other?
And then it reminds me also of these different modalities of therapy and even thinking about like Maslow's hierarchy of needs.
The idea that the end all be all is the linguistic expression, I'm sorry, or I'm happy.
That's kind of the tip of the iceberg for linguistically capable adults.
But what is that embodied iceberg?
What is the actual thing that we're trying to communicate?
What's the territory, not just the linguistic map?
And then how does this relate to the communication or other issues that adults have?
And we want to work it out.
And then are we going to use our words?
Are we going to use our lower levels of the Maslow's hierarchy, lower chakras?
We get physical for better or for worse.
We hope you enjoyed this week's episode on human communication during development and communicative systems.
In the next episode, we're going to discuss the same paper and we're going to talk about attunement.
So stay tuned.
