Welcome to the ActInf podcast, where we will present short, digestible segments clipped from Team Com's weekly active inference live streams.
If you like what you hear and you want to learn more, check out the entire live stream on the Active Inference Lab YouTube channel.
My name is Blue Knight, and I will be guiding you through this podcast, which is clipped from Active Inference Lab live stream number 3.2.
This week's episode is a discussion that is loosely structured around the paper, A World Unto Itself, Human Communication as Active Inference, by Jared Vassell, Paul Badcock, Axel Constant, Carl Friston, and Maxwell Ramstead.
Daniel Friedman, who is based out of Davis, California, is facilitating this live stream discussion about attunement.
So here's a quotation from the paper.
The hypothesis here is then that repeated couplings between infants and children with adults and more experienced peers may cause the prior beliefs of inexperienced individuals to converge more towards the hidden causes generating sensory consequences, i.e. the mental states of more experienced others, rather than the other way around.
That is, coupled action perception cycles in such dyads tend to be characterized by an asymmetric entrainment of prior beliefs.
What does this mean?
What is the most just foundational interpretation of this question?
And then how does this relate maybe to the infant-adult dyad communication?
I'll just start with the base interpretation.
We're talking about these communicative dyadic situations between two or multiple agents, and we're referring to one of the individuals as more experienced and one of them as relatively inexperienced in the context of some niche.
So it isn't that one is closer to absolute truth, that's not that babies are closer to absolute truth, it's not that the adult is closer to absolute truth, it's that one of these individuals has had more experience in a certain informational niche, and also might have a higher degree of precision on their beliefs.
And that could be an example of this evolutionary hyper-prior, which is like the temperature on decision-making of a young person starts high.
So you could tell them, yep, the sky is like a fabric, and the sun is carried by a chariot.
And that explains, it reduces their uncertainty about the path of the sun in the sky, and so potentially that is taken up by the younger or the more inexperienced individual.
Whereas somebody who had very high precision on what the sun was, whether they thought it was a car or a nuclear reactor or something, that person is going to be harder to move into a new narrative.
And so when you have an experienced and an inexperienced individual, or for that matter, a stubborn and an open-minded individual, because of the asymmetries, you're going to get this type of asymmetric, this differential outcome through the communication.
And here it's being described as the inexperienced individual converging to the priors of the experienced one, and not vice versa.
Here Daniel is going to switch topics.
He's going to start talking about learning together versus learning alone.
And in the learning together paradigm, that would be similar to when you're having a conversation with someone, and right when you stop talking, the other person starts to talk, and then vice versa.
So that's how people learn together.
And he's going to start to talk about the learning alone paradigm in this next cut.
We were thinking about this, like the two recording studios, the two individuals are singing a call and response song, but they're not synchronized.
And so through their singing, they end up desynchronizing through no fault of their own.
However, when you're having a sensory coupling and a deep prior that you want to be aligned with your conversant or with your communicative partner, that's learning together.
You need the sensory coupling, and you also need this prior that you want to be aligned on your mindset.
Let's think a little bit more about attunement with this other quote from the paper.
They wrote, human individuals appear characteristically, i.e. species typically, we can discuss that, to be endowed with an adaptive prior that one's mental states are aligned with those of conspecifics.
What does that mean, just what is the first level interpretation of that sentence, and then what about our priors are adaptive, can they go wrong, and then what about that is species typical with respect to humans?
Any thoughts there?
So in differentiating human communication from non-human primae and other species, in the paper, what happened a lot was this discussion about the humans wanting to have their mental states aligned.
And we saw that in the previous quote, like, the baby isn't satisfied until the mental state is aligned, until it believes that the mental state is aligned.
And I think it was Shannon who brought up this, something where if somebody gets the right food for you from the grocery store, but you think that they were misinformed about something else, it's almost like it's not good enough for us to get what we asked for at the grocery store.
We really want to make sure that they also knew exactly, at a deeper level, why we were wanting that.
And so this question about the humans being endowed with a prior that we want to be aligned at a mental state level.
Now, I'll just first start with the species-specific question.
I wonder if in a wolf pack or in an ant colony, although one could debate to what extent these mental states are aware or something like that, that's a little bit on the qualia end of the spectrum, I would still say that in these groups, be it insect or other mammals, these individuals do benefit from having the mental state of the pack aligned.
And so in that respect, I wonder if they also have an adaptive prior that their mental states would be aligned with conspecifics.
Hi, guys. I'm Shannon. I'm usually in Merced, California, but I'm in South Dakota for the pandemic.
That's actually interesting bringing up, like animals is intuitive, or wolf packs, because we have dogs and we can see they try to align maybe something about their emotional state with their human owners or with other dogs you have in your house.
And you can see that maybe with wolves, but when you bring up ants, that's interesting, because outside of the movie Ant-Man, you don't really prescribe emotions to them.
But there's definitely an alignment of their action states, like in terms of which chemical pathways they're going to follow, and when they leave these chemical traces that say, there's definitely food here, more and more ants travel, there's more and more chemical traces, and as the food's depleted, the trace goes away.
So even though there's that really close physical proximity, there's still some knowledge of the other ants' mental states in their coordinated behavior.
And so it's interesting to kind of make that jump from behavior to actually ascribing, I want my mental state to match yours in some way.
And the way that that gets manifested through feedback with the environment, or stigmergy in the social insects, the way that somebody might decorate a tea room, and it's very serene.
It's like when you're in this space, I want you to be synchronized on this mental alignment.
This is a sacred space, or this is a messy spot.
And then similarly, when we're just talking about the traces in the ant colony, which fundamentally are serving to reduce the uncertainty of the colony about where to get food in that case, and the way that the ants can communicate with each other is through direct touch, tactile touch and olfaction, as well as these long-term traces, which can potentially generate something like collective mental state.
And so these are really interesting questions, like does the worker ant have a prior?
Is that the mental state that's being shared, or does it want it to be shared?
Or is it that individuals who act in a way that lead to coherent colonies, we end up seeing them over evolutionary time more?
So it's almost independent of whether there's this experiential component to the adaptive prior.
It's almost whether it is adaptive is this sort of circular question, kind of like survival of the fittest.
We're going to see packs of animals or packs of single-cell bacteria or insects that end up having aligned and adaptive and effective communication.
And then what does that actually tell us?
Because we're only going to see those systems persist.
We're only going to see communication as a dysfunction in mostly functional systems because things just didn't randomly show up here, one way or the other.
I think you nailed it with that statement, that it's a circular argument in a way.
I was thinking about that rereading the paper as well.
It's like, wow, this sounds just too clean.
Like, it all kind of makes sense in the direction that this argument's going.
And back to the point about how we as humans interpret what other species are doing to be communicative cooperation or not,
is a whole other question, because if it's furthering their means as a species, then they're cooperating the right amount.
There's a line about how even great apes, they do pointing, but in a way that's not communicative cooperation, but more selfish.
And I wonder if that's just kind of a human, our human species bias on how other species communicate, but not as good as we do.
Yep, and to bring this actually to narratives and narrative attunement, the action patterns from a mechanical standpoint that humans are being asked to do by each other are too complicated to just be hard-coded or directly.
You can't say, hey, move your left hand a little bit up.
Okay, now go a little bit down.
Now go back to where you were and go, okay.
So you can't tell someone, here's how you draw the letter A.
Okay, now here's how you draw the next letter.
You tell them the next level of would be write the word Alexandra, and then they're going to interpret that, unpack that in their own way.
And then an even higher level of narrative attunement would be like, I want you to do this, or here's why it's important that you should do this.
And so if you can get people to be aligned at the, here's why it's important to go out and do community service towards this end,
then they're going to figure out all the details with getting in and out of the car and turning left at the stoplight and coming to all these details that you would spend your whole life trying to micromanage.
If you can provide narrative attunement, then each individual agent is going to unpack that in their own niche in a way that makes sense to them.
And so it's a very high leverage point to be able to specify and attune narratives, because people who are narratively aligned with you will act in a similar way.
They'll respond to stimuli in a way that's similar to yourself or at least beneficial in a broad coalition.
And that's a, um, avenue or a vector for attunement of action in humans that is not as developed potentially in other species, which comes back to this question about human specific.
Is it really human specific to be having an adaptive prior that communication is useful?
Well, it's different in, uh, degree.
There's no other species with such an extent of digital or written communication, but is it really different in type when we have turn taking?
Rhythmic coordination across the animal and even non-animal kingdom.
So cool stuff there.
Any thoughts on attention or on attunement before we get to attention?
Hello everyone.
I'm Alex.
I'm in Moscow, Russia.
I'm a researcher in system management school.
I just want to say maybe, uh, uh, should we, or is it possible?
To, uh, separate maybe for like a signal level and for, I don't know, content level.
So to have a good attunement, you first, for example, need to exchange some kind of, uh, special signals to start, uh, the main part of this attunement.
Yep.
And that relates to these ostentive cubes.
So if in a, uh, email, the first.
Line is to whom it may concern.
It's a relatively formal way.
It's saying, this is a cue.
I'm showing you my hand right at the beginning.
I speak English.
I speak formally, et cetera, versus there's other ostentive cues that could attune somebody.
Hey, just a quick message.
Um, these are different cues.
And then there's the level of syntactic attunement.
That's making sure that the message comes across just from a bit wise perspective.
And then there's the semantic attunement, the meaning of the message, but of course the media is the message.
So there's like somewhat of a blurring between the, um, content and the delivery mechanism.
And then there's the narrative attunement, which is at the highest level that goes beyond any single meme, the JPEG or the words in it or whatever.
It's that higher level attunement that actually dictates how humans respond.
We hope you enjoyed this week's episode discussing attunement in human communication.
Stay tuned for next week's episode where we will talk about attention.
