Welcome to the ActInf podcast, where we will present short, digestible segments clipped from TeamCom's weekly Active Inference live streams.
If you like what you hear and you want to learn more, check out the entire live stream on the Active Inference Lab YouTube channel.
My name is Blue Knight, and I will be guiding you through this podcast, which is clipped from Active Inference Lab live stream number 3.2.
This episode is a discussion that is loosely structured around the paper, A World Unto Itself, Human Communication as Active Inference, by Gerald Vassell, Paul Badcock, Axel Constant, Carl Friston, and Maxwell Ramstead.
Daniel Friedman is facilitating the live stream discussion. He's based out of Davis, California, and he's going to start off asking the participants about communication.
The first question is, what is an interesting type of communication you've experienced or maybe even thought about in the previous week?
Hello everyone, I'm Alex. I'm in Moscow, Russia. I'm a researcher in System Management School.
For me, it was a meeting with my relatives, what I didn't have a chance to see about for half a year.
Before, because of COVID, and so on. So, last weekend was quite happy meeting with relatives and some kind of discussion.
And so, attunement between us after a long time.
Cool. And maybe either Ivan or Shannon, related to that answer.
How has going remote, or just this situation of the past year, influenced your style of communication or relating?
Hi guys, I'm Shannon. I'm usually in Merced, California, but I'm in South Dakota for the pandemic.
So, yesterday, we had our first meeting of our graduate student group, and we had about 40 people in one Zoom room.
And after a whole summer of seeing maybe four or five different faces on a screen, and being able to make pseudo eye contact with whoever you're talking to,
Yesterday was a bit of a bombardment of visual sensory information, like searching for the person who was speaking,
and trying to tune out the extra movements, or drinks with a water bottle, or someone's pet on screen,
while also trying to pay attention to if someone had a nod, or raised their actual physical hand in a video.
So, it was definitely an adjustment, like, I was a lot more conscious of all of the interactions of everyone on the screen than I would have been had we been in a room, in person.
Yeah, there's big differences between being with three people in a room, and 40 people in a room,
and so it shouldn't be surprising that there's differences between the kind of smaller video chat that we're having here and then the larger scale rooms,
but it's really hard to stay on top of everything when we don't get the full information.
And then, I guess, a last general question. What is something that is new that you've experienced or learned about this week?
Hi, everyone. My name is Ivan. I'm from Moscow, Russia.
I can tell that in our company we have a frequent meeting each Monday morning. We discuss about work issues, and
this week I saw that the meeting goes different when different number of people
involved in this meeting. And it's very interesting why people who are absent now, how do they influence the meeting?
And maybe they don't know about that they influence while they are absent.
Interesting. Yeah, with organizations, people can have influence whether they're in the room or not.
So sometimes the communication ecology of the meeting room includes people who are in a different room, fundamentally.
And then also, because communication is so non-additive, it's non-linear, if you have a certain outcome with person A, B, C, and they have a dance party,
and then you take away person C and there's no dance party, that doesn't mean that person C is the dance party.
It just means there's some sort of emergent outcome with the three people who were there,
and there's a different emergent outcome when somebody isn't there. So how do we deal with that,
this non-linearity of communication? And maybe even this paper might have some ideas.
Sasha?
Sasha? Hi, everyone. I'm Sasha, and I'm in California.
Maybe you'll see in the recording, but as we're working towards alignment of mental states, your video
and audio are not aligned. And in the evolutionary sense, I want to make sure that your voice and video
are aligned because that would never happen outside of a video chat. But in a video chat,
I don't need to worry that they're offset because I'm listening to your voice for the content of what
you're saying. So that those two things are not aligned is actually okay in this scenario, but it's
still concerning and draws my attention to that mismatch.
Yep. That's a deep prior that we've learned by communicating in person that definitely gets
violated. Also, people being pixelated in person. I don't remember that happening, but it did happen
from time to time. So I think this was, Alex, your question. There's cooperative, competitive, or
adversarial communication, and there's other kinds of communication too, possibly. So what are the kinds of
communication that can be identified and how? What made you ask this question or what would be
interesting to know about this? Yeah, because the paper, the paper that we are reading is about
cooperative communication and everything is about it. But also it mentioned that it's possible and it's
really true. It's possible what communication could be competitive in some situation between two
people, people between teams. And the question is what our types could be to be identified, maybe some
kind of mix of these two types. And in case when communication is happening, how it is possible maybe to
understand if it's really cooperative or it's changed in competitive in some moment.
Great question. And is cooperative communication about the ends? If it results in cooperative
behavior, is that cooperative communication or does cooperative communication entail turn-taking and
feeling of cooperation? Because the feeling of cooperation and turn-taking can be hijacked or used
non-cooperatively, let's just say. And then the sort of all's well that ends well approach might excuse
some extremely inappropriate communication mechanics in service of a cooperative end goal. But who's
cooperative end goal and how are they defining that? So it's a big question. Like, do we define
communication by the mechanism and the details of the conversation itself? Or do we define it by the context?
So if we consider it from some, again, from an engineering point, we need to have some kind of
approaches to manage communication and to control it during its way to have predicted or expect results from it.
Yep. And I think that the general message passing or information sharing frameworks are almost broader
than cooperation itself. The communication outline that's inactive inference could be between a person
and a tiger. And that, whether it's cooperative or not, could be kind of a lens that you apply to it. But the signals
are certainly moving between the communicating agents, whether they think they're cooperating or they
actually are. So communication is sort of the fundamental. And then all these other adjectives
get layered on top depending on how we think about that kind of communication. Any other thoughts on that
first part? I'd briefly. And then thinking in the context of long-term collaboration, it seems like
communication would have to have signs of cooperativity at every stage along the way because there is no end
that is obvious. Or, you know, if you want a long-term collaboration, you don't want it to end because
of the miscommunication and how to focus on that kind of positive feedback without sinking into kind of
the superficial signs of cooperation of where people simply feel that it is cooperative.
Nice. Good point. This second quote speaks to that a little bit. It says,
a single individual is necessary to obtain a low risk and low reward. And then collaboration appears
as a riskier but more rewarding option. So this is kind of within that prisoner's dilemma type game
theory where individuals are, whether it's individual cells or eagles or birds or some other
thing, it's being phrased as a question of action for the individual, whether they want to go their
own way, whether that's considered defecting or it's just the baseline state to be individuated and
obtain with a higher probability, a smaller reward. Like I could work for $10 an hour by myself.
Or collaboration opens the door to potentially win-win collaborations where you make on average more
than $10 an hour because you worked with multiple people and you allowed your specialization and
your perspectives to contribute to a shared value. However, it may be the case that this collaboration
is also riskier. And so I think Alex, again, you asked what types of risk can be identified in a
communicative setting and how could we quantify such risks, especially if we were going to quantify them
using the way of thinking of active inference?
Yes, again, it's about for me, if we speak about collaboration and collaboration is based on
communication and first risk is not to have alignment at the end of communication. But what
possible kind of risks could be arised additionally, for example, to take a wrong direction for communication
and maybe if such kind of list could be prepared, if there are any possible way to quantify it in terms of
active inference framework and in terms of, I don't know,
maybe some kind of epistemic values or something like this.
I have a bit of an addition to that to bring it back to FEP and the minimization of uncertainty.
How do we determine kind of a good enough alignment, like something that is appropriate for the goal?
Because you could imagine that there's collaborations where you don't feel very aligned, but it's a low
stakes situation and at the start and at the end, you feel that your values or goals weren't really
aligned, but you still did the task that you were trying to do. And perhaps that's not the best case
scenario, but it's a realistic one. Yep. And de-risking communication. So for example,
and there's many kinds of risks that can be identified. So maybe I'll start with that. Like
there's the risk that you end up trusting somebody who ends up leaking your information or directly
causing an action to you or to a project that is deleterious. Somebody who causes your time to be
spent inefficient inefficiently. There's all these kinds of risks of biting off a bigger chunk with
the help of the team, but then the chunk that you bite off is the wrong one, or you fail to bite off
the chunk if it is the right one. And then how do we quantify? I like that idea, Alex, of course,
sort of like a checklist manifesto, but from the active inference potential applications and asking
more specifically, what kinds of things can we discuss as a team that reduce our uncertainty about
this and this and this? And I think that's definitely one of the directions we're moving.
So maybe we can keep that kind of question in mind and think about what are these best practices for
teams at the onset or in the middle or in the closing of even a little phase of their collaboration?
What are these questions or provocations that teams could take on that would de-risk
their communication and improve the throughput potentially in a way that could be lending itself
towards being formalized? Yeah, I have a thought on that. This kind of sounds like the Grice's
maxims, maxims, where what you say like in communication, one maxim is like relevance,
it needs to be relevant to the conversation or to whatever you're referring to. And I think
it's either quantity or quality where you need to say just enough that your message gets across,
but not too much. And this is like also something that you're inferring on your communicative partner.
Very cool. I looked up these Grice's maxims. G-R-I-C-E is the last name. And the four of them,
just to clarify, the maxim of quantity, which is be as informative as you possibly can without any more
information than needed. The maxim of quality, which is being truthful and not giving information
that's false or not supported by evidence. The maxim of relation, where one tries to be relevant and
say things that are pertinent to discussion. And then the maxim of manner is the fourth and last one,
where one tries to be clear, brief, and orderly without obscurity or ambiguity.
So these are really interesting. It reminds me of the truth, the whole truth, nothing but the truth
from the justice system. And also, these are great reminders in all sorts of communication,
especially ones that are potentially recorded or for a consumption, where the kinds of vocal pauses that
are played off as irrelevancies in conversation become magnified a lot. And good public speaking
is a challenge because having these cognitive maxims at the top of our mind prevents us from thinking
about the topic itself, unless it's a situation, thankfully, where you're talking about the maxims
themselves. So it's hard to speak directly and with high relevantness and quality and quantity
when all these other things are happening.
That concludes this episode of the podcast by Team Calm on communication as active inference. Stay tuned
for more of this discussion in the next coming weeks.
