Welcome to the ACT-INF podcast, where we will present short, digestible segments clipped
from the Active Inference Lab weekly live streams.
If you like what you hear and you want to learn more, check out the entire live stream
on the Active Inference Lab YouTube channel.
My name is Blue Knight, and I will be guiding you through this podcast, which is clipped
from Active Inference Lab live stream number 4.2.
This week's episode is a discussion of the paper, Cultural Affordances, Scaffolding Local
Worlds Through Shared Intentionality and Regimes of Attention, by Maxwell Ramstead, Samuel Vessier,
and Lawrence Kiermaier.
Daniel Friedman, who is based out of Davis, California, is facilitating this live stream
discussion, which will start off with a discussion of local worlds.
The first question is, what is a local world that you live in?
Well, so I'm Maxwell Ramstead.
I'm the first author on this paper, Cultural Affordances.
It's a good question.
I mean, I guess this says something about the way that we live.
I mean, I live in Montreal, and my local world, I live around the McGill area, so it's very
student-y.
I guess I live in a world where people share progressive values, and I also get the feeling
that there's something like a rift, you know, where several of us are sharing the same geographical
location, but don't necessarily live in the same world, per se, in the sense of that things
don't afford the same kinds of things that they do, you know, for other people living
in another, as it were, world.
Yeah.
Yeah.
The first thing I thought of was that local can be geospatial, or it can be informational.
One informational link away is just one video chat away, one phone call away.
And what we're experiencing in a big way is that tension between our informational local
worlds and our spatial ones, and that can lead to discordance.
Any other thoughts on this part?
Hi, my name is Alex.
I'm in Moscow, Russia, and I'm a researcher in systems management school.
Maybe in this term of local, maybe it's based on communications, which happens most often
with you, even in a global environment, but if you communicate each day with somebody, you
are kind of local world.
Cool.
Second question.
What gives meaning to our local worlds?
So this can be maybe a thought from the paper.
What did they propose gives meaning to local worlds, or just experientially, what is it that
gives meaning to your local world?
Yeah, Stephen.
Hello, I'm Stephen.
I'm in Toronto right now, and very excited about being here today.
Well, I think there's the geographical, like physical embeddedness of that world.
So how you actually, when I think of world, I kind of think very much of it in terms of
the physical space being part of that whole piece.
Um, but then, like you say, how those things show up, um, then starts to become maybe more
abstract or more inferred through other people.
Yep.
And from a process perspective, as we'll get to later, it's the feedback loops that happen
within ourself and amongst various people that provide semiotic meaning.
Um, Sasha, hi, good morning, everybody.
Um, I am as usual in Davis, California, and I'm looking forward to this conversation.
Yeah.
For some reason, I just thought of this phrase, um, like theory of place, kind of going along
with theory of mind, um, that it, in this kind of, uh, local information environment, but
maybe not, um, geospatially local, that the people that you're communicating with, you
may or may not know where they're communicating from, and that, um, could be helpful in your
communication or not, because, um, simply because we're all here on this live stream, we
don't really need to know the exact location of each of the participants.
Um, but if I did know it might add something to our communication or the narrative that we're
building, um, to kind of know where we can all connect from.
And then to follow up with the thinking through other minds idea, it's like thinking through
other spaces.
It's about putting yourself in someone else's shoes, understanding where they're coming from.
These are embodied and spatial metaphors that we use just like, can you grasp it?
Can you sketch out the idea?
These are tactile ways to talk about abstract things like ideas.
And so you're literally putting yourself in someone else's shoes.
If you ask, well, what is the accessibility of this room going to be for somebody who's
coming from a different place?
And these are the important things to consider.
And we'll return to this.
I think when we talk about the third space that exists in social interactions.
Last in terms of the, uh, the paper cultural affordances, the proposal there is something
like, well, um, what, what's at stake is something like a dialectic between affordances and expectations.
Right.
So, uh, what, what ends up shaping the, the worlds that we inhabit, right.
Which, which we're conceptualizing in terms of affordances, um, really are the, the shared
expectations that we have, uh, you know, with, with other people in our community and by shared
expectations, I mean something very broad, uh, to encompass, uh, the beliefs that we have
about, uh, the shared world, but also the norms, uh, that are, uh, kind of structuring,
uh, our, our appraisal and interaction with, uh, the world as well as practices that might
be ongoing and crucially the, the shared physical environment, uh, that we have in common that
in, in the case of humans comes to encode information about the way that we live.
Um, so, you know, think about, uh, the fact that in most cities streets meet at right angles,
uh, or, you know, the, uh, use of, uh, circular, uh, traffic signalization, uh, to kind of coordinate
our patterns of movement throughout a city.
I think what's at stake is really the, this dialectic.
Yep.
The ant colonies architecture is in feedback with their behavior and they're exactly updated
and generated by the very same process, which is niche construction or distributed cognition,
different contexts are going to have different terms.
And also one thought on local worlds and getting a grip.
So once there's a grip on the object, it becomes part of your extended cognition.
If you have the grip on the hammer, you can hit the nail, but if you don't have a grip
on the hammer, it's not part of your affordances to nail that in with a hammer.
Or if you're in someone else's shoes, the local world kind of becomes the foot shoe container.
And the local world is what gives meaning to that coupling between the foot and the shoe,
between the hand and the hammer.
And so in, in just a spatial way, but perhaps also in an abstract way, the local world is
tying back to the affordance idea.
And upon that control, um, idea, Sasha.
Oh, uh, yeah.
Just to add a little, uh, you know, metal level, uh, comment on that.
Um, the way that we communicate, um, right.
It has to capture the content of what we're trying to communicate and then also, uh, in
a way that makes sense to, uh, the receiving party, but it's just funny, especially on this
sort of podcast conversation style that, um, we're trying to communicate with each other,
but also in a way that is going to be, uh, understandable to a future audience.
And so I think there's a few different levels of modulating, um, our communication style
and, um, the kind of affordances that we have.
Perfect transition.
Another quote from the paper is we hypothesize that the central mechanisms whereby cultural
affordances are acquired, especially conventional context involving affordances consists in looping
our feedback relations between shared intentionality and shared attention in this light.
One can view social norms and conventions as devices to reduce mutual uncertainty.
That is constantly with a free energy framework as entropy minimizing devices.
One must know what is in the minds of others, such as what one would see and how one would
interpret another's action generally and in context in order to make a successful inference,
both explicit content involving or implicit correlational inferences about other agents
in each simulation situation.
Sorry.
So the question here was how do narratives reduce uncertainty?
How does conversation?
That's a great question.
Um, I mean, you know, y'all did, uh, our paper on narratives a few weeks ago,
so I'm sure you have some elements to answer that already, but I mean, the fundamental idea,
I think, uh, is the, also, I don't want to take up too much room.
If other people have more interesting things to say, please, uh, by all means, uh, it, you know,
jump in.
But I think, you know, narratives do this in two main ways, uh, following the two main senses
of narrative that we've outlined, right?
So by a narrative, you might understand, uh, some kind of internal cognitive shame of,
right?
So like when you tell, tell the story of your life or whatever, and like, from that point
of view, what narratives allow is for a kind of a novel kind of useful, uh, re-representation
of lived events that you've already undergone.
So it's a way of kind of, uh, introducing new structure and meaning into the flow of events
that have happened to you.
Uh, but by narrative, you might also mean a shared, uh, story.
Uh, so literally, uh, a cultural artifact that is produced through a storytelling practice.
And, uh, you know, from, from a niche construction point of view, uh, these are shared elements of
a common environment, uh, that we interact with and effectively, uh, internalize the structure of,
uh, such that we're, we're then able to, uh, you know, redeploy the ideas, concepts, values,
and so on that are present, uh, in the structure of that narrative to structure our social life.
If I had to, in a nutshell, I think those are the two main function.
Yep.
Um, and please, anyone on Team Com, raise your hand if you want to bring in the paper.
Uh, the idea of that narrative as almost being embodied in our evolutionary priors reminds me
of the hero's journey and the, the narrative structure of the hero's journey.
It's not about the hero tying and untying their shoes.
It's about a story arc, which goes from A to Z, and that does many things.
It compresses the past into a distilled representation so that you don't need to remember every single
detail of the past, but rather you can remember the action relevant sections of the past.
Like the bird told me something relevant.
You don't need to remember how many feathers were on the bird.
It's enough to know that in a certain space in time, you had an interaction where the bird
told you go down this path, not that one.
And then the symbolism as well.
And so words are symbols.
These are things we'll return to as well.
And so the narratives are like paths of symbols, whether strings of words, um, or evocative,
uh, patterns.
Yeah.
Stephen.
Stephen.
Yeah.
And this also probably changes a bit in terms of how indigenous cultures work with, um, story
and legend and, uh, animalism and unknowns in the environment, which they were tuning to.
And the way that we've kind of codified our, um, narratives, these kind of grand narratives,
which rather than it being about the land, which indigenous culture tends to be about the land
and timeless qualities that are unfolding, you get this kind of, you know, you mentioned about
the past as an entity that's in a timeline where we have a sense of self in the timeline,
which is actually kind of a more modern way of thinking about things.
So in some ways we've actually designed an understanding of how we fit into the world
because our niche has changed in the way that, you know, you were talking about because we've
constructed our own way of understanding what our sort of human world is and attune to that.
Now we're kind of, we're even redefining the way we see our history and the way that we see
narratives because narratives are these broader temporal depths, which can stretch and then
stories have become kind of commodified. Whereas in indigenous culture, um, story and land and us
are much more kind of in the present in this kind of enfolded kind of cycle that nature provides
rather than saying what our calendars or our watches provide.
Yeah. Two thoughts on that. One is the distinction between Kronos and Kairos. So the chronometer
is the clock that's tick, tick, tick, tick, tick. That's the regularities and the decimal system
and Kairos means timeliness. And so it relates to dinner time versus 6 PM. Those are very different
things. One is an exact time independent of an embodied experience. And the other one is actually
the experience independent of the clock time. So that's important. And then also just to highlight,
um, the pragmatism of taking an action oriented approach or the active inference approach to
thinking about our modern life. As team come, we often find it helpful when beginning and closing
a meeting like bookends to almost have narrative review, just restating syntactically. Here's who's
here. Here's what we intend to get out of this interaction, or here are the goals of the meeting
in previous frameworks. Like getting things done is technically an action oriented framework,
but not in the inactive embodied sense. It's sort of in a productivity homo economicus framework.
And so you get convergent evolution of sometimes the recommendations like make a to-do list or restate
the goals at the beginning of the meeting. But rather than thinking about these as simply tasks to be
achieved, it actually helps us realign at an increasingly fine scale with the work that needs
to be done. And that is a full stack alignment from the syntactic level, the details and the nitty gritty
of the work that does need to get done up through the narrative. Where are we at this moment? And what
alphas does this project relate to? That's from the systems engineering framework all the way up to the
highest level, which is what is our group doing? What is our company doing? What problems are we
trying to solve? And these ground floor or pet house level questions, depending on how you think
about it, are foundational. And we return again and again to these questions about what our purpose is.
And that's man's search for meaning. That's the whole task. And that doesn't really end. So by framing
the problem, not just as a set of popping in tasks to the stack and then finishing them, we can think
about this as this ongoing process of realignment of the details of our sensory states to our desired
regularities that we want to see in the world. We hope you enjoyed this week's episode and stay
tuned for more discussions of the same paper. Next week, we'll be looking at a discussion on skilled
intentionality.
