Welcome to the ActInf podcast, where we will present short, digestible segments clipped from the Active Inference Lab weekly live streams.
If you like what you hear and you want to learn more, check out the entire live stream at the Active Inference Lab YouTube channel.
My name is Blue Knight, and I will be guiding you through this podcast, which is clipped from ActInf Lab live stream number 4.2.
This discussion will be loosely structured around the paper, Cultural Affordances, Scaffolding Local Worlds Through Shared Intentionality and Regimes of Attention,
by Maxwell Ramstead, Samuel Vessier, and Lawrence Kiermeier.
Daniel Friedman will be leading this discussion, starting off talking about the relationship between ontology and culture.
The question is, how do ontologies relate to culture?
And then, if a person wanted to address that question with a raised hand, or the second question is,
what kinds of tools are needed to work with ontologies and narratives?
So, I'll start with one of language as an ontology scheme for the regularities and the objects that are around us.
So, it's one of the cliches that X culture has Y words for Z concept.
You know, this culture has 22 ways to describe this.
And, of course, you can always add adjectives to describe a variety of different kinds of snow or sand or whatever it is,
but it becomes deeper through time.
And there become specialized words that really capture and can finesse as a handleable, as a grippable concept,
different types of sand, snow, whatever it happens to be, trees,
and then can then be built into larger systems or sentences.
Maxwell?
Hi, I'm Maxwell Ramstad.
I'm the first author on this paper, Cultural Affordances.
Yeah, so, I mean, I think what you just said was very interesting.
I just want to clarify a bit what we meant by ontologies in this context.
So, I mean, we're drawing on the ontological turn material that's coming out of anthropology in large part.
Apologies to Stephen.
Some of this material is Deleuzean.
I mean, you know, I also tend to share your reservations about some of the stuff coming out of Deleuze and stuff.
But, so the ontological turn fundamentally is saying something like,
well, what we should be doing is talking about the worlds in which people inhabit in the way that they inhabit it, right?
Rather than just saying what we have as scientists, as knowledge, and what other people have as mere belief,
what we should be doing is talking about, like, really the worlds in which people live,
and the ontologies or, like, the categories of types of being that people are kind of bringing on board.
So, you know, we don't, I think we're at odds with some of the people in the ontological turn
because we take a meta-Beyesian approach to this, which is to say, well, we all operate with beliefs.
The scientific worldview is also a set of beliefs that comes with its own ontology and whatever.
So, as long as it's an even playing field and there's no, like, kind of disparity between, you know,
the respect that we're according to different kinds of knowledges, then, you know,
we're sort of all operating with our ontologies.
And in the context here in this paper, what we mean more specifically is things like ontologies of persons, right?
Like, so for those of us in the American and particularly North American context, you know,
racism and colorism are major issues and, you know, it just is the case that young children even,
even children that hail from minority groups internalize the categories of personhood of the dominant political group, right?
So, you know, the well-known, you know, experiments on children suggesting that, you know,
children from racialized communities tend to prefer dolls, for example, that look like white people or whatever,
over dolls that are consonant with their own kind of ethnic, you know, outward appearance.
And so, yeah, what we're talking about then is, like, the categories of, you know,
different kinds of people, different kinds of places, all of these kind of concepts and norms and frameworks that,
so all this is an ontology.
It's a way of cutting up your sensory stream, effectively, of parsing your phenomenology.
And what we're suggesting is that this is acquired mainly through immersive participation and practices.
So you don't have to be explicitly told, for example, the first time you go to a fancy restaurant,
not to jump up and down on the tables.
Humans are exquisitely sensitive to context, and we're able to just dynamically extract the norms of the situation,
or at least most neurotypical humans are able to do this, on the fly, without instruction.
And so this is where the ontology stuff at least comes in in this paper.
Yeah, Alejandra?
Hello, hello, everybody.
My name is Alejandra, and also, as usual, I'm here in Mexico.
Actually, I was thinking about this idea about the landscape affordances and the shared attention,
and how this shared attention is determining which expectations will be encoded in this hierarchical predictive processing.
So I was wondering, and also, in terms of these ontologies related to culture, about social networks.
It's kind of weird, but yeah, this idea that's constantly in my mind, how these new ways of interacting are changing.
It's a kind of a massive joint attention, I don't know how to say it, but yeah, like a massive joint attention,
a kind of extended culture that is manipulating us to what to attend.
So in some ways it's changing what we believe that is relevant and manipulating us, our attention and what to expect,
but in a massive way, and I think we are not conscious about this, the effect that it's having on our beliefs.
And as you were saying, Maxwell, this racism and social preferences, I think that, I don't know if I'm explaining myself,
but this massive joint attention is kind of affecting our grip, the way we grip with society in an unexpected way.
Oh, yeah, that makes total sense to me.
I really think that this is like a really key issue.
I mean, you know, it's unfortunate, but, you know, prejudicial behavior, like hate crimes have been on the rise steadily since, you know, the Trump administration took power.
And I mean, I think it speaks to the power of, you know, the power of the media effectively and of shared images and shared narratives, you know.
I mean, personally, I think a lot of the issue comes from the fact that, you know, older generations weren't taught to be information skeptic, right?
So, I mean, you know, growing up now as a 30-something, when I was a kid and internet was like starting out, you know, what you learned was don't trust everything you read on the internet.
So, I think one of the issues is that communities form around different types of epistemic standards, effectively.
And, I mean, if you sort of look at the split, the cultural split, the increasingly deepening kind of cultural split between, you know, more conservative and more liberal populations in the U.S., for example,
I think what you see is really a split in modes of adequate justification, you know, so it's stunning to me how the same kind of fact base can lead to completely opposite interpretations in this kind of context.
But, unfortunately, you know, the fact that, you know, you have like these very hateful groups that now spread messages, you know, on a medium that then is shared.
I mean, it really takes the, it takes the, Joseph Henrich puts this well in his great book, The Secret of Our Success.
He says, essentially, the same things that make us capable of incredible feats of coordination, you know, and that have allowed us to, you know, like build large-scale cities and develop modern medicine,
the same capacity for intense cooperation, the same capacity for intense cooperation is also what makes us docile and what makes us crave totalitarian rulers.
We just like to be very nice and agreeable, you know, and if everyone kind of decides that some group is going to be the scapegoat, well, you know, there's a tendency to go along with that.
And, you know, if our hypothesis is correct and there's also a tendency to just acquire, unthinkingly download the kind of information that's presented to us in immersive contexts,
then it's not surprising that, you know, if these messages are spreading online, you know, in very highly immersive kind of tunnel vision things like YouTube channels that just like relink similar content.
Like, I mean, like, yeah, I don't know if this is an entirely coherent message, but I do deeply resonate with what you were saying, Alejandro.
I think this is a huge set of issues that we need to address.
A lot of my own research for the next several years is going to be directed in precisely this direction.
Like countering, understanding and countering the spread of these narratives and like just modeling social dynamics using these tools more broadly.
Yeah, exactly.
Well, sorry, then just to add something in terms of like your personal narrative, your own story, how, how is affected?
Um, I can see it in, in, in, in adolescence or, or in childs, they are just expecting a like, and that's meaning so meaningful to, to, um, minimizing prediction error about yourself.
So, um, yeah, it's like, you have like thousands and hundreds of people just paying attention about your picture and, and if you receive 10 likes or 100 likes, um, what is like, um, the way that the self is gripping to, to this.
Um, oh, that's an interesting point.
So there's a weird kind of self evidencing, I guess.
Yeah.
It's very sad, but I guess that it's really tragic when you think about it.
Right.
We have off-sourced, we off-sourced our sovereignty of attention to algorithms and those are driven by exploit.
And, and, and our sense of self-worth, right?
So there's, from an active inference point of view, likes and retweets and shares and whatever are evidence for your existence, right?
For, for, for a model of you having worth in a social environment, uh, that's actually, I think, worth at least a paper.
If you want to write that up, Alejandra, like send me a DM and we'll write that up as a paper.
It sounds, it's a great idea.
Yeah.
Um, Sasha?
Hi, everyone.
Um, I'm Sasha and I'm in California.
Uh, yeah, I just wanted to add onto that, um, a comment about, uh, don't trust the internet.
Um, and I, I really liked the phrase that you used, uh, Alejandra, uh, the massive joint attention.
Um, and then it seems like social media, um, is kind of able to bypass that filter of don't trust
the internet, but these are my friends.
This isn't the internet.
This isn't the internet.
Um, these, um, the social network somehow is able to pass through that filter that this
is a group of people that we trust or that we feel that we trust more than the internet
as this, um, greater entity.
Well, they don't call it anti-social media.
They don't call it physical distancing.
They say social distance.
These words really matter as far as slipping in the back door semantically with what, um,
uh, is, uh, being communicated in the end.
So yes.
Um, to pick up on what Sasha was saying, I think, uh, the internet's epistemic status is
very much up in the air.
Like, you know, I, I think I'm, I'm always a bit naively optimistic.
Uh, and so I like to think that people are critical about what they read on the internet,
but I, I think it was a joke somewhere.
I forget who said it, but it's something like, you know, when I was growing up, my mother
told me, don't get into a car with strangers and, uh, like now I literally summon strangers
from my internet, having mobile device to pick me up and to bring me places.
Right.
Uh, like the, uh, I, I, I mean, as, as some of you are pointing out, it's, it's sort of
the connective tissue of a lot of relations, especially post COVID.
A lot of my friendships, for example, have been pursued over the internet.
Uh, so that, that's actually a very interesting point.
Maybe the fact that this information is being presented through our friends that are sharing
this, uh, information does tend to increase its precision for us and make it more salient.
A hundred percent.
It's why the word of mouth recommendation of a product is the highest form.
It's why influencers try to be personable.
There there's so much to that angle and using the preexisting and the possible social networks
to leverage, uh, the spreading of memes that might be just purely corrosive, not even for
or against one side, just pure disinformation or pure things that, uh, are divisive.
Let me just run through a few of our ladder questions so we can get some more neurons firing,
connect some more ideas and stabilize these concepts.
So in this quote, which, um, I will not read, it's just about how cultural affordances are
acquired through cultural practices.
And I found a really nice image that I thought tied together ontologies with culture.
So this is an image from the ontotext.com on the bottom there.
And it writes ontologies do not only introduce a shareable and reusable knowledge representation,
but can also add new knowledge about the domain.
So I had a few questions here about ontologies, and that could be in that anthropological term,
the anthropological, or the ontological term as Maxwell was describing it, or in the more
computational sense, like gene ontologies, the structure of words that we use to describe
genes.
So ontology in that sense means like a formal knowledge structure.
And about the attention and relationship between attention and ontology, between ontologies
and development.
And then especially for this group, how do ontologies and active inference interact?
And how does that actually add knowledge to a situation rather than being a pure descriptor?
Well, I mean, in part, you don't grasp the world in a naked way, right?
Like we grasp it through our conceptual categories, uh, through the salience.
It's structures that are encoded in our conceptual categories in large part.
And, uh, yeah, I mean, the, uh, the point of having an ontology is to kind of, you know,
fix the frame problem in a sense to kind of say, okay, what out of all of these elements
that could be monopolizing my attention at a given moment, you know, who are the relevant
interlocutors that are deserving of my attention?
What are the, uh, salient aspects of the scene that require my processing?
Um, yeah.
And in general, what, you know, just in, in the broad sense, right?
Like what, uh, is kind of the, uh, cause otherwise you're just, you know, dealing with a sensory
stream, which is all fine and good.
But like, so the ontology is what you bring to bear on the sensory stream to kind of parse
things out from it.
Yep.
And I, I like where you took that.
It was exactly what I was thinking about.
Like how many tennis balls can you fit in your hand?
Maybe three, maybe you have a large hand for tennis balls or something, but you have a bag
and you can cluster the tennis balls and you could pick up a bag with a hundred tennis balls.
So that's the grip physical metaphor is the tools, the affordances that cluster allow you
to grip more.
And so similarly, we can use ontologies of ideas and use that to get a grip on really high
level concepts.
And then when we pick up the double-edged sword though, right?
Because, uh, I mean, you know, this is the problem of using priors in general is that,
you know, you're starting from a point that might not be the right one and that might actually
prevent you from, uh, you know, so ontologies are the reason why we have, you know, uh, the
capacity to interact with each other, for example, as peers, you know, because we have these categories,
uh, you are my peers and my friends and we can interact, but, you know, ontologies are also
responsible for racist behavior, uh, for sexism.
Uh, you know, if I, if my ontology says women are inferior, uh, to men or the people with
dark skin, by the way, I don't believe any of that bullshit, just to be clear.
But like, if that, if that is my ontology, then I'm bound to treat, uh, others in a way
that reflects those beliefs.
Uh, so, I mean, this is why they're so important to culture, I think, because they, they kind
of, it's, it's not unrelated to this formal definition that you were discussing, Dan, like
it, it gives you the kind of general tracks that, that you'll follow in your treatment
of others.
Uh, so then it becomes interesting to, you know, use anthropological methods, for example,
to see what are the ontologies that people are actually bringing to bear, uh, you know,
to, and, and to, to use that physical carrying metaphor.
So you go, okay, well, I can hold three eggs in my hand.
I should have a bag with 500 eggs because I can pick it up.
Well, now you have none or you have a mess.
And so oversimplification through any number of mechanisms within a value structure simply
leads to false positives and false negatives.
And another way that we can bring in the free energy principle is the phrasing of free
energy as model accuracy penalized by complexity.
And in some ways, the extreme, uh, simple model, let's say a one category modeling, all
people are people or two or three category model.
And so do the models get more accurate in terms of reducing surprise as we include more
and more parameters.
And then in the extreme case, we have everyone is unique, which is an interesting bookshelf,
you know, end piece to contrast with this.
Everybody's the same.
And so somewhere in between is where we're actually going to end up.
And so how do we help bring these implicit generative models of the world and our priors
into being shaped and designed?
And, uh, personally, I think we never escaped the value question.
And it's one thing to come together with somebody who has a different perspective.
And it's why it's so important to highlight coming together across differences, because
there's just no amount of cultural or genetic or whatever homogeneity that is going to prevent
conflict.
And so instead we can have a coming together story about working together across differences
rather than wedging tiny differences.
And that story itself is in a trade-off with essentially gaslighting and telling people
that suffering is just part of how things are.
So there's so many trade-offs that exist, especially when we're talking about issues that matter most.
I mean, we're not talking about species definitions in foxes.
We're talking about our own lives and our world and our ecosystem.
And so, yes, they're touchy topics.
And it's so important to be clear about what is and also what we want to see.
And so I think there's so much that can be explored and expanded on here.
I like that you brought in complexity minus accuracy, because in a sense, this is a little
bit, a slightly looser way of thinking about it.
But in general, you want as little boxes as possible, right?
Boxes, I mean, if you listen to Buddhist wisdom, for example, boxes are the source of suffering,
right?
We cling to our boxes.
We put things in boxes.
And it makes us feel comfortable.
But really, this is the source of suffering, you know, this tendency to only be comfortable
with things when they're nicely packaged in these kind of nice binary categories.
I think this is why people get so, like, uncomfortable when these binaries get challenged, you know,
by, like, gender fluidity and transness and these kinds of things.
On the flip side, if we didn't have boxes at all, we would die.
You know, you need to be able to parse that sensation as hunger in order to generate, like,
you know, appropriate survival-generating behavior.
So I think that's, like, the fundamental paradox of human existence is both that we need boxes
to survive, but that they also are the source of much, you know, just suffering, both that we're
inflicting to ourselves by forcing these kind of conceptual straitjackets onto ourselves,
but also because of the social wrongs that can be the result of, you know, using the wrong ontology.
Yep.
And cognitive diversity means differences in risk tolerance.
It means, of course, different perspectives, unique perspectives.
And also, maybe on that explore-exploit or on that model accuracy versus complexity,
some people will accept a more accurate model from their perspective that is also a lot more
complex, whereas somebody else's, the coefficient of how much they're penalizing a complex model
is different.
So they're going to come to a different conclusion, and it's not as simple as right versus wrong
in that situation.
It's model preference, and could we take a step back?
Could we reframe and understand how we're all part of the ensemble that's learning?
It would be nice.
We hope you enjoyed this week's episode discussing ontologies and culture.
Stay tuned for next week when we will be talking about communication and the construction of meaning.
