Welcome to the ActInf podcast, where we will present short, digestible segments clipped
from the Active Inference Lab weekly live streams.
If you like what you hear and you want to learn more, check out the entire live stream
on the Active Inference Lab YouTube channel.
My name is Blue Knight, and I will be guiding you through this podcast, which is clipped
from Active Inference Lab live stream number 4.2.
This week's episode is a discussion of the paper, Cultural Affordances, Scaffolding Local
Worlds Through Shared Intentionality and Regimes of Attention, by Maxwell Ramstad, Samuel Vestier,
and Lawrence Kiermaier.
Daniel Friedman, who is based out of Davis, California, is facilitating this live stream
discussion on Active Inference and Niche Construction.
He's going to start off reading a quote from the paper.
This multi-level embodiment of the generative model, as we shall argue below, extends to
the concrete, material, human design milieus, or designer environments, in which humans operate.
Some generative models in this wide sense involve semantic content, and others do not.
They involve something more minimal than satisfaction conditions, i.e. reliable co-variation.
So my question, which is pretty broad, was what does Active Inference tell us about Niche
Construction in the physical sense or in the cultural sense?
Well, so I'm Maxwell Ramstad.
I'm the first author on this paper, Cultural Affordances.
So Axel Constant and Yella Brunenberg, I think, are the two first people to really start working
on the Niche Construction aspect of Active Inference back in 2017 or so.
And so all this work rests on the fact that whenever we're talking about Active Inference, we're talking
about a story that's symmetric in some deep sense.
So Active Inference is a story about how organisms over the course of development and learning and through
perception and processes like evolution become more like their ecological niche, which technically
means that their statistical structure comes to recapitulate, in some sense, the structure of the environment
in which the organisms that we're interested in exist.
So for example, you can tell a lot about my environment just by looking at my physical body, right?
So the fact that I'm wearing a parka tells you that summer's over in Canada, for example.
So there are these kind of predictive relations between the state of my phenotype and the expected
state of the environment that kind of come together.
So the other side of Active Inference that's often emphasizes the active bit.
So, you know, rather than making my beliefs more like the environment, I can make my environment
more like my beliefs or conform to my preferred data distributions.
What was overlooked before 2017 is that from the point of view of the organism and environment,
the story is symmetric.
So when we're making the environment more like our preferred data distributions as an active
inference, we're effectively changing the structure of the environment to make it more like our own
structure or to make it like the structure of the preferences that we're encoding.
And so I think a lot of the more interesting work done on culture recently in the active
inference tradition draws on this niche construction stuff.
I mean, you know, at some point, the idea is you've only got so many layers of cortex and
cortex is metabolically expensive.
So where are you going to keep optimizing, you know, after like the sixth layer or whatever
of like increasingly meta, increasingly centralized representation?
Well, one way to go is really just in the environment.
So there's a sense in which really like coordinating amongst conspecifics, you know, like or with
a team member or whatever is sort of like constructing a niche in another person in a sense.
You're sort of like, you know, uploading into another person the sets of priors that will
optimally allow you to interface together, which relates to some of the top, top effects that we
were discussing last week.
So I mean, ultimately, the picture that I kind of draw for multiscale active inference is that
you have two stacks, essentially, you've got a kind of vertical stack and a horizontal stack.
By vertical stack, I mean that all the systems that we're considering are nested systems of
systems of systems, right?
So, you know, our bodies are made of organs that are made of cells and so on.
Or, you know, the broader socioeconomic community in North America is made up of like, you know,
more regional groups like the U.S., Canada, Mexico, which in turn are made up of, you know,
so you've got these kind of nested structures going.
And the, yeah, the active inference story then can be used to, I think, make sense of the
ways in which we structure the environment, especially humans.
This is especially the case for humans, that we structure the environment in order to foster
adaptive patterns of group behavior.
One part that I thought was really interesting, Maxwell, was this notion of like a deep symmetry,
especially when the two interacting components of the system have very different affordances.
So I was thinking about winter, just like you brought up.
We don't recapitulate snow or cold weathers.
However, we do come to embody those regularities in the day and in the year with our first,
our thermoregulation as an organism, and then with our behavior and with our extended phenotype,
with our buildings and with our air conditioners.
And so we do, in a very deep sense, come to embody those regularities.
And then the air conditioners change the climate in some sense, maybe a little, maybe a lot.
Maybe it's in a good direction.
Maybe it's in a bad direction.
But there is a consequence of this coming to embody the regularities.
And especially when the systems are very different.
Maybe when you're doing a call and response, it looks symmetrical at the syntactic level,
and it has this deep symmetry at the turn-taking level.
And then with other systems where the turn-taking looks very different, it's still something symmetrical,
but it's not quite symmetrical at the first pass.
Right, well, so the idea I was trying to elaborate a bit earlier with this vertical and horizontal stack
touches precisely on this, is that it's not just that organisms are stacked in this kind of vertical way,
it's that you also have this kind of horizontal relationship between an organism or an agent
and its niche that turn out to also be stacked in this kind of way.
So it's not just that my cells make up organs that make up organs that make up my body, for instance.
It's that my body is a niche for my organs, and my organs are a niche for my cells.
And so when we're talking about niche construction, it's that we're thinking through the environment that is populated by others.
We're thinking through other worlds.
One thought I'll give there on the primacy of the organism from a philosophy of biology or natural selection perspective
is it was seen that the organism, or more specifically to some, the genes of the organism,
are the only thing that make it through the Weissman barrier.
The only thing that make it into the next generation is the information that encodes the organism in one sense.
And so that says, okay, well, the organism is the unit of analysis, and things lower are subgroups.
Yes, the beta cells in the pancreas have a niche that's surrounded by other types of cells,
and yes, the oocyte is supported by other kinds of cells, but still the organism is the unit of selection.
And so that gives some people a reason to think that that is the default
and that anything bigger than an organism is collective behavior.
Anything smaller than the organism is molecular physiology or some different field.
But some of the implications of taking this multi-scale proposal seriously
are that we still get the richness of collective behavior, of lateral interactions within a level,
as well as the hierarchical layering.
And that combination of hierarchical layering with lateral interactions goes by various names,
including a heterarchical system from the social insect literature.
And when we start thinking about things like the whole of genome,
like the genome encoding a developmental trajectory in relationship with an environment
and a microbiome, pretty interesting stuff.
And it leads to question what the unit of selection is.
Is it the organism?
Is it the kin group?
Is it the kin group and the extended phenotype?
And one of the ways that we at least delay the question while deepening our understanding
is by just observing and by modeling in the most integrative framework that we can imagine.
And then many of these other things fall out.
Many of the relationships between higher and lower levels fall out.
But just because there's a relationship between a higher and a lower level spatially or laterally
doesn't mean that one level or the other is the one where things are actually happening.
It's actually happening across all the levels.
Oh yeah, I mean, I think that there's a perspective that's being opened up here
that really allows us to move beyond these kind of simplistic and empirically inadequate models
like homo economicus, like this idea that what human beings are really doing at the end of the day
is optimizing their individual expected utility when they're performing tasks.
I mean, it turns out that humans act in a way that's deeply social.
We evince a fairness psychology, not Nash equilibrium type.
So there's some interesting work in comparative mythology that puts chimpanzees against humans
in a variety of economic tasks, like the ultimatum game.
And yeah, it turns out that humans just don't operate according to the principles of classical economics.
We don't zero in on Nash equilibria.
It turns out that classical economics is actually pretty good at predicting the behavior of chimps, though.
And so it's probably the case that humans in particular are subject to forms of social and cultural selection,
like forms of, like, let's use the word, you know, it's group selection, right?
And, you know, this might have been spooky and hard to explain a while back.
But with the nested Markov blanket formalism, I think we're finally getting to a point where we can talk about group selection in a way that's not just slippery
and in a way that doesn't reduce everything being selected to, as you're saying, Dan, to the genes.
Yeah.
Two quick points on that.
First, with the homo economicus, it debases us twice.
It says your behavior is fundamentally economic, one strike.
And two, you're not even that good at it.
You make errors or you have these cognitive biases that lead you to make false positive investments or false negative.
Instead, we could just take a step back and observe how we see people interacting in a phylogenetic context,
just like you were describing.
And maybe that is how we are, which is that we are pro-social and it's not an error correction on an error correction on a debasement.
It's actually we can step into the richness of us as social creatures rather than thinking of sociality as being recovered after we've already, you know, paid off everybody.
And then also the question about group and kin selection and all these different levels of selection debate.
First off, in the last several years through the work of Okasha and others, it has been described that some of these mathematical equations are actually formally identical.
So there's an isomorphism and it's like you can model it different ways, but you're going to get to some of the same consequences.
And we can think about the affordances of a single cellular bacteria, let's say.
Now, a single cellular bacteria's niche may also involve metabolites from conspecifics and social interactions like quorum sensing.
That's an example where the replicator is still the single bacteria.
However, there's collective behavior like quorum sensing.
And then the major transitions in evolutionary individuality.
So like the prokaryote plus another something to make a eukaryote.
Eukaryotes coming together to make multicellular organisms and multicellular insects becoming the eusocial organisms.
It's not based upon, you know, formica economicus.
It's not the ants making an economic tradeoff.
It's that when their affordances change in the context of a niche, you end up seeing an evolutionary trajectory that favors obligate cooperation at that scale.
And precisely, precisely.
It sidesteps a lot of these.
How would I feel if I were an ant who didn't get to reproduce type questions, which are really sidetracks relative to what is happening.
Yeah.
And, you know, I think it's doing a lot of damage if we're being real about it.
I mean, you know, these economic models are not just flawed theoretically and empirically inadequate.
They're also driving investment.
And, you know, the current state of the economy, I think, which is, you know, despite what you might hear from propaganda, like not so great right now.
I mean, it's I think in part it has to do with the flawed way in which we're understanding, you know, human economic behavior.
What we really need to be doing is fostering a move towards, like, you know, value or affordance based economies.
Yeah.
Or instead of how can we give everybody enough U.S. coin so that they can buy food?
Another way to phrase that is how could we reduce people's uncertainty about their next meal?
And maybe sometimes it looks this way.
Sometimes it looks that way.
But if we were focused on reducing physiological surprise rather than as a proxy trying to increase some value on a spreadsheet, thinking that people would then just acquire the foods, it's an interesting idea.
If we pivoted from these reward based framings of political or economic issues to uncertainty based issues, because it's often what you hear people needing help with is not knowing where the next place they're going to sleep or get their meal from.
Not I don't have enough to get a meal.
I don't know where the meal is coming from.
So it's actually interestingly an uncertainty question, even in that case.
Oh, yeah, absolutely.
We hope you enjoyed this week's podcast episode and stay tuned for next week when we're going to discuss local worlds and narratives.
In relation to active inference.
