Welcome to the ActInf Podcast, where we will present short, digestible segments clipped
from the Active Inference Lab weekly live streams.
If you like what you hear and you want to learn more, check out the entire live stream
on the Active Inference Lab YouTube channel.
My name is Blue Knight, and I will be guiding you through this podcast, which is clipped
from Active Inference Lab live stream number 4.1.
This week's episode is a discussion that is loosely structured around the paper Cultural
Affordances, Scaffolding Local Worlds Through Shared Intentionality and Regimes of Attention
by Maxwell Ramstead, Samuel Vessier, and Lawrence Kiermaier.
Daniel Friedman will be leading this live stream discussion, starting off discussing Umwelt
and Affordances.
One bonus word that's not here, but Umwelt, does anyone have a sense of what that means?
But I figured I'd just throw it out there as a sort of compliment to affordance.
So I'm Maxwell Ramstead, I'm the first author on this paper Cultural Affordances.
I mean, I think, you know, so I think those of us, you know, working in more specifically
on ecological psychology will have some beef with the way that I kind of just generally
put all of this together.
together, but I think like, you know, affordances, Umwelts, phenomenology, and I'm sure many people
are not going to agree with me.
So, you know, feel free to discuss this, but then they're all perspectives on the same kind
of thing, which is that if we're trying to talk about, you know, the meaning making of
organisms, living organisms that share a world.
We can't, we can't just not talk about the first person perspective and the way that meaning
appears from a specific vantage point.
And that's sort of what the affordances and Umwelts stuff gets at.
Hi, my name is Alex.
I'm in Moscow, Russia, and I'm a researcher in systems management school.
As usual, I'm trying to connect to my domain is engineering domain.
And it's more like a question about, could we consider affordances from some kind of functionalities
view?
As for example, if I need to drive in a nail, the hammer provides me affordance to use it.
But if I don't have a hammer, I could use even microscope to do the same only one or two times.
But anyway, for my engineering task, it could be enough.
And if I see a chair and it's providing affordance to sit, it's like a basic function of the chair
to just to sit on it.
So from this perspective, how it could be considered like when agent need to do something and need
some kind of functionality and this functionality or maybe service to do it, how it's possible link.
Oh, absolutely.
This has been pursued by a lot of work.
There's a really cool group based in the Netherlands, Eric Rydveld and Juliet Kiverstein in particular
work from this perspective where Eric Rydveld's work is in architecture and affordances.
So he really tries to bring this whole affordances perspective into the design of the spaces that
we live in.
So what you're saying is totally consonant with at least some really interesting uses
of the concept of affordances in the literature since the early 2000s.
Cool.
Shannon?
Hi, guys.
I'm Shannon.
I'm usually in Merced, California, but I'm in South Dakota for the pandemic.
I'm just thinking of this, this field landscape difference and Umwelt and it's really helpful
considering the perspective of the agent you're investigating, especially so I'm in music neuroscience.
So we can learn a lot about how people or brains interact with music by putting a person
in an fMRI scanner and playing some music, but that's not exactly how we interact with
music in our day to day life.
Maybe now more so, because we can turn on our iPod and just, sorry, iPhone, we don't
have iPods anymore, and listen to music alone as this solo endeavor, but in general for the
history of human evolution, music has been this really interactive participatory activity
and in order to understand from where I am how we interact with, understand, or process
music, it really is also a question of how we understand and interact with other people.
And so when we bring in these affordances, we can have an affordance for music in a certain
field that's us listening to music alone.
But as soon as the landscape is a little bit bigger and maybe our small field incorporates
one other person or one more other person, then the perspective that we need to take needs
to change to adapt the perspective of each of those individuals or of that musical sort
of environment as a whole.
That, that's such a great point.
I don't know if you're familiar with this paper.
It's by Anna Anderson and Tom Zimke called Exploring the Multilayered Affordances of Composing
and Performing Interactive Music with Responsive Technologies.
And it was one of the first papers to pick up our cultural affordances work.
And in precisely the context that you're proposing, Shannon, like what they're saying is our concepts
need to be enriched with a kind of intermediate scale concept.
So their idea is like when you're performing live electronic music, there's something intermediary
between the field of affordances that each individual is coping with at any moment and this
evolutionary level kind of landscape of affordances or this population level landscape of affordances
is where there's, you know, there are special affordances that open up in this performance context,
kind of a mezzo scale in between the landscape and the field.
I forget the precise term that they, that they introduced, but yeah, the music is definitely one of the
cooler domains of application of this stuff.
Hi everyone. I'm Sasha and I'm in California.
Um, yeah, just a brief comment to follow up on what Alex said, um, uh, from the engineering
perspective, you know, if you have a hammer, everything's a nail.
It kind of made me think, uh, about crime where, um, if you need something and you're not, um, inhibited
by, uh, law or social norms, you can just take it.
And maybe that's a, uh, you know, overly simplistic understanding of, um, why people commit crime.
But in, in that context, um, if you're not inhibited by, uh, laws, then your affordances are
quite different than if you are.
Okay. And perfect. Richard.
The next person to answer this question is Richard Niemeyer.
Yeah. In terms of the field versus the landscape, would it be accurate to, to kind of conceptualize
this, the field of affordances is kind of the, the episodic knowledge of the individual.
So what are their, their personal learned experiences, their personal body capabilities,
kind of this really episodic self, you know, um, form of, of memory where landscape of affordances
is more about the semantic knowledge that if there was a way for me to kind of look at the population
and ask, what are all the skills and habits that this population has? That would be the
landscape. If I was to drill down on one person, how well do you know how to ride a bike?
That would be more of your field affordances.
Precisely. That's precisely the idea. And the idea also is that not all affordances are equally
salient at a given time, but they're still there in a sense. Right. Uh, so I don't know,
like, um, I, 24 seven, uh, coffee shop. There's times a day where it's a salient affordance to some
people. Well, I was going to precisely give a, a food and coffee related example. Um, yeah, uh,
I drink coffee in the morning, but I tend to, uh, have insomnia if I, if I drink it too late in the
evening. So there are times in the day when coffee affords drinking more than other times in the day.
And so, you know, it, it's still the case that at any moment I could go into the kitchen and make
myself a coffee. Right. Uh, so the field of affordances has more to do with those, those
affordances that are soliciting me at a given moment. Uh, you know, it corresponds to the,
more of the phenomenology of interacting with affordances, whereas the landscape is more of
anthropological or sociological statement as, as Richard, you were just saying about the kinds of
things that a population can do in a given space. It's interesting that you talk about that idea of,
of salience in the moment, because one thing we talk about a lot in sociology is, is identity.
And so if you activate my identity, prime me to think as a professor, I'm going to notice certain
things in the environment differently than if you prime me to think of my identity as a husband or a
son or a brother. Um, so that kind of, but then again, but identity means, you know, my identity as a
professor may be different from any one of your identities as a professor based on socialization
and culture and disciplines even as well. Right. So, okay. Interesting. Thank you.
Yep. And just one thing to tie back, they write as Heiziger famously argued, it is only when my
smooth coping breaks down, say when I run out of coffee or when the cup breaks that the objective
properties, the cup becomes salient, present in perceptual experience at all. And depending on if
you're at home, you run out of coffee, maybe you go back to the coffee machine, you set up a new brew.
If you're in a restaurant culturally, maybe you raise your hand or maybe you whistle, or maybe
there's some other thing that's done culturally to signal that somebody else should see that as
their affordance to come over and ask you what you need. So the landscape of affordances is a very
role specific, uh, it's realized through specific roles, but it represents that population level.
And that's, so yeah, lots to say here. That was an excellent discussion.
We hope you enjoyed this week's episode. Be sure to tune in next week as the discussion of
cultural affordances unfolds.
