Welcome to the Acton's podcast, where we will present short, digestible segments clipped
from the Active Inference Lab weekly live streams.
If you like what you hear and you want to learn more, check out the entire live stream
at the Active Inference Lab YouTube channel.
My name is Blue Knight, and I will be guiding you through this podcast episode, which is
clipped from the Active Inference Lab live stream number 5.1.
This discussion will be loosely structured around the paper, Multiscale Integration,
Beyond Internalism and Externalism, by Maxwell Ramstead, Michael Kirchhoff, Axel Constant,
and Carl Friston.
Maxwell Ramstead, the first author, will start off our discussion of Markov blankets.
So Markov blankets are one of the kind of building blocks or ingredients that go into the free
energy formalism.
Mathematically, what it does is if you have a set of random variables and you want to
effectively map or individuate a random variable or a set of random variables from another set
of random variables.
So for instance, you want to individuate a system like the brain from all the other dynamical
systems with which it interacts.
Well, what you do is that you stipulatively define a third set of states between the internal
states of the system that you're interested in discussing and the external states of the
embedding environment.
This third set of states is called a Markov blanket, and it's defined by the absence of
connections.
So effectively, the internal states are influenced by sensory states, but do not influence them.
And external states are influenced by active states, but do not influence them.
So by precluding these two basically directed edges of this kind of connected graph, what we're
doing is essentially formalizing the kind of channel through which any interactions between
the environment and the internal states of the system have to go through this channel effectively.
Yeah, that's what the formalism does for us.
It allows us to individuate a system formally in terms of the interactions that it has with
its, with its embedding environment.
Now that we have a formal definition of a Markov blanket, Daniel Friedman will continue
facilitating this discussion.
Great.
And Mel, go for it.
Hi, I'm Mel Andrews.
I'm in Cincinnati, Ohio right now.
Yeah, I think a lot of people publishing on the FEP and the Markov blanket formalism, but
even more so in kind of the discussions you get after a conference, people really expect
of the Markov blanket formalism that it's picking out not token distinctions, but type distinctions.
So, people really want the Markov blanket formalism to cut at natural joints, that is to find
kind of the type boundaries between natural kinds, sorts of natural systems.
And it really doesn't do this.
It really, really doesn't do this.
It really picks out individual systems.
That's what it does, is it finds token systems.
And naturally, I think a, a formal methodology that, that isn't about, it's not about finding
privileged scales, privileged spatial scales or privileged time scales.
It's, it's about finding particular systems.
And so, I think naturally, when we employ this formalism, it's not going to lend us a view
of, of privileged scales, because that's not what formalism does.
Cool.
And I think that's kind of against, goes against what people tend to think the Markov blanket
formalism is for.
Awesome.
Muddy?
Hi, guys.
My name's Muddy.
So, I was a, I was a PhD student with Carl Briston, graduating back in 2016.
But, I was just going to say that, so, I would say that most people on this call are far more
intelligent than I am.
And I, I try to come up with, with my own sort of baby interpretations of this, which,
to my knowledge, nobody has been angered by before.
And I think really what this tells me is if I have an agent that is interacting with an
environment, the only, the only channel by which they can actually update their beliefs
in order to change their actions, say, comes through this sort of border state, these sensory
states.
So, it's, it's interesting in that I don't consider this, well, I mean, it is a separation,
obviously, between two, between two objectively different realities, should we say.
But it also, it speaks to the, the force with which, forcing the, the analytical link between
the two through a certain set of substates, which is, which is really important, right?
And this is this border set on, on all your sensory states, your sensory and active states.
So, that's kind of how I've always viewed this, I have two sets of realities that are trying to
come together in terms of what's going on.
One of them has a belief state, one of them just is, and the, the belief state is really
trying to figure out what is, and the only way it can do that is by modifying its sensory states.
So, that's just something which for maybe people who aren't actively part of the community might
make it a little bit more reductionist and simple to, to, to digest.
But if anybody disagrees with me, please.
Nice.
Well said, Richard, and then if anyone else wants to raise their hand.
So, my name is Richard Niemeyer.
I'm an assistant professor of sociology in Denver, Colorado.
Yeah, so, I'm sure this is probably a naive question, but, you know, when I was listening to
Maxwell talk about it, do, do Markov blankets work in the sense of, I, I hypothesize a priori that
there's a thing called an environment, there's a thing called an organism, there's a thing called
sensory states, and then the Markov blanket allows me to go in and find it statistically and determine
whether or not these things can be isolated, you know, empirically and therefore kind of
reinforcing my idea that, that these things actually exist in reality, or can I just feed a Markov blanket
a whole bunch of random data and it's going to find something, you know, kind of that garbage in,
garbage out model.
So like, what, what, when you're, when we're talking about Markov blankets and finding these boundaries,
um, how exactly does that, does that work?
Let's have Maxwell just directly respond to that very nice question, and then we'll continue on the
stack with Steven and then Mel.
Uh, sure, um, to answer the question, Richard's question directly, uh, in principle, uh, what we've been
able to do recently is, uh, develop techniques that more or less automatically, although, you know,
we can discuss, there are a few design decisions that have to be made, and these have been discussed
in a few of our discussion channels recently. I'm sure Mel will, uh, I'm sure you'll remind me of this,
uh, but basically what happens is, um, what you do is you start with a bunch of states,
right? So we're, we're working from a dynamical systems perspective and we define whatever states
are, uh, of interest for us. And, um, essentially the Markov blankets are constructed, uh, by looking
at, uh, the relative rates of change of variables with respect to each other. So, uh, mathematically
what we're doing is taking the, the partial derivatives of each variable with respect to each
other. And, uh, and then using effectively, uh, these rates of change, uh, to construct the Markov blankets
automatically. So you start with a bunch of states. So, I mean, these can be anything whatsoever. Uh,
in a recent paper that was pre-printed, uh, this has been used to analyze fMRI data. So in, in that paper,
each of your states is one 3D voxel. Um, and basically what you do is you write down an adjacency matrix,
uh, so an adjacency matrix is, uh, effectively, uh, a, uh, a matrix where you have all, all of your
states by all of your states and the entries in the matrix are quantifying the effect, the influence
that one, uh, state has on another. Um, and if you take the, if you take the Jacobian of this adjacency
matrix, you're replacing all of these entries with the partial derivatives of one, uh, variable with respect
to others. And, uh, so having said all that, you, you can construct the Markov blankets analytically by
noting the, the absence of dependencies in this adjacency matrix. Uh, so zeros in your Jacobian mean
that the partial derivative of one variable with respect to that other variable is zero, uh, which is
another way of saying that basically the two variables in question are conditionally independent
in that direction. Um, and so, I mean, there are a few modeling decisions, uh, that you need to
make effectively. Uh, there are most, there are two to my knowledge. One is basically, uh, going to be
deciding which states are internal states, um, effectively. So you're going to say, okay, if this
one is an internal state, then it's blanket is this and the external states relative to it or that,
uh, that arbitrariness isn't all that arbitrary in the sense that the, you know, uh, the blanket
structures are going to be essentially the same. It's just what, what is, what's going to count as an
internal state might change. Um, and then there are a few design decisions, uh, when you're, when you're
implementing this, uh, basically you have to, when you're constructing your adjacency matrix, you have to
kind of decide what counts as a cutoff for interaction. Um, so those two things might make it less
objective, but in principle, if you'll allow, uh, for these two, uh, kind of modeling decisions,
uh, you can feed these algorithms, uh, like a time series data, for example, and it'll chunk out
the Markov blankets from it. Very nice answer, Maxwell. Thank you. So we'll go to Steven and then Mel,
then Alex K and Shannon. Okay. I am Steven. I'm in Toronto and, uh, I do community development
projects, um, using theater and immersive participatory approaches. And, uh, um, one of the
things that I think this also is maybe not always easy to imagine is the, is the dynamical nature of
all this, that it's talking about states. So it's not, you're never actually being one thing. You're
always in this state of, um, unfolding and that the Markov blanket then is that kind of, um, statistical
kind of, um, you could say record keeping at the different scales. Ultimately, I would say everything's
at the cell level to some level, because that's the kind of engine that's, um, enabling everything
else to be created. Um, the only thing I kind of feel that is important to maybe distinguish when
talking, because I think there's a danger with the word systems is that there's like, I see these
blankets as more like a swarming of, um, statistics, which creates the structures and the networks,
such as the kind of leafs or whatever. And they, and it's that kind of structures, which actually are
kind of in the world, so to speak. And those structures have systemic properties. I, they become
the, um, support mechanism for a plant, the leaf does, or, but the structure has come out from the
swarming of the, um, actual blankets. So that's, I think I'm still trying to get my head around how to
pass it. Nice. We can return to that Mel and then Alex K. Yeah, I think, I think Maxwell basically
said it all, but, but the, the short of it is, um, you have some time series basically, and that could
be, that could be, um, real data or that could be, uh, sim data, that could be a simulation, right? And
you're pointing the Markov blanket formalism, you're directing it to the internal state, and you're
handing it your threshold for, for how conditionally dependent should be conditionally independent enough
to count. Um, and then that does the rest of the work for you. That, that, that will partition
your state. So you give it the internal states, and you give it the kind of threshold for conditional
independence, and that partitions the rest into external states, uh, sensory states and active states.
Cool. Alex K., then Shannon and Muddy.
Uh, hi everyone. I'm Alex. Um, I'm coming from a philosophy and cognitive science background.
Yeah, just a really brief point. I'm just wondering if one way of thinking of this is that the, the
Markov blanket partition, insofar as it's objective, um, together with some data, like maybe it, maybe it
cuts nature at particular joints, but it just doesn't cut at types of joints in a way. Um, so I don't know,
maybe we can pick that up later. Well, yeah, that's a good point. If I can just jump in here. I think Mel
is right when they say that, uh, like the, so it's, it's the, the Markov blankets are always going
to pick out individuals. Uh, if there's anything like, uh, a species level regularity that we can
express or like, uh, you know, uh, regularities that are specific to members, uh, members of the same
group, uh, that'll be, uh, more in terms of the generative model, non-equilibrium steady state
density. Uh, so, so, I mean, you know, this is also discussed in the paper, but essentially what
we're saying is you can imagine a joint probability distribution all over all of the variables of the
system and implicitly also over some fictive external states that the system is interacting
with. And this entire joint density, uh, you can think of as the phenotype of the system. Uh,
and it's known as, uh, a non-equilibrium steady state density or a generative model. Uh, so I think,
yes, things that pick out types have more to do with this, uh, joint density that tells you like
about the kind of creature that I am. Whereas, uh, as Mel was just pointing out, like these are, uh,
these, these Markov boundaries are effectively the boundaries of individuals, uh, every time. So.
Cool. Shannon and then Muddy. I'm Shannon Brooks. I'm in South Dakota currently,
but I'm usually based at the University of California. I think I might be echoing a lot
of what was said already. Um, but on, on what the Markov boundary is, is, is separating, um,
it's always going to be a decision on the part of the researcher for, for what correlations seem
to matter for the explanation that you're looking for, for the particular system's behavior. So,
like, if there's certain long range correlations that are constraining short range correlations,
whatever you're, whatever you're wanting to answer. So if I want to answer how, um, a certain musical
phrase affects the movement of the person listening to it, the particular, the particular,
um, like inter, the particular part of the system that's interesting to me is maybe not going to be
the electric electrical firing of a neuron at that moment, because the electrical firing of a neuron
at that really short range correlation, that really short range time scale,
isn't going to have a huge effect at the long range time scale in my explanation,
even though it's important, you can't have the reaction without the brain having some electrical
activity. That's still not the most informative skill of analysis.
Nice. Madi and then Mel.
Awesome. I, um, so again, just, just bringing this back to, uh, a level of understanding that
allows me to like get some sort of intuition, why this hierarchical, uh, markup framework is, is really,
really, uh, important and useful, um, defining dynamical systems. So one example, you know, my background
in, in, in medicine reason why we, we were interested in, in functional neuroimaging is we wanted to
understand at what scale can we intervene in certain effective connectivity architectures in order to
make clinical difference. So understanding the boundary states of which pieces of this puzzle are
genuinely boundary states, you know, genuinely, uh, fall within some Markov blanket is really, really
important. And one example of this is if I take, uh, my auditory cortex and my visual cortex at a
hierarchical level of processing in here, one could say that the internal, uh, circuitry that allows me
to interpret, you know, the, the, uh, signals from my cochlear versus my retina are not correlated with
each other. However, at an integrative state above this, when I'm trying to actually make some sort of
cohesive view of the world, they are both, of course, within that same Markov boundary state.
So here's an example of a hierarchical separation of boundary states, which is really, really important,
not only from a, an empirical modeling decision in terms of like, what level do I abstract,
but also from an understanding perspective, you know, one can say assume a boundary state and then
test empirically if this, if this, uh, is correct with say some sort of dynamic causal model. Um, simply
just by changing what you think the actual Markov boundary states are, or, or, you know, the, the scopic level
of that Markov boundary, um, you can start inferring things that are really like clinically useful,
for example. So the, you know, the, the motor cortex and, um, the cerebellum quite clearly form
a Markov boundary for motor processing, but then motor cortex and S1 also form a Markov boundary
in terms of action decision-making. So this tool, it's, it's, it's really a beautiful explanation of the world,
but it's really a beautiful modeling tool as well for abstracting away hierarchical noits in, in terms
of your models. So I just wanted to add that in. Let's return to Mel and then anyone else can raise
your hand. Yeah. Just to quickly clarify, um, contrary to what Alex said, I think, um, the term,
the, the phrase cutting at natural joints as it's used in philosophy of science actually refers
specifically to, to type distinction, not, not token distinction. So it's actually,
it's about finding natural kinds and natural kinds are, are definitionally type distinctions,
not token distinctions. Yep. Also, if I could add one note there from my field of gene expression
analysis, there's often a few different ways to construct a network of relevant genes for it. You
could, uh, pull down and see which proteins are physically touching or which transcription factors
are binding to which genes. So that might be a protein protein interaction network or a, um, a
gene regulatory network, or there are statistical networks like co-expression networks, which are
very related to things like, um, Granger causality or effective connectivity. They're statistically derived
and there might be two elements like two proteins or two genes or something that are correlated in their
expression, but never touch. And those will come up on the functional connectivity matrix. Um, or you might
have two proteins that touch and actually are very integrate integrally important for function, but
they're not expressed in a correlated fashion. And so that might lead to them being missed on the
co-expression graph or the co-activation graph on the brain. And so then somebody might want to say,
well, what's the, what's the real map of the territory or what's the real network? And that's where
this meta modeling question returns and, uh, related to the carving of the joints. Yes. On the top of
figure one, we see, okay, let's carve out the organism from the environment, but that's not
just a really close line around the organism that actually includes some long range statistical
dependencies as well as things that might be touching, but not that important for regulating
organismal states. So there's multiple perspectives that are required and certainly multiple disciplines
that are required when we want to be asking, how do we design interventions or systems given this
causal structure? The endpoint isn't just scaffolding out this infinitely complicated reference map.
It's an action oriented framework that we want to be talking about multi-scale models and then also
knowing how to work within them. Sasha, and then anyone else before. Hi, thank you. My name is Sasha.
Um, I'm a neuroscience graduate student at Davis. Um, great point, Daniel, about, um, the interact,
different kinds of interactions that exist in systems and whether it's, um, statistical or like physical
correlation. And I think the, the kind of overarching theme here is that you wouldn't know unless you
measured it and you need to know what sorts of variables are important in order to even
see statistically if they're going to be related. So that is where this kind of framework is really
critical because we need to, um, measure the relevant things in our system. And if things are happening
at scales that are too long or too short outside the bounds of our measurement, then we'll never know.
Nice. We'll do Maxwell and then Steven. Well, I just want to pick up a bit on this meta
modeling thing that, that had been mentioned. I think it, it's one of the strengths, uh, to,
it's one of the strengths of the framework to, on the one hand, um, describe like the workings of
organisms using this, uh, free energy minimization stuff. So we're sort of, uh, we're sort of adopting,
uh, uh, the theory itself, the free energy principle theory itself, uh, adopts an
instrument, instrumentalist stance on organisms, uh, to say, well, what organisms are essentially
doing is leveraging the statistical structure of their bodies in movement, which we can interpret
as a generative model as a joint density over all the system variables. So using the statistical
structure of their bodies in movement to generate adaptive patterns of behavior. So at that,
at that first kind of theory level, there's an instrumentalism, uh, that's going on and there's
a kind of metal, there's a modeling aspect going on. We're saying that effectively organisms are
sort of in a process of approximate Bayesian modeling of their, the causes of their sensory
stimuli. But then there's a kind of meta, uh, level of analysis where we can actually,
as scientists write down the generative model that says, well, the Markov blanket is here
and then score that model in terms of the variational free energy and use a variational
free energy approach to kind of find where the boundary is of the variational free energy
minimizing system. So I, I kind of take that, uh, you know, meta aspect to be a strength of the
framework. Nice. Agreed. Um, we'll go to Steven and then Mel.
Yeah. And sort of following on from that as well, the, the, the piece that sometimes
gets maybe lost here, but is in the other papers when you look at regime of attention
is that it's not just that the system cleaves, like the whole is the, the, the, the Markov blanket
gives a capacity to change how you take your attention from the stream sort of coming in. Like
I suddenly feel my hand, then I feel my face. And I suppose one of the things that would be an
example as well of something that's at a very large scale is, um, the threat of climate change.
And I'm thinking about when I start thinking about a glacier in Antarctica starting to come away and
go into the, the water and possibly raising sea levels in 20 years, I, my physiology changes and my
whole, like, when I bring that into my considerations, the way I take my attention and the way I tune to
a lot of things around me in the world changes. So, you know, is it, is that as my system boundary
changed, or I would say that it's more about my attentional integration that's changed. So that's
where I think there's a question around whether the word systems could be overused sometimes. And
it's maybe staying with this kind of statistical dynamic is quite, quite useful.
Right. It's, uh, statistically influencing you, whether you like it or not. And then your awareness
and your attentional regime is something that's almost separate. Awesome.
We hope that this episode uncovered a lot of what it means to define a Markov blanket.
Stay tuned for next week when we will be talking about inactivism and operational closure.
