Welcome to the Acton Podcast, where we will present short, digestible segments clipped
from the Active Inference Lab weekly live streams.
If you like what you hear and you want to learn more, check out the entire live stream
at the Active Inference Lab YouTube channel.
The link to the live stream is provided in the episode description.
My name is Blue Knight, and I will be guiding you through this podcast episode, which is
clipped from ActInfLab live stream number 9.1.
This discussion will be loosely structured around the paper, The Projective Consciousness
Model and Phenomenal Selfhood, by Kenneth Williford, Daniel Bennekin, Carl Friston, and David Rodroff.
In today's episode, Daniel Friedman is going to take us through a description of the functional
features of consciousness, as described by the authors.
So the authors highlight four functional features of consciousness, which are global optimization
and resilience, global availability, motivation of action and modulation of attention, and
simulation enhancement.
So their goals are basically, these are the things that they say, notice that it's very
mechanism independent.
It doesn't say you got to have neurons, you need glia, it doesn't say it has to be at this
time scale.
These are all like things that you might say about a cybernetic system, a control theory,
action perception system.
So these features are the abstract functional features of consciousness, which through neurophenomenology
will get brought into the brain, perhaps, but just at the functional level, these are the
functions of consciousness.
And they write, we claim that the overall function of consciousness, again, is it that consciousness
is getting spun off by systems that have these functions, or is consciousness literally the
function that maps back into the system and gives these features presence in the world?
We claim that the overall function of consciousness is to address a general cybernetic problem or
problem of control.
Consciousness enables, again, ambiguous, a situated organism with multiple sensory channels to
navigate its environment and satisfy its biological and derived needs efficiently.
This entails minimizing predictably erroneous representations of the world and maximizing
preference satisfaction.
A good model of consciousness must be able to explain how this is accomplished.
The PCM thus emphasizes the following interrelated functional features of consciousness.
So ask yourself if there was a robot that could do intermodal sensory things and memory, and
it was doing counterfactual simulations, and it had motivated looking action and modulation
of attention, global availability of some variables or some processes, and it was resilient within
some resilience.
Of course, we're not resilient to getting hit with a hammer on the head.
We are resilient to a train coming at us from a mile away, but not an inch away.
I mean, it's always going to be about where you draw the bounds.
Oh, I mean, that's out of bounds.
You don't need to be resilient to that kind of an insult to this drug, but to this molecule
you are.
So I would just ask, if we had a robot that had some of these features, would we include
it in the conscious club?
Or would Dennett include it in the club?
No.
Would a panpsychist?
Yeah, they might say, well, it's something it's like to be that robot.
But where are we really getting if we just say it's something it's like to be this robot
and this thermometer and this networking system?
Well, if the only way we can ask it is the exact same affordances that we as observers
have today, like measuring electromagnetic frequencies or something like that, then aren't
we going to be debating these things forever?
Because no one really disagrees that these things all appear to happen for systems that
we think are complex goal-directed systems, like humans and cats and things like that.
But isn't the question about what else we're going to do beyond this?
So hopefully that's where the projective geometry, it's kind of like that's the hook that they
hang their coat on, so to speak.
They're going to bring it all to projective geometry, and they're going to say, this is
what explains all these functional features and the invariants, which we'll get to in
a second, and it makes some other predictions that would be unique and testable.
So they're going to say, yeah, there's probably a lot of ways that theories of consciousness
could explain these features, like attention schema theory or the global workspace theory
or integrated information theory, all these different frameworks for consciousness.
But we're going to take these things and we're going to go in a new direction by
talking about the projective geometry.
So what supports in their eyes, the need for not just a quantitative or a formalized
framework, but also specifically the projective geometry.
And for them, it's about these phenomenological invariants.
So it's kind of like universal basic income.
It's like, it's universal.
You know, these are invariant.
What part of that don't you get?
So these are the things that generalized systems of consciousness.
You could debate with them, whether these systems that they're talking about are the
right ones or whatever, but these are the invariant features of experience and phenomenology.
And they have them as relational, phenomenal intentionality, which is that all experience
and all consciousness is about relations, especially between one and another system, like internal
and external relationship, even though, as we're going to kind of see, it's a little bit
trippier than that.
But basically it's about the relation of like the I to not I, it's like I, thou, I, I, you,
these kinds of things.
There's a situated 3D spatiality.
And that means that you're starting, you're in a situated spot.
You're not just everywhere experiencing a 3D simulation, but it's always perceived as
from a situated spot in spatial dimensions, three of them.
And then through time, three and four, there's this multimodal synchronic integration, which
is in a snapshot, it's multimodal.
And then four is through time, everything's happening.
So this is kind of capturing through space or through senses.
And then through time saying, yep, you're at a concert and there's the light and the sound
and things bumping into you.
All of that is happening in this integrated way.
You don't just experience those separately.
At the very least, the illusion appears to cover integration across senses, which are
qualitatively different.
Like a chemical is different than a photon from the sun.
And then there's this temporal integration through time, which is kind of related to the
perceived event durations.
There's messages that can be flashed on a screen or sounds that can be outside of your
awareness.
But there's also ones that can be within your awareness at a certain duration of time.
So if it flashes for a second, it's able to be at a timescale that's integrated into
consciousness.
There might be timescales that influence you below that, but it doesn't become aware.
So like that's kind of conscious and subconscious, but it's dealing with that a little bit
blurry about whether consciousness is just the whole neurosystem and anything that gets
integrated into the nervous system through time is considered to be temporally integrated.
Or is it that there's experiences that actually play out over certain timescales that
we experience?
And then lastly, kind of related to one is this subjective character, which is that it's
about the subject.
And one and five are very similar, but in fact, they hold that two through five are all
implicated in one.
Okay.
So they have the functional features.
It's pretty abstract and cybernetic.
And then they're like, okay, what are the invariants, almost the axioms that we want to be building
from that we want our theory to be able to address.
And then they're, they laid them all out one through five.
And then they're like, yep.
Turns out the two through five all collapsed back onto one.
So really one is the part we need to explain in how they've set up the problem.
So it's relational.
It's about the relationship between the agent and the world.
It's phenomenal.
It's based upon experience and it deals with intentionality.
And that is going to bring in agency, affordances, all these kinds of things that have come
into play.
We hope you enjoyed this week's episode.
Stay tuned for next time when we'll have additional discussions of the same paper talking about
projective geometry.
