Welcome to the ActInf Podcast, where we will present short, digestible segments clipped
from the Active Inference Lab weekly live streams.
If you like what you hear and you want to learn more, check out the entire live stream
at the Active Inference Lab YouTube channel.
The link to the live stream is provided in the episode description.
My name is Blue Knight, and I will be guiding you through this podcast episode, which is
clipped from ActInf Lab live stream number 7.1.
This discussion will be loosely structured around the paper, Variational Ecology and the
Physics of Sentient Systems by Maxwell Ramstead, Axel Constant, Paul Bagcock, and Carl Friston.
Daniel Friedman will be starting off and facilitating this discussion about ergodicity.
One that I was wondering about is this introduction of the minds and the sentient systems.
And so there was a sentence in the paper about the sentient systems being sensory systems,
though often when people talk about the search for sentient life and things like that, they're
talking about the experiential dynamics as well.
And so the idea of getting the interacting minds from the interacting evolutionary systems, I just thought that was kind of a curious thing, maybe foreshadowing in integration with psychology or with phenomenology.
Hey everyone, I'm Maxwell Ramstead, I'm a postdoctoral fellow at McGill University in Montreal.
The sentience aspect is really, I think, just to highlight what the free energy principle
stuff does.
I mean, at the end of the day, the free energy principle shares with perceptual control theory the idea that action is about the control of perceptual input, namely keeping it within certain bounds.
So that might be relevant to consider.
I mean, yeah.
So from that point of view, sentience is the capacity to be affected by the world in a way that allows us to control how the way the world affects us.
Yep, like something hitting a rock still could be felt or is still as influential on the state of the rock, but it doesn't necessarily have the ability to then act, especially in a proactive way to get around that.
And also just one other note is actually the Schrodinger's question paper from 1944, and then the answering Schrodinger's question paper from 2018, I think are also great places for people who are kind of coming at this from a first principles of biology perspective, because Schrodinger's question was about how organisms are organized.
And very interestingly, and nine years before the discovery of the structure of DNA and many years before a lot of the other approaches that would come on the scene with the molecular revolution in the second half of the 1900s, Schrodinger said there has to be something like a quasi-periodic crystal, and organisms have to organize at least locally.
They're not going to violate the laws of physics, this isn't vitalism, but at least locally, you have to be able to take the bag of sugar and then organize it into biomolecules that constitute an organism.
That's an increase in order. How does that happen? Is that the defining principle of life?
And in some ways, as we look on Earth and elsewhere for life, these two ideas of Schrodinger really remain as prescient as ever.
So I find that just really interesting. Stephen?
Hello, it's Stephen here. I'm in Toronto. I'm doing a practice-based PhD at Canterbury Christchurch University in the UK.
I know you're probably going to mention this, but I suppose the idea of ergodicity sort of comes in through the active inference piece more than it normally is thought of in the other areas.
But that maybe synergetics is another way that these kind of ergodic ways to extract information are present.
And I suppose the question is, is that non-ergodic processes, the ways to tap into things which are non-ergodic and sort of causal,
is that something which is when you then step outside of normal active inference and you have this extra structure on top,
which is our cognition, which allows us to sort of process things that are kind of non-ergodic.
So I think that might be interesting, like in terms of how we construct things as humans,
as opposed to that kind of more organic niche construction.
Not that that's really touched on here, but I suppose it's just the idea of how patterns are extracted and what levels of meaning
or what processes of like attuning or constructing or relating, what's that kind of dynamic at play?
Thanks for that comment. I think the word ergodic is really what a lot of that idea hinges on.
So if anyone wants to have a take at what the word ergodic means, I tried to go through it a little bit in 7.0.
But if anyone wants to explain what an ergodic system is, and Stephen, what your question gets at is really whether the models of ergodic systems,
of systems where the time average is equivalent to the ensemble or the spatial averaging,
though there's also other ways to phrase that or perspectives on that,
in systems with extreme historiosity, like niche construction.
If you build a road in one place, the whole society kind of leverages around that.
Or if there's an introduction of a new species into an area,
that can irreversibly and extremely historically change the trajectory of that ecosystem.
So how are we to model these systems using ergodic frameworks?
Ergodicity, from a mathematical point of view,
you can understand it heuristically as the, you know, so a system is ergodic if the average of our measures of the system converges to a measure of the average of our value of whatever we're measuring.
So another way of thinking about it is that, like, wherever your system starts in its state space,
with an ergodic system, it will end up in a regime of characteristic states.
Like, so no matter where you start, you end up in these states.
So, I mean, you know, you can think of, you know, my body temperature, for example, would be describable in this way.
You know, it varies a bit, but it ends up continuously converging to 36 and a half degrees Celsius.
So there's a lot of confusion in the literature and in discussion about this ergodicity thing.
One thing to point out is that, so to the extent that it is implied in the framework, the notion that we're considering is only local ergodicity.
So we're not saying that, you know, because the maximal version of, like, an ergodic system, like a system that's globally ergodic,
is a system that doesn't really have a history in the sense that it doesn't really matter where you start.
You always end up in the same place.
The notion of ergodicity that we're employing in the free energy framework, to the extent that it's employed at all,
is a notion of local ergodicity, which means that on some appropriate temporal and spatial scale,
it's useful to think about the system as being ergodic, as in that it will regularly converge to the same set of states or values of those states, rather.
Sure. So I guess there's a lot to say here on the one hand, you know, this local ergodicity thing is important.
So when we say that the Earth is round, you know, we're not saying that it's not flat enough locally for us to build buildings on it.
So, like, locally, the Earth is flat enough, has a negligible enough curvature that we can build, for example, a building on it.
And this is the same kind of idea. So the ergodicity at play is that, you know, on some appreciable timescale,
systems converge to the same set of values effectively.
And, yeah, so I guess that's one point. Another related point is that ergodicity actually isn't, they, well, it's not really baked into the free energy principle.
All you really need to get the free energy principle running is a Markov blanket and a non-equilibrium steady state or generative model,
which we've been discussing over the last few weeks. So generally, notions like ergodicity and weekly mixing also appears in some of these discussions.
It only applies to certain kinds of systems with multiple particles under special assumptions, namely the assumption that all the particles are exchangeable.
So if we're dealing with a single particle, this kind of probability distribution in general doesn't exist.
The only probability distribution to which we have access is when we sample the state of a single particle over time.
So, yeah, the real assumptions on which the free energy stuff is built is this non-equilibrium steady state assumption.
And it's related to the ergodicity thing in a certain sense.
So non-equilibrium steady state, we're saying that, you know, the system has a set of characteristic states to which it tends, you know, over time.
And so if a system has a non-equilibrium steady state, then, you know, under the conditions that we just described, where there are particles that are exchangeable, then you can treat the system as ergodic.
But it's not as crucial to the framework as some would suggest.
So, like, I've heard in the, you know, in the bushes that some people are mounting a critique of the free energy principle based on the idea that living systems aren't actually ergodic.
I think that's a bit of a waste of time because we're not claiming that biological systems are globally ergodic, just that it's useful to treat them as ergodic.
And, you know, the way that we get out of this kind of weird place, formally speaking, is by pointing to this nested systems of systems thing.
So the idea is that from the perspective of any layer of the system, the layer above it might as well be stationary.
So from the point of view of my cells, for example, my body is essentially stationary, you know, so their entire life cycle, you know, from birth to cell division will occur without any major structural change happening to the non-equilibrium steady state of my whole body.
So, you know, you get around the implausibility of the strong interpretation of these assumptions by pointing out that, well, what's actually at play is a nested series of systems.
And, you know, you only need things to look ergodic locally relative to other layers of the system.
Hi, everyone. I'm Shannon. I'm a PhD student at the University of California in Merced.
I think that's really helpful for what my question would have been, which would be like, how would if you're talking about the behavior of a crowd and if there's a certain mark of blanket that can extend over this this group of individuals.
The thing about a crowd is it's not a cell. It's not bounded by being stuck inside of a body.
They could leave like they can leave the stadium or leave the protests.
But if we're talking about ergodic or like interacting just enough at just the right spatial temporal scale, then we can talk about some Markov blanket over some whole crowd or some set of a crowd at some event at some time.
Exactly. Yeah, that's precisely what's going on here.
So it's all about defining the relevant spatial and temporal scales.
I mean, if your relevant spatial and temporal scale is like, you know, the whole city over several weeks, then obviously the protesters that gather, you know, and spontaneously form a social group wouldn't count as, you know, even having a non-equilibrium steady state.
I mean, it just kind of forms and dissipates.
But if you're looking over the scale of, you know, minutes to maybe hours, then it does make sense to say, well, locally, you know, there's something robust here.
It has a statistical independence from its environment.
It seems to be, you know, attracted to the same set of states and then it dissipates.
So it's the same story over and over again, just a different kind of spatial and temporal scale.
So you're totally right.
I think that's right on point.
Cool. Let's do Muddy and then Steven.
Hi, I'm Muddy.
I'm the director of AI at Versus Labs and the Special Web Foundation.
Yeah, I just wanted to speak to some of the, like, just to give a little bit of intuition.
So I'm kind of not super in active research right now.
So these terms, I like sharing kind of the way I think about them for people who might be listening, who might not be familiar with the, like, ergodicity in general.
So just generally, I, and please correct me if I'm wrong about this because I'm looking to have my understanding probe.
But I view ergodicity or a system that's ergodic.
My intuition is that if I take a sample of a system, that system is ergodic if that sample is representative of the greater dynamics of that system.
So that's what Maxwell was saying about tending to the mean.
So it doesn't really matter if I take my data from here, here, here, or here.
As long as the sample I'm taking is representative, that is another kind of worms.
It should tend to the same mean or, you know, basically represent the same dynamics of the underlying model and underneath.
But the way in which you define ergodicity is actually defined by your sample space.
It's necessarily defined by your sample space.
So you have all of these emergence properties which are hard to pin down.
So you have, like, dynamic ergodicity, which are, you know, partials with respect to time,
which tend towards some stable value for the local and then the actual mean,
versus static ergodicity, which is if I take a snapshot of my system at any one given time,
so like a cloud of gas, it kind of looks the same, but without any knowledge of my attractor systems,
I can't say that my system is ergodic dynamically over time.
And then you can think about continual ergodicity at different levels.
So I think the example Maxwell gave of flat earth is a really, really beautiful one
because if you take a local representative sample, say 100 meters by 100 meters,
you could define every single sample by a single function, a stable function,
which has either a stability maximum point or is linear in its nature.
So at that level, I have a continuous function which defines ergodicity across all scales,
but it's nested within a larger system which might have chaotic dynamics, actually.
And so it's actually ergodicity.
I think the ambiguity comes in when you're actually trying to define the problem space itself.
As a concept, it's just basically saying this sample represents the model I'm trying.
This sample of a larger system represents the larger system at whatever mathematical perspective
I happen to be looking at it from, whether it's with respect to time or some other variable.
So I just wanted to add that in.
I mean, just to play devil's advocate, thank you, buddy, for that.
I agree with everything you said.
Just to make the, you know, put some meat on the bones of criticism in the interest of fairness.
One of the reasons that you might resist the idea that biological systems is ergodic is, for example,
the pretty plain fact that evolution isn't going anywhere, right?
There doesn't seem to be some kind of evolutionary kind of attractor basin towards which all of evolution,
you know, contra this kind of anthropocentric, you know, religious view of, you know, man's place in nature.
Well, humans aren't all that special, and we're just, like, one among, you know, a series of other animals.
Yeah, so that...
Wait, one quick before we go to Steven.
Also, if your body temperature hits a certain very low or very high value, it's not returning to a steady state either.
And so that's, like, there's a lot of reasons to think at a certain scale of analysis that there's violations of this kind of behavior.
Steven?
Oh, I mean, very clearly, we all die, right?
Yeah.
We all dissipate.
And so at long enough time scales, nothing is, hasn't, has, like, this non-equilibrium steady state or is ergodic in that sense.
Right.
Like, we all just dissipate.
You know, in some sense, the only real ultimate ergodic, you know, end point is the heat death of the universe, right?
Yeah, it's an uncanny valley, because at a short time scale, you're stable.
Then at the lifelong time scale, you dissipate.
And then, again, you're just a flash in the pan.
So very cool and highlights that it's important what scale we're talking about.
Steven, before we close out the slide.
Yeah, I also think that, you know, we talk about the system.
It's the system ergodic internally, externally.
But I don't know whether this is right, but I kind of am more from a practice perspective trying to do the sense making of active inference and that kind of the dynamics of things going backwards and forwards.
So I'm trying to think of the ergodicity as maybe more about the process of this noisy, chaotic, like Muddy was saying, data going backwards and forwards or across the Markov blanket.
And within there, there's ergodicity in that, you know, within and that, even if the systems, I don't know whether they are or not ergodic of the organism,
but there's something in the data stream that allows you to extract information from the entropy, the sort of the noise.
So I was trying to work out if, you know, that might be two questions here.
I think it ends up going to this bigger question about whether the systems are ergodic, but I'm not sure whether it's about the dynamics, the non-linear dynamics have ergodicity sort of tucked away in there.
Yeah, just to give an ecological example, let's think about a predator-prey relationship, like a Latka-Volterra model, you know, the cougars and the rabbits or something like that.
So it's always changing through time and there's a winnerless competition where they're always oscillating.
And so from the first pass, the first moment, it's not ergodic.
It's changing at certain timescales, but it has what Muddy was referring to as this dynamical stationarity or the dynamical ergodicity.
It's kind of like the more things change, the more they stay the same.
Sometimes when we're talking about these higher order relational dynamics or rates of change, the partial derivatives that Muddy mentioned,
then it's actually through time at the correct timescale of analysis that you see that the predator-prey relationship is in like this higher order ergodicity.
And then at another timescale above that, the predator and the prey species don't even exist.
So of course it can't be an ergodic system.
So again, we see that there's timescales where systems display ergodicity and timescales and spatial scales where they don't,
as well as relying on questions about exchangeability and other attributes.
We hope you enjoyed this discussion of ergodicity.
Stay tuned for the next episode where we will continue this discussion and move into talking about Markov blankets in multiscale systems.
