46  ROCHESTER REVIEW  January–February 2013
Corbis (Metropolis); Adam Fenster (Kimmel)
What’s Alien About Science Fiction?
Less than many people 
think, says movie critic 
Dan Kimmel ’77.
Interview by Karen McCally ’02 (PhD)
Movie critic Dan Kimmel ’77 has got a 
yellow jacket in his bonnet. The former 
president of the Boston Society of Film 
Critics, cochair of the Boston Online Film 
Critics Association, and media professor at 
Suffolk University says there’s one movie 
genre that’s never gotten its due: science 
fiction.
In 2011, he made his case in a polemic, 
Jar Jar Binks Must Die . . . and other Obser-
vations about Science Fiction Movies (Fan-
tastic Books). It was nominated for a 2012 
Hugo Award, among the most prestigious 
honors in science fiction writing. 
The one-time Logos humor columnist re-
turns to Rochester every five years to speak 
at the Class of 1977 dinner. His first nov-
el, Shh! It’s a Secret: A Novel about Aliens, 
Hollywood, and the Bar-
tender’s Guide (Fantastic 
Books), is set to come out 
early in 2013.
Why do science fiction 
films need an advocate?
Whenever there is a se-
rious television show or 
movie with science fic-
tion elements, you will 
inevitably read a review 
with a director or one of 
the stars or the writer, 
“It’s not really science 
fiction. Yes, we use time 
travel and spaceships and 
killer robots. But it’s not really science fic-
tion. It’s really about people.” Oh really? 
One of my favorite films of the last 15 years 
is Gattaca. It’s set in a near-future society, 
where basically all babies are born with de-
signer genes. The protagonist was born the 
old-fashioned way. There’s a chilling scene: 
He’s born and they draw his blood. They 
say he’s going to have bad 
vision and he might have 
a heart defect. His whole 
life is written for him, just 
from his DNA. And we’re 
so much more than our 
DNA. I show that movie 
to my students and they 
love it. I had one come 
up to me and say, “I never 
thought I would cry at a 
science fiction movie.”
You’ve had a lot to say, 
in this same vein, about 
Metropolis.
Yes. When Metropolis, by 
the great Fritz Lang, generally acknowl-
edged to be one of the greatest filmmak-
ers of all time, was restored to its original 
length about three years ago, one of the 
German film archivists who was working 
on restoring the film gave an interview to 
the New York Times and he said, “Well, now 
that we can see the complete film, we can 
GENRE BENDER?  
The German expressionist 
classic Metropolis is a sci-fi 
masterpiece, says Kimmel.
CRITIC: Sci-fi addresses serious 
themes, says Kimmel.

January–February 2013  ROCHESTER REVIEW  47
Alumni Gazette
Corbis
see that the science fiction trappings are re-
ally very thin.” This is a movie with a mad 
scientist, a killer robot, and a dystopian fu-
ture! A more recent example is The Time 
Traveler’s Wife. It’s a romantic film and 
it’s also science fiction. You can read the 
interviews—“Oh no, it’s not really science 
fiction. It’s really about the relationship be-
tween the characters.” That would be like 
Clint Eastwood saying, “Unforgiven isn’t 
really a western, it’s about the characters.”
So why the dismissive appraisals?
Even in fandom, somebody famously not-
ed that the golden age of science fiction 
is when you’re 12. Which is true, because 
that’s when a lot of us get into it. But sci-
ence fiction is really by adults, a lot of it is 
written for adults, and when it comes to 
junky sci-fi movies, I point to a quote by the 
great science fiction writer Theodore Stur-
geon. An interviewer said to him, “Isn’t it 
true that 90 percent of science fiction is just 
crud?” And Sturgeon said, “Yes. Ninety per-
cent of anything is crud.”
Why does it matter what genre critics and 
others assign—or don’t—to a film?
First, let’s talk about what genre does. 
Genre offers a set of tools to tell stories 
about us and our lives. It allows us to talk 
about things in code. And so for westerns, 
that means that High Noon could talk about 
the Hollywood blacklist without ever men-
tioning communism. And for science fic-
tion, Invasion of the Body Snatchers could 
do the same thing. So you see a movie like 
that—a critic now might say, “Oh it’s about 
pods from space”—but I’m sitting there 
saying, “Wow, this is about some really in-
teresting ideas that they really couldn’t 
talk about directly in 1956 because some-
body would have yelled, ‘Commie!’” There 
would have been pickets in front of the the-
ater. But it’s pod people, so we can get away 
with it.
You just completed a science fiction novel—
Shh! It’s a Secret: A Novel about Aliens, 
Hollywood, and the Bartender’s Guide?
It’s due out in January. The premise is first 
contact between Earth and this other plan-
et. And now it’s a year later. They’ve been 
exchanging scientists, exchanging ambas-
sadors. And the son of an alien ambassador 
comes out to Hollywood and wants to be 
in the movies. It’s about the friendship be-
tween the movie executive and the alien as 
they’re working on what turns out to be a 
top secret movie project. So, yes, it’s about 
people. But it’s also science fiction.r
Kimmel’s ‘Baker’s Dozen’
So what are the must-see science fiction 
films? Kimmel provides a “baker’s dozen.” 
One note: “Where there are multiple 
versions, I go with the earlier one. Except 
for The Fly,” Kimmel says. “In that case, I 
favor the 1986 remake.”
•	 Metropolis (1927)
•	 Bride of Frankenstein (1935)
•	 Things to Come (1936)
•	 The Day the Earth Stood Still (1951)
•	 The Thing (1951)
•	 Forbidden Planet (1956)
•	 Invasion of the Body Snatchers (1956)
•	 2001: A Space Odyssey (1968)
•	 Colossus: The Forbin Project (1970)
•	 Sleeper (1973)
•	 Blade Runner (1982)
•	 The Fly (1986 remake of the 
1958 original)
•	 Gattaca (1997)
RECOMMENDED: Kimmel’s favorites 
include The Day the Earth Stood 
Still, Blade Runner (inset, top left), 
and 2001: A Space Odyssey 
(inset, bottom left). 

