Boundaries of the Mind
The Individual in the Fragile Sciences

Cognition
Where does the mind begin and end? Most philosophers and cognitive scientists take the view that the mind is bounded by the skull or
skin of the individual. Rob Wilson, in this provocative and challenging new book, provides the foundation for the view that the mind
extends beyond the boundary of the individual.

The approach adopted offers a unique blend of traditional philosophical analysis, cognitive science, and the history of psychology and
the human sciences. There are highly accessible discussions of the origin of psychology, nativism about the mind, contemporary views of
computation, mental representation, consciousness, the metaphysics
of mind, the idea of group minds, and how to think about the individual in the cognitive, biological, and social sciences, what Wilson
refers to as the fragile sciences. A companion volume Genes and the
Agents of Life explores this general theme in the biological sciences.

Written with verve and clarity, this ambitious book will appeal to
a broad swath of professionals and students in philosophy, psychology, cognitive science, and the history of the behavioral and human
sciences.

Robert A. Wilson was born in Broken Hill, Australia, and lives in
Edmonton, Canada. He is the author or editor of five other books,
including the award-winning The MIT Encyclopedia of the Cognitive Sciences (1999).

i
ii
Boundaries of the Mind
The Individual in the Fragile Sciences
Cognition
ROBERT A. WILSON
University of Alberta
iii
cambridge university press
Cambridge, New York, Melbourne, Madrid, Cape Town, Singapore, São Paulo
Cambridge University Press
The Edinburgh Building, Cambridge cb2 2ru, UK
Robert A. Wilson 2004
For Selina
Contents in Brief
part one: disciplining the individual
and the mind
part two: individualism and externalism in the
philosophy of mind and the cognitive sciences
part three: thinking through and beyond the body
part four: the cognitive metaphor in the biological
and social sciences
The Group Mind Hypothesis in Contemporary Biology
Contents
List of Tables and Figures page xiii
Acknowledgments xv
part one
disciplining the individual and the mind
ix
x Contents
part two
individualism and externalism in the philosophy
of mind and the cognitive sciences
5 Metaphysics, Mind, and Science: Two Views
Contents xi
part three
thinking through and beyond the body
xii Contents
part four
the cognitive metaphor in the biological
and social sciences
1 Group Minds and the Cognitive Metaphor in the Biological
6 Collective Psychology, Superorganisms, and Socially
12 The Group Mind Hypothesis in Contemporary Biology
List of Tables and Figures
tables
figures
5.1 (a) Constitutive Decomposition Involving Entity-bounded
Realization and (b) Integrative Synthesis Involving Wide
xiii
xiv
Acknowledgments
I began thinking about some of the material in this book in the mid-1990s
as work on three distinct projects progressed. Some of the metaphysical
issues concerning the mind, particularly what I think of as the hardnosed physicalist challenges to nonreductionist views posed by Jaegwon
Kim and David Lewis, had been passed by too quickly in my first book,
Cartesian Psychology and Physical Minds. These called for further reflection.

I had also started developing, slowly and through trial-and-error teaching,
some background in biology and the philosophy of biology. Finally, I was
being forced to think about the diversity of views within cognitive science
through my role as general editor for The MIT Encyclopedia of the Cognitive
Sciences. It took a few years for these interests and issues to coalesce, and
for the project of which this book is a part to be articulated.

The project itself was initiated while I held a fellowship at the Center
for Advanced Study at the University of Illinois, Urbana-Champaign, in
the spring of 1998. The center also played a broader supportive role for
me throughout my time at Illinois, for which I am grateful. Rough versions of the first chapter and those in Part Two were drafted in the fall
of 1999 while holding a fellowship courtesy of the Program for Liberal
Arts and Sciences Study in a Second Discipline at Illinois. During this
period, the Cognitive Science Group at the Beckman Institute at Illinois
provided a stimulating intellectual home that regularly transgressed disciplinary boundaries of all kinds. I thank my colleagues there and in
the Department of Philosophy – especially Gary Dell, Gary Ebbs, Steve
Levinson, Patrick Maher, Greg Murphy, and Fred Schmitt – for fostering a
constructive and welcoming academic environment in which a somewhat
open-ended project could be undertaken.
