
xv
xvi Acknowledgments
Most of the writing for the project has been done while I have been at
the University of Alberta these past two or three years, and with generous
release time provided by grant SSHRC 410-2001-0061 from the Social Sciences and Humanities Research Council of Canada. As the project developed, it became clear that it could not be completed within a single book.

Much of the last year has been spent making both this book and Genes
and the Agents of Life (Cambridge 2005), walk the line that independent
but related books must. I thank my departmental chair, Bernie Linsky,
for his flexibility in assigning my teaching load, giving me the whole of
calendar 2002 to concentrate on both books. My thanks also to my research assistants over the last two years – Ken Bond, Jennie Greenwood,
Li Li, and Patrick McGivern – and to members of an upper-division and
graduate course in the spring of 2003 who grappled with, and usefully
critiqued, material from both books.

For feedback and encouragement along the way, I would like to thank
Karen Bennett, Paul Bloom, Andy Clark, Lesley Cormack, Gary Ebbs,
Frances Egan, John Heil, Terry Horgan, Frank Keil, the late David Lewis,
Patrick Maher, Robert McKim, Ruth Millikan, Alex Rueger, Robert Smith,
Andrea Scarantino, Gabe Segal, Larry Shapiro, Sydney Shoemaker, Bob
Stalnaker, Kim Sterelny, Paul Teller, John Tienson, J. D. Trout, Peter
Vallentyne, Steve Wagner, David Sloan Wilson, and Steve Yablo. Greg
Murphy and Larry Shapiro provided detailed written comments on the
penultimate manuscript, for which I am grateful, and Michael Wade
did the same for the material that comprises Part Four. The editorial
and production team at Cambridge – Stephanie Achard, Jennifer Carey,
Shari Chappell, and Carolyn Sherayko – have been a pleasure to work
with throughout, and have improved the final manuscript considerably.

I would also like to thank four reviewers for Cambridge University Press
who provided feedback and guidance on the overall shape of the project,
and Terence Moore at Cambridge for his editorial leadership.

Many of the chapters draw on and develop material that I have published elsewhere. I would like to acknowledge publishers for permission
to include material drawn from the following publication sources:
Chapters 4 and 7:“Individualism,”in Stephen P. Stich and Ted A. Warfield
(eds.), The Blackwell Guide to Philosophy of Mind. Oxford: Blackwell Publishers, 2002, pp. 256–287.

(2001), pp. 1–30.  C 2001 Kluwer Academic Publishers.

Acknowledgments xvii
Chapter 6: “Some Problems for ‘Alternative Individualism,’ ” Philosophy
of Science, 67 (2000), pp. 671–679.  C 2000 Philosophy of Science Association. All rights reserved. The University of Chicago Press.

Chapters 7 and 8: “The Mind Beyond Itself,” in Dan Sperber (ed.),
Metarepresentations: A Multidisciplinary Perspective. Volume 10, Vancouver
Studies in Cognitive Science. New York: Oxford University Press, 2000,
pp. 31–52.

Chapter 8: “The Individual in Biology and Psychology,” in Valerie Gray
Hardcastle (ed.), Where Biology Meets Psychology: Philosophical Essays.

Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1999, pp. 357–374.

Chapter 10: “Intentionality and Phenomenology,” Pacific Philosophical
Quarterly, 84 (2003), pp. 413–431. Oxford: Blackwell Publishers.

Chapter 12: “Group-Level Cognition,” Philosophy of Science, 68 (2001),
pp. S262–S273.  C 2001 Philosophy of Science Association. All rights
reserved. The University of Chicago Press.

Edmonton, Alberta
June 2003
xviii
Boundaries of the Mind
The Individual in the Fragile Sciences
Cognition
xix
xx
part one
DISCIPLINING THE INDIVIDUAL AND THE MIND
1
2
1
The Individual in the Fragile Sciences
1 individuals and the mind
Where does the mind begin and end? We think of the mind as tied to
and delimited by individuals. Minds do not float free in the air or belong
to larger, amorphous entities, such as groups, societies, or cultures. No,
they are tightly coupled with individuals. Minds exist inside individuals,
and the particular mind that any individual has constitutes an important
part of what it is to be that individual. We may not know precisely when
during ontogenetic development the mind begins to exist and when it
ceases to exist. Indeed, we might think that there is no such precise time,
and that to think otherwise is to fall into some sort of conceptual muddle.

But that a particular mind’s temporal boundaries are delimited by the
life of the individual is reflected in both Western science and law.

Likewise, we might quibble about how far throughout the brain and
central nervous system the mind extends spatially. But again, the boundary of the mind is no greater than the boundary of the individual. If it
doesn’t stop further in, in the brain, it at least stops at the skin.

There are ways in which these ideas about the mind may appear to
be challenged by pervasive systems of thought beyond science. For example, on many religious views, at least something very like the mind is
neither temporally nor spatially bounded by the body by which we usually
identify an individual. Minds leave bodies when a person dies, and can
find themselves in places beyond Earth, or in other bodies on Earth. This
sort of view is even accommodated within analytic discussions of personal
