identity in philosophy. The soul of a prince may end up in the body of
a pauper, or (in the modern version) a person’s mind might be stored
3
4 Disciplining the Individual and the Mind
in a computer and downloaded in other matter, or teletransported Star
Trek-style to another spatial location.

In fact, such widespread views reflect and reinforce, rather than challenge, the tie between minds and individuals. For in effect what they do
is identify an individual in terms of his or her mind. It is that very same
individual who sins on Earth and is thus punished in the afterlife, and
the very same individual who emerges from the teletransporter as the one
who stepped into it. If this were not true, then Hell would deliver only
a Kafkaesque notion of justice and desert, and teletransportation would
be suicide and the creation of a new life all in one.

This book is about the boundaries of the mind. The preceding two
paragraphs aside, it has nothing directly to say about religious thought
or about work on personal identity. Rather, its focus is on the idea of
the individual as a boundary for the mind in the cognitive sciences and
the philosophy of mind. There are various strands to the idea that the
individual serves as a boundary for the mind in those sciences, and I
want to tease them apart, to probe and examine them, and to question
at least some of them. I take seriously the idea that there are important
senses in which the individual is not a boundary for the mind, but do
so from within the confines of the cognitive sciences. This will involve
saying much about what I think the mind is. And it will be hard to say
much of use on this topic without also entering into discussion of what
individuals are. That, I suggest, takes us immediately beyond the mind
and the cognitive sciences to a larger arena within science.

2 individuals and science
The concept of the individual is central to how we think about the mind,
about living things, and about the social world. The sciences that concern
each of these domains – the cognitive, biological, and social sciences –
have developed independently. Human agents are often taken to be
paradigms of individuals in each of these sciences, what I shall collectively
refer to as the fragile sciences. Yet there exists little systematic discussion
of the roles and conceptions of individuals across the cognitive, biological, and social sciences. Boundaries of the Mind focuses on the role that
the individual has played and continues to play in guiding our thinking
about the mind within cognitive science. It conceptualizes that science
(or, better, cluster of sciences) as part of a broader range of sciences, the
fragile sciences, that use individuals as a touchstone. It aims to contribute
and draw on the fragile sciences.

In everyday life human agents are our paradigm example of individuals. We take for granted human agents in our everyday lives, and they
feature centrally in our myths, histories, literature, and artistic representations. They are perhaps the most familiar part of our landscapes and our
memories. Individuals are not some theoretical abstraction or posit, but
perceived and known things. They are something that we can feel sure
about, something basic or foundational, something beyond question.

Individuals have also been taken for granted within the various explanatory enterprises that form part of contemporary science. But here
the sense of security and surety can begin to dissipate as we register some
of the variation that exists in just how human agents are thought of within
the domain of the human sciences. Within evolutionary biology, human
agents are conceived as animals with a phylogenetic history and a particular range of ecological niches. Within anthropology, human agents
are interpreters of meaning and creators of culture. Within cognitive science, they are the locus for computational programs and modules. Within
economics, rational decisionmakers, optimizers of utility. The claim that
individuals play a central role in these sciences is platitudinous. Yet recognition of the various roles that individuals have in these sciences, and of
the presuppositions and implications of such roles, have been limited
enough to warrant using the platitude as a focal theme for a broader
discussion of the individual in the fragile sciences.

So my first point about individuals and science is that while we can
readily accept human agents as paradigmatic individuals, how such individuals are conceptualized varies across different sciences. This should
occasion no real surprise, given that these sciences have developed with
considerable autonomy from one another, and the central role that “the
individual” plays in each. There are, however, various kinds of project
that might take this as a point of departure. For example, there are historical investigations of specific conceptions of the individual, detailed
comparisons of distinct traditions and thinkers across these disciplines,
and synthetic overviews that weave a narrative revealing affinities and
ruptures within these fields of thought. While the kind of project that I
am undertaking incorporates historical, comparative, and synthetic perspectives, the unifying structure to it lies in the interplay between the role
and conception of individuals and the way in which the corresponding
sciences have developed.

In both common sense and the sciences we have a firm grip on what
individuals are: They are individual human beings like you and me, and
by extension, individual thinkers, organisms, and agents. What warrants
6 Disciplining the Individual and the Mind
reflection, however, are the various ways in which these thinkers, organisms, and agents have been construed, respectively, in psychology, biology,
and the social sciences. For these construals are pivotal to many of the
most important and controversial topics in those sciences and the sort of
sciences they become.

This brings me to a second point. How one conceives of individuals and
the role that one ascribes to individuals structure and constrain how any
“individual-focused” science is theorized and practiced. We can illustrate
both of these points with an example from the biological sciences, that
of the role of individuals in the theory of natural selection.

In the traditional Darwinian theory of natural selection, the individual
organism plays the central role as the agent on which natural selection
operates. Organisms are the individuals that bear phenotypic traits, that
vary in their fitness within a population, and that, as a result, are selected
for over evolutionary time. Organisms are the bearers of adaptations,
such as thick coats in cold climates, or porous leaves in humid climates.

They are the agents of selection. On Darwin’s own view, units larger than
the individual, such as the group, were (more or less) unnecessary, and
units smaller than the individual, such as the gene, unknown.
