
By contrast, in the postsynthetic view of evolution by natural selection
that is often glossed in terms of the concept of the selfish gene, individuals
play a very different role. On this view, it is genes rather than individuals
that are the agents of selection, and that come to play many of the roles
(and have many of the features) that are ascribed to organisms on the
traditional Darwinian view. On this view, individuals are not much more
than ways in which genes get to propagate themselves. In terms that
Richard Dawkins uses, they are the vehicles in which the real agents of
selection, genes, the replicators in the story of life, are lodged. Genes are
the bearers of adaptations, and the units between which variations in
fitness provide the basis for the process of natural selection. Furthermore,
not only is the individual organism no longer the agent of selection, but as
Dawkins has also argued, it is only an arbitrary boundary for phenotypes,
which should be seen as extending into the world beyond the organism.1
Each of these conceptions of the role of the individual in the theory
of natural selection carries with it implications for a number of issues to
which that theory is central. I shall mention just two here.

The first is what is usually called the problem of altruism. Altruistic
phenotypes and behaviors are those that decrease the relative fitness
of the organisms that bear them. On the traditional Darwinian view of
natural selection, focused as it is on organisms and their reproductive
success, the existence of altruism represents a puzzle. If organisms are
the agent on which natural selection operates, then natural selection will
select those organisms that have a relatively higher level of fitness. Thus,
organisms adapted to increase the relative fitness of other organisms,
that is, decrease their own relative fitness, could not evolve through this
process, except as incidental by-products. The problem of altruism, in
this view, is how to explain the existence of organism-level altruism.

On the gene-centered view of natural selection, by contrast, this problem does not exist. Or, rather, it is solved by showing how altruism,
so conceived, is a result of the process of natural selection operating
on genes and maximizing their reproductive success. For copies of the
same genes can exist in different organisms, and so altruistic behavior
would be predicted by a gene-centered view of natural selection where
organisms share significant proportions of their genes, such as when they
are kin.

A second issue for which the individual- and gene-centered views of
natural selection have implications is how important higher-level selection is in shaping the tree of life. Such selection operates on agents larger
than the individual, anything from temporary dyads, to demes, to species,
to whole clades. Both the traditional Darwinian and the gene-centered
view are skeptical about the need to posit higher-level selection, and posit
higher-level selection only when explanation at their preferred level is not
empirically adequate. On the traditional Darwinian view, these higherlevel agents are conceptualized very much as organisms in that they are
seen as sharing many properties ordinarily ascribed to organisms. But
on the gene-centered view, groups, species, and clades are simply larger
pools of genes, different sized vehicles, if you like, but never truly the
agents of selection.2
This example brings out another dimension to discussion of the individual in the cognitive, biological, and social sciences. Human agents
are the paradigmatic individuals in these sciences, but they are neither
the only entity that serves as an individual nor always the most central
such entity. Entities both smaller (for example, information-processing
modules) and larger (for example, whole species) than our paradigm individuals are sometimes conceptualized either as individuals or as having
many of the properties possessed by paradigmatic individuals, and thus
as being like individuals. Sometimes it is these entities that are central
to the relevant sciences, with our paradigm individuals receding to the
background. We can raise the same questions about the conception and
role of such entities as we have about our paradigm individuals. As I will
8 Disciplining the Individual and the Mind
argue in the final chapters, this may be true even when our focus is on
cognition, and where the relevant individuals are groups of some kind.

3 the fragile sciences
I have introduced “the fragile sciences” as shorthand for the cognitive,
biological, and social sciences, and here I want to say something about the
neologism itself. Given that human agents are paradigmatic individuals
in these sciences, one might think that “human sciences” is descriptively
more informative. But like “behavioral sciences” or “special sciences,”
this is a term whose connotations are more misleading than helpful, and
whose extension differs from that of the range of sciences that I have in
mind.

The first respect in which this is true is that “the human sciences”
denotes simply those sciences that attempt to understand human nature
in one or more of its dimensions: biological, psychological, behavioral,
social. The term thus suggests continuities between humanistic studies of
human nature that precede the disciplinization of the psychological and
social sciences in the nineteenth century and subsequent, disciplinarybased research that I shall not discuss at all. Roger Smith’s The Norton
History of the Human Sciences is an excellent work with this focus, but
my concern is largely with conceptions of the individual that postdate
the formation of psychology and the various social sciences as distinct
disciplines.

A second but related reason for not speaking of the human sciences is
that even if human agents are paradigmatic individuals in the cognitive,
biological, and social sciences, their conceptualization here seldom even
attempts to capture the essence of humanity or to grapple with the loftier
goals of earlier inquiries, such as“man’s place in nature.” The conceptualization of the individual has become more partial and less encompassing,
but also more closely tied to models, techniques, and research strategies
in particular sciences. It is these ties, rather than the study of human
agency or human nature, that interest me.

A third reason to coin a term rather than make do with an existing one,
such as “the human sciences,” is that the greater part of the biological
sciences, as well as a sizable portion of the cognitive sciences, have at least
as much to say about nonhuman as about human agency. The scientific
study of intelligent capacities has sometimes been used as a brief characterization of cognitive science, to which artificial intelligence, the study
of such capacities in machines, has been, historically and substantially, a
