major contributor. Human beings constitute one special object of study
within zoology. If “the human sciences” is taken, as it often is, to refer to
psychology plus the social sciences, then we need a term that refers to
these plus the biological sciences.

But why fragile sciences? Two brief reasons. The first is that it both parodies and transcends traditional divisions between the sciences: between
the natural and social sciences, hard and soft science, and the physical
and human sciences. As a sometimes philosopher of science, I have found
these dichotomies too often driving views of the nature of science, and as
inevitably privileging the natural, the hard, and the physical over the social, the soft, and the human.“Fragile sciences”serves as a partial counter
to these tendencies pervading not only philosophy but also education,
popular culture, and science itself. The second is the cluster of ideas that
fragility calls to mind. Fragile things can be easily broken, are often delicate and admirable in their own right, and their labeling as such carries
with it its own warning, which we sometimes make explicit: Handle with
care! But they are also both strong and weak at the same time, and their
fragility lies both in their underlying physical bases and in how it is that
we treat them. No doubt, “fragile sciences” triggers other meanings, and
should two reasons not be reason enough, let that be a third. Welcome
to the fragile sciences!
4 individualism in the cognitive, biological,
and social sciences
One way in which the role of the individual has been made prominent in
the fragile sciences is via the defense of one or another form of individualism. I have examined individualism in psychology in detail elsewhere,
concluding with the suggestion that the relationship between the various
individualistic theses in psychology, biology, and the social sciences deserved substantive exploration. While that exploration does not exhaust
the content of either Boundaries of the Mind or the broader project of
which it is a part, the relationship between these individualisms constitutes a reference point for discussion of individuals in the fragile sciences.

I shall begin to discharge the promissory note that there is something to
be gained by considering “the individual” across the fragile sciences by
sketching a common, simple framework in terms of which these forms of
individualism can all be understood.3
In psychology and the cognitive sciences, more generally, individualism is the thesis that psychological states should be construed without
10 Disciplining the Individual and the Mind
reference to anything beyond the boundary of the individual who has
those states. This is the thesis that Jerry Fodor has called methodological solipsism, and it requires that one abstract away from an individual’s environment in taxonomizing or individuating her psychological
states. A more precise and common expression of individualism in psychology says that psychological states should be taxonomized so as to
supervene on the intrinsic, physical states of the individuals who instantiate those states. (A property, A, supervenes on another, B, just if
no two entities can differ with respect to A without also differing with
respect to B.) Those who deny individualism are externalists. In Parts
Two and Three I shall develop several varieties of externalism about
the mind. Individualism about mental states requires, and will there
receive, more detailed articulation. I briefly note three things about
it here.4
First, individualism is a normative thesis about how one ought to do
psychology: It proscribes certain views of our psychological nature – those
that are not individualistic. For this reason, I consider individualism in
psychology as a putative constraint on the sciences of cognition.

Second, this constraint itself is claimed to derive either from general
canons governing science and explanation or from entrenched assumptions about the nature of mental states themselves. It is not construed as
an a priori constraint on how one does psychology, but one derivative from
existing explanatory practices that have met with considerable success in
the past.5
Third, combining the previous two points, approaches to the cognitive
sciences that are not individualistic are both methodologically and metaphysically misguided. They go methodologically awry in that the most
perspicuous examples of explanatorily insightful research paradigms for
cognition or for science more generally have been individualistic in
the corresponding sense. Included here are computational approaches
to cognition and the taxonomy of entities in science more generally
by their causal powers. Given the successes that such individualistic approaches to the mind have had, those rejecting individualism are left in
methodological limbo.

Externalist approaches to the mind go metaphysically awry in two corresponding ways: Either they relinquish our only real insight into the
nature of mental causation – cognition is computational – or they imply
that the mind is not governed by principles that apply more generally to
the physical world – such as the supervenience of a thing’s properties on
its intrinsic, causal powers.

These three features of individualism in psychology are shared by individualistic theses in both the biological and social sciences. There are
various forms that individualism can take in the biological sciences. For
now I elaborate on an example that I have already mentioned, that concerning the agents of selection.

In evolutionary biology there has been a sustained and continuing debate over the agents of selection: At what level or levels in the biological
hierarchy – from the very small, such as cells and their constituents, to
the very large, such as whole species or larger taxonomic units, such as
genera or families – does the chief force of evolutionary change, natural
selection, operate? Three putative agents of selection have been most
frequently proposed and defended: the individual organism, with individual selection being what I have already referred to as the traditional
Darwinian view; the gene, a unit inspired by the rise of population genetics through the evolutionary synthesis, with genic selection associated
most often with George Williams and Richard Dawkins; and the group,
with discussion of the process of group selection experiencing a contemporary revival, due largely to the work of David Sloan Wilson and Elliott
Sober. While much of the debate over the agents of selection concerns the
relative strength and thus importance of each of these selective forces –
individual, genic, and group – there is a strand to the debate that has
concerned the level at which selection operates, and thus, which is less
pluralistic than is suggested by such a construal of that debate. It is this
strand that I want to focus on here.6
In the context of this debate over the agents of selection, individualism
is the view that the organism is the largest unit on which natural selection
operates. Thus, proponents of genic selection who claim that natural
selection can always be adequately represented as operating on genes or
small genetic fragments are individualists about the agents of selection,
as are those who adopt the traditional Darwinian view that allows for only
individual-level selection. Like individualism in psychology, individualism
in evolutionary biology is a putative normative constraint that derives
from existing explanatory practice, and whose violation, according to its
proponents, involves both methodological and metaphysical mistakes.

Let me explain.
