
Individualism about the agents of selection implies that individual organisms act as a boundary beyond which evolutionary biologists need not
venture when attempting to theorize in considering the nature of what
it is that competes and is subject to natural selection, and thus evolutionary change. By focusing on the individual and what lies within it, one
12 Disciplining the Individual and the Mind
can best understand the dynamics of adaptive change within populations
of organisms, whether it be via population genetic models, through the
deployment of evolutionary game theory, or by means of the discovery
of the forms that individualistic selection takes. This constraint on how
to think about the operation of natural selection builds on the specific
explanatory successes of models of kin selection, reciprocal altruism, and
other processes that articulate strategies that individuals might adopt in
order to maximize their reproductive success.

Finally, those who go beyond the individual in postulating selective
processes that flout individualism create both methodological and metaphysical problems that individualistic approaches avoid. Methodologically, since the full range of observed behaviors can be explained in evolutionary terms by models of evolution that are individualistic about the
agents of selection (for example, via kin selection and reciprocal altruism), those who reject individualism are abandoning real explanatory
achievement. As we saw was the case with the rejection of individualism in psychology, precisely because the constraint of individualism in
evolutionary biology rests on a history of explanatory success, those advocating a nonindividualistic view of the agents of selection are faced (and
not unreasonably) with the question of what their perspective buys that
cannot be purchased with an established currency. The corresponding
metaphysical problem lies in the idea that natural selection – somehow –
transcends the level of the individual and goes to work directly on groups.

A common response to this sort of nonindividualistic suggestion is either
that the appropriate model of group selection really boils down to a variant on an existing individualistic model of selection, or that it requires
assumptions that rarely, if ever, hold in the actual world. In the former
case, we don’t, in fact, depart from individualism; in the latter, we are
committed to views about what there is that do not correspond to how
the world actually is.

Consider now the social sciences. In the social sciences, methodological individualism is a cluster of views that give some sort of priority to
individuals and their properties, particularly their psychological properties, in accounting for social phenomena. As with mental phenomena,
although there is a sense in which we have an intuitive grasp of what
social phenomena are, there are questions of how those phenomena fit
into the natural order of things, and of how we should go about studying them. Methodological individualism has sometimes been expressed
as the view that all social phenomena must be explained, ultimately, in
terms of the intentional states of individual agents. Like individualism
in psychology, it has also sometimes been formulated as a supervenience
thesis, the thesis that social phenomena supervene on the psychology of
individuals.7
These two formulations, what we might think of as the explanatory and
ontological formulations, are usefully seen as linked by viewing methodological individualism as a thesis about the taxonomy or individuation of
social phenomena, as I have suggested that individualism in psychology is
most usefully viewed. Methodological individualism is the view that social
phenomena should be taxonomized so as to supervene on the intrinsic, physical properties of the individuals who participate in or sustain
those phenomena. Thus, our explanations of social phenomena should
be restricted to positing states and processes that respect this normative,
individualistic constraint. This is what is thought to give the intentional
states of individuals both explanatory and ontological priority over social phenomena, just as, given individualism in psychology, the intrinsic,
physical states of individuals have explanatory and ontological priority
over mental phenomena.

Fueling the idea that methodological individualism is a constraint on
the social sciences is also a claim about a tradition of explanatory successes, although unlike the case of the cognitive and biological sciences,
this claim about an established track record for individualistic approaches
to the social sciences has a significantly slimmer evidential basis. This is in
large part because relatively uncontroversial explanatory success stories
are rare in the social sciences; it is also because the best-known defenses
of methodological individualism in the social sciences, such as those of
Karl Popper and John Watkins, predate most of those successes that we
can identify. Historically, it is more accurate to see the rise of methodological individualism in the social sciences as a gamble, a promissory
note about what approaches to understanding society would prove most
fruitful, though contemporary advocates of methodological individualism do, I think, share the “past success” view of their putative constraint
on the social sciences, listing to their credit, for example, a variety of
applications of rational choice theory in economics and schema theory
in cognitive anthropology.8
The parallel to the third feature of individualism in psychology that
I drew – the claim that violation of the constraint brings with it related
methodological and metaphysical problems – is, I think, relatively clear.

Individualists have claimed that approaches to and theories in the social
sciences that are non-individualistic, such as Emile Durkheim’s account
of suicide, or Karl Marx’s theory of capitalism, to take two well-known
14 Disciplining the Individual and the Mind
examples, have proven to be methodological dead ends. As with claims
about individualistic success stories in the biological sciences, these claims
about explanatory failure are contentious. In any case, with respect to the
social sciences more emphasis has been given to the metaphysical pitfalls
of a denial of methodological individualism: social science that is nonindividualistic reifies social objects and categories, such as class interest
(sociology), markets (economics), and cultures (anthropology). It posits
an inflated social ontology of entities that have some type of sui generis
existence, and provides no promise of how to integrate the developing
social sciences with the natural sciences.9
There are questions about these three forms of individualism that
this brief comparative treatment of them leaves open, and we will return
to explore in detail those concerning cognition in Part Two. My main
point here has been to sketch a common framework in terms of which
these distinct individualistic theses can be viewed. The existence of such
a framework suggests that problems, challenges, solutions, and responses
that have arisen with respect to a given debate over individualism may also
exist or be lurking in the background of another debate over individuals and their role in explanation in the fragile sciences. This common
framework will thus function like a trampoline for some individualism
hopping across the fragile sciences.

Thus far I have attempted to show that three individualistic theses in
the cognitive, biological, and social sciences that have seldom been discussed together in fact share an important set of affinities. The natural
and further suggestion is that the debates into which an individualistic or externalist position in any of these sciences launch one can be
mutually informative. That in turn presupposes that each of these individualistic perspectives has important ramifications for central debates
in each of these fields. It is in part by way of supporting this claim that
