I turn now to consider innateness hypotheses in the fragile sciences. I
shall propose a two-dimensional analysis of a range of nativist debates
both that shows what they share despite their distinct subject matter, and
that reveals the link between nativism and individualism. I begin with
the cognitive sciences, where nativism has received its most extensive
treatment.

5 inside the thinking individual
Nativists about the mind hold that the mind itself is an important source
of, and imposes a structure on, the nature of human knowledge and
when we discuss nativism about the mind at length, contemporary nativism about cognition in general has been inspired by nativism about
language more specifically. Language acquisition, and cognitive development more generally, are viewed as proceeding maturationally, rather
than through some type of environmentally driven process, such as learning. And these maturational processes are viewed by nativists as requiring
specialized, internal cognitive machinery, rather than general purpose,
one-size-fits-all mechanisms.

In the contemporary cognitive sciences, the chief antinativist cluster
of views are empiricist, holding that it is our sensory or perceptual apparatus, not something distinctly cognitive or mental, that structures human knowledge and mental representation. Both nativists and empiricists
recognize that there is a given, built-in organismic contribution to cognition. But since empiricists locate this contribution within perception,
“upstream” of the mind, what enters the mind proper is a function of
experience in the world. This experience may vary with one’s environment and shapes an organism’s particular cognitive structures. Cognitive
structures are thus not built into the design of the organism’s mind. In
this sense, its cognitive architecture is not innate but contingent on the
nature of its environment.

There are two distinct dimensions to contemporary debates over nativism about the mind. The first concerns the nature of an individual’s
internal structure, while the second concerns the causal role that an individual’s external environment plays in the acquisition and development
of a given cognitive process. These dimensions can be represented as two
theses about cognition as follows. Letting X stand in for some particular
cognitive ability, phenomenon, or behavior, these theses are:
The Internal Richness Thesis: Structures and processes internal to the individual
that are important to the acquisition and development of X are rich;
and
The External Minimalism Thesis: Structures and processes external to an individual
play at best a secondary causal role in the acquisition and development of X.

A cognitive structure is rich just if it is specialized, localized, internally
complex, and causally powerful. Intuitively, the internal richness thesis
says that there is a wealth of structure built into the individual that explains why it possesses a particular cognitive ability or manifests some
specific behavior.

16 Disciplining the Individual and the Mind
Consider a strong candidate for an innate human cognitive capacity, such as the capacity to acquire language. Nativists about language
acquisition hold that language learners are equipped with a “language
acquisition device” that is rich in the sense I have specified. While they
acknowledge environmental input as essential, it clearly plays a secondary
causal role in language acquisition. By contrast, consider the ability to
do calculus, something usually acquired through classroom instruction.

Here whether one acquires the ability to do calculus depends in large
part on the structure of one’s environment, in particular, on whether it
contains a teacher who can transmit the relevant knowledge. Since calculus is a relatively recent human innovation, it is unlikely that the brain
contains structures specifically for calculus.

Paradigmatic nativists in the cognitive sciences, such as Chomsky and
Fodor, accept both the internal richness and the external minimalism
thesis about a range of cognitive capacities. Paradigmatic antinativists,
such as behaviorists and early connectionists, reject both of these theses.

One implication of the two-dimensional view of nativism is that we can understand such views as diametrically opposed to one another, as Figure 1.1
makes clear: In virtue of accepting both theses about cognition, Fodor
and Chomsky are what I shall call strong nativists about cognition, while
behaviorists and at least early connectionists, by virtue of rejecting both
theses, are strong antinativists. As Figure 1.1 makes clear, these strong positions do not exhaust the range of options in the debate over nativism
about the mind, a point to which I shall return in Chapter 3.

External Minimalism Thesis
YES NO
Chomsky
Fodor
Y
E Internal
S
Richness
Behaviorists
Early Connectionism N Thesis
O
figure 1.1. Nativism and Cognition
Nativist views, particularly what I have been calling strong nativism, provide at least prima facie support for individualistic views of the mind. Consider the external minimalism thesis. If the environment plays a secondary
role in the acquisition and development of a given cognitive ability –
and in the extreme case is best viewed as little more than a trigger for
that ability – then there is a clear sense in which the environment can
be bracketed out when we formulate taxonomies and explanations for
mental phenomena. This strand to strong nativism suggests a “methodologically solipsistic” research strategy in psychology. And if one accepts
the internal richness thesis, then there is a sense in which cognitive structures for specific tasks are programmed within the organism, and so again
it would seem that bracketing out the environment for the purposes of
psychological taxonomy and explanation would be appropriate. In short,
if our innate cognitive machinery is rich in structure, and our psychological taxonomies aim to carve mental reality at its joints, then those
taxonomies should be individualistic.

There is more to be said not only about nativism about the mind, but
also about these putative relationships between nativism and individualism, and we will return to such issues in due course. This introduction of
the two-dimensional view of nativism is, however, intended primarily to
exemplify the trampoline hopping across the fragile sciences that I mentioned at the end of the previous section. Let’s hop, then, from cognition
to biology.

6 the beast within
Debates over nativism also have a well-worn history within the biological sciences. The two-dimensional view of the contemporary debate
over nativism within the cognitive sciences helps to illuminate these
debates.
