
One such debate concerns the role and conception of inheritance
and organismic development. How should we understand inheritance
and organismic development? Gross bodily traits in human beings, such
as number of arms and legs, eye color, and position of the mouth, are
typically considered to be innate, and this ascription of innateness fits
with the two-dimensional analysis of nativism. The environment plays a
secondary causal role in the development of such traits, with the primary role being played by rich structures internal to the organism. By
contrast, for traits that are typically viewed as acquired, such as height
or number of scars borne by age five, neither the external minimalism
18 Disciplining the Individual and the Mind
nor the internal richness thesis is true. As in the cognitive case, the
two-dimensional view provides a way of demarcating paradigmatically
innate from paradigmatically acquired bodily traits.

The parallel with nativism about the mind runs deeper, however, in
that the two-dimensional view also specifies strong nativist and strong
antinativist views of inheritance and development. Within classical and
molecular genetics the prevalent view of the inheritance and development of phenotypic traits gives genes a preeminent role to play, holding that genes both code for and direct organismic development. Here
genes play much the role that modules do in nativist accounts of cognitive
development: They are internally rich structures that play the principal
role in guiding development. Thus, while an organism’s environment
plays a necessary role in inheritance and development, it is not the primary causal agent in those processes. This view of the nature and role of
genes in inheritance and development represents a strong nativist view
within the biological sciences.

Corresponding to the strong empiricist views about cognition is a
strong antinativist view of inheritance and development associated most
directly with Richard Lewontin, sometimes referred to as interactionism
or constructivism about development. To be clear, no one denies the existence of intracellular units, genes that play an important role in inheritance. What has been questioned, however, is (a) whether genes play
either a unique, universal, or asymmetrical role in the processes of inheritance and development with respect to other cellular (and extracellular)
components; and (b) whether the concept of a gene, and the roles that
it plays in our theories of inheritance and development, can be understood in an environment-independent way. To call (a) into question is to
imply that genes are not internally rich structures in the sense that I have
specified; to call (b) into question is to challenge the external minimalist
strand to strong nativism.10
Figure 1.2 shows both the opposition between these “strong” views and
the open space that is represented by less radical positions about nativism
and biology. As with nativism about the mind, here a strong nativist position, particularly acceptance of the external minimalism thesis, makes an
individualistic position in biology attractive. Even if claims about genes
as “master molecules” directing hereditary and developmental traffic are
relaxed in favor of a more encompassing view of the nature of those processes, so long as we remain within the organism, the environment of
that organism can, in effect, be bracketed off from our taxonomic and
explanatory practices.

External Minimalism Thesis
YES NO
Classical and Molecular
Genetics
Y
E Internal
S
Richness
Interactionism or
Constructivism N Thesis
O
figure 1.2. Nativism and Inheritance and Development
I shall say more about this characterization of nativism in biology in
Chapter 3. As we will see there has been some recent skepticism within biology over whether the notion of innateness has outlived its usefulness.11
7 culture, nature, and the individual
In the social sciences, perhaps the most hotly contested arena in which
the nativism debate has been played out concerns culture, particularly
within anthropology. In the first half of the twentieth century the concept
of culture came to define the core domain that anthropologists studied,
just as biologists studied the domain of the living and psychologists the
domain of the mind. The anthropologist Adam Kuper has provided an
elegant history of the conception of culture within anthropology and
beyond it (within “cultural studies,” for example). It is only one strand
to the recent part of that history that is my concern here. Paralleling the
cases of cognition and biology, we can capture two opposed views of the
relationship between culture and what individuals are innately endowed
with by using the two-dimensional view of nativism.12
The prevalent view of culture within anthropology is strongly antinativist in rejecting both the external minimalism and internal richness
theses about culture. Culture is not a monolithic structure that all humans
share, but something that varies across different groups of people, who
socially construct their cultures through particular traditions, rituals, and
customs. Cultures, in all their rich detail, rather than some abstraction,
20 Disciplining the Individual and the Mind
“culture,” are what shape up individual patterns of behavior and what
anthropologists study. Individuals come to acquire the ways of thinking
and behaving particular to their culture through various forms of social
transmission, and the particular structure to their environments determines what cultural traits they come to possess. While a certain internal
complexity, particularly mental complexity, is needed for groups of organisms to develop a culture, there are no built-in, specialized, mental
structures necessary for culture.

This view of culture and its acquisition by individuals has been challenged by recent evolutionarily inspired views, typified by John Tooby
and Leda Cosmides. Sociobiologists such as Edward O. Wilson had earlier argued for the in-principle extension of the ethologists’ treatment of
behaviors as part of an organism’s phenotype to the full range of human
social behaviors. Tooby and Cosmides have advocated a similar view of human cultures, emphasizing the particular cognitive adaptations that, they
claim, generate human cultures. On their view, there are a variety of cultural universals that derive from internally rich cognitive programs that
are built into our minds. The structures of an individual’s environment
explain only the particular cultural variants that he or she acquires, not
what lies at the heart of culture. This is a view of human cultures that parallels the linguistic nativist’s view of natural languages. Indeed, this strong
nativist view of culture derives from strong nativist views of language and
the mind. The cognitive scientist Steven Pinker has popularized these
views and the connections between them in a series of books.13
Clearly then, part of what is at issue in this debate over culture and
“what’s within” is the conception of the place of the mind within anthropology. Few (if any) strong antinativists would deny that the mind is
entirely irrelevant to culture. Rather, they propose that we understand the
mind through culture. The most influential expression of this view is the
