anthropologist Clifford Geertz’s interpretationism, which holds that culture lies in the actions and artifacts of agents in the observable, physical
world rather than in any inner theater of the mind. The task of a cultural
anthropology is to interpret these actions and artifacts where this involves
uncovering their meaning, what they symbolize, and how they function
in a given society. In “Thick description,” the opening essay to Geertz’s
The Interpretation of Cultures, having said that “[c]ulture is public because
meaning is,” Geertz continues:
The generalized attack on privacy theories of meaning is, since early Husserl
and late Wittgenstein, so much a part of modern thought that it need not be
developed once more here. What is necessary is to see to it that the news of it
reaches anthropology; and in particular that it is made clear that to say that culture
consists of socially established structures of meaning in terms of which people do
such things as signal conspiracies and join them or perceive insults and answer
them, is no more to say that it is a psychological phenomenon, a characteristic
of someone’s mind, personality, cognitive structure, or whatever than to say that
Tantrism, genetics, the progressive form of the verb, the classification of wines,
the Common Law, or the notion of a ‘conditional curse’ ... is.14
“Socially established structures of meaning” are the meeting point of
mind and culture, the trading zone in which psychology and anthropology exchange their goods.

The fragment of the broader debate over culture and the mind that
I have recounted as one between strong nativists and antinativists about
culture (see Figure 1.3) suggests three points. The first is that views about
the nature of culture in anthropology are intimately entwined with views
about the nature of the mind. The second is that the two-dimensional
analysis of this debate here implies that, as in the cognitive and biological
sciences, there are positions that depart from both strong nativism and
strong antinativism that are worth exploring. The third is the possibility
that“taking culture seriously” may require thinking beyond the boundary
of the individual not only in how we think of culture itself, but also in
how we think of the mind.

In the cases of nativism about cognition and biology, I have suggested
that strong nativist views promote a corresponding form of individualism
External Minimalism Thesis
YES NO
View of Culture from
Evolutionary Psychology
Y
E Internal
S
Richness
Interpretationism N Thesis
O
figure 1.3. Culture and the Individual Mind
22 Disciplining the Individual and the Mind
in leading one to focus exclusively on what lies within the boundary of the
individual organism in investigating psychological or developmental processes. Perhaps unsurprisingly, none of the general views about culture
that I have demarcated are individualistic in this sense: It is not in dispute
that one must look beyond the head of individuals in order to describe
and explain culture. But those who have accepted strong nativist views
of culture have, I think, come close to expressing a methodologically individualistic view of culture as either reducible or explainable in terms,
ultimately, of the thoughts and actions of individuals. In traditional sociobiology, culture is simply the sum of individual behaviors; in evolutionary
psychology, it is sometimes construed as the sum of individual cognitive
programs. Thus again, strong nativist views of culture fit naturally with
the corresponding form of individualism, in this case methodological
individualism.

8 the metaphysical picture: smallism
I have thus far outlined the general framework shared by individualists
across the fragile sciences, tried to show the affinities that exist between
a cluster of nativist views in those sciences, and connected these nativist
views to corresponding forms of individualism. I want to round out this introductory chapter by suggesting that there is a metaphysical picture that
makes individualism and nativism and the methodologies they both invite
seem quite compelling. The metaphysics here is a twentieth-century generalization of seventeenth-century corpuscularianism, a view that played
a central role in the scientific views of some of the leading scientists of
that period, including Robert Boyle and Sir Isaac Newton.

This modern day generalization of corpuscularianism constitutes, in
my view, a form of metaphysical discrimination that has left its mark
on a range of sciences. In keeping with these politically correct times,
I shall refer to this form of discrimination as smallism, discrimination
in favor of the small, and so, against the not-so-small. Small things and
their properties are seen to be ontologically prior to the larger things
that they constitute, and this metaphysics drives both explanatory ideal
and methodological perspective. The explanatory ideal is to discover the
basic causal powers of particular small things, and the methodological
perspective is that of some form of reductionism.15
Corpuscularianism is the view that matter is ultimately made up of
simple corpuscles or atoms, which themselves possess a relatively small
number of intrinsic properties. It is these corpuscles and their associated
properties, the primary qualities, that explain all observable physical and
chemical phenomena. While corpuscularianism itself reached its height
at the end of the seventeenth century and is no longer taken seriously as a
hypothesis about the structure of the physical world, some of its features
have structured smallist views in the psychological, biological, and social
sciences. To see this, consider corpuscularianism itself.

This view was developed in seventeenth-century Europe chiefly in the
works of Galileo Galilei, Pierre Gassendi, and Robert Boyle. The sort
of atomism that it promoted in metaphysics and science can be found
throughout the works of many thinkers of the period, including those
of Thomas Hobbes and John Locke. While the list of primary qualities
has varied across these authors, an aggregated list includes the following properties: solidity, extension, figure, mobility, motion or rest, number, bulk, texture, motion, size, and situation. Most relevant for my purposes here are two features of corpuscularianism: The idea that primary
qualities are inherent in corpuscles, and the claim that all of an entity’s
properties could be explained in terms of corpuscles and their primary
qualities.16
Primary qualities are inherent in the sense that the things that have
them do so in and of themselves, without reference to any other thing
whatsoever. More generally and precisely, a quality Q is inherent to a
