thing X just if X would have Q even if X were the only thing to exist
in the world at all. The idea that the real and ultimate properties that
a thing has are inherent in this sense plays an important role in the
compositional nature of corpuscularian metaphysics and explanation.

Corpuscles are (physical) parts of observable things, and parts of the parts
of observable things. It is properties of the parts of observable things, and
ultimately of the corpuscles themselves, that cause, and thus explain, the
observable properties of macroscopic objects. Given the inherentness of
primary qualities, this implies that the properties of the things that their
subjects constitute will be a function of these inherent properties, plus
the relations that hold between the things that have them.

It should be clear how this sort of corpuscularian metaphysics makes
individualism an inviting position to hold. If the ultimate properties that
are the causal movers and shakers in general are inherent in individuals,
then systematic explanations ought, in the long run, to make some sort
of appeal to those properties. We need, then, to constrain our higherlevel, fragile sciences in a way that will allow them to hook up with the
sciences that discover the primary qualities of the most basic material
things. Since these are inherent properties, the constraint should be one
24 Disciplining the Individual and the Mind
that limits the higher-level sciences to positing inherent properties. This
is just what the individualistic constraints that I have outlined in this
chapter attempt to do: An entity’s properties must supervene on that
entity’s intrinsic, physical properties, where the most significant entity is
a paradigmatic individual. So the fragile sciences should focus on what’s
inside individuals, not what lies beyond their boundaries. This is true
whether we focus just on our paradigmatic individuals human agents, or
whether we think of units both larger and smaller than our paradigms as
individuals.

This emphasis on what is inside is the common point between individualistic and nativist views across the fragile sciences. What’s inside is
construed as being rich in structure and fixed despite any variation in
organism-environment interactions. Individuals are not just concentrations of especially important properties, but have those properties by
virtue of something about those individuals themselves: They have them
inherently.

One general problem for smallism is shared by individualistic (and I
think nativist) views in the fragile sciences. Many of the kinds of things that
there are in the world – modules, organisms, and species for example –
are relationally individuated. Thus, what they are cannot be understood
solely in terms of what they are constituted by. Moreover, regardless
of how the entities themselves are individuated, many of their most
salient properties – their functionality, fitness, and adaptedness, for
example – are relational properties. As such, since these properties do
not inhere in the entities that have them, they cannot be fully understood
by focusing exclusively on what falls inside the boundaries of those entities. This metaphysical point itself carries the methodological imperative
to look beyond the boundary of the individual in exploring the ways in
which individuals and their components function causally in the world.

The prima facie problem that relational properties and kinds pose for
smallist and individualist views requires further articulation, and it invites
some obvious responses. We will see several forms that this problem takes,
and explore some smallist responses, in Part Two.

9 a path through boundaries of the mind
This book has four parts. In the remainder of Part One, I aim to further round out the start made in this chapter in articulating the idea of
the individual as a boundary for the mind. In the next chapter, I shall
introduce the idea that both the mind and its scientific study, as well as
individuals, have been “disciplined” in Michel Foucault’s sense. Neither
the mind nor its study are givens, but are, in some sense, constructed
through genealogical processes. Thus, in this chapter, I want to convey
some sense of psychology’s recent history (even if not of its “long past”),
and the conception of minds and individuals within it. In Chapter 3, I
shall return to put some flesh on the bones of my discussion of nativism.

Rather than using the two-dimensional view of nativism illustratively, as
I have in the current chapter, in Chapter 3 I will aim to defend the twodimensional view of nativism about the mind, and to explore some of the
claims about its significance left undeveloped here.

Parts Two and Three form the core of the book, and focus exclusively
on individualism and externalism about the mind. The three chapters
in Part Two are foundational, with Chapter 4 discussing individualism in
the philosophy of mind in detail, and Chapters 5 and 6 moving to discuss
the metaphysical notion of realization. The idea that mental states are
realized by physical states of the brain is commonplace in the philosophy
of mind. Although realization is a technical notion within philosophy, it
is linked to the concepts of mechanisms and dispositions, each prevalent
within the cognitive sciences themselves. One of the key ideas in these
chapters is that the standard way of thinking about realization in the
philosophy of mind carries with it a smallist bias, and that recognizing
this opens the way to an externalist view of the mind. Chapter 7 begins to
develop such a view with reference to computational cognitive science.

So, Part Two contributes to the increasingly elaborate debate between
individualists and externalists about the mind conducted within the philosophy of mind and computational cognitive science. In Part Three,
the externalist view of the mind I defend is extended beyond these domains to areas of psychology that typically are less explicitly computational (Chapter 8) and to consciousness (Chapter 9). Chapter 8 both
points to existing work on memory, cognitive development, and folk psychology that can be viewed from an externalist point of view and suggests
how externalism may be extended further. Chapter 9 introduces what I
call the TESEE conception of consciousness: consciousness as temporally
extended, scaffolded, and embodied and embedded. In this pair of chapters my aim is to continue with the articulation of externalism undertaken
in Chapter 7 by reference to existing empirical work on the mind.17
In the final chapter in Part Three, I return to more “purely philosophical” work in exploring the relationship between intentionality and phenomenology. Much of the motivation for externalist views in the philosophy of mind has derived from reflection on the nature of intentionality,
26 Disciplining the Individual and the Mind
and at least some of the resistance to externalism stems from views of consciousness and phenomenology. Chapter 10, in part, addresses this resistance through a critical examination of two recent proposals by philosophers for thinking about the relationship between intentionality and
phenomenology.

This chapter began with the idea that individuals and minds were
strongly connected in several ways. One of these connections manifests
itself in the innocent-sounding claim that individuals have minds, but that
