groups, societies, and cultures do not. In the two chapters in Part Four, I
explore the claim, common enough a hundred years ago in the nascent
social sciences, that groups can be said to have minds. This group mind
hypothesis was important both at the interface of social psychology and
sociology, and in early systematic work on animal and plant communities,
including that on insect colonies as superorganisms. Chapter 11 discusses
these ideas in their historical context. It has, however, a philosophical
moral, one that, I shall argue in Chapter 12, is highly relevant to recent
revivals of the group mind hypothesis in both the biological and social
sciences. The biologist David Sloan Wilson has defended the group mind
hypothesis in the context of his broader defense of group selection in
evolutionary biology. The anthropologist Mary Douglas has suggested
that there is more to Ludwig Fleck’s notion of a Denkkollektiv or “thought
collective” than contemporary social scientists have recognized. As I shall
argue, there is something right about both of these claims – just what is
the topic of Part Four.18
2
Individuals, Psychology, and the Mind
1 psychology amongst the fragile sciences
In Chapter 1, I identified psychology as one of the fragile sciences. It is
the science of the mind. Historically, psychology developed as the institutional home for the scientific study of the mind in a variety of dimensions,
including cognitive, biological, and social dimensions. Along with these
distinct aspects to the mind, psychology has also encompassed many different organizing theories or paradigms. Consider just those that have
structured research within the cognitive dimension to psychology. These
range from introspectionism, Gestalt psychology, and behaviorism in the
first half of the recent history of psychology, to computationally based
paradigms, such as the “rules and representations” approach that began
the cognitive revolution in the 1950s, and connectionism and dynamic
systems theory that have challenged that approach more recently.

The contemporary discipline of psychology – sprawling, heterogeneous, and perhaps unitary in only the most attenuated of senses – is
the result of this ecumenical and paradigm-shifting history. Departments
of psychology in major research institutions are characteristically organized into divisions or subfields whose descriptive adjectives – such as
cognitive, developmental, social, perceptual, decision making, clinical,
quantitative, and personality – correspond to clusters of research interests, publication venues, and professional organizations. These divisions
frequently carry with them distinct courses, degree requirements, hiring
procedures, graduate admissions policies, and laboratory and seminar
meetings. In moderate to large psychology departments, it is common
for researchers to work exclusively within their division, and even to have
27
28 Disciplining the Individual and the Mind
little or no professional contact with the majority of their departmental
colleagues in other divisions throughout their careers.

As well as being characterized as the science of the mind, “the science
of mental life,” as William James put it more than one hundred years
ago, psychology is also commonly viewed as being wedged between biology and the social sciences. This is so not only in representations of
hierarchies of sciences familiar from the logical positivist tradition within
the philosophy of science, but in characterizations of the methodologies
appropriate for the scientific study of mental life, which are drawn from
both the biological and the social sciences.

There is something right about both of these common views of psychology and the mind: The study of the mind is psychology’s prerogative, even
illustrated, the study of the mind can be directly relevant to, indeed, a
part of, the social sciences. Consider areas of the social sciences that are
concerned primarily with the operation of institutions or large-scale social changes rather than the minds of individuals. These operations and
changes are mediated by the actions of individuals. Accounts of them
typically propose or presuppose some principles governing the minds of
those individuals, whether this be rational choice theory (in economics)
or schema theory (in anthropology).

Aspects of the mind and mental life are also claimed by the biological
and medical sciences as their operational domain. Pathological development of the mind, such as that leading to mental retardation or a variety
of syndromes typically named after a person instrumental in their isolation and demarcation (for example, Williams, Asperger, and Down’s
syndromes), is often studied by geneticists and by medical doctors. Institutionally, psychiatry is a specialization within medicine, rather than
a field of psychology. This is motivated in part by the idea that mental
disorder should be assimilated to bodily disease. Moreover, techniques
developed within the biological sciences, such as single-cell recording or
positron-emission tomography (PET), have found widespread use in the
last twenty years in studying distinctively mental abilities and traits.

Despite contemporary psychology being a house of many mansions,
at its core is a focus on distinctly mental processes of individuals, human
agents. Minds belong to individuals, and the processes that constitute
minds occur inside the boundary of those individuals. Core topics within
the study of cognition, such as memory, language, or learning, are construed in this individualistic way. But such a view permeates psychology
Psychology
Biological Sciences
Social Sciences
mind-laden
interpersonal
figure 2.1. Psychology amongst the Fragile Sciences
more generally. How does what is inside an individual, particularly what
is inside her head, enable her to act on her environment, interact with
others, and dynamically adapt her behavior? Without distinctly mental
processes, we are in the realm of mere biology. And if we move on to encompass an exploration of the relationship between individuals, of processes and actions that extend beyond the boundary of the individual,
we move from psychology to the social sciences. We might encapsulate
this idea by saying that psychology is both mind laden (rather than mind
free) and individual bound (rather than interpersonal) and depict the
place of psychology within the fragile sciences through Figure 2.1: Since
psychology leaks into the rest of the fragile sciences, we should properly
locate some of its sub- (or related) disciplines, such as neurophysiology and psychophysics somewhere along the axis linking psychology to
the biological sciences, and others, such as social psychology and parts
of clinical psychology, along the axis linking psychology to the social
sciences.

Neither psychology as a discipline nor mind-laden individuals as the
subject matter of that discipline are givens. The discipline has not always
existed, and there is a history or a genealogy to the formation of the discipline that has involved construing individuals and minds in different ways
at different times. This chapter takes the historical contingency of psychology seriously, and attempts to draw several genealogical lines from its
