early history to current presumptions about the boundaries of the mind.

I begin in the next section with some brief, general comments about the
disciplining of psychology before moving on in the following sections to
30 Disciplining the Individual and the Mind
discuss how individuals and the mind were construed as psychology was
disciplined.

2 the disciplining of psychology
In The Order of Things, Michel Foucault provided a sweeping analysis of the
emergence of the disciplines of biology, economics, and philology in the
eighteenth century. Foucault’s analysis was aimed, in part, at illustrating
how both subject areas and individuals were disciplined in what I am calling the fragile sciences. This theme of the way in which the formation of
areas of discourse and knowledge is intertwined with the construction of
particular types or kinds of individuals became central to his more widely
read works, such as Discipline and Punish and The History of Sexuality.

1
Disciplines have a contingent rather than necessary existence. They
come into existence through a complex process with conceptual, social,
political, technical, and methodological aspects, and construct, rather
than simply discover, their subject area in the process. When their subject area concerns the individual, as it does for the most part in the fragile
sciences, that means constructing individuals in certain ways: identifying
some of their properties rather than others as important for this particular discipline, emphasizing some categories and kinds and not others as
those needed to classify individuals. Not just discourse and knowledge is
disciplined; so too are individuals.

Thus, the disciplining of psychology is intimately connected to the
disciplining of the individuals it studies. In part, this is because both processes are subject to the same historical contingencies, but also because
the individual and what lies inside it has become central to the very conception of the psychological. Certain construals of the individual, and
ways of studying the mind of the individual, are entrenched within the
discipline of psychology, and those construals are good for extracting
some types of knowledge, and bad for others.

Ebbinghaus’s famous remark that psychology has a short history but
a long past, made as the distinct disciplinary pathways of psychology and
philosophy were being sculptured in the late nineteenth century, has a
certain charm to it. Philosophers and psychologists alike regard it with
some fondness – in my view, with too much fondness. Although philosophers have offered various accounts of the mind and its place in nature
since at least the Greeks over 2,400 years ago, it was only in the nineteenth
century that the conceptual, methodological, and institutional prerequisites for a distinct science of psychology coalesced and the disciplining
of psychology began. No point in time, of course, demarcates the beginning of the scientific discipline of psychology from either prescientific
psychological thought or scientific nonpsychological investigation. Yet
two landmark events have been claimed as marking the beginning of psychology in the origin myths that contemporary psychologists often tell
themselves, a myth that I will rely on in what follows.2
The first is Wilhelm Wundt’s foundation of the first experimental laboratory devoted to the study of psychological phenomena in Leipzig in
1879. Wundt’s designation of his laboratory space as “psychological” was
preceded by a number of significant steps down the path to the formation
of a discipline. Included here are several decades of experimental work in
perceptual physiology and what Gustav Fechner had called psychophysics,
work headed by Hermann von Helmholtz, Eward Hering, and Fechner, as
well as Wundt’s own publication of the widely used and cited Foundations of
Physiological Psychology in 1874. The second is the publication of William
James’s Principles of Psychology in 1890, the book that James began by
identifying psychology as the “science of mental life, both of its phenomena and their conditions.” James’s Principles sought to integrate the rich,
philosophical tradition of work on the mind that ascribed a central place
to inward reflection on one’s conscious mental life with the developing
physiology of the nervous system. While both Wundt and James recognized the debt that psychology, conceived as a distinct science, owed to
physiology and psychophysics, both also characterized its distinctiveness
in terms of the nature of the phenomena that it investigated. These were
distinctly mental, and such phenomena could not be exhaustively understood in terms of existing physiological and psychophysical theory and
practice.3
As the origin myth implies, Wundt and James clearly did play important
roles in the disciplining of psychology from physiology and philosophy. In
the next section I shall spell out these roles more precisely before turning
to the question of the disciplining of psychology from the social sciences.

Individuals come to be conceptualized differently in different parts of
the fragile sciences, and this has left a legacy concerning how psychologists conceptualize individuals, minds, and the relationships between
them.

3 from physiology and philosophy: wundt and james
Physiology is the science that studies the structure and function of bodily
systems, including the nervous system. Like psychology, it did not always
32 Disciplining the Individual and the Mind
exist. It was disciplined and emerged from anatomy as a distinctly experimental science in the first half of the nineteenth century, both in Germany
under Johannes Muller and more particularly his students, such as Emil ¨
Du Bois-Reymond and Helmholtz in the 1840s, and in France initially
under Francois Margendie and then later Claude Bernard in the ¸ 1850s.

Previous to this period, physiology had been secondary to anatomy, and as
such had focused on the identification and operation of physically localized biological structures, paradigmatically bones, muscles, and organs.

Physiology then was concerned principally with the internal organization
of the organism, rather than its dynamic functioning. As a systematic attempt to explain not just biological structures but also biological functions in physical terms, the beginnings of experimental physiology were
instrumental for those of psychology in an indirect and in a direct way.

Indirectly, the focus on function itself allowed physiologists to abstract
from particular, observable structures and explore the putative systems
performing those functions of which those structures formed a part. By
experimentally intervening in the operation of these systems, they could
reveal some of the complexity to the dynamics of physiological systems
without antecedently having to identify and characterize all of the component parts of those systems. Or, to put it in terms that will feature centrally
in my discussion of realization in Part Two, experimental physiology constituted a form of integrative synthesis. Here anatomically identified organs
were located within some broader, functional system, with integration
replacing localization as the corresponding technique of investigation.

Thus, experimental physiology carried with it the general idea that there
could be a properly scientific investigation of an organism that was, in a
certain sense, autonomous of detailed anatomy and further decompositional analysis.4
