More directly, since some of the functions had a mental aspect to them
in that they involved the reactions and registrations of conscious beings,
experimental physiology could be directly applied to understanding the
mind, or at least parts of it. This was not least because the mind itself was
increasingly conceived as being realized in the brain and nervous system,
and this system was subject to increasing functional analysis throughout
the nineteenth century, beginning with the positing of distinct mental
functions in different parts of the brain by phrenologists in the early part
of the century. The first widely accepted evidence for the localization of
a specific mental ability – that of speech – in the cerebral cortex was Paul
Broca’s description of patients with damage in their left frontal lobes in
1861, patients who suffered from what is now known as “Broca’s aphasia.”
I have said that both Wundt and James viewed psychology in terms of its
concern with a distinctly mental life. This characterization of psychology
not only distinguished it from physiology, as I noted there, but also allied
it with traditional philosophical discussions of the mind that can be found
throughout the history of Western philosophy. This is one sense in which
psychology emerged between physiology and philosophy, between the
empirical and experimental exploration of the material world and the
a priori investigation of the mental world. It is perhaps worth reflecting
further on the gulf that existed between these two worlds, and so on
what sort of bridgework was done in the formation of psychology as a
discipline.

The dichotomy between mind and body has pervaded both common
sense and scientific thinking for the last 400 years. The study of the
mind was traditionally the province of philosophers, either as that branch
of “metaphysics” concerned with nonmaterial (but earthly) reality, the
mind, or as a branch of “morals” concerned with human nature and the
aptitudes contained within human agents. As the material world became
the subject of various disciplinary projects through the scientific revolution in the seventeenth century, questions concerning the nonmaterial
part of reality became more pressing. What was the reach of the corpuscularian, mechanical philosophy? Where did the immaterial parts of reality
fit into this worldview? How did these two worlds, that of the mind and
that of matter, connect?
Body and mind, and the relationship between them, constituted the
most obvious locus for the discussion of such questions. Bodies were
material. Individual human bodies became the subject of scientific investigation not only through the development of the practice of medical dissection, but also with corpuscular theory as an overarching metaphysics
for all material things, including bodies. Everything material, including
bodies, was made up, ultimately, of corpuscles, and could be understood
in principle in terms of their properties. If such a view pointed to the
way in which bodily activity could be understood, then the question of
whether this form of materialism could be extended to the mind itself
became a real one. Rene Descartes took his mechanical view of the world ´
to extend partly to what we might think of as the mind – to sensation and
reflexive movements, for example – but claimed that the most important
aspects of mind, typically reified as Reason and the Will, could not be understood through this kind of science. This general view remained widely
shared in the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries by both rationalists
and empiricists, both within and beyond the corpuscularian framework.

34 Disciplining the Individual and the Mind
This was a legacy in part of dualism about mind and body, and in part of
a concern with how far the knowledge new in the seventeenth century
could extend.

In Chapter 1, I claimed that this corpuscularian metaphysics has underwritten a quite general, pervasive attitude in the fragile sciences in the
twentieth century – that of smallism, discrimination in favor of the small
and so against the not-so-small. The application of corpuscular thinking
to the body constituted a way to extend a smallist metaphysics into the
realm of individuals, as did the positing of the “mental atoms” of sensation in the hands of British empiricists and their nineteenth-century
positivist successors. If dualism about mind and body preserved at least
aspects of the mind as exceptions to the reach of corpuscularianism, the
physiological basis to psychology whittled away this exceptionalism. Experimental psychology emerged in the nineteenth century in the grip of
the smallist visions that corpuscularianism had inspired.

Here, then, is the picture of the late nineteenth-century emergence of
the discipline of psychology that I am sketching. As physiology consolidated as a distinctive science, systematic accounts of sensory phenomena,
such as haptic and auditory discrimination, were developed, and seemingly more and more of the mind admitted of a physiological or physical
explanation. Combining the general point from physiology – that an
organism’s functions could be experimentally investigated independent
of a detailed knowledge of that organism’s physical anatomy – with the
legacy of dualism – that not all of the mind could be understood via the
dominant scientific paradigms – created space for an autonomous experimental science of the mind that went beyond “mere” philosophy. This
was the science of psychology.

The method of this new science was, like that of physiology, experimental. Complementary to the idea that psychology was the science
of mental life was the development of an experimental methodology
that was also introspective in nature. The combination of introspection
and the experimental method was the crux of Wundt’s contribution
to the emergence of psychology. Wundt was critical of the reliance on
what we might think of as unconstrained (that is, nonexperimental) introspection in studying the mind (what he called innere Wahrnehmung
[inner perception]), distinguishing this from the objective, controlled
self-observation (Selbstbeobachtung) around which he built his conception of psychology. Both the emergence of the discipline of psychology
from those of physiology and philosophy and its continuing connections
with those disciplines, and thus the fluidity of disciplinary boundaries at
the founding of psychology, are reflected in the careers of Wundt and
James.5
Wundt began teaching physiology at Heidelberg in the late 1850s after
having taken a doctorate there in medicine. He held professorships in
both anthropology and medical psychology at Heidelberg in the mid-
1860s, and then in the mid-1870s moved to Leipzig where he held
the position of professor of philosophy. Wundt remained influenced by
the philosophical work of Immanuel Kant and Arthur Schopenhauer
throughout his life, and published more purely philosophical works in
logic and ethics as well as those for which he is better remembered. Although Wundt’s Foundations was the best known and the most widely read
of his works during his lifetime, his conception of psychology is better
represented by the earlier publication of a pair of books: his Contributions
to the Theory of Sensory Perception in 1862, which concentrated on perceptual phenomena, and Lectures on Human and Animal Psychology in 1863,
a more wide-ranging and longer work that encompassed culture, society, emotion, and aesthetics. As both of these works indicate, Wundt’s
publication of his ten-volume “folk psychology” between 1900 and 1920
did not represent a shift from his earlier conception of psychology as a
