methodologically introspective, experimental discipline, as is sometimes
claimed, but, rather, reflects Wundt’s initial conception of a discipline
with two faces: one experimental and concerned with in-the-head mental
processes, the other observational and focused on complicated mental
processes that involved external cultural representations.6
James had taken a medical degree at Harvard in 1869 and began his
teaching career there in the early 1870s in anatomy and physiology, moving on to teach physiological psychology in 1875, and finally giving his
first lectures in philosophy in 1879. In conjunction with the course in
physiological psychology, James had established a minor psychology laboratory prior to Wundt in the late-1870s, but unlike Wundt, James did
not use it as a base for recruiting and training graduate students. ( James
disliked doing laboratory work.) James’s professorial appointments at
Harvard were in physiology in 1876, philosophy in 1885, and then in psychology in 1889, shortly before the publication of his Principles in 1890.

Like Wundt, James formed part of a philosophical tradition, in James’s
case, the relatively recent and still developing tradition of American pragmatism, whose best known exponents, apart from James himself, were
Charles Sanders Pierce and John Dewey. And again like Wundt, after
forging a connection between physiology and psychology, James further
explored the mind in a nonexperimental context. In James’s case, the
36 Disciplining the Individual and the Mind
focus was on psychical and supernatural phenomena, religious belief,
and pedagogy.

Psychology may have emerged from physiology and philosophy, but for
both Wundt and James it was never simply the extension of physiological
methodology to mental functions, nor merely the application of scientific techniques to resolve traditional philosophical questions about the
mind. It is not just that both Wundt and James had a more encompassing
conception of what the discipline of psychology was and to which other
fields it was allied than do the majority of contemporary psychologists, but
that they exploited the fluidity of the discipline in recognizing problems
with and limits to specific methodologies and assumptions. Perhaps this is
simply one way in which they both remained philosophers in establishing
the discipline of psychology.

4 disciplining the social aspects of the mind
If the object of study of psychology distinguished it from physiology as an
antecedently (but recently) established discipline within the university
system, and its experimental methodology distinguished it from philosophy, it was psychology’s concern with mental processes that occurred
within the individual that distinguished it from the later-developing field
of sociology. Social psychology is concerned largely with social aspects of
individual cognition, while sociologists are concerned with social systems
that are constituted by and influence the actions of individuals. This basic division remains in place today, with the field of social cognition, a
recent incarnation of how psychologists working within a cognitive and
often computational framework approach the social aspect to individual
cognition. Perhaps the most integrative perspectives within the two disciplines are to be found in the revival of symbolic interactionism within
both recent social psychology and sociology via a reappreciation of the
work of George Herbert Mead and Irving Goffman.7
August Comte has sometimes been represented as the founder of both
sociology and social psychology, and in characterizing sociology as a laterdeveloping discipline than psychology, I might be accused of overlooking
this or of ignoring the contribution of Comte to both disciplines. Comte’s
views themselves are interesting, especially in the context of thinking
about the later demarcation of sociology from psychology in terms of
what occurs within the boundary of an individual.

Comte coined the term sociologie as one of two species of “psychic” science. In doing so, Comte conceived of two aspects to the mind, leading
to two distinct paths to its study: the “static aspect,” leading to the study
of the organic, bodily basis for the mind, and the “dynamic aspect,” leading to sociology. According to Comte, this latter study “will simply amount
to tracing the course actually followed by the human mind in action,
through the examination of the methods really employed to obtain the
exact knowledge that it has already acquired.” That is, sociology, what
Comte also called “social physics,” would be a science based on the methods of natural science, these being those that have led to exact knowledge.

It would study complex relations between organisms in the way in which
physiology was beginning to study complex relations within organisms.8
This left no room for what would become the distinctive science of
psychology. Indeed, writing in the second quarter of the nineteenth century, Comte was skeptical of the idea that there could be a distinctive
psychological science, particularly one that made use of introspection,
on the grounds that this constituted a metaphysical rather than a positive
stage in the development of the science. Somewhat later, in his System
of Positive Polity, Comte foresaw the necessity of a science that integrated
physiology and sociology. Calling this science la morale, Comte claimed
that it would be “able to reduce to a system the special knowledge of
man’s individual nature, by duly combining the two points of view, the
Biologic, and the Sociologic, in which that nature must be necessarily
regarded.” But Comte died before this sort of suggestive comment was
developed more fully. Writing before psychology had been disciplined,
and given Comte’s own positivism about scientific inquiry, it is not clear
what shape la morale was to take.9
The interface between psychology and sociology qua disciplines in
the late nineteenth century was the nascent field of social psychology,
with both disciplines able to treat it from their own perspective. The
first textbook with “social psychology” in the title appeared in 1908, and
was written by the sociologist Edward A. Ross. Ross used the metaphors
of planes and currents of mental states to characterize social psychology, claiming that “[s]ocial psychology ...studies the psychic planes and
currents that come into existence among men in consequence of their
association.” Ross was concerned to explain the “planes of uniformity”
that one finds across individuals with respect to beliefs and actions as well
as the dynamics of the currents that sweep up individuals when they act
as members of a group at a particular time, such as during a lynching. As
a form of psychology, social psychology focuses on these planes and
currents as they act on individuals. This contrasts with sociology, which
focuses on human groups and structures themselves. What demarcates
38 Disciplining the Individual and the Mind
social psychology from psychology more generally for Ross is that social
psychology is concerned to identify causes of individual human behavior that derive from outside the individual; these Ross calls suggestions,
and his focus is on social factors that influence the human psychological disposition to suggestibility. Note that for Ross, social psychology is a
discipline that theorizes exclusively about human beings.10
There is an interesting contrast between this perspective on social
psychology and that of the psychologist William McDougall, whose An
Introduction to Social Psychology also appeared in 1908. McDougall is chiefly
concerned to show that there is an area of psychology – social psychology –
