that treats an individual’s psychology as more encompassing than simply
that individual’s consciousness or mental life, and that serves as the foundation for the social sciences. Put the other way around, McDougall seeks
to show, against sociologists such as Durkheim and Comte, that the social
sciences are not independent of psychology, since there is a conception
of psychology that is broader than the experimental introspectionism
that had been extracted from Wundt’s approach to scientific psychology. This aspect of psychology studies an individual’s innate instincts,
and McDougall identifies its appeal to evolutionary theory as the ground
for the expectation of psychological continuities between humans and
(other) animals. The first three-quarters of McDougall’s book (Section I)
is devoted to his instinct theory; only the last quarter (Section II) turns
to how some of these instincts operate to form the basis of human societies. Amongst McDougall’s list of instincts are flight, repulsion, curiosity,
pugnacity, self-abasement, and self-assertion – which play little role in his
account of human social organization – and the parental, reproductive,
and gregarious instincts – which play a more significant role here.

Here I want to register three points of contrast between Ross and
McDougall in terms of how they conceptualize the social aspect of psychology. First, while McDougall is particularly concerned to explain human
social life on the basis of a subset of his instincts, on his conception instinct
theory should also explain features of nonhuman social life. Thus, the
scope of social psychology is broader than it is under Ross’s conception.

Second, as a psychologist, McDougall begins with a rich conception of
what is within the individual and offers a much thinner characterization
of the social phenomena that his instincts purport to explain, while Ross,
as a sociologist, has just the opposite emphasis or bias. Third, McDougall
is wary not only of social science that ignores psychology but that which
builds on what he regards as a misleading psychology. Included here
would likely be Ross’s own appeal to suggestibility as a basic feature of
the human mind, it being little more than an attribution to individuals
of a psychological disposition that parallels a social phenomenon, that of
individuals whose actions are influenced by the suggestion of others.

In the previous section, I argued, in effect, that psychology overcame
a putative subsumptive challenge from both physiology and philosophy
by demarcating itself in terms, respectively, of its endorsement of experimental methodology and its articulation of a distinct level of organismic
abstraction. One might wonder, by contrast, whether the “within the individual” criterion really functioned (and functions) to demarcate social
psychology from sociology. In fact, sociology never posed a threat of subsumption to psychology; rather, from the outset, sociology itself was concerned to establish its own autonomy from other disciplines, including
psychology.

Perhaps best known here is Emile Durkheim’s statement that “a social
fact can be explained only by another social fact ... Sociology is, then, not
an auxiliary of any other science; it is in itself a distinct and autonomous
science.” This aspect to Durkheim’s thought is provokingly developed in
a classic discussion of the nature of representation in psychology. Writing after the foundations had been laid for the discipline of psychology,
Durkheim recognized an individual level of representation that governs
individual behavior, but claimed that in addition there are collective representations that are not in any sense reducible to or explainable by reference solely to what goes on in the heads of individuals. Just as individual
representations are no mere “echo” or epiphenomena of cerebral activity, claimed Durkheim, so too are collective representations not inherent
in or intrinsic to individual minds. Durkheim sought to distinguish such
collective representations from anything interior to individuals, and in so
doing was the first in a long line of social scientists to create or maintain
a space for social sciences, which relied little, if at all, on psychology. We
will return to discuss this idea of collective representations in Part Four.11
The foregoing historical reconstruction of the partial origins of psychology as a distinct discipline, brief as it is, takes us beyond the obvious
fact that psychology concerns first and foremost individual human agents
to the more interesting issue of the ways in which human agency has been
construed in psychology. For philosophers, physiologists, and sociologists
not only generalized and theorized about the individual: Each construed
the individual in a particular way. Philosophers concerned with the mind
thought of the individual as a receiver of sense impressions from the
world (in the empiricist tradition) or as the source of innate ideas (in the
rationalist tradition). Physiologists viewed individuals as complicated sets
of biological systems that were integrated into a functioning whole. And
sociologists saw the individual as a Janus-faced figure at the intersection
40 Disciplining the Individual and the Mind
of the purely biological or physical world and the social world. Each of
these disciplines, of necessity, abstracted away from individuals in situ.

In the next two sections, and following the work of the historian of
psychology Kurt Danziger, I shall focus on the abstractions made within
psychology itself and the ways in which they have shaped the sort of
science that psychology has become, particularly the ways in which psychology was developed as an experimental science. In particular, I shall
discuss the conception of individuals in the psychological paradigms initiated by Wundt, and then turn to that within the Galtonian paradigm for
psychology. Both abstract individuals from their social and physical contexts in an attempt to make individuals scientifically and mathematically
tractable, but do so in very different ways.12
5 wundt’s individuals
For introspection to yield a repeatable, quantifiable result, not any old
inward-looking report under physical stimulation would do, and unregimented introspection yielded reports that varied in accord with the
theoretical proclivities of the laboratories in which they were produced.

Within Wundtian experimental psychology, one solution was to ensure
that the subject was someone with a sort of expertise in being able to
attend to and report on the contents of his or her consciousness correctly under experimental conditions. It is for this reason that Wundt
himself or one of his assistants typically played the role of subject in his
experiments; as Danziger says, “the experimental subject was the scientific observer, and the experimenter was really a kind of experimental
assistant.” The reliability of one’s findings was measured in the first instance by intrasubjective agreement over repeated trials, with replication
of this reliability across subjects being initially of less significance. As
Danziger puts it, in the Wundtian paradigm the individual subject was an
“exemplar of the generalized human mind,” and intersubjective replication of an experimental finding served simply to confirm an antecedently
established finding.13
As we have seen, Wundt himself thought that you could investigate
only elementary psychological processes through this method, with complex processes being studied in the broader social contexts in which
they were embedded, and through methods that linked psychology to
the humanities and social sciences. Whatever Wundt’s own intent, his
view amounted to a sort of bipartite view of the psychological, with the
experimental subject investigated individualistically and the individual’s
broader psychological features, such as his personality, his temporally extended consciousness, his sociality, divorced from this paradigm and studied largely beyond the laboratory. It was a relatively small step from such
a bipartite view of the psychological to full-scale psychological apartheid,
whereby only the individualistic construal of the individual survived as a
part of psychology proper.

