Thus, even though the particular identity of the individual subject
was important to the success of the Wundtian experiment, this was a
thin identity, not one to which the person more fully considered was
relevant. This assumption about individuals – that specific aspects of their
mental processing can be experimentally investigated in isolation from
the broader psychological and social profiles of those individuals – has
been generalized in contemporary psychology and survived through the
behaviorist and cognitive revolutions of the twentieth century.

The Wundtian paradigm thus both relied on a thin construal of the
subject and recognized limitations of the scope of experimental psychology. These two aspects of the Wundtian construction of the individual
were corollaries of his attempt to study the “generalized human mind”
scientifically, and both promoted an individualistic view of the discipline
of psychology. The individualism within the experimental part of the
Wundtian paradigm – its bracketing off of the individual’s broader psychological and social life in order to focus on understanding elementary
psychological processes – might be thought to be a necessary corollary
of any experimental investigation of psychological processes that occur
within the head of an individual and that are not simply idiosyncratic
to that individual. The very point of experimentation, after all, is to isolate the specific factor responsible for a certain, observable effect: Bracketing off or controlling certain factors is necessary in order to investigate others. But while this general point about experimental control is
true, this leads to individualism about psychology only on the assumption
that embedded aspects to an individual’s mental states can always be (or
even are ideally) bracketed out through experimental control and leave
something of genuine psychological interest. In Parts Two and Three, I
shall argue that an individual’s mind may be more deeply socially and
physically embedded than this implies.

6 galton’s individuals
Sir Francis Galton, a first cousin of Charles Darwin, was an idiosyncratic
pioneer in a variety of areas of what was becoming psychology in the
42 Disciplining the Individual and the Mind
late nineteenth century. Consider three of his better known initiatives,
all of which have left their trace on contemporary psychology. Galton
developed techniques of composite portraiture and applied them to the
study of judgments of beauty; he introduced statistical techniques for
generalizing about groups of subjects; and he initiated the use of twin
studies in studying the mind. In addition, Galton systematically explored
specific mental faculties (such as that for mental imagery), and placed
the scientific examination of mental qualities in an evolutionary and anthropological context. Unlike Wundt and James, Galton conducted most
of his psychological investigations as a gentleman scholar, rather than as
a university professor. Galton’s influence on the practice of psychology,
however, is at least as great as that of Wundt and James. This legacy is
manifest in much that is at the core of experimental methodology within
psychology, and was established in part through Galton’s influence on
“applied” areas of psychology, such as education and what we might think
of as public mental health.

The Galtonian paradigm arose to prominence with and through the
development of mental testing and has had more far-reaching effects
on the conduct of psychology than perhaps any other single approach.

Galton began by combining his belief in the heritability of traits of all
sorts with his adaptation of Adolphe Quetelet’s insights about statistical measurement in a population, originally with Hereditary Genius and
later in Inquiries into Human Faculty and its Development. At his notorious
“anthropometric laboratory” at the International Health Exhibition in
London in 1884, Galton sought to measure human psychological abilities by having many individuals perform certain tasks, and then applying
statistical analysis to the population of results obtained. These abilities
were quite general, characterlike intellectual dispositions that were close
to ordinary folk psychological ways of describing the stable mental life of
individuals.14
Galton’s interest in such abilities derived from two beliefs he held.

The first was that mental characteristics should be treated just like bodily
characteristics and other features of the natural world. The second was
that since mental traits were heritable they could either be selected for or
against in a population. Hence, the link between the Galtonian paradigm
and the eugenics movement. Galton’s interest was not so much in what
cluster of abilities his subjects possessed, but, rather, in the distribution of
abilities in a population of subjects, and thus by extrapolation, in the population more generally. Such a distribution was used to establish norms
that could be used to make judgments about particular individuals, where
what was being judged were the innate biological propensities of those
individuals. Thus, individuals remain the subject matter of psychological
attribution, but their role as subjects of experimentation is very different
than in the Wundtian paradigm. As Danziger puts it:
To make interesting and useful statements about individuals it was not necessary
to subject them to intensive experimental or clinical exploration. It was only necessary to compare their performance with that of others, to assign them a place in
some aggregate of individual performances. Individuals were now characterized
not by anything actually observed to be going on in their minds or organisms but
by their deviation from the statistical norm established for the population with
which they had been aggregated.

Thus, the individual experimental subject simply provides data used to
construct an aggregate or collective subject about which generalizations
are formed, and individuals are then judged relative to this collective
subject.15
In contrast to the regimentation of the individual that characterized
the Wundtian experimental paradigm, the Galtonian paradigm of psychology encouraged an almost playful interaction between investigator
and subject. This was not, however, because the Galtonian paradigm was
any less individualistic but because it developed a battery of measurements whose reliability did not depend on control of the precise conditions under which they were taken. Indeed, the Galtonian and experimental paradigms share the idea that psychological propensities inhere
in subjects and could be investigated without regard to the social backgrounds of those subjects. As with the Wundtian paradigm, the mental
abilities of individuals within the Galtonian paradigm are not simply in
the individual but are so in such a way as to imply that they can be adequately investigated in abstraction from that individual’s environment.

Consider the basic process leading to psychological judgment and generalization in the Galtonian paradigm. First, we begin with tasks that can
be understood with minimal explanation, attempted by anyone regardless of their particular background, and completed through the agency of
an individual person. Second, we devise a performance scale that we can
use to grade individual performance on these tasks, ideally one that can
be calibrated around a standard distribution curve. Third, we measure
the performance of a large number of individuals on these tasks. Fourth,
we statistically analyze the performance of this population of individuals
and use this to construct a collective subject. Fifth, we locate, rank, or
