taxonomize particular individuals relative to this collective subject.

44 Disciplining the Individual and the Mind
While I think that an individualistic perspective permeates all five
of these steps, I want to focus on Galton’s tasks and the testing situation invoked at the first step. As Danziger notes, performances on these
tasks “defined characteristics of independent, socially isolated individuals and these characteristics were designated ‘abilities.’”16 The governing
assumption of the testing situation itself, however, is that the psychological abilities of interest are those that can be assessed by probing an
individual in abstraction not only from her real life, social environment,
but from any substantial social environment. For Galton, this assumption
was underwritten by the search for heritable, biological factors governing
cognition. But the assumption itself is independent of Galton’s particular
motivation, and I want to ask why one might think that it is true.

One reason, one that I have found sometimes offered by psychologists
themselves in conversation, is that this is just what psychological abilities
are: They are dispositions that individuals carry around with them from
situation to situation. Psychological abilities are intrinsic dispositions,
and as such they do not rely in any substantive way on specific social
or other extraindividual circumstances. This is an individualistic view
of dispositions, and in Part Two, I shall introduce a framework in which
there is a place for an alternative understanding of dispositions, including
psychological dispositions. On this view, dispositions may be irreducibly
embedded in that they are not simply fixed or determined by the intrinsic,
physical properties of the individuals that have them. This view lays a
metaphysical foundation for developing an externalist psychology that
departs from both the Wundtian and Galtonian paradigms.

One might be both more metaphysically reserved about the nature
of psychological dispositions than encapsulated in the above line of argument, and more pluralistic about the place of heritable mental traits
in the study of the mind than was Galton himself. Suppose then that
there are just some psychological abilities that are intrinsic to individuals,
for whatever etiological reason. For these, at least, surely the Galtonian
paradigm of mental testing provides a way to meaningfully measure the
mind.

This seems to me to be likely to be true, although it stops short of
establishing the claim that such psychological abilities are, in some way,
more important than embedded abilities, or that they provide the key
to understanding such abilities and the individuals who have them. To
view the Galtonian paradigm from both a less individualistic and a more
pluralistic perspective is, I suspect, to assign it a more restricted role
within future psychology than it has had historically.

7 nativism and the continuity thesis
I would like to close the substantive part of this chapter by returning to
Ebbinghaus’s remark that psychology has a short history but a long past.

This chapter has focused on the short history and ignored the long past.

A substantive reason for this focus is my view that the disciplining of
the individual within psychology in the particular ways that continue to
pervade psychology are inextricably entwined with the disciplining of
psychology as an academic field in the late nineteenth century. But there
are also ways in which psychology’s long past can distort, and not just
dilute, our view of the individual, and I want to return to the debate over
nativism that we discussed in Chapter 1 in order to illustrate this claim.

The debate over nativism is typically considered as exemplifying the
sort of truth expressed by Ebbinghaus’s remark, with the long history
reaching back via the positions of classic rationalists and empiricists in
the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries all the way to Plato. This view
of the debate involves accepting what I shall call the continuity thesis, the
claim that contemporary positions in this debate are continuous with
thinkers of times long gone, particularly early modern “rationalists” and
“empiricists.” The continuity thesis is close to ubiquitous amongst cognitive scientists who glance back at the history of philosophy in locating
their views.17
While the broad sweep that the continuity thesis invites can be useful, I
think that we should be more cautious about its embrace than most have
been. There are important differences between the traditional and contemporary discussions. Using the two-dimensional analysis of the nativism
debate from Chapter 1 as a lens, I will focus on three related features of
the classical positions and debate that make for important differences
with the contemporary literature. These are the concern with justification and thus normativity, the (near) absence of a psychology, and the
commitment to a dualist view of the mind.

First, the traditional rationalist-empiricist debate is largely concerned
with investigating the foundations, scope, and limits of human knowledge. That is, it is a debate within epistemology in general and over the
nature of knowledge and justification in particular. This normative dimension is peripheral to contemporary discussions of nativism in the
cognitive sciences. Broadly speaking, early modern empiricists, such as
John Locke, George Berkeley, and David Hume, hold that all of our
knowledge derives from our sensory, experiential, or empirical interaction with the world, either in the sense that all knowledge is acquired,
46 Disciplining the Individual and the Mind
ultimately, from the senses, or in the sense that the ultimate justifications
that there are for the knowledge we have are grounded in the senses.

Early modern rationalists, such as Rene Descartes, Gottfried Leibniz, and ´
Benedict Spinoza, by contrast, hold the negation of either or both of
these views, that is, either that there is some knowledge that does not derive from experience, or there is some knowledge that cannot be justified
by appeal to experience.

These claims about acquisition and justification were intimately connected in all of these writers in the classical rationalist-empiricist debate.

Their primary concern, however, was with the epistemological question
of whether certain knowledge claims were justified, and the nature of
that justification. For them, the threat of skepticism, the view that there
is no knowledge, loomed large. Claiming that certain ideas were or were
not acquired in a certain way established a position on this epistemological issue. For example, to claim that the notion of causation could not
be acquired through sense experience, as David Hume famously argued,
was a way of undermining whatever justification there was for relying on
that notion in our reasoning and theorizing about the world. To claim,
as Locke did at the outset of Book II of An Essay Concerning Human Understanding, that all ideas derive from experience, is to imply that one cannot
