justify any ideas by appeal to their innateness. These links between the
acquisition and justification of ideas are largely absent in contemporary
debates over nativism – except when authors are attempting explicitly to
support the continuity thesis.

Suppose that we put this difference to one side and focus instead
on what might be thought to be a common preoccupation with the acquisition of knowledge and ideas. This brings me to a second reason for
resisting the continuity thesis. While at a superficial level there is a shared
interest in “where ideas come from,” both the external minimalism thesis and (more obviously) the internal richness thesis are claims about the
processes governing cognition. This concern with how cognition works is
all but absent in both classical rationalists and empiricists, who disagree
over the products of cognition, particularly over whether those products,
especially ideas, were acquired. This could be put (no doubt, too strongly)
by saying that there is no psychology in the classical tradition. Let me say
more about what I mean by this and the contrast I have in mind.

Since at least our paradigms of knowledge – knowledge of our immediate environments, of common physical objects, of scientific kinds –
seem obviously to be acquired through sense experience, empiricism
has some prima facie intuitive appeal. Why not suppose that all our
knowledge is like those paradigms? Rationalism, by contrast, requires
further motivation: minimally, a list of knowables that represent a putative challenge to the empiricist’s global claim about the foundations
of knowledge. Early modern rationalists included knowledge of God,
substance, and abstract ideas (such as that of a triangle, as opposed to
ideas of particular triangles), claiming that such knowledge and the corresponding ideas do not derive from sense experience but are part of
the mind’s innate endowment that is merely elicited by environmental
interaction. But there is no particular claim about the cognitive processes
and structures that underlie such innate ideas; indeed, this type of nativism is compatible with a consistent skepticism or agnosticism about our
ability to know about the structure of the mind at all. Hence, while early
modern rationalists share with contemporary nativists something similar
to the external minimalism thesis, they hold such a thesis with respect to
ideas, rather than the processes underlying those ideas; moreover, they
have nothing like an internal richness thesis on the table.

Likewise, while early modern empiricists deny something like the external minimalism thesis about the contents of the mind, they too have
little to say about the structure of the mind, and lack any view corresponding to a denial of the internal richness thesis. Given the currency
of the continuity thesis, particularly amongst those who see empiricism as
constituting a sustained tradition, this claim requires further discussion.

Some contemporary empiricists view our cognitive architecture as
structured by a relatively small number of general principles and mechanisms that govern all of our perceptual and cognitive abilities, with these
mechanisms being deployed in different ways in light of particular experiential inputs. Thus, in connectionist models, backpropagation constitutes
a general type of learning algorithm that is tailored by means of particular learning sets to guide performance in various perceptual, cognitive,
and linguistic tasks. Early modern empiricists might be thought to share
this same general view of the structure of the mind: It is governed by a
few global processes, such as association and similarity, and so constitutes
a domain-general device. Common as this view is, it paints a misleading
picture of early modern empiricism.

Common to all early modern empiricists is some version of the distinction between, to use Locke’s terms, simple ideas and complex ideas.

Global processes are introduced not to explain how original or simple
ideas are acquired (and thus justified), but how we move beyond these to
derived or complex ideas. The account of how we acquire our simple
ideas is extremely thin, discussion being focused instead on the simple
48 Disciplining the Individual and the Mind
ideas themselves and how they are taxonomized. Locke, for example,
discusses simple ideas in terms of the ways in which they are acquired,
that is, by one sense, multiple senses, reflection, and both sensation and
reflection. But the focus here is on the ideas themselves, particularly on
what introspection can reveal about them, rather than on the processes
generating them. Furthermore, although Locke lists what he calls combination, association, and abstraction as the three chief ways in which
complex ideas are derived from simple ideas, there is little attention to
how these processes operate. The bulk of the remaining twenty or so
chapters in Book II are devoted, again, to the ideas themselves, not to
the processes putatively generating them.18
A third reason for denying the continuity thesis, or viewing it as of
limited significance, is that both rationalists and empiricists were, by and
large, dualists, either about the nature of substance or about the nature
of the properties that substances had. That is, since neither rationalists
nor empiricists were physicalists about the mind, their views of how the
mind was structured were views about the contents of minds, the products
of mental substance that could be examined through introspection. This
dualism also explains, I think, why within the traditional debate between
classical rationalists and empiricists there is not only no argument over the
internal richness thesis but little by way of a psychological story at all cast
in terms of the mechanisms governing the processes that generate our
ideas. Very few cognitive scientists are professed dualists about cognition.

In short, the continuity thesis minimizes the normative dimension
to the traditional debate between rationalists and empiricists, suggests a
concern with the nature of psychological processes where it does not exist,
and overlooks the significance of the difference between “psychology” as
conducted within dualist and physicalist frameworks.

8 overlaying the mind
I have been interested in this chapter in identifying some of the abstractions from what we might think of as full individuality that are made
within particular paradigms of psychology, and have done so via a very
partial treatment of aspects of the early history of psychology. I have focused on cognitive abilities (rather than, say, on personality traits), and
on abstractions in which an individual’s social, ecological, and physical
“contexts” are thought of as something into which an individual can be
inserted once we complete our characterization of that individual’s psychology. As the subject of psychological states, individuals have often been
construed individualistically in the specific sense that factors outside of
the boundary of the individual organism are bracketed off or treated
in some secondary way. This has meant that features of individuals
that seem intuitively to be important to how those individuals function
psychologically – such as their location in a particular set of cultural
practices, their thoughts having particular meaning, or their belonging
to groups with specific characteristics – have been viewed as peripheral
to psychology per se. As the psychologist Jerome Bruner has put it, they
have been viewed as overlays to, rather than constituents of, an individual’s
