psychology.19
In drawing attention to this dimension of psychology, I hope at least to
have raised the question of whether psychology need be individualistic in
this sense, and whether some of the ways in which individuals have been
viewed within psychology are as innocuous as they might initially seem.

The externalist psychology developed in Parts Two and Three provides
a way, or a variety of ways, of developing cultural, social, and semantic
aspects to cognition within one’s psychology, rather than laid over on
top of it. This has implications, in turn, for how we conceptualize the
relationship between psychology and some of the disciplines with which
it shares a border zone.

3
Nativism on My Mind
1 nativist threads
The issue of nativism was used in Chapter 1 to illustrate two points. First,
adopting a shared framework for understanding various individualistic
theses across the cognitive, biological, and social sciences can be mutually
informative. Second, these individualistic perspectives have ramifications
for central debates across the fragile sciences. To make these points I
introduced a two-dimensional analysis of a range of nativist debates: about
the mind, biology, and culture. Here I develop and defend that analysis
in more detail with a particular focus on nativism about cognition and
the mind.

I begin in section 2 by tracing the most influential nativist lineage in
the cognitive sciences. This lineage begins with the Chomskyan revolution in linguistics, a revolution that is generalized to other aspects of cognition by philosophers and developmental and cognitive psychologists
and then further extended and given a Darwinian twist by evolutionary
psychologists. I then turn in section 3 to the chief alternative to such
nativist views, often characterized as “empiricist,” and briefly explain why
behaviorist and connectionist views of cognition are paradigms of such
alternatives. In sections 4–6, the heart of the chapter, I reintroduce, develop, and defend the two-dimensional account of the debate over nativism about the mind. There has been a recent revival of attempts to
analyze nativism about cognition in fewer and in more dimensions than
two, and part of my defense of the two-dimensional analysis will involve
showing its superiority to its contemporary competitors. Finally, in sections 7–9, I return to issues raised in considering nativism debates across
50
the fragile sciences: whether we need more than two dimensions in order
to understand some specific nativist views, and how to build on the application of the two-dimensional view to the biological sciences sketched in
Chapter 1.

1
2 from chomsky to fodor to pinker: a thumbnail
Nativist views of the mind came to prominence with the rise of the cognitive sciences through the revolution in linguistics led by Noam Chomsky.

The phonological and syntactic regularities to be found in spoken and
heard sentences in particular natural languages required explanation, as
did the apparent ease with which those languages were acquired, and the
flexibility of children as language learners. Chomsky pointed to an underlying cognitive complexity, one that arose from the mind itself, rather
than the “stimulus” that led to the acquisition of spoken language, as
lying at the root of a common explanation for these facts about natural languages. As tragic cases of extreme linguistic deprivation showed,
linguistic stimulation of some kind was necessary for the acquisition of
language. But the “poverty of the stimulus” suggested that the contribution of the mind to natural language was innate rather than learned or
in some other way a reflection of complexity in the environment. This
innate contribution, universal or generative grammar, is itself structured,
and encompasses an individual’s phonological, syntactic, and semantic
knowledge.

Many of the aspects to this Chomskyan paradigm for language and
their implications for cognition more generally are expressed succinctly
in the following passage from Chomsky’s work:
[H]uman cognitive systems, when seriously investigated, prove to be no less marvelous and intricate than the physical structures that develop in the life of the
organism. Why, then, should we not study the acquisition of a cognitive structure
such as language more or less as we study some complex bodily organ?... Even
knowing little of substance about linguistic universals, we can be quite sure that
the possible variety of languages is sharply limited. ... The language each person acquires is a rich and complex construction hopelessly underdetermined by
the fragmentary evidence available [to the child]. Nevertheless individuals in a
speech community have developed essentially the same language. This fact can be
explained only on the assumption that these individuals employ highly restrictive
principles that guide the construction of grammar.2
As the first half of this quotation says, the part of the mind responsible
for language should be viewed as complex bodily organs, such as kidneys
52 Disciplining the Individual and the Mind
or hearts. Yet as suggested by the remainder of the quotation, what the
language organ produces is itself structurally complex. Linguistic complexity is to be explained by an appeal to complexity in the mind of the
organism. Thus, the language organ must have a structure that can be expressed as a series of principles generating the complexity in the natural
language it produces.

Although Chomsky focuses on language and how facts about its complexity, acquisition, and universality should be explained, as the reference above to “human cognitive systems”suggests, Chomsky sees his views
about language as having broader implications for how we should study
cognition and behavior more generally. The basic properties of cognitive
systems are innate in the mind, part of the human biological endowment, on a par with whatever determines the specific, internally directed
course of embryological development, or of sexual maturation in later
years.3
Jerry Fodor has been foremost in extending a number of aspects of
Chomskyan nativism to the mind more generally. In particular, he has
argued for two views that can be seen in this light. First Fodor has argued
that there is a general language of thought that is innate, a sort of universal grammar for thinking, whose atomic components (concepts) are
built into the structure of the mind. Second, Fodor views the cognitive
architecture of the mind as including a range of mental organs, each
operating in some particular domain.4
The first of these claims has been defended as part of Fodor’s computational theory of mind, and includes a radical form of nativism about
concepts. As Fodor says,
such cognitive theories as are currently available presuppose an internal language
in which the computational processes they postulate are carried out. ... [T]he
same models imply that that language is extremely rich (i.e., that it is capable
of expressing any concept that the organism can learn or entertain) and that its
representational power is, to all intents and purposes, innately determined.5
Fodor is skeptical of all extant accounts of concept acquisition, and he
views virtually all lexical concepts as innate. As Laurence and Margolis
