note in a recent discussion, this radical concept nativism has won very
few converts in the cognitive sciences over the almost thirty-year period
during which Fodor has advocated it.6
By contrast, Fodor’s development of the idea of a mental organ has
been enthusiastically endorsed by perceptual, cognitive, and developmental psychologists. Indeed, this modularity thesis has been extended
beyond the bounds that Fodor originally set for it – sensory perception
plus language – to distinctly “central processes,” such as reasoning and
inference, an extension that Fodor remains critical of. The most enthusiastic application of the modularity thesis has been made by evolutionary
psychologists, who view the mind as composed of thousands of innately
specified modules that operate across the full range of cognitive domains,
not just those that are perceptual.7
Evolutionary approaches to understanding the mind start with Darwin
and Spencer themselves, but it is only via the notion of modularity that
such approaches have entered into the mainstream of thinking about
cognition. Evolutionary psychologists not only blend an evolutionary perspective on cognition together with a strong modular view of the mind,
but do so using the tools of experimental psychology that are central
to the cognitive sciences. Foundational here has been the work of Leda
Cosmides and John Tooby on social reasoning.8
Cosmides sought to understand the varying (and often dismal) performance on a standard, experimental reasoning task that involved subjects
deciding which of four double-sided cards to turn over in order to determine whether a given, simple rule had been adhered to or broken. The
task was initially devised in the 1960s by the psychologist Peter Wason
to explore Karl Popper’s ideas about the role of falsification in science,
and the literature that this paradigm had generated over a twenty-year
period was vast. Cosmides’s general idea was that we could best make
sense of basic performance on the task, where less than 10% of subjects
succeed, and that on modified versions of the task, by thinking of reasoning not as a general ability but as a domain-specific faculty that evolved to
solve social problems. Cosmides’s specific hypothesis is that the aspect of
this ability drawn on in the Wason tasks and its variants is the detection
of those who break social rules. In short, what happens in such tasks is
that a social reasoning module, equipped with a cheater-detection algorithm, is pressed into service beyond the reasoning domain in which it
evolved.

The basic metaphor that evolutionary psychologists have used for the
structure of the mind is that of the mind as a Swiss army knife, containing
many specialized pieces. These pieces, mental modules, can be pressed
into service for a range of tasks, but each evolved in the history of the
species (and beyond) to fulfill some particular cognitive task within some
specific domain. These tasks were set as evolutionarily significant problems, and they were solved through the evolution of specific mental modules. Amongst the many modules posited by evolutionary psychologists,
54 Disciplining the Individual and the Mind
apart from those for social reasoning, are those that govern criteria for
mate selection and standards of beauty, eye direction detection and the
theory of mind, and principles of generalization. As Cosmides and Tooby
make clear in their thinking about the adapted mind more generally, and
as the psychologist Steve Pinker has emphasized, evolutionary psychology revolutionizes how we should think about the social sciences and the
relationship between the mind and culture.9
3 empiricist alternatives to nativism
Although nativist views of the mind have been influential within the cognitive sciences, they are far from having won ubiquitous support. The
chief antinativist views about cognition are empiricist. Nativists and empiricists share a commitment to the idea that there is at least some given,
built-in organismic contribution to cognition, but differ on the nature of
this contribution. In general terms, empiricists locate this contribution
in our perceptual or sensory apparatus, not in the mind itself, and hold
that the only genuinely cognitive structures and representations that are
innate are general purpose, of the one-size-fits-all variety. What ends up
in the mind, both content and structure, is a function of an organism’s
perceptual and sensory experience of the world. Cognitive structures and
representations are thus not hard wired in the design of the organism
but are contingent in some deep way on the nature of the interactions
between an organism and its environment across the sensory and perceptual interface.

In the dialectic between nativism and empiricism in the twentieth century study of cognition, behaviorism looms large. Classic behaviorism
dominated psychology from roughly 1920–60, and the cognitive revolution in both linguistics and psychology was very much directed at
overthrowing this paradigm, beginning with Noam Chomsky’s famous
critique of B.F. Skinner’s Verbal Behavior. And critiques of and recent
alternatives to the nativist views sketched in the preceding section are
often characterized as neo-behaviorist. There are many strands that run
through behaviorist views in psychology: the emphasis on observation
and empirical data, the corresponding skepticism about “theoretical”
posits, the priority given to laboratory studies of model organisms and
the putative generalizability of results from such organisms to human beings. However, it is not my intention here to provide a detailed survey of
behaviorism, but both to show the opposition between empiricism and
nativism and to explain why behaviorism is a paradigm of empiricism
about cognition.10
The two aspects of behaviorism most relevant for these purposes are
the primacy it accords perception and sensation and the central role that
learning plays as a mechanism for the acquisition of complex behaviors.

For behaviorists, sensory and perceptual abilities provide the developmental basis for the acquisition of all other psychological and behavioral
capacities, and organisms move from this sensory base to what might
be called cognition proper through one or another process of learning.

Learning involves a change in the capacities of an organism or system
in response to its interactions with the environment, where these capacities are cognitive in some broad and intuitive sense. (Building up your
muscles at the gym satisfies the chief clause, but not the qualification.)
This process may take various forms, including associative learning, where
two or more presented stimuli become linked together by the organism;
latent learning, where information about an environment (for example,
spatial layout) is gathered at some time but not manifest or deployed
until some subsequent occasion; or skill learning, where what is learned
is a particular skill, such as bicycle riding, reading, or the ability to play
chess. For behaviorists, the most important of these is associative learning, since it is a general process that, in principle, allows any perceptible
stimuli to be connected by the organism and leads to the modification
of its behavior. It is the means by which an organism, supposedly beginning just with sensory primitives and general psychological mechanisms,
acquires the variety of knowledge that it ends up possessing; it is how
environmental complexity leads to or produces organismic complexity.

The centrality of learning for behaviorists is reflected in their emphasis
on techniques of conditioning and in their attempted development of a
generalized learning theory that applies to any behavior that is cognitive
in a broad and intuitive sense.

