If the twentieth-century nativist-empiricist dialectic begins with the
Chomskyan challenge to the empiricist paradigm of behaviorism, it has
been continued by a newer empiricist alternative, that provided by connectionism. Connectionism was developed in the early 1980s as a computational modeling technique alternative to that embodied by “classical”
or “traditional” artificial intelligence. Like behaviorism, its empiricism
was manifest in its emphasis on explaining complex capacities in terms
of the operation of learning strategies or rules on relatively simple inputs.

Rather than viewing the innate cognitive contributions of the organism
to be specific, rich, and “high-level” in structure, connectionists place an
emphasis on environmental stimuli (the initial data set) and powerful,
general computational algorithms that are reapplied to an initial data set
to generate complex outputs.

56 Disciplining the Individual and the Mind
One computational model that illustrates the challenge that connectionist models pose to nativist views of language is the connectionist
model for the formation of past tense developed by David Rumelhart
and James McClelland. What is significant about this model in the current context is that it does not have a preexisting linguistic rule that
distinguishes regular from irregular cases, but eventually develops this
distinction from repeated applications of an algorithm. The model was
taken by its proponents to exemplify the idea that a sensitivity to linguistic structure could be developed through repeated interactions with an
environment, rather than having to be “built in” to the language learner,
as nativists had claimed. As Pinker notes, the “model irrevocably changed
the study of human language. ... it is no longer possible to treat the mere
existence of linguistic productivity as evidence for rules in the head.”
While nobody views this model as depicting how we learn the past tense
in natural language, the model has spawned over twenty descendants
that have led proponents of “rules and representations” views of language acquisition to attenuate their views. These have also motivated the
development of hybrid models that integrate the insights of such views
with their connectionist competitors.11
4 the two-dimensional approach
The basic idea of the two-dimensional approach to the debate between
nativists and empiricists, recall, is that two simple, independent theses determine a two-by-two space in this debate. The two-dimensional approach
does three things. First, it helps to identify strong forms of both nativist
and empiricist views. Second, it points to views that are less extreme and,
in some sense, intermediate between the strong versions of nativism and
empiricism. Third, it provides a common framework for understanding
debates over nativism elsewhere in the fragile sciences.

The first thesis, the internal richness thesis, concerns the nature of an
individual’s internal structure, while the second, the external minimalism
thesis, concerns the causal role of an individual’s external environment in
the acquisition and development of a given cognitive process, structure,
or phenomenon. Where X stands in for the relevant cognitive process,
structure, or phenomenon, these two theses can be stated as follows:
Internal Richness Thesis: Structures and processes internal to the individual that
are important to the acquisition and development of X are rich.

External Minimalism Thesis: Structures and processes external to an individual
play at best a secondary causal role in the acquisition and development of X.

Richness here is a technical term, but it is intended to draw on the ordinary
sense that the word has. Internal structures are rich, recall, just if they
are antecedently specialized, localized, internally complex, and causally
powerful. Proponents of the “modularity of mind” are paradigms of those
who accept the internal richness thesis about cognition, while those who
hold that cognitive processes are “domain general” or close to nonexistent (for example, behaviorists) are paradigms of those who reject that
thesis. Likewise, those who conceptualize the environment as a “trigger”
for cognition accept the external minimalism thesis, while those who
view learning as the central mechanism for the acquisition of cognitive
structure reject that thesis.

As these examples might suggest, strong nativist positions – exempli-
fied by Chomsky and Fodor – accept both the internal richness and the
external minimalism thesis. Although Chomsky and Fodor are strong
nativists with respect to a range of mental processes and structures,
Chomsky’s view of generative grammar and Fodor’s views of concepts
exemplify their commitment to strong nativism as I have characterized
it. Strong empiricist positions – exemplified by behaviorists and at least
early connectionists – reject both the internal richness and the external minimalism thesis. For both behaviorists and early connectionists,
an organism’s cognitive structures are acquired through the process of
learning. This process is not internally rich in the sense specified above,
and ascribes a primary role to the structure of the environment in the
process of acquisition. That both of these theses capture standard nativist
and empiricist positions is reflected in Steve Laurence and Eric Margolis’s
recent characterization of these views:
Though there is clearly a continuum of positions, empiricist models are on the
side that attributes few innate ideas, principles, and mechanisms, and generally
considers the innate material of the mind to be domain-neutral and relatively
simple; empiricist models also tend to give special weight to the role of sensory
systems, in the most extreme cases maintaining that all concepts are constructed
from sensory constituents. By contrast, nativist models are on the side that views
the mind as highly differentiated, composed of far more innate elements, including domain-specific systems of knowledge or principles of inference, and innate
concepts of arbitrary levels of abstraction.12
Although these two theses are independent, strong nativists view them
as mutually reinforcing. Here’s why. Suppose that we accept the internal
richness thesis. If our cognitive architecture is internally rich, there is a
complexity to what we bring to any cognitive task that leaves less role for
an appeal to the complexity of the environments in which we operate.

58 Disciplining the Individual and the Mind
In the extreme case, environments are just triggers for the operation
of innately complex structures. Conversely, suppose that we accept the
external minimalism thesis. Since external structures play a minimal role
in the acquisition and development of cognition, any complexity that
cognition generates must be due to something else, and what lies within
the cognizer is a strong candidate for that something else.

To the extent that the two-dimensional analysis accurately classifies
paradigmatic nativist and empiricist positions, it passes one relatively undemanding test for the adequacy of an analysis of the debate. Yet the
two-dimensional view is well suited to capture more of this logical geography, including positions less extreme than either of the paradigmatic
