nativist and empiricist views, and I consider this one of its chief virtues.

There are various ways to reject paradigmatic nativist and empiricist views
of cognition, and the two-dimensional view is not only “empirically adequate” but informative about this aspect to the logical geography of the
debate over nativism and cognition.

Consider the option of accepting the external minimalism thesis but
rejecting the internal richness thesis about cognition. Classic ethologists
and proponents of general intelligence as a built-in, global cognitive ability are both advocates of such a position. In fact, we might locate much of
cognitive psychology here, insofar as it gives little role to the environment
in structuring cognition yet is cast largely in terms of domain-general capacities, such as memory and reasoning, emotions and imagination.

The converse alternative – of holding the internal richness thesis while
rejecting the external minimalism thesis about cognition – has also been
endorsed. For example, there are modularity theorists, such as Annette
Karmiloff-Smith, who view modules as being assembled through environmental interaction, rather than endogenously prespecified or governed.

For forms of cognitive activity in which there can be specialized, acquired
expertise, such as chess playing or mathematical problem solving, such
a view is particularly plausible. Proponents of socially distributed cognition, such as Edwin Hutchins, seem also to endorse this sort of view. On
Hutchins’ view of cognition, the structure of the social environment of
the individual plays a primary role in generating the structure of both
individual and group cognition. Yet individuals themselves are, in effect,
internally rich devices for the performance of cognitive functions.13
Figure 3.1 provides a summary of how the two-dimensional view applies
to this range of positions.

The two-dimensional view also sheds some light on how each of two
neurally inspired views depart from strong nativist views of cognitive
External Minimalism Thesis
YES NO
Strong Nativism Socially Distributed/
Acquired Cognition
Y
E Internal
S
Richness
General Cognitive
Psychology N Thesis Strong Antinativism
O
figure 3.1. Nativism and Cognition
development, and how they are related to one another. The “constructive
learning” view of neural and cognitive development that computational
neuroscientists Steve Quartz and Terry Sejnowski articulate exemplifies a
strong rejection of nativism. It ascribes a central role to the structure of the
environment in the construction of representations (and so rejects the external minimalism thesis), while denying the need to posit antecedently
richly structured cognitive modules (and so rejects the internal richness
thesis). By contrast, neuronal selection theory, whereby neural development is explained as a selective process responsive to endogenous events,
shares the internal richness thesis with strong nativist views, but appeals
to underlying neural features, rather than cognitive modules, to explain
the structure of cognition. This affinity between neural selection theory
and strong nativist views, as well as their shared rejection of the external
minimalism thesis, underpins, I believe, Quartz and Sejnowski’s rejection
of both.14
Another criterion for evaluating the two-dimensional view is to see how
adequately it captures more specific debates over nativism amongst cognitive scientists. For example, we might turn to debates over the acquisition
of concepts in general, of word meanings or other aspects of language,
such as syntax, or those over specific postulated cognitive domains, such
as the theory of mind.15
Consider first the last of these examples, that of the theory of mind
within developmental psychology. The two-dimensional account classes
the views of Alan Leslie and Simon Baron-Cohen, who hold that children’s
60 Disciplining the Individual and the Mind
psychological attributions and understanding of the mind are governed
by a domain-specific module that develops maturationally, as strong nativist positions. Strong antinativist positions, by contrast, are exemplified
by Peter Hobson and Michael Tomasello. They view these abilities as deriving not from dedicated modules but from more general symbolizing
capacities acquired through social experience.16
But again there are those who have maintained views less extreme
vis-`a-vis nativism. For example, “theory theorists,” such as Alison Gopnik
and Joseph Perner, take children to develop a theory of mind through the
same mechanisms of theory construction that children apply elsewhere
in acquiring knowledge of the world (and so reject internal richness).

Yet Gopnik and Perner ascribe only a limited role to the environment in
the generate-and-test process that governs their conceptual change, and
so share the external minimalism thesis with strong nativists. By contrast,
theorists such as Jay Garfield and Candida Peterson maintain a view that
appropriates the mediational views of Vygotsky – and so reject the external
minimalism thesis – but recognize a modular component to children’s
acquisition of knowledge of the mind, even though they do not think that
there is a domain for the theory of mind per se, and so accept a form of
the internal richness thesis.17
Figure 3.2 summarizes the two-dimensional view of the nativist aspect
to the theory of mind debate. As one might expect, there are further
aspects to the debate over the theory of mind that the two-dimensional
view itself does not capture: For example, that between theory theorists
and simulationists, that over the relationship between language and the
theory of mind, and that concerning the significance of false belief task
performance. This should remind us that although nativism is one issue
in play in work on the theory of mind, it is not the only one.

5 making do with less?
Traditional philosophical analyses, cast in terms of the conditions putatively necessary and sufficient for the concept of innateness, have typically
tried to understand nativism in one dimension, even if that dimension
has some internal complexity to it. Several recent accounts of nativism
attempt to make do with just one dimension, and I want to concentrate
in this section on problems that such views face. The two views on which I
shall concentrate, those of Muhammad Ali Khalidi and Richard Samuels,
have been developed as alternatives to existing one-dimensional views,
such as those that view innate structures as those present at birth, or
