External Minimalism Thesis
YES NO
Modularists
Leslie
Baron-Cohen
Y
Garfield, Peterson, and Perry
2001
E
S Internal
Richness
Gopnik
Perner
Enculturists
Tomasello 1999
Carpendale and Lewis
(in press)
Thesis
N
O
figure 3.2. Nativism and the Theory of Mind
those that develop in the normal course of an organism’s life. In what
follows, I shall take for granted the criticisms that Khalidi and Samuels
make of such views.18
Khalidi has defended the adequacy of a triggering view of innateness
over what he calls the disease model and plasticity accounts of nativist
views and argued that domain-specificity stands in an evidential rather
than a constitutive relationship to nativism. In essence, Khalidi’s account
makes do with just one of the two dimensions that I have posited to
the debate over nativism, that encapsulated by the external minimalism
thesis. Khalidi begins by registering the variety of cognitive scientists –
including Hirschfeld, Gelman, Landau, Cosmides, Tooby, Keil, Gopnik,
and Meltzoff – whom he considers as viewing innateness and domainspecificity as constitutively linked. He then states his view that an “innate
mental state or cognitive capacity is one that would be triggered by the environment,” a view articulated earlier by the philosopher Stephen Stich.

The remainder of Khalidi’s paper criticizes views that attempt to show
62 Disciplining the Individual and the Mind
that there is some constitutive link between this notion of innateness and
domain-specificity.19
There are two methodological problems with this view and how it is
defended. The first is that it is rather philosophically high-handed in
implying that many of those at the center of contemporary debates over
nativism are conceptually confused about what nativism is. No doubt,
there is some confusion. But defending a view of nativism that implies
that a wide variety of researchers working on nativism are infected with
this particular confusion is like insisting that lawyers are conceptually
confused when they treat spoken agreements as contracts on the grounds
that one has analyzed the concept of a contract in terms of signed, written
agreements. The implication itself should be grounds for rethinking the
grounds of the analysis.

The second problem is that the arguments that Khalidi provides can at
best show that internal richness is neither identical to, nor reducible to,
nor entailed by something like the external minimalism thesis. This point
should be granted by a proponent of the two-dimensional view. Indeed,
one might take this, in conjunction with how researchers themselves talk
about nativism, as a reason for insisting that we need at least two independent dimensions to understand the debate over nativism. Moreover,
since the arguments against incorporating something like the internal
richness thesis into the account of nativism are all arguments that presuppose the priority of a one-dimensional triggering criterion, they beg
the question against a proponent of the two-dimensional view.

Richard Samuels provides another one-dimensional analysis of innate
cognitive structures, the primitivist account, that proceeds in two steps. According to Samuels, “a psychological structure is innate just in case it is a
psychological primitive,” and (step two) psychological primitives are structures posited by some correct scientific psychological theory, structures
whose acquisition is not in turn explained by any such theory. (Putative
counterexamples to the sufficiency of the account lead Samuels to modify it by making an additional appeal to the acquisition of the structure
“in the normal course of events”; I ignore this here since nothing I say
turns on this modification.)20
There are three related problems with this view: it (a) places a burden on the notion of a complete psychological theory heavier than that
notion can bear; (b) presupposes a tidy alignment between psychological structures and the mechanisms that mediate their acquisition, and
(c) entails that psychologically complex structures cannot be innate.

What these problems imply is that the primitivist account is uninformative
[(a)] or mistaken [(b) and (c)] about what psychological structures are
innate. I spell out each problem in turn.

Consider (a). Whether a structure is innate, on Samuels’s official view,
turns on there not being any correct psychological theory that explains
its acquisition. Given that even by the most optimistic of lights there
remain significant and fundamental disagreements about the acquisition
of almost every postulated cognitive structure, one might wonder just
what structures a correct psychological theory will postulate as acquired.

Even the current best candidates for innate psychological structures, such
as those governing intuitive mechanics and intuitive mathematics, have
previously been viewed within developmental psychology as having been
acquired. Without a more complete psychological theory it is difficult to
see what their status will be when psychologists call it a day.21
Suppose that the sorts of inferences that we can make from the current
state of psychological theorizing to a complete and correct psychological theory are limited, as I am implying. Then the primitivist account is
about as useful as an analysis that claims that innate cognitive structures
are those that God planted in our minds. Either (even both) of these
analyses might be true, but it seems desirable for a correct analysis to
be more informative than is either. To draw a contrast, it may be that
the fundamental physical entities in the universe are those posited in a
correct physical theory. But this constitutes a part of an insightful characterization of (say) physicalism only given that current physical theory
provides us with some solid epistemic guidance as to what a correct physical theory looks like, and what it postulates as fundamental. I suggest that
this is precisely what we lack at the moment in the cognitive sciences.

Let us put the official talk of “correct psychological theories” to one
