side and turn to the heart of the primitivist view, which holds that “innate
cognitive structures are ones that are not acquired by any psychological
process or mechanism.”22 Since there is an obvious sense in which all
of an organism’s structures are acquired – all organisms develop (say,
from a fertilized egg) from not having to having them – this account
implies that innate structures are those acquired by nonpsychological
mechanisms. This brings me to (b): that the account presupposes a
neat alignment between the nativist status of psychological structures
and the kinds of mechanisms that mediate their acquisition. Those acquired by nonpsychological mechanisms are innate, while those acquired
by psychological mechanisms are not innate. This appears to make good
sense of cases where the mechanisms responsible for some psychological
structure are paradigmatically psychological (for example, learning) or
64 Disciplining the Individual and the Mind
paradigmatically nonpsychological (for example, genetic). But I think the
appearances are misleading, and very few, if any, structures are acquired
exclusively either by psychological or by nonpsychological mechanisms.

Consider first the sorts of case where the primitivist account might
seem adequate. For example, the psychological structures needed to read
or to consciously solve algebra problems are not innate because they
are acquired via the psychological mechanisms or processes of teaching,
learning, study, and instruction. And the psychological structures needed
for identifying something as a physical object are innate because they are
acquired simply by “triggering,” that is, by brute-causal exposure. Reflection on both of these cases, however, brings out why (b) is a problem.

Reading and consciously solving algebra problems are abilities acquired through psychological processes, no doubt. But their acquisition
usually also involves mechanisms that are “social,” such as instruction,
and others that are “biological,” such as those for neural storage. Indeed, any psychological ability that is acquired once a child already has
acquired a lot of psychological structures and mechanisms, however they
are acquired, is likely itself to be acquired through the agency of both
psychological and nonpsychological mechanisms. One reason for the
importance of psychological mechanisms is the way in which they are integrated with both “higher” and “lower” level mechanisms, and thus the
correspondence proposed by Samuels between “noninnate” and “psychological” acquisition processes is problematic.

There is much the same problem for the proposed link between “innate” and “nonpsychological” mechanisms of acquisition. Brute-causal
exposure to physical objects and how they behave mechanically may
be sufficient to activate the intuitive physics of normal newborn or very
young infants. But there are surely psychological mechanisms that such
infants are equipped with that play a role in how their intuitive physics operates. For example, they have mechanisms that govern how they behave,
such as how long they look at a stimulus, or other mechanisms that govern
preferential looking or other forms of early behavior. That such behavior is subject to psychological generalizations, such as “Find unexpected
stimuli interesting” and “Look longer at objects that are interesting,” is
presupposed in the very experimental paradigms for the investigation of
the proposed innate structures.

The basic problem that the entwinement of psychological and nonpsychological mechanisms poses for the primitivist account is as follows.

If innate psychological structures are those acquired without any psychological mechanisms or only by nonpsychological mechanisms, then
no or almost no psychological structures are innate. Importantly, the
psychological structures that are our current best bet for being innate
turn out not to be innate, on such a view. And that suggests that the
primitivist account is mistaken.

Finally, consider (c). By a “psychologically complex” structure I mean
a structure that has parts whose coordination and integration physically
constitute that structure, and which themselves are psychological. For
such a structure, there may be a correct psychological theory for how
that structure is acquired that is given in terms of how those parts develop
and are integrated. But for all that, the structure itself might be innate.

Indeed, those who view such structures as innate often take the prime
psychological task to be to functionally decompose the structure and understand the developmental trajectory of those parts. For example, Leslie
and Baron-Cohen posit an innate theory of mind module (ToMM), and
propose a particular compositional structure that is psychological and
whose development is explained in psychological and neuropsychological terms. This is true more generally of domain-specific theories (for
example, of physical objects, of biology), which are complex in something
like the sense above but whose innateness is not thereby ruled out. One
could insist that the psychologists who talk in this way are mistaken. But
such insistence would seem high-handed in much the way that I claimed
was Khalidi’s account.

6 satisfying some desiderata
Samuels also posits five constraints on the adequacy of any account of
innateness. These can be summarized group-wise as follows:
(i) X is innate → (X is not learned) and /→(the environment plays
no role in the acquisition of X)
(ii) the account must make sense of the chief arguments for/against
nativism, of why nativism matters to cognitive science, and of the
logical geography to the debate.

Samuels calls (i) “conceptual constraints” and views them as more foundational than (ii). All five desiderata that Samuels offers are plausible
constraints, and despite its other problems, the primitivist account prima
facie does a reasonable job of satisfying all of them.

But the two-dimensional view does a better job here. Since the external
minimalism thesis is one dimension in the view, that view readily meets
both of Samuels’ “conceptual constraints.” I have already directed much
66 Disciplining the Individual and the Mind
of my discussion at showing how the two-dimensional view fares regarding
the “logical geography” of the debate over nativism. The only point I shall
underscore here is that, in contrast to both one-dimensional views we have
considered in the previous section (as well as others we have not), the
two-dimensional view makes it natural to see why “being innate” is not
an all-or-nothing matter, and how we might distinguish between stronger
and more moderate positions in the debate over nativism.

The two remaining constraints that Samuels posits are that the account make sense of the arguments for nativism and that it show why the
debate over nativism is of significance within cognitive science. Samuels
himself considers two chief arguments for the innateness of cognitive
structures – those which appeal to the poverty of the stimulus and to
