early development – and to those we might add arguments that cite the
universal manifestation of a psychological structure, or that invoke neurally specific deficits. Endorsement of the external minimalism thesis
itself would make each of these arguments plausible ones to offer, but it
is worth noting that the internal richness thesis also provides grounding
for at least these arguments. For if that thesis is true and cognition is
governed by internally rich units, then we might expect normal environments to be sufficient for the abilities that those units imbue an organism
with, and so develop early and universally, and for those abilities to be
subject to impairment through specific neural damage. As importantly,
the two-dimensional view also helps to explain why rejecting one of these
arguments – say, the poverty of the stimulus argument – or viewing it as
having limited significance, need not involve a wholesale abandonment
of nativism or the arguments for it.

Finally on the desiderata front, the two-dimensional view suggests that
part of the significance of the debate over nativism lies in arguments over
two distinct issues: the causal role of the environment in the acquisition of
cognitive structures and abilities and the nature of the internal resources
that individuals antecedently bring to bear on cognitive tasks. Positions
on each of these issues carry with them methodological implications for
how to study cognition and particular cognitive abilities. One’s view of
the external minimalism thesis affects (or reflects) whether one thinks
that cognitive scientists should invest their time in studying the structure
of an organism’s environment. And one’s view of the internal richness
thesis does the same with respect to the sort of internal structures posited
or sought inside the cognizer. The two-dimensional view also makes it
clear that a position on one of these issues leaves room for disagreement
about the other.

7 but could two dimensions be enough?
Suppose that we need two dimensions to understand the debate over nativism and that these are the two that I have suggested. Might we need
more? For example, one might think, particularly if one views evolutionary psychology as a strong nativist position, that one should also view the
claim that rich mental structures are evolved or encoded in the genome
as part of the commitment of a strong nativist view. The developmental
psychologist Frank Keil has suggested that it is an important part of nativist views of the mind that what is “built in” to an organism is not simply
perceptual abilities but something intuitively further “upstream” from
perception, something “more central,” something genuinely cognitive.

The philosopher Fiona Cowie has also identified five theses as constituting the “Chomskyan nativist” view of language acquisition. On Cowie’s
view, a firm commitment to one of these, the thesis that the constraints
and principles that define the domain of language and its subdomains be
identified with universal grammar is what distinguishes the Chomskyan
view from all nonnativist alternatives. Perhaps we should view this dimension as essential to characterizing nativism more generally. Since we
double the grain of our analysis for each additional dimension we add,
why not enrich our view of the nativism debate further? Why think two is
enough, especially if one leads to impoverishment? But I think we should
be cautious here. More is not always better. Consider briefly the proposals
of Keil and Cowie in turn.23
Keil’s suggestion is motivated by the recognition that all parties to the
debate over nativism acknowledge that some psychological structures are
innate and that what distinguishes nativists from empiricists, apart from
their views of what I am calling internal richness, is how far upstream this
structure is to be found. I think that there is some truth in this and that
this dimension of “centrality” is important in understanding why nativist
views come in degrees. In some specific debates over nativism, such as that
over concepts, this dimension of centrality may be significant enough to
be added as a distinct dimension. So it may be that it is useful to add this
as a third dimension to the account I have proposed, at least for some
purposes.

Yet this dimension doesn’t help much in understanding other particular nativist debates, such as that over the theory of mind, which occur,
so to speak, at one place in the stream, and whose alternatives to strong
nativism include positions that identify intuitively more central abilities,
such as metarepresentation (Perner) or theory construction (Gopnik), as
68 Disciplining the Individual and the Mind
underlying the theory of mind. Moreover, I am inclined to think that this
dimension is subsumable under or derivable from the internal richness
thesis insofar as stronger nativist views tend to view the thesis as having a
greater range of applicability to cognition than do weaker nativist views.

Although it is conceptual open space to hold the internal richness thesis
about just “upstream” structures, and not those together with sensoryperceptual structures, as a matter of fact no one holds such a view. Thus,
all views that apply the thesis more widely also apply them to central
cognitive processes.

My view of Cowie’s proposal is similar. Recognizing the distinctness of
a “universal grammar” dimension to the nativism debate over language
may be useful – for example, in distinguishing Chomskyan nativism from
lexical functional grammar. Yet it is unclear how such a distinct dimension helps elucidate such debates in all areas of language, such as that
over the acquisition of the semantics of words, or more importantly, beyond language and in other cognitive domains where the combinatorial,
generative role that universal grammar plays in language is less significant. For example, in cognitive development, there is a focus on the
principles that govern infants’ recognitional and behavioral interactions
with physical objects – naive physics – and on those that govern their interactions with persons – naive psychology and naive sociology. Yet such
principles constitute a grammar or a syntax in only a metaphorical or
extended sense. The problem of how to apply this dimension to other
nativist and empiricist views is exacerbated once we turn from cognitive
to noncognitive domains.

In summary, while further dimensions may shed light on nativism in
specific contexts, they do not appear to have the generality that make
them useful in understanding nativist views more generally. We can see
this more clearly by turning from the cognitive to the biological domain.

8 nativism about cognition and biology
The renewed attention that the concept of innateness has received of late
within the cognitive sciences, typified by the authors I have thus far discussed or mentioned, is marked by a near-exclusive preoccupation with
what it means for a cognitive or linguistic structure or process to be innate, and arguments for thinking that many such structures and processes
are innate. This focus neglects the other primary domain in which the
concept of innateness has been deployed, that of the biological sciences.

As I suggested in Chapter 1, an additional virtue of the two-dimensional
