account is that it sheds some light on nativism debates within this domain,
and so reveals an affinity between the largely disjoint cognitive and biological literatures. Here I shall focus on the two areas of biology to which
nativism – under the heading of innateness – has been perhaps most central. I shall expand on my compressed remarks about inheritance and
development from Chapter 1 and will also briefly consider innateness in
behavioral ecology. Rather than talk of strong antinativist views here as
empiricist, which would sound idiosyncratic, I shall refer to such views as
strong externalism about organismic development.24
There has been some skepticism about whether the notion of innateness any longer plays a useful role within either of these areas of biological science. For example, the biologist Patrick Bateson has distinguished
seven different things that “innate” means when applied to behavioral
phenotypes in the study of animal behavior, and suggested that only confusion arises from continuing to use “innate” to mark all of these correspondingly distinct contrasts. The philosopher of biology Paul Griffiths
has said that in “molecular developmental biology innateness seems as
antiquated a theoretical construct as instinct and equally peripheral to
any account of gene regulation or morphogenesis,” and has claimed that
since there is no univocal sense in which biologists speak of a trait as
being innate, we should retire talk of innateness.25
These views of Bateson and Griffiths do, I think, provide reason to
be skeptical about traditional one-dimensional analyses of innateness in
biology, including recent analyses in terms of canalization and generative entrenchment. But I also think that the two-dimensional approach
shows why Bateson and Griffiths are perhaps overly pessimistic about the
prospects for making sense of innateness in the biological sciences.26
While both the internal richness thesis and the external minimalism
thesis are formulated with respect to cognitive phenomena, processes,
and abilities, it is a trivial matter to apply them both to biological structures and processes. In Chapter 1, I pointed out that within genetics and
developmental biology questions of the innateness of any given trait are
often cast in terms of the role and conception of genes in organismic development. The dominant view here accepts genes as being at the core of
the rich, internal structure that guides organismic development, with the
environment subsequently playing some kind of secondary causal role.

Both classical and molecular genetics, both cast since the 1940s largely in
terms of the complex metaphor of a genetic program – blueprints, codes,
instructions, reading frames, executive controls – adopt this view of organismic development in general, and as such represent strongly nativist
70 Disciplining the Individual and the Mind
views of this process. Genes code for phenotypes – the traits are “in the
genes” – and organismic development is the unfolding of this preformed
structure in the genetic code. But as a global view of development, such a
view has been challenged in whole and in part, and the two-dimensional
view of nativism captures much of the character of such challenges.27
While no one denies the existence of intracellular units, genes, both
their role in organismic development and the relationship between
“genetic” and “environmental” causes of development have been contested. For example, as I said in Chapter 1, Richard Lewontin has rejected the idea that genes are the primary agents of development, as well
as the claim that genetic and environmental “factors” can be partitioned
in ways so as to meaningfully inform us about the causes of particular
developmental changes. In effect he rejects both the internal richness
and the external minimalism theses, and his views represent a strong externalist position within genetics and developmental biology. Thus, the
two-dimensional view captures both strong nativist and strong externalist
positions in genetics and development. But it is important to see that, as
is the case with cognition, the two-dimensional analysis also provides for
the representation of less extreme views of genetics and development.

For example, some developmental biologists, such as Brian Goodwin,
share Lewontin’s skepticism about the roles ascribed to genes as agents
of development, and have argued for the primacy of other internal factors, such as morphogenetic fields, as such agents. In seeing development as endogenously driven, however, Goodwin accepts the external
minimalism thesis. What he rejects is the particulate view of the engines
of development entailed by the internal richness thesis. Rather than a
gene-centered developmental biology, Goodwin advocates a revival of
what he calls a rational morphology, with a primary role for developmental
constraints and morphogenetic fields in explaining development. This is
one way to depart from both strong nativist and strong externalist views
of organismic development.28
Proponents of developmental systems theory, by contrast, maintain that
the agents of development are developmental systems. Developmental systems are series of processes that use a range of developmental resources,
including genes, chromatin markers, and organelles within the organism. Those developmental systems theorists, such as Eva Jablonka and
Marion Lamb, who emphasize cellular, epigenetic inheritance systems
have some affinity with Goodwin’s rational morphology insofar as they
identify nongenetic, internal causes of development. But others, such as
Susan Oyama and Russell Gray, take there to be an important symmetry
External Minimalism Thesis
YES NO
Classical and
Molecular Genetics
Developmental Systems
Theory
Y
E Internal
S Richness
Thesis
Rational Morphology Radical Interactionism N
O
figure 3.3. Nativism, Genetics, and Development
between developmental resources that lie within and beyond the boundary of the organism, and so view developmental systems as often extending
beyond that boundary. Such views reject the external minimalism thesis,
and often share much with Lewontin’s criticisms of gene-centered views
that predominate within molecular genetics. Figure 3.3 shows how the
two-dimensional analysis applies to this range of positions about nativism
and development.29
I have so far been suggesting that the two-dimensional view of nativism sheds some light on the “logical geography” of recent views within
genetics and developmental biology. The basic idea of this view – to
treat internal structural richness and external causal role as independent dimensions – is particularly apt for genetics and development within
the biological domain. This is because much of the debate over innateness within biology has turned on questioning traditional dichotomies –
innate versus acquired, genetic versus environmental – that deny their
independence.

These two dimensions also subsume many of the characterizations
that have been given of innate traits in behavioral ecology. For example,
consider the seven senses that Patrick Bateson detects in uses of “innate”
in describing animal behaviors. Innate behaviors have been claimed to be
those that are (a) present at birth, (b) not learned, (c) adapted over the
72 Disciplining the Individual and the Mind
course of evolution, (d) unchanging through development, (e) shared
by all members of the species, (f) part of a distinctly organized system of
