behavior driven from within, (g) caused by a genetic difference when two
organisms differ with respect to them. Bateson points out that there are
many cases in which these criteria come apart and argues that this limits
the usefulness of the concept of innateness within behavioral ecology.

If we view these, however, not as criteria for innateness but as seven
evidential bases for ascriptions of innateness in a given case, then I think
the two-dimensional approach is well placed to explain their appeal. Of
these, (a) and (b) are readily explained as a result of the external minimalism thesis, and (f) and (g) by acceptance of the internal richness
thesis. The remaining three, (c), (d), and (e), could be explained by
either or both theses. Likewise, the idea of innate traits as those that are
developmentally fixed and so relatively insensitive to environmental variation (canalized), or those that are “generatively entrenched,” can be
understood in terms of the external minimalism thesis. In short, the twodimensional approach to nativism within biology makes sense not only
of the major positions that have been held within genetics and developmental biology, but also explains the sorts of characterization of, and
evidence for, claims of innateness in particular cases within behavioral
ecology.

9 conceptual analysis and nativism
Identifiable nativist views have been with us for a long time, and they are
likely right about at least some of our cognitive structures and abilities,
just as they are right about some of our bodily phenotypes and behaviors.

The two-dimensional approach to the debate over nativism developed
in this chapter allows us to pinpoint what nativists are claiming about
cognition, and how one might go part of the way toward accepting the
strongest nativist views and so accommodate their insights without simply
assimilating cognitive development to bodily growth.

I also argued in the previous chapter, however, that the “short history,
long past” view of the debate over nativism should not blind us to the
significant differences between what has been central to that debate during distinct historical periods. In particular, there are several important
discontinuities between traditional rationalism and empiricism and contemporary nativist and nonnativist views. The two-dimensional approach
aims to capture something important about the contemporary debate,
and I think we do less justice to that goal by either insisting on or implicitly
assuming a continuity thesis that is insensitive to the distinctive preoccupations of seventeenth- and eighteenth-century thinkers.

It has been part of my plaint over an extended period of time that
philosophers (as well as zealous cognitive psychologists, linguists, and
computer scientists) should learn to say “some.” In philosophy we too
often yearn for something close to a standard conceptual analysis of a
concept or term in attempting to understand what is a corresponding
complicated and messy reality. If we view one-dimensional accounts of
nativism about the mind as suffering from the inability to “say ‘some,’”
and from focusing largely or exclusively on nativism about the mind,
then it is a fair question to ask how well the two-dimensional analysis
itself scores on both of these fronts.

The two-dimensional view is an analysis of sorts, but one aimed primarily at understanding the debate over nativism, rather than our “ordinary”
concept of innateness (if there be such), and that is primarily descriptive
rather than normative or revisionary. Although I have responded briefly
to a few “higher dimensional” accounts of the debate, and attempted to
show how further or other dimensions that have been proposed are, in
some sense, derivative from the two-dimensional approach, it seems to
me less significant whether one is right here than it is to be right about
the need to move beyond one-dimensional accounts. This is in part because nativist views are enmeshed with a variety of other views about
cognition – about its evolution, about its relationship to culture, about its
demarcation from both the noncognitive and the nonpsychological. And
where one’s nativism ends and such other views begin seems difficult to
pronounce on, and unwise to build on.

One final point. One implication of the two-dimensional view is that
strong nativist views will likely be defensible for a more limited range of
traits than have often been thought of as innate. But this is neither because
there are more traits for which strong antinativism or externalism hold,
nor because “innate” is a term that has outlived its usefulness. Rather,
the two-dimensional view requires that we consider both internal and
external dimensions to the acquisition and development of any given
trait. Often enough, we will have to be satisfied with a view of acquisition
and development that departs from strong forms of both nativism and
empiricism.

74
part two
INDIVIDUALISM AND EXTERNALISM
IN THE PHILOSOPHY OF MIND AND
THE COGNITIVE SCIENCES
75
76
4
Individualism
Philosophical Foundations
1 making sense of the individualism-externalism
debate
Individualism about the mind was introduced as a form of methodological
solipsism in considering the nature of an individual’s mental life and how
we ought to theorize systematically about it. I drew on this conception
of individualism in discussing the disciplining of psychology as a field
of inquiry and nativism about the mind. In Chapter 1, I also provided a
more precise characterization of individualism in psychology in terms of
the notion of supervenience.

It is sometimes unclear to those outside of the philosophy of mind just
how either the methodological solipsism or the supervenience formulation of individualism could give rise to a substantive debate about the
mind and its study. Consider construals of each of these formulations that
make either individualism or externalism seem trivially true.

Methodological solipsism in psychology is the view that psychological states should be construed without reference to anything beyond the
boundary of the individual who has those states. It is in light of this view
that the debate between individualists and externalists has sometimes
been glossed in terms of whether psychological or mental states are
