“in the head.” But to the initiated and uninitiated alike, that is likely
to sound like a puzzling issue to debate: Of course mental states are in
the head! (“Where else could they be?,” as Robert Stalnaker once asked.)
So this construal of individualism makes externalism a nonstarter, and so
individualism seem trivially true.

77
78 Individualism and Externalism in Cognitive Sciences
The supervenience formulation of individualism says that mental states
supervene on the intrinsic, physical properties of the individual who bears
them. The most important feature of the central relation of supervenience, at least for our purposes, is that it is determinative: According to
the individualist, an individual’s mental states are determined by her intrinsic, physical states. But then it seems that it is individualism that is
a nonstarter, for surely, one might think, there are many environmental
factors that determine what mental states an individual ends up having.

What visual perceptions you have are determined by what’s in front of
you, and what sorts of things you think about is determined, in part, by
what concepts you have been taught – by parents, siblings, peers, and
teachers. So construed, externalism seems trivially true.

Both of these construals of the issue that separates individualists from
externalists about the mind are, of course, caricatures. But I hope they will
be useful caricatures, in several ways. First, the ease with which they can be
derived from each characterization of individualism poses a challenge: to
articulate a version of the issue separating individualists and externalists
that makes more perspicuous why individualism is a substantive and thus
potentially controversial claim about the nature of the mind and how we
should study it. Second, I think that each caricatured objection contains
more than a grain of truth about, respectively, externalism and individualism. And so part of our task in responding to the above challenge in
the next section will be to sift the true from the false in each of these
caricatures.

In section 3, I review the original arguments for externalism provided
by Hilary Putnam and Tyler Burge. Both of these arguments appeal to
claims about intentionality or content, but the issues they raise concern
psychological states in general. Burge concluded his original critique by
saying that the “sense in which man is a social animal runs deeper than
much mainstream philosophy of mind has acknowledged.” In section 4,
I show just how externalism suggests that the social aspects to having a
mind run deeper than a range of influential philosophical views have
allowed.1
If individualism is as entrenched a view in the history of philosophy and
in contemporary analytic philosophy as sections 2–4 imply, then it should
be no surprise that the conclusions from the Putnam-Burge arguments
have been resisted. The remainder of the chapter aims to give the flavor of
this resistance. In section 5, I discuss perhaps the most prevalent response,
one that draws on a distinction between narrow and wide content. The
idea that there is some notion of content immune to the Putnam-Burge
arguments is popular even if problematic. Section 6 explores the prima
facie relationship between individualism, functionalism, and physicalism,
and section 7 reviews and critiques an influential argument for individualism that purports to show that individualism in psychology is mandated
by reflection on the nature of scientific taxonomy more generally.

The chapter as a whole aims to be a self-contained philosophical
primer on individualism about the mind. At its end, we will be in a better
position to lay the foundations for an alternative, externalist conception
of the mind.

2 individualism, taxonomy, and metaphysical
determination
Externalists don’t claim that mental states are somewhere other than in
the head, and individualists don’t think that what is outside the head has
nothing to do with what ends up in the head. The key to understanding
the debate between individualists and externalists about the mind lies in
grasping the notion of determination at its heart.

Individualists and externalists agree that an individual’s environment is
a causal determinant of that individual’s thoughts and thus mind. Agents
causally interact with their world, gathering information about it through
their senses, and through their communicative interactions with others.

Thus, the nature of their minds, in particular what their thoughts are
about, is in part causally determined by the character of their world.

That is, the world is a contributing or efficient cause to the content of
one’s mind, to what one perceives, desires, and thinks about. This is just
to say that the content of one’s mind is not causally isolated from one’s
environment. Separating individualists and externalists is the question of
whether there is some deeper sense in which the nature of the mind is
determined by the character of the individual’s world. It is this “deeper
sense” of world-mind determination that we need to articulate further.

We can approach this issue by extending the brief discussion of the
idea that the content of the mind is in part causally determined by the
agent’s environment to explore the conditions under which a difference
in the world implies a difference in the mind. Individualists hold that this
is so just in case that difference in the world makes some corresponding
change to what occurs inside the boundary of the individual. Externalists
deny this, thus allowing for the possibility that individuals who are identical with respect to all of their intrinsic features could nonetheless have
psychological or mental states with different contents. And, assuming
80 Individualism and Externalism in Cognitive Sciences
that mental states with different contents are ipso facto different types
or kinds of states, this implies that an individual’s intrinsic properties do
not determine or fix that individual’s mental states.

Thus, to state individualism adequately, we need to draw a distinction
between causal and metaphysical determination. Individualists claim, and
externalists deny, that what occurs inside the boundary of an individual
metaphysically determines the nature of that individual’s mental states.

