The individualistic determination thesis, unlike the causal determination
thesis, expresses a view about the nature or essence of mental states, and
identifies a way in which, despite their causal determination by states of
the world, mental states are, according to individualists, autonomous or
independent of the character of the world beyond the individual.

I said in the previous section that the relation of supervenience was
determinative, and we can now see that the appropriate notion of determination is that of metaphysical, rather than causal, determination.

The determining properties – for individualists, the intrinsic, physical
properties of the individual – are called the subvenient or base properties.

Once subvenient or base properties are fixed or held constant across
two or more situations, the supervening properties – in this case, the
individual’s mental properties – are also fixed across those situations.

Many of an individual’s properties, particularly those that are of interest to scientists, supervene on that individual’s intrinsic, physical properties. To take a simplistic example, it is plausible to suppose that your
mass supervenes on the mass of all of the particles in your body. Given
this supposition, it doesn’t matter what else is true or false about you: If
the mass of all the particles in your body is 100 kg, then your mass is also
100 kg. Provided that the mass of all the particles in your body is 100 kg,
it doesn’t matter whether you are on Earth or on Mars, whether you are
stationary or in motion, or whether you are rapidly losing or gaining
particles, your mass is also 100 kg. There is no way to change your mass
from 100 kg that does not also change the mass of all of the particles in
your body. We might say that mass is compositionally or mereologically
determinative: The masses of any physical thing’s components or parts
metaphysically determine its mass.

If you are injected with a liquid that increases your mass by 1 kg, that
action also increases the mass of the particles in your body by a total of
1kg – say, either because of the mass of the particles in the liquid itself, or
because of the way in those particles interact chemically with the particles
already in your body, thus adjusting their number and mass. Alternatively,
if someone removes a part of your body – an arm, a kidney, a piece of
skin – and your mass is subsequently reduced, the mass of all of the particles in your body is reduced by precisely the same amount. At least this
is true provided that a person’s mass supervenes on just the mass of all
of the particles in her body, that is, that mass is mereologically determinative. (Note that the theory of special relativity provides no grounds for
denying this view, since although an object’s mass varies with its velocity,
so too does the mass of its physical parts.)
The idea that mental properties should be assimilated to properties
explored in the physical sciences, such as mass, has provided one powerful reason for thinking that psychology must or should be individualistic.

If the distinction between causal and metaphysical determination shows
what is mistaken about the caricature of individualism that makes externalism appear trivially true, then this assimilation between the mental
and the physical helps to explain the grain of truth in the caricaturized
picture of individualism with which we began. For what is right about
the caricature is that individualists do place an emphasis on the central
role that an individual’s intrinsic, physical properties play in the causal
economy of that individual. This has sometimes been summarized in the
slogan “No mental difference without an intrinsic physical difference.”
That many see such a slogan as derivative from the physicalist slogan
“No difference without a physical difference” points to one perceived
and 7.)
Let us return to the methodological solipsism formulation of individualism to see both why externalists are not committed to denying that
mental states are “in the head,” and why this caricature nonetheless captures something true about externalism. Even though individualism is a
thesis of metaphysical determination, it is also a claim about how psychological states ought to be individuated or taxonomized. This is implicit,
I think, in the adjectives “mental,” “psychological,” or “cognitive,” predicated of states, properties, processes, or events, since to talk of (say)
mental properties is already to talk of properties as being of a certain
kind or type. Thus, although individualists and externalists agree that
mental states are “in the head” – just as they agree that they are causally
determined, in part, by what lies beyond the head – they disagree about
how mental states should be individuated or taxonomized. What is right
about the caricature of externalism, then, is that externalists do think that
what lies beyond the head, what is not “in the head,” is relevant to psychological taxonomy. What psychological kinds an individual instantiates
is not metaphysically determined by what is in the head.

82 Individualism and Externalism in Cognitive Sciences
We can now put together the point about determination with this claim
about taxonomy. Individualism is the view that mental states, qua mental
states, are metaphysically determined by an individual’s intrinsic, physical
properties. The expression “mental states” is used in a general sense,
and encompasses determinate forms of states, properties, processes, and
events that are termed “mental,” including kinds that are motivational,
cognitive, and perceptual.

Individualists are right to think that the cognitive and physical sciences
are subject to similar constraints, but wrong, I shall suggest, about what
those constraints are. Talk of mental states being “in the head” may be a
useful shorthand for the individualistic claim that such states, insofar as
they feature in psychological taxonomies, are metaphysically determined
by an individual’s intrinsic, physical properties. But we should also be wary
of how readily this locational metaphor can mislead us about the nature
of the debate between individualists and externalists.

As a thesis of metaphysical determination, individualism implies that
two individuals identical in their intrinsic respects must have the same
psychological states. The modal aspect to this implication makes supervenience an appropriate concept to use in stating individualism more
precisely. This implication, and indeed the debate over individualism, is
often made more vivid through the fantasy of doppelgangers ¨ , molecule-formolecule identical individuals, and the corresponding fantasy of Twin
Earth. I turn to these dual fantasies next.

3 getting to twin earth: what’s in the head?
Hilary Putnam’s “The Meaning of ‘Meaning’” introduced both fantasies
in the context of a discussion of the meaning of natural language terms.

Putnam was concerned to show that “meaning” does not and cannot
jointly satisfy two theses that it was often taken to satisfy by then prevalent
views of natural language reference: the claim that the meaning of a term
is what determines its reference, and the claim that knowing the meaning
