of a term is simply a matter of being in a particular psychological state.

This latter claim is sometimes glossed by saying that meanings are “in the
head,” and it is an individualistic claim in that it implies that knowledge
of meaning is metaphysically determined by what’s inside the head.

These theses typified descriptive theories of reference, prominent
since Gottlob Frege and Bertrand Russell explicitly formulated them,
according to which the reference of a term is fixed or metaphysically
determined by the descriptions that a speaker attaches to that term.

Such views were central to both ordinary language philosophy and logical empiricism, two encompassing frameworks that had much influence
in English-speaking philosophy throughout the 1950s and 1960s. The
basic idea of descriptive theories of reference is perhaps best conveyed
through an example.2
Suppose that I think of Aristotle as a great, dead philosopher who wrote
a number of important philosophical works, such as the Nicomachean
Ethics, and who was a student of Plato and teacher of Alexander the Great.

These are the descriptions that I associate with the name “Aristotle.”
Then, on a descriptivist view of reference, the reference of my term
“Aristotle” is just the thing in the world that satisfies the various descriptions that I attach to that term: It is the thing in the world that is a great
philosopher, is dead, wrote a number of important philosophical works,
was a student of Plato, and was a teacher of Alexander the Great. Such
descriptivist views of the reference of proper names were the critical focus of Saul Kripke’s influential Naming and Necessity, while in his attack
on this cluster of views and their presuppositions, Putnam focused on
natural kind terms, such as “water” and “tiger.” Both Kripke and Putnam
intended their critiques and the subsequent alternative theory of natural
language reference, the causal theory of reference, to provide another,
general way to think about the relationship between language and the
world. As Gary Ebbs has pointed out, in at least Putnam’s case, this theory was part and parcel of a more wide-ranging critique of the notions
of analyticity, the a priori, and reductionism associated with empiricist
views in metaphysics and the philosophy of science. But let us stay close
to Putnam’s argument in “The Meaning of ‘Meaning’” and draw out its
connection to individualism.3
Consider an ordinary individual, Oscar, who lives on Earth and interacts with water in the ways that most of us do: He drinks it, washes
with it, and sees it falling from the sky as rain. Oscar, who has no special
chemical knowledge about the nature of water, will associate a range of
descriptions with his term “water”: It is a liquid that one can drink, that
is used to wash, and that falls from the sky as rain. On a descriptive view
of reference, these descriptions, what the logician Gottlob Frege called
the sense and Rudolph Carnap the intension of the term, determine the
reference of Oscar’s term “water.” That is, the reference or extension
of Oscar’s term “water” is fixed by the set of descriptions he attaches to
the term as part of his grasp of its sense. And since those descriptions,
so grasped, are “in the head,” natural language reference on this view is
individualistic.4
84 Individualism and Externalism in Cognitive Sciences
To continue Putnam’s argument, now imagine a molecule-for-molecule doppelganger ¨ of Oscar, Oscar*, who lives on a planet just like Earth
in all respects but one: The substance that people drink, wash with, and
see falling from the sky is not water (that is, H2O), but a substance with
a different chemical structure, XYZ. Call this planet “Twin Earth.” This
substance, XYZ, is called “water” on Twin Earth, and Oscar*, as a doppelganger ¨ or twin of Oscar, has the same beliefs about it as Oscar has about
water on Earth. (Recall that Oscar, and thus Oscar* as his twin, have no
special knowledge of the chemical structure of water.) Oscar* believes
that it falls from the sky as rain, is drinkable, can be used for bathing,
is found in rivers and streams – all the things that Oscar believes of water. Oscar and Oscar* associate just the same descriptions with the term
“water”: their term has the same meaning, sense, or intension, where
these are conceived individualistically. On a descriptive theory of reference, since meaning determines reference, their terms “water” should
have the same reference.

But there are several reasons to resist the claim that Oscar and Oscar*
have a term, “water” with a common reference. First, recall that Twin
Earth is introduced as being just like Earth, except that it has another
substance, XYZ, in place of water, that is, H2O. If this is right, then it
is hard to see how Oscar* could come to refer to water, since there is
no water on his planet. Twin Earth has what we might call “twin-water”
or “twater” on it, not water, and it is twater that Oscar* interacts with,
not water. Second, Oscar and Oscar* stand in the same relation to their
respective environments, which suggests a certain parity in their cases.

Given that Oscar’s term “water” refers to or is about water, then Oscar*’s
term “water”refers to or is about twater. Putting these two points together:
If Oscar uses “water” to refer to water because that is the stuff that is in his
local environment, then Oscar should use “water” to refer to twater, for
just the same reason. That implies that Oscar and Oscar* have natural
language terms that differ in their reference. And this is so despite the fact
that their terms agree in their in-the-head meaning. By hypothesis, Oscar
and Oscar* are doppelgangers ¨ , and so are identical in all their intrinsic
properties, and so are identical with respect to what’s“in the head.” Thus,
Putnam argues, the reference of the natural language terms that Oscar
uses is not metaphysically determined by what is in Oscar’s head.

Putnam’s target was a tradition of thinking about language that treated
the meanings of natural language terms and language more generally in
ways that supposed that the world beyond the individual language user did
not exist. With a focus on natural kind terms, and the broader, naturalistic
alternative that Putnam saw himself as offering, Putnam’s views here became associated with scientific and metaphysical realism, whereby the
referents of those terms, natural kinds, had underlying essences that
were discovered a posteriori through scientific methodology. Thus, part
of the interest that Putnam’s views have generated, and some of the controversies they have engendered, turn on these broader features of his
views.5
Since Putnam’s chief point is one about natural language terms and the
relationship of their semantics to what’s inside the head, one needs at least
to extend his reasoning from language to thought to arrive at a position
that denies individualism about the mind itself. Indeed, there are various
points at which Putnam himself seems to presuppose individualism about
the mind in making his case against descriptive theories of reference. For
example, Putnam says, in reference to a doppelganger ¨ of his whose word
“elm” refers not to elms but to beech trees that “[i]t is absurd to think
