his psychological state is one bit different from mine: yet he ‘means’ beech
when he says‘elm’ and I‘mean’elm when I say elm. Cut the pie any way you
like, ‘meanings’ just ain’t in the head.” It is precisely the view that Putnam
labels as absurd here, however, that is expressed by anti-individualists
about the mind.6
The term “individualism” itself, and the development of a series of
thought experiments that made a case against individualism and which in
many ways paralleled Putnam’s Twin Earth thought experiment, were introduced by Tyler Burge in “Individualism and the Mental.” Burge identi-
fied individualism as an overall conception of the mind prevalent in modern philosophical thinking at least since Descartes in the mid-seventeenth
century, and argued that our common sense psychological framework for
explaining behavior, our folk psychology, was not individualistic. Importantly, Burge was explicit in making a case against individualism that did
not turn on perhaps controversial claims about the semantics of natural
kind terms. He developed his case against individualism using agents with
thoughts about arthritis, sofas, and contracts, and so his argument did
not presuppose any type of scientific essentialism about natural kinds.

Like Putnam’s argument, however, Burge’s argument does presuppose
some views about natural language understanding.7
The most central of these is that we can and do have incomplete understanding of many of the things that we have thoughts about and for
which we have natural language terms. Given that, it is possible for an
individual to have thoughts that turn on this incomplete understanding,
such as the thought that one has arthritis in one’s thigh muscle. Arthritis
86 Individualism and Externalism in Cognitive Sciences
is a disease only of the joints, or as we might put it,“arthritis”in our speech
community applies only to a disease of the joints. Consider an individual,
Bert, with the thought that he would express by saying “I have arthritis in
my thigh.” In the actual world, this is a thought about arthritis; it is just
that Bert has an incomplete or partially mistaken view of the nature of
arthritis, and so expresses a false belief with this sentence. But now imagine Bert as living in a different speech community, one in which the term
“arthritis” does apply to a disease both of the joints and of other parts of
the body, including the thigh. In that speech community, Bert’s thought
would not involve the sort of incomplete understanding that it involves
in the actual world; in fact, his thought in such a world would be true.

Given the differences in the two speech communities, it seems that an
individual with thoughts about what he calls “arthritis” will have different
thoughts in the two communities. In the actual world, Bert has thoughts
about arthritis. In the counterfactual world he has thoughts about some
other disease, what we might refer to as“tharthritis”to distinguish it from
the disease that we have in the actual world.

In principle, we could suppose that Bert himself is identical across the
two contexts, that is, that he is identical in all intrinsic respects. Yet we attribute thoughts with different contents to Bert, and seem to do so solely
because of features of the language community in which he is located.

Thus, the content of one’s thoughts, and so how we taxonomize those
thoughts as intentional states, is not metaphysically determined by the
intrinsic properties of the individual. And again taking a difference in
the content of two thoughts to imply a difference between the thoughts
themselves, this implies in turn that thoughts themselves are not individuated individualistically.

One contrast sometimes drawn between the externalist views of
Putnam and Burge is to characterize Putnam’s view as a form of physical
externalism and Burge’s view as a form of social externalism. According
to Putnam, it is the character of the physical world – the nature of water itself – that, in part, metaphysically determines the content of one’s
mind, while according to Burge it is the character of the social world –
the nature of one’s linguistic community – that does so. While this difference may serve as a useful reminder of one way in which these two views
differ, we should also keep in mind a social aspect to Putnam’s view of
natural language that I have not yet mentioned: his division of linguistic
labor. What allows individuals to use natural kind terms to refer to objects
in the world despite those individuals not necessarily having identifying
descriptions, according to Putnam, is their ability to borrow reference
from others, experts, who are able to reliably pick out those referents
through their knowledge. Important to both Burge’s and Putnam’s views
is the idea that language users and psychological beings depend and rely
on one another in ways that are reflected in our everyday, common sense
ways of thinking about language and thought. Thus, there is a social aspect to the nature of meaning and thought on both views, and this is in
part what justifies the appropriateness of the label anti-individualism for
each of them.8
I close this section with a parenthetical observation that raises one issue
for further thought. The contrast between the individual and the social is
built into the debate between individualists and externalists. This contrast
takes different forms in the cognitive, biological, and social sciences, but it
remains central to influential views in all three. We might wonder just why,
whether there is a theoretically illuminating account of the distinction
itself, and why it has such ubiquitous appeal in the fragile sciences.

4 the social aspect to having a mind
In retrospect, Putnam’s conclusions about natural language meaning
should have been no real surprise since there is obviously a social dimension to language. While the fact that language is used in a social context,
and that one of its chief functions is to communicate between individuals or groups of individuals, have rarely been completely ignored in the
philosophy of language and cognitive science, a range of dominant views
about language have, however, downplayed these aspects of language and
treated them derivatively.

For example, Paul Grice had proposed that we understand what a
speaker means by an utterance in terms of a complex set of intentions
that that speaker has, and that we then understand what a sentence means
in terms of this notion of speaker meaning. Part of the complexity to a
speaker’s intention was that it was an intention to effect a change in the
mental states of one or more hearers. Thus, there clearly is a communicative aspect to Grice’s proposal. But like descriptivism about reference, this
is an account of meaning given primarily in terms of what happens in the
head of a given speaker, with shared, interpersonal meaning – what Grice
called sentence meaning – analyzed in terms of individual speaker meaning. Thus, as Burge pointed out in “Individualism and the Mental,” the
Gricean program in semantics is individualistic. The same general point
holds of a range of other influential views of natural language: for example, David Lewis’s account of convention, Noam Chomsky’s conception of
88 Individualism and Externalism in Cognitive Sciences
linguistics, and early attempts to develop natural language understanding
programs in artificial intelligence.9
Although I have emphasized the similarities between the externalist
