arguments of Putnam and Burge, the corresponding moral that can be
drawn from Burge’s argument – that there is a social dimension to having
a mind – remains striking, even in retrospect. This is so not only because
one might think that mental states do not primarily serve a communicative function, but also because the very enterprise of understanding the
complexities of the mind directs us inside the head. I want to point to
two distinct features of minds and how they have been thought about to
illustrate this.

First, the cognitive sciences have developed an elaborate conception
of cognition as a form of computation. In what has become known as
“classical” cognitive science, the focus here has been on the specific algorithms governing state-to-state transitions between internal, mental symbols. On this conception, any social aspect to cognition would need to
be secondary or derivative in some way, since computation itself is fundamentally asocial. This asociality assumption would also seem to be shared
by connectionist variations on the computational theme, whereby cognition is at bottom the adjustment of connection weights between idealized,
neurally inspired nodes. Likewise, the development of computational
techniques within cognitive neuroscience, from single-cell computation
to computation in relatively large-scale units, such as columns and modules, has not provided any reason to give up this assumption. As a kind
of computation, cognition is not social at all.

Second, we are conscious of many of our mental states. There is something it is like to have them, a phenomenology to our mental lives that is
“had,” that is experienced, from a particular perspective, that of the first
person. If we focus not on the intentionality of mental states but on their
phenomenology, there seems less room for an externalist – let alone a
social – dimension to mentality. There is simply an asymmetry between
how I know about my own mental life and how I find out about those of
others, one that makes it difficult to see how externalism could be true
of that part of mentality of which we are conscious. We are intimate with
some of our own mental states, and have a knowledge of them whose
directness and noninferential nature seem hard to reconcile with the
idea that such states are metaphysically determined by factors beyond
the head, including social factors. Indeed, our first-person knowledge
of the mind has been thought to be incompatible with externalism in
general.10
Other aspects of our conception of minds, however, are more conducive to the claim that the mind is itself social in nature. The first of
these is the idea that cognition is situated or embedded in a particular social environment. The social embeddedness of thought is apparent both
in Putnam’s appeal to the division of linguistic labor and Burge’s reliance
on incomplete understanding, and some work in the cognitive sciences
has adopted this sort of view of cognition from a more general and developed interest in embedded cognition. Work on embedded or situation
cognition has often focused on how individuals become tightly coupled to
their physical (rather than their social) environments, concentrating on
the role of the physical environment in enhancing or even constituting
individual performance. But other people and the artifacts, institutions,
practices, and interactions they both create and inherit are the most significant feature of any individual’s environment for her mental life, a
point being slowly taken up within some areas of the cognitive sciences.11
A second way in which sociality has been thought to permeate the
psychological is via the idea that the mental is normative. The source
of this normativity is the social world: from interpersonal relationships,
to institutional roles, conventions, and institutions themselves. Ordinary
folk psychological ascriptions carry with them normative and not just
descriptive implications, those concerning justification, rationality, and
appropriateness of what those states are about. This normative dimension to the mental has been recognized in the idea that mental states
provide reasons for acting, and it forms the backbone of interpretationist views of folk psychology, such as those of Donald Davidson and Daniel
Dennett. These discussions predate, and have been largely orthogonal
to, the individualism-externalism debate.12
Others have made a more direct connection between these two issues,
normativity and externalism. Burge himself has argued for externalism
via an appeal to the normativity of perception and the general idea of intellectual norms. And normative requirements have been taken by some
to provide the basis for distinguishing between simple intentionality and
truly thoughtful intentionality of the type that human beings possess.

Philip Pettit, for example, has argued that rule following is one thing
that distinguishes true thinkers from merely intentional creatures, and
that rule following requires what Pettit calls an ethocentric conception of
thought, one which views thought as involving activity in an interpersonal,
social world.13
It is in what we might call the “Pittsburgh school” of thought, rooted in
Wilfrid Sellars’ classic attack on the Myth of the Given, that links between
90 Individualism and Externalism in Cognitive Sciences
the normativity of the mental and externalism about the mind have
been forged most thoroughly, particularly in the work of John McDowell,
Robert Brandom, and John Haugeland. What these views share, and what
allows them to carve a path from normativity to externalism, is the idea
that in order to have at least certain kinds of meaningful, content-laden,
intentional states one must be subject to rules, standards, and conventions, where these are not metaphysically determined by intrinsic facts
about the bearer of those states. Recognizing the normative dimension
to the mental takes one beyond the individual and into the social.14
5 narrow and wide content
Thus far, I have barely paused to register the various twists and turns
to the debate over individualism in psychology. But there is one twist
that can’t be missed: the distinction between narrow and wide content.

One intuitive response to the initial Putnam-Burge arguments against
individualism has been to concede that while there is a sense in which
even doppelgangers ¨ can have mental states with different content, there is
an equally important sense in which they must have mental states with the
same content. That content, content shared by doppelgangers ¨ no matter
how different their environments, is narrow content.

We can use Putnam’s own example to illustrate what narrow content is,
and why we might insist on its existence and importance. While we might
distinguish between the meaning of Oscar’s term “water” and Oscar*’s
term “water” (which we designate with “twater” in part to highlight its
distinct extension), we could equally ascribe a common, shared meaning to their terms “water,” one neutral between H2O and XYZ. Precisely
because there is so little difference between Oscar’s term “water” and
Oscar*’s term “water,” it is plausible to view those terms, even if not
strictly identical, as sharing so extensive a common core of meaning that
we would be overlooking something important were we simply to treat
them as semantically independent terms. Putting this in terms of the psychological states that Oscar and Oscar* are in, we can say that although
there is some difference between the psychological ascriptions we would
make for each – those that employ a notion of wide content – there is also
much intentional psychology that is shared between Oscar and Oscar*.
