
In fact, there is much shared in their intentional psychology even when
we are considering their thoughts about“water.”In order to express these
common, intentional psychological states, we need some notion of content that Oscar and Oscar* share. That is, we need some notion of narrow
content. Whatever else it is, narrow content is the type of content that
physical twins must share, however different their environments.

In introducing narrow content in this way, I have presupposed that the
Twin Earth thought experiments have shown that Oscar and Oscar*’s psychological states differ in their propositional content. More generally, I
am assuming that our ordinary, pretheoretical notion of propositional
content, of intentionality, is not narrow but wide. This is certainly the
received view both of what the Twin Earth arguments show and of intentionality, but it will pay to spell out just why.

The intentional content of so-called folk psychological states, such as
belief and desire, is what is specified by the that-clause of an ascription
of propositional attitudes. For example, when we say that
Peter thinks that wolves are placental
the content of Peter’s thought is that wolves are placental. This is what his
thought is about, what it represents as being the case. Peter’s thought
is about wolves, that is, he has some internal representation that refers
to wolves. At least when we are considering folk psychology, there is no
intrinsic feature of the representation itself that makes the corresponding
thought one about wolves. In fact, note that we can understand what
the content of Peter’s thought is in this example although I have said
nothing at all about the nature of the representation in and of itself.

Even supposing that Peter’s thought is instantiated in Peter in virtue of
there being a token of the sentence “wolves are placental” inscribed in
Mentalese in a place in Peter’s brain that we can call his “thought box,”
this fact about Peter’s internal organization is not sufficient for Peter’s
thought to be about wolves being placental. Someone else with just that
inscription in her thought box could have a distinct thought were facts
outside of Peter other than they are. In particular, this could be so were
“mere” social facts, facts about our communal conventions for the use
of natural language terms, different. The claim that this is true not just
of particular in-the-head facts but of all of them considered together –
they do not suffice to fix the contents of one’s thoughts – is another way
to express the conclusions drawn from the Putnam and Burge thought
experiments.

The intentionality of folk psychological states seems intuitively to lie in
some sort of relation between what is inside the head and what is outside of
it. It is plausible to think that this relationship is, broadly construed, causal
in nature. It is wolves that Peter thinks about because wolves are what
causally impinge on Peter either through his own direct sense experience
92 Individualism and Externalism in Cognitive Sciences
of wolves or through his causal location in a linguistic community. This is
not to imply that being in such a causal relationship is sufficient for one to
have thoughts about wolves, but that these causal relationships are partial
metaphysical determiners of the intentionality of one’s thoughts. And
this shows that folk psychological content is wide, since individuals who
differ in this beyond-the-head relation may have thoughts with different
contents, no matter how similar they are in in-the-head respects.

Consider now the claim that there is, in addition, a notion of narrow
content to be found lurking in folk psychology. The intuition that the
above appeal to the twins Oscar and Oscar* drew on was that their internal identity does generate some sort of intentional identity or similarity,
even if there is also a respect in which they have thoughts with different
contents. One way to express this is to say that their “water” thoughts
share a narrow content, even though they differ in their wide content.

There are three motivations for the notion of narrow content, none of
which presupposes individualism about the mind, and each of which has
served as the basis for a distinct proposal about what narrow content is.

The first concedes that individual representations do not suffice to fix
content but challenges the generalization of this point to cover all individual representations considered together. That is, once one considers
not just the intrinsic features of a given mental token but its relations to
other mental tokens, the claim that what’s inside the head doesn’t fix any
notion of content loses its plausibility. This is because there can be, and
typically is, a rich causal structure to mental representations that begins
and ends in the head, a point that can be drawn from the functionalist view of mental states. For example, Oscar and Oscar* both have a
mental token, “water,” that is causally related to the same perceptual and
mental inputs, and the same mental and behavioral outputs, and this is
sufficient for those tokens to share some type of content. The proposal
that the narrow content of a mental state is its narrow conceptual role
is a development of this idea, an idea also developed independently as
procedural semantics in early work in artificial intelligence.

The second motivation reaches back to the origins of the antiindividualistic perspective on mental content in the philosophy of language to recognize two aspects to the meaning of natural language terms
and the close relationship between them. Consider the term “I.” The
referent of a spoken token of the word “I” is the speaker, and that is
who is meant by that utterance; the referent of “you” is the person being
spoken to. But “I” also has a common meaning when different people
utter it, as does “you”: “I” refers to the speaker, and “you” refers to the
hearer. Thus, when two people say to each other “I love you,” there is
clearly some sense in which they have said exactly the same thing to one
another, and we need some notion of content that captures this. What
these utterances and their constituents share is their narrow content, this
being a sort of rule – such as that “I” refers to the speaker/writer – that is
then contextualized to derive the referent of a particular token utterance
or inscription. This has generated the proposal that narrow content is a
function from contexts to truth conditions: Take the narrow content of a
mental state, add a beyond-the-head context, and one arrives at its (wide)
propositional content.

The third motivation is the idea that the beyond-the-head differences
between Oscar and Oscar* make absolutely no difference to how the
two see the world: Their worlds are phenomenologically identical. But
how the world appears to one is mediated not just by any old internal
