machinery but by content-laden internal machinery, such as concepts
and ideas, thoughts and beliefs. If physical twins are phenomenologically identical, then they must be intentionally identical in some sense,
and the corresponding notion of content must be narrow, not wide.

This has given rise to the idea that narrow content is phenomenological
content.15
These various proposals provide a strategy for limiting the significance
of the Putnam-Burge arguments against individualism since they suggest that there is no strict incompatibility between an individualistic and
an intentional psychology. Thus, one can concede the conclusions that
Putnam and Burge draw but rely on the presence of some notion of narrow content either to continue with content-laden psychology as it has
developed to date, or to look for alternative ways to connect computational and neuroscientific approaches to the mind with our existing folk
psychology.

6 functionalism, physicalism, and individualism
For many philosophers of mind, individualism has been attractive because of a perceived connection between that view and physicalism and
functionalism in the philosophy of mind, both of which have been widely
accepted over the last thirty years. Physicalism or materialism has been
expressed in various ways, perhaps most commonly in terms of the notion of supervenience that we have already met: All facts, properties,
processes, events, and things supervene on the physical facts, properties,
processes, events, and things, as they are posited in elementary physics.

94 Individualism and Externalism in Cognitive Sciences
This ontological formulation of physicalism is often accompanied by an
explanatory thesis, which states that physical explanations are, in some
sense, the ultimate explanations for any phenomenon whatsoever.

Individualism has been thought to be linked to physicalism since it implies, via the supervenience formulation, that there is no psychological
difference without a corresponding difference in the intrinsic, physical
states of the individual. Those rejecting individualism have sometimes
been charged with endorsing a form of dualism about the mind, or making a mystery of mental causation by ignoring the causal powers that
mental states have. Causation between mental states and events is ultimately causation between an individual’s physical states and events, and
scientific taxonomies of mental states must respect this feature of mental causation. Connecting this up with the methodological formulations
that have had influence in cognitive science itself, individualism has been
claimed to be a minimal constraint on arriving at psychological explanations that locate the mind suitably in the physical world, a psychology that
taxonomizes its entities by their causal powers.

Individualists themselves disagree about what this implies about the
substantive nature of psychology. For example, Jerry Fodor thinks that
this minimal constraint provides a way of seeing how folk psychology in
particular and the notion of mental content more generally, have a respectable place in the cognitive sciences. At one point Fodor held that this
in turn required cognitive science to use a notion of narrow content, although in subsequent work he has suggested that ordinary propositional
content was adequate for the tasks of theory construction in the cognitive sciences. Stephen Stich, by contrast, thinks that individualism implies
that cognitive science should jettison both folk psychology and the notion
of mental content altogether, arguing that content should be eliminated
from psychology, in part because of the conflict between the minimal
constraint of individualism and the wide nature of intentionality. Both
of Fodor’s positions suggest that individualistic approaches to psychology
will be recognizable descendants of current work in the cognitive sciences
that incorporates and builds on folk psychology. Stich’s view, by contrast,
implies that an individualistic cognitive science will be divorced from
folk-contaminated research traditions, being fashioned instead from the
cloth of computational intelligence or cognitive neuroscience.16
Functionalism is the view that psychological states and processes
should be individuated by their causal or functional roles, that is, by their
place within the overall causal economy of the organism. It has been common to suppose that these functional or causal roles are individualistic.

Functionalism was introduced in the 1960s as a way of understanding the
relationship between mental and physical states that meshed with two
perspectives on minds then nascent but that have had a lasting effect on
how philosophers think about the mind.

The first was the rise of the computer metaphor and particularly the
analogy between the distinctions between software or program and hardware, on the one hand, and mind and brain, on the other. Mental states
were not strictly identical to brain states but involved some sort of abstraction from those states, in much the way that computer programs were not
strictly identical to electronic states of computers but abstractions from
them. Functionalism cohered with the computer metaphor because it
offered a causal understanding of the mind that also seemed to characterize the less mysterious relationship between programs and computers.

Functionalism also provided the conceptual underpinnings for the very
idea of artificial intelligence.

The second was the related desire for an account of the mind that
made it perspicuous how creatures very much unlike us in many respects
could nonetheless share a mental life very much like our own. This desire
was typically expressed as the requirement that an account of the mind
must allow mental states to be multiply realized, that is, instantiated even
when the underlying physical realizers vary. The most attention-grabbing,
putative cases of multiple realization were those where the physical realizers for mental states were extremely different – humans versus possible
silicon-based Martians. But there was also a concern for biological differences across species, as well as physical differences in a given individual
over time.

Functionalism seemed perfect for an account of the mind that meshed
with these two perspectives, since what mattered for functional identity
was not the nature of the physical stuff but, rather, the way in which that
stuff was structured or organized. Again, the computer metaphor was apt
here: The very same program could be instantiated on physically quite different machines. Crucial to program identity is functional organization;
likewise for minds.

Functionalism has been understood in various ways, but the two ways
most prevalent in cognitive science – in terms of the notion of computation, and in terms of the idea of analytical decomposition – both lend
themselves to an individualistic reading. Computational processes, conceived as operating solely on the syntactic properties of mental states,
have been plausibly thought to be individualistic. And it is natural to view
analytical decomposition as beginning with a psychological capacity, such
96 Individualism and Externalism in Cognitive Sciences
as memory or depth perception, and seeking the intrinsic properties of
the organism that create and constitute that capacity.

7 the appeal to causal powers
Appeals to an entity’s causal powers are prominent in discussions of the
relationship between individualism and physicalism, and they are at the
