core of an influential and persistent argument for individualism first offered by Jerry Fodor. Although criticisms of the argument seem to me
decisive in showing the argument to be fatally flawed, the argument itself taps into a cluster of intuitions that run through deep philosophical
waters. Perhaps for this reason the argument has continued to inspire
individualistic appeals to causal powers, despite acknowledged problems
with Fodor’s original statement of it.17
The basic version of the argument itself is easy to state. Taxonomy or
individuation in the sciences in general satisfies a generalized version of
individualism about psychology: Sciences taxonomize the entities they
posit or discover by the causal powers that those entities have. Psychology
and the cognitive sciences should be no exception here. But the causal
powers of anything supervene on that thing’s intrinsic, physical properties. Thus, science taxonomizes entities by properties that supervene
on the intrinsic, physical properties of those entities. Science, and so
psychology, is individualistic.

One way to identify the problem with this argument is to ask what it
is that makes the first premise about scientific taxonomy in general true.

Given the naturalistic turn supposedly embraced by those working in contemporary philosophical psychology, one would think that support here
would come from an examination of actual taxonomic practice across the
sciences. However, once one does turn to look at these practices, it is easy
to find a variety of sciences that do not taxonomize “by causal powers”:
They instead individuate their kinds relationally, where often historical
relations determine kind membership. Examples often cited here include
species in evolutionary biology, which are individuated phylogenetically
(and so historically), and continents in geology, whose causal powers are
pretty much irrelevant to their individuation as continents.

The problem is particularly acute in the context of this argument for
individualism, since a further premise in the argument states that a thing’s
causal powers supervene on that thing’s intrinsic properties. Thus, one
cannot simply save the first premise in the argument by stipulating that individuation in these sciences is “by causal powers,” using some extended
or nonstandard sense of that notion. For example, Fodor has acknowledged that scientific taxonomy is often relational, and his attempt to
show how his argument accommodates this fact involves precisely this
sort of broadening of what it means to individuate “by causal powers.” If
one operates with an extended notion of individuation by causal powers,
however, then “causal powers” no longer supervene on an individual’s
intrinsic, physical properties. In adjusting the sense of “causal powers” to
accommodate relational taxonomies in science, we make the other chief
premise in the argument, that causal powers supervene on intrinsic, physical properties, false. We can take causal powers to be intrinsic properties,
in which case they do supervene on what’s inside an individual, but then
the claim about scientific taxonomy being “by causal powers” is false.

It is for this reason that the argument from causal powers equivocates
on the crucial term “causal powers.” I have argued elsewhere that this
equivocation permeates all versions of the argument. I also think that
we have reason to be skeptical about views of explanation and taxonomy
that place more weight on the distinction between intrinsic and relational
properties than it can bear.18
The cluster of intuitions that persists despite an acknowledgment
that the argument itself is flawed in something like this way revolve
around the idea that an entity’s causal powers are central to both the place
of that entity in the causal nexus and in how that entity is or should be
taxonomized. To get from this somewhat vague idea to the individualistic
claim that scientific taxonomy is “by causal powers,” one has to establish
some sort of asymmetry between properties that are metaphysically determined by what lies within the boundary of the individual, and those,
like relational properties, that are not. For example, one could claim that
only an entity’s intrinsic properties feature in causal laws governing that
thing’s behavior, or that the causal efficacy that any relational property
has depends only on the intrinsic properties of the entities it relates.

Such views are part of the smallist legacy of corpuscularianism that I
identified at the end of Chapter 1. The basic problem with them is very
much that with the claim they are invoked to defend: That once one turns
to taxonomic and explanatory practice in a range of sciences, one finds
many examples in which the putative asymmetries – between causal powers and other properties, or between intrinsic and relational properties –
do not exist. This is a developed form of the prima facie general problem that, I claimed in Chapter 1, smallist views in metaphysics and the
philosophy of science face, and we will encounter it again in the next two
chapters in critiquing the standard view of realization.

98 Individualism and Externalism in Cognitive Sciences
Nonetheless, the intuition that individualism does articulate a constraint for the explanation of cognition that sciences more generally satisfy, one that would make for a physicalistically respectable psychology,
persists. My view is that this intuition itself seriously underestimates the
diversity in taxonomic and explanatory practice across the sciences, and
that it simply needs to be given up. Attempts to revitalize this sort of
argument for individualism proceed by making the sorts of a priori assumptions about the nature of scientific taxonomies and explanations
that are reminiscent of the generalized, rational reconstructions of scientific practice that governed logical positivist views of science. This should
sound alarm bells for any self-professed naturalist.

There is one difference between individualists and externalists about
psychology emerging from reflection on the argument from causal powers worth keeping in mind as we think about the individual in the fragile
sciences more generally. Individualism, especially as it has been articulated by those proposing or defending this particular argument, is touted
as a global thesis about individuation in psychology that follows from an
even more general thesis about individuation in science. Externalism,
especially as defended by those attacking the argument from causal powers, is accompanied by a more pluralistic view of psychological taxonomy.

This view allows some place for the causal powers of individuals but also
sees scientific (and so psychological) taxonomy in many cases as being
determined by an entity’s relational and even historical properties. These
individuative theses carry with them normative visions about what good
and bad scientific taxonomy, and thus explanation, is like in particular sciences. In psychology, individualism implies that folk psychology,
together with the vast tracts of psychology proper that incorporate or
develop folk psychology – including much of social psychology, cognitive developmental psychology, and work on decision making – involves
a problematic taxonomy of mental states. It also implies that the way to
repair such problematic taxonomies is to modify them to reconcile them
with individualism. Hence, the narrow content program. Externalists are
likely to view scientific taxonomies and scientific explanation as being
sensitive to a range of factors, and to be skeptical about the prospects for
any recipelike prescription regarding proper scientific taxonomy of the
sort that individualists propose.

