8 metaphysics and the fragile sciences
What of the more general, putative connection between physicalism and
individualism? If the denial of individualism could be shown to entail
the denial of a plausibly general version of physicalism, then externalism
would itself be in real trouble. But like the individualist’s appeal to causal
powers and scientific taxonomy, the move from the general intuitions
that motivate such an argument to the argument itself will likely always
prove problematic. For example, externalists can respect the physicalistic slogan “no psychological difference without a physical difference”
because the relevant physical differences lie beyond the boundary of the
individual; attempts to refine this slogan (for example, no psychological difference without an intrinsic physical difference) are likely either
to beg the question against the externalist, or to invoke a construal of
physicalism that is at least as controversial as individualism itself.

Externalists have not been as attentive to the metaphysical notions
at the core of contemporary materialism as they could have been, however. When they have so attended they have often opposed prevalent
physicalist or materialist views without offering a substantive, alternative
metaphysics of the mind. Tyler Burge is the most prominent externalist
of whom this could be said. In his original discussion of the implications
of individualism for related views about the mind, Burge claimed that
the rejection of individualism implied the rejection of widely accepted
token-token identity theories of the mind. In much of his later work,
he has also pointed to inadequacies both in arguments from physicalist assumptions to individualism and to materialist conceptions of the
metaphysics of mind. At the same time, Burge has emphasized the need
to focus on explanatory practice in order to properly understand metaphysical issues, such as the nature of mental causation, saying that such
reflection “motivates less confidence in materialist metaphysics than is
common in North American philosophy.”19
The most underdiscussed, relevant metaphysical notion is that of realization. The next two chapters offer an extended treatment of the concept of realization. They will not only prove useful in our current focus
on individualism in psychology, but also in thinking about the role of the
individual in the fragile sciences more generally.

5
Metaphysics, Mind, and Science
Two Views of Realization
1 the metaphysics of mind and the fragile sciences
It is commonplace for materialist philosophers of mind to talk of mental
states as being realized in states of the brain. So much so, that realization
has become part of the very framework in terms of which many conceptualize the metaphysics of mind. However, while the concept of realization
has been invoked in the philosophy of mind and psychology for over forty
years, it has only recently become the subject of direct philosophical theorizing. Implicit in the literature on the metaphysics of mind is the idea that
realization is a general relation, rather than one invoked solely to answer
the mind-body problem. In this chapter, I shall argue that making this
assumption explicit provides reason to rethink the concept of realization.

By the end of this chapter, I hope to have shown how the metaphysical
foundations of the cognitive sciences are intertwined with broader metaphysical and methodological issues in other parts of the fragile sciences.

Psychologists and cognitive neuroscientists do not, for the most part,
talk of realization, but of the neural correlates, or of the neural mechanisms
for psychological functions and capacities. Cognitive capacities are localized in states of the brain. It is part of philosophical lore that such
talk is loose-speak for the more metaphysically loaded discussions within
the philosophy of mind cast in terms of supervenience and realization.

This lore is what justifies the sense that philosophical discussions of the
metaphysics of mind are continuous with and contribute to the cognitive
sciences, even though one does not hear “realization” in the mouths of
cognitive scientists themselves. It is part of the self-image of naturalistic
philosophy of mind.

100
Challenging this self-image is no part of my aim in this chapter, though
developing how I think realization should be conceptualized requires
some discussion of the network of concepts to which realization is related, including those of mechanism and localization within the cognitive
sciences. Having spent the core of the chapter discussing realization in
general, I shall conclude it by returning to neural realization. I begin with
a brief history of how realization came to be so central to the metaphysics
of mind.

2 realization within the philosophy of mind
Contemporary views of realization in the philosophy of mind can be
traced to Hilary Putnam’s use of the notion in the context of his appeal to
Turing machines in discussing the mind-body problem. Putnam argued
that the relationship between mental and physical states should be no
more puzzling (and no more interesting) than the relationship between
the abstract states of a given Turing machine and the structural states
of the device realizing that Turing machine. Putnam drew a distinction
between the logical description of a Turing machine and the physical
states that realize the states to which that description refers, the idea
being that we see mental states as realized by physical states of the brain
in just this sense.

Accompanying this idea were two claims that have had far-reaching
consequences for how philosophers have thought about the mind over
the last forty years: first, that systems adequately characterized by Turing
machine descriptions can be multiply realized by physical states; and second, that there are no significant barriers to identifying mental states
with brain states. Within a few years, the first of these ideas, that of the
multiple realizability of mental states, had become a central reason for rejecting the second of them, the mind-brain identity thesis, largely through
Putnam’s own influence. Thus arose the functionalist view of the mind
that, despite its critics (including a later timeslice of Putnam himself), has
survived as the dominant “ism” in contemporary philosophy of mind.1
With the rise of functionalism, the claim that mental states are realized
in physical states of the brain became part of the received wisdom on the
mind-body relationship. Indeed, the concept of realization, particularly
that of multiple realization, is well-entrenched in the articulation, explanation, and defense of nonreductionist forms of physicalism. Yet perhaps
the most sustained discussion of realization itself, that of Jaegwon Kim,
102 Individualism and Externalism in Cognitive Sciences
advocates reductionism about the mind on the basis of what Kim thinks
is a proper understanding of the metaphysics of realization. The dissonance here derives in part from the neglect of the concept of realization
that I mentioned in the opening paragraph, a point that Terence Horgan
observed in a “state of the art” review of the concept of supervenience
for the journal Mind over a decade ago.2
