In this respect, at least, the state of the art has changed only very
recently. My read on the current state of the art is that the standard
view of realization, shared by reductionists and nonreductionist alike, is
deeply flawed, and that there exists a general alternative to that view,
which accords a central place to the idea that realization is essentially
and irreducibly context sensitive.

3
3 a sketch of two views of realization
As a way of outlining the chief contrast between these two views of realization, I begin with a first approximation of what I take to be the standard
view of realization as used in the philosophy of mind. While there is a
recognition both of realization as the (two-place) relation that holds between mental and physical states, and of realizations as the physical states
that occupy the realizer place in this relation, it is the latter of these that
has been the focus of discussion. Intrinsic, physical states of individuals –
more particularly, of the central nervous systems of individuals – are the
physical realizations of an individual’s mental states, and these realizers
are metaphysically sufficient for the presence of the states they realize.

This is what makes realization a metaphysically robust relation simultaneously suitable and problematic for underwriting an account of mental
causation: Suitable because metaphysical sufficiency would seem to have
the strength to underwrite an account of mental causation; and problematic because, so-construed, physical realizer states, themselves being physical, seem to leave no room for distinctly mental causation. Thus, while
the intuitions about psychological explanations generated by the PutnamBurge thought experiments that we recounted in Chapter 4 may indicate
ways in which our concept of the mental is sensitive to beyond-the-head
factors, such as the nature of the physical environment or facts about one’s
social location, a proper understanding of the metaphysics of realization
points one to an individualistic or internalist view of mental states.

By contrast, the view of realization that I shall propose in this chapter,
and articulate and defend at greater length in the next, takes the contextsensitive character of mental states to be inherent to their nature, since
realization itself is a context-sensitive notion. More poignantly, the claim
at the core of the standard view of realization – that realizers are metaphysically sufficient for the properties or states that they realize – drives
one to this view. This presents those adopting the standard notion of realization with a dilemma: Either give up or soften this claim of sufficiency
(but at the expense of a range of further physicalist claims), or admit that
realization, and so the metaphysics of the mental, is ineliminably context
sensitive. Either way, some widely held physicalist views need to be revised
or rejected.

In the next section, I offer a more rounded characterization of the
standard view of realization that brings out more explicitly two theses at
the heart of that view. This will make my chief objection to the standard
view easy to state and set the scene for an exploration of some contextsensitive alternatives to it.

4 the standard view (i): realizers as
metaphysically sufficient
A widespread view amongst physicalists in the philosophy of mind, whatever their other differences, is that realizers satisfy what I shall call the
metaphysical sufficiency thesis:
Metaphysical Sufficiency Thesis: Realizers are metaphysically sufficient for the
properties or states they realize.

I want to say something about why this thesis is implicit in standard
conceptions of realization, particularly those used in the philosophy of
mind.4
One reason is historical. As materialists came to be influenced by the
way in which the computer metaphor suggested that mental states were
multiply realized in physical states, rather than strictly identical to those
states, the claim that physical states were metaphysically necessary and
sufficient for particular mental states, appropriate when considering an
identity theory, was weakened to one of sufficiency only.

A second reason is that many statements of what it means for mental
states to be realized by physical states presuppose or imply this claim. For
example, it is common to think of realization as a relation of determination (of mental states by physical states), and the sufficiency thesis is at
least a necessary condition for such determination. Also, in explaining
the one-many relationship between mental and physical states allowed
by the notion of multiple realization, it is common to point out not only
104 Individualism and Externalism in Cognitive Sciences
that this is not to be confused with the claim that there is a many-one relationship between mental and physical states, but that such a possibility
would call physicalism itself into question. This possibility, that of emergent realization, that is, of a physical realizer for a given mental property
that could realize some other mental property were the world different
in various ways, is precisely what is ruled out by the sufficiency thesis,
because such realizations would not in and of themselves determine the
properties they realize.

A third reason is that the sufficiency thesis is needed to make sense of
many of the positions that physicalists have adopted and the arguments
they have offered in support of them. An intuition at the core of physicalism is that all the relevant physical facts fix all the nonphysical facts,
and the notions of supervenience and realization have both been used
to articulate this intuition further. Supervenience, in all its varieties, is
itself a relation of determination, and if one thinks of realization as a
correlative notion, then it too must be determinative. (Alternatively, if
one holds that the physical realization of a given property is typically a
subset of the subvenient base properties, realizations are, at most, partial
determinants of the properties they realize, a view I return to discuss in
Chapter 6.) And as already bruited above, the sufficiency thesis not only
seems necessary for reductively identifying mental and physical states in
views such as Kim’s, but it also generates the recent wave of what Jerry
Fodor calls epiphobia among nonreductionists – epiphobia being the
fear that one is becoming an epiphenomenalist.

5 the standard view (ii): realizers as
physically constitutive
Kim’s own reductionism about the mind is also guided by a second thesis,
one at least implicitly shared by many others, including Richard Boyd,
David Lewis, and Sydney Shoemaker. I shall call this thesis the physical
constitutivity thesis:
Physical Constitutivity Thesis: Realizers of states and properties are exhaustively
physically constituted by the intrinsic, physical states of the individual whose states
or properties they are.

I understand this thesis broadly such that stronger and weaker versions
