of it could be articulated in terms of the notions of supervenience, typeidentity, or token-identity. In the philosophy of psychology, this thesis
might be thought to have its methodological counterpart in the popular
endorsement of the idea that homuncular functionalism and functional
analysis involve the decomposition of psychological capacities into their
constituent capacities, a claim we will have reason to consider more carefully later.5
Since physical realizations have been claimed to provide a metaphysical and explanatory basis for the higher-level properties they realize,
it is not surprising that these links between functionalism, realization,
and constitution structure (or perhaps derive from) a broader physicalist metaphysics, one that accords microstructure a central role. As Kim
says, speaking in the first instance of our common sense conception of
chemical kinds, but clearly with a more general view in mind:
... many important properties of minerals, we think, are supervenient on, and
explainable in terms of, their microstructure, and chemical kinds constitute a microstructural taxonomy that is explanatorily rich and powerful. Microstructure
is important, in short, because macrophysical properties of substances are determined by microstructure. These ideas make up our ‘metaphysics’ of microdetermination for properties of minerals and other substances, a background of partly
empirical and partly metaphysical assumptions that regulate our inductive and
explanatory practices.

As Kim says a little later,“[t]o have a physical realization is to be physically
grounded and explainable in terms of the processes at an underlying
level.” Such a view is also manifest in Kim’s one-time enthusiasm for the
prospects of understanding “mind-body supervenience as an instance of
mereological supervenience,” that is, the supervenience of wholes on
their parts.6
6 smallism, the standard view,
and the fragile sciences
In Chapter 1, I claimed that smallism, discrimination in favor of the small,
lurked in the background of contemporary individualism and nativism.

The constitutivity thesis is certainly smallist, but it might well be thought
that its influence is quite limited. After all, recall that “realization” is a
term of art with its contemporary origin in a specific literature – that
of Turing machine functionalism in the philosophy of mind. However,
I want to suggest that an explicit appeal to or an implicit reliance on
that concept and thus on the sufficiency and constitutivity theses can
also be found in a range of positions in the fragile sciences, and thus
the reach of the standard view of realization is significantly broader than
one might think. Consider two such positions that are related to issues
106 Individualism and Externalism in Cognitive Sciences
first discussed in Chapter 1 in exploring the relationship between various
forms of individualism and nativism.

One such position concerns the status of collectives in the social sciences. It is common to hold that social-level entities, such as electorates,
institutions, practices and rituals, and their properties are, in some sense,
nothing over and above the individuals who are involved in them and
their properties. Although this relationship has seldom been expressed
in terms of the standard notion of realization, that concept would seem
ideal to capture the “nothing over and above” aspect to that relationship:
Individuals physically constitute social-level entities, and having the individuals and their particular properties is metaphysically sufficient to
have social-level entities and their corresponding properties. Consider
an electorate that is in the process of voting in a new government. That
electorate is physically realized at that time by a given number of individuals, and by a certain majority of those individuals voting for the opposition
party the electorate is thereby in the process of voting in a new government. Nothing more than these mundane individual-level facts is needed
for this to be true. Nonreductionists and reductionists about collectives
disagree about what this realization relation implies about social ontology. As we saw in Chapter 1, methodological individualists in the social
sciences hold that the relevant properties of individuals are psychological and that this has methodological implications for how to do social
science.

A quite distinct arena in which there is likewise an implicit reliance
on the conjunction of the constitutivity and sufficiency thesis is developmental biology in which genes are held to be both physically constituted
and metaphysically determined by particular DNA sequences. The claim
about the physical constitution of genes in general – they are strings of
DNA – is one of the triumphs of twentieth-century biology. That particular sequences of DNA are held to be metaphysically sufficient for the
presence of a given gene underlies not only comparative molecular phylogenetic inferences that identify the same (or, as it is typically put, a
homologous) gene across organisms belonging to two different species
or other cladistic groups, but also the robustness of the appeal to DNA
sequences in talking of the “gene for” a given phenotypic trait. Thus, it
would make sense of key aspects of how genes are conceptualized in genetics and developmental biology to say that they are realized in sequences
of DNA, even if that is not how biologists have in fact put the matter. In
fact, I shall argue later in this chapter that talk of realization has quite
general application within the biological sciences.

While I think that it is the constitutivity thesis that is problematic in
talk of the realization of mental states, my general challenge is to the conjunction of the sufficiency and constitutivity theses for at least a variety of
properties and states, including not only mental properties and states but
those from across the fragile sciences. Context can feature in an account
of realization in a number of ways, but feature it must, and I see no way of
adequately representing the role of context in such an account that does
not undermine either the sufficiency thesis or the constitutivity thesis. A
bald statement of my chief objection to the standard view of realization
is that the sufficiency and constitutivity theses are typically not true of
the same putative realizers. Often the realizations that are metaphysically
sufficient for the properties they realize are not exclusively physical constituents of individuals with those properties. Conversely, sometimes the
physical constitution of an individual with a given property is not metaphysically sufficient for that property to be present. Mental properties
are no exception here.

Physicalists who understand realization as a relation of metaphysical
determination, as most do, should embrace the idea that at least some
states and properties, including mental states and properties, have realizers that extend beyond the individual instantiating them. States and
properties that have what I shall call a wide realization are prevalent in
both common-sense thinking and in the biological and social sciences.

Perhaps because there has been no general framework for such a view of
realization, this view has not been explicitly endorsed in the literature on
mental properties, although it is the view of realization that makes most
direct metaphysical sense of the widespread recognition that a range
of mental properties are not individualistic, and a view that externalists
should readily agree with. This advocacy of wide realizations represents
one way of developing a context-sensitive notion of realization.

There are initially less striking ways in which realization is context
sensitive, however, and I shall discuss two of them next.
