
7 context-sensitive realization
and metaphysical sufficiency
As a way of introducing the idea that realization is context sensitive, consider the mental state of pain and the Ur-example of its realizer, C-fiber
stimulation. As Sydney Shoemaker has pointed out, C-fiber stimulation
is, at best, a partial realization of pain. What Shoemaker calls a corerealization of that mental state is the specific part of the central nervous system
108 Individualism and Externalism in Cognitive Sciences
most readily identified as playing a crucial, causal role in producing or
sustaining the experience of pain. But when an individual is in pain other
parts of her central nervous system are also activated, and the activity of
these parts is crucial for C-fiber stimulation to play the causal role that is,
according to functionalists, definitive of pain.7
In general, the physical states that are partial realizations of a property or state will be metaphysically context sensitive in that they will realize
that property or state only given their location in some broader physical
system. Considered just in themselves, they do not satisfy the sufficiency
thesis. Additionally, in the special case of the core realization of a property, conceived of as the most salient part of some larger system in which
that property is instantiated, we have an epistemic dimension to the context sensitivity of the realization. What we find of greatest causal salience
depends on our conceptual and perceptual abilities. It also depends on
the questions we ask, the background information we have, and, more
generally, our epistemic orientation.

The context sensitivity of partial and core realizations should be uncontroversial, but might be thought of as having little relevance here
because such realizations do not and have never been claimed to satisfy
the sufficiency thesis. Even if core realizations of a property are what
we most readily call to mind in thinking of the realization of that property, there are more complete physical states of which core realizations
are a part that do satisfy the sufficiency thesis. Any interesting contextsensitivity thesis about realization should apply to them, not simply to
core or other partial realizations. Following Shoemaker, we might define
a total realization of a property as just such a state of a system.

By talking of a given higher-level property, P, and the system, S, in
which P is realized, we can characterize the general distinction between
core and total realizations as follows:
(a) core realization of P: a state of the specific part of S that is most
readily identifiable as playing a crucial causal role in producing or
sustaining P
(b) total realization of P: a state of S, containing any given core realization as a proper part, that is metaphysically sufficient for P
In particular cases, “S” is to be replaced by the appropriate system,
whether it be psychological, biological, economic, computational, chemical, and so on, and their more determinate forms. In the case of pain,
the appropriate system is the nociceptive system, containing mechanical
and polymodal nociceptors in the skin (muscles and viscera), myelinated
and unmyelinated axons (the latter being the famed C-fibers), spinal
neurons, parts of the brainstem and thalamus, and the somatosensory
area of the cerebral cortex. More generally, while P is a property of some
individual entity, such as an organism, S need not be identical to that
entity but, as in the example of pain, may form a part of it. Paradigms
of such systems are those in which bodily functions and their associated
properties are realized – for example, the respiratory system, the digestive
system, the circulatory system – that are a part of each creature with the
respective properties. Total realizations of P are exhaustively constituted
by a core realization of P plus what I will refer to as the noncore part of the
total realization.

While total realizations are in some sense complete states of S, they
are incomplete in two important respects. First, the distinctness of S and
the subject or bearer of P entails that total realizations do not include all
states of those subjects or bearers, for not all states a subject or bearer
is in form part of the system specified. For example, a person’s having
a toenail of two centimeters, while a property of that person, is not a
property of that person’s digestive or respiratory systems; “x has a toenail
of two centimeters” expresses a property of persons, not of digestive or
respiratory systems. Second, the total realization of P excludes the background conditions that are necessary for there to be the appropriate,
functioning system. While these may themselves be necessary for a given
entity to have P, since they are not states of S, they are no part of the total
realization of P. Thus, total realizations should be distinguished from the
broader circumstances in which they occur.

To illustrate these points, consider the mammalian circulatory system,
which is made up of various parts – such as the heart, arteries, capillaries, arterioles, venules, and blood. Various states of these parts, considered together, determine what circulatory properties one has at any
given time. Related common sense and medical theories about circulation specify what the circulatory system includes and excludes, but it is
clearly a (proper) part of an organism. For a given circulatory property –
say blood pressure – not all parts are of equal causal importance. From an
intuitive point of view, one’s blood pressure is most saliently determined
by the condition of one’s heart and arteries. Thus, the core realization
of, say, having blood pressure of 120/80 would be identified with a state
of these parts of the circulatory system – for example, having clogged
arteries and a strong heart. Yet such states do not by themselves and independent of the state of the rest of the circulatory system guarantee
blood pressure of 120/80 in a person. Rather, they need to be located
110 Individualism and Externalism in Cognitive Sciences
in a certain way within the rest of the person’s circulatory system. A total
realization of having blood pressure of 120/80 is a state of the circulatory system, including the states of having clogged arteries and a strong
heart, that determines the presence of that property. Excluded from total realizations are both properties instantiated by the individual that are
not properties of the circulatory system at all (such as her having brown
hair, or being six feet tall), as well as broader features of the individual’s
environment that are necessary for her to have a functioning circulatory
system (such as there being oxygen in the environment and the world’s
persistence through time). Such background conditions are no part of
the total realization of the corresponding property since they are not
properties of the circulatory system at all.

Since the distinctness between a total realization and background conditions is important for the general alternative to the standard view of realization that I want to present, consider one other way of coming to this
distinction. Consider our common sense view of circulation and how we
would expect it to be modified by the findings of circulatory physiologists.

While we would expect physiologists to offer a more precise specification
of both the core and total realizations of the properties of this system, we
wouldn’t expect them to contribute much to our understanding of the
nature of the background conditions of these realizations. (For this, they
defer to other scientists, or to common sense.) In investigating a given
biological system, scientists examine both the core and noncore parts
of a total realization, but the boundaries of the system to a large extent
