delineate the boundaries of their inquiry.

Strictly speaking then, it is only the physical states constituting a total
realization together with the appropriate background conditions that metaphysically suffice for P. Our paradigms for the relevant systems are functioning, integrated physical systems, and without the appropriate background
conditions in each case there would be no such systems. This might be
taken to suggest that even total realizations, considered simply as complex
configurations of physical matter and energy, are metaphysically context
sensitive in much the way that partial realizations are.

Let us catch our breath. In this section I have identified two types
of realization that violate the sufficiency thesis and pointed to ways in
which realizations are context sensitive. First, core realizations in and
of themselves are not metaphysically sufficient for the properties they
realize, but must be part of some larger functional system. This point is
of some significance because even if no one really believes the sufficiency
thesis to be true of core realizations, it is physical structures that in fact
are core realizations – such as C-fiber firings – that are typically invoked
in discussions of reductionism, realization, and functionalism. This is
especially true in discussions of mental states. By the end of this chapter
I hope to have made a prima facie case that this is also true of the sorts
of example, those of genes in developmental biology and collectives in
the social sciences, that I mentioned in the previous section. Second,
since total realizations are physical states of larger functional systems, and
there are background conditions necessary for their functioning, strictly
speaking even total realizations themselves do not satisfy the sufficiency
thesis. The significance of these points will unfold over the next few
sections.

8 physical constitutivity and wide realizations
Thus far, I have assumed the constitutivity thesis and thus individualistic realizations, having used that assumption to challenge the sufficiency
thesis. That thesis was challenged as a global view of realizations in two
ways by realizations that are context sensitive: Core realizations are both
metaphysically and epistemically context sensitive, and in presupposing
background conditions necessary for the existence and functioning of
the corresponding system, total realizations are metaphysically context
sensitive. I turn now to the constitutivity thesis and how it is undermined
by a more far-reaching type of context sensitivity. Here the sufficiency thesis will be my ally, and I shall return to focus initially on mental properties
in particular.

I begin by elaborating on my claim, made in section 5, that homuncular functionalism is often construed as a methodological counterpart to
the constitutivity thesis. The idea of the prevalent strategy of homuncular decomposition in cognitive science is to explain complex, intelligent,
representational capacities by functionally analyzing them into simpler
(but typically more numerous) capacities, and then reapplying this first
step recursively until we have simple abilities that require neither representation nor intelligence. If each homuncular level of analysis provides
a realization of the level above it, and realizations satisfy the constitutivity
thesis, then any view of homuncular functionalism that purports to be a
physicalist view should proceed via physical decomposition.8
The constitutivity thesis itself implies that realizations of mental properties are individualistic, in that two molecularly identical individuals
must also share the same realizations of mental properties. And if realizations are determinative of the properties they realize, mental properties
112 Individualism and Externalism in Cognitive Sciences
must be individualistic, too. Indeed, reflection on the relationship between the above bodily systems and the individuals to whom they belong
supports this as a general view of realizations: Because bodily systems are
parts of individuals, there is no way for molecularly identical individuals
to differ in the bodily systems that each has.

This general view overlooks, however, that there are two species of
total realizations, only one of which can be understood in terms of the
notion of constitution above. While it is often the case that S is a part
of the individual that has P, there are a variety of examples in which the
converse is true, examples in which the individual that has P is a part of S.

These are cases in which S extends beyond the boundary of the individual,
and I shall call the type of total realization that exists in such cases a wide
realization.

Let IB be the subject or individual bearer of P. In constitutive decomposition, of which homuncular functionalism is often construed as
a paradigm, S is a part of IB. By contrast, in cases of integrative synthesis
IB is a part of S; in these cases, P has total realizations that are wide. We
can summarize the distinction between wide and entity-bounded realizations in terms of the location of the noncore part of a total realization as
follows:
(c) entity-bounded realization: a total realization of P whose noncore
part is located entirely within IB, the individual who has P
(d) wide realization: a total realization of P whose noncore part is not
located entirely within IB, the individual who has P
Figure 5.1 provides a simplified depiction of the metaphysical parallels
between these two forms of realization, as well as of the differences between the corresponding strategies of constitutive decomposition and
S
B
Background
Conditions
(a)
S
Background
Conditions
B
(b)
figure 5.1. (a) Constitutive Decomposition. Involving Entity-Bounded Realization (b) Integrative Synthesis Involving Wide Realization. S = system B = bearer
integrative synthesis. As a species of total realization, wide realizations
satisfy the sufficiency thesis. Yet since they extend beyond the physical
boundary of the individual, they are not exhaustively constituted by the
intrinsic, physical properties of the individual subject, and so do not satisfy the constitutivity thesis.

The concept of a wide realization allows us to make metaphysical sense
of Putnam-Burge externalism introduced in the last chapter. On this view
the propositional attitudes are not individualistic, or they at least have
a nonindividualistic aspect. The propositional attitudes have a physical
total realization, albeit one that is not entity bounded. The realization
of particular folk psychological states is wide, and given the framework
I am proposing that entails that those states should be understood by
using integrative synthesis to locate their bearers in some broader system,
