presumably one that involves social relations between individuals. I shall
call this our folk psychological system.

The width of our folk psychological system is not anomalous in
psychology; in fact, the strategy of integrative synthesis also applies readily
to computational psychology. Many computational systems that govern
cognition are themselves wide, where the computational system S extends
beyond the boundary of IB, the individual who bears the psychological
properties, and the appropriate type of total realization is a wide realization. I have previously argued that we should expect wide computational
systems of cognitive states just when there has been sustained mind-world
constancy over evolutionary time of the type that one finds in the case
of many perceptual and behavioral systems. Such systems include our
mechanisms for form perception and the navigational systems that ants
and bees deploy.9
This general view – that world-mind constancy creates the opportunity
for cognitive loads to be shifted from inside the head to beyond it – has
Principle – “know only as much as you need to know to get the job done” –
was postulated to explain informational off loading and exploitation by
organisms in an evolutionary context, and his more recent endorsement
of “the extended mind” has taken this perspective as implying that the
mind itself may include parts of the world beyond the individual. Likewise,
the cognitive scientist Edwin Hutchins views his study of navigation as a
socially distributed, embedded computational process to imply that the
computations performed during navigational tasks extend beyond the
boundary of the individual. I shall discuss wide computationalism and
these sorts of views of computation and cognition more generally and
114 Individualism and Externalism in Cognitive Sciences
in more detail in Chapter 7. My chief point here is that the invocation
of wide realizations is not an ad hoc ploy introduced simply in order
to add a supporting metaphysics to our externalist intuitions about folk
psychology.10
9 wide realizations in the biological
and social sciences
The further point that I do want to develop in some detail is that there
is nothing strange about mental states having wide realizations. In fact,
I think that wide realizations are typical across the fragile sciences,
at least if we assume a notion of realization that satisfies the suffi-
ciency thesis. The claim that wide realizations are ubiquitous in such
sciences should sound, at least prima facie, counterintuitive. But once
we make the connection between the metaphysics of realization and the
methodologies of constitutive decomposition and integrative synthesis,
this point becomes easier to understand. Let me begin with the biological
sciences.

A variety of evolutionary and ecological properties themselves have
wide realizations and are profitably understood through the strategy of
integrative synthesis, that is, by locating their bearers in the corresponding wide systems. Such properties include fitness, being highly specialized, and being a predator, properties of individual organisms or even
species; and properties of phenotypic traits or behaviors, such as being
an adaptation, a homology, or a spandrel.

Consider first the example perhaps closest to common sense, the property of being a predator. Predators play a certain role in an ecological system, occupy a particular ecological niche, that of preying on other living
things, typically (but not solely) for nourishment. This property is relational in at least two ways: An organism is a predator for certain other
living things (their prey), and in certain types of environments (their
ecosystem). Here the relevant system is the predator-prey system, whose
dynamics are captured, in part, by the Lotka-Volterra equations and is
explored in population ecology. While the part of this system most readily identifiable as playing a crucial causal role in producing or sustaining
the property of being a predator, that is, that property’s core realization,
might be thought to be contained within the organism that is a predator,
the total realization for this property is clearly wide. Since being a predator involves a relation between an organism and something beyond its organismic envelope, what is metaphysically sufficient for particular bodily
or behavioral phenotypes to be those of a predator extends beyond the
boundary of the individual.

The same is true of being highly specialized, the ability to occupy a relatively small number of the ecological niches available. Although we can
and do speak of certain organisms as realizing this property by virtue of
having specific intrinsic properties, at best these states or properties of
individual organisms are core realizations for that property, and the corresponding total realizations include physical configurations in a system
that extends beyond the individuals who are highly specialized, that is,
the total realizations are wide. In the case of being highly specialized, the
relevant system is the ecosystem, this being the system in terms of which
ecological niches are defined.

Finally, an organism’s fitness is its propensity to survive and reproduce
in its environment. We can represent the former as a probability between
0 and 1 (the organism’s viability), and the latter as a number greater
than or equal to 0 (the organism’s fertility) where this number represents
the organism’s expected number of offspring. In either case, although
fitness is a dispositional property of individual organisms (or even whole
species), this disposition is not individualistic, since physically identical
organisms may differ in fitness because they have been or are located in
different environments. That is, the numbers that represent viability and
fertility may vary solely because of an organism’s environmental location.

This relational aspect to the property of fitness is often masked by the
fact that an organism’s environment usually plays (in effect) the role of a
constant in many of the contexts in which the concept of fitness is put to
work. Yet the properties “has a probability of surviving of 0.7” and “has
an expected number of offspring of 2.2” are incompletely specified in
a way that makes them meaningless without an implicit reference to an
environment. What metaphysically suffices for a given organism to have
a specific level of fitness is not instantiated entirely in that organism: The
total realization of fitness (and its determinate forms) is wide, not entity
bounded. Here the relevant wide system is the organism plus something
like its niche, broadly construed to include its location within a particular
population structure and other relational aspects of its existence.

The same general point is true of the total realizations of properties of
phenotypic traits or behaviors. What makes a trait or behavior an adaptation, for example, is something about its evolutionary history, not just
something about the individual who has the trait or exhibits the behavior.

Whatever we want to say about their core realizations, their total realizations are not individualistic. There are ontological and not just epistemic
