116 Individualism and Externalism in Cognitive Sciences
reasons why you can’t tell whether, say, the presence of wings in a given
species is an adaptation or a spandrel simply by inspecting existing members of that species. These examples show that total realizations do not
always satisfy the constitutivity thesis; they also exemplify the pattern of
integrative synthesis depicted in Figure 5.1b.

To this point I have been discussing wide realizations whose core part
is located within an individual. One might well wonder whether a realization could be wide in that not only does its noncore part extend
beyond the individual but so too does its core part. I shall call this type of
wide realization a radically wide realization:
(e) radically wide realization: a wide realization whose core part is not
located entirely within IB, the individual who has P
The clearest examples of radically wide realizations are those of social
actions that involve engaging with the world and have further social and
institutional background conditions. And so we move from the biological
to the social sciences in thinking about the full range of the applicability
of the notion of wide realization in the fragile sciences.

Consider actions such as making a withdrawal from a bank, committing
a felony, or voting, each of which we might do by signing a piece of paper
in certain circumstances. Here, not only the noncore part of the total
realization extends beyond the individual agent, but so too does the most
natural candidate for the core realization of these actions, signing a piece
of paper. This is an action of an individual, as are the actions that it in
turn realizes, even though the action extends beyond the boundary of
that individual. The relevant system explored via integrative synthesis –
whether it be the banking system, criminal justice system, or electoral
system – likewise extends beyond the boundary of the individual agent
and has its own background conditions.

The same is true of many of our ways of classifying agents in the social sciences. In economics, for example, individuals are homeowners,
consumers, and wage earners. Someone falls into one of these categories
by virtue of the relationship between what she does and has done, and
the legal, social, and economic institutions and practices to which she is
subject. An agent enters into verbal and written agreements, hands over
cash, or performs certain tasks. Since these actions or behaviors themselves, however, literally extend into the world beyond the individual,
their realizations do not stop at the skin. Behavior that stops at the skin –
the bodily movement that an agent makes – is not even a core realization
of the corresponding action.

10 two views reconsidered
This chapter has been more analytical in its style than those that have preceded it, and it may pay to step back from the thick of it all to see where
we are. In sections 7–9, I have proposed four ways in which physical realizations are context sensitive, the first and second of which challenge
the sufficiency thesis (section 7), and the third and fourth of which challenge the constitutivity thesis (sections 8 and 9). In section 8, I introduced
(ordinary) wide realizations, exemplified by intentional mental properties, whose noncore part extends beyond the boundary of the individual
who has those properties. What I called radically wide realizations in section 9 are wide realizations whose core part also extends beyond that
boundary, and I suggested that they were exemplified by social actions.

My more general point in these sections was that there are a range of
properties in the cognitive, biological, and social sciences that have wide
rather than entity-bounded realizations.

Those who would like to salvage the standard view of realization can
shuffle where they locate the particular examples I have introduced in this
four-fold schema. But since the sufficiency and constitutivity theses are
jointly satisfied in none of the four forms of context-sensitive realization,
there will remain a problem for the standard view, no matter how much
shuffling is done.

On the standard view, realizations are metaphysically determinative of
the properties they realize and physically constitutive of the individuals
who possess those properties. On the alternative, context-sensitive view,
realizations are located within systems, and those systems in turn are located within broader environments. The context-sensitive view allows that
the standard view is correct about some properties and their realizations –
what I called entity-bounded realizations in section 8 – but insists that
there is a wide variety of properties that involve another form of context
sensitivity, that of wide realization. In effect, the context-sensitive view
implies that there is an individualistic bias within the standard view, one
that not only ignores the perhaps innocuous context sensitivity of both
core and total realizations, but that overlooks or denies the possibility of
wide realizations altogether.

I have been arguing that there is a sort of tension within the standard
view. For what metaphysically determines the presence of a property often extends beyond the boundary of the individual who has that property. And, conversely, the physical constituents of the individual bearing
a given property are often contributory or partial realizers rather than
118 Individualism and Externalism in Cognitive Sciences
metaphysically determinative realizers of that property. In advocating the
endorsement of wide realizations, I have, in effect, embraced the suffi-
ciency thesis over the constitutivity thesis.

With this in mind, let us return to reconsider the relationship between
realization and appeals to neural correlates, mechanisms, and localizations within the cognitive sciences. Just as realizations are assumed to be
entity bounded on the standard view, psychologists and cognitive neuroscientists typically think of neural mechanisms as entity bounded, and so
have an individualistic view of these. Given the tension within the standard view of realization, it seems clear that cognitive scientists themselves
would likely opt for the constitutivity over the sufficiency thesis. If that is
so, however, then this represents a significant break from the physicalist
orthodoxy that “the physical” determines “the mental.”
Whatever psychologists and cognitive neuroscientists think about rejecting the metaphysical sufficiency thesis, it is a view deeply embedded
within the philosophy of mind. First, the view of realization as a determinative relation is one that reductionists such as Jaegwon Kim have readily
drawn on in arguing that nonreductionists occupy an unstable position;
this view is not likely to be seen by such reductionists as merely optional.

Second, while this view of realization can be seen as just one of a cluster of
intuitions, it is central to understanding the cluster as a whole. For example, it connects the notion of realization with that of supervenience in an
intuitive way by treating them as correlative notions; it explains the sense
in which realizers provide a metaphysical basis for what they realize; and
it allows us to make sense of the idea that mental properties are “nothing
over and above” their realizations. This should make us wary of simply
dropping the sufficiency thesis. To settle, in effect, for partial realizations,
such as core realizations, as the metaphysical substrate to the mind that
