best corresponds to what cognitive scientists mean in talking of the neural
correlates, mechanisms, and localizations for cognitive capacities would
require a softening in how physicalism is to be understood.

The context-sensitive view suggests another option, one that both preserves this determination thesis in some cases and brackets consideration
of it in others. While some cognitive capacities and the mechanisms that
realize them have an entity-bounded realization, others merely have neural correlates, or are partially realized in specific regions of the brain. The
context-sensitive view of realization goes hand in hand with a contextsensitive view of mechanisms. Neural mechanisms, like neural realizations, are always located within cognitive systems, and I have argued
that cognitive systems sometimes extend beyond the boundary of the
individual property bearer. When they do, the mechanisms are wide in
that they are individuated by reference to this system.

By identifying a range of properties across the cognitive, biological,
and social sciences to which the context-sensitive view seems to naturally
apply, I have made a start on articulating that view and perhaps shown its
promise. I have thus far, however, done little by way of really defending
the context-sensitive view of realization. That is the task of Chapter 6.

6
Context-Sensitive Realizations
1 adjusting one’s metaphysics
The argument of Chapter 5 provides a prima facie motivation for further
exploring the context-sensitive view of realization. In this chapter, these
explorations are of three kinds. Together they constitute a philosophical
defense of the context-sensitive view.

The first concerns context-sensitive realizations and physicalism. Physicalism has been formulated both as a view of the mind-body relation
and as a more encompassing metaphysical position, and one of the aims
of the next three sections is to show what the context-sensitive view of
realization implies about both of these forms of physicalism. Although
there are forms of physicalism in the philosophy of mind that allow for
the possibility that minds have nonphysical realizations, it remains true
that the expression “physical realization” would be regarded by many as
containing a redundancy. There are, so far as I know, no developed proposals for just how the mind would be “realized in” nonphysical stuff.

Given this, it is important to show that the context-sensitive view of realization preserves robust forms of physicalism, even if, as I shall argue, it
requires either giving up or revising several strands to physicalist thought.

In this regard, in sections 2–4, I shall discuss, respectively, the thesis of
microphysical determinism, the nature of dispositions, and nonreductive
materialism.

The second kind of exploration considers modifications to the standard view of realization that address its putative shortcomings as a general
view of realization. One general suspicion often directed at so-called novel
views is that their putative insights can be captured within the framework
120
of existing views. Being clear about the overall metaphysical package that
the context-sensitive view brings with it is one way to dissipate such suspicions, or at least to shift the burden of proof to those who harbor them.

In section 5, I shall examine a version of the standard view that ascribes a
key role to background conditions without buying into the full range of
context-sensitive realizations advocated within the context-sensitive view.

Here it will be useful to introduce an analogy to the place of background
conditions in discussions of causation, both in articulating the modified
standard view and in revealing its shortcomings relative to the contextsensitive view. In section 6, I examine several other attempts to encompass some form of context sensitivity within the framework provided by
the standard view. If the argument of these sections is correct, then the
context-sensitive view offers a richer metaphysical package than do these
variations on the standard view.

Finally, I shall conclude this exploration of the context-sensitive view
by tacking to the other side, responding to claims that taking the contextsensitive view seriously requires adjustments in our conception of minds,
individuals, and the relationship between them that are considerably
more radical than those I have entertained thus far. Those who both
are sympathetic to the context-sensitive view and think that it marks an
important departure from business as usual in a materialist metaphysics
of mind might well think that my own remarks in this chapter and the
last are unduly conservative or restrictive. If mental states have wide realizations, for example, why think that we can (or would want to) hold
onto realism about the mind, or restrict ourselves to viewing subjectivity
as attaching to individuals at all? I shall take up these sorts of question in
sections 7–9.

2 microphysical determinism, relations, and smallism
In the previous chapter, I said that the fragile sciences often traffic in
properties that have a wide realization, and that when they do the corresponding methodology of integrative synthesis is appropriate. These
sciences often investigate the relational properties of individuals, and
what (totally) realizes such properties is not contained within the boundary of those individuals. Thus, an adequate account of the metaphysics of
realization must move beyond the standard view with its exclusive focus
on entity-bounded realizations and the constitutivity thesis.

We could express this criticism of the standard view by saying that
it manifests a form of smallism, discrimination in favor of the small, in
122 Individualism and Externalism in Cognitive Sciences
directing us always to what constitutes individuals, rather than what they in
turn constitute. Indeed, the problem that relational properties and kinds
I identified as a general problem for smallist views in metaphysics. Since
the standard view has been developed as part of a physicalist view of the
mind, and the problem that I claim exists is quite general, we should
consider the resources that physicalists have to address it.

A common expression of physicalism says that all facts, properties,
events, processes, states, and entities supervene on the totality of physical
facts, properties, and so on. This is to say that there is some or other
physical base set of facts, properties, and so on for any fact, property,
and so on. It is a short step from here to gloss physicalism as the view that
there are physical realizations for all of the facts, properties, and so on that
there are. Given that both supervenience and realization are relations of
metaphysical determination that, so to speak, run in opposite directions –
from realizations and to supervening properties – we might be tempted
to think of these two metaphysical notions as getting at much the same
