idea. If that is so, then our short step is very short indeed, perhaps just
that of logical closure.

Physicalism, thus, is a kind of thesis of metaphysical determination:
The physical determines the rest. Microphysical determinism is a more
specific form of physical determinism, one more directly relevant to assessing smallist metaphysical views. It is the general view that the properties of microphysical entities metaphysically determine all the properties
there are. Consider two forms of microphysical determinism that, in different ways, attempt to accommodate relational properties.

The first of these Paul Teller has called local physicalism and particularism. It holds that the microphysical properties of any given entity, plus
the microphysical properties of all those entities to which it is related,
determine all of the properties it has, including its relational properties.

Suppose that Tom has a mass of 100 kg and Susan has a mass of 80 kg,
and so Tom has the relational property of being heavier than Susan,
and stands in the relation “is heavier than” to Susan. On the particularist version of microphysical determinism, this relational property of
Tom’s, and the corresponding relation between Tom and Susan is determined by Tom’s microphysical properties and Susan’s microphysical
properties. What particularism preserves from corpuscularianism is the
idea that an individual thing’s intrinsic properties determine its place in
the causal nexus. The relational properties of that individual thing are
determined not simply by its intrinsic properties, but by those together
with the intrinsic properties of the object(s) to which it is related. For
the particularist, it is still the intrinsic properties of individual things that
realize all the properties that there are. There are several problems that
particularism faces.1
First, it suggests a general strategy for understanding relational properties that presupposes that they can always be viewed in terms of relations to particular objects. Certainly, many relational properties in science can be so understood. But many of the examples I provided in
the last chapter invoke relational properties that lack this feature, and
this points to the difficulty of assimilating all relational properties and
kinds to particularism. For example, thinking about water, having a specific level of evolutionary fitness, and being a homeowner are relational
properties, but not ones that simply involve relations between the bearer
of the property and one or more particular objects. Rather, they are
relational in presupposing the location of the bearer of the property
in some larger system or environment: in a certain linguistic community, in an (usually, the actual) environment, in a society with certain
kinds of institutions and practices. An individual’s intrinsic properties
do not determine whether it has any of these relational properties. Simply adding to these the intrinsic properties of other individuals (and
which individuals?) does not lead to a realization base for these relational
properties.

Second, since particularism is a form of microphysical determinism,
then not any old intrinsic property serves as the ultimate realizer for
all the properties that there are, but just those intrinsic properties that
very small things have. Thus, as well as having to show how all relational
properties are determined as are quantitative comparative properties,
particularism must also show how all of the intrinsic properties of the not
so small are realized by just the intrinsic properties of the smaller things
that constitute them. But this seems false even at the chemical level,
let alone at “higher” levels. For example, salt is physically composed of
sodium and chlorine. Yet its having the chemical composition that it does,
and the intrinsic properties it has, is not realized simply by the intrinsic
properties of sodium and the intrinsic properties of chlorine, but those
together with the realizing sodium and chlorine standing in a certain
relation to one another (in particular, having a certain spatial relation to
one another). Likewise, organism-level properties that we might think of
as intrinsic, such as running speed or bodily musculature, are not simply
realized by the intrinsic properties of organism parts, but by those plus
how those parts are put together.

124 Individualism and Externalism in Cognitive Sciences
This second problem suggests a natural revision to particularism.

Rather than try, as does particularism, to maintain that there is a sense
in which the relational properties of individual things can be reduced
to intrinsic properties, instead consider relations themselves as ontologically basic. Call such a view relational microphysicalism. This form of microphysicalism plays up the fact that when we turn to physics itself we
find a range of relations: from states of entanglement in quantum mechanics, to space-time separation in relativity theory, to velocity in good
old Newtonian mechanics. Since such relations occur within physics –
indeed, within microphysics – the idea is to take them, together with the
intrinsic properties of the physically very small, as what realizes all other
properties and relations. Relational microphysicalism thus abandons the
putative asymmetry between intrinsic and relational properties, but as a
form of smallism maintains the asymmetry between the small and the not
so small.

David Lewis’s endorsement of the thesis of Humean supervenience
expresses a form of relational microphysicalism. In the preface to the
second volume of his collected papers, he expresses this doctrine as
holding that
all there is to the world is a vast mosaic of local matters of particular fact, just one
little thing and then another . . . we have local qualities: perfectly natural intrinsic
properties which need nothing bigger than a point at which to be instantiated.

For short: we have an arrangement of qualities. And that is all.2
Lewis’s references to mosaics and arrangements suggest relational microphysicalism rather than particularism.

Relational microphysicalism avoids the second problem facing particularism, but still faces the first problem, that of accounting for relational
properties that do not involve relations between objectlike relata. In addition, while it countenances relations, it is only those relations that, in
the first instance, hold between the smallest objects there are. Relational
microphysicalism is aggregative about what there is in the world in that
any composite entity, C, and its properties, are realized by its physical constituents, A and B, their properties, together with the relations between
A and B. Yet C’s relational properties will not be realized by A, B, and the
relations between them. So quite apart from relational properties that do
not involve objectlike relata, and even granting that relational microphysicalism is true of an object’s intrinsic properties, provided that aggregated
individuals have some relational properties, relational microphysicalism
remains unable to account for all there is.

3 dispositions and science
Many properties in the physical sciences are dispositional: They are tendencies that the objects that have them manifest in certain circumstances
or under certain conditions. While the manifestation of dispositional
properties may require those circumstances or conditions to obtain, what
is often called the categorical base of the disposition surely does not: The
base is intrinsic to the bearer of the disposition. Given this popular view
of dispositions, one might develop several lines of argument that indicate
