that there is something mistaken about the context-sensitive view of realization. For example: Because dispositions are intrinsic and important
in the physical sciences, in trafficking in unanalyzed relational properties the fragile sciences lose their mooring from physicalism. Or: Because
we can understand the role of “context” in making sense of dispositions
without abandoning the idea that intrinsic properties are ontologically
basic in some sense, we can preserve the asymmetry between intrinsic
and relational properties, or between the small and the not so small,
that I have used the context-sensitive view of realization to challenge. Or:
Even if there is a sense in which some properties have a wide realization (manifestation), there is a deeper sense in which they must have an
entity-bounded realization (base).3
These lines of argument could, no doubt, be filled in. But my aim
here, in part, is to suggest that to do so will be in vain, for the view of
dispositions on which they rest is problematic for much the reason that
the standard view of realization is problematic. Many of the dispositional
properties in the physical sciences are themselves relational.

Consider dispositional properties in chemistry, such as acidity and miscibility. Whether a given liquid is acidic or miscible, whether it has those
properties, is metaphysically determined by more than facts about its constitution. This is because these dispositional properties are dispositions
to have certain effects on other chemical substances and kinds, and so
whether they have those dispositions – not just whether they manifest
these dispositions – is determined by facts about those other substances.

The very presence of the disposition, not just its manifestation, involves
the physical configuration of the world beyond the bearer of the disposition. These dispositional properties have a wide physical realization.

This point is reflected in standard definitions of an acid – for example, as a proton donor, or as an electron-pair acceptor. For whether a
substance with a given physical structure has the disposition to donate
protons or to accept electron pairs depends on facts about the broader
126 Individualism and Externalism in Cognitive Sciences
chemical system in which that substance exists. If just these facts were
different, a liquid that is actually an acid could lose this disposition, and
could do so even were its chemical composition to remain unchanged.

While successive concepts of an acid – from that of Arrhenius, to those of
Bronsted and Lowry and Lewis – characterize an acid in what we might
think of as increasingly “purely” dispositional terms, that is, in ways that
increasingly abstract away from the environment, all of these concepts
make either explicit or implicit reference to the character of solvents
and bases which lie beyond the boundary of the thing that is an acid.

Whether, say, hydrogen chloride has the disposition to donate a proton
when placed in water depends not only on the intrinsic chemical character of HCl, but also on that of H2O and the relative strengths of the
forces governing their interaction. A physical duplicate of a substance
that is acidic in the actual world may not be acidic in a world where the
facts about solvents and chemical forces are different, even once we hold
fixed the facts about other physical forces as “background conditions.”
In this respect, acidity is like fitness or any of the other examples I have
cited from the fragile sciences. The salience of the fact that the core realization of acidity is individualistic should not obscure our view of what
metaphysically determines the presence of the disposition itself.4
This requires endorsing that at least some dispositions, including some
dispositions in the physical sciences, are extrinsic or wide: Whether something has the disposition is not determined by that thing’s physical constitution. Jennifer McKitrick has recently provided a range of commonsense examples of extrinsic dispositions – the power to open a door,
weight, the disposition to dissolve the contents of my pocket, vulnerability, visibility, and recognizability – and defended this idea against the
predominant view of dispositions as essentially intrinsic. Some of the
examples that I provided in Chapter 5, such as fitness and folk psychological states, are often understood as dispositional properties within the
fragile sciences, and if they are relational, as I have argued, then they
must be wide dispositional properties. In fact, such wide dispositions are
widespread across the sciences, including acidity, miscibility, and solubility in the chemical sciences; conductivity, heat sensitivity, and rigidity
in the electronic and engineering sciences; and trustworthiness, fertility,
and stability in the cognitive, biological, and social sciences.5
Part of my point here is to preempt a series of connected ideas concerning dispositional properties and the nature of science: that an appeal to dispositional properties provides refuge for the standard view
of realization and the asymmetry that it posits between intrinsic and
table 6.1 Realization in Psychology, Biology, and Chemistry
Psychological Biological Chemical
P being in pain being a predator being acidic
S nociceptive system predator-prey system system of acids and
bases
IB person animal liquid solution
core R certain level of
activity in C-fibers
having sharp claws having an empty
electron shell
total R CR plus states of rest
of nociceptive
system (thalamus,
somatosensory
cortex, etc.)
CR plus properties of
rest of IB and prey
that, together with
IB, constitutes the
predator-prey
system (e.g., speed
of IB, body of prey)
CR plus properties
of rest of IB plus
those of solvents
and bases that,
together with IB,
constitute the
acid-base system
BCs
(holding
of world
beyond S)
conditions of rest of
the nervous
system of IB and
IB’s other bodily
systems
conditions of the
ecological
