environment
occupied by S, e.g.,
terrain, seasonal
conditions
conditions of the
physical world
more generally,
e.g., particular
value of gravity
on Earth, laws of
nature
relational properties; that“real dispositions”in the fundamental sciences
are intrinsic; that the ubiquity of relational properties in the fragile sciences casts them under some sort of metaphysical shadow dissipated by
the light of the physical sciences. But part of my point is to extend the
reach of the context-sensitive view of realization and the framework that
I introduced in articulating it. To this end, Table 6.1 shows the parallels
between psychological, biological, and chemical examples that I have discussed within this framework. As this table shows, both entity-bounded
and wide realizations can be readily represented within this framework.

The symmetry between the two, I want to suggest, implies the irrelevance
of the boundary of the individual as a constraint on what counts as a
realization of a given property.

Relational properties permeate the fragile sciences, and we should
thus expect wide realization and the strategy of integrative synthesis to
be the norm across those sciences. While entity-bounded realization and
constitutive decomposition are certainly predominant in the physical
sciences, there is also a range of properties in these sciences that are,
like those in the fragile sciences, implicitly relational, including many
128 Individualism and Externalism in Cognitive Sciences
dispositional properties. Such properties and kinds have wide realizations. This is one more reason to be skeptical of the idea that there is anything metaphysically distinctive or suspicious about the fragile sciences,
or about the nature of relational properties and kinds.

Having examined aspects of physicalism in general in light of the
context-sensitive view of realization, let us return to focus on physicalism about the mind in particular. Rejecting the constitutivity thesis in
the standard view most obviously requires giving up reductive physicalist
views of the mind. But this also has perhaps less obvious implications for
nonreductive materialism.

4 nonreductive materialism
The conflict between the sufficiency and constitutivity theses provides a
novel way of expressing a long-acknowledged tension between externalism and reductive forms of physicalism in the philosophy of mind. Yet it
also points to largely unrecognized inadequacies in a number of ways of
expressing nonreductive materialism. Those expressions have also relied
on the standard view of realization.

Nonreductive materialism has sometimes been formulated in terms of
the acceptance of a “token-token” identity thesis or via a compositional
view of realization. Consider each view in turn and what our discussion
thus far implies about it.6
The token identity theory claims that tokens of mental and physical
states may be identical even if types of mental and physical states are
not identical, where the relevant physical states are intrinsic states of the
brain. Since such states are intrinsic, physical states of the individual,
the token identity theory, at least as usually articulated, presupposes the
constitutivity thesis. But our exploration of the varieties of realization
suggests that this thesis and the token identity theory are false for at least
many mental states. This is because the total realizations of a range of
mental states are wide and thus are not intrinsic states of the brain. At
most, it is the core realizations of mental and physical states that are
identical, but this does not help us identify mental and physical states.

Compositional views of realization, and thus physicalism, likewise take
the relevant composed entity to be the individual or her central nervous
system, and in so doing, rely on the constitutivity thesis. They thus face
the same problem that the token identity theory faces. In short, both of
these common expressions of nonreductive materialism have relied on
the standard view of realization. If either view allows the relevant tokens
or composed entity to be larger than the individual who instantiates the
corresponding mental properties, and so in effect gives up the constitutivity thesis, it must be revised in fairly significant ways: We are no longer
talking of token physical states of the brain, or compositional states of
individuals.

Nonreductionist forms of physicalism are also often expressed in terms
of there being “higher” and “lower” levels of explanation, the latter of
which provide a metaphysical but not a reductive basis for the former.

Whether we can adequately conceptualize mental states in general as being (totally) realized by “lower level” states seems to me doubtful. Those
articulating this idea further using a constitution-based conception of realization either will be hard pressed to maintain the view that realization
is determinative, or will, in effect, concede that lower levels do provide a
reductive base for higher levels. Neither option should be attractive to a
nonreductionist. To tackle the first horn of this dilemma would require
a fairly radical rethinking of the concept of realization, one that gives up
on the sufficiency thesis altogether. Tackling the second horn threatens to
locate the site of one’s nonreductionism solely within the realm of explanation, a threat exploited by Jaegwon Kim in his attacks on nonreductive
physicalism.7
We can make this point in another way and more positively. I said in
Chapter 5 that a constitution-based conception of realization appears to
provide the metaphysical grounding for the explanatory strategy of homuncular functionalism. In the language of higher and lower levels, this
is the idea that things and properties specified by lower-level homuncular descriptions physically constitute those specified by higher-level homuncular descriptions. If we grant that at least these latter things and
properties are often relationally individuated, this relation of constitution can be determinative only if the former things and properties are
likewise relationally individuated. This is to say that the things and properties specified by lower-level homuncular descriptions may be relationally
individuated. And if the relevant relations for the higher-level properties
extend beyond the boundary of the individual, so too must those for the
lower-level properties. So while there may be some sense in which lower
levels “constitute” higher levels, neither need be exhausted by the subject or bearer’s intrinsic, physical properties, that is, by those properties
usually taken to physically constitute an individual.

In effect, a homuncularly decompositional view that takes relational
individuation seriously entails rejecting a premise crucial to a smallist,
