individualist view of the mind, a variation on the sufficiency thesis, viz.,
130 Individualism and Externalism in Cognitive Sciences
that the physical constitution of an individual metaphysically determines
what mental properties that individual has. There are metaphysical and
not merely pragmatic grounds for construing homuncular functionalism
as an externalist view, and proponents of homuncular functionalism need
to transcend their implicit reliance on the standard view of realization.

5 the modified standard view: causation
and realization
One might reasonably doubt whether the context-sensitive view is needed
to accommodate the ubiquity of relational properties and kinds in the
fragile sciences. Perhaps a view of realization embracing both the suffi-
ciency and constitutivity theses can be modified in ways that “take relational individuation”seriously. In this section I shall consider the idea that
a modified standard view can do so simply by acknowledging a greater
and more explicit role for background conditions than the standard view
itself has.

Central to the standard view is the intuition that total realizations themselves always satisfy the constitutivity thesis. Even if ascribing any property to an entity, including mental properties, presupposes that certain
beyond-the-individual background conditions hold, realizations themselves do not extend into the world beyond the individual. That is, all
total realizations are in fact entity bounded, and we should not mistake
some of these background conditions for (parts of) the realization itself. Putative examples of wide and radically wide realizations should be
reinterpreted within the parameters of the standard view, modified to
acknowledge just the first two forms of context-sensitive realization that
I identified in Chapter 5: That of core realizations, which are realizations only insofar as they are part of a total realization, and the context
sensitivity of total realizations to background conditions. On this modi-
fied standard view, realizations are entity bounded and the background
conditions necessary for the realization of a given property may be more
extensive than initially envisaged.

We can support the modified standard view by drawing a parallel between how we should think about realization and how we often think
about causation. We talk of Sarah’s carelessly discarding an unfinished
cigarette as the cause of the bushfire even though we recognize that this
event is not itself sufficient to bring about that effect. It does so only
given that a variety of conditions are in place: that it not rain, that the
cigarette make contact with combustible material, that the cigarette is not
extinguished before it ignites that material, and so on. This distinction
between causes and conditions is commonplace in theories of causation,
but it provides little reason, one might argue, for viewing causes as either
“wide” or “radically wide.” It is Sarah’s action itself that is the cause, this
event here and now. Likewise, one might think, for realizers.

I shall return to the analogy to causation in a moment, but let us consider the modified standard view itself. Of critical importance is how well
that view allows us to make sense of the full range of properties and kinds
posited across the various sciences, as well as those found in our commonsense discourse. Both social actions and mental states pose problems here,
and suggest that utilizing only an entity-bounded notion of realization,
together with background conditions, requires abandoning some central
intuitions about realization.

Most problematic are social actions, which not only have political, economic, and legal background conditions but also literally extend into the
world beyond the individual who enacts them. For these actions, such as
signing a check, even what I have been calling their core realizations do
not stop at the skin. On the modified standard view, realizations must
be entity-bounded, and so the realization of the action of (say) signing
a check can appeal to holding a pen and writing on paper only as background conditions for the realization of the action. Yet these are things
that the agent herself does, part of the action itself, not (like other background conditions) merely general features of the social and institutional
environment in which she acts, and this distinction is ignored within the
modified standard view. The real problem here is that viewing something
like the bodily movements of the agent as the total realization of her
signing a check is to collapse the distinction between total and core realizations. In effect, it is to accept that the realization of the action is not
determinative of the action, and so give up the sufficiency thesis. Thus,
this is not a view that modifies the standard view, but abandons it.

There is a fundamental, general problem for the modified standard
view here. Treating total realizations as core realizations makes them
not simply metaphysically context sensitive but also epistemically context
sensitive. That is, what counts as the realization for any given property
or kind depends on us. On the modified standard view, any part of the
world that is a physical constituent of the bearer of the property or kind
can be the realization of that property. All that needs to be done is simply to assign the state of the remainder of that individual to the set of
132 Individualism and Externalism in Cognitive Sciences
background conditions that, together with that physical constituent, are
metaphysically sufficient for the property or kind. In the case of signing
the check, we could push further back into the body (in fact, all the way
to the brain) in identifying the realization of that action, provided that
we make a corresponding addition to our set of background conditions.

Thus, on the modified standard view there is no mind-independent way
to specify the realization for any given property or kind.

Consider another example that illustrates the general problem here.

Any psychological state, such as being in pain, involves the firing of thousands if not millions of neurons. In a given case, which of these is the
realization of the pain? On the modified standard view, a single neuron
firing in my head at a given time could realize this state, provided that we
specify the remaining neural firings as part of the background conditions
for that single neuron’s firing to metaphysically suffice for the individual
to be in pain. To put it the other way around, on the modified standard
view there is no answer to the question of what the realization of a given
psychological state is that is independent of our decision of how extensive to make the corresponding background conditions. This constitutes
a reductio of the modified standard view.

We can return to the analogy to causation to diagnose what has gone
wrong here. Causes have the effects they do only given the presence of
certain conditions. If one has only the distinction between causes and
the conditions that necessitate their effects, then the arbitrariness of the
distinction between cause and condition lead one to consider the individuation of some events as causes and others as conditions as dependent
on us. Essentially, this is the situation that the modified standard view of
realization is faced with.8
On the context-sensitive view that I have introduced, background conditions are necessary for there to be a functioning system that (totally)
