realizes an individual’s properties. To be a realist about properties, and so
about mental properties, is to be a realist about at least their total realizations, and thus about the systems with respect to which total realizations
are defined. Thus, the distinction between background conditions and
noncore parts of total realizations is required by the realism implicit
in the view I have defended (see also section 7). We simply don’t get
to decide where to draw the line between realization and background
conditions, and in particular it is not simply up to us to decide that
the realizations must be entity bounded, or where within an individual they begin and end. Given that the systems in terms of which realizations are characterized are robust entities either that form parts of
individuals or that individuals form a part of, background conditions have
a more restricted role to play than this modification of the standard view
suggests.

In terms of the analogy to causation, this is something like introducing
the notion of a causal chain between that of cause and condition. Causes
form causal chains, and these causal chains have their effects only given
the existence of certain other conditions. When we single out some event
as the cause of another, we imply that it is the most salient part of that
causal chain, and that without the remainder of that causal chain linking
cause and effect, “the cause” would be no cause at all. But it is also true
that without further supporting conditions, even the whole causal chain
would not produce that effect. What distinguishes causal chains from
the conditions against which they bring about their effects is a further
issue. But the parallel between two trichotomies – between cause, causal
chain, and conditions; and core realization, system (total realization),
and background conditions – is useful in understanding why one needs
to go beyond the resources of the modified standard view of realization.

6 context sensitivity within the standard view
Several physicalist proposals that can be viewed as sympathetic to the
standard view have acknowledged the role of context in the metaphysics
of mind, and in this section I shall consider whether they adequately accommodate the sort of context sensitivity introduced in Chapter 5. These
proposals are Terry Horgan’s idea of regional supervenience, and Denis
Walsh’s more recent defense of a view he calls wide content individualism
or alternative individualism.

While neither of these proposals focus on the notion of realization per
se, both views can be construed as attempts to provide a role for context
that maintain some version of the constitutivity thesis about realizations.

Their shortfalls qua modifications of the standard view are my concern
here.

Terry Horgan introduced a thesis of supervenience that he later christened regional supervenience:
There are no two P-regions [spatio-temporal regions of a physically possible
world] that are exactly alike in all qualitative intrinsic physical features but different in some other qualitative intrinsic features.9
Regional supervenience was introduced to account for what Horgan
calls an individual’s context-dependent properties. Horgan’s examples
134 Individualism and Externalism in Cognitive Sciences
include being president of the United States, being a bank, and knowing
that Oscar Peterson is a jazz pianist. It does so by extending the subvenient
base to the spatio-temporal region that contains that individual so as to
include the relevant contextual factors in that base.

If we were to consider this as extending the realization base beyond the
individual, we would have something like a wide realization (though note
that I have defined these in terms of entitylike systems, rather than spatiotemporal regions). But this, of course, would be to give up the constitutivity thesis. Horgan himself thinks that the realizers for such properties
are typically narrower than the corresponding subvenient base, suggesting that he views realizations as satisfying the constitutivity thesis. Such a
view, however, can claim only that realizations, together with the larger
spatio-temporal region of which they are a part, determine the properties they realize, giving us realizers that by themselves do not satisfy the
sufficiency thesis. What satisfies the sufficiency thesis is the regional supervenience base, but clearly that does not satisfy the constitutivity thesis.

In short, I think that we see here something like the tension between the
two halves of the standard view of realization, with what metaphysically
determines the presence of a property in an individual being something
more than what is bounded by that individual.

This argument can be reexpressed as follows. Consider the constitutivity thesis reformulated with respect to the entire region, rather than
the individual in that region who has the properties:
regional physical constitutivity thesis: Realizers of states and properties are exhaustively physically constituted by the intrinsic, physical states of the region
containing the individual whose states or properties they are.

The metaphysical sufficiency thesis and the regional physical constitutivity thesis are jointly satisfiable. But since the latter thesis explicitly requires
going beyond the boundary of the individual property bearer in order
to specify what determines that property, realization on this view is not
entity bounded.

Denis Walsh’s chief aim is to articulate a position that resolves what he
calls the antinomy of individuation: that combining the plausible claim
that thoughts of the same psychological kind have the same (wide) contents with individualism entails the implausible conclusion that“thoughts
which are instances of the same physiological kind have the same wide
contents.” Walsh’s solution to the antinomy is to reformulate each of
these three claims so as to make explicit the way in which psychological
states are context sensitive. These three principles, which together he
calls wide content individualism, are:
(1) Necessarily, if individuals have thoughts of the same psychological
kinds with respect to a context, then their thoughts have the same
(context-sensitive) content with respect to that context.

(2) Necessarily, states of the same physiological kind which share a
context realize states of the same psychological kind with respect
to that shared context.

(3) Necessarily, states of the same physiological kind which share a
context realize thoughts with the same content with respect to that
context.

As in the original antinomy of individuation, (1) and (2) entail (3), but
(3), Walsh suggests, is true.10
(2) implies that identical intrinsic, physical states of individuals in the
same context realize the same psychological states with respect to that
