context, while (3) spells out this implication for the special case of intentional psychological states. While Walsh suggests that this is a way of
reconciling wide content with individualism, consider (2) and especially
(3) in light of the constitutivity and sufficiency theses and my argument
thus far. In effect, (3) says that if you take realizers that satisfy the constitutivity thesis and fix their context you have realizations of intentional
states with the same content. Yet, as the conjunction here makes clear,
the realizers that satisfy the constitutivity thesis themselves satisfy the suf-
ficiency thesis with respect to intentional states only in conjunction with
their context. Thus, we lack any one realizer that satisfies both theses.

This is precisely the problem that we identified with Horgan’s regional
supervenience thesis considered as an attempt to develop the standard
view of realization in a way that accounts for the context sensitivity of
mental states.

Furthermore, since Walsh’s view invokes a relatively unconstrained
notion of context, it would seem subject to a variation on the single neuron objection that I introduced in section 5. Walsh says that he thinks
of a context “as corresponding to a set of properties of an individual’s
environment.” If we make the context rich enough – including, for example, properties that might normally be determined by an individual’s
internal, functional organization – then two identical single neurons
that realize the same physiological state (and so satisfy the constitutivity
thesis) could also realize the same psychological state relative to that context. But this does not so much provide us with a realization that also
satisfies the sufficiency thesis as indicate a problem with drawing on such
136 Individualism and Externalism in Cognitive Sciences
a notion of context as a way of saving the standard, entity-bounded view
of realization.11
Walsh’s defense of the view that he calls alternative individualism is also
an attempt to build context sensitivity into individualistic views in the
metaphysics of mind and science. At the heart of alternative individualism
is a context-sensitive version of the local supervenience thesis – that causal
powers supervene on the intrinsic, physical properties of individuals – that
serves as a premise in the argument from causal powers that we discussed
in Chapter 4. Walsh takes alternative individualism to preserve what is
right in that argument. The supervenience thesis that Walsh defends
claims that for all contexts, necessarily an object’s having a given contextsensitive, intrinsic property in a context fixes the psychological properties
it has in that context. We can express this succinctly in symbols, where
“γ” denotes a context,“Φ” an intrinsic, qualitative property, and “ ” the
psychological kinds that an individual, x, instantiates:
∀γ· ∀x(Φx, γ ⊃  x, γ).

Walsh’s claim here generalizes beyond psychology to scientific taxonomy
in general.12
The problem with this supervenience thesis, as with that of the orthodox individualist (which simply drops the contextual relativization) is that
there is a wide range of examples for which it simply does not hold. Two
organisms that were intrinsically identical in the very same context could
belong to different species because of ancestral, phylogenetic differences
between them; two viral infections in a person – and thus, I assume, in one
context – that give rise to identical symptoms and are treated by the same
regimen can be of different types because they are caused by different
viral agents. In both cases, the identity of consequences in a given context
(or even of intrinsic, qualitative properties) does not determine sameness
of scientific kind because the corresponding kinds are individuated, in
part, by causal antecedents, not causal consequences.

Recall that my basic criticism of the original argument from causal
powers was that it equivocates on “causal powers,” invoking a wider notion in one premise (individuation in science is by causal powers) and
a narrower notion in another (causal powers supervene on an individual’s intrinsic properties). Alternative individualism is an attempt to salvage both of these premises, but it too involves much the same equivocation, this time on context-sensitive causal powers. The fundamental
problem in all of these cases is brought out once one asks whether relational properties are, or are fixed by, such powers: They must be if the
premise about scientific individuation is to be true, but they can’t be if the
premise about supervenience is to be true. Alternative individualism, like
Walsh’s wide content individualism, is committed to causal powers (within
a context) subsuming relational properties – that is what allows these
modifications of individualism to be seemingly compatible with externalism about the mind – but this is precisely what calls into question whether
such powers are a subset of (or supervene on) an individual’s intrinsic
properties.

Considered in tandem, Horgan’s and Walsh’s views illustrate that the
basic tension in the standard view of realization between the constitutivity
and sufficiency theses is not easily relieved. Placing emphasis on the need
to move beyond the boundary of the individual subject in order to have a
determinative base for mental states, as Horgan’s regional supervenience
does, highlights the point that realizations satisfying the sufficiency thesis
do not themselves satisfy the constitutivity thesis. And emphasizing that
realizations that satisfy the constitutivity thesis determine mental states
only given a shared context, as Walsh’s (2) does, suggests, conversely, that
in at least some cases realizations that satisfy the constitutivity thesis do
not satisfy the sufficiency thesis.

Those willing to hum along to the tune of the context-sensitive view of
realization and entertain the idea that properties at least sometimes have
wide realizations might reasonably wonder whether the context-sensitive
view has more radical implications for how we think about the mind. I
want to take up one such putative implication in each of the next three
sections, beginning in each case with a question.13
7 keeping realism afloat
Why doesn’t the context-sensitive view lead to an irrealist position on
mental states? Consider the very idea of a physical state’s being “metaphysically sufficient” for a given mental state. We have seen that, strictly
speaking, metaphysical sufficiency requires both that some physical system be in a certain state (a total realization) and that certain background
conditions hold, thus making even total realizations metaphysically context sensitive. This view of total realizations underwrites the realism about
mental properties that I invoked at the end of section 5, a realism that
would be called into question if it could be shown that total realizations
are also epistemically context sensitive, as core realizations are.

In fact, we might well think that total realizations must be epistemically
context sensitive if the core realizations they contain as proper parts are.

138 Individualism and Externalism in Cognitive Sciences
A sufficient condition for an individual having a given mental state is that
there be a total realization of that state whose core part lies wholly or in
large part in that individual. But if that core realization is epistemically
context sensitive, then so too is that state itself, and mental states start to
