sound more like merely ascribed states of individuals.

Moreover, it seems doubtful that there is any particular physical state
that is“the”total realization for a given property, for what we pick out as a
total realization will depend on what we count as part of the corresponding system and what counts as background conditions to it. Once one
“goes wide” about realization, as perhaps one should, we have a plurality
of ways of thinking about the underlying metaphysics, a pluralism that
suggests that we, rather than the world, are the source for how the distinctions between individual, system, and background conditions are drawn.

Thus, the context-sensitive view is faced with much the problem that we
posed for the modified standard view in section 5, and an externalist
metaphysics pushes us toward irrealism about mental states.

Reply: This irrealist challenge can be arrested. In the first place, epistemic context sensitivity is not simply inherited by total realizations from
their constituent core realizations. A total realization of P could have
been defined simply as a state of S that is metaphysically sufficient for
P, that is, by dropping the relative clause that refers to core realizations,
without significantly changing the view that I have defended. There can
be multiple total realizations not because there are multiple core realizations that are epistemically context sensitive, but because, given the
complexity of the sort of systems there are, there will at least typically be
many ways in which those systems can be arranged or instantiated, each
of which will metaphysically suffice for P.

Consider pain. The nociceptive system that realizes pain is complicated, and there are many states it can be in that would metaphysically suf-
fice for an individual organism to be in pain. Even given a particular core
realization of pain – say, as a particular instance of C-fiber stimulation –
there remain multiple total realizations for that core realization because there are various noncore parts of the realization that could
suffice for the mental state of pain, even though just one of these will, in
any given instance, form part of the total realization in that case.

As with the boundary of individuals, the line between what falls within
any given system (and so can be part of the total realization for any
properties it realizes) and the background conditions for its existence
and operation can be fuzzy. The individuation conditions for systems are
likely to be more coarse grained than for individuals, but in both cases
these are highly constrained by the physical facts. It is not simply up to us
to determine what constitutes a system or the system of relevance. Like
the individuals that they either constitute (in cases of entity-bounded realization) or that constitute them (in cases of wide realization), systems
have individuation conditions, and these depend only in minor ways on
our epistemic proclivities and fancies. Whether teeth or saliva form part
of the digestive system, or operate as background conditions for its operation, may be “up to us.” But the facts about how food is broken down
into energy and distributed within the body, and how waste products are
formed and removed from the body determine what, plus or minus a
bit, constitutes the digestive system. We discover, rather than invent, what
physically constitutes the digestive system; the same is true of cognitive
systems, whether they be entity bounded or wide.

Cases in which there are genuinely alternative systems which we could,
plausibly, identify as the locus of a given total realization are likely to
be rare. Again, focus on the physiological systems that are a paradigm
here. While it is logically and metaphysically possible that there be two or
more candidate systems for the realization of any biological function –
respiration, circulation, digestion, reproduction – the requisite complexity to each of these systems in practice makes it relatively unproblematic
to single out what “the” relevant system is for any given property. The
same is true of cognitive systems. As with any systematic theorizing, in science or elsewhere, this theorizing about both entity-bounded and wide
cognitive systems is subject to error, modification, and revision, but this
is not the sort of epistemic context sensitivity that would undermine a
realist view of the ascription of psychological states.

8 pluralism about realization
Why don’t all mental states have wide realizations? Suppose that we accept
the view that at least some mental states have wide realizations. Might we
replace the existential by the universal quantifier here, and suggest that
the moral of the story so far is that mental states have individualistic core
realizations but wide total realizations?
Reply: Given that social actions appear to have radically wide realizations, and the ways in which at least our common-sense conception of
the mind is linked to such actions via the idea of a reason for acting, we
might have pause about the latter of these two views. Here I want to make
some brief comments about the former claim, the idea that all mental
states might have wide realizations.

140 Individualism and Externalism in Cognitive Sciences
One natural thought in response to the claim that all mental states have
wide realizations is that mental properties typically denoted by monadic
predicates – such as pain – surely have entity-bounded realizations, since
their presence at a time or over a time interval is determined solely by
what is going on within the boundary of the individual who has the property. In fact, given that the nociceptive system is a proper part of an
individual organism, as I suggested earlier, this conclusion about pain
seems inescapable. More generally, there would seem to be a range of
mental states and processes that form part of entity-bounded systems:
Good candidates include fear, motor imagery, and haptic perception.14
It has been the working assumption of much traditional cognitive science, committed as it has been to individualism about the mind, that all
mental states and processes can be viewed in such a way, with the task
of cognitive science being to uncover what these entity-bounded systems
are. While I think that there is little reason to think that such a general
view of cognition can be sustained, my point here is that the individualistic view of at least some cognitive processes does seem correct. This
suggests a general conclusion – that whereas some of our mental states
have an entity-bounded realization, others have a wide realization.

It may be worth briefly pondering the more radical alternative that I
am somewhat casually rejecting here, that no psychological states actually have entity-bounded realizations. This would imply that the cognitive
sciences are radically mistaken, and supposing that many noncognitive,
biological systems are individualistic, suggests that there is a radical juncture between the cognitive and the biological. The scale and nature of
the error within the cognitive sciences would be akin to that which behaviorists charged introspectionists with in the first part of the twentieth
century: There simply aren’t the kinds of internal states (systems) that
such a psychology seeks. While I don’t say that it is impossible that the
cognitive sciences have gone awry so radically, it does seem that one
would want very strong reasons for thinking that the smallist metaphysics
on which they have relied is completely mistaken. It seems to me clear
where the burden of proof lies on this issue.
