
If some of our mental states do have entity-bounded realizations, while
others have wide realizations, then there is a respect in which the standard
way of characterizing (total) realizations via the Ramsey-Lewis method
for defining theoretical terms – a method commonly used to characterize functionalist views in the philosophy of mind – is both restricted
and misleading. Ramsey-Lewis sentences purport to represent complete
theories for a given domain and are constructed by conjoining all of the
truths specified by such theories; one derives the total realization for a
particular property or state by conjoining its core realization to the realization of complete theories for the domain. Here let us simply grant
that such a conception of folk and scientific theories is coherent and
a close enough approximation of the theories we have actually developed to model those theories usefully. Now, if some part of psychology
is wide, then since the total realization for a complete psychology will be
a wide realization, that for any particular psychological state will also be
wide. Given the wide nature of the propositional attitudes and at least
some subpersonal psychological states, the goal of characterizing a complete psychology implies that the total realizations of any psychological
state must be wide.15
If we follow Brute Intuition and our brief reflection on cognitive science, and insist that surely some psychological properties have entitybounded realizations, and thus accept my claim that not all psychological
properties are wide, the Ramsey-Lewis method appears to provide us with
no way to represent a significant distinction. The most obvious modification to the standard Ramsey-Lewis view – to attempt to define properties
like being in pain by reference to a theory of pain, and properties like
believing that p by a theory of belief – fails, because each of these theories will almost certainly mention terms from the other, and so will not
allow one to define properties with entity-bounded realizations. I leave
further exploration here to those more enamored with the Ramsey-Lewis
method than am I.

9 abandoning the subject?
Why aren’t subjects or bearers of mental states themselves wide? The characterization of wide realizations preserves the idea that properties with
such realizations are still properties of individual subjects. Thus, fitness
remains a property of individual organisms even though its realization is
wide. And my belief that Paris is the capital of France remains my belief
even though it has a wide realization. I think that this is also true even
in cases of radically wide realization, paradigmatically in those involving
social actions: Jane’s signing a check is her action because the core realization of that action is realized in large part (even if not wholly) by
something that she does, such as moving her pen-grasping hand over
a piece of paper. To my mind this is a desirable feature of my view of
142 Individualism and Externalism in Cognitive Sciences
mental properties in particular because it preserves what is right about
an individualistic view of subjectivity and in so doing readily allows for
both third- and first-person perspectives on the mind.

One might well challenge this aspect of my view as unnecessarily and
unjustifiably conservative. Unnecessarily, for once realization goes wide
surely we are on our way to undermining subjectivity and the misplaced
position of privilege that the individual subject has in our thinking about
the mind. And unjustifiably, since in at least some cases of wide realization, particularly those of radically wide realization, there is no nonarbitrary way to single out individuals as the subjects or “owners” of the
corresponding mental properties. If we have wide realizations of mental
states, and thus wide mental states, so too we should have “wide subjects”
of those states. Andy Clark and David Chalmers suggest something like
this view of the self as a consequence of their endorsement of what they
call “the extended mind,” a view that Clark has more recently applied in
his thinking about rationality and human intelligence.16
Reply: There may, of course, be interesting science fiction or other fanciful examples that pull our intuitions toward such radical conclusions,
but it is important not to lose sight of the fact that, at least in the world
that we actually inhabit, and being the creatures that we actually are,
there is a basis for marking out individuals as the subjects of properties,
even those properties with wide realizations. Individuals – and here, as
always, our paradigms are individual people and individual organisms –
are spatio-temporally bounded, relatively cohesive, unified entities that
are continuous across space and time. Recall that the possibility of wide
systems was modeled on the actuality of systems that formed part of such
individuals as exemplified by the variety of physiological systems theorized about in biology and medicine. While these narrow systems (for
example, the circulatory system) share some of the features that make
individuals metaphysically distinctive and certainly have their own properties, they are not themselves individuals, and it seems strained or at best
derivative to view them as the subjects of the sorts of properties that we
would intuitively ascribe to the individuals they constitute. For example,
the visual system and its parts can be lesioned, can have imbalances in levels of neurotransmitters, and have certain of its pathways blocked (either
experimentally or “in the wild”). But it is the individual who perceives,
who suffers from a visual agnosia, who experiences a hallucination. The
same is true of wide systems, and this provides a principled basis for ascribing mental properties in particular to individual subjects rather than
the wide systems of which those subjects are a part. In the actual world, it
is individuals who form and maintain beliefs, experience emotions, and
wonder about what will happen next, even if those individuals form part
of what I have called folk psychological systems.

10 putting our metaphysics to work
The chief goal in this chapter and the last has been to develop a metaphysics suitable for an externalist view of psychology. Importantly, the
argument here is not driven by a consideration of the special nature of
mental properties but, rather, by reflection on a range of properties from
the cognitive, biological, and social sciences.

Although the considerations here have been metaphysical, the externalist metaphysics developed is one with explicit ties to a strategy of explanation, integrative synthesis. The explanatory strategy of constitutive
decomposition is well entrenched in a range of physical sciences, and
philosophers of the cognitive sciences have been quick to point to ways
in which it can be and has been used with respect to cognitive capacities. Integrative synthesis, while not quite novel, has a patchier history,
particularly in the physical sciences. But again, if I am correct about the
significance of the notion of wide realization, then we should expect integrative synthesis to find a central place in the sciences, including the
fragile sciences.

In the following chapters we will see where all of this philosophical
footwork leads us. In the next chapter I consider externalist views of the
mind in action in the cognitive sciences, extending this to noncomputational approaches to cognition in Part Three.

7
Representation, Computation, and Cognitive Science
1 the cognitive science gesture
We saw in Chapter 4 that as individualism was coming under attack in the
late 1970s, it was also being defended by Jerry Fodor and Stephen Stich
as a view of the mind particularly apt for a genuinely scientific approach
to understanding cognition. In contrast to the original externalist papers
of Putnam and Burge, those in which methodological solipsism and the
