principle of autonomy were introduced focused on the relevance of individualism for explanatory practice in cognitive science. They appealed to
the computational nature of cognition in arguing that cognitive science
should be individualistic, and for substantive conclusions about its scope
and methodology.

These early individualist arguments of Stich and Fodor invoked what
I shall call the cognitive science gesture. They primarily pointed to general
features of cognition and theory in cognitive science that, they claimed,
revealed their individualistic nature. Cognition was computational (and
computation was individualistic), or cognitive processing was mechanistic
(and such mechanisms were individualistic). Neither used a sustained,
detailed examination of particular theories and explanations in cognitive
science to argue that they were or must be individualistic. Instead, Fodor
and Stich were, at least initially, content with a more abstract, general
gesture toward features they took to be central to cognitive science.

The gesture toward the developing cognitive sciences in defending
individualism served both to motivate and to buttress more purely philosophical considerations in favor of individualism, such as appeals to functionalism, physicalism, and causal powers, and the idea that it was narrow
144
content that was truly explanatory of cognition. We have also seen how
the standard view of realization reinforced the idea that the metaphysics
of the mental pushed one to an individualistic view of the mind. Thus, a
happy confluence: A range of broadly accepted views of the place of the
mind in the world and empirical practice in our nascent sciences of the
mind both imply individualism about the mind. The rejection of individualism was to come both at the expense of an acceptable metaphysics
and at the cost of forgoing the prospects for a thoroughly naturalistic
treatment of the mind.

My chief aim in this chapter will be to undermine this view of the relationship between individualism and cognitive science. After outlining the
accepted view of individualism and the cognitive sciences in sections 2–3,
in sections 4–7 I turn to reshape the received wisdom here, using David
Marr’s celebrated theory of vision as a focus. At the core of my discussion are the notions of exploitative representation and wide computationalism.

With an alternative vision of representation and computation in hand, I
shall conclude by considering some recent examples within the cognitive
sciences that exemplify externalism in practice.

2 individualism in cognitive science
Although the cognitive science gesture is a gesture – rather than a solid
argument that appeals to empirical practice – it is not an empty gesture.

Even if the original arguments of Fodor and Stich did not win widespread
acceptance amongst philosophers, they struck a chord with psychologists,
linguists, and computer scientists. Indeed, the dominant research traditions in cognitive science have been at least implicitly individualistic.

Consider three expressions of individualism that bring out its attractions
for many cognitive scientists.

One attraction of individualism is its perceived connection to the representational theory of mind, which holds that we interact with the world
perceptually and behaviorally through internal mental representations of
how the world is (as the effects of perceiving) or how the world should be
(as instructions to act). Ray Jackendoff expresses the connection between
such a view and individualism when he says:
Whatever the nature of real reality, the way reality can look to us is determined
and constrained by the nature of our internal mental representations. ... Physical
stimuli (photons, sound waves, pressure on the skin, chemicals in the air, etc.) act
mechanically on sensory neurons. The sensory neurons, acting as transducers in
Pylyshyn’s (1984) sense, set up peripheral levels of representation such as retinal
146 Individualism and Externalism in Cognitive Sciences
arrays and whatever acoustic analysis the ear derives. In turn, the peripheral representations stimulate the construction of more central levels of representation,
leading eventually to the construction of representations in central formats such
as the 3D level model. ...

Jackendoff calls this view the “psychological” (versus philosophical) vision of cognition and its relation to the world. His central claim in this
paper is that only the psychological vision directs us to viable research programs in cognitive science. Provided that the appropriate, internal, representational states of the organism remain fixed, the organism’s more
peripheral causal involvement with its environment is irrelevant to cognition, since the only way in which such causal involvement can matter
to cognition is by altering the internal mental states that represent that
environment.1
Jackendoff’s skepticism about the “philosophical” vision parallels the
disdain for “philosophical” approaches to language that Noam Chomsky
has expressed in drawing the distinction between the “I-language” and the
“E-language,” and Chomsky’s insistence that only the former is suitable
as an object of scientific study. Chomsky takes a conception of language
as “internal,” “intentional,” or “individual,” as opposed to “external,”
“extensional,” or “social,” to be a condition of a serious, empirical investigation of language, to be what makes the question of language use
and acquisition a problem rather than a mystery. The I-language is the
generative procedure inside the individual that is causally responsible for
that individual’s linguistic output, and it is what linguists attempt to reconstruct when they postulate features of a universal grammar. Given
Chomsky’s nativism about language in particular and cognition more
generally, and in light of the relationship between strong nativism and
individualism that I argued for in Chapter 1, we could expect Chomsky
to be critical of externalist views of the mind. Indeed, in “Language and
Nature” Chomsky turns directly to the philosophical tradition of externalism, beginning with the Putnam-Burge thought experiments, to argue
for the poverty of the resulting conception of language and how it should
be studied, a critique extended in his New Horizons in the Study of Language
and Mind.

2
To take a third example of an individualistic perspective on cognition, consider this extract from the Foreword to Simon Baron-Cohen’s
Mindblindness, written by Leda Cosmides and John Tooby:
Although it is a modern truism to say that we live in culturally constructed worlds,
the thin surface of cultural construction is dwarfed by (and made possible by)
the deep underlying strata of evolved species-typical cognitive construction. We
inhabit mental worlds populated by the computational outputs of battalions of
evolved, specialized neural automata. They segment words out of a continual
auditory flow, they construct a world of local objects from edges and gradients
in our two-dimensional retinal arrays, they infer the purpose of a hook from its
shape, they recognize and make us feel the negative response of a conversational
partner from the roll of her eyes, they identify cooperative intentions among individuals from their joint attention and common emotional responses, and so on.3
While Cosmides and Tooby clearly do assign the environment of the
