organism a role in the evolutionary history of species-typical capacities,
the cognitive capacities themselves are individualistic.

These individualistic conceptions of the mind ultimately shape the
direction of research within the cognitive sciences through their effect
on how central notions in the field are construed. The most central of
these are representation and computation.

3 mental representation as encoding
Underlying the visions of cognitive science exemplified by Jackendoff,
Chomsky, and Cosmides and Tooby are what I will call encoding views of
mental representation. Simply put, encoding views hold that to have a
mental representation, M, is for M to encode information about some
object, property, event, or state of affairs m. A well-known, protean version of the encoding view is the picture or copy theory of mind, where to
have a mental representation of m is to have a mental picture or image
of m in your head, where the picture is “of m” just because it looks like
m. A version of the encoding view more prevalent in cognitive science
and that builds more elaborately on the idea that cognitive processing
takes place in a sort of code is the language of thought hypothesis: To
have a mental representation of m is to have a token in your language of
thought, M, that stands for or refers to m. Unlike the copy theory of mental representation, on this view there need be no resemblance between
representation and represented, with the role that resemblance plays in
the picture theory being played by some putatively natural relation, such
as causation or teleology. At the time that the debate between individualists and externalists was being articulated, the language of thought
hypothesis laid some claim to be “the only game in town” for understanding mental representation and computation.

On either view, discrete mental representations encode information about particular aspects of the world. Existing in a code, mental
148 Individualism and Externalism in Cognitive Sciences
representations are governed by a kind of syntax that determines how basic units in the code can be manipulated, combined, and decomposed.

Thus, cognitive scientists can and should explore the properties of representations and the rules that govern their internal dynamics, rather than
the relationships that exist between organisms and environments.

There are two prima facie problems with encoding views of mental
representation. These problems constitute not so much knockdown arguments against such views as open the way to reconceptualize representation in ways amenable to externalist visions of cognition.

The first is that although there may have been a time at which encoding
views were the only game in town, over the last twenty years a number of
views of mental representation have been developed that break from the
encoding tradition. One of these is the notion of distributed representation. On this view of representation, what is in the head are not discrete
symbols, each encoding their own piece of information, but less contentladen nodes which, in combination with the connection strengths linking
them, collectively represent information about the world. A related alternative conception of representation is that of subsymbolic computation,
whereby the units over which the computations are defined, the representations, are not themselves symbols (that is, codes). Both of these
conceptions of representation were developed within a connectionist
framework, but they have a basis in dynamic approaches to cognition
more generally. What these views share is the idea of thinking about representation as fleeting, situated, dynamic, and interactive, and as such
they mark a departure from encoding views of representation.4
These alternatives to encoding views constitute an important break
in the grip that those views have had on how cognitive scientists have
conceptualized mental representation. (So much so, in fact, that they
were sometimes overenthusiastically characterized as dispensing with the
notion of representation altogether.) But as they have been developed
primarily within individualistic frameworks, they do not themselves constitute externalist views of representation. They reconceptualize the internal form and dynamics of mental representation, but do little by way
of viewing mental representation as, in some sense, essentially embodied
or embedded.5
The second problem for encoding views is that the medium for encoding is, by definition, some type of code, and codes themselves need
to be interpreted. By virtue of what is such interpretation performed?
Either by virtue of some other type of code – in which case we face the
same question again – or by virtue of some brute noninterpretative and so
noncoding process – in which case it is difficult to see what role the initial
appeal to codes (and thus interpretation) is doing. Thus, the appeal to
mental encoding either leads to a regress or it was not necessary in the
first place. This dilemma constitutes an objection to the use of the notion
of encoding in understanding mental representation in particular, rather
than representation in general, since in other cases one or the other of
these two horns can be grasped.

For example, consider public codes, such as communicated natural
language and Morse code. These are interpreted by people, with interpretation mediated by knowledge of the conventions governing those
codes. Since public codes are not self-interpreting, grasping the first horn
of the dilemma above to explain how public codes are interpreted is
unproblematic.

Alternatively, consider computational languages. These can be layered
on top of one another through compilation and translation, with the
most basic language, the machine language, engineered directly in the
circuitry of the machine. Although this combination of compilation and
engineering is sometimes taken as an analogue for how our language
of thought is instantiated in the head, note that while compilation does
involve encoding a higher-level language in a lower-level language, engineering does not. Electronic circuitry is not a code for machine languages
but an implementation of them. Thus, in this case we can grasp the second horn of the dilemma, but we do so by giving up the metaphor of
encoding.

One might object that this dilemma argument takes too literally what
is only an analogy between mental representations and codes. All that
cognitive scientists mean by mental representations are discrete, internal
structures that correspond to things in the world. It is these structures and
their properties, not objects in the world and their properties that cognitive processes are sensitive to. Things in the world drop out as irrelevant
for cognitive processing once the structures to which they correspond
are formed or activated, and it is for this reason that cognition is methodologically solipsistic.

This view can be expressed by saying that the process of mental representation is simply that of symbol formation, and that cognition is
symbol crunching. Mental representations are natural symbols in that
they are generated by brute causal relations between cognizers and
their worlds, and so unlike conventional symbols, such as those on road
signs and in written languages, they do not require interpretation to be
symbols.

150 Individualism and Externalism in Cognitive Sciences
I suspect that this softening of the parallel between mental representations and codes accurately captures what many cognitive scientists
