(particularly psychologists) think is right about the language of thought
hypothesis. Such softening, however, raises or leaves open questions that
strict encoding views close off.

First, by placing more weight on mental representations as natural
symbols, it weakens the connection between mental representation and
computation, since computational symbols are conventional. If mental
representations are not, strictly speaking, codes but natural symbols, then
we need some account of the basis for not only how the symbols get
their original meaning, but for the syntax that governs their processing.

Fodor’s own view – that the symbols in the language of thought, concepts, are innate, as is the syntax of that language – is one answer to this
question, but one that very few cognitive scientists have been prepared to
swallow.6
Second, this softening also highlights the question of what is special
about mental representation. There are myriad causal dependencies between an organism’s internal structures and states of the world. Why are
those involving my perceptual apparatus and my mind symbolic, while
those that concern my digestive system or the state of tension in the muscles in my leg merely causal? Philosophical projects in “psychosemantics,”
such as informational semantics and teleosemantics, have inevitably appealed to other forms of representation in articulating their vision of
mental representation. The paradigm of these have been the internal
states of measuring instruments, such as thermostats and fuel gauges, in
the former case and the functioning and products of biological organs
and behaviors, such as the heart and the dance of bees, in the latter.

This deflationary naturalism about mental representation is no doubt a
good thing. But whether such views can be happily married to something
like encoding views of representation, or to an individualistic view of the
mind, seems far from clear.7
4 the debate over marr’s theory of vision
Thus, individualism receives some support from the computational and
representational theories of mind, and so from the cognitive science
community in which those theories have been influential. But I have also
indicated that the claim that a truly explanatory cognitive science will be
individualistic has an epistemic basis more like a gesture than a proof.

One way to substantiate this second view in light of the first is to turn to
examine the continuing philosophical debate over whether David Marr’s
celebrated theory of early vision is individualistic.

Marr’s theory occupies a special place in cognitive science as well as
in the individualism-externalism debate. Marr was trained in mathematics and theoretical neuroscience at Cambridge in the 1960s, and spent
most of the 1970s at both the AI Lab and the Department of Brain and
Cognitive Sciences at MIT before dying, tragically, of leukemia at the
age of thirty-five. His ability to draw on and contribute to neuroscience,
artificial intelligence, psychology, and philosophy exemplified cognitive
science at its best. Although many of the specific algorithms that Marr
and his colleagues proposed have been superceded by subsequent work in
the computational theory of vision, the sweep and systematicity of Marr’s
views, especially as laid out in Vision: A Computational Investigation into
the Human Representation and Processing of Visual Information, have given
their views continuing influence in the field. The importance of Marr’s
theory for the individualism-externalism debate can perhaps best be understood historically and in light of the cognitive science gesture made
by individualists in the late 1970s.8
In the final section of “Individualism and the Mental,” Burge had suggested that his thought experiments and the conclusion derived from
them – that mental content and thus mental states with content were
not individualistic – had implications for computational explanations
of cognition. These implications were twofold. First, purely computational accounts of the mind, construed individualistically, were inadequate. Second, insofar as such explanations did appeal to a notion of
mental content, they would fail to be individualistic. It is the latter of
these ideas that Burge pursued in “Individualism and Psychology,” in
which he argued, strikingly, that Marr’s theory of vision was not individualistic. This was the first attempt to explore in detail a widely respected
view within cognitive science vis-`a-vis the individualism issue, and it was
a crucial turning point in moving beyond the cognitive science gesture
toward a style of argument that really does utilize empirical practice in
cognitive science itself.9
What is called “Marr’s theory of vision” is an account of a range of processes in early or “low-level” vision that was developed by Marr and colleagues, such as Ellen Hildreth and Tomas Poggio, at the Massachusetts
Institute of Technology. These processes include stereopsis, the perception of motion, and shape and surface perception, and the approach is
explicitly computational. Marr’s Vision became the paradigm expression
of the approach, particularly for philosophers, something facilitated by
152 Individualism and Externalism in Cognitive Sciences
Marr’s comfortable blend of computational detail with broad-brushed,
programmatic statements of the perspective and implications of his approach to understanding vision. For example, in his first chapter, entitled
“The Philosophy and the Approach,” Marr recounts the realization that
represented a critical breakthrough in the methodology of the study of
vision, as follows:
The message was plain. There must exist an additional level of understanding
at which the character of the information-processing tasks carried out during
perception are analyzed and understood in a way that is independent of the
particular mechanisms and structures that implement them in our heads. This
was what was missing – the analysis of the problem as an information-processing
task. ... if the notion of different types of understanding is taken very seriously,
it allows the study of the information-processing basis of perception to be made
rigorous. It becomes possible, by separating explanations into different levels, to
make explicit statements about what is being computed and why and to construct theories stating that what is being computed is optimal in some sense or is
guaranteed to function correctly.10
Over the last twenty years, work on Marr’s theory of vision has continued,
extending to cover the processes constituting low-level vision more extensively. By and large, the philosophical literature on individualism that
appeals to Marr’s theory has been content to rely almost exclusively on
Marr’s Vision in interpreting the theory.

As the passage from Marr quoted above suggests, critical to the computational theory that Marr advocates is a recognition of the different
levels at which one can – indeed, for Marr, must – study vision. According to Marr, there are three levels of analysis to pursue in studying any
information-processing device. First, there is the level of the computational theory (hereafter, the computational level), which specifies the goal
of the computation, and at which the device itself is characterized in
abstract, formal terms as “mapping from one kind of information to another.” Second is the level of representation and algorithm (hereafter, the
algorithmic level), which selects a “representation for the input and output
and the algorithm to be used to transform one into the other.” And third
is the level of hardware implementation (hereafter, the implementational
level), which tells us how the representation and algorithm are realized
physically in an actual device.11
Philosophical discussions, like Marr’s own discussions, have been focused on the computational and algorithmic levels for vision, what Marr
