himself characterizes, respectively, as the “what and why” and “how” questions about vision. As we will see, there is particular controversy over what
the computational level involves. In addition to the trichotomy of levels
at which an informational-processing analysis proceeds, there are two further interesting dimensions to Marr’s approach to vision that have not
been widely discussed in the philosophical literature. These add some
complexity not only to Marr’s theory, but also to the issue of how “computation” and “representation” are to be understood in it.

The first is the idea that visual computations are performed sequentially in stages of computational inference. Marr states that the overall
goal of the theory of vision is “to understand how descriptions of the
world may efficiently and reliably be obtained from images of it.” He
views the inferences from intensity changes in the retinal image to fullblown three-dimensional descriptions as proceeding via the construction
of a series of preliminary representations: the raw primal sketch, the full
primal sketch and the 2 1/2-D sketch. Call this the temporal dimension
to visual computation. The second idea is that visual processing is subject to modular design, and so particular aspects of the construction
of 3-D images – stereopsis, depth, motion, and so on – can be investigated in principle independently. Call this the modular dimension to visual
computation.12
A recognition of the temporal and modular dimensions to visual computation complicates any discussion of what “the” computational and
algorithmic levels for “the” process of vision are. Minimally, in identifying each of Marr’s three levels, we need first to fix at least the modular
dimension to vision in order to analyze a given visual process; and to fix
at least the temporal dimension in order to analyze a given visual computation. We will see how these points interact with the debate over Marr’s
theory shortly.

Burge’s argument that Marr’s theory is not individualistic is explicitly
and fully presented in the following extended passage:
(1) The theory is intentional. (2) The intentional primitives of the theory and
the information they carry are individuated by reference to contingently existing
physical items or conditions by which they are normally caused and to which they
normally apply. (3) So if these physical conditions and, possibly, attendant physical laws were regularly different, the information conveyed to the subject and the
intentional content of his or her visual representations would be different. (4) It
is not incoherent to conceive of relevantly different (say, optical) laws regularly
causing the same non-intentionally, individualistically individuated physical regularities in the subject’s eyes and nervous system. ... (5) In such a case (by (3)) the
individual’s visual representations would carry different information and have
different representational content, though the person’s whole non-intentional
physical history ... might remain the same. (6) Assuming that some perceptual
154 Individualism and Externalism in Cognitive Sciences
states are identified in the theory in terms of their informational or intentional
content, it follows that individualism is not true for the theory of vision.13
The second and third premise make specific claims about Marr’s theory
of vision, while the first premise, together with (4) and (5), indicate the
affinity between this argument and Burge’s original argument for individualism, cast in Twin Earth-like terms, that we discussed in Chapter 4.

Burge concentrates on defending (2)–(4), largely by an appeal to
the ways in which Marr appears to rely on “the structure of the real
world” in articulating both the computational and algorithmic levels for
vision. Marr certainly does make a number of appeals to this structure
throughout Vision. For example, he says
The purpose of these representations is to provide useful descriptions of aspects
of the real world. The structure of the real world therefore plays an important
role in determining both the nature of the representations that are used and the
nature of the processes that derive and maintain them. An important part of the
theoretical analysis is to make explicit the physical constraints and assumptions
that have been used in the design of the representations and processes...

And Marr does claim that the representational primitives in early vision
(such as “blobs, lines, edges, groups, and so forth”) “correspond to real
physical changes on the viewed surface.” Together these sorts of comments have been taken to support (2) and (3) in particular.14
Marr’s appeals to the “structure of the real world” do not themselves,
however, imply a commitment to externalism. For these remarks can be,
and have been, interpreted differently. Consider two alternative interpretations available to individualists.

The first is to see Marr as giving the real world a role to play only
in constructing what he calls the computational theory. Since vision is
a process for extracting information from the world in order to allow
the organism to act effectively in that world, clearly we need to know
something of the structure of the world in our account of what vision is
for, what it is that vision does, what function vision is designed to perform.

If this is correct, then it seems possible to argue that one does not need
to look beyond the head in constructing the theory of the representation
and algorithm. As it is at this level that visual states are taxonomized qua
the objects of computational mechanisms, Marr’s references to the “real
world” do not commit him to an externalist view of the taxonomy of visual
states and processes.

The second is to take these comments to suggest merely a heuristic role
for the structure of the real world, not only in developing a computational
taxonomy but also in the computational theory of vision more generally.

That is, turning to the beyond-the-head world is a useful shortcut for
understanding how vision works and the nature of visual states and computations. This heuristic is effective either in providing important background information that allows us to understand the representational
primitives and thus the earliest stages of the visual computation, or by
serving as an interpretative lens that allows us to construct a model of
computational processes in terms that are meaningful. Again, as with the
previous option, the beyond-the-head world plays only a peripheral role
within computational vision, even if Marr at times refers to it prominently
in outlining his theory.

Beyond questions of how to interpret Marr’s own comments, individualists have objected to Burge’s argument in two principal ways. First,
Gabriel Segal and Robert Matthews have both in effect denied (2), with
Segal arguing that these intentional primitives (such as edges and generalized cones) are better interpreted within the context of Marr’s theory
as individuated by their narrow content. Second, Frances Egan has more
strikingly denied (1), arguing that, qua computational theory, Marr’s theory is not intentional at all. Both objections are worth exploring in detail, particularly insofar as they highlight issues that remain contentious
in contemporary discussions. In fact, Marr’s theory raises more foundational questions than it solves about the nature of the mind and how we
should investigate it.15
5 segal and egan on computation and representation
Segal points out that there are two general interpretations available when
one seeks to ascribe intentional contents to the visual states of two individuals. First, one could follow Burge and interpret the content of a given
visual state in terms of what normally causes it. Thus, if it is a crack in a
surface that plays this role, then the content of the corresponding visual
state is “crack”; if it is a shadow in the environment that does so, then
the content of the visual state is “shadow.” This could be so even in the
