case of doppelgangers ¨ , and so the visual states so individuated are not individualistic. But second and alternatively, one could offer a more liberal
interpretation of the content of the visual states in the two cases, one
which was neutral as to the cause of the state, and to which we might give
the name “crackdow” to indicate this neutrality. This content would be
shared by doppelangers ¨ , and so would be individualistic.

The crucial part of Segal’s argument is his case for preferring the second of these interpretations, and it is here that one would expect to find
an appeal to the specifics of Marr’s theory of vision. While some of Segal’s
156 Individualism and Externalism in Cognitive Sciences
arguments here do so appeal, Segal also introduces a number of quite
general considerations that have little to do with Marr’s theory in particular. For example, he points to the second interpretation as having economy on its side, thus appealing to considerations of simplicity, and says,
The best theoretical description will always be one in which the representations
fail to specify their extensions at a level that distinguishes the two sorts of distal
cause. It will always be better to suppose that the extension includes both sorts of
thing.16
Why always? Segal talks generally of the basic canons of good explanation
in support of his case against externalism, but as with the appeals to the nature of scientific explanation that turned on the idea that scientific taxonomy individuates by “causal powers” that we discussed in Chapter 4, here
we should be suspicious of the level of generality (and corresponding lack
of substantive detail) at which scientific practice is depicted. Like Burge’s
own appeal to the objectivity of perceptual representation in formulating a general argument for externalism, these sorts of a priori appeals
seem to me to represent gestural lapses entwined with the more interesting, substantive, empirical arguments over individualism in psychology.

When Segal does draw more explicitly on features of Marr’s theory, he
extracts three general points that are relevant for his argument that the
theory is individualistic: Each attribution of a representation requires a
bottom-up account, a top-down motivation, and is checked against behavioral evidence. Together these three points imply that positing representations in Marr’s theory does not come cheaply, and indeed is tightly
constrained by overall task demands and methods. The first suggests that
any higher-level representations posited by the theory must be derived
from lower-level input representations; the second that all posited representations derive their motivation from their role in the overall perceptual process; and the third that “intentional contents are inferred from
discriminative behavior.”17
Segal uses the first assumption to argue that since the content of
the earliest representations (“up to and including zero-crossings”) in
doppelgangers ¨ are the same, there is a prima facie case that downstream,
higher-level representations must be the same, unless a top-down motivation can be given for positing a difference. But because we are considering
doppelgangers ¨ , there is no behavioral evidence that could be used to diagnose a representational difference between the two (Segal’s third point),
and so no top-down motivation is available. As he says, “[t]here would
just be no theoretical point in invoking the two contents [of the twins],
where one would do. For there would be no theoretical purpose served
by distinguishing between the contents.”18
How might an externalist resist this challenging argument? Three different tacks suggest themselves, each of which grants less to Segal than
that which precedes it.

First, one could concede the three points that Segal extracts from his
reading of Marr, together with his claim that the lowest levels of representation are individualistic, but question the significance of this. Here one
could agree that the gray arrays with which Marr’s theory begins do, in a
sense, represent light intensity values, and that zero-crossings do, in that
same sense, represent a sudden change in the light intensity. But these
are both merely representations of some state of the retina, not of the
world, and it should be no surprise that such intraorganismic representations have narrow content. Moreover, the depth of the intentionality or
“aboutness” of such representations might be called into question precisely because they don’t involve any causal relation that extends beyond
the head. They might be thought to be representational in much the way
that my growling stomach represents my current state of hunger. However, once we move to downstream processes, processes that are later on in
the temporal dimension to visual processing, genuinely robust representational primitives come in to play, primitives like “edge” and “generalized
cone.” And the contents of states deploying these primitives, one might
claim, as representations of a state of the world, metaphysically depend
on what they correspond to in the world, and so are not individualistic.

The plausibility of this response to Segal turns on both the strength of
the distinction between a weaker and a stronger sense of“representation”
in Marr’s theory, and the claim that we need the stronger sense to have
states that are representational in some philosophically interesting sense.

Second, and more radically, one could allow that all of the representational primitives posited in the theory represent in the same sense, but
challenge the claim that the content of any of the corresponding states is
narrow: it is wide content all the way out, if you like. The idea that the representational content of states deploying gray arrays and zero-crossings is
in fact wide might itself take its cue from Segal’s second point – that representations require a top-down motivation – for it is by reflecting on the
point of the overall process of constructing reliable, three-dimensional
images of a three-dimensional visual world that we can see that even early
retinal representations must be representations of states and conditions
in the world. This view would of necessity go beyond Marr’s theory itself,
which is explicitly concerned only with the computational problem of
158 Individualism and Externalism in Cognitive Sciences
how we infer three-dimensional images from impoverished retinal information. But it would be very much in the spirit of what we can think of
as a Gibsonian aspect to Marr’s theory.

Third, and least compromisingly, one could reject one or more of
Segal’s three points about Marr’s theory or, rather, the significance that
Segal attaches to these points. Temporally later representations are derived from earlier representations, but this itself doesn’t tell us anything
about how to individuate the contents of either. Likewise, that Marr himself begins with low-level representations of the retinal image tells us little
about whether such representations are narrow or wide. Top-down motivations are needed to justify the postulation of representations, but since
there are a range of motivations within Marr’s theory concerning the
overall point of the process of three-dimensional vision, this also gives
us little guidance about whether the content of such representations is
narrow or wide. Behavioral evidence does play a role in diagnosing the
content of particular representations, but since Marr is not a behaviorist,
behavioral discrimination does not provide a litmus test for representational difference.19
This third response seems the most plausible to develop in detail, but
it also seems to me the one that also implies that there is likely to be
no definitive answer to the question of whether Marr’s theory employs
either a narrow or a wide notion of content, or both, or neither. Marr
was not concerned at all himself with the issue of the intentional nature
of the primitives of this theory. But the depth of his methodological
comments and asides has left us with an embarrassment of riches when
it comes to possible interpretations of his theory. This is not simply an
indeterminacy about what Marr meant or intended, but reflects a similar
indeterminacy within the computational approach to vision itself, and, I
think, in computational psychology more generally.

With that in mind I shall turn now to Egan’s claim that the theory is not
intentional at all. This is a minority view of Marr’s theory that has brought
