some incredulous stares in light of the constant references within Marr’s
work to notions of representation. How could Egan’s claim be squared
with such appeals? Of interest in this connection is Chomsky’s endorsement of Egan’s interpretation of Marr. Speaking of Ullman’s studies of
the determination of structure from motion within a broadly Marrian
framework, Chomsky says
The account is completely internalist. There is no meaningful question about
the ‘content’ of the internal representations of a person seeing a cube under the
conditions of the experiments, or if the retina is stimulated by a rotating cube,
or by a video of a rotating cube; or about the content of a frog’s ‘representation
of’ a fly or of a moving dot in the standard experimental studies of frog vision.

No notion like ‘content’ or ‘representation of’ figures within the theory, so there
are no answers to be given as to their nature.20
On Chomsky’s view, the nonintentional interpretation of such theories of
vision is made plausible by the claim that “content” and “representation
of” are terms that are neither defined within such theories nor with a clear
meaning within them. The theories are nonintentional in the relevant
sense, and thus it is a moot question whether they operate with a narrow
or a wide notion of content. As Chomsky continues,
The same is true when Marr writes that he is studying vision as a ‘mapping from
one representation to another, and in the case of human vision, the initial representation is in no doubt – it consists of arrays of image intensity values as detected
by the photoreceptors in the retina’ (Marr 1982:31) – where ‘representation is
not to be understood relationally, as representation of.’
We will return to these points in assessing Egan’s interpretation below.21
At the heart of Egan’s view of Marr is a particular view of the nature of
Marr’s computational level of description. Commentators on Marr have
almost universally taken this to correspond to what others have called
the “knowledge level” or the “semantic level” of description, that is, as offering an intentional characterization of the computational mechanisms
governing vision and other cognitive processes. Rather than ignoring
Marr’s computational level, Egan rejects this dominant understanding
of the computational level, arguing instead that what makes it a computational level is that it specifies the function to be computed by a given
algorithm in precise, mathematical terms. That is, while this level of description is functional, what makes it the first stage in constructing a
computational theory is that it offers a function-theoretic characterization
of the computation, and thus abstracts away from all other functional
characterizations.22
Thus, while vision might have all sorts of functions that can be specified in language relatively close to that of common sense – it is for
extracting information from the world, for perceiving an objective world,
for guiding behavior – none of these, in Egan’s view, form a part of Marr’s
computational level of description. Given this view, the case for Marr’s
theory being individualistic because computational follows readily:
A computational theory prescinds from the actual environment because it aims to
provide an abstract, and hence completely general, description of a mechanism
160 Individualism and Externalism in Cognitive Sciences
that affords a basis for predicting and explaining its behavior in any environment, even in environments where what the device is doing cannot comfortably
be described as cognition. When the computational characterization is accompanied by an appropriate intentional interpretation, we can see how a mechanism
that computes a particular mathematical function can, in a particular context,
subserve a cognitive function such as vision.23
According to Egan, while an intentional interpretation links the computational theory to our common sense–based understanding of cognitive
functions, it forms no part of the computational theory itself. Egan’s view
naturally raises questions not only about what Marr meant by the computational level of description but more generally about the nature of
computational approaches to cognition.

There are certainly places in which Marr does talk of the computational
level as simply being a high-level functional characterization of what vision
is for, and thus as simply orienting the researcher to pose certain general
questions. For example, one of his tables offers the following summary
questions that the theory answers at the computational level: “What is
the goal of the computation, why is it appropriate, and what is the logic
of the strategy by which it can be carried out?” Those defending the
claim that Marr’s theory is externalist have typically rested with this broad
and somewhat loose understanding of the computational level of the
theory.24
The problem with this broad understanding of the computational
level, and thus of computational approaches to cognition, is that while it
builds a bridge between computational psychology and more folksy ways
of thinking about cognition, it also creates a gap within the computational approach between the computation level and the algorithmic level.

For example, if we suppose that the computational level specifies simply
that some visual states have the function of representing edges, others
the function of representing shapes, and so on, there is nothing about
such descriptions that guides us in constructing algorithms that generate the state-to-state transitions at the heart of computational approaches
to vision. More informal elaboration of what vision is for, or of what it
evolved to do, do little by themselves to bridge this gap.

The point here is that computational specifications themselves are a
very special kind of functional characterization, at least when they are
to be completed or implemented in automatic, algorithmic processes.

Minimally, proponents of the broad interpretation of computational approaches to cognition need either to construe the computational level as
encompassing but going beyond the function-theoretic characterizations
of cognitive capacities that Egan identifies, or they must allocate those
characterizations to the algorithmic level. The latter option simply exacerbates the “gap” problem identified above. But the former option lumps
together a variety of quite different things under the heading of “the
computational level,” and subsequently fails to recognize the constraints
that computational assumptions bring in their wake. The temporal and
modular dimensions to Marr’s theory exacerbate the problem here.

There is a large issue lurking here concerning how functionalism
should be understood within computational approaches to cognition,
and correspondingly how encompassing such approaches really are.

Functionalism has usually been understood as offering a way to reconcile
our folk psychology, our manifest image of the mind, with the developing
sciences of the mind, even if that reconciliation involves revising folk psychology along individualistic lines. And computationalism has been taken
to be one way of specifying what the relevant functional roles are: They
are “computational roles.” But suppose that Egan is right about Marr’s understanding of the notion of computation as a function-theoretic notion,
and we accept the view that this understanding is shared in computational approaches to cognition more generally. Then the corresponding
version of functionalism about the mind must be function-theoretic in
Egan’s sense: It will “prescind from the actual environment,” as must
the computational level, but also from the sort of internal causal role
