but he makes it clear that “the constraints are used by turning them
into an assumption that may or may not be internally verifiable.” For
all of Marr’s talk of the importance of facts about the beyond-the-head
world for constructing the computational level in a theory of vision, this
is representative of how Marr conceives of that relevance. It seems to me
clear that, in terms that I introduced in the previous sections, Marr himself
adopts an encoding view of computation and representation, rather than
an exploitative view of the two. The visual system is, according to Marr, a
locationally individualistic system.30
Whatever Marr’s own views here, the obvious way to defend a wide
computational interpretation of his theory is to resist his inference from
“x is a physical constraint holding in the world” to “x is an assumption
that is encoded in the brain.” This is, in essence, what I have previously
proposed one should do in the case of the multiple spatial channels
theory of form perception. Like Marr’s theory of vision, which in part
builds on this work, this theory has usually been understood as postulating
a locationally individualistic computational system, one that begins with
170 Individualism and Externalism in Cognitive Sciences
channels early in the visual pathway that are differentially sensitive to four
parameters: orientation, spatial frequency, contrast, and spatial phase.

My suggestion was to take seriously the claim that any visual scene (in
the world) can be decomposed into these four properties, and so see
the computational system itself as extending into the world, with the
causal relationship between stimulus and visual channels itself modeled
by transition rules. Rather than simply having these properties encoded
in distinct visual channels in the nervous system, view the in-the-head
part of the form perception system as exploiting formal properties in the
world beyond the head. In Marr’s theory, there is one respect in which
this wide computational interpretation is easy to defend, and one respect
in which it is difficult to defend.31
The first of these is that Marr’s “assumptions,” such as the spatial coincidence assumption and the “fundamental assumption of stereopsis,”typically begin as physical constraints that reflect the structure of the world;
in the above examples, they begin as the constraint of spatial localization and three matching constraints. Thus, the strategy is to argue that
the constraints themselves, rather than their derivative encoding, play a
role in defining the computational system, rather than simply filling a
heuristic role in allowing us to offer a computational characterization of
a locationally individualistic cognitive system.32
The corresponding respect in which a wide computational interpretation of Marr’s theory is difficult to defend is that these constraints themselves do not specify what the computational primitives are. One possibility would simply be to attribute the primitives that Marr ascribes to the
image to features of the scenes perceived themselves, but this would be
too quick. For example, Marr considers zero-crossings to be steps in a
computation that represent sharp charges in intensity in the image, and
while we could take them to represent intensity changes in the stimuli in
the world, zero-crossings themselves are located somewhere early in the
in-the-head part of the visual system, probably close to the retina.

A better strategy, I think, would be to deflate the interpretation of
the retinal image and look “upstream” from it to identify richer external
structures in the world, structures, which satisfy the physical constraints
that Marr postulates. That is, one should extend the temporal dimension
to Marr’s theory so that the earliest stages in basic visual processes begin
in the world, not in the head. Since the study of vision has been largely
conducted within an overarching individualistic framework, this strategy
would require recasting the theory of vision itself so that it ranges over a
process that causally extends beyond the retinal image.

Mark Rowlands has contrasted Marr’s approach, beginning with the
retinal image in his analysis of vision with the ecological approach of
James J. Gibson, which begins with information contained in what Gibson
called the ambient optical array. Although Rowlands locates the views of
Marr and Gibson on a continuum, his chief aim in drawing the contrast is
to argue for a view of perception closer to Gibson’s end of the continuum
than to Marr’s. My idea here is somewhat different: to suggest that we can
augment Marr’s computational view by something like Gibson’s view of
what the starting point for an analysis of vision is. The importance of the
idea that the ambient optical array, as an information-bearing structure
external to the organism, is the appropriate starting point for this analysis,
as Rowlands argues, is that doing so enriches the information available for
visual processing and so reduces the complexity that we need to attribute
to the organism itself in accounts of vision. The ambient optical array
is part of the locationally wide computational system that vision takes
place in.33
Once we take this step, then the interaction between informationprocessing structures inside organisms and information-bearing states
outside of them becomes central to a computational account of vision.

And there seems a second Gibsonian insight that can direct research here:
The idea that vision is exploratory, and that crucial to that exploration
is the movement of the organism through the ambient optical array.

Rowlands thinks of this as an organism manipulating its environment to
extract information from it, whereas it seems to me that it is more fruitful
to see this as an organism manipulating itself, in particular, its body and
its parts, for this purpose. This is one way in which vision is animate,
a point to which I shall return and a second respect in which we can
extend the temporal dimension to Marr’s theory. Visual inputs are not
simply snapshots that are then (somehow) assembled and bound together
within the organism in generating complete visual scenes. Rather, they
are complete visual scenes sampled through bodily explorations of the
ambient optical array over time.

If we view these aspects of Gibson’s views as extensions of the temporal
dimension to Marr’s theory, then we might also wonder about revisiting
the modular dimension to Marr’s theory. As I said near the beginning
of section 4, a second complexity to Marr’s theory is the assumption
that visual computations are highly modular, such that features of the
final visual image, such as depth and motion, are computed independently. But if the information available to wide computational systems
is enriched in the temporal dimension relative to that available to their
172 Individualism and Externalism in Cognitive Sciences
narrow counterparts, then surely there is less need to assume that vision
is as modular as Marr himself assumed.

