The second task – of showing that wide computational systems themselves, and not just their in-the-head components, are cognitive systems –
is perhaps better undertaken once we have a range of examples of wide
computational systems before us. Before turning to that, now that we have
explored the debate over Marr’s theory in some detail, I want to return
to the idea of narrow content.

7 narrow content and marr’s theory
Consider the very first move in Segal’s argument for the conclusion that
Marr’s theory of vision is individualistic: The innocuous-looking claim
that there are two general interpretations available when one seeks to ascribe intentional contents to the visual states of two individuals, one “restrictive” (Burge’s) and one “liberal” (Segal’s). In introducing the distinction between narrow content and wide content in Chapter 4, I indicated
that something like these two general alternatives were implicit in the basic Twin Earth cases with which we – and the debate over individualism –
began. There I also said that the resulting idea – that twins must share
some intentional state about watery substances (or about arthritislike diseases, in Burge’s standard case) – is the basis for attempts to articulate a
notion of narrow content, that is, intentional content that does supervene
on the intrinsic, physical properties of the individual.

The presupposition of a liberal interpretation for Marr’s theory, and a
corresponding view of the original Twin Earth cases in general, are themselves questionable. Note first that the representations that we might, in
order to make their disjunctive content perspicuous, label “crackdow”
or “water or twater,” do represent their reliable, environmental causes:
“Crackdow” is reliably caused by cracks or shadows and has the content
crack or shadow; similarly for “water or twater.” But then this disjunctive
content is a species of wide, not narrow, content. In short, although being
shared by twins is necessary for mental content to be narrow, this is not
sufficient for narrow content.

To press further, if the content of one’s visual state is to be individualistic, it must be shared by doppelgangers ¨ no matter how different their
environments. Thus, the case of twins is merely a heuristic for thinking
about a potentially infinite number of individuals. But then the focus on a
content shared by two individuals, and thus on a content that is neutral between two environmental causes, represents a misleading simplification
insofar as the content needed won’t simply be “crackdow” but something
more wildly disjunctive. This is because there is a potentially infinite number of environments that might produce the same intrinsic, physical state
of the individual’s visual system as (say) cracks do in the actual world. It is
not that we can’t simply make up a name for the content of such a state –
we can: Call it “X.” – Rather, it is that it is difficult to view a state so individuated as being about anything. And if being about something is at the
heart of being intentional, then this calls into question the status of such
narrowly individuated states as intentional states.

Segal has claimed that the narrow content of“crackdow,” or by implication “water or twater,” need not be disjunctive, just simply more encompassing than, respectively, crack or water. But casting the above points
in terms of disjunctive content simply makes vivid the general problems
that (1) individuation of states in terms of their content still proceeds via
reference to what does or would cause them to be tokened; and (2) once
one prescinds from a conception of the cognitive system as embedded
in and interacting with the actual world in thinking about how to taxonomize its states, it becomes difficult to delineate clearly those states
as intentional states with some definite content. As it is sometimes put,
narrow content becomes inexpressible. Two responses might be made to
this second objection.34
First, one might concede that, strictly speaking, narrow content is inexpressible, but then point out ways of sneaking up on it. One might do
so by talking of how one can “anchor” narrow content to wide content, or
of how to specify the realization conditions for a proposition. But these
suggestions, despite their currency, seem to me little more than whistling
in the dark, and the concession on which they rest, fatal. All of the ways
of “sneaking up on” narrow content involve using wide contents in some
way. Yet if wide content is such a problematic notion (because it is not
individualistic), then surely the problem spreads to any notion, such as
snuck-up-on narrow content, for whose intelligibility it is crucial.35
If narrow content really is inexpressible, then the idea that it is this
notion that is central to psychological explanation as it is actually practiced, and this notion that does or will feature in the natural kinds and
laws of the cognitive sciences, cannot reasonably be sustained. Except
in Douglas Adamesque spoofs of science, there are no sciences whose
central explanatory constructs are inexpressible. Moreover, this view
would make the claim that one arrives at the notion of narrow content
via an examination of actual explanatory practice in the cognitive sciences extremely implausible, since if narrow content is inexpressible,
174 Individualism and Externalism in Cognitive Sciences
then one won’t be able to find it expressed in any existing psychological theory. In short, the idea that snuck-up-on narrow content is what
cognitive science needs or uses constitutes a lapse back to the cognitive
science gesture.

Second, it could be claimed that although it is true that it is difficult for
common-sense folk to come up with labels for intentional contents, those
in the relevant cognitive sciences can and do all the time, and we should
defer to them. For example, one might claim that many if not all of the
representational primitives in Marr’s theory, such as blob, edge, and line,
have narrow contents. These concepts, like many scientific terms, are
technical and, as such, may bear no obvious relationship to the concepts
and terms of common sense, but they still allow us to see how narrow content can be expressed. One might think that this response has the same
question-begging feel to it as does the claim that our folk psychological
states are themselves narrow. However, the underdetermination of philosophical views by the data of the scientific theories, such as Marr’s, that
they interpret remains a problem for both individualists and externalists
alike here. As my discussion of exploitative representation and wide computation perhaps suggests, my own view is that we need to reinvigorate the
ways in which the computational and representational theories of mind
have usually been construed within cognitive science. If this can be done
in more than a gestural manner, then the issue of the (in)expressibility
of narrow content will be largely moot.

8 locational versus taxonomic externalism
Our extended treatment of Marr’s theory of vision over the previous four
sections has distinguished two different ways of thinking about externalism that make contact with computational approaches to cognition:
taxonomic and locational externalism. A cluster of related paradigms
within contemporary cognitive science that go under various names –
situated cognition, embedded cognition, distributed cognition, improvisational cognition – can be understood in terms of either or both of these
forms of externalism. In this section, I shall discuss specific accounts of
cognition within these paradigms. In particular, I shall argue that these
accounts of cognition posit wide computational systems, and thus are
committed to the idea that cognition is locationally externalist.

Coincident with the rise of connectionist models of cognition in which
cognitive representations can be distributed across a number of nodes,
rather than localized in few of them, has been the idea that cognition
can be distributed either across agents or across agents and their environments. In the former case, cognition is construed interpersonally, involving social and cultural mediation between people, while in the latter
