to me hyperbole, especially given that these are computationally driven
processes. Given that we admit no computation without representation,
then either his creatures are a combination of reaction (world-creature)
and computation (in the creature), or they are computational all the way
out. Either way, we have a locationally externalist view of processing, and
in the latter case, wide computationalism.38
178 Individualism and Externalism in Cognitive Sciences
We can now, finally, return to the question of whether wide computational systems themselves – as opposed simply to their in-the-head
realizations – are properly thought of as cognitive. Suppose that one
grants locational externalism about computational systems. Might one
still maintain individualism about cognition by conceptualizing the cognitive system proper as ending at the boundary of the individual? Such a
view rests on the plausibility of identifying what is internally realized as
always being the appropriate cognitive system. Consider the navigation
systems that Hutchins discusses. For individualism to be defensible as a
view of cognition in this case, there must be an in-the-head account of all
of the relevant cognitive processes; likewise for the case of animate vision
and behavior-based robotic systems. But recall that all three cases share
the strategy of pointing to individual-world interactions as a way to avoid
positing more costly internal representations and computations. Thus,
this individualistic move is unmotivated and runs counter to the reconceptualization of representation within these paradigms. Representation
is not something implanted in individuals but something that individuals
do by exploiting the rich structures of their environments in cycles of
perception and action.

9 having it both ways?
Two strands to the discussion in this chapter might be thought to be in tension with one another. The first stems from my claim that once one moves
from the cognitive science gesture to a more full-fledged examination of
theory and explanation in the cognitive sciences themselves, the debate
between individualists and externalists becomes tougher to resolve. This
debate turns not only on how one interprets particular theories but also
on broader issues in the philosophy of mind and science. Thus, I have
been arguing not only for the conclusion that the cognitive science gesture itself far from resolves the debate in favor of individualism, but that
going beyond that gesture leaves much in the debate open. But, second,
in offering a wide computational interpretation of Marr’s theory of vision
in section 6 and in linking this interpretation to a range of contemporary
work on situated and embedded cognition, I have argued for a resolution
of the debate in favor of externalism. Surely, one might think, one can’t
have it both ways.

The way to resolve this tension, I think, is to lean on the distinction between taxonomic and locational externalism. The debate over Marr’s theory of vision has been conducted almost exclusively in terms of taxonomic
externalism and individualism, as manifest in the focus on narrow and
wide content. But whether any theory employs a notion of narrow or wide
content will turn largely on what it says about wildly counterfactual cases,
cases in which there are molecular (or even narrowly functional) duplicates in minimally different environments. And Marr’s own discussion of
the computational level supports both a narrow and a wide interpretation of it. Thus, the nonconclusiveness of individualism construed as a
taxonomic thesis about the cognitive sciences.

Once we shift to the locational conception of externalism, matters become somewhat clearer. The issue here is whether the cognitive sciences
sometimes investigate wide computational systems, and at least on the
surface this seems easier to resolve, since it is a matter primarily of identifying whether the computational system of interest literally extends beyond the boundary of the individual. Locational externalism is a stronger
view than taxonomic externalism and entails it unless there is a plausible, nonquestion-begging way to individuate mental states independent
of their total realizations. We have seen several failed attempts to do this,
in this chapter and the last, and the emphasis on locational externalism
clearly places an onus on individualists.

This is a matter of whether the cognitive sciences do or should employ
a strategy of integrative synthesis, as well as constitutive decomposition,
whereby individuals and their cognitive processes are located in systems
larger than those individuals. My argument in this chapter has been that
by refashioning the notions of representation and computation, there is
no reason why not, and much reason to be bipartisan or pluralistic about
these notions, as we should be about realization.

10 beyond computation
In introducing and defending wide computationalism as a perspective
on research in cognitive science, I have appealed to existing work that I
think can plausibly be seen as exemplifying a wide computational view
of cognitive processing. Such a view shifts the attentional focus of the
field in such a way as to suggest new directions for the computational
theory of mind. I have suggested that one could interpret Marr’s theory
of vision as invoking the strategy of integrative synthesis (over Marr’s own
likely objections), and identified three paradigms of research in cognitive
science – in distributed cognition (Hutchins), in animate vision (Ballard),
and in reactive robotics (Brooks) – that prima facie also exemplify this
strategy.

180 Individualism and Externalism in Cognitive Sciences
Individualists, of course, are unlikely to take the appearances here at
face value. Indeed, they should challenge the claim that any of these research paradigms are properly construed as invoking wide computational
systems. There are various ways of doing so: from questioning the conceptual integrity of the very idea of wide computationalism, to arguing
that individuals are the largest cognitive units to which we in fact apply
computational analyses of cognition, to pointing to inadequacies of wide
computational interpretations of specific theories and explanations.39
Rather than continuing this debate here, I want to move on beyond
computation. In the next chapter, I shall generalize from wide computationalism to wide psychology, and in so doing discuss a variety of noncomputational approaches to cognition that also exemplify the externalist
view of cognition that I have been developing in Part Two. The argument
will be that both taxonomic and locational externalism, whether computational or not, provide the theoretical backdrop for redirecting some of
the individualistic research on core topics, such as memory and cognitive
development, in ways that draw on some largely forgotten insights within
psychology itself.

part three
THINKING THROUGH AND BEYOND THE BODY
181
182
8
The Embedded Mind and Cognition
1 representation and psychology
The chapters in Part Two have laid the foundation for a general externalist view of cognition and the mind. For the most part, the concepts of
realization, representation, and computation have been developed and
