deployed within individualistic frameworks. In broadening and refashioning these concepts I have created a space for an externalist psychology, and illustrated ways in which some of that space has already been
occupied within computational cognitive science.

The most important of these concepts for cognitive psychology is that
of representation. Cognitive psychology explores the nature and structure of mental representations and how they are processed: how they
are stored, retrieved, transformed, and related to one another. In the
last chapter we saw that a representational view of cognition need not
be individualistic. In this chapter, I move beyond foundation laying for
externalism to show the place that exploitative representation has within
cognitive psychology. I shall focus on areas of psychology in which representation has played a central role – on memory (section 4), developmental psychology (section 5), and folk psychology and the theory of
mind (section 6).

Representation is not simply a form of encoding but more generally
a form of informational exploitation of which encoding is a special case.

Representations need not be thought of as internal copies of or codes for
worldly structures. Rather, representation is an activity that individuals
perform in extracting and deploying information that is used in their
further actions. It involves an agent enmeshed with the world not prior
183
184 Thinking Through and Beyond the Body
to or following but in the very act of representing. On the traditional view
of representation, cognition is wedged between perception and action,
implying, in the philosopher Susan Hurley’s words, that “[t]he mind is
a kind of sandwich, and cognition is the filling.” The shift in perspective
that the concept of exploitative representation introduces opens the way
to developing a view of cognition that treats what is inside the head and
what is beyond it in a symmetrical fashion.1
One form that this symmetry takes, exemplified by the multiplication
example depicted in Figures 7.1 and 7.2, is the identification of explicit
symbolic structures in a cognizer’s environment that, together with explicit symbolic structures in its head, constitute the cognitive system relevant for performing some given task. Such symbols in the world can
be exploited rather than encoded by individuals and their in-the-head
computational systems.

The same is true when information in the world does not take this
explicit symbolic form. To use the psychologist George Miller’s apt term,
we are informavores and can exploit causal and probabilistic dependencies
in the world in generating in-the-head structures that, in part, direct
our behavior. In the previous chapter, I developed this idea in terms
of computation extending beyond the boundary of the individual, but
we could express this more generally in terms of information-processing
systems that do so. Again, there is no metaphysical significance to the
boundary of an individual’s body for individuating where that individual’s
mind begins and ends.2
The exploitative view of representation is one way to develop the
idea that cognition is situated, embedded, and embodied. One oftenexpressed concern about this idea is that it involves an unacceptably
deflationary understanding of what cognition is. Proponents of the embedded mind either focus exclusively on aspects of cognition that involve
the organism’s interface with the world (for example, perceptual and motor capacities), or they offer thin behavioristic or functionalist construals
of intuitively more central cognitive abilities. By showing how exploitative representation applies to paradigm cases of core cognitive capacities,
and by suggesting extensions of existing paradigms of representational
psychology, I hope to preempt both of these standard criticisms.

2 life and mind: from reaction to thought
Our paradigm of a living thing is an organism. All organisms react to
occurrences in their environments, and use those reactions to control
their bodies in some way. I am inclined to think that much the same is
true of all thinking things, and to view this as a simple but deep fact about
the nature of cognition, certainly for animate creatures like us whose
cognitive functioning is tied to their continued existence as living beings.

Cognition allows us to register what is in our here and now environment,
and to adapt our bodies to what we register. But this truth should not
overshadow the fact that cognition also allows us to do much more, to
go beyond our immediate environments, back to the experienced past
through memory and ingrained habit, and forward to the distant future
through planning and imagination.

The parallel between the embeddedness and embodiment of living
and thinking things, together with the recognition that thought is something more than stimulus driven and response driving, invite the question of what more there is to cognition than simple registration and
reaction. We can think of this in terms of types of representational system that organisms possess, each with a distinctive locus of control for
action.

First, a creature might simply have a reactive representational system. It
registers one or more states of its environment, and this guides its behavior, but the connections between registration and reaction are simple and
fixed. The behavior of the creature is thus effectively under control of the
stimuli in its environment. Vary the position of an intense light source
within certain parameters and you cause a variation in the position of the
flower in a sunflower. Adjust the magnetic field in the liquid in which
a paramecium floats, and you change the direction in which it moves.

Although the internal structure of creatures with such representational
systems plays a crucial role in the mediation of stimuli and response, the
locus of control for their behavior is external. It is environmental.

But many creatures are able to exercise more control over their own
reactions. Their representational systems are not simply reactive but enactive: They endow those blessed with them some control over the nature
and strength of the behaviors enacted. A registration of the environment
is made, but it does not automatically generate a reaction in what is done.

Rather, it is combined with other registrations, and these together generate a bodily output. I would hazard the guess that most of the animal
behavior that we are familiar with in everyday life – from interacting with
our domestic pets, to watching squirrels or birds in a yard, or vertebrates in
general in the wild – involves enactive representational systems. It is with
enactive representational systems that most of us are first comfortable
in invoking distinctly psychological language in a literal sense. Enactive
186 Thinking Through and Beyond the Body
creatures perceive and decide, whereas reactive creatures do so only in a
metaphorical sense.

Yet even if an enactive representational system introduces a distinctive psychology, it does not suffice, one might think, for the full range of
