psychological capacities that creatures have. In particular, enactive representation is still closely tied to what one does with one’s body, and does
not yet give us higher cognition with a completely internal locus of control. That is what a symbolic representational system creates, the capacity
to divorce cognition from its bodily origins. It creates genuine thinkers,
creatures who can use representations to generate other representations,
and so whose cognition may have a high level of autonomy from the here
and now. It is here that we have thought, inference, reasoning, planning, wishful thinking, and reflection. The heart of cognition. Cognition
central.

Human beings manifest all three types of representational systems: in
reflexes (reactive), in bodily skills (enactive), and in higher cognition
(symbolic). Although there is a physiology that underlies any biological
reflex, it is plausible to view the reflex as under the control of the stimulus
that elicits it. (In fact, if standard stimuli do not elicit the reflexive reaction, then we view the system responsible for it as having broken down,
as not functioning as it is supposed to.) It is in this sense that reflexes are
not options exercised by the organisms that have them, and the external
locus of their control is one reason not to think of them as cognitive
in nature. Bodily skills, such as riding a bicycle, introduce such options,
given any particular stimulus. Yet there remains a sense in which they
are not controlled “centrally” in that they do not require – in fact, often
require the absence of – direction from paradigmatic cognitive states,
such as beliefs and desires. This is why they can be performed, as we say,
“without thinking about it,” and why thinking about it sometimes gets
in the way of successful performance. Once you know how to perform a
bodily skill – from bicycle riding, to typing, to gymnastics, to catching a
ball – it is a matter of letting the body do what it knows to do, rather than
trying to control what it does consciously. One may concentrate in performing a bodily skill, but not on the sequence of actions that constitute
that performance.

In contrast to both these cases, higher cognitive capacities have an internal locus of control: What directs them, what leads them ultimately to
govern our behavior, lies within us. This control is not always conscious
but it is neither environmental nor bodily and is mediated by “what is in
table 8.1 Locus of Control and Representational Type
Type of Organism/ Example in
Locus of Control Representational System Humans
environmental reactive reflexes
bodily enactive mimetic skills
cranial symbolic beliefs, desires
the head.” Symbolic representation makes for truly voluntary behavior,
free action, genuine choice, and rationality. Some would say that symbolic
representational systems are uniquely human, or that they are what make
language, a social life structured by conventions, and rich cultural traditions possible. Table 8.1 summarizes the three types of representational
system, and some of what I have said about them.

Given this view of higher cognition, it is perhaps natural to think that
cognitive psychology, at least in studying such higher cognitive capacities,
should focus just on what is in the head. It should bracket off what the
head is in and maintain that the symbols that it is concerned to understand supervene on the intrinsic, physical states of not just the individual,
but of the brain. In short, higher cognition is individualistic.

The plaint of this chapter is that this final conclusion is mistaken.

Before turning to the substantive discussion, a brief sketch of why I think
even so-called higher cognition is best viewed from the externalist point
of view.

3 the embeddedness and embodiment
of higher cognition
All three areas of cognitive psychology that I will discuss in this chapter –
memory, cognitive development, and folk psychology – have a metarepresentational edgeto them in that they involve the representation of representations. Metarepresentation epitomizes much of what I have said about
symbolic representational systems. It has been thought to characterize,
and even to uniquely identify, human intelligence. It is a prerequisite for
rational reflection and deliberation, and for living one’s life in accord
with goals, plans, values, and ideals. If the locus of control as we move
from reflexes to bodily skills to symbolic abilities becomes increasingly
internal, increasingly removed from the direct effects of what the head is
188 Thinking Through and Beyond the Body
in, then surely metarepresentational abilities go one further step in this
direction. And if an internal locus of control makes for an individualistic
perspective, then externalists should face an uphill battle in trying to
make sense of these abilities.

What I would like to do is grant the symbolic nature of cognition and
the idea that cognition has an internal locus of control, and show how neither leads to individualism. But this simply makes space for an externalist
view of cognitive psychology. What reason is there to occupy this space?
A common theme in my discussion will be that as we move from simpler
to more complicated cognitive processing in our accounts of memory,
cognitive development and folk psychology, the pressure to move from
an individualistic to an externalist psychology increases. Far from being
the province of an inwardly withdrawn mind, metarepresentation and
the levels of cognitive performance that it facilitates belong to the mind
as it is located in the social and physical world.

The strategy of argument that I shall use in making a case for an externalist cognitive psychology will draw on an inversion of the trichotomy
between reactive, enactive, and symbolic representational capacities. I
will argue that many cognitive capacities in symbol-using creatures, far
from being purely internal, are either enactive bodily capacities, or worldinvolving capacities. These capacities are not realized by some internal
arrangement of the brain or central nervous system, but by embodied
states of the whole person, or by the wide system that includes (parts of)
the brain as a proper part (Table 8.2).

Enactive bodily capacities and the embodiment of cognition more generally are important in their own right. But understanding the ways in
which higher cognition is embodied can also be instrumental in showing the limitations to encoding views of representation that underpin
individualistic views of the mind. Since my primary concern is to show
how higher cognition extends beyond the boundary of the individual, I
table 8.2 Higher Cognition and Its Realizations
Cognitive Capacities in
Symbol-Using Creatures Realization of the Capacity
purely internal internal cognitive arrangement
of the brain
enactive bodily cerebral + bodily configuration
