world involving cerebral arrangement + environmental
configuration
shall concentrate more heavily on world-involving capacities than enactive bodily capacities in what follows.

4 memory
Memory has been one of the most active areas of research in psychology.

From Ebbinghaus’s initial experiments on the recall of lists of nonsense
syllables to current PET or fMRI research on the localization of particular
memory systems, the bulk of this research has reflected psychology’s origin as an experimental discipline. There is, I think, a real question about
the scope and ultimate value of the bulk of the work in this tradition, a
question that has manifested itself in recent debates over the relationship that such research bears to everyday memory, memory in the wild,
memory as it is used in our day-to-day lives. Over two decades ago the
cognitive psychologist Ulric Neisser provocatively stated that
the results of a hundred years of the psychological study of memory are somewhat discouraging. We have established firm empirical generalizations, but most
of them are so obvious that every ten-year-old knows them anyway. We have made
discoveries, but they are only marginally about memory; in many cases we don’t
know what to do with them, and wear them out with endless experimental variations. We have an intellectually impressive group of theories, but history offers
little confidence that they will provide any meaningful insight into natural behavior. Of course, I could be wrong: perhaps this is the exceptional case where the
lessons of history do not apply, and the new theories will stand the test of time
better than the old ones did. ... But because they say so little about the everyday
uses of memory, they seem ripe for the same fate that overtook learning theory
not long ago.3
For all that has happened in the past twenty-five years, there is little reason
to revise this general judgment.

Part of Neisser’s point about the experimental tradition in memory
research is that the near exclusive concentration on controlled conditions under which one finds a significant difference between two groups
of subjects has led many investigators to forget what memory is for, what
it does for us as individuals in our day-to-day lives. “Real life” memory –
for example, on memory as it is used by an individual to construct narratives about what has happened to her, or on memory as it operates in
eyewitness testimony in the legal system – is the remedy that Neisser himself sees as a way of rectifying this deficit in traditional memory research.

Reconceptualizing the study of memory as a form of externalist psychology can contribute to this general project of reenvisioning memory.4
190 Thinking Through and Beyond the Body
Consider first the classic “storehouse” model of memory that derives
from a brief comment that the philosopher John Locke made in An Essay
Concerning Human Understanding. Locke says
... This is Memory, which is as it were the Store-house of our Ideas. For the narrow
Mind of Man, not being capable of having many Ideas under View and Consideration at once, it was necessary to have a Repository, to lay up those Ideas, which
at another time it might have use of.

While Locke is often credited with originating the storehouse metaphor
in this passage, what is seldom noted is that having introduced it, Locke
immediately warns us about how it should be understood, with this
passage continuing:
But our Ideas being nothing, but actual Perceptions in the Mind, which cease to
be anything, when there is no perception of them, this laying up of ourIdeas in the
Repository of the Memory, signifies no more but this, that the Mind has a Power,
in many cases, to revive Perceptions, which it has once had, with this additional
Perception annexed to them, that it has had them before. And in this Sense it is,
that our Ideas are said to be in our Memories, when indeed, they are actually no
where, but only there is an ability in the Mind, when it will, to revive them again.5
Here Locke is cautioning against reifying memory as a storehouse for
ideas, since he holds that ideas, including memories, exist only when they
are perceived consciously by the mind. Locke is also, I think, suggesting a
more dispositional conception of memory. If this is correct, then there is
a question whether this ability is, as Locke says, “in the Mind,” or whether
it is what, in Chapter 6, I called an extrinsic or wide disposition.

The psychologists Asher Koriat and Morris Goldsmith have noted that
while the storehouse metaphor has structured the bulk of memory research over the last hundred years, this metaphor has been challenged
in recent years by research that draws on what they call the “correspondence metaphor.” According to this view, it is of the essence of memory to
correspond to some past state of affairs, rather than simply to act as a storehouse for readily identifiable chunks of data. The storehouse metaphor
facilitates a conception of memory as a place that can contain a finite
number of individual units, and thus suggests that memory be studied
in terms of the quantification of those units. By contrast, the correspondence metaphor is conducive to investigating and assessing memory in
terms of the accuracy of the contents of the memory, where this is not
simply a matter of how much is remembered.6
The correspondence metaphor of memory invokes a taxonomically
externalist conception of memory. That is, what individuates memory
so conceived in general from other types of cognitive processes (for example, imagination, fantasy, wishes) is the relationship memory bears to
past, experienced states of affairs in the world. Moreover, there is a second
way in which the correspondence metaphor relies on a taxonomically externalist conception of memory. What individuates particular memories
from one another, on this view, is at least in part what they are memories
of or about, that is, their intentionality. On this view, that memories are
not simply self-standing encodings but records of events and episodes in
the world is an important fact about them, not something that should be
factored out or bracketed off in investigating them.

Ulric Neisser has recently claimed that the underlying metaphor structuring real-life memory research is not that of correspondence, but one
of “remembering as doing,” with emphasis given to the activity of remembering, rather than the results of that activity, things called “memories.”In
this respect, Neisser’s view is interestingly like Locke’s dispositional gloss
on his storehouse metaphor. This conception of memory in the experimental literature has its locus classicus in Frederic C. Bartlett’s influential
Remembering. Bartlett criticized the view of memory as a storehouse of images or traces, arguing instead that remembering, as an activity, was essentially a constructive process. With some misgivings, Bartlett adapted the
term “schema” in referring to the “active organization of past reactions.”
In tracing parallels between the role of schemata in individual memory
and conventionalization in societal remembering, Bartlett laid the foundation for the development of the theory of cultural models that has been
influential in recent anthropology and ethnology.7
This performative, enactive, or constructive model of memory opens
the way for a locationally externalist conception of memory, where what
is enacted does not simply stop at the skin but involves engaging with
the world through cognitively significant, embodied action. On this view,
internally stored memories lose the privileged role that they play on the
storehouse conception and become simply one resource that is used in
the act of remembering. What are critical are acts of remembering, and
while these use internal resources they also take place through bodily
activity that is, in turn, engaged with the world. Remembering, on this
view, involves exploiting internal, bodily, and environmental resources in
order to produce some sort of action, often social in nature.
