
To adapt Neisser’s own examples, to tell a joke or recite an epic tale
is not simply to make certain mouth and body movements, any more
than it is to produce a certain number of items from memory or to recall something accurately. Rather, it is to make a suitable impact on an
192 Thinking Through and Beyond the Body
audience there and then through one’s memory-driven actions. We can
conceive of such memory itself as extending into the world through the
way in which it engages with and appropriates external symbols, treating
them in just the way that internal symbols are treated, and thus giving us
a locationally externalist cognitive system.

Such a conception of memory is operative in the psychologist Merlin
Donald’s view of the evolution of human cognition. On Donald’s view, the
critical transition that makes distinctively human cognition possible is the
formation of what Donald calls the external memory field. This is constituted
chiefly by visual symbols and the devices that generate them, and these
derive from human cultural achievements, such as the development of
writing systems and pictorial conventions. We have hybrid minds that
combine internal with external symbolic processing. In more recent work,
Donald has developed this view with an eye to highlighting its implications
for consciousness and its evolution.8
Following Donald, the philosopher Mark Rowlands points not only
to visuographic representations but also to the role of bodily grounded
mimesis as providing a new form of semantic memory, one that allowed
for the development of both learned bodily skills and the communication of sophisticated information about one’s self and its environment.

Rowlands also identifies sound, including spoken language, as an external
medium for memory, one whose patterns of repetition, such as rhyme and
rhythm, allow complicated sound patterns to be remembered. Sound and
the patterns that can be generated through it constitute external memory
resources, and provide the basis of the oral traditions that characterize
all human cultures even in the absence of permanent external vehicles
of representation, such as writing systems.9
Thus, this general idea can be developed without restricting oneself
to thinking of memory exclusively in terms of symbols. For example, we
can think of the performative memory system that extends beyond the
head of the individual as incorporating aspects of an individual’s environment that are nonsymbolic, including the agent’s bodily orientation
and actual objects in her environment. So conceived, enactive, procedural memory that is locationally wide is an extension of traditionally
conceived procedural memory. The idea that procedural memory may
involve doing things with one’s body, while itself old hat, does suggest
an idea that seems more novel: that one may remember by doing things
with one’s environment. Perhaps even this idea is old hat; after all, we all
know that we can use environmentally cued mnemonics, such as tying a
piece of string around one’s finger, or leaving a note on the refrigerator.

My suggestion is that these need not simply be prompts to remember
but themselves are ways of remembering – ways that involve a sustained,
reliable causal interaction between an organism and its environment. The
magnitude of our symbol-laden environments should be taken seriously,
and to do so is to see the mind as extending beyond itself, that is, as being
constituted by such symbols and thus as locationally wide.

To make this graphic, consider the popular problem-solving game for
children, Rush Hour. The game is played on a square board made up
of thirty-six small squares that are snuggly fitted by cars (of length two
squares) and trucks (of length three squares). The cars and trucks are of
various colors and can be placed either horizontally or vertically on the
board. The aim of the game is to move the cars and trucks sequentially
so that a designated car (the red car) can proceed to the sole exit on
the board. The game comes with two-sided cards. One side depicts the
way in which the cars should be set up initially (Figure 8.1, with the red
car designated “X”). The other side provides a code for completing a
series of sequential moves sufficient to solve that particular “rush hour”
problem (Figure 8.2). The first move, in the game depicted, is to move
car G one square to the right. And in just forty-six more simple moves
you’re home free!
The way in which most of us go about solving even a relatively simple Rush Hour problem involves a sustained perceptual and cognitive
figure 8.1. Rush Hour: A Problem
194 Thinking Through and Beyond the Body
(a) (b)
figure 8.2. (a) and (b): Rush Hour: A Solution
interaction with a highly structured environment. The board of fixed dimensions, the rules for the movement of the cars and trucks, and the
objective of the game all structure and constrain what we can do in playing the game. But in playing it we do not simply encode all of this and
then solve the problem. (Go ahead, be my guest!) For most of us, at any
rate, that is not possible. Rather, we solve the problem by continually
looking back to the board and trying to figure out sequences of moves
that will get us closer to our goal, all the time exploiting the structure
of the environment through continual interaction with it. We look, we
think, we move. But the thinking, the cognitive part of solving the problem, is not squirreled away inside us, wedged between the looking and
the moving, but developed and made possible through these interactions
with the board.

Of course, there is a second way to solve any given Rush Hour problem (apart from asking your kids to do it). Set up the board, flip to the
“answer side” of the card, read off the code, and move each car or truck
accordingly. (This was actually my six-year-old daughter’s preferred solution, after she got the hang of the game – and perhaps after she tired
of my fumbling around with standard ways of proceeding.) While we
might be tempted to think of this as involving a problem-solving technique that is more purely internal, note how much external structure
even it exploits. There is the labeling of the cars and trucks on the board,
the code for each move, the convention that we read from left to right,
both in each encoded move and from one instruction to the next. We
then have to put all of that together with finding the car corresponding to the symbol, moving it in accord with the instruction, then finding
our place back on the solution card (lose your place there and you’re
dead).

The first point to make is that much of our everyday cognition is more
like the first way than the second way of solving a Rush Hour problem.

We are geared to interact cognitively with external structures. This is not
simply because of our memory and reasoning limitations. Rather, it is
because in doing so we can take advantage of both the rich environmental
