structures that we find all around us and our ability to control ourselves
and adjust our relationship to those structures. The second point is that
even the second way of solving the problem, the method intuitively that
relies on encoding rather than exploitation, is still not purely internal
and symbolic in how it proceeds. With both methods the mind extends
itself beyond the purely internal capacities of the brain by engaging with,
exploiting, and manipulating parts of its structured environment.

The externalist perspective is most compelling in cases in which systems of external symbols come to change, in significant ways, the cognitive capacities of individuals who interact with them. Most striking
here are cases in which an organism, such as a bonobo, develops in
a symbol-enriched environment and subsequently displays massively increased symbolic capacities. Consider Kanzi, the human-raised bonobo
that has been central to both the life and research of the primatologist Sue Savage-Rumbaugh. Kanzi has been thoroughly enculturated,
and engages in sophisticated linguistic communication through a 256-
symbol keyboard that he can carry with him. Given Kanzi’s actual developmental environment, Kanzi plus a 256-symbol keyboard forms a
cognitive system with memory and other cognitive capacities that far
exceed those of just Kanzi. (Much the same holds true of Alex, Irene
Pepperberg’s African grey parrot.) My point here is not the trivial one
that enriched environments can causally produce smarter critters; rather,
it is that what metaphysically determines the smartness of at least some
critters is their being part of wide cognitive systems. To connect this
back to Donald’s views of human cognition and its evolution, we are certainly such creatures, although I also think that we are not alone in this
respect.10
In illustrating this perspective by invoking these exotic sorts of case I
do not mean to imply that memory is locationally wide only in extreme or
unusual circumstances. Rather, the real import of these cases is that they
196 Thinking Through and Beyond the Body
provide us with a way to think about everyday, human memory. Both our
day-to-day acts of remembering and the systems that those acts involve are
locationally wide, drawing as they do on the symbolic and nonsymbolic
environments that we individually and collectively create, from the more
obvious forms of external storage devices, such as notepads, diaries, books
and memos, to the daily routines we form to structure our lives and the
habits that form us and the structure of our lives. This is not chiefly a
developmental point, one about how we come to possess rich internal
structures, memories, that guide our lives; nor is it a claim about what
stimulates or prompts particular acts of memory. Rather, it is a claim
about what is at the heart of memory, what memory is: It is a locationally
wide ability that creatures like us have that allows us to make use of the
past in acting for the future.

Such a conception of memory is implicit in the work of those, such
as Michael Cole and Paul Connerton, whose interests lie in the use of
memory in specific, culturally mediated activities. Cole develops the
Vygotskyan view of cognition as a mediated activity that relies as much
on external as on internal symbols, symbols that are culturally loaded
and are to be understood in terms of their location in a broader cultural
system; I shall discuss it further in section 5 on cognitive development.

Connerton, by contrast, views what he calls social memory not primarily
as inscriptional, a matter of encoding, but as performative in nature,
where the performances establish both individual and cultural habits.

The idea of procedural memory, and the distinction between procedural and episodic memory, is well entrenched in individualistic paradigms
within psychology, and Connerton extends this idea to apply collectively
to whole groups of individuals. Performances, things that we do, are
both bodily and ritualistic in that they involve the repetition of the performance in light of the perceived past, where this past is the shared past
of a group of individuals. Performance is memory in action.11
Although Connerton’s argument concentrates on specific rituals in
just one historical episode – the ritualistic beheading of Louis XVI in the
French Revolution and the ways in which body posture and dress style
changed in the aftermath of the revolution – the conception of social
memory that he develops is quite general. It applies to how we greet
others; how we lock and unlock our doors; how and what we eat; the
forms of entertainment we engage in; our work styles and choices; how
and where we sleep; what, whether, and how we drive; how we read; how
we die. Individual habits and civil rituals act reciprocally to influence
both how individual and collective memories are constructed, and the
way in which they direct individuals and societies. This perspective on
memory invokes a wide psychological conception, a reason why it marks
a somewhat radical departure from memory as it has been chiefly studied
within departments of psychology. In the little that I have said here, I hope
it is clear that such a conception of memory was not, however, always alien
to the experimental tradition of research. In fact, it would have been quite
familiar to someone like Bartlett.

There are two caveats to enter about the externalist conception of
memory that I have advocated here. First, “memory,” like “cognition,” is
something of a catch-all term, and the phenomena it refers to are ubiquitous in our mental lives: in language acquisition and use, the performance
and learning of skills, communication and socializing, daily routines, and
any form of employment. If memory is externalized, then so too is much
of our cognitive life. While I have suggested that we think of memory as a
locationally wide system that constitutes a form of exploitative representation, I don’t mean to impose a false unity on the diverse manifestations of
memory in everyday life. Second, both Donald and Rowlands present externalist conceptions of memory in terms of the distinctions traditionally
used to characterize memory – between episodic and semantic memory,
implicit and explicit memory, procedural and declarative memory, and
long-term and short-term memory. This enhances the impression that the
externalist view of cognition is primarily an extension of existing ways of
thinking about memory beyond the head, and I have followed Donald
and Rowlands part of the way here. Yet if truth be told, many of these
distinctions seem to me to be problematic, to be understood and used
inconsistently by psychologists, and to stand in need of radical rethinking. Insofar as the externalist view suggests further modifications to how
memory is conceptualized, some of these may be extensions of existing
dichotomies, others replacements for them.

In concluding my discussion of the claim that mental states have a
wide realization in Chapter 6, I raised and addressed the question of
whether this entailed that the subjects or bearers of such states were
themselves locationally wide, that is, larger than individual organisms. A
similar question can be raised about conceptualizing memory in terms
of a locationally externalist system: Does this mean that memories do
