not belong to individual people, but are only a part of some collective
memory or (worse) free-floating cognitive flotsam?
The short answer is “No,” and we can explain why by returning again
to the idea of a locus of control. We do have forms of external memory
storage, such as diaries, which while deriving from (and often recording,
198 Thinking Through and Beyond the Body
in part) an individual’s mental life, can exist beyond the life of their
author and come to be accessed as a form of memory by others. And
each time any one of us speaks or writes in a communicative context, we
create tokens of external symbols that constitute a common symbol pool
from which each of us draws. But these become integrated into an overall
cognitive system that we control, and that control is critical to cognition
being ours and to bearing on our lives as agents. Each of us forms a
core part of a specific wide memory system, one in which we serve as a
locus of control. And that is why the individual remains the entity that
has memories, even if memory is neither taxonomically nor locationally
individualistic.

5 cognitive development
Research on cognitive development, particularly that of the last twenty-
five years, has produced fascinating data about the richness of the internal representational structures that infants and young children have. This
research has brought with it a sea change in how children’s minds are
conceived, implying that children have significantly richer, more specific
knowledge than previous research had indicated. Moreover, the corresponding cognitive mechanisms that generate such knowledge appear
to be in place at significantly younger ages than previously thought, in
some cases at birth or shortly thereafter. The common-sense view, largely
accepted and developed within earlier developmental psychology, holds
that cognitive abilities are heterogeneous across children, they develop
largely through learning and other forms of environmental interaction,
and anything like adult abilities only begin to appear after the age at
which children begin formal schooling in Western societies. By contrast,
the picture of cognitive development painted by the research of the last
twenty-five years is one of widely-shared abilities with a rich, innate component that differ from those of adults in many ways but not in terms of
their basic cognitive nature.

To make this contrast more concrete, consider two striking examples.

One might think that the concept of number is acquired by the child
through long-term exposure to basic mathematics at a relatively late age,
or that the concept of a physical object is acquired through an inductive
extrapolation from exposure to instances of physical objects over time.

Intuitively, the possession of each of these concepts seems to be a cognitive achievement gained through relevant experience with the world. Indeed, this was the accepted view of these concepts within developmental
psychology, largely due to the influence of Piaget’s interactionist view of
cognitive development. By contrast, the “new” developmental psychology,
using sensitive (and clever) experimental techniques, indicates that infants early in their first year of life are already acting in ways that imply
that they have some concept of number and of physical object. At this
age, there has been no instruction in mathematics, and little opportunity
to extrapolate from instances. Thus, the data suggest that these concepts
are not acquired in these ways. Moreover, these concepts seem present so
early in the life of the child that there is reason to think that they are not
acquired at all, but instead are innate, part of the intrinsic endowment
of the child, with the development of these concepts merely triggered by
environmental stimulation, not shaped by it.12
This strand of nativism in recent work on cognitive development corresponds to one dimension I identified in strong nativist views of cognition in Part One, the external minimalism thesis. This work also manifests the other dimension to strong nativist views, the internal richness
thesis, through its commitment to the modularity of cognitive development. Characterized generally, the new developmental psychology views
preschool children and infants as having domain-specific, cognitive modules, including not only modules for knowledge about physical objects
and number during infancy, but also those for biology, social relationships, and minds. This knowledge ascribed to infants and young children
has typically been understood in terms of the child’s possessing a theory
about the relevant domains, which lead her to expect certain outcomes
rather than others, and thus behave in some ways rather than others.13
Like the maturational view of cognitive development that endorses the
external minimalism thesis, this aspect to contemporary research puts it
at odds not just with common sense but with much of the earlier work on
development. Included here is work conducted within an associationist
framework, and that within the Piagetian, constructivist tradition, each
of which has claimed that cognitive development is driven by domaingeneral processes, such as learning and stage-relative decalage. These ´
recent claims not only fly in the face of the received folk and scientific
wisdom of the past, but also raise many questions about the nature of
development that were previously unasked.

For example, if infants begin with at least some domain-specific, conceptual knowledge, how is that knowledge used in the development of
children’s later domain-specific knowledge? Given the characterization
of the child as a theorist of sorts, what is the relationship between the
child and the scientist, or between development and scientific change?
200 Thinking Through and Beyond the Body
What place is there in this conception for more global, domain-general
processes in cognitive development of the sort that had, until recently,
populated the mind of the child within developmental psychology? Such
questions are the subject of ongoing research within the “new” developmental psychology.

There are limitations to the individualistic way in which this paradigm
thus far has been and can be developed. There are also natural ways to
extend the gambit of a developmental psychology that incorporates and
builds on its insights. The massive redescription of the nature and extent
of the child’s knowledge at the heart of recent developmental psychology
has concentrated on the structure of an infant or child’s internal mental
representations, on what it is that the child does or doesn’t know about
the relevant domain at a given age, and on the internal mechanisms governing developmental change. If infants and children know significantly
more than theorists had previously ascribed to them, as they appear to,
then views of later developmental changes will also almost certainly need
to be modified, since the state of (say) the three-year-old from which the
(say) eight-year-old develops is not what it was once thought to be. But
ultimately this nativist emphasis within the new developmental psychology must move beyond the head in making sense of the full pattern of
cognitive development.

One way of augmenting the resulting individualistic perspective on
development is via the mediational approach that derives from the work
of the Russian psychologists Lev Vygotsky and Alexander Luria in the
1930s that I mentioned in passing in the previous section. Motivating
