this view was, in Luria’s words, the idea that
[t]he chasm between natural scientific explanations of elementary processes and
mentalist descriptions of complex processes could not be bridged until we could
discover the way natural processes such as physical maturation and sensory mechanisms become intertwined with culturally determined processes to produce the
psychological functions of adults.14
This idea carried with it the working assumption that individual mental
abilities are significantly modified by the various mediational tools that
they employ. Such mediators include maps, tools, and other artifacts,
numerical systems, memory aids, and, most importantly for Vygotsky,
spoken and written language. All such mediators are not only cultural
products in that they are the products of particular cultural histories and
thus are available to an individual only within the corresponding cultural
contexts. In addition, they are employed primarily within the context of
social interaction and facilitation, typically in small groups or dyads. As
Vygotsky says, “The path from object to child and from child to object
passes through another person. This complex human structure is the
product of a developmental process deeply rooted in the links between
individual and social history.”15
For Vygotsky, higher thought processes, such as remembering, attending, and speaking, are essentially mediational, and thus social. Cognitive
development is not, like embryological development, primarily the unfolding of existing structures in accord with some fixed, biological program, but a dialectical or dynamic process that involves in-the-head mental structures, beyond-the-head mediators, and the social context in which
they interact. Humans have natural psychological abilities, but these are
qualitatively different from the forms they take when they are deployed
together with specific mediators. Attention or memory without the direction provided by spoken, communicative language or other external
aids, are fleeting and transient. Literacy, the ability to read and write, itself
augments and restructures significant aspects of thought and language,
including the size of the lexicon, the development of metalinguistic abilities, and strategies of memorization. Employed with the mediators of
spoken and written language, these core cognitive capacities become enhanced abilities that make a qualitative difference to the sorts of things
that children can do.16
If this is true of higher cognitive processes in general, then it is true
of the domain-specific processes postulated by the new developmental
psychology. This suggests a natural direction in which to shift the focus
of research attention: In investigating the conceptual changes within a
given domain, or the emergence of new domains of thought in childhood, look outside of the head and consider how it modifies the child’s
“theory of X.” In emphasizing both the social and dynamic nature of
cognitive processing and its development, it should be clear how the
Vygotskyan perspective ascribes an integral role to the environment outside the individual. The external environment does not simply cause
changes in a child’s internal mental structures but in a literal sense comes
to constitute part of new, locationally wide abilities, which are then used
to interact with other mediators, leading to further locationally wide abilities, and so on. Once such wide, mediational abilities are established,
they can then be transformed and internalized by individuals and thus
decontextualized from their initial context of acquisition.

A part of the child’s environment that serves as a crucial mediator
across a range of contexts is other people. Here some work within the
202 Thinking Through and Beyond the Body
recent “theory of X” approach in developmental psychology shows convergence with some of the conclusions central to the Vygotskyan tradition.

The work that I shall discuss in the remainder of this section focuses on
explanation and how a grasp of it develops in children over time.17
A striking paradox about explanation and how it is cognized turns on a
triad of claims. First, explanation is a crucial and ubiquitous part of much
of everyday life. Second, its ubiquity in our day-to-day dealings with one
another seems to reflect the various “theories” that we have about corresponding domains. Yet third, the level at which we are able both to offer
and understand explanations is amazingly shallow. What I mean by this
is simply that explanations typically stop or bottom out surprisingly early
on. Consider an intuitive example from the developmental psychologist
Frank Keil. Although almost everyone who owns a car can give some sort
of explanation as to why their car starts (or doesn’t) when the key is placed
in the ignition and turned, few of us are able to respond with any depth to
even the next few follow-up “why” or “how” questions. The shallowness in
this case is the norm: We rarely have ready access to explanations of any
depth for all sorts of phenomena for which we are able to offer some sort
of explanation. Indeed, we often carry with us what Leonid Rozenblit and
Frank Keil call an illusion of explanatory depth until we are faced with the actual task of explanation. Thus, people frequently seem to think they have
vivid, fully mechanistic models of how something works or how it got the
way it did. But when forced to state explicitly that mechanism as an explanation, their own intuitions of explanatory competence are shattered.

Although overconfidence in one’s abilities has been experimentally
documented in a range of domains, this experimental work has been
recently extended to apply to explanation in particular. For example,
Rozenblit and Keil asked college students whether they know how various familiar devices work, such as flush toilets, piano keys, and zippers.

Subjects were given a list of forty-eight familiar items, and asked to use
a seven-point scale to rate how well they understood how each worked.

They were then given a four-item test list and asked to produce a detailed,
step-by-step causal explanation for each item on this list, followed by a
series of reratings of how well they understood each of these items following their attempt to produce an explanation and their reading of expert
explanations. Rozenblit and Keil also ran versions of the experiment with
facts, narratives, procedures, and natural phenomena.

The general finding of this series of studies supports the original claim
that Keil and I made about the shallows of explanation: There is an illusion of explanatory depth in ordinary people’s understanding of familiar
devices. Many subjects assert or imply that they have a complete and fully
worked out understanding such that they could explain all the necessary steps in any process involving the object. Yet when asked for such
explanations, a large percentage of these participants show striking inabilities to put together a coherent explanation, missing not just a few
arbitrary details, but critical causal mechanisms. Until they attempt such
explanations, they are often under the illusion that they have a complete, “clockworks,” vivid understanding. The inflation in the estimate of
one’s ability to provide an explanation seems not to be general, since the
pattern of results obtained in the device condition was not repeated in
the facts, narrative, or procedure conditions, although it was repeated in
the natural phenomena condition. Thus, there seems to be something
about our knowledge of both familiar devices and natural phenomena
that creates this illusion of explanatory depth. Rozenblit and Keil suggest
that these domains promote the illusion because they are sites at which
a series of confusions converge. For example, people mistake something
like the perceptual vividness of familiar devices and natural phenomena
for the richness of their own internal representations, and their understanding of these at their functional or operational levels with that of the
underlying causal mechanics.

