Apart from the illusion of explanatory depth itself, what is striking
and relevant for developmental paradigms that emphasize the nature
of underlying theories that guide cognitive development is the lack of
explanatory depth itself. Missing in adults seems to be the sort of theoretical understanding of the underlying workings that anything more
than a skeletal theory in the relevant domain would surely provide. The
shallows of explanation thus pose a prima facie problem for accounts of
cognitive development that ascribe to the child a theory of the relevant
domain, which is then added to or modified through development. This
is because the shallows of explanation we observe in adults seem to be
due to a sort of theoretical abyss. The gap between the limited explanations that suffice for the purposes at hand and those that we believe
ourselves to have is due ultimately to a lack of corresponding, detailed
theoretical knowledge that would allow us to provide more satisfying,
detailed explanations. That is, the shallows of explanation are not due
simply to contextual or pragmatic features of the practice of explanation,
or from general processing or access abilities. Rather, it stems from something central to the “child’s theory” view of cognitive development: the
absence of detailed theories themselves.

This implies that the problem in the triad generating the paradox concerning explanation (ubiquity-theory-shallows) lies in the second claim:
that explanations reflect an individual’s theoretically rich understanding
204 Thinking Through and Beyond the Body
of some phenomenon. If explanation is theoretically shallow, how can it
also be ubiquitous?
What makes explanation both ubiquitous and shallow is a certain division of cognitive labor, one which makes detailed theoretical knowledge
in the head of each individual unnecessary, a division akin to the social division of labor central to Putnam-Burge externalism. We rely on
knowledge in others extensively in our explanatory endeavors (as in our
linguistic endeavors), and we rely on the assumption of knowledge in others to give us a sense of explanatory insight. Everyday folk know enough
about the “nominal essences” of the things that they interact with on a
regular basis in order to be able to offer relatively shallow explanations for
their behavior. But there are also experts who have either the within-level
or across-levels knowledge that the folk typically lack, and who are in a
position to offer explanations with more depth. Although we are faced, as
individuals, with the theoretical abyss as the norm, the theoretical knowledge that we lack exists somewhere, just not in our heads. This is to say
that explanation and the theories that underwrite their depth, are wide:
They do not supervene on an individual’s intrinsic, physical properties.

This reliance on the knowledge of others in explanatory understanding seems to be a feature that even preschool children recognize, as recent work by Donna Lutz and Frank Keil indicates. For example, a child
might be told that Bill knows all about why two magnets, if turned the
right way, stick together; and that John knows all about why a china lamp
breaks into pieces if it falls off a table. The child is then asked who knows
more about why television screens get all fuzzy sometimes during thunderstorms. Even preschoolers will cluster explanations about electricity
and magnetism together to a greater extent than either of those explanation types with mechanics. There is no doubt that they are in nearly full
ignorance of any specific mechanisms, yet as early as the age of four they
have some sense of how some explanations are more likely to be related
in the minds of experts. (In this particular example they may be keying
into notions of invisible forces and action at a distance.) As Lutz and Keil
report, even three-year-olds have a sense of how knowledge is clustered
in the minds of at least some experts, although this knowledge is far less
secure and extensive than it is at four.

One may think that this simply reveals more complexity to the internal
structure of the child’s mind than one might have initially suspected. Indeed, die-hard strong nativists and individualists might even see it as providing evidence for another module, that for deference to others! But this
would be to miss the significance of these results and their relationship to
those concerning the illusion of explanatory depth. What both indicate
is not simply that children are built to rely on the knowledge of others but
that their actual reliance limits the extent to which internally rich structures are needed to understand the world around them and function
effectively in it.

This cognitive division of labor and the relatively impoverished, internal cognitive structures that go with it are instances of more general
features of cognition. As we rely on other people, so too do we make
use of information in the world more generally. And as we have at least a
skeletal understanding of what others know (and who knows what), so too
do we have “modes of construal” of the various ways in which properties
are causally clustered and distributed in the world. The general point is
that throughout much of development, and long before formal schooling, a set of framework explanatory schemata are at work and seem to
be essential for further theory growth and conceptual change. This suggests the basis for some rapprochement between the new developmental
psychology and a mediational view of cognitive development.18
Vygotsky himself had a specific, general view of how mediational abilities developed. All mediational abilities, he claimed, begin as interpsychological abilities, abilities that are developed and manifested only in social
relations between individuals. This is a consequence of his “general genetic law of cultural development,” which says that
[a]ny function in the child’s cultural development appears twice, or on two planes.

First it appears on the social plane, and then on the psychological plane. First it
appears between people as an interpsychological category, and then within the
child as an intrapsychological category.19
While this is plausible for communicative abilities, it is incompatible with
the results of what I have been calling the new developmental psychology, even Keil’s modes of construal tempering of it, which indicate the
theoretical and conceptual sophistication that young children bring to
cognitive tasks “on the social plane.”
In any case, Vygotsky’s “law” seems less plausible for the full range of
forms that even mediational cognition can take. For example, many of the
mediational devices that have been culturally developed, such as maps,
signs, and even numerical systems, can be and are used by individuals
from the outset, particularly once they have already acquired related
psychological abilities. They do not appear to have the double existence –
first on the social plane, and then on the psychological plane – that
Vygotsky’s law attributes to all higher cognitive processes. But even if some
206 Thinking Through and Beyond the Body
mediational cognition is not tied as closely to a social context as Vygotsky
seems to have thought, the more general point that mediational cognition
is ontogenetically prior to many of the higher cognitive processes that are
the focus of individualistic psychology gives us reason to rethink what it
is we are discovering when we discover the “child’s theory of X.”
I want to conclude the substantive part of this chapter with some
thoughts about externalist psychology and the child’s theory of X, where
X = mind.

6 folk psychology and the theory of mind
We are mindreaders. The explosion of work over the last twenty years
in both cognitive development and primatology exploring the developmental and evolutionary origins of this ability has largely construed the
capacity itself as a theory of mind, a theory that attributes folk psychological states to agents, and that allows one to predict and explain an agent’s
behavior in terms of the relationships between those states, perception,
