and behavior. Folk psychology itself forms a core part of many areas within
psychology, including work in social cognition, group dynamics, and decision making. Philosophical discussions of folk psychology concentrating
on the relationship between folk psychology and a truly scientific psychology have sometimes implied that such work could form no part of a
truly scientific psychology. Yet such eliminativist conclusions have not garnered widespread support either in philosophy or in psychology. Here I
focus my discussion of our mindreading abilities on the end state of these
ontogenetic and phylogenetic processes, the folk psychology that we end
up sharing and relying on in everyday life.

Folk psychology has played a prominent role in the debate between
individualists and externalists, beginning with the widely accepted conclusion from the Putnam-Burge thought experiments that folk psychological
states are externalist. In Part Two, I argued that we should see this as entailing that folk psychological states have a wide realization, and that folk
psychology itself is a type of wide cognitive system, one that involves the
social relations between individuals. But what of the underlying capacity
or disposition that each of us has to construct such a folk psychology?
The large and growing literature on our mindreading abilities has, by
and large, treated this capacity as an individualistic system, a theory of
mind module or the child’s theory of mind.20
In discussing this I want to distinguish between our bare-bones folk
psychology, belief-desire psychology, and a richer conception of folk
psychology, one that includes the full range of psychological states, such as
emotions (anger, elation, fear), moods (restless, horny, inattentive), and
sensations (pain, experiencing red, tickling). I shall refer to this richer
conception as full-blown folk psychology. Consider, first, bare-bones folk
psychology.

It is plausible to think that the capacity that normal human adults have
to ascribe belief and desire to one another is both locationally narrow and
taxonomically wide. It is locationally narrow because the realization of the
capacity is purely internal to the individual who has the capacity. But it is
taxonomically wide because beliefs and desires are individuated, in part,
by their intentional content, that is, what they are about, and such content
is wide. This is so whether one thinks that this ascriptive ability operates
via a theory or via acts of imaginative simulation. Bare-bones folk psychology admits of what we might think of as an intellectualist construal, one
in which the ability itself is purely internal to the cognitive agent, and
I suspect that this is one reason why it has been the focus of attention
in the “theory of X” tradition. Matters are less straightforward, however,
when one considers both the full-blown capacities we have for folk psychological explanation and some of our more advanced deployments of
folk psychology.

Consider full-blown folk psychology, which augments bare-bones folk
psychology with a heterogeneous bunch of further states and capacities
that the folk readily attribute to one another. Apart from the various emotions, moods, and sensations already mentioned, full-blown folk psychology includes character and temperament states (sturdy, reliable, happygo-lucky) and global cognitive assessments (rational, intelligent, scatty).

It is much less plausible to think that the realization of the capacity to
ascribe full-blown folk psychology is purely internal than to think so in
the case of bare-bones psychology. That is because these states have a
felt component, whether it be experiential or bodily (or both), and it is
difficult to see how one could accurately and reliably ascribe such states
to others without knowing what they were like in one’s own case. Such
knowledge itself is procedural and has a bodily realization in that it involves not simply having one’s brain in some internal state but, at least,
having one’s brain and body in a certain state.

The most obvious ploys for proponents of the theory view of folk psychology would be to argue that (i) full-blown folk psychology can be reduced to bare-bones psychology, or (ii) however important experiential
and bodily aspects are to the acquisition of folk psychology, they do not
form part of its realization, which is purely internal. Both of these options
208 Thinking Through and Beyond the Body
and 6: (i) would seem to involve either the sort of hierarchical decomposition that I argued against there, while (ii) overlooks or simply dismisses
wide realizations as a species of total realization. Even if we conceded
that bare-bones folk psychology was individualistic, both strategies would
seem to manifest one or another form of smallism.

My claim, then, is that the move from bare-bones to full-blown folk
psychology involves a shift from a purely internal mental capacity to a
bodily enactive skill. But I also want to suggest that some of our most
sophisticated deployments of folk psychology, such as understanding a
complicated narrative about the mental lives of others, and manipulating
another’s full-blown folk psychology – involve a symbolic capacity that
is world-involving. In such cases, folk psychology starts to look not just
taxonomically but locationally externalist.

Consider narrative engagement that involves understanding the fullblown folk psychology of characters in a literary, dramatic, or cinematic
genre. To understand, say, a certain kind of novel one must not only ascribe full-blown folk psychological states to the characters in the novel
but also understand those characters’ (partial) views of the world, a world
which naturally includes other people. (Very effective novels in this respect include Vladimir Nabokov’s Lolita or Ian McEwan’s The Innocent or
Amsterdam.) As you read deeper into the novel, you must modify your
representations of the folk psychological representations that each character has. But since the metarepresentational load here increases dramatically with the complexity of the portrayal of the characters and their
relationships to one another, it is no surprise that even partial expertise
typically involves knowing how to find one’s way about in the novel. It involves
knowing how to locate and identify the folk psychological representations
that respective characters have, and the signs of these in the novel itself.

Here the representations that are the object of your own representations
are located somewhere other than in your own head. In short, this understanding involves constructing a representational loop that extends
beyond the head and into the minds of the fictional characters – and
perhaps the narrator or even the author – with which you are engaged.

Perhaps unsurprisingly, much the same is true of appreciating the fullblown folk psychology of real people, especially those to whom you are
close. Our representations of the mental lives of companions and friends
are more sophisticated not simply because of the added internal complexity such representations have in our own heads, but because they
index richer mental representations in the minds of one’s companions
than those in the minds of strangers. Rather than simply encoding information about these mental representations, we engage and interact
with them, and in so doing extend the system of mental representations
to which we have access beyond the boundary of our own skins. As with
our reliance on cognitive artifacts to bear some of the representational
load borne during a complicated cognitive task, here we exploit rather
than replicate the representational complexity of our environments. But
unlike at least the cases of distributed cognition that I have discussed in
which the individual is displaced as the unit of cognition, here individuals remain both the unit of cognition and the locus of representational
control, with interactions with external representations augmenting the
internal representational systems of individuals.
