
Both the case of narrative engagement and that of locationally wide,
full-blown folk psychology involve representational capacities whose locus of control is still, by and large, internal. But such a locus of control
is not an essential feature of full-blown folk psychology, even if in many
instances it is a pervasive feature. We can come to rely on others psychologically in such deep ways that we in effect surrender our autonomy, or
have it stripped away from us. A final word about such cases and their
relationship to the externalist mind.

Consider, first, cases in which one person has blind devotion to and
trust in another, which can involve close kin relations, lovers and life
partners, or religious believers and their spiritual leaders. In extreme
cases, the thought and action of the trusting party is given over to that of
the trustee. When that happens we have a locus of control that is external
to the trusting party. As with these other forms of locationally wide folk
psychological systems, the cognitive capacity here is world involving, with
the relevant folk psychological representations being located both inside
and outside of a given individual’s head. The folk psychological states of
the trustee come to form a part, a controlling part, of the folk psychology
of the trusting party, effectively displacing some of the higher cognitive
capacities of that individual.

Suppose, for example, that sustained deception arises in a relation of
blind devotion or trust. From the perspective of the deceiver, manipulator, or person trusted, the locus of control here remains internal. But from
the perspective of the deceived, the manipulated, or the person trusting, their representational folk psychological states are controlled by folk
psychological states beyond what we usually think of as their own mind.

There are, I think, many real-life situations that approximate this sort
of case, even if few involve pure blind devotion and trust. They may involve
210 Thinking Through and Beyond the Body
partial or mutual psychological dependencies, enhanced or diminished
cognitive functioning, asymmetrical power relations, or sustained deception and manipulation. It would be close to the pure cases that the self,
the subject of psychological states, is no longer bounded by the body, and
where separation of the trusting and trustee approximates the severing of
a physical boundary within an organism. This provides one way to think
about the death of a loved one, or the betrayal of personal trust, and the
psychology of the grief or anger that follows in its wake.

7 the mind beyond itself
Dissatisfaction with the idea that mental representation is simply a form
of encoding has motivated a variety of ways of thinking of the mind as
embodied and embedded. While some radical, early expressions of both
connectionism and dynamic approaches to cognition implied that the
notion of representation itself was the source of the problem, for the most
part representation has been reconceptualized rather than consigned
to the dustbin of Bad Ideas. By articulating the notion of exploitative
representation in Part Two and showing how it applies to higher cognition
in this chapter, I have presented a view of the mind as encultured, as
embedded in social and technical networks, and as constructed through
its extension beyond the boundary of the individual.

Although I have said less about the mind as embodied, I think that the
exploitative view of representation can be applied to make sense of the
embodiment of cognition as well, where the body becomes another resource that cognitive systems use to work their magic no different in kind
from cognitive resources in the environment to which the individual is
coupled. Recent representational views that emphasize the embodiment
of cognition, such as those of George Lakoff and Mark Johnson, Arthur
Glenberg, and Rick Grush, different as they are from one another, maintain what we might think of as a Cartesian bias in thinking of cognition
in terms of what lies within the skin – ideally, the brain – of the individual cognizer. In this respect, I suspect that they remain too closely
wedded to encoding views of representation. Mental representation is
metaphorically structured (Lakoff and Johnson), operates through embodied encodings (Glenberg), or is processed through inner dynamical
models or emulators (Grush). We need to look beyond both head and
body in thinking about mental representation.21
There is a more conservative and a more radical strand to the argument in this chapter for adopting an externalist perspective of cognition.

The more conservative strand works with the idea that a range of psychological states and processes are taxonomically wide in that how they
are individuated, classified, or taxonomized relies on factors outside of
the head, and thus do not supervene on the intrinsic, physical properties of individuals. By applying this strategy not just to the philosopher’s
favorite, (bare-bones) folk psychology, but to a range of states and processes in subpersonal psychological theories, one can see that taxonomic
externalism is not simply an implication of the Putnam-Burge thought experiments but implicit in much existing psychological explanatory practice. I suspect that, particularly amongst cognitive psychologists, there will
remain the feeling that taxonomic externalism remains merely a metapsychological perspective on explanatory practice, rather than a view that
actively guides the research that is done within the cognitive sciences
themselves.

Such a view is more difficult to sustain with respect to the more radical
strand to the argument, the one that holds that at least some psychological states and processes are locationally externalist: In a literal sense, they
physically extend beyond the head of the individual who has them. Much
of the discussion in this and in the previous chapter has focused on both
examples of this type of externalist psychology and general features of
cognition that make this a viable paradigm for structuring psychological research. Locational externalism appeals to the ways in which cognition, particularly human cognition, relies on and incorporates physical
and social aspects of the environment of the individual. The contextsensitive view of realization in Part Two provides a missing link between
a materialist metaphysics and such an externalist psychology. The accompanying explanatory strategy of integrative synthesis does the same
for methodology and explanatory practice in the cognitive sciences and
externalism.

While psychologists and cognitive scientists themselves may not view
the metaphysics here as all that relevant to the type of science they develop, the direction of research in the cognitive sciences has been shaped
by the general sense that a properly scientific psychology should be individualistic, in much the way that it was shaped in a previous generation by the sense that such a psychology should be behavioristic. Views
of what there is, of what you need to postulate (or can’t postulate) in
your ontology to do your science, are often not far beneath the surface
of explanatory practice. In particular, by scratching a little at the idea
that cognition is a form of symbol-processing, we were able to identify
why individualism might seem a necessary or desirable view of cognitive
212 Thinking Through and Beyond the Body
psychology, whether or not one held in addition a computational view of
the nature of these symbols and how they are processed.

The externalism developed in this chapter takes the symbolic nature
of thought seriously but suggests that internal symbols are simply one
kind of cognitive resource used in memory (as constituents of a storehouse), cognitive development (as constituents of theories), and in folk
psychology (as constituents of beliefs). External symbols are an obvious
