second kind of cognitive resource used in cognitive processing, but simply to see externalists as adding external to internal symbols would be
to mischaracterize the shift in perspective implied by the externalism I
have defended. For the central notion becomes that of a cognitive system. Some cognitive systems are wide, and some contain both internal
and external symbols. But enactive, bodily cognitive systems, such as wide
procedural memory systems, may be conceptualized in terms of explicit
symbols only with some strain, as may wide perceptual systems that involve the extraction of information that is usually thought of as non- or
subsymbolic.

A large part of the significance of mind-world coupling lies in its iterative nature. We take part of the world, and learn how to incorporate
and use it as part of our cognitive processing. That, in turn, allows us
to integrate other parts of the world that, in turn, both boost our cognitive capacities and allow us to cognitively integrate further parts of the
world. And so on. Although some recent discussions of the embeddedness of cognition have focused on novel and future technologies – from
cell phones, to electronic implants, to telerobotics – the two most signifi-
cant forms of iterative scaffolding are older than the human species: the
advent of spoken language (itself a scaffold for much higher cognition
and written symbol systems), and the cognitive dependence of infants on
their parents (the mother of all inventions?).22
With that in mind, we can see how externalism departs from the smallist views that typically drive researchers to look further “into” the brain
in search of cognitive systems. Rather, the externalism I have defended
suggests that in order to understand central aspects of cognition we look
not to what’s in the brain but what the brain is in. Memory, the process
of cognitive development, and folk psychology as they actually guide the
cognitive lives we lead are embedded cognitive systems, and much of the
embedding framework is social.

In both species of externalism that I have discussed, the individual
remains the subject or bearer of psychological states, even if she no
longer serves as a boundary demarcating the entities of a respectable
psychological science. At the end of the previous section I introduced
cases in which this is no longer true – where subjectivity itself may no
longer be easy to locate – but I think that such cases, unlike those involving locationally externalist cognitive systems, are rare. Thus, this is one
respect in which the individual is a focal point even for an externalist
psychology.

To further extend this externalist account of the mind, I turn in the
next chapter to consciousness.

9
Expanding Consciousness
1 the return of the conscious
Although the 1990s was officially the “Decade of the Brain” in the cognitive sciences, judging by the volume and range of literature, for philosophers of mind it was, rather, the “Return of the Conscious.” From early
in the decade, works such as John Searle’s The Rediscovery of the Mind and
Owen Flanagan’s Consciousness Reconsidered aimed to restore consciousness to center stage in the philosophy of mind. This restoration was in
part a way of correcting a distortion that the cognitive revolution’s emphasis on unconscious mental processing had wrought, initiating a culture in
which discussions of consciousness could be held without philosophical
embarrassment. By the end of the decade, the philosophical literature on
consciousness had outstripped that on any other topic in the philosophy
of mind.

To be sure, much of the work on consciousness in the last dozen years
or so has attended to or even stemmed from research in the neurosciences. But perhaps the issue that has most engaged philosophers of
mind has been whether the neurosciences or indeed any physical science could reveal all there is to know about consciousness. Claims that
there would, of necessity, remain some sort of explanatory or ontological
gap between the world revealed by science and conscious phenomena
themselves had been articulated and defended by Thomas Nagel, Frank
Jackson, and Joseph Levine more than twenty years ago. Such claims have
more recently received a reinvigorated examination by David Chalmers
in his The Conscious Mind, the most widely discussed book by philosophers
of mind since at least D. M. Armstrong’s A Materialist Theory of the Mind.

1
214
In this chapter, I do not attempt to review this literature, nor develop
a substantive, comprehensive theory of consciousness, which I suspect
is an illusive goal (more on which in a moment). Rather, I shall focus
specifically on the implications that the sort of externalist psychology
that I have defended in the last two chapters has for consciousness and its
study. Consciousness has seemed especially problematic for externalists,
involving mental phenomena – ranging from pain to visual experience
to self-knowledge – for which internalist accounts have seemed prima
facie inescapable. In general terms, conscious mental phenomena have
appeared to be so intimately or immediately related to facts about the
conscious subject, their bearer, and so distantly or mediately related to
facts about the world of that subject, that externalism has faced an uphill
battle in presenting itself as even a possible view of consciousness.

2 processes of awareness and phenomenal states
To begin, let’s review a sampling of the range of mental phenomena that
have been regarded as either being conscious or being at the heart of
consciousness:

bodily sensations, particularly the feelings one has through the senses
of touch or proprioception 
pain, particularly intense or acute pain 
visual experience, particularly that of color 
higher-order cognition, cognition with mental states as their objects 
attention, particularly that directed at aspects of one’s experience of
the world 
introspection, being reflection of some sort on one’s own mental life,
including one’s self
Specifying the relationship between any of these phenomena, as well as
how each is to be understood – what processes each involves, what is essential to each, what role each plays in consciousness – takes one immediately
into the various debates over consciousness. I shall proceed by focusing
on particular phenomena on this list and considering externalism with
respect to each.

At the core of the chapter is articulation of what I call the TESEE
conception of consciousness: consciousness as Temporally Extended,
Scaffolded, and Embodied and Embedded. In sections 3 and 4, I focus
on aspects of consciousness that are thoughtlike – higher-order cognition, attention, and introspection – what collectively I shall call processes of
