216 Thinking Through and Beyond the Body
awareness, first introducing (section 3) and then arguing for (section 4)
an expanded view of such processes. The TESEE conception of processes
of awareness complements the externalist view of cognition already developed in Chapters 7 and 8.

One further question is how well such an externalist view accounts
for the “other half” of consciousness – pain, bodily states, and visual
experience – what I group together as phenomenal states. Recently, philosophers such as Michael Tye, Bill Lycan, and Fred Dretske have attempted
to extend externalism from its roots in characterizing intentional phenomena to consciousness by adopting a representational view of the phenomenal. Although the relationship between the intentional and the
phenomenal will be the focus of the next chapter, in section 5, I consider
Dretske’s view, in particular a dilemma argument that he uses to motivate
his externalism about the phenomenal. The discussion here will set the
scene for considering views of at least some phenomenal states that exemplify the TESEE conception of them in section 6. Here I will draw on
recent work by the philosopher Alva Noe and the psychologist J. Kevin ¨
O’Regan on the sensorimotor contingency theory of visual experience,
and by Susan Hurley on consciousness more generally. As we will see,
especially in sections 7 and 8, there are limitations to how extensive an
externalist account of the phenomenal can be, and there are various ways
in which the TESEE view stops short of the sort of “global externalism”
defended by Dretske and other representationalists.

There are two reasons for suspecting that a general theory of consciousness will prove illusive. The first is that, as suggested by the six kinds of
mental phenomena I presented as examples of conscious states, such a
theory either has to lump quite diverse phenomena together, or explain
why some are more fundamental as conscious mental phenomena than
others (and treat just those). Even though I view as useful the categorization of these into processes of awareness and phenomenal states, and
shall show ways in which the TESEE conception of consciousness illuminates both, there are important differences between these two categories
of mental phenomena, as well as within them.

The second is that the demands placed on a theory of consciousness
come from many different quarters. These range from demands peculiar to philosophers – such as those sometimes imposed within the explanatory gap literature or work on the problem of self-knowledge – to
constraints that derive from facts about neural processing or limits to the
accessibility of consciousness within cognitive neuroscience and psychology. These demands sometimes apply primarily or paradigmatically to just
some subset of mental phenomena considered conscious (thus interacting with my first reservation), or address distinct aspects to consciousness.

We are in the same position as are those searching for a theory of matter
that satisfies both idealists, who think that all there is are ideas – and so
need to be shown how any theory of matter is compatible with that –
and physicists who are convinced that matter exists but disagree about
whether it is continuous or particulate, uniform or differentiated.

3 expanding the conscious mind: processes
of awareness
Consider higher-order cognition, attention, and introspection, what I
refer to collectively as processes of awareness. These are sometimes
thought of as processes that characterize distinctively human consciousness, though they have also been deployed in offering a general account
of consciousness. For example, so-called higher-order theories of consciousness (HOT) propose that consciousness is awareness. On HOT
views, what makes a given state conscious is that it is the object of some
other, higher-order mental state of a particular kind. In keeping with
my general aims in this chapter, here my focus will not be on such theories but instead on the processes that they posit and their relation to
externalism about the mind.

I shall suggest that processes of awareness call out for a radical rethinking along externalist lines, one that turns on taking locational externalism
about consciousness more seriously than it has been taken, even by externalists about the phenomenal. The argument here will be similar to
that given in the previous chapter, where I argued that our conceptions of
memory, cognitive development, and folk psychology should be explicitly
refashioned along externalist lines. At the heart of this reconceptualization are three features of processes of awareness that have usually been
ignored or downplayed: They are temporally extended; they are typically scaffolded on environmental and cultural tools; and they are both embodied
and embedded. Let me take each of these in turn.

In both the philosophical and psychological literature, processes of
awareness are usually thought of as enduring for very short periods of
time. The sort of first-person introspection or retrospection on one’s
own mental states that allows philosophers to conceptually analyze the
products of processes of awareness, and psychologists to experimentally
record reports and other outcomes of those processes, are temporally
quite limited. (Seconds for philosophers, milliseconds for psychologists.)
218 Thinking Through and Beyond the Body
It is this conception of processes of awareness that generates many of the
classical problems in each field. For example, consider Hume’s problem
of the elusive I, the self being difficult to detect amongst the fleeting
objects of awareness that one finds in introspection. Or consider a version of the binding problem, the problem of accounting for how various
aspects of experience are bound together to form a seamless, relatively
unified experience, given the different ways in which these aspects are
processed within the organism. Both problems presuppose a conception
of consciousness as operating on a timescale of seconds or less.

These forms of the processes of awareness are important to cognition, but they are not the only form that such processes take. As Merlin
Donald has pointed out, there is a more temporally extended form that
awareness takes, enduring minutes or hours, that is especially significant
for human cognition, for without it we would not be able to perform
many of the tasks that are uniquely human (or near enough so). Constructing or following a narrative, planning to and then acquiring a given
motor skill, and negotiating a crowded street in a car or on foot are
three examples of such actions that we perform not simply while conscious but at least sometimes consciously. The processes that generate
such actions temporally extend beyond the limit of the second hand.

Such tasks are ubiquitous in everyday, waking life, and they involve an
agent who is both embodied and embedded (more of which in a moment). Both culturally and individually we construct perception-action
cycles that involve attuning ourselves to the world, and the world to ourselves. Many such cycles are constituted primarily by conscious experiences and acts, and their temporal extension, over minutes or hours, goes
hand-in-hand with their spatial extension beyond the brain of individual
cognizers.2
This temporally and spatially extended conception of processes of
awareness makes it easy to understand consciousness as environmentally
and culturally scaffolded. Although the cognitive role of specific, culturally developed tools, such as navigation equipment, clocks, and maps,
has been acknowledged in some recent thinking about cognition, there
has been a concentration in this literature on symbolic devices and symbols and their interaction with the cognizers. One consequence of this
is that the scaffolded nature of processes of awareness and cognition
more generally appears as a relatively esoteric, specialized addition to
biological cognitive systems, the cream on the cake of cognition. This is
seriously misleading, for the range of scaffolding involved in processes of
