awareness is extensive, and includes, in addition to humanly constructed
symbolic devices, a range of environmental and social structures that are
appropriated by cognizers.

For example, systematic, reflective, cognitive use has been made of
natural features of land and sky, such as the position of the sun or the
shift in position of landmarks, in traditional seafaring navigation. These
natural features play similar roles that cognitive devices play in modern,
Western navigational practices. To take another example, a road itself can
be as important a cognitive resource as signs along that road or a map
that shows where the road leads. Individuals who want to get from A to
B need to be appropriately coupled to all of these resources. In neither
case need we think of such cognitive resources as symbolic in nature,
or as carrying meaning in and of themselves. What is crucial about such
scaffolds for processes of awareness is that they are causally integrated
into what can be complicated, conscious actions that simply could be not
performed without them. Their integration, their causal connectedness
to the individual cognizer, extends not only that individual’s cognitive
abilities, but expands her consciousness.3
Once we adopt a temporally extended view of consciousness and start
looking for scaffolding in everyday mental life, examples multiply. In the
section on cognitive development in the previous chapter, I said that both
spoken language and written language serve as mediators that change
the structure of cognition, and much the same is true of consciousness.

The written word and all that invokes it – from labels on packages, to
directional signs, letters, books, advertisements, addresses, codes, computers, scientific instruments, t-shirts, shopping lists, cards, the Western
educational system, law courts, and bureaucracy in general – is ubiquitous in how we cognitively negotiate our daily lives. Its integration into
our conscious mental lives alters the very processes of awareness that
constitute consciousness through augmentation. Those processes now
incorporate the written word, just as the processes of awareness of speaking creatures came to incorporate speech into consciousness. In each
case, consciousness itself relies on, and expands to include, such external
scaffolds.

A second, general source for mental scaffolding, as suggested in my
discussion of folk psychology in the previous chapter, is other people.

Others often constitute cognitive resources that can be accessed fairly directly (for example, by asking them) or in more indirect ways. If we accept
that cognitive resources can be distributed across individuals, then it is a
small step to viewing these resources as sometimes the object of processes
of awareness. But let me say something more about the third plank to the
220 Thinking Through and Beyond the Body
view of processes of awareness I am articulating – the embodiment and
embeddedness of such processes – before taking this small step.

Temporally extended processes of awareness are embodied and embedded not simply in that they are processes of organisms, organisms
have bodies, and these bodies exist in environments. This is banal. Rather,
conscious life in the time scale of minutes or hours involves agency, and
agents, at least the sorts of agents that we are and all examples that we
know of are, exercise their agency in the physical world through their bodies over extended periods of time. There is no other way to act. And bodies
gain traction with the physical world through reliably causing changes in,
and in turn by being changed by, that world. No environment, no bodily
action; no bodily action, no agency; no agency, no temporally extended
processes or awareness.

The countervailing claim that we can imagine such processes taking
place without either or both a body and an environment at all has a
rich philosophical history, from Descartes’s evil demon hypothesis to
brain-in-a-vat thought experiments. Does the TESEE view of consciousness deny that we can imagine processes of awareness going on in such
cases? Two related replies. First, such imaginings are typically radically underdescribed, and they often become incoherent once they are imagined
more fully. More pointedly, I have found that disagreements over what
can and can’t be imagined here often turn on one’s prior philosophical
commitments, and that makes me suspicious about relying too heavily
on such claims of imaginability. So, while I am sympathetic to arguments
that point to problems with completely disembodied and disembedded
consciousness, I think that methodologically it is wise to steer clear of
a commitment here. Second, the TESEE view of consciousness is a view
of how consciousness works as a matter of fact for creatures like us with
bodies in environments, rather than of necessity for any creature that we
think we can imagine having the very same processes of awareness as us.

One need not have a view of the latter in order to have a theory of the
former.4
The previous paragraphs suggest an argument from the temporally
extended nature of processes of awareness to the further claims about
agency, embodiment, and embeddedness. But in fact I think that the
argument could be run from any one of these claims to the others,
since they form a cluster of claims that stand or fall together. If this is
right, then the position I am advocating needs to be either accepted
or resisted in toto; there is no middle-ground position. Thus, the tempting idea of viewing processes of awareness as temporally extended, but
taking the somatic and extrasomatic resources they involve as simply inputs for internal processes of awareness to operate on, is a nonstarter. If
one expands consciousness on one of these dimensions, one expands it
on all.

There are thus two sorts of arguments that need to be made to support
this position. The first should make a prima facie case for this conception
of processes of awareness being a package deal, so that the only live
options are two: Accept or reject the package. The second should then
argue for the former over the latter of these options.

4 arguing for expanded consciousness
Much of the previous section constitutes a start on the first of these tasks,
since it proceeded by showing how accepting one part of the package
leads to accepting other parts. But we need also to show that there is
no privileged starting point in this conception of processes of awareness.

Consider the following argument, which draws on the premise that processes of awareness – higher-order cognition, attention, and introspection – involve not only various sorts of access to environmental resources,
but that these are properly thought of as cognitive resources for the individual.

(1) Processes of awareness involve accessing and using cognitive resources.
