
(2) Some of these resources lie beyond the head of the individual.

(3) Accessing and using these resources requires acting on the world in
specific ways (through eye and head movement, bodily orientation
and motion, manipulation). [2]
(4) Even accessing and using internal cognitive resources (for example, memories, perceptions) often requires such bodily action
and worldly engagement through mnemonics, intention-fixing,
rehearsal and repetition, talking to oneself, doodling. [1]
(5) The actions required in 3 and 4 typically occupy a temporal extension of many seconds, minutes, or even hours. [3 and 4]
(6) So processes of awareness are temporally extended [5], scaffolded
[2], and embodied and embedded. [3 and 4]
I take it that the most controversial premise in this argument is 2.

An individualist who concedes 1 (and perhaps 4), might think that she
can embrace the temporally extended nature of processes of awareness,
222 Thinking Through and Beyond the Body
and so a version of 5 and 6, without going externalist. This would be to
concede that consciousness is temporally extended and relies on environmental resources, while denying that the beyond-the-head resources
are cognitive.

Traditionally, the mind is conceptualized as beginning and ending
inside the head. We can express this view as implying two things about
the cognitive resources that constitute the mind. First, they lie exclusively
in the head, and second, they do not strictly require bodily action and
worldly engagement to be cognitive resources. Suppose that we attempt to
tackle the argument for the TESEE view of consciousness by staying close
to the traditional view of the mind on just the first of these two points.

That is, suppose that we have a head-bound view of cognitive resources,
but acknowledge that these internal cognitive resources often interact
with the world beyond the head in their role as cognitive resources. In
effect, this would be to attempt to cede both 1 and 4 in the argument,
while denying 2 and 3. Can such a position be defended?
One reason to think not is that the very processes that 4 concedes
involve resources in the world. If these processes are cognitive, then these
are cognitive resources. Hence 2. What is needed is a way to deny that
processes of awareness are ever themselves embedded. But the range of
examples that we have seen in the previous section makes this prima facie
implausible. The chief and perhaps most obvious way to deny this is to
defend the view that there is a fundamental asymmetry between what is
inside the head and what is outside of it, such that only the former can
constitute processes of awareness. An encoding view of representation
would fit the bill, since then resources inside the head would code for
those outside the head, but not vice-versa. But I have argued against such a
view in the previous chapter. I see no nonquestion-begging way to defend
the requisite asymmetry.

On the view of representation as exploitative that I have developed,
individuals or cognitive systems exploitatively represent objects, properties, events, and propositions, but the boundary of the individual does
not mark the place where representation begins or ends. States inside the
head are caused by, and carry information about, states outside the head,
but they bear this same relation to states of the body. Applying this view
to processes of awareness that operate through bodily action beyond the
limit of milliseconds and seconds makes it particularly difficult to distinguish as cognitive resources just those states that occur inside the head.

As we manipulate our relationship to the world through action – whether
it be through physical grasping with the hands in object manipulation,
head or eye movements in visual attention, talking to oneself or another
in figuring out what one thinks – we also cause changes in those parts
of the beyond-the-head world. Processes of awareness often have a phenomenology, can be “directly” activated or accessed, and have a subjective
dimension. But as both internal and external resources play crucial and
similar roles in these processes, it is arbitrary to assume that the processes
themselves begin and end in the head.

Thus, it is problematic to maintain just the first part of the traditional
view of the mind, that it lies in the head, while granting that there is some
sense in which processes of awareness are temporally extended and embodied and embedded. So suppose instead that we look to uphold both
parts of the traditional view, conceding less to the TESEE conception. In
terms of the argument for TESEE that I have given this would be to reject
4 as well as 2 (and so 3), or maintain only an individualistic version of 4.

This is clearly possible, but at a price. For then the only processes of awareness the argument encompasses are those that don’t involve bodily action
and worldly engagement. This would exclude much higher-order cognition and attention, both of which are often worldly directed, and even
large parts of introspective practice, which is seldom purely internally
directed. More importantly, there seems little sense in which processes of
awareness could be temporally extended, rather than a series of temporal snapshots strung together, since nearly any such process that endures
many seconds, minutes, or hours does involve precisely what the denial
(or modification) of 4 prohibits. Thus, removing 2, 3, and 4 from the
argument also removes, or at least radically attenuates 5. This reinforces
the sense that the elements of the TESEE conception form a package,
and need to be accepted or rejected as a whole.

Now, to stage 2: The defense of the conception of processes of awareness as temporally extended, scaffolded, and embodied and embedded,
the TESEE conception. There are two chief, general, related desiderata
to appeal to here: to account for as full a range of mental life involving
processes of awareness as possible; and to deliver a conception of such
processes that shows how such processes are integrated with the rest of
cognition.

On the question of integration, how well one thinks this view integrates with the rest of cognition will depend on what one thinks the
rest of cognition is like. In Chapters 7 and 8, I sketched a view of both
computational and noncomputational psychology in which the ideas of
exploitative representation and locational externalism played a central
role. Most relevant for thinking about processes of awareness, is the
224 Thinking Through and Beyond the Body
externalist conceptualization of memory, cognitive development, and
folk psychology, introduced in the previous chapter. For a strong case
can be made for seeing continuity between such processes and processes
of awareness. This is in part due to the metarepresentational edge to
