these processes, involving, as they often do, the representation of representations. The theme developed in that chapter was that there was some
pressure to move from individualistic to externalist conceptions of such
processes as we considered the more sophisticated and real-life forms
that they took. The same is true of processes of awareness.

Take higher-order cognition, which is typically characterized as explicitly metarepresentational. The simplest example of such a process is that
of occurrently thinking about or entertaining some other thought you
have. Suppose that you are sitting in a room, eyes closed, and you do
this. The second-order thought is distinct from simply having the corresponding occurrent first-order thought. Intuitively, it involves something
in addition, some further mental process whose object is that first-order
thought. There is some pressure to construe such examples of higherorder cognition as taxonomically externalist; in effect, this was argued
with respect to memory in the previous chapter. But consider more complicated instances of this sort of process that are common in everyday life.

Consider, for example, the higher-order cognition you have when you
are reflecting on whether your beliefs or opinions are consistent, or engaging in a conversation whose aim is to resolve a dispute over values, or
writing up a sort of informal balance sheet that allows you to explore how
realistic it would be for you to seek to achieve a long-time goal. These
are all processes that typically involve you doing something, from reading
over your diaries, to drawing on the views of others, to making diagrams,
notes, and annotations. As such, they depart from the simple case we began with and its Cartesian overtones. The something that is done involves
the body’s interactions with cognitive resources beyond the head. This
action is possible only because the relationship between what is inside
the agent and what is beyond its boundary is reliable and systematic, and
thus can be taken for granted in acting.

If this is correct, then this is one respect in which the externalist views
defended here offer a way to treat conscious and unconscious cognitive
processing in an integrated or unified way. The traditional division between higher cognition (what I have referred to as “cognition central”),
and processes of awareness as forms that consciousness takes is an artifact of history and of disciplinary orientation. If we adopt this view of
how processes of awareness are integrated with other parts of cognition,
then the issue of integration becomes entwined with that of its range
of application. For now there is no firm boundary between what I have
been calling processes of awareness and “merely” cognitive processes.

The TESEE conception applies to both.

To avoid one misunderstanding of what the TESEE conception of
processes of awareness aims to do, let me locate that view within the
pluralistic view of cognition that is part of my externalism. The aim in
the preceding and present section is not to tout the behavioristic view
that there is nothing internal to conscious experience, or that processes
of awareness are never purely internal. Sometimes they are. Rather, it
is to suggest that such processes more often involve what is inside the
individual insofar as they are integrated into what that individual does
as an embodied and embedded agent. And more so, rather than less,
as we move to more sophisticated, realistic examples of consciousness in
action. What the TESEE conception challenges is the near exclusive focus
on what is inside the head in thinking about processes of awareness, just as
the introduction of context-sensitive realization, wide computationalism,
and exploitative representation challenge a similar focus elsewhere in
our conception of the mind and cognition.

5 global externalism and phenomenal states
Let us now turn from processes of awareness to the other half of consciousness, what I have referred to collectively as phenomenal states: bodily sensations, pain, and visual experience. However plausible the TESEE
conception of processes of awareness is, it is prima facie more problematic to apply it to phenomenal states. Individualism is a natural starting
point for accounts of such states, even if we grant the externalist view of
computation and cognition developed thus far.

Philosophers have generated a variety of views from the idea that phenomenal states are a sort of internal event, one wedged at the interface between mind proper and world. These include classic empiricist accounts
of the mind, Cartesian skepticism within epistemology, twentieth-century
sense-data theory, and versions of the explanatory gap problem for contemporary materialism. Phenomenal states have typically been regarded
as occurring completely within the boundary of the individual. Thus,
they are at least locationally individualistic. Why think that they are also
taxonomically individualistic?
In the case of at least bodily sensations and pain, this has been taken
to imply taxonomic individualism about those conscious states, typically
226 Thinking Through and Beyond the Body
because such states are not thought to have propositional content
(though see below). Thus, the chief feature of mental states that has
been seized on as the basis for viewing them as taxonomically externalist –
their intentionality – is absent in the case of bodily sensations and pain.

What is pain about? Nothing: It just hurts. There is a distinct feel to
pain, and a distinct phenomenology more generally to bodily sensations,
such as those gained through touch. This “raw feel” to pain and bodily
sensations supervenes on just the intrinsic, physical states of the body.

In the case of visual experience, a version of this view has been thought
to hold because there is an aspect of visual experience – how things seem
to me visually here and now – that can be distinguished from the conceptual or propositional content that such experience possesses. Even
if we concede that visual experiences have a (wide) propositional content, there is some further content they have that is narrow, and so taxonomic individualism is plausible for at least this aspect of visual experience. This has sometimes been expressed by saying that visual experience
has nonconceptual content, that this content is individualistic, and that it
plays an important role in understanding the phenomenology of visual
experience.5
Fred Dretske has defended the view, by contrast, that if one is an externalist about conceptual or propositional representational mental states,
then one should also be an externalist about all experiential mental states,
particularly those of visual experience. Dretske holds this view as a function of his endorsement of a representational account of experience that
entails that consciousness is a species of representation. If one is an externalist about representation, then one should also be externalist about
consciousness. Dretske recognizes, however, that to avoid the conditional
being run as part of a reductio against externalism, externalism about conscious experience requires defense. Why should one be an externalist
about phenomenal states?
Dretske’s chief positive argument for this position can be put succinctly. What are phenomenal states? If they are or involve conceptual
or thoughtlike entities, then those states are taxonomically externalist:
They inherit their width from that of the concepts or thoughts they involve. In this respect, phenomenal states are like metarepresentational
or higher-order mental states, and the sorts of arguments that motivated
externalism about intentional states apply to them. If, on the other hand,
phenomenal states are completely divorced from conceptual or thoughtlike entities, such that (for example) it is possible for two individuals to
have distinct phenomenal states despite their sharing all their intentional
states (including beliefs about those states), then phenomenal states are
unknowable – even from the first-person point of view. Apart from running counter to how phenomenal states are usually thought of, this in
