turn removes whatever ground we might have for thinking that such states
of intentional doppelgangers ¨ are different.6
Although Dretske is concerned in the first instance with sensory states,
he views this argument as applying more generally to phenomenal states,
including pains, emotions, and motivational states. The position that
Dretske defends, or sees as defensible, thus might be termed global externalism, since it holds, or suggests, that externalism is true of all mental
states. William Lycan and Michael Tye have also defended such a view.

All three philosophers reach their global externalist conclusion via their
endorsement of a representational account of the phenomenal. Here I
want to focus on global externalism itself, and why it should be resisted.7
At the end of the previous section, I located the TESEE conception of
processes of awareness within the over-arching pluralistic view of the mind
and cognition that I have been developing in Parts Two and Three. I have
also said that I am skeptical about the prospects for a general theory of
consciousness in part because of the diversity among the phenomena and
processes considered as falling within its ambit. These points together
suggest at least a certain caution in speaking of “the mental” or “the
conscious” as categories that we might systematically and globally theorize
about. I suspect that the same is true of “the phenomenal” as a category
about which we might have substantive, interesting, true generalizations.

I include here Dretske’s complex generalization that all such states are
externalist if language- or thoughtlike, and unknowable if not. While
Dretske’s dilemma argument identifies something correct about some
phenomenal states, both horns of the dilemma can be resisted.

This resistance is easiest to mount in the case of pain and bodily sensations, and it turns on the fact that we have ways to individuate such
states other than via whatever propositional content they have. (This
is the truth, I assume, in the idea that such states are not representational at all.) Intuitively, one such way is by an appeal to their phenomenal character, but Dretske’s dilemma argument suggests that there is a
fragility to this sort of appeal, one that may well call into question our
first-person knowledge of the nature of our phenomenal states. Let me
explain.

Some phenomenal states, such as pain or the bodily sensations generated by touch, have an aspect to them that is only distantly related
to language. Subsequently, they have a content that may be difficult to
228 Thinking Through and Beyond the Body
express in language. I feel a dull, gnawing pain in my knee area, and
thus come to believe that I have a pain here, but what has been called
the phenomenological content of the former state is not identical to the
propositional content of the latter. If I have another such recurrent pain
in my thigh, it will likely cause me to believe that I have a pain in my
thigh. But if I am attentionally preoccupied, or tired or drowsy, then I
could experience one or the other of these pains without forming the
corresponding belief. I know that I was or even am in pain, but I don’t
know just which pain it is. (Suppose that I have both kinds of pain regularly, and they are not all that phenomenologically distinctive from one
another.) Maybe I form the wrong belief here, or maybe I form no belief
at all. Perhaps I simply register discomfort somewhere or other in my leg,
not conceptualizing it as pain, or as more specifically located.

Suppose we view such states as being thoughtlike, so that they fall
under the first horn of Dretske’s dilemma. Then according to Dretske
they should inherit their content from that of the thoughtlike states to
which they are causally related. Yet it is difficult to say just what this
content is precisely because the relevant thoughtlike states are fleeting
and poorly attended. But insofar as they have a clearly specifiable content,
it seems doubtful that their content is itself wide. Since it both pertains
to a condition of one’s body and is suitably general (because vague),
it seems that at least embodied doppelgangers ¨ must share it. There can
be no externalist contagion from the thoughtlike to the phenomenal if
the thoughtlike states themselves are individualistic. When I think “I feel
discomfort around here,”thinking of what is in fact a pain in my knee but
which I do not conceptualize as such, then this is a state that would seem to
be shared by anything identical to me in its intrinsic, physical properties.

Even though there will be representational descriptions that doppelgangers ¨
need not share (for example, I have a pain in my knee), they are not the only
thoughtlike states that one may have. Thus, the thoughtlike character of
some phenomenal states does not entail externalism.

Suppose, on the other hand, that we view such phenomenal states as
not being thoughtlike (and so as falling under Dretske’s second horn).

Then Dretske’s claim is, in effect, that such states are unknowable, and
that we thereby lack a way of individuating them. Thus, we have no basis
for saying that they are either identical or different in any particular pair
of cases. This claim is effective in undermining the use to which individualists put Twin Earth–styled arguments about phenomenal states, which
is part of Dretske’s own aim here, and it rightly flags some significant
limits to the first-person knowledge we have of phenomenal states. Yet we
should reject the more general claim that phenomenal states lack criteria
of individuation unless they are thoughtlike.

Again, consider the state of pain that leads me to be in the thoughtlike state “I feel discomfort around here.” Even if we think of this state of
pain itself as not thoughtlike, we can still individuate it by reference to
the relevant entity-bounded system. As I said in Chapter 5, states of pain
form part of the nociceptive system, and at least as conceptualized within
the medical communities that focus on pain (anesthetists, oncologists,
pharmacologists, for example), this is an entity-bounded system, and so
locationally individualistic. On this view, the principal entity that is individuated is the nociceptive system, and the individuation of various states
of the system is derivative. The nociceptive system in a particular overall
state will instantiate pain (say, rather than a tickle, or nothing at all), or
pain with a certain representational content, because that is the kind of
state that this type of system instantiates. In short, the systemic conception of individuation and realization defended in Part Two provides a way
of resisting the second horn of Dretske’s argument. Thus, denying the
thoughtlike character of at least some phenomenal states does not entail
externalism.

Consider a variant on the simple example I have focused on so far to
clarify what this response to Dretske’s argument for global externalism
shows, and what it suggests is special about at least some phenomenal
