states. I have granted that states of pain have a representational content
but argued that this concession does not entail externalism about phenomenal states via either horn of Dretske’s dilemma. There is something
right about Dretske’s argument, but it does not lead to global externalism
about phenomenal states.

Suppose I feel a strong pain in my left knee for about five seconds, and
so come to think
There is a strong pain in my left knee that has lasted about five seconds.

The representational content of this thought concerns the strength, location, and duration of the pain. We might think, first, that we can thus
individuate the pain itself by the corresponding content: It is strong, occurs in my left knee, has lasted about five seconds, and so on. And, second,
that such content must be narrow. But consider a doppelganger ¨ who lives
in a community that uses “knee” to refer to what we call the knee, plus
the lower half of the thigh area, yet (here, mistakenly) thinks that knees
are just the joint area in the middle of the leg. Suppose that we each
undergo two pains, the first in what we each think of as our knees, the
230 Thinking Through and Beyond the Body
second in the lower part of our thighs. Then the thought that we each
report by saying
The first pain was in my knee but the second was not
is one whose wide content differs, depending on which one of us has the
thought. And so if the pain itself is individuated in terms of this content,
then it is an externalist state.

About this, I think Dretske is correct. Since the sort of content that
is typically ascribed to phenomenal states is subject to precisely this sort
of point, the representational nature of phenomenal states often entails
taxonomic externalism about the phenomenal. Perhaps paradoxically,
this is particularly true of the content typically reported in the first-person,
since we tend to characterize our own states more precisely and in richer
detail using a public language than we do the states of others.

Yet contra Dretske, representationalism doesn’t strictly entail such externalism because one can individuate pains other than via this kind of
propositional content. In fact, there are at least two different ways to
do so that together constitute the basis for a response to both halves of
the dilemma that Dretske poses. First, there remains a kind of content –
vaguer, more general, and bodily – for which such Twin Earth examples
cannot be constructed (and so the first horn can be grasped). Second, we
can individuate states in terms of the systems of which they are a part, and
in the case of at least pain and presumably bodily sensations these are entity bounded. Thus, there remains a path to an individualistic scheme of
individuation for those phenomenal states that is independent of their
connections to any kind of content (and so the second horn can be
grasped).

One might wonder whether this response can be generalized in either of two ways. First, might a version of the first half of the response
also apply to the propositional attitudes themselves? Some proponents of
narrow content, such as Frank Jackson, Philip Pettit, and Stephen White,
have suggested that there is such a notion of general narrow content. Second, could a version of the second half of the response be generalized
to apply to phenomenal states in general? This would support the idea
that externalism stops with the intentional and need not infect all of the
phenomenal, some of which remains individualistic. I think that neither
of these generalizations is warranted.8
Consider the first. The notion of narrow content for states of pain and
bodily sensations is quite restricted; I have suggested that it does not apply
even to such states in general. Our usual ways of thinking about our own
states of pain and bodily sensations make use of the same public language
used to specify the content of our intentional states. Dretske is correct in
holding that phenomenal states, so specified, inherit the wide content of
the concepts employed here. Yet there remains something it is like to have
such states that can be specified more vaguely and generally that does not
make implicit commitments to how the physical or social world beyond
the individual is. Once we move to other sorts of phenomenal states,
such as those of visual experience, or to the propositional attitudes more
generally, the Dretskean point about the inheritance of width applies
so broadly that talk of narrow content appears misplaced. To claim, for
example, that the narrow content of
There is some water
is
There is some drinkable, transparent, sailable-on kind of stuff
or
There is some stuff that I use “water” to refer to
is perhaps to identify a psychological state that some doppelgangers ¨ share.9
Yet that state and the content it has is not truly narrow, since doppelgangers ¨
may differ with respect to them. The sort of content that we would need
would be something like
There is some watery stuff
where “watery stuff” refers to stuff that has the appearance of water. Even
were this individualistic (which I doubt), note that it is not something that
has the same meaning as “There is some water,” and not something that
individuals need be in position to use to characterize their own internal
states, since they may lack the concept “watery stuff.”
Whether phenomenology itself might be sufficient to determine an
individualistic form of content is something I shall discuss in more detail
in the next chapter. My point here is simply that the relationship between phenomenology and content may vary depending on the type of
phenomenal state we are considering, and this is sufficient to undermine
the first generalization, from the restricted appeal to narrow content that
I have made.

Consider, more briefly, the second generalization, one that generalizes on the appeal to entity-bounded systems. Why not simply appeal to a
range of entity-bounded cognitive systems – for belief, for perception, for
232 Thinking Through and Beyond the Body
motivation, for emotion – in order to undermine Dretske’s claim that phenomenal states divorced from language cannot be individuated? There
are two reasons, perhaps familiar in light of our discussion in earlier
chapters. First, whether any given system is entity bounded or wide is not
simply “up to us,” something we invent rather than discover. Rather, that
is resolved by looking to the relevant sciences: How do they taxonomize
the kinds of system that they traffic in? Second, perception, memory, and
folk psychology all constitute cognitive systems that are not just taxonomically but locationally externalist, at least when we consider the full range
of their uses. Given this, it is plausible to view entity-bounded cognitive
systems as the exception, rather than the rule. Pain and bodily sensations are two paradigms of mental states realized by such systems. Their
