assimilation to physiological systems together with the limited role that
wide content plays in their individuation, is a rare combination for cognitive states. For example, I doubt that either feature holds of all forms
of visual experience, particularly given the locationally externalist view of
perception.

6 tesee and sensory experience
In the previous section I intimated that even though Dretske’s dilemma
could be averted in at least the case of pain and bodily sensations, it retained its force against its primary target, individualistic accounts of visual
experience. I have also suggested that the TESEE view of consciousness
applies both to processes of awareness and to phenomenal states. In light
of this pair of points it seems most plausible to develop the TESEE view for
visual experience in the first instance, stepping back to consider sensory
experience and then phenomenal states more generally once we gain a
foot in the door of the phenomenal.

The TESEE view holds that consciousness is temporally extended, scaffolded, and embodied and embedded. As with the application of the
TESEE view to processes of awareness in sections 3 and 4, developing a
TESEE view of visual experience requires reconceptualizing the relevant
aspect of consciousness. Such a rethinking of the nature of visual experience is underway and has been facilitated by a more general paradigm
change in the study of vision. Traditional views of vision conceive of it as
passive, internal, and essentially in the business of generating rich internal
representations. Much of the work on vision over the last dozen years or
so within the cognitive sciences has self-consciously contrasted itself with
tradition here and conceptualized vision as active, embedded, and essentially in the business of generating action. For example, the psychologists
David Milner and Mel Goodale have reinterpreted the original distinction between the “what” and “where” visual systems in the ventral and
dorsal processing streams as systems for, respectively, perception and the
guidance of action. They remind us that “vision evolves in the first place,
not to provide perception of the world per se, but to provide distal sensory control of the many different movements that organisms make.” The
computer scientist Dana Ballard distinguishes literalist from functionalist views of visual representations, the latter of whose “principal tenet is
that the machinery of the brain has to be accountable to the observed
external behaviour, and that there are many ways to do this other than
positing literal data structures.”10
While such views stop short of reenvisioning the kind of experience
that we call visual, they make that reenvisioning possible. I shall discuss
two ways in which a rethinking of visual experience has been undertaken
recently. Both involve abandoning or significantly tempering the idea that
particular states of an individual are phenomenal in and of themselves,
and in light of this they have broader implications for our thinking about
consciousness.

The first of these views has been articulated by the philosopher Alva
Noe and the psychologist J. Kevin O ¨ ’Regan as part of theirsensorimotor theory of visual consciousness. Developed specifically as a view of visual experience, their view holds that seeing is a kind of act that involves an organism
actively exploring its environment. This activity is governed by what they
call sensorimotor contingencies, knowledge of which is gained through
active exploration of an environment, and whose acquisition constitutes
the acquisition of the relevant experience. As O’Regan and Noe say, visual ¨
experience is“the activity of exploring the environment in ways mediated
by knowledge of the relevant sensorimotor contingencies.”11
To explain this view on an intuitive level and how it departs from
traditional views of visual experience, Noe draws an illuminating parallel ¨
between visual and tactile perception. Seeing a bottle is more like tactilely
feeling a bottle than it is like taking a picture of a bottle. When you have
a bottle in your hands, you only make contact with a part of the bottle
at any given time, although you feel the bottle, not simply some part
of it. That is how you would naturally report your experience, in any
case. Moreover, you move your hands to actively explore the bottle in
perceiving it, and this interaction with the sensed environment is not a
way of taking a series of tactile snapshots of the bottle in order to infer
that it is a bottle. Rather, the active manipulation of the bottle is your
tactile experience of it. The tactile experience is not some event inside
you, but something that you undergo in your active exploration. Tactile
234 Thinking Through and Beyond the Body
experience, so conceived, is temporally and spatially extended, and since
it requires active exploration of objects in the environment, it is also
clearly embodied and embedded.12
One of the strengths of the sensorimotor view is that it provides a natural way to interpret a range of cases where sensory experience itself seems
to involve or require either explicit or intended action on the part of the
subject. These include well-known cases of adaptation to left-right inverting lenses and those involving change blindness, where scene change
during saccadic motion creates stunning lapses in change detection. On
the sensorimotor contingency theory, the first of these involves a subject
learning a new sensorimotor contingency within one sense modality that
comes to be integrated with the rest of the adapting subject’s behavior.

The second not only reveals the limitations to the information that is encoded in visual representation, but also shows the importance of active
and continual sensory interaction of the surrounding environment for
complete perception.13
The account also predicts that there should be cases of sensory substitution just when alternative sensory channels preserve the same structure
of sensorimotor contingencies. This arguably is precisely what is found
in cases of remote tactile sensing and the visual experiences of users of
tactile visual sensory systems (TVSSs). The best known of the latter of
these use a camera to feed visual information into cutaneous stimulators
attached to the subject’s back, stomach, finger, or forehead, where tactilely stimulated, blind subjects report visual experiences. On the sensorimotor contingency theory, what subjects learn through their practice
in actively controlling the camera is a new series of tactile sensorimotor
contingencies, each of which is isomorphic to those that the visual system
would normally develop.14
Critical to the success of these TVSSs in producing reported visual
experiences in the blind is the ability of the subject to control the
movement of the camera. This makes sense on the sensorimotor theory, since what is critical to visual experience, on that view, is establishing
or maintaining sensorimotor contingencies, not simply receiving or preserving information that codes for visual features of the environment.

(For readers with CAVE – Complete Audio-Visual Environment – virtual
reality experience, note the experiential difference when you walk with
the virtual reality control, as opposed to when you follow someone else
holding the control.) The reported visual experience of TVSSs are, to be
sure, incomplete vis-`a-vis those using their eyes – for example, subjects do
not report seeing objects as colored. But this can be explained in terms of
the limitations to the isomorphism between the visual information that
the subject controls through the camera and the tactile stimulation she
receives on her skin. The relevant (and surprising) finding is that there
is any visual experience reported at all.
