
Likewise with remote tactile sensing more generally. Tactile sensations
are usually felt at a particular location in the body, but they can also be
felt in objects that extend beyond the body, typically in (and through)
objects to which the body is reliably connected. On the sensorimotor
theory, and TESEE views more generally, this is because sensory experience is a matter of embodied and embedded agents doing things in the
world. While the body is a critical mediator for that action, it forms only a
contingent boundary for sensory experience that can be, and sometimes
is, transcended. Blind people experienced in the use of a cane feel objects in the world, not the cane itself; bicyclists can feel the flatness of a
tire while they are riding, and without touching the tire itself; and experienced hockey players feel the puck on the end of their sticks. Just as in the
case of visual perception using TVSSs, here the phenomenology requires
practice and is more restricted than that gained through regular tactile
stimulation. In particular, the sensations are chiefly spatial in character,
concerning the position, size, texture, and shape of what is felt, and do
not correspond to the full range of bodily sensations. On this view, tactile
sensations are felt at a bodily location, despite the fact that it is in the
brain where they are registered, because the body is systematically linked
to the brain as a matter of physiology. When the body becomes similarly
causally linked to other features of the world, at least some of those felt
sensations can be transferred to those features.

A second way in which a TESEE view has been developed is through
Susan Hurley’s attack on the equation of perception with input (and action with output). Hurley’s alternative idea is that perception and action
are better thought of as forming dynamic cycles. In the previous chapter,
I briefly mentioned Hurley’s caricature of the traditional view of the mind
as a sort of sandwich in which cognition is the filling. Her conception of
perception and action as forming dynamic cycles is one of her positive
alternatives to the traditional characterization of perception and action.

On the traditional view, perception is input and the cognitive architecture of the organism is conceptualized in terms of what Hurley calls
vertical modules:
Each vertical module performs a broad function, then passes the resulting representations on to the next. Within the perceptual module, information about
locations, color, motion, and so on, is extracted from inputs by various parallel
236 Thinking Through and Beyond the Body
streams of domain-specific perceptual processing. The representations produced
by the various streams of input processing converge and are combined by perception. The unified result is sent on to cognition, the central module that interfaces
between perception and action.15
The chief puzzles about visual experience on this view are where, when,
and how consciousness of particular features of visual experience come
about, and how they are unified to form the seamless experience that,
for the most part, we typically have.

In challenging this division between perception and action, Hurley
introduces the idea of horizontal modules, content-specific layers that loop
“dynamically through internal sensory and motor processes [as] well as
through the environment.” There are several features of horizontal modules relevant to our rethinking of visual experience. The first is that they
are dynamic in that they involve continuous feedback between perception and action. For this reason, any process that they govern must be
conceptualized as temporally extended, rather than simply as a series
of temporal atoms, and as embodied in an active agent. The second
is that there is no barrier to such modules being either entirely internal to an organism, or extending partly into that organism’s environment and so locationally externalist. Perception does not occur first,
with perceptual inputs being processed “centrally” and then instructions
passed off to action. Rather, the many systems engaged in perceptual
processing, including in the production of the “what it’s like” of experience, cut across the input-output distinction. As with the sensorimotor
contingency theory, on Hurley’s view there is a “there” to sensory experience, but sensory experience is not properly conceived as a type
of internal event, or a property of some specific internal state of the
organism.16
There are several affinities between the views of O’Regan and Noe¨
and Hurley. Like the sensorimotor contingency theory, Hurley’s views
of perception challenge the traditional way of thinking of visual experience as some sort of internal event that is then monitored or processed
further in some other way to give rise to consciousness. And like that
theory again, Hurley’s view makes sense of a range of actual and hypothetical experiments concerning perceptual experience, intention, and
action. These include some of those that O’Regan and Noe also discuss ¨ –
including the left-right inversion prism experiments of James Taylor
and Paul Bach-y-Rita’s studies of TVSSs – but also Ivo Kohler’s classic
experiments with blue-left and yellow-right inverting goggles and cases
of asymmetrical bodily and perceptual neglect.17
Particularly relevant is Hurley’s discussion of the spatial inversion
experiments that Taylor performed using the mathematician Seymour
Papert as a subject. In these experiments, the subject was fitted with leftright inverting goggles, and then trained on a range of tasks that required
moving his body through the actual (uninverted) world. Taylor reports
that Papert adapted to the wearing of goggles fitted with these lenses to
the extent of being able to ride a bicycle with them on, and also readily
adapted to the removal of the goggles, even while riding the bicycle. As
Hurley recounts, to perform successfully on such tasks requires calibrating a range of cognitive systems, including those for motor control and
for proprioceptive feedback and control, for now we have a subject acting in the world, not simply recording information about it visually and
reporting that information. To the adapted subject, the world appears
the right way up, and his performance on a range of spatial tasks suggests
that his adaptation is not simply visual but proprioceptive, intentional
(in the sense of concerning the agent’s intentions), and motoric as well.

What has adapted is the whole subject, or at least cognitive systems that
cut across the perception-action divide of traditional views of perception.

One conclusion that Dretske draws in his argument for global externalism can be expressed by saying that visual experience is metaphysically
determined in part by the thoughts and language that we use to describe
it. We can draw a similar moral from left-right inversion cases: that visual
experience itself is metaphysically determined in part by what one does.

More specifically, visual experience lies in the coordination and integration of visual“input” and behavioral“output,”in the exploitation of visual
information for the direction of behavior.

Hurley also considers a variation on the actual experiment that places
the subject in “Mirror Earth,” an environment in which there are leftright reversals that are, in turn, reversed by the left-right inverting lenses.

This scenario parallels Ned Block’s“Inverted Earth”thought experiment,
which Block uses to challenge externalist, particularly representationalist,
views of the nature of consciousness. What is distinctive about the Mirror
Earth thought experiment that Hurley offers is that, as with the left-right
inversion experiments, it involves a “where” rather than a “what” system.

