As such, this Mirror Earth case allows – indeed, requires – the subject’s
exploration and manipulation of things in his environment. Since the
inverting lenses correct only for the worldly inversion as it is perceived
visually, further inversions are required if the subjects are to remain in
the same internal states through their respective explorations of their
environments. As Hurley points out, unlike the case of Inverted Earth,
238 Thinking Through and Beyond the Body
which involves color inversion, this case of Mirror Earth requires that
motor output and proprioceptive feedback be systematically inverted in
order to have a case in which we have two individuals identical in their
intrinsic, physical properties.18
Part of Hurley’s point in considering the dynamic Mirror Earth variant
on the actual left-right inversion experiments is that it is in fact very
difficult to satisfy the assumption that an individual on Mirror Earth can
be a duplicate of an individual on Earth, since the requisite inversions in
the dynamic case seem to require changes in the subject himself. It is with
this Mirror Earth case in mind that I want to turn to some broader issues
about consciousness and philosophical methodology in the next section.

7 individualistic residues
Both the sensorimotor contingency theory and the dynamic cycles conception of perception-action exemplify how a TESEE view of visual experience can be developed. Together with representationalist views of visual
experience of the type that we have seen Dretske articulate, they provide
a basis for challenging much that has been taken for granted about visual experience that has suggested an individualistic view of it. I think
that the root assumptions at play here are that (a) particular states are
phenomenal in and of themselves, and that (b) phenomenal properties
are intrinsic properties of the states that have them, or (at least) of the
subjects of those states. The systemic view of taxonomy and individuation
introduced in Part Two provides a general reason to be skeptical about
(a), and the TESEE view of visual experience provides a positive framework that either does without (a) or tempers its significance. Insofar as
particular visual experiences are phenomenal, they are part of an embodied system as it dynamically interacts with a particular environment
and with an agent’s motoric, intentional, and proprioceptive capacities.

The rejection of (b) amounts to a rejection of “qualia,” or at least one
significant feature of them, but it is important to see that the TESEE view
is not eliminativist about visual experience, as other critiques of qualia
have been. There are phenomenal properties that we have first-person
access to, just as there is mental content to which we have such access.

But in both cases, these properties are not what we might have thought
they were. In particular, they are externalist, rather than individualistic,
in nature.19
What of the TESEE view and the remaining phenomenal states, those
of pain and bodily sensations? In section 5, I argued that Dretske’s
argument for global externalism was weakest in the case of these sorts
of phenomenal states. This is because their representational character is
not necessarily subject to the social deference that drives taxonomic externalism, and they are realized in entity-bounded systems, and so are
not subject to an appeal to locational externalism. These points make it
prima facie less plausible to apply the TESEE view to these kinds of phenomenal states across the board, even if many of the representational
characterizations we naturally give to such states follow those of visual experience and are at least taxonomically externalist. This constitutes one
sort of individualistic residue that remains once we push externalism as
far as we can, from the intentional to the phenomenal.

But there is another such residue, a sort of legacy of a philosophical tradition heavily populated by thought experiments. Philosophical
discussions have made it seem easier than it in fact is to articulate an individualistic conception of phenomenal states, and correspondingly made
externalist views appear more counterintuitive than they in fact are in
part because of their reliance on what can and can’t be conceived in certain kinds of thought experiments. For example, a familiar line of attack
on materialist views of phenomenal states is based on the claim that one
can conceive of the possibility of either inverted or absent qualia. The
paradigm case discussed in such arguments is that of color experience
and its inversion or absence. If all the physical facts about an individual
are fixed yet it is possible for that individual to have either inverted or no
color experience at all, then physical facts (about an individual) do not
determine all of that individual’s properties.

The classic response to such arguments, one that opens the door to
the sort of argument that we have seen Dretske make for global externalism, is to point to the causal (and so, for some, conceptual) connection
between qualitative states and the first-person beliefs that they generate.

As the philosopher Sydney Shoemaker says, to think that absent qualia
are possible is “to make qualitative character irrelevant both to what we
can take ourselves to know in knowing about the mental states of others
and also to what we can take ourselves to know in knowing about our own
mental states.” And qualia severed from first-person knowledge of them
under at least some circumstances constitute some sort of conceptual
confusion. It is for this reason that Shoemaker holds that while inverted
qualia are possible, absent qualia are not. There are two points to make
about the dialectic here.20
First, such thought experiments themselves presuppose both (a) and
(b), for they hold, ex hypothesi, all physical or functional facts true of an
240 Thinking Through and Beyond the Body
individual while varying the phenomenal state: Green is the phenomenal
state present rather than red (or nothing), or pain is present in one
individual while it is absent in her physical or functional duplicate. Insofar
as the response that Shoemaker offers shares these assumptions, it too is
problematic.

Second, it is easy to radically underdescribe inverted and absent qualia
thought experiments, and misleading to draw substantive conclusions
on the basis of such underdescription. This is just the sort of point that
Hurley has made against Block’s appeal to Inverted Earth. Such thought
experiments take us so far, but only so far, in telling us something about
the nature of the mind and how we can and should conceive of it.21
8 global externalism and the tesee view
While I have rejected Dretske’s argument for global externalism, one
might wonder about how great the distance is between global externalism
and the TESEE conception of consciousness. The appeal to the preceding
arguments of Parts Two and Three shares in Dretske’s representationalist
strategy of arguing for an externalist view of consciousness on the basis
of assuming externalism about intentionality.

