There are several important differences between global externalism
and the TESEE view of consciousness, the most significant of which
concerns the universality and necessity of the corresponding externalist
claims. If I understand the representationalist position shared by Dretske,
Lycan and Tye correctly, it holds that global externalism is necessitated
once one allows an externalist foot in the door of intentionality. As we
will see in the next chapter, such a view seems to be shared by recent defenders of “narrow phenomenology,” such as Terence Horgan and Brian
Loar, for they aim to defuse such a global externalism with a “global
internalism” about both phenomenology and intentionality.

By contrast, the TESEE view of consciousness, like the more general
externalism of which it is a part, is inherently pluralistic. It allows that individualism may be correct about certain mental states – pain is an example
that I have given at several points – but that there is no barrier to developing an externalist view of the full range of mental states, intentional
or conscious. The TESEE view aims primarily to show that individualism
is not a constraint on a psychology or cognitive science of any specific
sort of mental state, including the full range of conscious states. As a
consequence, it implies that a certain internalist picture of cognition has
held us captive, and seeks to replace that picture with another vision of
cognitive processing. Given this, the chief ground for preferring the externalist vision is not any a priori argument from the purported nature of
intentionality to claims about the nature of consciousness. Rather, these
concern the general theoretical virtues of the externalist view, such as its
range of application and overall integral character.

A second difference between global externalism and the TESEE view
is that the TESEE conception takes locational externalism much more
seriously than does global externalism. In part because of this, the TESEE
conception is more vulnerable to the charge of “changing the subject” in
offering an expanded view of consciousness. But rather than allow this to
lapse into a dispute over what words mean I have suggested that the attractiveness of the TESEE view lies primarily in its scope and integrity. If the
charge against the TESEE view is that it changes the subject by adopting
a distinct view of what consciousness is, then the corresponding charge
against existing views is that they offer a contracted view of consciousness.

Such a view makes it difficult to see how entwined consciousness is with
our everyday mental life and the range of cognitive processing that we
engage in.

A third and subsequent difference between global externalism and
the TESEE view of consciousness is the sensitivity of the latter to developments within the cognitive sciences themselves. There has been a recurring tension throughout Parts Two and Three between the naturalistic
deference to explanatory practice in the cognitive sciences that is central
to the argument of the book as a whole and the recognition that the
cognitive sciences are predominantly individualistic in methodology and
outlook. It is in part because of this pair of points that I remain skeptical
of global externalism. Its endorsement requires viewing current and past
explanatory practice in the cognitive sciences as quite radically mistaken,
even about consciousness. Instead, on the TESEE view, there are what
we might call philosophical excesses that fall out of the individualistic
mindset of tradition – we might include here the belief in qualia, as well
as the idea that the first-person perspective is necessarily internalist – but
there is no compunction in giving individualism its due. It is just a more
limited due than one might have thought.

In the next chapter, I explore some recent philosophical views that
attempt to present a robust articulation of consciousness within an individualistic framework. At their heart are some proposals about the relationship between intentionality and phenomenology.

10
Intentionality and Phenomenology
1 the relationship between intentionality
and phenomenology
Traditionally, postbehaviorist philosophy of mind and cognitive science
has proceeded on the assumption that intentionality and phenomenology can most profitably be treated independently or separately from one
another. The intentional and the phenomenal have often been viewed as
the two fundamental categories of the mental within the philosophy of
mind, with more specific types of mental states falling under one or the
other of them. Belief and thought are paradigms of the intentional, and
pain and bodily sensations paradigms of the phenomenal. Even when this
divide between the intentional and the phenomenal has not been treated
as a mutually exclusive categorization scheme for thinking about the constituents of the mind, intentional and phenomenal aspects of particular
types of mental states remain distinguished and treated in separation
from one another. Terence Horgan and John Tienson have called this
general position separatism.

1
These forms of separatism about the intentional and the phenomenal
likely have no single cause. For some, separatism makes sense because
intentionality is thought to be significantly more tractable than phenomenology. “Look,” one might say, “figuring out how the mind works is
really hard. Consciousness is a complete mystery. But we at least have some
inkling about intentionality and mental representation. So let’s work that
out first.” Hence, the explosion of work on causal, informational, and
teleological theories of content, and the attention that the individualismexternalism debate has generated over the past twenty-five years. For
242
others, separatism is driven by viewing a divide-and-conquer strategy in
general as more efficient in dealing with difficult-to-understand phenomena. And there are some who simply think that the intentional and the
phenomenal are metaphysically quite distinct, so that carving the mind
at its joints requires separatism. Extending the Horgan and Tienson terminology, I shall call the former type of positions pragmatic separatism and
the latter-most position metaphysical separatism.

Pragmatic separatism implies a research strategy that can be adopted
independent of one’s stance on metaphysical separatism. Pragmatic separatism amounts to a two-part gamble. The first assumes that parsing
the mental world into the intentional and the phenomenal provides the
basis for conceptual and empirical advances in what we know about the
mind. This gamble has gone hand-in-hand with the classic computational
theory of mind and traditional artificial intelligence, which have chiefly
modeled intentionality independent of considerations of phenomenology. The second gamble is to assume that treating intentionality as a
unified phenomenon, such that one can theorize about it and explore
it in both the mental and nonmental realms, will turn out to have much
the same benefits. This gamble has generated informational and teleological accounts of intentionality, which have assimilated mental states to
mechanistic detectors (such as thermostats) and bodily organs (such as
hearts and kidneys).

