Over the last decade or so, these gambles have been challenged, and
separatism of both kinds has been rejected. As consciousness of consciousness has increased, a number of philosophers have advocated a
central role for the phenomenal in our conception of the mental, and in
our conception of the intentional in particular. For example, John Searle
has defended the connection principle, the principle that “all unconscious
intentional states are in principle accessible to consciousness,” using this
principle to cast doubt on the existence of many of the kinds of mental representations posited within cognitive science. Galen Strawson has
claimed allegiance to the widespread view that what he calls “behavioral
intentionality can never amount to true intentionality, however complex
the behavior, and that one cannot have intentionality unless one is an
experiencing being.” That is, no matter how complicated a creature’s
behavior, unless that creature has consciousness all attributions of intentionality are mere “as if” intentionality, not the real McCoy. Both of these
views appear to make the existence of phenomenology in a creature a
prerequisite for intentionality, at least “original” or “real” intentionality.

In doing so, they have brought a focus on human minds – rather than,
244 Thinking Through and Beyond the Body
say, animal minds or computers – as the paradigmatic loci of intentional
states.2
Some recent views go further than this in suggesting more specific
and foundational roles for phenomenology vis-`a-vis intentionality. Brian
Loar has argued that there is a form that intentionality takes – subjective
intentionality, psychological content, intentional qualia, or phenomenal
intentionality – that is psychologically pervasive. It is distinct from, and in
certain respects more primitive than, the kind or kinds of intentionality
that have been discussed in light (or perhaps the shadow?) of the externalist arguments of Putnam and Burge. Loar thinks that such intentionality
is narrow, and in part this is because he views phenomenology as being
individualistic. In Loar’s view, there is not simply a general, presuppositional connection between intentionality and phenomenology. Rather,
there is a form of intentionality that is thoroughly phenomenal and that
is manifest as the phenomenal content of a range of particular mental
states.3
Terence Horgan and John Tienson have taken a similar path. They
argue for a two-way inseparability thesis: that intentional content is inseparable from the phenomenal character of paradigmatic phenomenal states
(for example, pain, visual experience), and that phenomenal character
is inseparable from the intentional content of paradigmatic intentional
states (for example, propositional attitudes). In addition, they defend
what they call the phenomenal intentionality thesis: that there is a pervasive
kind of intentionality determined by phenomenology alone. Like Loar,
Horgan and Tienson argue that this intentionality is narrow, and that in
important respects it is more fundamental than wide content.4
While I think that even the general views typified by Searle and
Strawson are problematic, in this chapter, I shall focus on the more
specific proposals made by Horgan and Tienson and the views of Loar.

Both the inseparability and phenomenal intentionality theses seem to
me false, and even were the latter true, the significance that Horgan
and Tienson attach to it misplaced. Pinpointing the problems with the
Horgan-Tienson position will shed some light, I hope, on the limitations
of Loar’s more wide-ranging discussion and the broader issues that their
shared position and its defense raise.

2 dimensions of the inseparability thesis
One legacy of the attachment that many philosophers of mind had to
the intentional during the 1980s was the articulation of various forms of
representationalism with respect to the phenomenal through the 1990s.

Fred Dretske, William Lycan, Michael Tye, and Gilbert Harman have all
defended versions of representationalism about phenomenal states. The
basic idea of such representationalist views is to treat phenomenal states
as a type of intentional state, to analyze or understand the experiential in
terms of the representational. A key strategy of representationalists has
been to point to the transparent or diaphanous character of experience
and our reflection on it. When I engage in introspection on the character
of my experience, I find that it is thoroughly intentional, so thoroughly
so that it is hard to distinguish any purely qualitative, nonintentional
remainder of the experience. My on-line reflection on my current visual
experience, for example, seems to me to yield only what it is I am currently
looking at (books, a computer screen, a telephone, a coffee cup, and so
on), what is usually taken to be the content of my visual experience. Thus,
representationalism serves as a basis for either the rejection of qualia,
or their subsumption under the putatively better understood notion of
intentionality.5
Because of the recent prominence of the intentional and of representationalist views of experience, the two halves to Horgan and Tienson’s
inseparability thesis are not viewed as equally in need of justification.

Representationalists accept, of course, the idea that the intentional pervades the phenomenal, as Horgan and Tienson acknowledge. Thus, it is
the second half of their thesis – the claim that paradigmatic intentional
states, such as beliefs and desires, have an inseparable phenomenal character – that requires more by way of justification, at least in the dialectical
tenor of the times.

There are several dimensions along which versions of the inseparability thesis can vary that make for stronger and weaker views about the
relationship between intentionality and phenomenology. Consider three:
(a) quantificational range: Are there just some mental states of which
the thesis is true, or is it true of all mental states?.

(b) modal intensity: Are the intentional and phenomenal merely coincident, physically necessitated or nomologically linked, or conceptually related?
(c) grain of determinateness: At how specific a “level” does the inseparability thesis hold? At the least specific level, it would apply to the
properties being intentional and being phenomenal. At the most
specific level, the thesis would apply to specific mental states (for
example, attitude plus content), such as believing that there is a
246 Thinking Through and Beyond the Body
red tomato in front of me here and now, and having a specific,
reddish, roundish visual sensation.

Versions of the inseparability thesis that are strong on any of these
dimensions are implausible, not only given Horgan and Tienson’s other
commitments, but independently. Or so I shall argue.

3 deflating the inseparability thesis
Consider these dimensions to the inseparability thesis in reverse order.
