
Grain of determinateness. Few (if any) intentional states have a specific
phenomenal character without which they cannot have the wide content that they have. This is clearest in the interpersonal case, and one
reason for finding both pragmatic and metaphysical separability theses
plausible is that we can generalize about, for example, propositional attitudes in a robust manner without delving into the phenomenology that
(let us suppose) accompanies those states. What an arbitrarily chosen
pair of people share phenomenologically when they both entertain the
thought that George Bush is president of the United States is anyone’s
guess. Intuitively, people can share this thought despite speaking different languages, and sharing few substantive beliefs or opinions about
either George Bush, the presidency, or the United States, all of which
typically impact on how it feels, what it is like, to entertain that thought.

Phenomenological comparisons are also notoriously under strain in
crossspecies cases. Moreover, the finer the grain of determinateness to
the experiences, the greater the problem here.

But this is also true intrapersonally, even if the variation here is not in
general as great, in part because we are creatures of habit mentally as
well as behaviorally. It is easy to fall into mental ruts, where the recurring
phenomenology is part of the rut. Most pointedly, one and the same
intentional state can be realized by a person on two distinct occasions and
have a phenomenology at all on only one of them. Clearly this is true in cases
where an intentional state is conscious on only one of those two occasions,
assuming (for now) that phenomenology presupposes consciousness. But
it is also true even when both occurrences are conscious occurrences.

Horgan and Tienson claim that “[i]f you pay attention to your own
experience, we think you will come to appreciate”the truth of their claims
about the intentional and the phenomenal. In the spirit of Horgan and
Tienson’s appeal for a reader to “pay attention to your own experience,”
I have just done the decisive experiment: I thought first that George
Bush is president of the United States, and had CNN-mediated auditory
and visual phenomenology that focused on one of his speeches. I then
took a short break, doodled a little, wandered around the room, and
then had a thought with that very same content and ... nothing. Or at
least nothing distinctly Bush-like, as in the first case. I just drew a blank,
realized my coffee was finished, and moved on. To be honest, I am not
sure whether the drawing a blank or the phenomenal feel of realizing
my coffee was finished was the phenomenology that accompanied the
thought that George Bush is president of the United States, or whether
I was mistaken in some more basic way about what my phenomenology
was, or about what thought I was entertaining.6
However, there is nothing unusual or weird about this, although I
don’t claim that everyone will find that they have the same results when
they attempt their own replication of the experiment. (It is instructive,
however, to try this out on a class of students, and note some of the wild
variation in what is reported. And things would no doubt get worse in
this respect were we to leave the sanctity of the philosophy classroom.)
Some, no doubt, will report as Horgan and Tienson themselves do. But
do these different results show that I was mistaken about what I thought,
or that I mischaracterized or just missed my phenomenology? No, phenomenology is sometimes like that, tricky to coax out, difficult to map
to states with specific content, even fickle or uncooperative. And not attached unwaveringly to intentionality, at least at a relatively fine-grained
level of determinacy.

Thus far, I have considered just one specific thought in arguing for the
perhaps extreme-sounding conclusion that a thought can be entertained
by one person on two occasions and have a distinct phenomenology on
only one of them. Part of what I want to suggest is that even when mental
states have a certain prominence to them – their content is easily articulated, they are “before the mind’s eye,” they are shared by lots of people –
the notion of their having a distinctive phenomenology can remain puzzling. When we turn to mental states that are less prominent in these
respects, the puzzlement deepens. I remember from time to time that I
need to repair the spare tire for the car, continue to plan to spend less
time watching the seemingly endless hockey finals, and occasionally wonder about stranger things, such as whether metabolic systems must be
living. Sometimes these mental episodes are separated by months or by
years, and I am certainly in no position now to make a comparison of their
phenomenology. But even as mental life is going by it is difficult to know
just what the phenomenology of these mundane and not so mundane
248 Thinking Through and Beyond the Body
mental states is. This is not skepticism about phenomenology per se, but
about the idea that our first-person access to it can be unproblematically
granted at a relatively fine grain of determinateness.

Modal intensity. This brings me to the sense in which phenomenology
cannot be separated from intentionality. As I have intimated, Horgan and
Tienson employ what I shall call the methodology of imaginative evocation
in motivating and discussing the inseparability thesis. That is, they provide possible scenarios that we are invited to imagine in order to convey
some idea of the sort of thing that the phenomenology of intentional
states is, why it exists, and why the inseparability thesis is true. But this
methodology, despite its increasing deployment in thinking about consciousness, is inherently unsuited to making even a prima facie case for
anything but the modally weakest versions of the inseparability thesis,
namely, that phenomenology and intentionality are coincident in some
range of cases. To establish modally stronger theses through thought experiment they would have to show that we cannot have intentional states
without a corresponding phenomenology (or phenomenology without
intentionality).

We might think, however, that their methodology issues at least a challenge to those who would deny the inseparability thesis: Given that their
examples putatively point to a general feature of intentional states, and
their inability to conjure mental states without a corresponding phenomenology, the separatist must describe an occurrent, intentional state
that has no phenomenology at all. Yet even if we accept these discussions
as shifting the burden of proof in this way (and I am not sure that we
should), there are several problems here.

First, as I have indicated, I do not myself seem to have any problem in
identifying occurrent intentional states that lack a phenomenology (distinct from their intentionality) or, more accurately, whose phenomenology I feel in no special position to identify with any degree of certainty.

Representationalists such as Gilbert Harman report similar abilities. Since
I trust the reports of Horgan and Tienson (or rather, I trust them no less
than I trust my own erstwhile introspective attempts), it seems that the
right conclusion to draw is that there can be differences in what the
methodology of imaginative evocation produces in this particular case.
