
The further conclusion that these differences are a result of one’s different theoretical starting points is tempting. Such a conclusion would be
devastating for the methodology that Horgan and Tienson use.7
Loar employs the same methodology, putting particular emphasis on
a thought experiment that involves thinking of an isolated brain that
has just the same phenomenal experience as you when you are having a
particular visual experience (say, seeing a lemon). Loar says he “will be
content if you grant at least a superficial coherence to the thought that
my isolated twin-in-a-vat has visual experiences exactly like mine.” But it
is difficult to grant even this if your view is that brains need to be both
embodied and environmentally embedded, and actively so, in order to
provide the basis for any visual experience at all.8
As we saw in the previous chapter, precisely such a view has been recently articulated and defended by Susan Hurley, J. Kevin O’Regan, and
Alva Noe. For someone who thinks that embodiment and embeddedness ¨
are essential features of visual experience, the thought Loar invites us
to entertain is no more and no less conceivable than is the thought that
there is a box filled only with air that has just the visual experience that I
am having at a particular moment. Those who think that mere air could
instantiate mentality – call them airheads – are able to conceive something that those with this view of the relationship between experience,
embodiment, and embeddedness cannot.

Loar himself considers a version of the objection that phenomenology
is a product of theory rather than a reflection of the underlying mental
reality (of intentional qualia). He says:
Theory does have a bearing, it is true. But theory does not create the phenomenology. From a neutral position there is a certain phenomenology of perceptual experience. What is missing from the neutral position is a conception of the nature
of what is thereby presented.9
The bearing that theory has, on Loar’s view, concerns how the phenomenology is interpreted, not whether there is a phenomenology there
to be interpreted. Yet precisely this latter issue is raised by the version of
the objection being pressed.

Second, the modally strongest version of the inseparability thesis is vulnerable to the conceivability of momentary zombies, individuals who nearly
always have a phenomenology that accompanies their intentionality, but
who sometimes (perhaps due to hardware noise) fail to have a phenomenology. Momentary zombies have a phenomenology just like ours,
except occasionally there is a gap in it, and they are momentarily zombies.

Momentary zombiehood is much easier to concede than full-blooded
zombiehood, and surely it is plausible with respect to at least some intentional states (consider, again, the propositional attitudes). If momentary
zombies are possible, then it is possible for there to be particular intentional states without an accompanying phenomenology. But I also think it
250 Thinking Through and Beyond the Body
is plausible that we are momentary zombies, perhaps due to informationprocessing bottlenecks and other limitations of our consciousness, with
respect to at least some of the intentional states that Horgan and Tienson
appeal to. I find this particularly plausible with regard to the example of
what Galen Strawson has called understanding-experience, being the experience of hearing “someone speaking non-technically in a language one
understands,” and which I sometimes find I have, and sometimes not. In
any case, the general point is that modally strong versions of the inseparability thesis are particularly vulnerable to relatively tame versions of
some standard thought experiments.10
Quantificational range. If one concedes that there are dispositional intentional states, such as belief and desire, then the scope of the inseparability thesis needs to be restricted at least to occurrent intentional states,
or to dispositional states when they are occurrent. But does the thesis
need to be restricted further, not just to occurrent states but to those
occurrent states of which one is conscious? One reason to think so is that
if we think of occurrent states at a given time as those that govern our
behavior at that time, those of which we are conscious at that time will be
a proper subset of our occurrent states. But it is not clear that occurrent
states of which we are not conscious at a given time have any more of a
phenomenology than do nonoccurrent states. I noticed a short while ago
that the room was getting dark and that I should turn on a desk lamp; I
noticed more recently that I have been squinting at the papers scattered
on my desk in the enveloping dark. It is plausible to think that my wanting to continue reading guided my squinting behavior although there
was no phenomenology of that occurrent state prior to my reflecting on
my behavior. (How could there be?. I was not aware of this aspect of my
behavior, and it came as a surprise to me to realize just what I was doing.) This suggests that there are at least two “levels” of intentional states
for which there is no phenomenology, the purely dispositional and the
merely occurrent.

Horgan and Tienson explicitly restrict their thesis of the phenomenology of intentionality to intentional states when they are conscious. But
one wonders what this amounts to in light of the following passage:
The full-fledged phenomenal character of sensory experience is an extraordinarily rich synthetic unity that involves complex, richly intentional, total phenomenal
characters of visual-mode phenomenology, tactile-mode phenomenology, kinesthetic body-control phenomenology, auditory and olfactory phenomenology, and
so forth – each of which can be abstracted more or less from the total experience
to be the focus of attention.11
On this conception, phenomenology outstrips attention. On one reading, one that equates attention with consciousness, there is phenomenology of which one is not conscious. (But how then do you tell what its
content is?)
Alternatively, if Horgan and Tienson are equating consciousness with
phenomenology, they are saying that we only attend to a portion of our
conscious experience. But what is the status of the phenomenal content of
that unattended portion of our conscious experience? Does it exist, and
if so, how do we know its nature (since, by hypothesis, we do not attend
to it)? If we do not know the phenomenal content, then it is plausible to
think that such states have no more specific phenomenal content than
do dispositional states.

The point here is that the phenomenology of intentionality begins to
look more restricted in the range of states it applies to at any given time
than one might initially think: The dispositional, the merely occurrent,
and the unattended all seem to be precluded. If the inseparability thesis is
true, then it seems that it is true of a much more restricted set of states than
simply all intentional and all phenomenological states. In light of that,
the thesis loses a lot of the punch that it packs vis-`a-vis traditional views
of the mind that operate on the assumption that there is no necessary or
deep connection between the intentional and the phenomenal.

A different sort of problem in the scope of the thesis arises in Loar’s
discussion of phenomenal intentionality and intentional qualia. Loar
builds up a case for phenomenal intentionality by considering perceptually based concepts, then generalizes to recognitional concepts, spatial
concepts, and socially deferential concepts. But apart from the special
case where we reflect on such concepts and their instances we do not,
in our everyday experience, have any phenomenology of these concepts,
any more than we have any phenomenology of the individual phonemes
or distinctive features that make up the stream of speech we have auditory
experience of. The stream of consciousness is not, without special prodding, segmented into constituents such as concepts. It seems primarily in
