the hands of philosophers that our experience can become segmented
and particularized, in much the way that it was atomized in the hands of
that master introspectionist, Wilhelm Wundt.12
This reference to Wundt may remind us that neither introspection
nor phenomenology is simply a matter of turning one’s mind inward and
reporting what one finds. What one finds in one’s own experience will
depend in part on what one is looking for, the background perspective
that one brings to this first-person task.

252 Thinking Through and Beyond the Body
4 phenomenal intentionality
So far I have not argued that the inseparability thesis is false, but that
there are three dimensions of strength – scope, modality, and determinateness – on which it rates lowly. The point here is to deflate (not refute)
the inseparability thesis, for surely only a skeptic about the phenomenal
would refuse to concede that versions of the thesis weakened on each of
the forgoing dimensions are true. Along the way I have raised, in passing,
some doubts about the suitability of the methodology on which Horgan,
Tienson, and Loar rely in gesturing at what the phenomenology of intentionality is. Rather than develop these doubts here directly I shall turn to
consider phenomenal intentionality itself and what its proponents claim
about it. Again, the chief point will not be to show that such a property
does not exist, but that the most plausible way of understanding it makes
it unlikely that what its proponents claim about it is true.

Horgan and Tienson characterize phenomenal intentionality as a
“kind of intentional content, pervasive in human life, such that any two
possible phenomenal duplicates have exactly similar intentional states
vis-`a-vis such content.” Although this sounds stipulative, it is not, since
Horgan and Tienson continue by arguing for the thesis through imaginative evocation. As I noted in the previous section, this style of argument
does not seem well suited to the modally strong conclusion they seek, except insofar as it shifts the burden of proof to those who deny phenomenal intentionality. Yet it remains open to skeptics here to concede that
there can be a sort of phenomenal intentionality that is nonconceptual
but balk at the claim that the same is true of the conceptual realm. For
although ex hypothesi phenomenal duplicates share all their phenomenal
states, we are to show, not assume, that they share cognitive structures
that are genuinely intentional, such as concepts or beliefs.13
As part of their bridge from phenomenology to intentionality, Horgan
and Tienson distinguish between “two ways of thinking about truth
conditions: as determined wholly by phenomenology, and as determined
in part by items in the experiencer’s environment that satisfy the experiencer’s phenomenology.” The former of these, they argue, are narrow
and more fundamental than the latter. In their discussion, through imaginative evocation, they invite each reader to compare him or herself to
both a Twin Earth doppelganger ¨ and a “Cartesian duplicate.” The latter of
these has thoughts purporting to refer to someone named “Bill Clinton,”
but these lack reference altogether since there is no thing at all that
satisfies that putative reference for a Cartesian duplicate. Here it seems
that Horgan and Tienson allow that some phenomenal duplicates (for
example, those in no environment) may have mental states that have
no wide truth conditions and so no wide intentionality at all. But if at
least some phenomenal duplicates differ in that one has concepts with
ordinary (wide) satisfaction conditions, while the other does not, then
the defender of phenomenal intentionality must have available a way of
articulating the intentionality that such duplicates share that is independent of their wide intentionality. Whether phenomenology alone suffices
for intentionality given the complete severance to wide intentionality, as
in the case of Cartesian duplicates or brains-in-a-vat, might reasonably be
questioned. A more developed account of something like “phenomenal
intentionality” could silence doubts here.14
Brian Loar provides an account that purports to do the trick. To
bridge from phenomenal identity to intentional identity he appeals to
(i) brains in vats that (ii) share perceptually based concepts and (iii) share
all other concepts in virtue of their sharing their conceptual roles. As
Loar notes, in effect, (i) is required to ensure that any shared intentionality does not hold in virtue of shared (or similar) environments, and
so is narrow; (ii) provides a base case that Loar takes externalists to be
committed to in virtue of the phenomenon of failed perceptual demonstratives (and the inadequacy of representationalist accounts of it); and
the extension in (iii) appeals primarily to another resource, conceptual
roles, that Loar takes externalists to view as shared across contexts, no
matter how radically different those contexts may be. I want to put aside
concerns about (i) for now and concentrate on (ii) and (iii).15
Loar’s view here is programmatic and sketches a large-scale view of
phenomenal intentionality, rather than presenting detailed analyses for
any concept that putatively has phenomenal intentionality. My comments
are correspondingly cast. The idea of starting with individual concepts,
rather than phenomenal experience in its fullness, is a good one prima
facie, for part of the problem with sensory experience as a whole is that
it must be articulated ultimately in terms of a range of concepts, and
many of these are conceded by nearly everyone as being externalist, as
having wide content. This seems true even when the articulation we are
interested in is done from the first-person perspective. Begin, then, with
concepts whose phenomenal intentionality (and its nature) is not in serious dispute, and then constructively build a full account of experience
as having phenomenal intentionality.

I have already flagged one problem with this approach, however: It
seems to fragment the actual phenomenology we have, and so to be
254 Thinking Through and Beyond the Body
at best a philosophical analysis rather than a description of it. Suppose
that we put this aside, and suppose that we simply grant, for now, that
there are perceptually based concepts that are individualistic. How do
we constructively build from here? After discussing perceptually based
concepts, including “recognitional concepts” that “purport to pick out,
perceptually, kinds and properties rather than individuals,” Loar considers concepts that seem neither paradigmatically narrow nor wide, including the general concepts of physical objects and spatial relations. Here
he argues that these contain a recognitional component or aspect, and
so can be assimilated to recognitional concepts, which he has argued
to have phenomenal intentionality. While Loar concedes that this is not
true of socially deferential concepts – which have paradigmatically wide
content – he argues that their phenomenal intentionality derives from
the conceptual roles they play in the systematic internal economy of the
individual.16
There are thus two distinct paths to phenomenal intentionality: via
assimilation to perceptually based concepts (paradigms of the recognitional), and via assimilation to the logical connectives (paradigms of the
Conceptual Roley). These paths are very different from one another. One
concern is whether they in fact converge. That is, what grounds are there
for thinking that they determine the very same kind of property, phenomenal intentionality? This question seems to me to need a nonstipulative
answer for Loar’s program to be successful. Unlike Horgan and Tienson,
