Loar explicitly rules out the possibility that this unifying feature is the
availability of phenomenal intentionality to introspection, for he wants
conceptual roles to determine phenomenal intentionality independent
of its relationship to “an introspective glance.” Indeed, in light of this
concession, and independently, one wonders what makes intentionality
determined solely by conceptual roles phenomenological. What is the
phenomenology of the concept “and,” one wonders?17
There is a parallel here with wide content that might be drawn. Why
think that “environmentally-determined” content (for example, that of
water, `a la Putnam) and “socially-determined” content (for example, that
of arthritis, `a la Burge) are examples of a single kind of content, wide
content? There are, however, two important dissimilarities between this
pair of factors, the physical and social environments, and those determining phenomenal intentionality. First, one might plausibly (even if not
definitively) make the case that environmentally determined content of
these is really an instance of socially determined content, in that the key
feature of Putnam externalism is the pattern of social deference that it
identifies in the use of language. Second, and short of this, these “paths
to externalism,” while distinct, are not independent in that they share key
elements, such as the idea of a social division of labor between regular
folk and experts and that of individual knowledge as being incomplete
or partial.

A final general question: If phenomenology determines a kind of intentionality (albeit via two distinct paths), what is phenomenology’s relationship to wide content? Given the diaphanous character of much of our
introspective experience, a point (as we have seen) upon which representationalists have seized, it seems implausible to think that our everyday
phenomenology is never of, or never leads us to, intentionality that is
wide. I suspect that Loar, Horgan, and Tienson would concur. If that is
so, then there is nothing special about the path from phenomenology
to individualism, for there is also a path from phenomenology to at least
some kind of externalism. We should consider this issue more fully by
turning explicitly to the focus on twin cases, and to Loar’s appeal to the
brain in a vat.

5 individualism and phenomenal intentionality
Loar’s view, like that of Horgan and Tienson, moves from claims about the
phenomenology of perceptual experience to a conclusion about its (phenomenal) intentionality. As we saw in the previous chapter, Fred Dretske
has argued that even conscious perceptual experience is externalist, and
a reminder of the dilemma that Dretske poses is useful in understanding
a challenge facing those, such as Horgan, Tienson, and Loar, who deny
this. What are perceptual experiences? If they are or involve conceptual
or thoughtlike entities, then those experiences inherit their width from
that of the concepts or thoughts they involve. But if perceptual experiences are completely divorced from conceptual or thoughtlike entities,
then perceptual states are unknowable, even by their bearers.

In terms of this “wide or unknowable” dilemma posed by Dretske,
defenders of phenomenal intentionality attempt to grasp the first horn
by articulating concepts that are not externalist. This is a strategy that
Colin McGinn has also pursued in demarcating the limits of externalism,
arguing that perceptual content in general is not what he calls strongly
externalist, that is, dependent on nonmental features of a subject’s environment. Central to McGinn’s argument is the imagined case of Percy and
his doppelganger ¨ . Percy is behaviorally disposed to respond to round things
in round-thing appropriate ways, and so is said unproblematically to have
256 Thinking Through and Beyond the Body
an internal state that corresponds to the concept round; Percy’s duplicate, by contrast, is behaviorally disposed to respond to square things in
round-thing appropriate ways. The question is whether Percy’s duplicate
has the concept round or the concept square.

McGinn thinks that an externalist is committed to the latter, since
square things are the distal causes of the relevant internal state, and
externalists individuate mental states by such external causes rather than
by internal features of an organism. Yet the intuition that Percy’s duplicate
is a creature that misperceives square things as round is strong, and so,
according to McGinn, only an individualistic view of the case will do.

Here is a case where perceptual content is individualistic. It seems to
both Percy and his duplicate that they are both seeing a round thing, and
this shared seeming is what explains their shared behavioral dispositions.

Hence, there is a need for an account of the constituents of perceptual
contents that is individualistic. The argument here is similar to Loar’s
chief reason for appealing to phenomenal intentionality: cases of failed
perceptual demonstrative reference.18
Such pair-wise twin comparisons may be a first step in articulating a
conception of phenomenal intentionality via the claim that there are at
least some narrow concepts. Yet one needs to be able to generalize from
them to reach a conclusion about any pair of physical twins, which is
required to show that the corresponding concepts, and thus phenomenal
intentionality, are individualistic. In the remainder of this section I shall
argue for a contestability to what we can imagine in twin cases that poses
a problem for this generalization, and so for this putative link between
individualism and phenomenal intentionality.

In discussing a variant of McGinn’s example, Martin Davies implicitly
defends the view that a generalization from particular twin cases to arbitrary twins will fail, since it is relatively easy to find examples where it
seems more plausible to characterize the twin’s concepts in terms of our
ordinary notion of (wide) content. More telling, in my view, is Davies’ suggestion, following Fricker, that it may be most plausible to refrain from
ascriptions of content at all. Suppose, for example, that Percy’s twin is
a brain in a vat, in an internal state identical to the one that Percy has
when he sees round objects, but which is caused by square objects, and
that Percy’s twin (not ever having been embodied at all) has no behavior
at all. In such a case, we have no basis to ascribe even behavioral dispositions to Percy’s twin. It seems to me very hard to ascribe a specific content
to Percy’s twin in such a case without already supposing that only what’s
“in the head” determines content. Thus, what ascriptions one is prepared
to make turn largely on one’s prior theoretical commitments regarding
the individualism-externalism debate.19
If this is true, then defenders of phenomenal intentionality have seriously underestimated the task before them, for they have been content to
find relatively few cases in which perceptual content is (plausibly) shared
by doppelgangers ¨ , and then simply supposed that the generalization from
such cases is unproblematic. But consider the range of possible duplicates there are for any given individual. There is Rex and there is his
doppelganger ¨ T-Rex on Twin Earth. But there is also brain-in-a-vat Rex,
entirely virtual Rex, Rex the happy android, Rex the purely immaterial
