philosophical contamination.

To sum up this part of the argument: There may be aspects to phenomenology that are individualistic, but, more importantly, there are
260 Thinking Through and Beyond the Body
aspects that likely are externalist. Critically, some cases of perceptual experience, a general category that plays a central role in both the arguments of Loar and of Horgan and Tienson, appear to fall into the latter
category. Again, this is not to say that there is no truth to the claim that
phenomenal intentionality is narrow, but to suggest that it is a claim true
in a significantly more restricted range of cases than its proponents have
thought.

To have come this far, however, is to be in a position to comment on
the further claim that phenomenal intentionality is more fundamental in
at least certain respects than wide content. Minimally, this claim will have
to be hedged in ways that correspond to the restricted domain in which
phenomenal intentionality is narrow. But if externalism is true of the
phenomenology of at least some perceptual content, as I have suggested,
then given the centrality of this case to the conception of phenomenal
intentionality more generally, we may wonder what content remains to
this claim of “basicness.”
6 how to be a good phenomenologist
The fruitfulness of applying a divide and conquer strategy to the intentional and the phenomenal can be, and has been, reasonably questioned.

In this chapter, I have been concerned primarily with recent views that
go further than such questioning and make specific proposals about the
relationship between the intentionality and phenomenology of particular mental states. In particular, I have focused on the inseparability thesis
that Horgan and Tienson have articulated, and the general conception
of phenomenal intentionality that they share with Loar, as well as Loar’s
own way of further articulating that conception. There are certainly other
possible ways to articulate the relationship between intentionality and
phenomenology. Because I have not tried to show that the views of
Horgan, Tienson, and Loar suffer from some deep, general, flaw, I do not
take the argument of this chapter to express any overarching skepticism
about such work on these two pillars of the mental. However, there are
several general problem areas that can be marked “fragile” for now for
those making alternative proposals.

Past attempts to defend or chalk out an individualistic perspective on
the mental have typically focused on intentionality. The main concern
about such positions is with the notion of narrow content itself. Because
the chief proposals for articulating that notion – the narrow function theory of Stephen White and Jerry Fodor and the narrow conceptual role
semantics of Ned Block and Brian Loar – are generally acknowledged as
failures, one hope has been that the renewed attention to the phenomenal would provide the basis for a reinvigorated expression of the narrow
content program. But it seems that the notion of phenomenology itself is
as contestable between individualists and externalists as is that of intentionality. If this is true, then the idea of reviving narrow intentionality via
an appeal to phenomenology inherits that contestability.21
Perhaps the initial surprise is that phenomenology itself should remain somewhat mysterious. In the good old days, when the phenomenal
was neglected for the intentional, intentionality was thought to be more
theoretically loaded, subject more to the grinding of particular axes, than
phenomenology, in part because of the immediacy, directness, and firstperson intimacy of the phenomenal. Recall Horgan and Tienson’s claim
that “[i]f you pay attention to your own experience, we think you will
come to appreciate” the inseparability of the intentional and the phenomenal. Yet such attention and what it reveals are more contestable
than one might initially think.

In mentioning Wilhelm Wundt in passing at the end of section 3,
and so alluding to the introspectionist tradition in early experimental
psychology to which Wundt was central, I have implicitly suggested that
some of the problems in thinking about phenomenology parallel those
that Wundt faced in thinking about the nature of introspection. If the
advice on how to be a good introspectionist early in the twentieth century
was “Don’t listen to the psychologists,” then the corresponding advice on
how to be a good phenomenologist early in the twenty-first century might
be “Don’t listen to the philosophers.” And while it is not all the advice
one could hope for, it might be advice enough for now.

262
part four
THE COGNITIVE METAPHOR IN THE
BIOLOGICAL AND SOCIAL SCIENCES
263
264
11
Group Minds in Historical Perspective
1 group minds and the cognitive metaphor
in the biological and social sciences
There are two strands to our thinking about where the mind begins and
ends, and the role that the individual has in demarcating that boundary.

First, individuals are paradigmatic subjects or bearers of mental states:
They are the things, perhaps the only things, which literally have minds.

Minds are where, perhaps only where, people are. Second, individuals
serve as some sort of boundary for the mind. Minds are located inside
individuals, and we do not need to consider the body or the extracranial
world in theorizing about the nature of minds. The argument of Parts Two
and Three has been that this second strand to our thinking about the
relationship between individuals and minds is mistaken. For the most
part, this rejection of the mind as bounded by the individual has gone
hand-in-hand with the acceptance of minds as belonging to individuals.

In Part Four, this latter view is reconsidered. I shall take seriously the
idea that individuals are not the only kind of thing that has a mind. In
particular, I focus on the idea that groups can have minds. Doing so will
take us beyond the cognitive to both the biological and social sciences.

For it is in these other parts of the fragile sciences that the idea of a group
mind has a rich history, a history appealed to in a number of contemporary discussions. In this chapter, I consider the history, and in the next
the contemporary revivals of what I shall call the group mind hypothesis.

The idea that there are group minds will strike many as either an
ontological extravagance or an outright absurdity with which neither
