most crisp and influential expressions, respectively, shortly before and
shortly after the turn of the twentieth century. Authors working within
each of these traditions are diverse both in how they introduce the idea
of a group mind and what they are motivated by. The work within the
two traditions that seems to me of most interest in discussing the contemporary revival of the group mind hypothesis shares with that revival
a common explanationist commitment that might be characterized as
follows. Certain sorts of groups themselves have the ability to behave or
act as unified, integrated units, and these actions are properly or best
explained by positing a group mind. It is the group that behaves or acts,
and the cause of this behavior or action is, in some sense, the mind of
the group. I shall use this commitment to explanationism to help bring
out aspects of both traditions of relevance to contemporary claims about
group minds or group-level cognitive adaptations.

Both of these traditions postulate minds as emergent properties of
groups of organisms. Within these traditions, minds are group-level traits.

Yet there is a difference between the traditions on this issue important
enough for our later discussion to mark with some further terminology
now. In the collective psychology tradition, a group mind is what I will
call a multilevel trait, since the mind is claimed to exist at both the level
of the group and at the level of the individuals comprising the group. By
contrast, in the superorganism tradition, a group mind is a group-onlytrait,
in that it is claimed that it is only groups of social insects, not individual
members of those groups, which possess a mind.

Consider a nonpsychological illustration of the distinction between
multilevel and group-only traits, adapting an example suggested to me
by the biologist Michael Wade involving the fire ant (Solenopsis geminata).

Individual fire ants have the ability to sting small predators when they
are threatened, and this stinging action is often effective in deterring
such predators. Fire ants can also coordinate their individual stinging
behavior by emitting pheromonal signals, and this coordinated stinging
repels larger predators that attack the ant colony. The ability to sting is
a multilevel trait in that it is a trait that both individuals and groups can
possess. The capacity to deter large predators (or defend the nest) by
stinging, however, is a group-only trait, a trait that only groups of fire ants
possess.

In the next two sections, I shall discuss each of these traditions in some
detail before moving, in sections 5 and 6, to some critical analysis that
I hope sheds light on both. These traditions represent both insight and
confusion. Part of my aim will be to distinguish discovery from disease.

3 the collective psychology tradition
The collective psychology tradition has its roots in post-Commune
Parisian and French social thought, lasting roughly from 1870 to 1920.

Aspects of the tradition have been the subject of a number of detailed
professional historical studies. The tradition was largely motivated by and
focused on two sweeping, related social changes: a heightening in the visible actions of politically disenfranchised or marginalized individuals in
groups, including industrial strikes and peasant uprisings, and the increased activity of socialist and anarchist political organizations. These
two social changes were certainly related, and the collective psychology
tradition conceptualized their relationship in a particular way: as two
manifestations of the very same phenomena, the rise of the crowd.1
270 Cognitive Metaphor in Biology and Social Science
Although there are works that foreshadow the dark picture of the
crowd painted within the collective psychology tradition, the tradition
itself begins with the historical accounts of the French Revolution and
the Paris Commune by Hippolyte Taine in the mid-1870s, and reaches
an apotheosis in 1895 with the publication of the best-known work in the
tradition, Gustav Le Bon’s La Psychologie des foules, translated into English
simply as The Crowd. Authors in the tradition include Scipio Sighele and
Pasquale Rossi in Italy and Gabriel Tarde, Emile Zola, Henry Fournial,
and Emile Durkheim in France. The collective psychology tradition significantly shaped theories of “mass psychology” and political groups in
the early twentieth century.2
The above mixture of lawyers and criminologists, historians and anthropologists, novelists and social theorists here suggests that although
authors in the collective psychology tradition often invoked the name
of science, theirs was not simply a distant, academic perspective on new
social phenomena. Rather, the collective psychology tradition actively in-
fluenced how the very phenomena it studied was perceived and acted on
by those in political power. It was as much constituted by and appealed to
the popular imagination as by and to scholarly research. A number of the
works in the tradition became instant and long-term national bestsellers,
and their authors were consulted by a range of political authorities about
how best to deal with “the crowd” as a political entity.

The importance of the concept of a crowd, its unifying force for understanding contemporary social life in France in the last quarter of the
nineteenth century, and why the psychology of crowds provides the key
to understanding social upheaval, are brought out clearly in the early
pages of Le Bon’s The Crowd. Near the outset of his Preface, after linking
individuals and their abilities to the “genius of the race,” Le Bon says,
When, however, a certain number of these individuals are gathered together in a
crowd for purposes of action, observation proves that, from the mere fact of their
being assembled, there result certain new psychological characteristics, which
are added to the racial characteristics and differ from them at times to a very
considerable degree.

Organized crowds have always played an important part in the life of peoples,
but this part has never been of such moment as at present. The substitution of
the unconscious action of crowds for the conscious activity of individuals is one
of the principle characteristics of the present age.

The concept of the crowd is important to making sense of the social and
political climate, claims Le Bon, because the action of crowds has come to
replace that of individuals in the public sphere. The “crowd” that Le Bon
is interested in is not simply a gathering of individuals, however: It is an
organized crowd or a psychological crowd that exercises this heightened
influence over the direction of history. As such, crowds are not simply
