forms of social organization. The social manifestation thesis and the
group mind hypothesis represent the foundation of two different ways to
develop a scientific account of this observation.

The social manifestation thesis places an emphasis on an individual’s
abilities and dispositions, albeit those manifest in particular social contexts. Here whether an individual belongs to a group of a certain kind
becomes important to understanding that individual’s psychology, but
there is no need to posit psychological properties of groups themselves.

The group mind hypothesis, by contrast, does look to levels of organization larger than the individual in identifying the subjects of psychology,
claiming that groups themselves have minds. To many, this will seem to
involve a more far-reaching revision to our ideas of what minds are, and
what can possess them.

The argument in this chapter, particularly in the previous section,
has been that many putative expressions of the group mind hypothesis,
particularly those in the collective psychology tradition, are in fact better
characterized as expressions of something like the social manifestation
thesis. If this is correct, then, given the distinction between these two
theses, there is a real issue as to whether the group mind hypothesis does
form a central part of either the collective psychology or superorganism
traditions. If the social manifestation thesis more accurately captures both
traditions, then contemporary defenses of the group mind hypothesis are
misconceived if they are viewed as revivals of lost traditions of thought.

I shall argue, in the next chapter, that there is an additional layer of
misconception in such a construal of the group mind hypothesis. This is
because its contemporary putative expression is also better construed as
an expression of the social manifestation thesis.

12
The Group Mind Hypothesis in Contemporary
Biology and Social Science
1 reviving the group mind
In the previous chapter, I suggested that the group mind hypothesis could
be understood either literally or metaphorically. Expressions of the group
mind hypothesis, both in the collective psychology and superorganism
traditions and in contemporary discussions, often lend themselves to the
literalist interpretation, although I argued in the previous chapter that in
fact many of these are better understood as somewhat confusing attempts
to state a version of the social manifestation thesis. I shall begin by briefly
looking at contemporary views that appear to express the group mind
hypothesis, and then raise questions about how they are best understood,
and what notion of mind they draw on.

David Sloan Wilson has been a key advocate of the group mind hypothesis in the biological sciences, casting his advocacy in terms of the
notion of cognitive adaptations and locating it within his broader defense of group selection and group-level adaptations. Group-level adaptations are species-specific phenotypes, including behaviors, that evolved
because they conferred a selective advantage on their bearers, that is, on
the groups of organisms that have them. In extending the notion of a
group-level adaptation to cognitive phenotypes, Wilson says,
Group-level adaptations are usually studied in the context of physical activities
such as resource utilization, predator defense, and so on. However, groups can
also evolve into adaptive units with respect to cognitive activities such as decision
making, memory, and learning. As one example, decision making is a process
that involves identifying a problem, imagining a number of alternative solutions,
evaluating the alternatives, and making the final decision on how to behave. Each
of these activities can be performed by an individual as a self-contained cognitive
286
unit but might be performed even better by groups of individuals interacting in
a coordinated fashion. At the extreme, groups might become so integrated and
the contribution of any single member might become so partial that the group
could literally be said to have a mind in a way that individuals do not, just as brains
have a mind in a way that neurons do not.

Examples of group-level cognitive adaptations that Wilson cites here are
foraging and resource allocation strategies in bee colonies, as discussed by
David Seeley, human group decision making, and what Herbert Prins has
called “voting behavior” in buffalo herds in deciding in which direction
to move.1
As the passage above indicates, part of Wilson’s argumentative strategy involves showing that cognitive or psychological processes are no
exception to the general phenomenon of group-level adaptation. Wilson
himself identifies his defense of the group mind hypothesis as a revival
of an idea prominent in the foundations of the social sciences. What he
finds problematic about “early views of the group mind in humans” is
that they “were usually stated in a grandiose form and without attention
to mechanisms, similar to naive group selectionism in biology during the
same period.” His revival of the group mind hypothesis within a sophisticated group selectionist framework is a remedy to at least the latter of
these problems.2
The group mind hypothesis has received a more cautious and circumscribed defense within the social sciences, where intimations that
groups can think, decide, remember, or cognize more generally are typically hedged in ways that invite the metaphorical interpretation of the
hypothesis. For example, in her How Institutions Think, the anthropologist Mary Douglas urges a reconsideration of the contributions of Emile
Durkheim and Ludwig Fleck to the foundations of sociology, particularly
their treatment of institutions and social groups “as if they were individuals.” Recognizing “a tendency to dismiss Durkheim and Fleck because
they seem to be saying that institutions have minds of their own,” Douglas
attempts to “clarify the extent to which thinking depends upon institutions” through a discussion of Durkheim’s priority of the social over the
individual and Fleck’s notion of a thought collective.3
Likewise, in attempting to demarcate cultural psychology as a distinct
field, Richard Shweder introduces the idea of intentional worlds that
individuals share, taking cultural psychology to be the study of such
worlds. But Shweder is, like Douglas, wary of understanding such a study
as implying that social structures in and of themselves have minds, apart
from the intentionality that individual agents have. In both cases we need
288 Cognitive Metaphor in Biology and Social Science
to move beyond the attribution of in-the-head representations to individuals in order to do full justice to the complexity of social and cultural
phenomena, and this is done through making cognitive attributions to
entities larger than the individual.4
David Sloan Wilson has recently extended his thinking about the group
mind hypothesis to understand the nature of religious ideas and social
organizations. In doing so, he bridges between the biological and social
sciences, a trademark of some of his earlier work. Wilson’s basic idea is
