biologists nor social scientists need concern themselves. Yet this group
265
266 Cognitive Metaphor in Biology and Social Science
mind hypothesis was prominent both in social psychology and social theory in the late nineteenth century and in the study of social insects and
community ecology in the early part of the twentieth century. It was defended by many of the most influential thinkers in these fields and gained
support from the range of resemblances between at least some groups
and individuals. Moreover, contemporary defenses of the group mind
hypothesis can be (and have been) expressed as part of more systematic
views that are reshaping the ways in which parts of biology and the social
sciences are conceptualized and practiced.

For example, expressed as the idea that there may be group-level cognitive adaptations, the group mind hypothesis forges a link between evolutionary psychology, based on the claim that the mind is subject to natural
selection in much the way that the body is, and recent work on the levels
of selection, which has become pluralistic and endorsed the claim that
natural selection operates at multiple levels, including that of the group.

And when expressed in terms of the place of institutions and cultural
practices in directing whole styles of cognition, the group mind hypothesis finds application both in anthropology and in the social studies of
science. Taking such claims seriously will enable a discussion of some
deep and interesting issues, such as the sense in which cognition is social, the relationship between evolution and cognition, and the interplay
between culture, evolution, and sociality.

The group mind hypothesis itself can be understood in two different
ways. First, it can be interpreted literally as saying that groups have minds
in just the way that individuals have minds. On this view, groups are a sort
of higher-order individual and function as such in biological or social
theory. Groups may not have minds as rich as our own, much as we might
think animals have just some subset of the full range of psychological
states that we have. But however restricted be their minds in scope and
richness, groups are mind-laden entities of some kind. Alternatively, the
hypothesis can be viewed as an instance of what I shall call the cognitive
metaphor, the idea that we metaphorically extend our conception of mind
from our paradigmatic individuals to things – in this case groups – that
are not individuals. On this view, groups are sufficiently like individuals in
some respects that it proves useful or even inevitable that we treat them as
if they had a psychology, as if they were mind-laden entities, when in fact
they are not. They have minds by courtesy, in virtue of our application of
a cognitive metaphor to them.

The literalist interpretation makes most direct sense of the appeal to
certain groups of organisms as superorganisms in the biological sciences,
and some human social groups (the crowd, an army, the nation) as manifesting a variety of individual-level properties. The metaphorical reading
locates the group mind hypothesis among other instances of the cognitive metaphor within the biological and social sciences. These range
from the view of genes as selfish or competitive and cells as recognizing,
remembering, preferring, and seeking certain other cells or molecules
within the biological sciences, to ascriptions of institutions and human
social practices as rational or friendly and corporations as morally and
legally responsible.

Each of these interpretations is helpful in making sense of the uses to
which the group mind hypothesis is put in the fragile sciences, and the
differences between them is not as sharp as one might initially suspect.

Hence, I shall rely on both of them over the next pair of chapters and will
not enter into any discussion of which is the correct way to understand
the group mind hypothesis.

2 two traditions
In order to articulate a thesis that can be understood in these two ways,
consider the following as a statement of the group mind hypothesis:
Groups of individual organisms can have or can be thought of as having minds in
something like the way in which individual organisms themselves can have minds.

The literalist can be seen as removing the “can be thought of” caveat
and sharpening the “something like” in this statement of the group mind
hypothesis, while the proponent of the cognitive metaphor interpretation
places emphasis on these softening aspects of the hypothesis.

The group mind hypothesis was held by many of the founders of social psychology and the social sciences more generally, including William
McDougall in the former and Emile Durkheim in the latter. The view
of human social groups acting in ways that were guided by their distinctive mental characteristics and activity was widespread at the turn
of the twentieth century in thinking about society and its foundations.

All such views, which I will refer to as forming part of the collective psychology tradition of thought, were developed in the broader context of
reflecting on the relationship between individuals and the societies that
they constituted. Those in the collective psychology tradition typically
defended some sort of nonreductionist view of this relationship. Despite
their otherwise diverging interests and orientations, these theorists were
committed to a view of the communal or collective aspect of psychology as
268 Cognitive Metaphor in Biology and Social Science
autonomous and separable from both physiology and the experimental
psychology that derived from it. The psychology of collectives was emergent from and thus not reducible to the psychology of the individuals in
those collectives and was to be studied as such.

The group mind hypothesis has an independent origin in foundational work in ecology and on the social insects in the first twenty years of
the twentieth century. The idea at the core of what I shall call the superorganism tradition in evolutionary biology is that in certain groups of living
things – in particular, in colonies of Hymenoptera – it is the group rather
than the individual organism that lives in those groups, that functions as
an integrated unit, having many of the properties that individual organisms possess in other species. Individual bees, ants, and wasps function
more like organs or (parts of ) bodily systems in those species. Colonies
are independent, self-regulating groups organized to achieve specific biological goals – such as food collection and distribution, nest construction
and maintenance, and reproduction – via dedicated behavioral strategies, where some of these strategies and the functions they perform can
properly be thought of as psychological or mental. Since the members
of these colonies often lack any or all of these goals and the accompanying strategies, these strategies and goals are emergent properties of the
colony, in much the way that a group mind was thought to be emergent
from individual minds in the collective psychology tradition in the social
sciences. The Harvard entomologist William Morton Wheeler is arguably
the key figure in the superorganism tradition.

The collective psychology and superorganism traditions, as I am construing them, each extend over some fifty or so years, and receive their
