thesis could be true without entailing the group mind hypothesis if group
minds did not exist. Conversely, the group mind hypothesis could be true
without entailing the social manifestation thesis if the relevant groups
were comprised of individuals that did not have minds at all. We will return to further explore the relationship between the social manifestation
thesis and the group mind hypothesis in the next chapter.

6 collective psychology, superorganisms,
and socially manifested minds
Shifts between the group mind hypothesis and the social manifestation
thesis are common in the collective psychology tradition. But I also want
to make the perhaps initially puzzling proposal that those in this tradition
in fact have a primary preoccupation with the social manifestation thesis.

Although they often express their views in ways that suggest an explicit
endorsement of the group mind hypothesis, the broader context in which
their views are developed makes the social manifestation thesis a more
plausible interpretation of what they mean. I shall provide support for
this view by discussing a few representative quotations from the work of
Wilhelm Wundt and Gustav Le Bon.

For example, consider the chapter headed “Mental communities” in
Wundt’s Outlines of Psychology. Here Wundt focuses on the importance of
the environment, especially the social environment, both to the development of the child and to the sorts of properties that are significant for
individual consciousness. This focus is appropriate if the social manifestation thesis is one’s primary concern. But Wundt says, strikingly, that
these social interconnections have just as much reality as the individual consciousness itself. In this sense we may speak of the interconnection of the ideas
and feelings of a social community as a collective consciousness, and of the common
volitional tendencies as a collective will.

20
The first of Wundt’s claims here, and the chapter in general, supports
some version of the social manifestation thesis, even if his second claim
expresses a version of the group mind hypothesis.

We see the same shift in Le Bon’s The Crowd, which, as we have seen,
attempted to delineate the psychological characteristics of crowds and
their degrading effect on individual human cognitive performance.

Le Bon says
Whoever be the individuals that compose it, however like or unlike be their mode
of life, their occupations, their character, or their intelligence, the fact that they
have been transformed into a crowd puts them in possession of a sort of collective
mind which makes them feel, think, and act in a manner quite different from
that in which each individual of them would feel, think, and act were he in a state
of isolation.21
This is a version of Le Bon’s law of the mental unity of crowds, a view that
the sociologist Clark McPhail has called the transformation thesis, since it
is a thesis about how individuals are transformed when they belong to a
crowd. As such, clearly this is a view about the abilities and proclivities
of individuals, and should be subsumed under the social manifestation
thesis. Le Bon’s “law” implies the group mind hypothesis only if individuals are transformed because a group mind is formed, or a group mind
is a consequence of this transformation. Each of these is a further claim,
however, one for which no further argument is given. This is, in part,
because Le Bon himself has not distinguished the two theses in the first
place. If Le Bon’s chief concern is with how the capacities and abilities
of individuals are changed when they form a crowd, as I have been suggesting, then talk of group minds is a confusing (even if vivid) way of
expressing something like the social manifestation thesis.22
Prima facie, there is less room in the superorganism tradition for this
sort of melding of the social manifestation thesis with the group mind
hypothesis, chiefly because of the more circumspect and limited appeal
to psychological properties at all within it. For the social insects, recall
that the group mind is posited as a group-only trait, and at least in this case
there are no individual minds to have socially manifested, psychological
properties. In the case of plant communities and plant-animal biomes, as
I have already noted, there is a more circumscribed tendency to endorse
either the group mind hypothesis or the social manifestation thesis at all.

There is in the superorganism tradition, however, a shift between two
views that parallel our two theses, between a nonpsychological version
of the social manifestation thesis, and the claim that certain communal
groups are (literally) superorganisms. In addition, in at least places it
is the former of these that captures the heart of work in the superorganism tradition, even when language that suggests the superorganism
284 Cognitive Metaphor in Biology and Social Science
conception predominates. For example, although Clements and Shelford
postulate the biome as a living entity in its own right, the primary concern of their book as a whole, and the guiding idea of early ecology more
generally, is that animals and plants exert a ubiquitous, mutual influence
on one another. By virtue of this influence that exists between individual
organisms, each is able to act in ways that it could not otherwise act. This
is a behavioral or physiological version of the social manifestation thesis,
and is independent of the postulation of communities or biomes as superorganisms. Likewise, at the core of Allee et al.’s review of the social
insects is a discussion of both “the division of labor between individuals
composing the group and the integrative mechanisms that give unity to
the group,” both of which concern properties of and relations between
individuals. Individuals take on these properties only in the “true social”
insects. While Allee et al. take this to support the postulation of superorganismic status for the group, this is clearly a further claim, one that was
particularly pronounced in the contributions of Alfred Emerson to the
Chicago school’s approach.23
I suspect that it is likely a fruitless endeavor to attempt to defend the
idea that one or the other of these ideas is overall more fundamental
within the superorganism tradition, for each of them was drawn on and
developed for different purposes. My chief point here is that expressions
that suggest something like the group mind hypothesis should not always
be taken at face value, and that thinking about the ways in which groups
serve as a crucial context for the manifestation of individual capacities,
including cognitive capacities, may more adequately take one to issues at
the heart of the both traditions.

7 from the past to the present
In the previous section, I said that the superorganism tradition is motivated in large part by the observation of a variety of forms of social
harmony in the living world. Peaceful coexistence and cooperation are
viewed as constituting natural relationships between individual organisms, and there are mutual benefits gained by individuals through these
