aggregations of individuals, but something more. When such a crowd
exists,
The sentiments and ideas of all the persons in the gathering take one and the same
direction, and their conscious personality vanishes. A collective mind is formed,
doubtless transitory, but presenting very clearly defined characteristics. ...It [the
organized crowd] forms a single being, and is subjected to the law of the mental
unity of crowds.

3
This putative law claims that crowds destroy the individuality of those
that belong to them, psychologically unifying and homogenizing them
so that they act as one. We shall return to consider this law shortly. The
point to note for now is that the key to understanding the behavior of
crowds, something that we can all observe, is their underlying psychology,
something to be discovered. It is a putatively empirical or observational
study of the mental life of the crowd that is provided by the collective
psychology tradition.

Le Bon’s focus on a special type of gathering of individuals, one in
which an organized or psychological crowd is formed, however, is only apparent, as both the rest of his introduction and Part III of The Crowd make
clear. Having stated that his time is the era of crowds, Le Bon elaborates
by discussing the ways in which the “popular classes” have entered into
political life, and the increased “power of the masses” via labor unions,
parliamentary assemblies, and electorates. Understanding the psychology
of crowds is crucial to ameliorating the effects of these political changes,
and to controlling the masses within the existing political framework because such groups are themselves organized crowds. What we might call
gatherings represent but one type of crowd, but their psychology is also
the psychology of a diverse variety of collectivities, “crowds,” many of
which need not be aggregated in space and time as gatherings are.

Whether there is such a kind of thing as a crowd in this broad sense, a
kind that could be the object of scientific study and generalization, particularly of psychological study and generalization, requires closer scrutiny.

The term “crowd” within the collective psychology tradition encompassed
small and large gatherings (for example, mobs), associations constituted
chiefly by membership (for example, political parties), and institutional
abstractions (for example, electorates). All of these are social collectivities, but very different sorts of collectivities. The idea that each has a
272 Cognitive Metaphor in Biology and Social Science
psychology, a set of underlying mental dispositions and traits, let alone
that all share a common psychology, seems doubtful.4
By contrast, the idea that there might be general rules about social
control that can be formulated and exercised on a variety of levels, and
that these can be uncovered by understanding the “psychology of crowds,”
does provide an arena in which a broad, unified concept of crowds may
operate. Thus, we can use our crowd psychology, claims Le Bon, to see
why an indirect tax on consumer goods will be more readily accepted by
“the crowd” than will a direct tax on income; to select and influence a
jury in a trial; or to counteract the illegal acts of an angry mob.5
As several authors have noted, although Le Bon borrowed heavily from
earlier authors in what I am calling the collective psychology tradition,
his emphasis on the practical political consequences of “understanding crowds” shows a greater debt to Machiavelli’s The Prince than to the
nascent social science to which he explicitly gestures. Indeed, The Crowd
became extremely influential within French military circles prior to the
outbreak of the First World War, and a number of Le Bon’s subsequent
books placed less emphasis on the danger posed by the crowd than on
delivering advice on how to regiment and control groups of people in
order to extract the best from them.6
As might be expected, the collective psychology tradition drew on developing psychological views of the individual, particularly on what have
been called irrationalist theories of individual psychology invoked to explain individual deviance and breakdown. The real key to understanding the psychology of crowds was to recognize the ways in which such
a psychology was diametrically opposed to the psychology of individuals
in everyday life. The fundamental juxtaposition, which we have already
seen in passing in the quotes I have given from Le Bon, was between the
rational, conscious, and controlled individual, and the irrational, unconscious, and potentially uncontrollable crowd.7
The historian Susanna Barrows has pointed to the debt that the collective psychology tradition owed to Jean-Martin Charcot’s work on hypnosis and suggestibility as a rising form of irrationalism about individual
behavior. Hypnosis provides one mechanism by which an individual can
be changed from a thinking, rational, conscious agent to an unthinking,
irrational, unconscious agent. Forming a part of an organized crowd,
claims Le Bon, constitutes another way of bringing about such a transformation in an individual. This contrast appeals to the emotionality of
individuals in a crowd, as opposed to their rationality as individuals in everyday life. Le Bon cites the sentiment of invincibility, the contagiousness
of sentiments, and suggestibility as the three features of individuals that
cause crowds to have the psychology they do.8
The attribution of a heightened level of emotion in crowds, and the
contrast between rational individuals and emotional crowds, allowed
the crowd to be characterized in terms of dominant social dichotomies.

The psychology of the crowd was described as both feminine (rather than
masculine), and primitive (rather than civilized), ascribing to crowds the
putatively inferior minds of women and savages. This identification of
crowd psychology, manifesting and reinforcing a form of democraphobia
in the late nineteenth century, was seized on in the fascistic appropriations
of theories of mass psychology in the early twentieth century, including
in the work and thought of both Benito Mussolini and Adolph Hitler.9
This brief summary suggests three components at the core of the collective psychology tradition: (i) a deep mistrust and fear of crowds; (ii) a
way of understanding their psychology that drew on and reified existing
gendered and racialist thinking; and (iii) a self-image of thinkers from
diverse intellectual backgrounds forging a new science, that of the psychology of the crowd, of real practical import. As some of my comments
about Le Bon suggest, however, alongside this overarching framework in
which crowds were viewed negatively and pessimistically, there was also
a more enthusiastic view of what only crowds, not individuals, could accomplish, a view that built on perhaps only (iii) above.

This optimistic strand to the collective psychology tradition extended
from roughly 1895 until 1920 and was particularly prevalent amongst
some of the most influential participants in the emergence of both psychology and the social sciences, particularly sociology and anthropology.

Wilhelm Wundt’s Volkerpsychologie ¨ (discussed briefly in Part One), Emile
Durkheim’s collective representations, and William McDougall’s group
mind each constituted the basis for conceptualizing groups of individuals
in a more positive light. Collectively they represent attempts to theorize
about the products of group actions as cultural achievements. The processes leading to these achievements remain conceptualized as the underlying psychology of the group, and as such were viewed as irreducible
to changes wrought on an individual. But this group mind was no longer
