complex and rich psychological processes and traits to simpler and more
impoverished ones. But no such processes or traits could be invoked
within the superorganism tradition without a charge of anthropomorphism being laid. This left those in the superorganism tradition with more
limited resources for explaining the mechanisms through which a group
mind could have evolved or operated, and truncated the list of human
mental characteristics that could be literally or even metaphorically ascribed to animal societies.

Given the evolutionary and functional motivations for positing superorganisms, it is no surprise to find that the sorts of psychological properties that were postulated within the superorganism tradition were those
that served some identifiable biological function in the relevant species.

These include the perceptual and communicative abilities involved in
gathering information about food sources and the motoric capacities to
utilize resources and avoid predators and dangers in the world. Some
280 Cognitive Metaphor in Biology and Social Science
of these abilities, such as the ability of the bee colony to locate distant
sources of nectar and regulate the relative number of foragers and hive
workers in accord with the richness of the source, or the ability of the termite colony to rapidly repair damage to its nest, manifest both some level
of intentionality and a degree of concern over the integrity of the colony.

In short, the behaviors of at least some groups is such that it seems directed at self-preservation, where the self here is a colony, and the means
of achieving that goal is cognitive.

I have already intimated that both the collective psychology and superorganism traditions embody some confusions. It is to one of these
that I turn next, the confusion between the group mind hypothesis and
quite a distinct thesis about the nature of individual minds, the social
manifestation thesis.

5 group minds and the social manifestation thesis
As a way of introducing this confusion, let me begin with William
McDougall’s critical dissent from a reductionist claim made by Herbert
Spencer. In defending a reductionist view of social groups, Spencer had
introduced an analogy between how emergent properties of groups of
physical entities, such as stable geometrical forms and crystallization, and
those of social groups could be understood. To Spencer’s claim that the
“structure and properties of a society are determined by the properties
of the units, the individual human beings, of which it is composed,”
McDougall says,
the aggregate which is a society has, in virtue of its past history, positive qualities
which it does not derive from the units which compose it at any one time; and in
virtue of these qualities it acts upon its units in a manner very different from that
in which the units as such interact with one another. Further, each unit, when it
becomes a member of a group, displays properties or modes of reaction which
it does not display, which remain latent or potential only, so long as it remains
outside that group. It is possible, therefore, to discover the potentiality of the
units only by studying them as elements in the life of the whole.

McDougall’s continuation of this passage reexpresses his view in terms
that make its location within the collective psychology tradition more
explicit, as follows:
That is to say, the aggregate which is a society has a certain individuality, is a true
whole which in great measure determines the nature and the modes of activity
of its parts; it is an organic whole. The society has a mental life which is not
the mere sum of the mental lives of its units existing as independent units; and
a complete knowledge of the units, if and in so far as they could be known as
isolated units, would not enable us to deduce the nature of the life of the whole,
in the way that is implied by Spencer’s analogies [to stable geometrical forms and
crystallization].19
Melded together here, in both of the halves of this long passage, are two
quite distinct ways in which one might develop the general nonreductionist view of the relationship between society and the individual that
we have seen was characteristic of adherents to the collective psychology
tradition.

First, there is the idea that groups have properties, including mental
properties, which their individual members do not have, and which are
not reducible to the properties of those members. This emergentist view
of group properties, together with the further assumption that some of
these properties are psychological, entails a version of the group mind
hypothesis that postulates group psychological traits. These traits, while
in a strict sense multilevel traits (such as being angry or irrational), are not
actually possessed by the individuals in the corresponding social group
prior to or simultaneous with their forming that group. In this sense, these
group psychological properties are something other (or more) than the
properties of those individuals. Thus, they are more like group-only than
multilevel traits.

Second, there is the idea that individuals have properties, including
psychological properties, that are manifest only when those individuals
form part of a group of a certain type. This is what I shall call the social
manifestation thesis. Precisely how this sits with the group mind hypothesis
is far less clear, since it makes a claim about the character of individual
minds, and it would seem that any group properties relevant to this claim
could be and indeed would likely be nonpsychological in character.

For example, suppose that individual people become angry or aggressive in certain ways only when they form a certain type of group (for
example, a crowd). Then, unless they do so only because the crowd itself has a specific psychological profile, there is no need to posit group
psychological properties, and so no role for the group mind hypothesis.

Moreover, insofar as the social manifestation thesis does lead to the group
mind hypothesis, it does so only via the first view above, and so there is no
independent path from the social manifestation thesis to the group mind
hypothesis. It could still be true, of course, that there are important senses
in which group behavior cannot be reduced to or be derivable from that
of the individuals within it, even if what explains that behavior are the psychological states of individuals of whom the social manifestation thesis is
282 Cognitive Metaphor in Biology and Social Science
true. These points together suggest that the nonreductionist motivation
undergirding the collective psychology tradition, especially in its latter,
more optimistic phase from 1895 to 1920, does not lead indelibly to the
group mind hypothesis.

These two views, the group mind hypothesis and the social manifestation thesis, are logically independent. Clearly, the social manifestation
