substance, and multiperson Rex, whose phenomenal life is the fusion of
half-lives of two other individuals. In each case, we can imagine Rex’s phenomenal mental life being present in some radically (or not so radically)
different circumstance.

Or can we? Can we really imagine a purely immaterial substance having
exactly the same phenomenal life as regular embodied and embedded
Rex here on Earth? As I intimated in section 3, we may conceptualize
phenomenology not simply as the result of passive experience and active
introspection but as the active exploration of one’s environment through
one’s body. Given that, whatever it is we are imagining in these cases, it is
not a scenario in which the phenomenology remains constant across the
two scenarios. In fact, if one adopts such a view of at least the phenomenology of perceptual experience, as I think is plausible, then it is difficult to
imagine disembodied minds having the corresponding phenomenology
at all. In this respect, to draw on a Wittgensteinian example, comparing
Rex and disembodied Rex is like comparing the time on Earth with that
on the sun. Worse, comparing disembodied Rex and his differently situated but equally disembodied duplicate is like comparing the time it is
on two places on the sun’s surface.20
This is to flip around a response that physicalists have made to an
objection based on the conceivability of zombies: That in fact they are not
conceivable, or their conceivability (if it implies possibility) presupposes,
rather than indicates, the falsity of physicalism. Here I am suggesting that
the conceivability of phenomenal duplicates itself presupposes, rather
than indicates, the narrowness of phenomenal intentionality, by assuming
that embodiment does not go to the heart of phenomenal experience.

Loar, Horgan, and Tienson seem to me to adopt a misleading view of
what phenomenology is, of how it is merely contingently or extraneously
both embodied and embedded, and so make the task of imagining the
phenomenal experience of radically different individuals appear easier
258 Thinking Through and Beyond the Body
than it in fact is. But the more basic point is that phenomenology itself is
a contestable phenomenon, and what one can and can’t imagine about
it inherits that contestability.

Thus, the claim that phenomenal duplicates share all phenomenal
states is more problematic than it initially appears. We can come at this
point in another way that brings us back to my initial discussion of the
three dimensions to the inseparability thesis in sections 2 and 3. If we
allow that at least some phenomenal experience is the active exploration
by an embodied agent of its environment, then there are far fewer possible
phenomenal duplicates of any given individual than one might initially
suppose, since such duplicates are constrained by having to have suitably
similar bodies and environments. Given that, the focus on brains in a vat
is misplaced, and will tell us little about phenomenal intentionality.

But should the proponent of phenomenal intentionality adopt this
concessive view of phenomenal experience, whereby at least some such
experience is that of an essentially embodied agent? Neither Loar nor
Horgan and Tienson are as explicit as one might like about this issue,
and different things that they say suggest different answers here. Consider
what Horgan and Tienson say about the thesis of phenomenal intentionality. In arguing for the narrowness of phenomenal intentionality through
imaginative evocation, they seem to reject the concession, suggesting that
all phenomenal intentionality is narrow. Yet the inseparability thesis itself
posits a necessary connection (of some type) between phenomenology
and ordinary wide intentional states, suggesting that they may be happy
with the concession. This would mean, in turn, that the quantifier in
the thesis of phenomenal intentionality (“there is a kind of intentionality ...”) should be understood at face value as an existential quantifier.

In either case, there is a problem that can be expressed as a (somewhat
complicated) dilemma.

Consider whether ordinary wide intentional states have a phenomenology. If they do not, then while the claim that phenomenal intentionality is narrow remains general in scope, the inseparability thesis loses its
quantificational range, since Loar, Horgan, and Tienson all concede that
wide intentional states exist. By contrast, if they do have a phenomenology (as the inseparability thesis prima facie suggests), then either that
phenomenology is narrow or it is wide. Given that the first half of the inseparability thesis has been endorsed by proponents of representational
accounts of phenomenology as part of their phenomenal externalism,
as Horgan and Tienson recognize, and that both halves of the thesis are
concerned with intentional states as they are ordinarily conceived, such
phenomenology would seem to be wide. Certainly, when I describe my
current visual phenomenology – in terms of the books, paper, walls, and
computer screen I am currently looking at – it seems to me that my experience is not merely “as of” a world beyond my body but it is in fact so. The
intuition that drives both Horgan and Tienson’s “intentionality of phenomenology” thesis and phenomenal externalism – that at least much of
our experience seems to be experience of the actual world – together with
respect for the link between phenomenology and first-person reports of
its content, suggests that there is such a thing as wide phenomenology.

But then, clearly, the claim that phenomenal intentionality is individualistic implies that the thesis of phenomenal intentionality does not apply to
all phenomenology. And so the inseparability thesis has a more restricted
quantificational range and a weaker modality than one might initially
think.

The remaining option, that ordinary wide intentional states have a
narrow phenomenology might seem obviously the right thing to say dialectically, but it is also fraught with problems. Not only does it sever the
relationship between the first-person perspective and phenomenology,
but it makes little sense of those aspects of phenomenology that at least
seem – from both first- and third-person perspectives – to be bodily in
nature. For example, both haptic perception and proprioception are dif-
ficult to make sense of for the case of immaterial entities, and I think
they are almost as problematic for material entities, such as brains in vats
or Cartesian duplicates, that have no body at all. As I sit in my chair I
feel a pressure exerted on my lower back by the back of the chair, and
there is a certain feel to my body when I flex the muscles in my leg. But
how would these feel to a being without a body, even a being that was
molecule-for-molecule to me from the neck up? And, picking up on the
grain of determinateness dimension to the inseparability thesis, what reason is there to think that these would have the same feeling that they have
in me? Try as I may, I find these questions very hard to answer without
simply assuming that they must feel just as they feel in my own case. I
suspect that I am burdened by my externalist commitments, and proponents of the individualistic view of phenomenology may find it easier to
make sense of these cases than do those hampered by externalism. But
if so, this reinforces my more general concern that the method of imaginative evocation generates views of phenomenology that are subject to
