dark, destructive, and to be feared. Rather, its formation was crucial to
diverse social accomplishments, ranging from military victories to the distinctive progressive political organizations associated with the established
and emerging democracies within Europe.10
It was within this more optimistic strand within the collective psychology tradition that one finds a vision of group psychology as both
274 Cognitive Metaphor in Biology and Social Science
a meliorative and celebratory project. In the work of McDougall and
William Trotter written self-consciously in the shadow of the First World
War, groups constitute a natural environment for the development of
basic human instincts, the foremost of which is gregariousness. It is thus
important that humans form the right sorts of group so that this positive
instinct can be properly nourished and play a role in directing individuals into constructive rather than destructive behavior. This conception
of the group mind gave its study within social psychology and the social
sciences a sense of importance and urgency in making a difference to the
directions in which society as a whole were to take.11
These two strands to the collective psychology tradition – its original,
pessimistic view of the group mind and its later, more encouraging view –
both need to be kept in mind as we consider other developments of
the group mind hypothesis. For the group mind has often been viewed
exclusively through either a negative or a positive lens.

4 the superorganism tradition
Unlike the collective psychology tradition, the superorganism tradition
has not been well canvassed by professional historians. The chief discussions of this tradition are to be found in brief historical precursors or
afterthoughts in broader reviews by contemporary biologists, such as that
on social insects by Edward O. Wilson and on group selection by David
Sloan Wilson. As such, these are very much internal histories, told by those
who form part of the research lineage whose history is recounted.12
The apparent intricate social harmony and organization of the “social
insects” – the Hymenopteran wasps, bees, and ants, as well as the termites –
has been invoked as a model for moralizing about human society for
centuries. Unsurprisingly, it is these social insects that have been taken
as paradigms within the superorganism tradition, a tradition central to
the biological sciences from roughly 1900 until 1950. Rather than viewing itself as intermeshed with and building on existing common-sense
beliefs about group behavior, as did the collective psychology tradition,
the superorganism tradition set itself apart from prescientific, anecdotal reports on and claims about the groups on which it focused, insect
colonies. Their systematic study, however, remained linked to a wider
understanding of prosocial life.

The earliest work in this tradition that utilized the concept (even if
not the name) of the superorganism was in plant ecology, where there
was an early recognition of the various levels at which living systems
were organized. Ecology was founded as a science studying communities of organisms, and early in its history Frederic E. Clements introduced the idea that the key to understanding changes in communities of
plants over time was to view those communities themselves as complex
organisms. These complex organisms themselves formed plant-animal
communities or biomes, and both complex organisms and biomes were
viewed as more than the sum of their individual parts. Clements treated
biomes as subject to developmental regularities, whereby the succession
of biomes could be viewed as moving from immature to mature states,
something that could be measured in terms of species numbers and diversity. This is the beginning of the treatment of populations of organisms
as having a physiology. This physiological, organismic view of populations came to play a crucial role in the Chicago school of ecology headed
by Warder Clyde Allee, especially in the experimental work of Thomas
Park.13
Ecological work in this broader tradition was in part inspired by observation of the ways in which individual organisms, both within a species and
between species, operated in harmony with one another, from mere coexistence to active cooperation. This observation, made initially in plant
communities, also motivated similar developments in animal ecology.

Although research in both plant and animal ecology covered a wide range
of forms that sociality and community took across the living world, it was
the special form of social organization found in the social insects that
became the focus of the superorganism tradition itself.14
I have already said that perhaps the most central figure in the superorganism tradition as it developed with this focus on the social insects
was William Morton Wheeler, professor of entomology at the Museum
of Comparative Zoology at Harvard University from 1908 until his retirement in 1933. Wheeler’s career extended over a fifty-year period, and
his publications included many popular articles as well as a dozen books,
including the influential Ants (1910), Social Life Among the Insects (1923),
and The Social Insects (1928).15
Wheeler’s 1911 essay “The Ant-Colony as an Organism” developed the
idea of thinking of an insect colony as a higher-order organism, and his hilarious, insightful 1920 essay “The Termitodoxa, or Biology and Society”
introduced the term “superorganism” to describe such a colony. In the
earlier essay, Wheeler had defined an organism functionally as anything
that has the capacities for nutrition, reproduction, and protection, and
in the latter essay he correlates these with “castes” in termite societies:
respectively, workers, “the royal couple,” and soldiers.

276 Cognitive Metaphor in Biology and Social Science
Edward O. Wilson has implied that Wheeler’s defense of his thesis that
the ant colony is literally an organism follows readily from the breadth of
Wheeler’s functional definition of an organism. In fact, Wheeler actually
places little weight on the definition and concentrates instead on showing
that ant colonies share a wider range of features with paradigmatic organisms, such as individuality and regeneration. Wheeler’s deepest motivation for defending the idea of colonies as superorganisms derives from
and in turn further stimulates his sustained interest in the sociality of
organisms in general and of certain species of organism in particular.

Wheeler concludes “The Ant-Colony as an Organism” with some brief
comments about what he calls “the problem of the correlation and cooperation of parts,” saying
If the cell is a colony of lower physiological units, or biophores, as some cytologists
believe, we must face the fact that all organisms are colonial or social and that one
of the fundamental tendencies of life is sociogenic. Every organism manifests a
strong predilection for seeking out other organisms and either assimilating them
or cooperating with them to form a more comprehensive and efficient individual.

Wheeler suggests that colonies provide a more experimentally tractable
system for exploring this problem than do individual organisms. This, in
turn, presupposes that there is one and the same problem about colonial
and organismic life, and that it may have been solved in one and the same
way.16
We can express this problem in two ways, one suggested by Wheeler’s
name for it, the other by his putative solution, “egoistic altruism.” As a
problem of the parts, we might see this as the problem of why and how an
individual, whether it be a colony or an individual organism, manages
