to coordinate its parts harmoniously, given their own organismic character. Conversely, the idea of egoistic altruism – of cooperating in order to
benefit one’s own self – suggests not a problem of parts but of wholes, of
why and how it is that individual units, each satisfying Wheeler’s threepronged functional characterization of organisms, come to form larger
such units. So expressed, this approximates the problem of altruism, the
problem of explaining how phenotypes that differentially benefit individuals other than their bearer could have evolved through a process of
natural selection.

Although the superorganism tradition has maintained a focus on the
forms of sociality within the social insects, it has also shared Wheeler’s
interest in sociality in general, often with the social insects serving as a
paradigm for thought. Wheeler himself adapted his trichotomy between
nutritive, reproductive, and protective organismic functions from their
role in defining the organism and in characterizing castes within termite
colonies, to serving as the basis for distinguishing three forms that “true
societies” could take, depending on which of these functions predominate in the emergent social behavior. Corals and higher vascular plants,
in which a colony is formed asexually by reiterated budding, exemplify
a nutritive society, the social insects a reproductive society, and flocks and
herds of birds, mammals, and fishes, in which unrelated individuals act
together for protection, a defensive society. For Wheeler, such eusocial
groups both benefit the individuals that participate in them and, since
Wheeler thinks of them as types of superorganisms, they also benefit
themselves. Since there are two levels of adaptedness, the individual organism and the superorganism, there are two recipients of evolutionary
benefit.17
This concern with the form and levels of sociality within the superorganism tradition has been guided by a pluralistic view of the level at which
natural selection operates, that is, the view that natural selection can operate on a range of biological entities, from genes and cells to organisms
and groups. Group selection has been viewed as the most problematic
part of such a pluralistic view. Although I do not want to enter into substantive discussion of the debate over the agents of selection here, note
briefly two paths for exploring the interplay between group selection and
the conception of sociality within the superorganism tradition.18
First, consider the path from the superorganism tradition to a conception of sociality via the appeal to group selection. The extension of
Darwinian natural selection to at least groups of organisms that are themselves organisms, superorganisms, makes perfect sense, since the natural
selection that takes place between such groups is a form of competition
between individuals. Since group selection has been traditionally invoked
principally to explain the origins and evolution of sociality, within the superorganism tradition sociality itself is a natural feature of individual organisms, one that arises from the process of group selection. Here group
selection promotes sociality.

Second, consider a more direct connection between the superorganism tradition and the naturalness of individual sociality, and its implications for thinking about the “levels” at which natural selection operates.

For superorganisms there is a clear sense in which the opposition between
individual and group interest that has been taken as constitutive of the
classic problem of altruism does not exist. The competing interests of individual organisms within a superorganism have played to a draw, much
278 Cognitive Metaphor in Biology and Social Science
as one might think that they have in the case of individual cells within an
organism. Thus, the very existence of sociality is deemed unproblematic
or natural. Superorganisms are just those groups of organisms that have
overcome Wheeler’s “problem of the coordination and cooperation of
parts,” where the parts are individual organisms. Individual organisms
that are part of superorganisms have, in effect, eliminated or minimized
within-group selection. This suggests that in superorganisms the force
of natural selection between groups should be greater than that within
groups. Thus, if the sociality of individuals within superorganisms is to be
expected, so too is the strength of group selection, which is just selection
between groups. Here sociality promotes group selection.

The group mind hypothesis goes beyond a defense of the superorganism in that it postulates the emergence not simply of a novel individual but
one with a mind. Yet so far nothing I have said about the superorganism
tradition bears on the attribution of mental properties to superorganisms,
and thus on the concept of a group mind. Indeed, explicit endorsement
of the group mind hypothesis has been less pronounced in, and the hypothesis itself has been more peripheral to, the superorganism tradition
than to the collective psychology tradition. This has been so for at least
three related reasons.

In the first place, there has been a greater concentration on defending the integrity of the concept of the superorganism itself, introduced
as a novel scientific concept for understanding ecological and social organization, particularly that found in eusocial insect colonies. The collective psychologists, by contrast, devoted little attention to defending “the
crowd” as a legitimate, scientific construal of human groups – perhaps,
as I have implied above, less attention than they should have. Moreover,
for those like Clements who adapted the superorganism concept to make
sense of plant communities and biomes, even if populations were understood as having something like an ontogeny and a physiology, there was
little motivation to ascribe distinctly psychological functions to their objects of study. Even for someone like Wheeler, the superorganism concept
primarily allowed one to treat insect colonies via a form of social physiology, not psychology. Thus, with attention focused on whether insect
colonies were organisms at all, and an emphasis on adapting a physiological rather than a psychological methodology, the question of whether
they were organisms with minds became secondary.

Second, the predication of mental or psychological characteristics to
individual animals has generally been more circumspect than it has been
to individual humans. This has constrained the readiness with which
those characteristics could be extended to groups of animals. Particularly
for those setting out to go beyond folklore about the social insects and
engage in systematic scientific study of them, C. Lloyd Morgan’s canon –
never invoke a higher-level mechanism when a lower-level mechanism will
do – has loomed large. Both the behaviorist tradition within psychology
and the developing ethological tradition associated with Konrad Lorenz
and Nikko Tinbergen offered accounts of animal behavior that, in their
different ways, minimized appeals to the mind (as opposed simply to
internal brain physiology). These traditions thus created a climate in
which psychological attribution to animals was circumspect. When one’s
focus was animals whose individual members might be thought to have
minds in only some trivial sense, these tendencies of cautious mental
attribution were amplified. If insect societies were to have a group mind,
then not only would they constitute a new entity, the superorganism,
but this entity would itself have emergent properties of a kind that its
constituents lacked. In terms that I introduced at the end of section 2,
minds within the superorganism tradition are group-only, not multilevel
traits, and this fact about them contributed to making endorsement of the
group mind hypothesis circumspect within the superorganism tradition.

Third, as we have seen, collective psychologists readily helped themselves to the developing notion of unconscious mental processes in individuals to explain the behavior of crowds and how they produced
something like group personality traits: They were fickle, foolhardy,
emotional, irrational. For collective psychologists, the group mind was
the seamy and steamy emotional underbelly of human nature, reducing
