generating alternatives, to evaluating the alternatives, to making final decisions.

When individuals exist as members of groups, we should expect them to use
others as sources of information, but only in ways that increase the individual’s
relative fitness within the group.19
Here Wilson rests on the assumption that selection at a given level – in
this case, that of the individual – will produce certain traits at that level.

But suppose that the social manifestation thesis is true: Certain psychological properties are manifest only when individuals form a group of a
certain type. And suppose that these evolve through a process of individual selection. Must such traits promote autonomous decision making?
One reason to think not is that what kinds of trait evolve in such a case will
depend largely on the structure and internal dynamics of the group itself.

For example, if the group is one in which autonomous decision making
is punished, and shared, partial, and contributory decision making promoted, then it is more likely that these will be the socially manifested
psychological traits that evolve, even if there is only individual selection.

Thus, Wilson’s claim above linking selection at a level with a certain kind
of agency is mistaken.

Moreover, one could envision these social structures as diminishing the
completeness and autonomy of individual decision making so radically
that full decision making appears as a group-only trait. If this happened,
then we would have a group mind (with respect to decision making)
evolving through a process of individual selection. Wilson and Sober’s
own discussion of the Hutterites, a religious sect that has lived in relatively small communities in North America for almost two hundred years,
prominent in Wilson and Sober’s influential Behavioral and Brain Sciences
paper, suggests to me something like this interpretation, whereby a process of within-group selection shifts the balance of decision making from
individual to group. The more general point here is that taking the social
manifestation thesis seriously complicates any argument from the character of natural selection to the character of the minds it produces.20
Two final complications concerning the relationship between group
selection and group minds seem worth mentioning. First, there are very
few, if any, established hypotheses about which individual-level psychological processes and abilities are the product of evolution by natural
selection. Part of the problem here is the lack of consensus about how
to characterize human and animal minds in the first place. In addition,
there are doubts about each of the following: whether any of the processes
and abilities so characterized are plausibly viewed as cognitive adaptations
(versus by-products of other adaptations) at all; supposing that some are,
about which these are; and supposing that some particular process or
ability evolved, how it is to be characterized.

To take a classic example, there is a lively debate over whether social
reasoning constitutes a well-defined psychological unit – something like a
module – or whether the appropriate unit is better construed as a generalpurpose reasoning module that can be applied to the social domain, or
as a pragmatic reasoning module, or in some other way altogether. The
same seems to me true of most postulated psychological units – including
memory, language, and emotion. This is not to express skepticism about
whether there are cognitive adaptations, but to report a view of the state
of our knowledge here, despite (or perhaps because of) recent work that
makes some progress here.21
Second, there is the general issue of the role of cultural selection in
producing minds like ours and those of our recent ancestors. I have elsewhere followed Elliott Sober in viewing cultural selection as a family of
views, each of which extends or generalizes one or more of the three
conditions typically considered necessary for natural selection to occur:
phenotypic variation, related fitness variation, and heritability. We may
simply extend the concept of a phenotype to include cultural traits; in
addition, we may consider fitness to have something more than a strictly
reproductive dimension; and finally, we may conceptualize heritability as
306 Cognitive Metaphor in Biology and Social Science
cultural in nature. The members of this family of views constitute views
of cultural selection that increasingly depart from traditional natural
selection.22
My hunch is that these forms of cultural selection, particularly those
that involve more rather than less departure from traditional natural
selection, are likely to have been instrumental in shaping up the kinds
:of minds that we beasts have. Given the demonstrated effectiveness of
cultural group selection in shaping at least some behaviors, cultural selection needs to be factored in at both the individual and the group level.

If that is right, then our exploration of the relationship between group
selection and group minds must include these cultural varieties of natural
selection.23
8 groups, minds, and individuals
I began the previous chapter by saying that I would seriously consider
the idea that groups can have minds. While I have not argued that idea
is mistaken, I have suggested that much of what proponents of the group
mind hypothesis want to say about the mind can be expressed within the
parameters of the externalist view of the mind that I have developed in
Parts Two and Three. This involves reconceptualizing where the mind
begins and ends, in ways that both build on but also depart from our
sciences of the mind. But it does not require that we replace the individual
as the locus of cognition, as the subject of mental states, with some larger
unit, such as the group.

This deflationary view of appeals to group minds in the biological and
social sciences has been developed within a framework that both provides some constructive tools for thinking about group minds, as well as
a few conjectures, guesses, and hunches about where some of the complexities to thinking about the relationships between groups, minds, and
individuals lie. I have argued that we should approach the question of
whether cognition is a group-level trait in any particular case by identifying the focal processes or abilities, and so to some extent forego the
more exciting-sounding question of whether “group minds” or “group
consciousness” really exist. In the last few sections I have voiced a suspicion about general appeals – to the level at which selection occurs, or to
the kinds of characteristics that we find in individuals – as the basis for
defending the group mind hypothesis. But this, together with the overall deflationary message of Part Four, should not be taken to imply my
skepticism about whether group minds exist.


There can be no group-level focal cognitive processes and abilities
without the activities of individuals, and in at least some cases those individuals are cognitive agents, agents with minds. In articulating a view
of the mind, however, in which the social embeddedness of the individual makes a crucial difference to the kind of mind that that individual
has, I hope to have arrested the thought that the dependence relations
here flow simply from “higher levels” (the group, the social) to “lower
