that both of these implications hold, I don’t see them as problematic for
this way of construing the group mind hypothesis.

In effect, we could see each of these objections as placing a putative
constraint on the types of minimal minds that can exist without full-blown
minds: Minimal minds must be conscious, and minimal minds must be
holistic, respectively. Consider the latter of these first.

Mental processes and states in general are, I think, instantiated in clusters, and so are, in some sense, holistic. That seems to be true both of
individual and group minds (compare the characterization of artificial
minds above). Thus, I see no problem in group minimal minds satisfying
some version of the holism constraint. Since my characterization of minimal mindedness allows for the possibility of a minded entity with just one
psychological state, it is not compatible with one predominant view of
the holism constraint in the philosophy of mind. On this view, holism is
an a priori constraint on psychological attribution. But I reject this view of
the constraint. Rather, the constraint is empirical in reflecting the way in
which psychological states and processes cluster. This clustering should
be viewed as underwritten by homeostatic mechanisms and constraints
that determine the ways in which these properties are realized in the
actual world.7
The consciousness constraint, however, would make the group mind
hypothesis implausible, since the claim that groups have consciousness
has been central to neither of the collective psychology and super-
294 Cognitive Metaphor in Biology and Social Science
organism traditions, nor in their contemporary revivals. Indeed, at least
those in the collective psychology tradition have often tried explicitly to
distance themselves from such claims. For example, William McDougall
devotes an early chapter of The Group Mind to criticizing those in the
German idealist tradition who talk uncritically of “the consciousness of
the group” as something more than the consciousness of each of the
members of the group. Recall also the affinity between the collective
psychology tradition and the postulation of unconscious processes in
individuals.8
In Part Three, I distinguished between six mental phenomena that
have been considered as exemplifying consciousness, classing these as
processes of awareness (higher-order cognition, attention, and introspection and self-knowledge) and phenomenal states (pain, bodily sensation,
and visual experience). While some groups might be thought to manifest
something like processes of awareness – for example, consider quorum
sensing in bacteria as a form of self-awareness – none plausibly instantiate
phenomenal states.

This can be readily accounted for within the framework I have introduced in this chapter. If the chief motivation for positing a group mind
is explanatory, and we start with the notion of a minimal mind and add
specific focal abilities as they seem justified, then we would expect to
find paradigmatic intentional states (including processes of awareness)
among the constituents of the group mind, but not the “what it’s like”
of mental life. This reinforces two negative themes from Part Three: that
“consciousness” is not the name of a unitary mental phenomenon, and
the intentional and phenomenal aspects to the mind are not inseparably
bound together.

Interesting in this regard is the status of emotions, which one might
well think of as straddling the putative divide between intentional and
qualitative states. Emotions are psychological states that are typically
about something – they have intentionality or mental content – but there
is also something phenomenally distinctive about them: there is something it is like to have them. Both McDougall, and before him, Le Bon,
considered the ways in which emotions such as fear and panic can be
properties of groups that degrade the abilities of the individuals in those
groups via the sympathetic responses of individuals to one another’s reactions. If this is to be consistent with the denial of group consciousness,
then these group emotions must be nonqualitative, even though the emotions in individuals that give rise to them (the “sympathetic responses”)
need not be. The same would also have to be true of the “positive”
emotional traits of a group mind, those which, claims McDougall, emerge
from highly organized human societies, and which lead to heightened
individual abilities.

4 the contemporary defense of the group
mind hypothesis
I have noted that David Sloan Wilson’s recent revival of the group mind
hypothesis draws on his defense of group selection in evolutionary biology. I will eventually turn to some of the complexities to the relationship
between these two views, but first I want to examine Wilson’s views in light
of our discussion so far in this and the previous chapter.

It is in his paper“Incorporating Group Selection into the Adaptationist
Program: A Case Study Involving Human Decision Making” that Wilson
develops his views of the group mind hypothesis most fully, and it is the
“case study” part of that paper on which I will concentrate in what follows.

Wilson’s focus here is on the literature on human decision making, particularly on human decision making in groups, and this case study review
is intended primarily to support the idea that human decision making has
evolved both by individual selection and by group selection. He begins
by distinguishing two ways
in which human decision making can evolve to maximize the fitness of whole
groups. First, individuals might function as independent decision makers whose
goal is to benefit the group. This is the way we usually think about altruism (Sober
and Wilson [1998]). Second, individuals might cease to function as independent
decision makers and become part of a group-level cognitive structure in which the
tasks of generating, evaluating, and choosing among alternatives are distributed
among the members of the group. ... At the extreme, the role of any individual
in the decision-making process might become so limited that the group truly
becomes the decision-making unit, a group mind in every sense of the word.

Wilson illustrates the second of these alternatives with an example of decision making about food sources in honey beehives, going on to suggest
that although “we should not expect group-level cognition in humans
to resemble the social insects in every detail,” human social groups can
be said to constitute what he calls adaptive decision-making units. In the
framework proposed in this chapter, we can see Wilson here as positing
the existence of minimal minds in groups of animals, including humans,
where the focal psychological ability is decision making.9
It should be clear that it is only the second of Wilson’s alternatives that
represents the sort of emergentist view of group psychological properties
