X has a minimal mind just in case X has at least one psychological property (state,
process, disposition).

Given that we have full-blown minds, the group mind hypothesis and
minimal mindedness together entail that groups either literally have at
least one of the psychological properties that intact, functioning individual human beings have, or can usefully be treated as if they do. At least
the literalist reading is quite a strong and striking thesis about groups,
and seems the right way to understand the group mind hypothesis insofar as it has formed part of the collective psychology and superorganism
traditions. Where discussion of “the group mind” concentrates on just
one psychological process or ability, as it often does, I will refer to that as
the focal process or ability.

Can a group literally have a minimal mind? I want to argue first that the
most obvious reasons for saying “yes” or “no” won’t do, and that resolving
even this question is more difficult than it may initially appear.

Consider a problem with one “obvious” reason for answering “yes.”
It isn’t sufficient for a group to have a minimal mind for that group to
engage in some action that is caused by psychological processes. For if
those processes take place entirely in the heads of the individuals in those
groups, then the action can be explained adequately without positing a
group minimal mind. This implies that socially distributed cognition, at
least considered as a multilevel trait, does not entail even a group minimal
mind. For example, consider the (by now familiar) action of navigating a
navy vessel, which requires a complex social and mental division of labor,
or decision making in medical diagnosis. In these cases, the social context is integral to the way in which individuals process information and
cognize. If, despite this, it remains true that every psychological process
or ability that causes and thus explains the acts that constitute the navigation of a navy vessel, or that leads to a medical diagnosis, belongs to an
individual member of the group, then there is no group minimal mind
in addition to these minds. The statement “the crew saw the oncoming
ship and decided to change direction” might be made true simply by
individual-level psychological facts, together with other, nonpsychological facts about social organization. Thus, those who grant the existence of
group actions but think that psychological processes and activities are essentially individual-level (and so neither group-only nor multilevel) traits,
could deny the existence of even group minimal minds. Such a position
might be attractive to one who held the social manifestation thesis.6
As an aside, note how this points to an important disanalogy between
spatially organized neurons in someone’s head, and socially distributed
agents in some larger system, an analogy that we have seen David Sloan
Wilson make and that has been mentioned by others in conversation and
correspondence. Individual neurons do not perceive (but fire in response
to a stimulus), remember (but transmit information about the past), or
plan. By contrast, individual agents do all of these things, and these are
just the sorts of properties attributed in socially distributed cognition.

292 Cognitive Metaphor in Biology and Social Science
This suggests that the clearest cases that exemplify group minds will be
those that involve group-only, rather than multilevel traits. For in identifying a cognitive process found only at the group level, we preempt
the objection that the social manifestation thesis suffices to capture the
phenomenon being explained. Group-only cognitive properties can be
posited for human social groups, but as I implied in the previous chapter,
they are clearest in the case of superorganismal colonies.

Consider the claim that beehives have the focal ability of planning to
acquire honey from a given source. The action of the beehive is systematic,
structured, and predictable, and involves the coordination of hundreds
or thousands of bees. Putting together the group mind hypothesis, the
notion of minimal mindedness, and the account of what it is to possess a
psychological property, we have the following
A beehive possesses the psychological property of planning to acquire honey from
a given source just if that beehive either physically contains an entity-bounded
system or systems, or is part of a wide system or systems, that realize the processes
that generate or physically constitute such planning.

In this case, the entity-bounded systems are the individual bees that participate in the process of planning to acquire honey from the given source.

But since it is implausible to think that any single bee does this planning
(so little brain, so little time ... ), such planning, if it exists, must be a
group-only cognitive process.

Turn now to the objection that entities that never have full-blown
minds – minds in much the sense that we have minds – cannot possess any
psychological properties. Prima facie, some groups seem able to initiate
actions or behaviors – such as collecting food, steering a steady course
north, or building a school – that would be explained by positing underlying psychological processes and abilities were those actions performed
solely by individual agents. This is true even if those individual agents lack
full-blown minds, as is the case with current robotic and computational
systems. We readily and typically speak, for example, of a chess program as
knowing that you are about to take its bishop, of deciding to castle early,
of trying to dominate the center of the board, of remembering where
your Queen is. It may be that the best way to view these attributions is
as metaphorical, but it seems to me that a literal understanding of them
is not ruled out simply because we do not think of those programs as
complete psychological agents, agents with full-blown minds.

Consider the case of a person who has lost a range of her psychological
functioning, perhaps permanently. Suppose that significant parts of her
visual system, her memory, and her language abilities are impaired in
ways that limit what states we can plausibly attribute to her. Still, there
are likely to be clear cases where she literally tries to do something (such
as reach a glass or find the words to ask where your children are), or
knows or decides to do something. In short, she might be literally, and
not just metaphorically, minimally minded. And if individual agents can
have minimal minds, then so too can groups.

3 minimal minds, consciousness, and holism
Construing the group mind hypothesis in terms of the notion of a minimal
mind brings with it more specifically philosophical concerns. In implying that a minimal mind could lack consciousness, doesn’t this construal
of the group mind hypothesis stop short of giving us the real cognitive
McCoy, leaving us only with ersatz minds? And by suggesting that there
could be a group mind with a solitary psychological state, doesn’t it likewise trade real for mere “as if”intentionality and cognition? While I think
