As condensed as this summary is, one can note immediately that
thought collectives are not group minds but the social context in which individual minds function. In Kuhn’s foreword to the English translation of
Fleck’s book, he says that his own struggles with the book cluster around
“the notion of a thought collective,” saying that “a thought collective
seems to function as an individual mind writ large.” Although Kuhn does
not come straight out and say that the basic problem with the notion is
that collectives do not have thoughts, even if they are crucial to the having
of thought, this seems clearly one of the problems that Kuhn himself has
with the notion.14
If we turn to Douglas herself, what she sees as important in Fleck (and
in Durkheim) is the idea that“true solidarity is only possible to the extent
to which individuals share the categories of their thought.”Both Fleck and
Durkheim “were equally emphatic about the social basis of cognition.”
She concludes her monograph by saying that
Durkheim and Fleck taught that each kind of community is a thought world,
expressed in its own thought style, penetrating the minds of its members,
defining their experience, and setting the poles of their moral understanding. ... individuals really do share their thoughts and they do to some extent harmonize their preferences, and they have no other way to make the big decisions
except within the scope of institutions they build.15
What each of these expressions points to, and contrary to the title of
Douglas’s book, is not “how institutions think,” but how individuals think
(only) within institutional frameworks. Again, this is in keeping with the
social manifestation thesis, rather than the group mind hypothesis.

We have been led to the social manifestation thesis both by reflection on our two traditions and their contemporary revivals in the biological and social sciences. So I round out this chapter with some further thoughts on that thesis that reach back to earlier discussions in
Boundaries.

5 the social manifestation thesis
The social manifestation thesis says something significant about the nature of cognition and its relation to individuals, but it is important to be
clear about what is significant here. It says that some psychological states
of individuals are manifested only when those individuals form part of a
social group of a certain type. Both the “social” and “manifestation” parts
of the thesis require further explanation.

One way of understanding this pair of notions is in terms of the idea
that individuals have their psychology transformed through social membership. We have seen that this view has been thought of as playing a
300 Cognitive Metaphor in Biology and Social Science
central role within the collective psychology tradition, where the relevant social groups were “crowds.” Yet there are different ways to think
about individuals, cognition, and this process of transformation.

First, we may take an individual as a self-contained bundle of psychological dispositions, with membership in a crowd temporarily causing
some of these – the irrational, the unconscious, the emotional – to be
manifested, and those of the rational individual to remain merely dispositional. Here an individual’s social circumstances play a triggering
role in the expression of preexisting psychological dispositions. They do
not themselves bring about any new dispositions in individuals, just the
manifestation of dispositions already latent in the individual. What are
transformed are the dispositions that are manifested.

Second and alternatively, we can think of individuals who are normally
constituted by psychologically rational states as acquiring a new, distinct
set of psychological dispositions when they become part of a crowd. On
this view, the social circumstances change not simply what dispositions
become manifested, but what dispositions an individual has. Thus, being
part of a crowd brings about a more radical form of transformation of the
individual than is suggested by the triggering view. What is transformed
is the dispositions themselves.

These two kinds of transformation that social circumstances can bring
about in an individual contrast in roughly the way in which memory and
learning do in common sense thought. In the case of memory, our social
circumstances may cause us to manifest something we already have inside
of us, something that we already know; in the case of learning, those
circumstances change the knowledge structures that we have. The role
of the environment in memory is epitomized as the asking of a question,
while in learning it is the giving of instruction.

Despite this sort of difference, both of these conceptions of the social
manifestation thesis are continuous with the individualistic tradition of
thinking about psychological states that has been the focus of earlier parts
of Boundaries. This is because, on these views, an individual’s psychology
itself can (and should) still be understood in abstraction from that individual’s social environment. In neither of these cases do the psychological
dispositions themselves become social, that is, become constituted by the
social circumstances in which they are manifested. Both views draw on a
conception of the role of social circumstances in cognition akin to that
held by strong nativists (Chapter 3), whereby cognition is internally richly
structured antecedent to, and independent of, social circumstances. And
they both accept a view of (psychological) dispositions as always being
intrinsic to the bearer of the disposition. In Chapter 6, I argued that the
very idea of intrinsic dispositions sat uneasily with the prima facie existence of wide realizations of an individual’s properties. In effect, the argument there claimed that properties and their realizations are either both
individualistic or both wide, and thus that the width of the realizations
for at least some psychological properties implied that those properties
(including dispositional properties) were not individualistic. In light of
this, the idea of an individualistic but socially manifested property is an
unstable hybrid.

This places some conceptual stress on individualistic understandings
of the social manifestation thesis, pushing us instead toward a view of
it as positing psychological states that are socially constituted and so externalist in nature. This would make the thesis suitable for offering a
general characterization of the externalist view of psychology, which depicts cognitive processes as themselves intrinsically social in nature. In
Chapter 8, I introduced such a view of memory, cognitive development,
and folk psychology as a way of providing a more concrete idea of how
integrative synthesis should proceed in the psychological case. There I
was chiefly concerned to show how to generalize the wide computational
approach that I defended as a view of computational cognitive science
to noncomputational approaches within psychology, and to indicate the
sorts of questions and issues that arise on the resulting, externalist view
of psychological inquiry.

This interpretation of the social manifestation thesis thus provides
a middle ground between an individualistic psychology and the group
mind hypothesis. In contrast to individualism, the externalist psychology
