296 Cognitive Metaphor in Biology and Social Science
that I outlined in the previous chapter as part of the collective psychology
and superorganism traditions, and only in “the extreme” would such a
view support the group mind hypothesis. Insofar as the first of the alternatives Wilson presents states a view about psychology at all, it expresses a
version of the social manifestation thesis. Individuals have a psychological
character that confers benefits on the group as a whole, and do so only
because of properties of that group, such as having a high proportion of
altruists, or imposing severe social costs for nonaltruists.

Wilson continues by discussing the second of these alternatives, equating it with the idea that groups are adaptive decision-making units, and
focusing on an assessment of the performance of group and individual
decision making. This discussion is aimed largely at offering support for
the idea that human decision making evolved in part by group selection. But before turning to that claim, and in light of the discussion in
this chapter so far, it is worth asking whether the phenomenon to be
explained by an appeal to group selection concerns the character of individual decision making or that of group decision making. Wilson seems
to imply that it is both when he says if “human cognition is a product of
group selection, we should expect individuals to be innately prepared to
easily ‘hook up’ with other individuals to form an integrative cognitive
network.” There is the formation of an integrative cognitive network, and
the innate preparedness of individuals to form such networks. But it is
only the former and not the latter of these that is directly relevant to the
group mind hypothesis, rather than to the social manifestation thesis.10
Much the same general point can be made about Wilson’s application
of the group mind perspective to understand religion. At the outset,
Wilson says that he aims to “treat the organismic concept of religious
groups as a serious scientific hypothesis” and that his “purpose is to see
if human groups in general, and religious groups in particular, qualify
as organismic in this sense.” But he needs two things to be true if this
project is to lead to a defense of the group mind hypothesis.11
First, it is not just religious groups but religious ideas or something
appropriately psychological that must be adaptations (to get the mind in
“group mind”). Second, this psychology must attach not simply to the individuals in religious groups but to the groups themselves (to get the group
in “group mind”). Much of what Wilson says about the functionality and
adaptedness of religious groups could be true without either of these assumptions being true. That is, religious groups could be viewed as organismic in nature, and be subject to natural (group) selection, even though
the processes that drive selection are either individual-level psychological
or group-only nonpsychological processes. Moreover, it may be plausible
to think that some of these individual-level psychological processes, such
as those that produce feelings of devotion, of a deep sense of commitment, or of Godly love, pretty much require social groups with the features
that religious groups have. If that is so, then we have a view more accurately characterized by the social manifestation thesis than by the group
mind hypothesis.

Let us return to the examples of integrated cognitive networks and decision making. We have already seen that both the collective psychology
and superorganism traditions had an emergentist view of the nature of
groups (and thus group minds): Groups are more than the sum of the
individual parts, and having a group mind is more than having a group
of individuals with minds. If Wilson is to keep with this aspect of these
traditions, then it follows that the integrative cognitive networks that he
postulates must be something more than individuals being innately prepared to hook up with one another. Likewise, for his multilevel property
of decision making: Having a minimal mind with this focal ability must
be more than having individual members with this focal ability.

In some trivial sense, a club makes a decision (say, by majority vote)
about whom will be their next president simply by each of the members
publicly expressing a decision on this matter. Even though the decision
here is distinct from those of the individual voters – since individuals by
themselves cannot elect a new leader – if there is a group mind here it
is nothing over and above the minds of individuals. Given the independence of the group mind hypothesis and the social manifestation thesis,
there must be something more to having a group mind than there being
individuals with socially manifested psychological characteristics. There
is a problem for Wilson’s views here, at least construed as reviving the
group mind hypothesis.

With respect to human decision making, he would seemingly need
to show that this functions at the group level by individuals relinquishing their own decision-making activities. For it is only by doing so that
he could point to a group-level psychological characteristic that is, in
the relevant sense, emergent from individual-level activity. Now those
in the collective psychology tradition, and especially those writing from
1870–1895, did think that this happened. Yet they claimed that it typically led to a degradation of individual abilities. Crowds, for example, had their own psychological character, one that involved the transformation of autonomous individuals into members of madding crowds.

Wilson must distance himself from this aspect of the collective psychology
298 Cognitive Metaphor in Biology and Social Science
tradition – and does so in his discussion of Irving Janis’s more recent
concept of groupthink – since he aims to defend the view that groups are
adaptive decision-making units, that is, units that have properties that promote fitness. Thus, he must look for ways in which collectivities confer
benefits. But if those benefits are nothing more than benefits to individuals, then collective behavior would seem to be explained by an individual,
not a group, psychology. If individuals can simply enhance their own individual decision making by forming groups of a certain character, then
we may have the beginnings of an interesting argument for the social
manifestation thesis, but are no closer to the group mind hypothesis.12
Thus far, I have argued that the group mind hypothesis has been run
together with the social manifestation thesis not only in the collective psychology and superorganism traditions, but also in David Sloan Wilson’s
revival of those traditions within contemporary biology. Finally and more
briefly, I turn to the recent social sciences to explore whether such confusion exists there as well. As I have mentioned, Mary Douglas’s How
Institutions Think aims, in part, to call attention to Ludwig Fleck’s neglected notion of a thought collective, and examining Fleck’s own views
and their (belated) reception is revealing.

Fleck introduced the terms Denkstil and Denkkollektiv in a 1935 book,
finally translated and published as Genesis and Development of a Scientific
Fact. Part of the excitement about that book within the social studies of
science community, and a chief reason for its eventual translation, was its
anticipation of much that was ushered in to the study of science following
Thomas Kuhn’s The Structure of Scientific Revolutions. For Fleck, science is
always practiced within the confines of a thought collective,“a community
of persons mutually exchanging ideas of maintaining intellectual interaction,” with its own thought style. These provide the framework in which
“facts” are determined, and alternative thought collectives may represent
different and incompatible sets of facts. In short, Fleck is seen as anticipating some of Kuhn’s most influential ideas – that of a paradigm, of the
dependence of phenomena on paradigms, and the incommensurability
between successive paradigms. More generally, in ascribing a central role
to social dimensions to theory construction, hypothesis testing, and scientific change, Fleck made an early, decisive break from the positivist
view of science that Kuhn’s Structure called into question twenty-five years
later.13
