to see society and particular social structures as organisms, with religion
being one of the culturally evolved adaptations that maintain this social
organism over time. Again locating his views against the background of
his multilevel theory of selection, he says
If the individual is no longer a privileged unit of selection, it is no longer a
privileged unit of cognition. We are free to imagine individuals in a social group
connected in a circuitry that gives the group the status of the brain and the
individual the status of the neuron.5
While Wilson considers religion as a group-level adaptation, his expression here is interestingly neutral between a literal and a metaphorical
reading of the group mind hypothesis.

Critical to determining the plausibility of the group mind hypothesis, on either the literal or metaphorical understanding, is some further
discussion of what it means to have a mind at all.

2 on having a mind
A common reaction to the group mind hypothesis, at least among many
working biologists and social scientists, is that it has no real empirical
content because mindedness, the property of having a mind, is so vague.

This view of the group mind hypothesis is, no doubt, facilitated by the
ubiquity of the cognitive metaphor in describing biological and social
processes. But I suspect that this view also reflects an ignorance of and
an insensitivity to the conceptual work necessary to articulate what it is
to have a mind. Regarding this latter point, I think we can make some
progress.

In order for some entity to have a mind it must possess at least some
psychological properties (states, processes, dispositions). Rather than attempting to offer a definition or analysis of what a psychological property
is, let the following incomplete list suffice to fix our ideas. There are classical faculties, such as perception, memory, and imagination; processes
or abilities that are the focus of much contemporary work in the cognitive
sciences, such as attention, motivation, consciousness, decision making,
and problem solving; and common, folk psychological states, such as believing, desiring, intending, trying, willing, fearing, and hoping. But what
is it to possess one or more of these?
Whatever else is involved in having a psychological property, it surely
turns largely on how one is physically structured. In particular, one must
have a physical structure that realizes or implements that property (state,
process, disposition). If we put this together with the standard view of
realization discussed in Part Two, to possess a psychological property is to
contain what I called an entity-bounded system or systems that realize processes that generate or physically constitute that property (state, process,
disposition). For at least our paradigms of cognitive agents – intact, fully
functioning, normal human beings – I have argued that we need a more
general concept of realization, what I called the context-sensitive view,
which allows that the systems that realize cognition can extend beyond
the boundary of the individual. Replacing the standard with the contextsensitive view of realization gives us the following account of what it is for a
paradigm cognitive agent, A, to possess or have a psychological property:
A possesses psychological property (state, process, disposition) P just if A either
physically contains an entity-bounded system or systems, or is part of a wide system
or systems, that realize the processes that generate or physically constitute P.

So when Tom feels pain, he has that property by virtue of physically containing a nociceptive system that generates that feeling. When he believes
that snow is white, it is by virtue of being part of a folk psychological system
that extends beyond his own head.

This account does not tell us why it is A – rather than, say A plus or
minus bits of the physical world (including bits of A) – that possesses a
given psychological property. Rather, we start with paradigm cognitive
agents and attempt to explain what it is for them to possess psychological
properties. For the most part, both in common sense and in the cognitive
sciences, individuals rather than their parts or larger units of which they
are a part leap out at us as the bearers of psychological properties. It is Tom
who feels the pain or has the belief, and not Tom’s nociceptive system
or the folk psychological system at large. In passing, I have suggested
that this is because we physically contain at least the core realizations of
our mental states (even if not their total realizations), and are the locus
of control for the actions that result from those states. There are special
cases, such as those of split-brain patients being tested under special
290 Cognitive Metaphor in Biology and Social Science
conditions, or when people have specific neural deficits, where it may
be compelling to attribute (say) folk psychological states to entity-bound
systems themselves, and we might view the group mind hypothesis as
implying the need to consider something like wide systems as the subjects
of such states.

Clearly, in considering the idea that other kinds of entities, such as
groups, might have minds, we need to attend more closely to the issue of
just which entity it is that possesses psychological properties than in the
case of individuals. In particular, I have been arguing that at least historically many of the claims about group minds and group psychology are
best understood as making a claim about the role of groups in regulating,
developing, or disabling individual minds. In moving from individuals to
groups as putative bearers of psychological properties we need to ensure
that the multilevel or group-only traits we are ascribing are not better
understood simply as individual-level traits.

There is a second complication as we move from paradigm cognitive
agents to groups as putative cognitive agents. We do not simply instantiate
a few psychological properties but many, and these encompass a diverse
range of states, processes, and dispositions. Following my discussion of
folk psychology in Part Three, I shall say that in virtue of that we possess
full-blown minds. But I know of no defense of the group mind hypothesis that has claimed that groups have full-blown minds. (Talk of “group
consciousness,” for example, is nearly always talk of an aspect of the consciousness of individuals.) That is clearly science fiction, not borderline
science, in the league of Attack of the Killer Tomatoes rather than, say, the
Gaia Hypothesis. Moreover, there would seem to be little explanationist
motivation for adopting the full-blown group mind hypothesis.

As is the case in striving to make sense of the idea of animal minds
or of artificial intelligence, we should probably start with something less
than full-blown minds in trying to understand what group minds might
be. Consider, then, in light of our account of what it is to have or possess a
psychological property (state, process, disposition), the notion of minimal
mindedness:
