demarcated by the social manifestation thesis views psychological states as
both taxonomically and locationally embedded in broader social systems.

In contrast to the group mind hypothesis, it does not ascribe psychological states themselves to entities, such as the group, the community, or the
nation, larger than the individual and to which the individual belongs. On
this view, while the individual is not a boundary for psychological theorizing, psychology does posit individual-level, rather than group-level, traits.

We can put this the other way around. Socially manifested psychological
traits are properties of individuals, but since they occur only in certain
group environments, they cannot be understood in purely individualistic
terms.

I like to think that this is just what recent advocates of group mind
thinking, such as Mary Douglas and David Sloan Wilson, have themselves
had in mind. If so, then the externalism about the mind articulated in
302 Cognitive Metaphor in Biology and Social Science
Parts Two and Three provides a framework for further explorations of
the phenomena to which they have called attention.

6 the cognitive and the social
The evolutionary and cultural conditions that give rise to psychological states have been recognized in a number of approaches to cognition,
such as evolutionary psychology and explorations of social intelligence in
the framework of the Machiavellian hypothesis. The social manifestation
thesis suggests, however, that cognition and sociality are more intimately
connected than even these research programs allow. For example, research on the Machiavellian hypothesis has been focused on the role of
social complexity in producing mental complexity in the individual. It
is largely devoted to exploring the forms that both types of complexity
take and the relations between them. But if cognition itself is social, as
the social manifestation thesis implies, not simply a product of the social,
there will be a deeper connection between forms of (say) group living
and intelligence. Research programs that attempt to isolate and then explain individualistic modules for intelligent cognitive performance will
not go far enough in articulating the social and cultural dimensions to
cognition.16
The social manifestation thesis should also lead us to rethink some of
our ways of thinking about the “levels” at which selection operates. For
example, it has been common within debates over the agents of selection
to contrast individual-benefiting traits that evolve by individual selection
with group-benefiting traits that evolve by group selection. Furthermore,
at least in the hands of those who think that the “selfish gene” is the unit
of selection, the latter has been discounted altogether. But this putative
dichotomy becomes less compellingly exhaustive once we consider traits,
including psychological traits, which benefit individuals because those
individuals are members of groups of a certain type. In this sort of case,
individual-level and group-level traits are intrinsically woven together, and
natural selection is not sufficiently fine-grained to distinguish between
properties that, despite being distinct, are reliably coinstantiated and
homeostatically reinforcing.17
Concentration on the social manifestation thesis in an evolutionary
context thus may direct us to think about ways in which individual and
group selection can be mutually reinforcing processes, rather than conceived of primarily as forces that are opposed in evolutionary change. An
important species of case in which they work in the same direction is one
in which socially manifested traits are selected at the level of the individual, while group-level traits, whether psychological or nonpsychological,
are selected at the level of the group. This would be a sort of coevolutionary process in which there is a mutually reinforcing causal loop between
socially manifested psychological traits and group-level traits. This possibility suggests that, although the social manifestation thesis and the
group mind hypothesis are distinct views, they may be most interestingly
defended together.

7 from group minds to group selection
I have mentioned that David Sloan Wilson’s views of group minds are
tied to his defense of group selection. I want to conclude the substantive
part of this chapter by arguing that it is unlikely that there is any easy
argumentative flow between claims about the kinds of minds there are
and the types of selective processes that operate in nature.

There are two basic reasons for this. First, the level at which selection operates and the level at which its products, adaptations, are characterized are not as tightly connected as has typically been supposed. In
particular, selection could take place at the group level but produce adaptations at the individual level. Thus, arguing from the existence of group
selection on cognitive traits does not imply the group selection of group
minds. Conversely, pointing to group-level cognitive adaptations does not
entail that these arose through a process of group selection. Group selection even on groups of minimally minded individuals doesn’t itself make
minimally minded groups of individuals any more plausible than it does
groups of minimally minded individuals with certain dispositions and
abilities. Second, the failure to distinguish the group minds hypothesis
from the social manifestation thesis, and the resulting missing discussion
of the relationship between the two, represents a crucial hiatus in arguing
from group selection to group minds.

This pair of points, and the complexities and possibilities they introduce, can be seen in Wilson’s discussion of group minds. Wilson recognizes both individual- and group-level traits as possible outcomes of a
process of group selection, a view implicit in the claim that altruism, an
individual-level trait, could evolve by group selection. He argues that if
group selection were the sole selective force shaping the psychological
features of individuals and groups, then we would expect to find individuals whose decisions benefit the group (for example, altruism), and/or
adaptive group decision making (for example, honey bee foraging). To
304 Cognitive Metaphor in Biology and Social Science
put it slightly differently, group selection might lead either to individuals
whose nature would support the social manifestation thesis or to group
minds (or even both). But since Wilson doesn’t explicitly distinguish the
social manifestation thesis from the group mind hypothesis, he fails to
consider the idea that traits of individuals that would support the former,
at least when produced by group selection, sometimes or always lead to
traits of groups that exemplify the latter. That is, missing here is any discussion of the relationship between socially manifested individual traits and
the group-level cognitive adaptations. When Wilson does turn to discuss
the factors that regulate group decision processes, these turn out to be
nonpsychological characteristics of groups (for example, social organization, leader control) that could simply be construed as effecting whether
and how certain individual-level characteristics are manifested.18
A corresponding problem arises in Wilson’s sketch of what one would
expect to find if individual selection were the sole process acting on
individuals. He says,
If group selection can truly be ignored as a factor in human evolution, we should
expect individuals to be highly adaptive as autonomous decision-making units,
capable of performing the full range of activities from framing the problem, to
