This is Audible.
This is Innovative Language Learning.
This is a brief introduction to our language learning system.
Listen to this short introduction and the sample lesson that follows.
Congratulations!
You've just discovered the fastest and most fun way to learn a language.
Hundreds of thousands of language learners just like you have already discovered the
power of our system.
Since our start in December 2005, language learners in over 120 countries have downloaded
our fun and effective language learning lessons over 100 million times.
And every month, they download 5 million more.
So why are these lessons so popular?
You see, there's a powerful secret to learning a language.
A secret you'll find inside our language learning program.
Once you discover it, language learning becomes fun and fast.
Are you ready to discover the secret to language learning success?
Now, I can't just tell you the secret.
That wouldn't be fair.
It's something you'll discover for yourself as the program progresses.
Most people get it by the fifth lesson.
Some even after the first.
Simply use the program and you'll find it.
This program offers you a brand new way to learn a language.
You'll be speaking from the very first lesson with our fun, easy to use, and innovative method.
At the core of this new approach is a radio talk show format that keeps learning fun and
entertaining.
The program is taught by two hosts.
One is a professional language teacher with classroom experience.
The other is an accomplished learner who knows what it's like to go from absolute beginner
to advanced proficiency.
Together, they'll guide you through practical, real-world conversations in a fun and relaxed
way.
Master pronunciation, key vocabulary, and gain insight into the inner workings of the language
from the language teacher.
Learn advanced tips, tactics, and shortcuts to second language mastery from the accomplished
language learner.
Together, the two hosts offer you a powerful perspective that you won't find in any textbook.
This collection is a best of the best, a carefully selected group of up-to-date language lessons.
Designed with feedback from a large community of language learners just like you, you'll
learn key vocabulary and phrases, essential grammar, and cultural insight explaining the
real world of today.
Imagine using your language skills to speak with a partner, family member, coworker, teacher,
or friend.
Imagine the looks on their faces when they hear you speaking with fluency and perfect pronunciation.
So whether you're learning for personal growth, travel, business, or school, or to understand
culture or pop culture like movies, TV shows, or music, this course will help you meet your
language learning goals fast.
Follow the five simple steps outlined in our program and start speaking from the very first
lesson.
You'll learn proper pronunciation, cultural insight, and insider information that will
utterly shock and amaze your friends, family, coworkers, and teachers.
How to use the program This program focuses on building core skills
necessary to learn a language fast.
Each part of the program focuses on a particular skill, and the course was carefully designed
so each lesson builds upon the previous one.
We recommend 45 minutes to listen, study, and review each lesson, but you can master a lesson
in as little as 8 to 15 minutes.
A lesson consists of a lesson audio track, which is 8 to 15 minutes, a conversation-only audio track,
which is under a minute, a key vocabulary review audio track, which is approximately 3 minutes,
and the lesson notes, which take approximately 25 minutes to review.
To get the maximum benefit from our system, follow the following five simple steps.
These steps reduce complexity and accelerate learning.
Lessons stay fun and interesting, and you'll reach your language learning goals in the fastest
time possible.
Step 1.
Listen to the lesson audio track one time all the way through.
Each audio track is about 8 to 15 minutes, and each component of the lesson is designed
to improve a specific language learning skill or teach you some new information.
The lesson format was developed by professional teachers using feedback from the language learning
community.
The flow of the lesson track is as follows.
First, the host will provide context for a practical, real-world conversation in the language you're
studying.
Next, you'll hear the conversation, recorded by professional voice actors, three times in
a series.
First, you'll hear it at natural native speed, then at a slower speed with intonation clearly
pronounced, and finally with an English translation.
It's natural at this point that you won't understand every little nuance of the conversation.
Don't be alarmed or anxious, but continue to listen to the program.
Listening to the dialogues first is a key part of our system of accelerated learning.
The hosts will then take you inside the conversation and give you insight into the larger cultural
issues that frame it.
Next, you'll hear the key vocabulary.
Each word or phrase is presented once at natural native speed.
Then you'll hear the English translation.
After this, you'll hear it broken down in the native language, syllable by syllable, and
repeated once more at natural native speed.
The syllable by syllable breakdown of key words is critical to mastering pronunciation and adjusting
your ear to the sound of the language.
Next, you'll learn more about usage of key words and phrases as they are illustrated by
examples.
Finally, master the grammar used in the conversation with a detailed grammar explanation by the hosts.
Step 2.
Listen to the conversation-only audio track, which is less than a minute.
You'll understand the conversation much better this time, and by adding this short audio track
onto your portable media player or onto your computer's audio playlist, you can quickly and
easily review the whole lesson anywhere and at any time.
Step 3.
Practice with the audio review track, which is approximately 3 minutes.
When you listen to this track, you will hear a series of key words and core phrases that reinforce
fluency and pronunciation.
Listen to the word or phrase.
A pause will follow and give you time to say the word or phrase aloud.
Do so at this time.
It is very important to your progress that you say the words out loud.
Next, you'll then hear the English translation.
At the midway point of the track, the order will be reversed.
You'll hear the English translation first.
Your job is to say the equivalent word or phrase out loud in the pause that follows.
You'll then hear the word or phrase in the target language.
This review track allows you to both practice and evaluate yourself.
Step 4.
Read the lesson notes, which takes approximately 25 minutes.
Reading the transcript, translation, vocabulary, and grammar point will reinforce everything
you've heard so far.
You'll rapidly improve your reading ability and familiarize yourself with the writing
system of the language.
This exercise is designed to improve a different set of skills.
Step 5.
Read through the lesson notes while listening to the main audio track one more time, which
takes approximately 8 to 15 minutes.
Commit new information to memory and reinforce everything you've learned by following along
with the lesson notes.
Read the conversation transcript and study vocabulary and phrases while listening to the audio.
See a detailed explanation and examples of the grammar point as you read along.
Commit it to memory by reviewing all information you learned in the lesson.
Many new learners make the mistake of feeling they must reach 100% comprehension and mastery to
move on to the next lesson in the series.
Read from hundreds of thousands of listeners has taught us that seeking perfection actually
slows down learning and makes it tedious and less effective.
We designed our system from the bottom up to be self-reinforcing.
Once you reach about 80% comprehension of the dialogue in a lesson, you should feel free
to move on to the next lesson in the series.
It's important to listen to the lessons in order.
And since this course is one level in a larger system, once this level is complete, move on to
the next.
You'll master new language skills and also reinforce the lessons from this level.
Experience has taught us that this is the fastest and most enjoyable path to second language
mastery.
Course content.
What will you be able to do after the course?
After using our system, you'll be able to effectively navigate life in a foreign society.
You'll be able to talk with friends, partners, family, teachers, and coworkers.
And being able to order the food you want in restaurants and getting around town with confidence
in taxis, trains, buses, and cars.
Display mastery of manners, etiquette, and local customs.
Meet people and make friends.
And enjoy pop culture like movies, music, TV shows, and online media.
And the results?
Shockingly good, in the words of a user.
Program users are shocked at their rapid progress.
And native speakers are shocked at their language ability.
Many of our language learners have told us that native speakers are truly shocked at some
of the practical, everyday words and phrases they use.
The native speakers repeatedly ask where they learned such good language skills.
Follow our five simple steps and you, too, will see shocking results fast.
Go even faster.
Further enhance and accelerate your learning experience by visiting InnovativeLanguage.com.
Innovative Language Learning has developed a number of features offered through its websites
that make your language learning experience even more effective and fun.
Find the links to these sites and these features at InnovativeLanguage.com.
Some of these features include self-study tools, community interaction, line-by-line audio transcripts,
the voice recorder tool, and evaluation tools.
Self-study, vocabulary flashcards that let you select what you want to study and keep
track of your progress.
Meet other language learners and interact with our staff of professional hosts and teachers
directly through the website.
Have a question about a lesson?
Ask it directly on a page devoted to the lesson.
Have a comment or feedback?
Share it with others on that same lesson page or in our popular forums.
Line-by-line audio transcripts.
With a click of the button, you can hear the conversation broken down while reading the
text of the conversation.
Practicing with the line-by-line audio transcript allows you to practice reading and listening
comprehension simultaneously.
The voice recorder tool.
Using the voice recorder, you can practice while following along with the line-by-line audio
notes.
Try your best to copy the pronunciation of the native show hosts.
Evaluation tools.
Lesson-specific and general quizzes will reinforce what you've studied in the course and aid those
preparing for standardized language proficiency tests.
These are perfectly integrated with our five-step system.
Visit InnovativeLanguage.com to take advantage of these fun and advanced tools today.
Welcome to Basic Bootcamp.
This five-part series will help you ease your way into Arabic.
We'll go over all the basics that will really help you understand Arabic much quicker and
easier.
And we'll have fun doing it.
In this lesson, you will learn how to introduce yourself.
And we'll be listening to a conversation between two people meeting for the first time.
Hello, I'm Hala.
Pleased to meet you.
Hello, I'm Simon.
Pleased to meet you too.
Hello, as a reply.
Hello, I or I am.
It's nice to meet you.
Now, let's move on to the vocab and usage of some phrases in this lesson.
We have hello or ahlan.
So, Hala, when can we use this greeting exactly?
It can be used in the morning, day, evening, anytime.
We have other greetings for those, but this one is very popular.
And to say Fursa Saida, what does it mean?
Fursa Saida or it's nice to meet you.
This literally means happy chance or happy opportunity.
As an expression, it's what we use when we meet someone for the first time.
Fursa means chance.
You can use it separately in any conversation or context, like, that's a good chance.
D, Fursa, Kwayesa.
Or, I have a good chance in winning the trip, and so on.
It's just a little bit different when it comes to this part, as we use it as part of the expression itself, not separately.
And what about Saida? From what I remember, it means happy?
Yes, happy for a female.
So, I could say Ana Saida, and this means I'm happy.
Again, as part of the expression, it goes with a different meaning.
So, Fursa Saida, pleased to meet you, and as a reply as well.
Hala, I noticed when we were talking about self-introduction, it was only one word,
but I couldn't hear or find anything to indicate the usage of the verb to be.
Very good point, Simon.
In Arabic, we never use verb to be with self-introduction.
In Arabic, just to say Ana, it means both I or I am.
And this is the one we always use when talking about present tense as well.
But we will get to that later with more explanations.
Works great for me, and sounds easy enough.
So, Hala, when I introduce myself to someone, what's the best way to do it?
Should I use my first or second name?
Well, we always go with the first name basis.
If you're in a meeting or business gathering, you might need to go first and second name,
or first and family name.
It really makes no difference to us which one you use in this case.
But when meeting people for the first time, say, away from business?
Always go with the first name only.
It's more friendly, and for us, that's what we're going to use.
Second name here won't make much of a difference, but will sound a little bit strange.
Another thing I noticed is how certain names are used a lot.
That is true, Simon.
It's simply the Islamic names such as Muhammad, Ahmad, Mahmoud, Mustafa, which are all the names
for our Prophet, followed by the names of his companions, which holds great importance for us.
For women, you will find more options and name varieties.
But again, Islamic names will take the majority of it.
For us, we recognize it easily, even if it's not common.
For others, it will be a little bit hard at the beginning.
I assume people will introduce themselves by first name.
That is correct.
For people with common names such as Muhammad, if there are four or five Muhammads at the same time,
they will use the second name, and on this case, we might actually use it to call them.
Ah, you know, that explains a lot.
I do know a Muhammad Adil and a Muhammad Hussain, and I noticed when they're both there,
people just call them Adil or Hussain.
Yes, that's exactly how it goes.
And it might stick to them, just people calling them Adil or Hussain and not using Muhammad a lot.
But that's normal here.
Well, it's good to know.
Thanks everyone for listening.
Bye-bye.
We'll say a word or phrase, wait for you to pronounce it, and then give you the English equivalent.
Use this track to practice pronunciation and reinforce what you have learned.
Hello, as a reply.
Hello.
I or I am.
Hello.
Hello.
Hello.
As a reply.
Ahlan wa sahlan.
I or I am.
I am.
Hello.
Ahlan.
Ahlan.
I or I am.
Ahlan.
Ahlan.
Ahlan.
Ahlan.
Ahlan.
Ahlan.
Ahlan.
Ahlan.
Ahlan.
Ahlan.
I or I am.
I am.
Ahlan.
Ahlan.
Audible hopes you have enjoyed this program.
