The Courage to be Happy

by Ichiro Kishimi and Fumitake Koga



First published in Japan as Shiawase Ni Naru Yukiby Diamond Inc., Tokyo, in 2016
First published in Australia and New Zealand by Allen & Unwin in 2019
This English language edition published by arrangement with Diamond, Inc. in care of Tuttle-Mori Agency Inc., Tokyo, through Chandler Crawford Agency, Massachusetts, USA.

Allen & Unwin
83 Alexander Street
Crows Nest NSW 2065
Australia
Phone: (61 2) 8425 0100
Email: info@allenandunwin.com
Web: www.allenandunwin.com
ISBN 978 1 76052 971 0
eISBN 978 1 76087 134 5
Internal design by Bookhouse
Set by Bookhouse, SydneyAUTHORS’ NOTE
Though he stands beside Sigmund Freud and Carl Gustav Jung as one of the most important figures in the world of psychology, Alfred Adler was for many years a forgotten giant. Using the traditional format found in Greek philosophy of a dialogue between a young man and a philosopher, this book provides an introduction to Adler’s thought, which is said to be one hundred years ahead of its time.

The characters appearing in the book are a philosopher engaged in the study of Greek philosophy alongside Adlerian psychology and a youth who is pessimistic about his life. In the previous work, The Courage to be Disliked, the youth questioned the philosopher on the true meaning of his assertion, based on Adler’s ideas, that ‘People can change. And not only that, they can find happiness.’ The philosopher offered the following statements in response:
‘There is no such thing as an internal problem. All problems are interpersonal relationship problems.’ ‘One must not be afraid of being disliked. Freedom is being disliked by other people.’ ‘It isn’t that you lack competence. You just lack “courage”.’ ‘Neither the past nor the future exist. There is only “here and now”.’
The youth rebelled against this stream of radical statements again and again. On encountering Adler’s idea of ‘community feeling’, however, he came to accept the philosopher’s words and resolved to change himself.

The setting of this volume is three years later. The youth, who has become a teacher with the intention of putting Adler’s ideas into practice, calls on the philosopher once more. Adlerian psychology is nothing but a bunch of empty theories. You are trying to tempt and corrupt young people with Adler’s ideas. I’ve got to break away from such dangerous ideas.So says the youth.

In what way should we walk the path to happiness revealed in the preceding volume? Is Adler’s thought, which sounds like pure idealism, really a practicable philosophy? And what is the biggest choice in life that Adler arrived at?
This is the conclusion of a two-part work exploring the essence of Alfred Adler and his psychology of courage. Please ascertain for yourself, together with the youth who doubted and revolted against Adler, the true shape of the courage we need.CONTENTS
Authors’ note
Preamble
PART I
That Bad Person and Poor Me
Is Adlerian psychology a religion?
The objective of education is self-reliance
Respect is seeing a person as he is
Have concern for other people’s concerns
If we had the same kind of heart and life
Courage is contagious, and respect is contagious, too
The real reason why one ‘can’t change’
Your ‘now’ decides the past
‘That bad person’ and ‘poor me’
There’s no magic in Adlerian psychology
PART II
Why Negate Reward and Punishment?
The classroom is a democratic nation
Do not rebuke and do not praise
What is the goal of problem behaviour?
Hate me! Abandon me!
If there is punishment, does the crime go away?
Violence in the name of communication
Getting angry and rebuking are synonymous
One can choose one’s own life
PART III
From the Principle of Competition to the Principle of Cooperation
Negate praise-based development
Reward gives rise to competition
The disease of the community
Life begins from incompleteness
The courage to be myself
That problem behaviour is directed at you
Why a person wants to become a saviour
Education is friendship, not work
PART IV
Give, and It Shall Be Given Unto You
All joy is interpersonal relationship joy
Do you ‘trust’? Do you ‘have confidence’?
Why work becomes a life task
All professions are honourable
The important thing is what use one makes of that equipment
How many close friends do you have?
First, believe
People never understand each other
Life is made up of trials of ‘nothing days’
Give, and it shall be given unto you
PART V
Choose a Life You Love
Love is not something one falls into
From an ‘art of being loved’ towards an ‘art of loving’
Love is a task accomplished by two people
Switch the subject of life
Self-reliance is breaking away from ‘me’
To whom is that love directed?
How can one get one’s parents’ love?
People are afraid of loving
There is no destined one
