Love is a decision
Re-choose your lifestyle
Keeping it simple
To the friends who will make a new era
AfterwordIt should have been a more lighthearted and friendly visit. ‘I hope you will not mind if, at some point, I visit you here again. Yes, as an irreplaceable friend. And I won’t be saying anything more about taking apart your arguments.’ Indeed, the youth had blurted out such words on his departure that day. Now, however, three years had gone by and he had arrived at this man’s study with completely different intentions. The youth was trembling with the gravity of what he was about to confess, and he felt at a loss as to where to begin.PREAMBLE
PHILOSOPHER: Well, can you tell me what is going on?
YOUTH: You’re asking why I have come to visit this study again? Well, unfortunately, I’m not here just to hang out and renew an old friendship. I’m sure you are busy, and my situation, too, is that I have little time for such things. So, naturally, there is a pressing issue that has brought me here again.

PHILOSOPHER: Yes, of course, it would seem so.

YOUTH: I have thought things over. I have worried and obsessed over it all more than is necessary and thought it all completely through. In doing so, I arrived at a very serious resolution and decided to come here to convey it to you. I know you have much to do, so please give me your time for just this one evening. Because this will probably be my final visit.

PHILOSOPHER: What happened?
YOUTH: Haven’t you figured it out? It’s the problem I’ve been suffering over for so long: ‘Do I give up on Adler or not?’
PHILOSOPHER: Ah. I see.

YOUTH: I’ll get right to the point: Adler’s ideas are quackery. Utter quackery. Actually, I have to go further and say that they are dangerous, even harmful ideas. While you yourself are certainly free to choose what you wish to adhere to, if possible I’d like to get you to be quiet about it for once and for all. I’ve resolved to make this my final visit tonight as I’ve said, in the knowledge that I had to give up on Adler completely, in your presence and with this feeling in my heart.

PHILOSOPHER: So, was there some event that triggered this?
YOUTH: I will talk this through calmly and in an orderly fashion. First, do you recall that final day three years ago, when I last saw you?
PHILOSOPHER: Of course I do. It was a winter’s day, with glistening white snow all around.

YOUTH: Yes, it was. The night sky was a beautiful blue, and there was a full moon. Under the influence of Adler’s ideas, that day I took a great step forward. I quit my job at the university library and found a teaching position at my old middle school. I thought I’d like to put into practice a kind of education that was based on Adler’s ideas and bring it to as many children as possible.

PHILOSOPHER: Isn’t that a wonderful decision?
YOUTH: Sure. I was burning with idealism then. I simply couldn’t keep such wonderful, world-changing ideas all to myself. I had to get more people to understand them. But whom? I could arrive at only one conclusion. The adults, who are no longer pure and unsoiled, aren’t the ones who need to know about Adler. It’s by bringing his thoughts to the children who will build a new generation that his ideas will continue to evolve. That was the mission I had been assigned. The fire inside me was burning so bright, I might well have burned myself.

PHILOSOPHER: I see. You can speak of this only in the past tense?
YOUTH: That’s right; it’s totally history now. But please don’t misunderstand me. I haven’t lost hope in my students. And neither have I lost hope or given up with regard to education itself. It’s just that I have lost hope in Adler—which is to say, I have lost hope in you.

PHILOSOPHER: Why is that?
YOUTH: Well, that’s something for you to contemplate and ask yourself! Adler’s ideas have no use in actual society and are nothing more than abstract, empty theories. Especially that education principle that states, ‘One must not praise, and one must not rebuke.’ And just so you know, I’ve followed it faithfully. I didn’t praise, and I didn’t rebuke anyone, either. I didn’t give praise for perfect scores on tests or for a thorough job cleaning up. I didn’t rebuke anyone for forgetting to do their homework or for being noisy in class. What do you think happened as a result of this?
PHILOSOPHER: You got an unruly classroom?
YOUTH: Completely. But when I think back on it all now, that was only natural. It was my fault for getting taken in by such cheap quackery.

PHILOSOPHER: So, what did you do about it?
YOUTH: Needless to say, for the students who were doing bad things, I chose the path of stern rebuke. I know you’re probably going to make light of that and tell me it was a foolish solution. But look, I’m not a person who busies himself with philosophy and gets lost in daydreams. I am an educator who lives, and who handles real, on-the-ground situations, and looks after students’ lives and destinies. Because the reality right in front of us never waits—it’s moving constantly from moment to moment. You can’t just sit back and do nothing!
PHILOSOPHER: How effective is it?
YOUTH: Naturally, if I rebuke them any further, it doesn’t do any good. Because they disparage me now—I’m just a softy to them. Honestly, there are even times when I envy the teachers of ages past, when physical punishment was permitted and even standard.

PHILOSOPHER: It’s not an easy situation.

YOUTH: True. Just so there isn’t any misunderstanding, I should add that I am not letting my emotions take over or getting angry. I’m only rebuking, in a rational manner, as a last resort for the purposes of education. I guess you could say I’m prescribing an antibiotic medicine called ‘reprimand’.

PHILOSOPHER: And then you felt you wanted to give up on Adler?
YOUTH: Well, I mentioned that just to give you a clear example. Adler’s ideas are certainly wonderful. They shake up your value system and make you feel like the cloudy skies over your head are clearing up; like your life has changed. They would seem to be beyond reproach, a universal truth even. But the fact of the matter is that the only place they hold water is right here, in this study. Once you throw open the door and dive into the actual world, Adler’s ideas are just too naïve. The arguments they put forward are quite impractical and nothing but empty idealism. You’ve just been fabricating a world that suits your purposes here in this room and losing yourself in daydreams. You don’t know a thing about the real world and the swarming masses of people who live in it!
PHILOSOPHER: I see … And then?
YOUTH: An education in which one neither praises nor rebukes? An education that espouses autonomy and leaves students to fend for themselves? That’s nothing other than a renunciation of one’s professional duties as an educator. From now on, I am going to face the children in a way that is very different from Adler’s. I don’t care if it is ‘right’ or not. Because I have no other choice. I will praise, and I will rebuke. And naturally, I will have to mete out harsh punishment as well.

PHILOSOPHER: Just to confirm, you’re not going to quit working as an educator, are you?
YOUTH: Of course not. I will never give up on the path of being an educator. Because it is the path I have chosen. It is not an occupation, but a way of living.

PHILOSOPHER: It is most reassuring to hear that.

YOUTH: So, you think this is just somebody else’s problem? If I’m going to continue as an educator, I’ve got to give up on Adler right here and now! If I don’t, I’ll be renouncing my responsibilities as an educator and abandoning my students. This is the proverbial blade to your throat. Well, what’s your response?
* * *
PHILOSOPHER: First, allow me to make a correction. You used the word ‘truth’ earlier. But I am not presenting Adler as an absolute, immutable truth. One might say that what I am doing is giving a prescription for eyeglass lenses. I believe there are many people whose fields of vision have been broadened as a result of these lenses. On the other hand, there are probably those who say their vision has become even cloudier than before. I do not consider trying to force these lenses of Adler on such people.

YOUTH: Oh, so you run away from them?
PHILOSOPHER: No. Let’s look at it this way. No other form of thought is as easy to get wrong and as hard to get right as Adlerian psychology. The majority of those who say, ‘I know Adler’ misunderstand his teachings. They do not possess the courage to approach a true understanding, and they do not try to look directly at the landscape that spreads out beyond this way of thought.

YOUTH: People misunderstand Adler?
PHILOSOPHER: That’s right. If someone comes into contact with Adler’s ideas and is immediately moved very deeply and says, ‘Life is easier now,’ that person is grossly misunderstanding Adler. Because when one truly understands what Adler is demanding of us, one is likely to be shocked by its severity.

YOUTH: So, you are saying that I, too, misunderstand Adler?
PHILOSOPHER: Yes, from everything you have been telling me, it would seem so. You are certainly not alone in this, however. There are many Adlerians (practitioners of Adlerian psychology) who misunderstand him at the outset and then climb the stairway of understanding. It would seem that you haven’t actually found the stairway that you should climb yet. I didn’t find it right away either, when I was young.

YOUTH: Huh. You had a period when you were lost, too?
PHILOSOPHER: Yes, I did.

YOUTH: Then, I want you to teach me. Where is this stairway to understanding, or whatever it is? What do you mean by ‘stairway’ anyway? Where did you find it?
PHILOSOPHER: I was fortunate. Because I was a househusband in the midst of raising a young child when I came to know Adler.

YOUTH: What do you mean?
PHILOSOPHER: Through my child, I learned Adler, and, together with my child, I was able to practise and thus deepen my understanding and obtain positive proof of Adler.

YOUTH: So, that’s what I’m asking you to tell me! What did you learn? And what is this positive proof you obtained?
PHILOSOPHER: In a word, it was ‘love’.

YOUTH: What did you say?
PHILOSOPHER: You don’t really need me to say it again, do you?
YOUTH: Ha-ha, what a laugh! Love, the thing that there’s no need to speak of? You’re saying that if I want to know the real Adler, I have to know about love?
PHILOSOPHER: You who can laugh at this word do not yet understand it. The love Adler speaks of is the harshest and most courage-testing task of all.

YOUTH: Oh, please! You’re just going to recite some preachy talk about neighbourly love. I don’t want to hear it.

PHILOSOPHER: Just now you stated that you have reached a dead-end in education and have a feeling of distrust for Adler. And then you are eager to tell me that you are denouncing Adler, and that you don’t want me to talk about him anymore, either. Why are you so upset? I suppose you felt that Adler’s ideas were something like magic. As if you could just wave a wand and, without further ado, all your wishes would be granted. If that is the case, you shouldgive up on Adler. You should give up the mistaken images of Adler that you have embraced and know the real Adler.

