YOUTH: You’re saying I should respect each and every problem child?
PHILOSOPHER: Yes. Because at the root of it is ‘respect for people’. One’s respect is not limited to specific others, but extends to other people of all kinds, from family and friends to unknown passers-by, and even to people in other countries whom one will never meet as long as one lives.

YOUTH: Ah, another lecture on morality! Or else it’s religion. Well, I’ve got to say, you’re giving me a good opportunity. It’s true that morality is included in the curriculum in school education; that it has such a position. I concede that there are many people who believe in those values.

But consider this. Why is it even necessary to talk sense into children about morality? It’s because children are immoral beings by nature, as are all humans. Heck, what is ‘respect for people’ anyway? Look, for both you and me, at the very depths of our souls, there drifts the repulsively putrid stink of immorality!
You preach on what is moral to immoral people. I am seeking morality. This truly is intervention, nothing less than force. The things you say are full of contradictions. I’ll say it again: your idealism will have no effect at all in an actual situation. And besides, how can you expect me to respect these problem children?
PHILOSOPHER: Then, I will say it again, too. I am not preaching morality. And next, the other point is that especially with people like you, I have to get you to know, and to actually practise, respect.

YOUTH: Well, enough of that already! I don’t want to hear empty theories that reek of religion. I’m asking you for concrete examples that are practicable tomorrow
PHILOSOPHER: What is respect? Here is a definition: ‘Respect denotes the ability to see a person as he is; to be aware of his unique individuality.’ These are the words of the social psychologist Erich Fromm, who moved from Germany to America to escape Nazi persecution around the same time as Adler.

YOUTH: The ability to be aware of his unique individuality?
PHILOSOPHER: Yes. One sees that person, who is irreplaceable and utterly unique in the world, just as he is. Moreover, Fromm adds, ‘Respect means the concern that the other person should grow and unfold as he is.’
YOUTH: I don’t understand.

PHILOSOPHER: Not trying to change or manipulate the other person who is right there in front of you. Accepting that person as he is without setting any conditions. There is no greater respect than this. Then, on being accepted by another person ‘as one is’, one is likely to gain a great courage. And respect may also be regarded as the starting point of encouragement.

YOUTH: No way! That is not the respect that I know. Respect is a kind of emotion akin to yearning, a sort of imploring that one can rise to the occasion.

PHILOSOPHER: No. That is not respect, but fear, subordination and faith. It is a state in which one fears power and authority and worships false images without seeing anything of the other person.

The Latin respicio, which is the root of ‘respect’, has the connotation of ‘seeing’. First of all, one sees the person as he is. You have not seen anything yet, and neither have you tried to see. Place value on the person being that person without pushing your own value system on them. And further, assist in their growth or unfolding. That is precisely what respect is. In the attitude of trying to manipulate or correct another person, there is no respect whatsoever.

YOUTH: So, if I accept them as they are, will these problem children change?
PHILOSOPHER: That is not something you can control. Maybe they will change, and maybe they will not. But as a result of your respect, each of the students will accept themselves for being who they are and regain the courage to be self-reliant. There is no doubting this. Whether they use their regained courage is up to each student.

YOUTH: So that’s the separation of tasks?
PHILOSOPHER: That’s right. You can lead them to water, but you can’t make them drink. No matter how gifted you are as an educator, there is no guarantee that they will change. But it is precisely because there is no such guarantee that one has unconditional respect. First you have to start. Without setting any conditions whatsoever, and regardless of what the anticipated results might be, it is you who takes the first step.

YOUTH: But nothing will change that way.

PHILOSOPHER: In this world, no matter how powerful one is, there are two things that cannot be forced.

YOUTH: What are they?
PHILOSOPHER: ‘Respect’ and ‘love’. For example, let’s say the person at the top of a company organisation is an authoritarian despot. The employees will follow his orders, certainly. And they will probably display obedient behaviour. But that is submission based on fear, without an iota of respect. He can shout, ‘Respect me,’ but none of them will comply. In their hearts, they will just grow more and more distant from him.

YOUTH: Yes, I’m sure they will.

PHILOSOPHER: On top of that, if no mutual respect exists, then there is no relationship as human beings, either. An organisation like that is just assembling groups of humans to function as its nuts and bolts and gears. It can carry out machine-like labour, but no one else can do the human work.

YOUTH: Okay, enough roundabout talk, already! So, basically what you’re saying is that I’m not respected by my students, and that’s why the classroom gets out of control?
PHILOSOPHER: If there is fear even for a short time, it is unlikely for there to be any respect. It’s only natural that the class will get out of control. You just stood by idly as it developed, and now you resort to authoritarian measures. You use power and fear to try to make them do your bidding. Maybe you can expect that to be effective for a while. Maybe you’ll feel relieved that they really seem to be listening to you now. However …
YOUTH: They’re not hearing a single word that comes out of my mouth.

PHILOSOPHER: That’s right. The children are not obeying you, they are only submitting to authority. They do not entertain the slightest thought of understanding you. They just cover their ears and shut their eyes and wait for the storm of your rage to pass.

YOUTH: Heh-heh, you’ve really hit the nail on the head.

PHILOSOPHER: You fall into this vicious cycle because you fail to take the initial step of respecting the students yourself, of respecting them unconditionally.

YOUTH: So, because I failed to take that step, there is nothing I can do that will get through to them?
PHILOSOPHER: That’s right. You have been shouting to an empty room. There’s no way they can hear you.

YOUTH: Okay, fine, I get that. There are still so many points I need to refute, but I’ll accept this for the time being. Now, supposing that your approach is the right one—that relationships are built on the basis of respect. How, then, does one show respect, anyway? You’re not telling me to put on a pleasant smile and say, ‘Hey, I respect you,’ are you?
PHILOSOPHER: Respect is not something that comes about with words. And whenever an adult tries to cosy up to them in such a way, the children quickly detect the lie or calculation. The moment they think, ‘This person is lying,’ respect isn’t possible anymore.

YOUTH: Okay, okay. You’ve hit the nail on the head again. But what are you suggesting I should do, anyway? Because there’s actually a major contradiction in the way you’re talking about respect right now.

PHILOSOPHER: Oh? What contradiction is that?
Startfrom respect, the philosopher was saying. And that it is not only the foundation of education that is built through respect, but the base of all interpersonal relationships. Certainly, one doesn’t pay much attention to the words of people one doesn’t respect. There were aspects of the philosopher’s arguments that the youth could agree with. But the argument that one had to respect all other people—that even the problem children in his classroom, and the villains at large in society, were all worthy of respect—that was something he opposed vehemently. But this guy’s dug his own grave. He’s made a contradiction that can’t be overlooked. So, this is a job I have to do, after all. I’ve got to bury this Socrates in his cave.The youth slowly licked his lips and then continued at full speed.HAVE CONCERN FOR OTHER PEOPLE’S CONCERNS
YOUTH: Don’t you see? Earlier, you said, ‘Respect can never be forced.’ Sure, that is probably the case. That I can agree with wholeheartedly. But then, in the same breath, you tell me to respect the students. Ha-ha, isn’t it funny—you’re trying to force me to do something that apparently can’t be forced. If you don’t call that a contradiction, then what is?
PHILOSOPHER: It is true that if you pick out just those statements on their own, they might sound contradictory. But look at it this way. Respect is a ball that comes back to you only from the person to whom you pass it. It’s just like throwing a ball at a wall. If you throw it, it might come back to you. But nothing is going to happen if you just face the wall and shout, ‘Give me the ball.’
YOUTH: No way, I’m not going to let you get away with half-baked metaphors. Give me a proper answer. If I’m the one throwing that ball of respect, where does it come from? The ball doesn’t just come out of nowhere!
PHILOSOPHER: All right. This is an important point about understanding and practising Adlerian psychology. Do you recall the term ‘social feeling’?
YOUTH: Of course. Though I wouldn’t say I understand it completely.

PHILOSOPHER: Yes, it’s a rather difficult concept. Let’s consider it more thoroughly another time. For the time being, though, I would like you to recall Adler’s use of the term ‘social interest’ when translating the original German term for ‘social feeling’ into English. This ‘social interest’ means our concern for society or, more simply, our concern for the other people who make up society.

YOUTH: So, it’s different in the original German?
PHILOSOPHER: Yes. The German term is Gemeinschaftsgefühl, which combines Gemeinschaft, meaning ‘social relations’ or ‘community’, withGefühl(‘sense’ or ‘feeling’), which I translate as ‘social feeling’. If one were to give it an English translation that is more faithful to the original German, one might call it ‘community feeling’ or ‘community sense’.

YOUTH: Well, I am not particularly interested in such academic talk, but what about it?
PHILOSOPHER: Think about it for a moment. Why, when Adler introduced this idea of ‘social feeling’ to the English-speaking world, did he choose ‘social interest’ instead of ‘social feeling’, which is closer to the German? There is an important hidden motive here.

Do you remember how I said that when Adler first put forward the concept of ‘social feeling’ during his Vienna period, many of his colleagues parted ways with him? That he was opposed and ostracised by people who said that such stuff wasn’t science, and that he had introduced the problem of ‘value’ into the otherwise scientific field of psychology?
YOUTH: Yes, I remember that.

PHILOSOPHER: It is likely that through this experience, Adler understood sufficiently well the difficulty of getting people to understand ‘social feeling’. So, when it came time to introduce the concept to the English-speaking world, he replaced ‘social feeling’ with behavioural guidelines that were based on actual practice. He replaced the abstract idea with something concrete. And these concrete behavioural guidelines may be summarised with the words ‘concern for others’.

YOUTH: Behavioural guidelines?
PHILOSOPHER: Yes. To get away from one’s attachment to oneself, and to have concern for other people. If one progresses in accordance with these guidelines, one arrives at ‘social feeling’ as a matter of course.

YOUTH: I haven’t the faintest idea what you’re talking about now! Your argument has already become abstract, again. The very idea of there being ‘behavioural guidelines’ for having concern for other people. Speaking concretely, what should one do, and how?
PHILOSOPHER: Here, it would do well to recall that quote from Erich Fromm: ‘Respect means the concern that the other person should grow and unfold as he is.’ Without negating anything, or forcing anything, one accepts and values the person as he is. In other words, one protects, and one has concern for, another person’s dignity. Do you see where that concrete first step lies?
YOUTH: No. Where?
PHILOSOPHER: This is a quite logical conclusion. It lies in having concern for other people’s concerns.

