YOUTH: Other people’s concerns?
PHILOSOPHER: For example, the children enjoy playing in a way that is completely beyond your understanding. They get absorbed with utterly inane, childish toys. Sometimes, they read books that are offensive to public order and morals and indulge in video games. You know what I am referring to, yes?
YOUTH: Sure. I see such things almost every day.

PHILOSOPHER: There are many parents and educators who disapprove and try to give them things that are more ‘useful’ or ‘worthwhile’. They advise against such activities, confiscate the books and toys and allow the children only what has been determined to have value.

The parent does this ‘for the child’s sake’, of course. Even so, one must regard this as an act that is completely lacking in respect and that only increases the parent’s distance from the child. Because it is negating the child’s natural concerns.

YOUTH: Okay, so I should recommend vulgar pastimes?
PHILOSOPHER: One does not recommend anything from where one stands. One only has concern for the children’s concerns. Try to understand just how vulgar their pastimes are from your point of view and what they really are, first of all. Try them yourself, and even play together on occasion. Rather than simply playing with them, enjoy the activity yourself. If you do, the children may at last have the real feeling that they are being recognised; that they are not being treated as children; that they are being given respect as individual human beings.

YOUTH: But that’s …
PHILOSOPHER: Nor is this limited to children. It is the concrete first step of the respect that is sought in all interpersonal relationships. Whether in interpersonal relationships at one’s workplace, in relationships between lovers, in international relationships or what have you, we need to have more concern for other people’s concerns.

YOUTH: That’s impossible! Maybe you aren’t aware of this, but those children’s concerns include things that are just too depraved! Things that are indecent, grotesque and offensive. Isn’t it our role as adults to show them the right path?
PHILOSOPHER: No, it is not. Regarding ‘social feeling’, Adler liked to use the following expression: what we need is ‘Seeing with the eyes of another, listening with the ears of another and feeling with the heart of another.’
YOUTH: Huh?
PHILOSOPHER: Right now, you are trying to see with your own eyes, listen with your own ears and feel with your own heart. That is why you refer to the children’s concerns using such words as ‘depraved’ and ‘offensive’. The children do not think of them as depraved. Then, what are they seeing? One starts by understanding that first.

YOUTH: No, I can’t! That’s just beyond me.

PHILOSOPHER: Why?IF WE HAD THE SAME KIND OF HEART AND LIFE
YOUTH: You may have forgotten it, but I remember it well. Three years ago, you made an assertion that went something like this: we do not live in an objective world, but in a subjective world that we have given meaning to. The issue that we must focus on is not how the world is, but how we see the world. And also, we cannot escape our subjectivity.

PHILOSOPHER: Yes, that’s right.

YOUTH: Then, tell me this: how is it possible that we who cannot escape subjectivity could have the eyes of another or the ears of another or even the heart of another? If only you would stop playing around with words!
PHILOSOPHER: This is a crucial point. It is true that one cannot escape subjectivity. And one cannot become another person, of course. However, one can imagine what appears in other people’s eyes, and one can imagine the sounds their ears hear.

Adler proposes the following: first of all, think, ‘What if I had the same kind of heart and life as this person?’ If one does that, one should be able to understand that ‘I would probably be faced with the same sort of task as this person.’ And from that point, one should be able to imagine further, that ‘I would probably deal with it in the same sort of way.’
YOUTH: The same kind of heart and life?
PHILOSOPHER: Say, for example, that there is a student who never even tries to study. Questioning the student by saying ‘Why don’t you study?’ is an attitude completely lacking in respect. Instead, start by thinking, ‘What if I had the same heart as him? What if I had the same life as him?’ In other words, one thinks what it would be like if one were the same age as the student, lived in the same household and had the same friends and the same interests and concerns. If one does so, one should then be able to imagine what sort of attitude that self would adopt upon being faced with the task of one’s studies or why that self would refuse to study. Do you know what this sort of attitude is called?
YOUTH: Imagination?
PHILOSOPHER: No. This is what we call ‘empathy’.

YOUTH: Empathy? That’s what you call thinking about what it would be like to have the same kind of heart and the same kind of life?
PHILOSOPHER: Yes. What is generally thought of as empathy, that is to say, agreeing with another person’s opinion and sharing their feelings, is just sympathy, not empathy. Empathy is a skill, an attitude that one has when walking side by side with another.

YOUTH: A skill! Empathy is a skill?
PHILOSOPHER: That’s right. And since it is a skill, it is something that you, too, can attain.

YOUTH: Oh, well, isn’t this interesting? Okay, then, I want you to explain it as a skill. How can one know the other person’s ‘heart and life’ or whatever you call it, anyway? By doing counselling for each person, one by one? Hah, there’s no way you could learn such things!
PHILOSOPHER: That’s exactly why one has concern for other people’s concerns. One must not just observe from a distance. One must dive in oneself. You are just standing in a high place without ever diving in and making remarks such as ‘There’s no way to do this’ or ‘There’s such a barrier.’ There is no respect in that and no empathy, either.

YOUTH: No way; you’re wrong! That’s totally wrong!
PHILOSOPHER: What is wrong about it?COURAGE IS CONTAGIOUS, AND RESPECT IS CONTAGIOUS, TOO
YOUTH: Sure, if I were to run around chasing after a ball together with my students, they might like me more. It might make a good impression on them and give them a feeling of closeness. But if I come down to the level of being a friend to those kids, educating them will be even harder.

Sad to say, those children are not angels. They’re little demons who, the second I go the slightest bit easy on them, will take advantage of me and get too big for their britches, and then they’ll be totally out of control. You’re frolicking about in a fantasy with angels who don’t even exist in this world!
PHILOSOPHER: I brought up two children myself. And there are many young people who come to this study for counselling who weren’t able to adapt to school education. As you say, children are not angels. They are human beings.

However, precisely because they are human beings, one must pay them the highest level of respect. One does not look down at them, and neither does one look up at them or flatter them. One interacts with them as equals and has empathy for their interests and concerns.

YOUTH: I’m sorry but that reason for paying them respect doesn’t sit right with me. Basically, what you mean by respecting them is just stroking their egos, right? That’s exactly the sort of idea that is degrading to children.

PHILOSOPHER: It seems that you understand only half of what I have been talking about. I am not seeking a one-way respect from you. Rather, I want you to teach respect to your students.

YOUTH: To teach them respect?
PHILOSOPHER: That’s right. By way of your own personal practice of it, show what it is to have respect. Show the way to build the respect that is the cornerstone of an interpersonal relationship and get them to see what a respect-based relationship can be. As Adler tells us, ‘Cowardice is contagious. And courage is contagious, too.’ Naturally, respect also becomes contagious.

YOUTH: Courage and respect are contagious?
PHILOSOPHER: Yes. It begins with you. Even if there is no one who understands or supports you, first you must carry the torch, and show courage and show respect. Your torch will brighten only a few metres around you at most. It might seem like you’re on a lonesome night road, all on your own. But the light you carry will reach the eyes of someone hundreds of metres away. They will know then that a person is there, a light is there and a path is there, if they go to it. Eventually, dozens and then hundreds of lights will gather around you. Lights radiated by dozens and hundreds of your comrades.

YOUTH: What kind of allegory is that? I’m guessing what you’re saying is this: the role that we educators are assigned is to respect the children, show them what respect is and get them to learn respect. Have I got that right?
PHILOSOPHER: Yes. That is where the first step lies, not only in education, but in all manner of interpersonal relationships.

YOUTH: No way, I don’t care how many children you’ve raised or how many people you’ve given counselling to here, because you’re a philosopher who’s been shut up in his study. You don’t know a thing about society or school in the real, modern-day world!
Look, what people want from school education, and what people want in capitalist society, is not this stuff about personal character, or some obscure ‘human knowledge’ or whatever. Parents and guardians, and society, are looking for real results. And if you’re talking about the place where education happens, then the thing we’re looking for is scholastic improvement.

PHILOSOPHER: Yes, I suppose so.

YOUTH: No matter how much their students might like them, educators who don’t raise scholastic achievement will be branded as unfit to be teachers. It sounds just like a money-losing venture made up of a group of friends. And on the other hand, the educator who contributes to scholastic improvement with all his students completely under his thumb will be showered with acclaim.

But we haven’t even got to the main issue, yet. Even the students who have been thoroughly and continuously rebuked will later say, ‘Thank you very much for coaching me so rigorously back then,’ and convey their gratitude. They recognise that it is because of the strict treatment that they kept up their studies and that my strictness was really a ‘loving whip’, as it were, and they go so far as to thank me. How can you explain this reality?
PHILOSOPHER: Naturally, I would say that such a story is quite possible. Actually, one might even regard it as a perfect case model for re-learning the theories of Adlerian psychology.

YOUTH: Oh, so you are saying it is explainable?
PHILOSOPHER: Keeping in mind the discussion we engaged in three years ago, let us enter into a slightly deeper place within Adlerian psychology. There are many realisations to be had therein.

‘Social feeling’—a key concept of Adlerian psychology, and the most difficult one to grasp. The philosopher speaks of it as ‘seeing with the eyes of another, listening with the ears of another and feeling with the heart of another’. And that it requires the skill called empathy, the first step of which is to have concern for other people’s concerns. It made sense, in theory. But was it the educator’s job to become someone who truly understands children? Wasn’t that just the philosopher playing with language again? The youth glared pointedly at this philosopher who could bring up such words as ‘re-learning’.THE REAL REASON WHY ONE ‘CAN’T CHANGE’
YOUTH: Let’s hear it. What am I supposed to re-learn about Adler?
PHILOSOPHER: When you look at your speech and conduct, and at other people’s speech and conduct, think about the goals that are hidden in them. This is a basic way of thinking in Adlerian psychology.

YOUTH: I know—it’s ‘teleology’, right?
PHILOSOPHER: Would you give a simple explanation of it?
YOUTH: I will try. Regardless of what may have occurred in the past, nothing is determined by it. It does not matter if there are past traumas, either. Because human beings are not driven by past ‘causes’ but live according to present ‘goals’. Suppose, for example, the person who says, ‘My home environment was bad and that’s why I have a dark personality.’ This is a life lie. The truth is that person first has the goal of ‘I don’t want to get hurt by getting involved with other people,’ and in order to realise that goal, they choose a ‘dark personality’ that doesn’t get involved with anyone. Then, as an excuse for having themselves chosen such a personality, they bring up their past home environment. It’s something like that, right?
PHILOSOPHER: Yes. Please continue.

