
PHILOSOPHER: Right. Most of the people who come for counselling start off talking about one or the other. They tearfully complain about the unhappiness that has befallen them. Or, they speak of their hatred for the other people who torment them and the society that surrounds them.

It is not only in counselling. When speaking with family and friends, or when offering consultation, it is not an easy thing to be conscious of what one is talking about at that moment. However, by visualising it in this way, one can see clearly that what one is talking about is actually just these two things. It sounds familiar, doesn’t it?
YOUTH: To blame ‘that bad person’, or to plead ‘poor me’. Well, I guess you could put it that way …
PHILOSOPHER: But this is not the point we should be talking to each other about. No matter how much you seek agreement regarding ‘that bad person’ or complain about ‘poor me’, and whether there is someone who listens to that, even if you derive some temporary comfort, it will not lead to a true solution.

YOUTH: Then, what can one do?
PHILOSOPHER: The triangular column has another side that is hidden from you now. What sort of thing do you think is written on it?
YOUTH: Hey, stop messing around and just show it to me!
PHILOSOPHER: All right. Please read out loud what it says there.

The philosopher had brought out a piece of paper folded into a triangular column. From where the youth sat, only two of its three faces could be seen. On one face were the words ‘That bad person’, and on the other, ‘Poor me’. According to the philosopher, the complaints of anxious people always ended up being one or the other. And then the philosopher slowly rotated the triangular column with his thin fingers and revealed the words written on the remaining face—the words that shook the youth’s heart.THERE’S NO MAGIC IN ADLERIAN PSYCHOLOGY
YOUTH: … !
PHILOSOPHER: Well, say it out loud.

YOUTH: ‘What should I do from now on?’
PHILOSOPHER: Yes, this is precisely the point we should be talking to each other about: ‘What should I do from now on?’ We do not need ‘that bad person’ or suchlike. Neither is ‘poor me’ necessary. No matter how loudly you complain about them, I will just ignore it.

YOUTH: You, you’re inhuman!
PHILOSOPHER: I will not ignore it out of indifference. I will ignore it because there is nothing there that we should talk to each other about. If I were to listen to stories about ‘that bad person’ or ‘poor me’ and sympathise with your plight by saying things like, ‘That must have been tough’ or ‘It’s not your fault at all,’ it is true that you might get some temporary solace. And you might even have a sense of satisfaction that it was good to get counselling or good to consult this person.

But how would that change things the next day and every day after that? Wouldn’t you just want to seek more solace the next time you are hurt? Isn’t that dependence? That is why, in Adlerian psychology, we talk to each other about ‘What should one do from now on?’
YOUTH: But if you’re saying I should think seriously about my own ‘from now on’, then first I would need to know about ‘until now’, as its precondition.

PHILOSOPHER: No. Right now, you are in front of me. It is enough to know ‘you who are in front of me’, and in principle there is no way for me to know ‘the past you’. I repeat, the past does not exist. The past you speak of is nothing more than a story skilfully compiled by ‘you now’. Please understand this point.

YOUTH: No way! You are just sticking random pieces of theory together and reproaching me to stop whining. You’re just pushing the logic of the arrogant and strong, without any regard for human weakness, without even trying to become familiar with that weakness.

PHILOSOPHER: That is not so. For example, it is not uncommon for us counsellors to simply pass this triangular column to the client. And we make the following request: ‘It does not matter what the subject is, so please turn it to show me the content of what you are going to talk about.’ At that, many people choose ‘What should I do from now on?’ of their own accord and then begin thinking about the substance of that question.

YOUTH: Of their own accord?
PHILOSOPHER: In other schools of counselling, there are shock therapy-style approaches that attempt to provoke explosions of emotion by tracing deep into the past. But there is absolutely no need to engage in such practices
We are not prestidigitators or magicians. I repeat, there is no magic in Adlerian psychology. A constructive and scientific psychology of human knowledge that is based not on mysterious magic but on respect for people—that is Adlerian psychology.

YOUTH: Wow, you’re going out on a limb again and using the word ‘scientific’?
PHILOSOPHER: I am.

YOUTH: All right. I’ll swallow that. For the time being, I will swallow those words. Now, let’s get down to talking together about what is really the biggest issue for me: my ‘from now on’. My future as an educator.This dialogue with the philosopher wasn’t going to be wrapped up so easily, the youth realised. He had to admit it—this old Socrates was a formidable opponent, especially with all the abstract theories he kept bringing up. But the youth still felt sure he would win in the end. Take the discussion out of this little study as soon as possible, and bring it to the classroom. Put it to the test in the real world. I don’t want to just criticise it haphazardly. But it’s just a bunch of pie-in-the-sky theories that are totally divorced from reality, and I want to bring it all down to earth, into people’s actual lives.The youth pulled up a chair and took a deep breath.THE CLASSROOM IS A DEMOCRATIC NATION
YOUTH: In this world, the past does not exist. One must not get drunk on the cheap wine of tragedy. The only thing we should be talking to each other about is ‘What should be done from now on?’ Okay, I’ll go along with this premise. The issue I’ll be facing from now on, I suppose, is the kind of teaching I put into practice in my school. So, I’m going to get into this area of discussion right away. You’re okay with that, right?
PHILOSOPHER: Of course.

YOUTH: All right. Earlier you said that the concrete first step is to ‘Start from respect’, right? This is what I want to ask you about. Do you think that just by bringing respect into the classroom, that will solve everything? In other words, that the students will stop making any trouble?
PHILOSOPHER: That won’t solve things on its own. There will still be trouble.

YOUTH: Then, I’ll have to yell at them after all, won’t I? Because they’re still engaging in bad conduct and being a nuisance to other students.

PHILOSOPHER: No, you must not rebuke them.

YOUTH: So you’re saying I should just let them do bad things right under my nose and not do anything about it? But that’s no different from saying that a thief shouldn’t be caught and punished, now is it? Would Adler accept such lawlessness?
PHILOSOPHER: Adler’s view is not one that ignores laws or rules. That is, as long as they are rules that have been created through a democratic process. This is an extremely important point, both for society as a whole and for running a classroom.

YOUTH: A democratic process?
PHILOSOPHER: Yes. Think of your classroom as a democratic nation
YOUTH: Huh! What do you mean?
PHILOSOPHER: The sovereignty of a democratic nation is with its people, right? This is the principle of ‘national sovereignty’, where ‘Sovereign power rests with the people.’ The people, who are sovereign, establish all manner of rules on the basis of mutual consent, and those rules are applied equally to all citizens. It is for that reason that they can observe the rules. Rather than simply obeying the rules, they can observe them more actively, as ‘our rules’.

On the other hand, what happens when rules are established according to someone’s solitary judgement, rather than on the basis of citizen consensus, and when, furthermore, those rules are enforced very unequally?
YOUTH: Well, you can bet the people won’t be quiet about it.

PHILOSOPHER: Then, to suppress a rebellion, the ruler would have no choice but to exercise tangible and intangible powers. This is something that concerns not only the nation, but the corporation and the family, too. An organisation in which someone is using their power to suppress has irrationality at its foundation.

YOUTH: Hmm. I see.

PHILOSOPHER: The same goes for the classroom. The sovereign of the classroom-nation is not the teacher—it’s the students. And the rules of the classroom must be established on the basis of consensus from the students, who are sovereign. Let us start with this principle in mind.

YOUTH: As usual, you’re making things so complicated. So, what you’re saying is that the students should be allowed to govern themselves? Our school already has a regular system of self-government in place, with a student council and such.

PHILOSOPHER: No, I am talking about something more fundamental. If, for example, we think of the classroom as a nation, then the students are the citizens. What would be the position of the teacher, then?
YOUTH: Well, if you’re saying the students are the citizens, I suppose the teacher would be the prime minister or president who acts as their leader.

PHILOSOPHER: But that doesn’t seem right, does it? Were you chosen by the students in an election? And if you were to call yourself a president without having gone through an election, it wouldn’t be a democratic nation. It would just be a dictatorship.

YOUTH: I guess so. Logically speaking, anyway.

PHILOSOPHER: I am not talking about logic, but about reality. The classroom is not a dictatorship that is ruled over by the teacher. It is a democratic nation in which each and every student is sovereign. Teachers who forget this principle set up a dictatorship without even realising it.

YOUTH: Ha-ha! So, you’re saying I’ve got fascistic leanings?
PHILOSOPHER: If you put it in extreme terms, yes. The fact that your classroom has got out of control is not the problem of your students individually. And you are not insufficiently qualified as a teacher. It is only that the situation there is akin to a corrupted dictatorship—that is why it is out of control. An organisation that is under the command of a dictator cannot escape corruption.

YOUTH: Stop making accusations! On what grounds can you make such criticisms?
PHILOSOPHER: The grounds are quite clear. It is on the basis of that ‘reward and punishment’, which you insist is necessary.

YOUTH: What are you talking about?
PHILOSOPHER: You’d like to talk about this, yes? The subject of praising and rebuking.

YOUTH: It’s funny that you’re the one who’s throwing down the gauntlet. Because I’ve gained a fair amount of experience of teaching, especially in classrooms. I’m going to make you take back those extremely rude accusations, you can count on it!
PHILOSOPHER: All right, let’s talk it over to our hearts’ content.DO NOT REBUKE AND DO NOT PRAISE
