YOUTH: Adler forbids reward and punishment. He advises not to rebuke and not to praise. Why did Adler espouse such nonsense? And did he realise how much of a gap there is between the ideal and the reality? That is what I want to know.

PHILOSOPHER: I see. Just to make sure, you think of rebuking and praising as both being necessary?
YOUTH: Yes, of course I do. Even if my students might not like me because of it, I still have to rebuke them. They’ve got to correct their mistakes. Yes, let’s start with whether rebuking is right or wrong.

PHILOSOPHER: All right. Why must one not rebuke a person? It is probably best to look at this according to the situation. First, consider a boy who has done something bad. It could be something dangerous or that might harm another person, or something approaching a criminal act. Why on earth did the boy do such a thing? One thing that may be considered then, is the possibility that ‘he did not know it was a bad thing’.

YOUTH: He didn’t know?
PHILOSOPHER: Right. I’ll use my own story as an example. When I was a child, I had a magnifying glass with me wherever I went. I’d find insects and plants and look at them through it. I passed the time gazing to my heart’s content at worlds that were invisible to the naked eye. I’d spend all day absorbed in observing them, like a little entomologist.

YOUTH: Yes, I had such a phase, too.

PHILOSOPHER: A little while later, though, I learned of a completely different use for the magnifying glass. I’d focus the sunlight through it onto a piece of black paper and, lo and behold, smoke would rise from the paper until at last it would begin to burn. Witnessing this miracle of science that seemed like a magic trick, I felt the excitement course through me, and I couldn’t think of it as a magnifying glass anymore.

YOUTH: It’s really something, isn’t it? I too found that more to my liking, rather than crawling around on the ground staring at bugs. A small magnifying glass may inspire one to contemplate the power of the sun and even contemplate the universe. It’s a boy’s first step into science.

PHILOSOPHER: So, I was playing in this way one hot summer’s day, by burning paper. I’d placed a sheet of black paper on the ground, and I was focusing the light with my magnifying glass as I always did, when out of the corner of my eye I caught sight of a solitary ant. It was a large and sturdy ant with a deep black exoskeleton. I was getting bored already with the black paper, so what did I do to the black ant with my magnifying glass? I don’t think I need to explain any further.

YOUTH: I get it. Well, children can be cruel.

PHILOSOPHER: Yes. Children often do exhibit this sort of brutality, of killing insects for fun. But are children really cruel? Do they walk around with some latent ‘aggressive behaviour’, as Freud calls it? I don’t think so. Children are not cruel—it’s just that they don’t know. They do not know what life is worth, or about other people’s pain.

So, there is one thing that adults should do. If they do not know, teach them. And when we teach them, we do not need words of reprimand. Please do not forget this principle. Because it is not that they were engaging in bad behaviour, but simply that they did not know.

YOUTH: You’re saying that it’s not aggression or brutality, but a crime arising from ignorance?
PHILOSOPHER: A child playing on railroad tracks might not realise that it is a dangerous thing to do. A child shouting loudly in a public place might not know he is causing a disturbance. Whatever it may be, we all start from a point of not knowing. Wouldn’t you say that it is unreasonable to sternly reproach someone, if they do not know that what they are doing is wrong?
YOUTH: Sure, if they really do not know.

PHILOSOPHER: What is needed of us adults is not to reprimand, but to teach. With words of reason, and without getting emotional or raising our voices. You are not someone who cannot do this.

YOUTH: If that were the only example, then it’d be just as you say. Because there’s no way you’re going to accept your own ant-killing brutality, right? But this isn’t a line of reasoning that I’ll ever swallow. It just feels like it’ll get stuck in the back of my throat, like some cloying malt syrup or something. Your understanding of people is too naïve.

PHILOSOPHER: What is naïve about it?
YOUTH: Kindergarteners are another matter, but when it comes to grammar schoolchildren, and even more so with middle-schoolers, they’re all fully aware of what they’re doing. They’ve known for a long time what’s prohibited and what’s considered immoral. You might say that these kids engage in problem behaviour as prisoners of conscience. They’ve got to be severely punished for their offences. So, I wish you would just dispense with this old man act of making them out to be a bunch of pure-hearted angels!
PHILOSOPHER: To be sure, there are many children who get involved in problem behaviour knowing full well that it is wrong. And that may even be the case with the majority of problem behaviour. But haven’t you ever found it odd? They’re engaging in problem behaviour not only with the knowledge that it is wrong, but with the understanding that they will be rebuked by their parents and teachers for engaging in it. It’s quite irrational.

YOUTH: It’s simplistic, that’s what it is. They would understand if they’d only calm down and think it over, but they’re incapable of that.

PHILOSOPHER: But is that really the case? Can’t you see that there is another mentality operating deep inside them?
YOUTH: So, they do it knowing that they’re going to be rebuked? Even the kids who cry when they’re rebuked?
PHILOSOPHER: It would not be a waste of effort to consider that possibility, certainly. In contemporary Adlerian psychology, we think of human problem behaviour as having five stages, each of which has its own mental state operating in the background.

YOUTH: Oh, you’re getting to the psychology stuff finally!
PHILOSOPHER: Once you comprehend the five stages of problem behaviour, you should be able to see for yourself whether rebuking is right or wrong.

YOUTH: Let’s hear it, then. And I’m going to see how much you really comprehend children and comprehend the actual educational setting!
This philosopher’s reasoning makes no sense at all!The youth had become incensed. The classroom is a small democratic nation. And the sovereign of the classroom is the students. Fine up to that point. But why is reward and punishment unnecessary? If the classroom is a nation, aren’t laws needed there? And if there are people who break laws and commit crimes, aren’t punishments needed?The youth wrote the words ‘The five stages of problem behaviour’ in his notebook and smiled to himself. I am going to ascertain if Adlerian psychology is an area of study that actually holds water in the real world, or if it’s just a bunch of empty theories.WHAT IS THE GOAL OF PROBLEM BEHAVIOUR?
PHILOSOPHER: Why do children get involved in problem behaviour? Adlerian psychology focuses on the ‘goals’ that lie hidden in that behaviour. That is to say, we think of the problem behaviour that children (and not only children) engage in, with all manner of goals, as having five stages.

YOUTH: Does having five stages mean it is something that gradually escalates?
PHILOSOPHER: Yes. And these stages cover all forms of human problem behaviour. As much as possible, steps must be taken at an early stage before the behaviour escalates.

YOUTH: All right. So, please begin with the first stage.

PHILOSOPHER: The first stage of problem behaviour is the ‘demand for admiration’.

YOUTH: Demand for admiration? In other words, it’s as if they’re saying, ‘Praise me’?
PHILOSOPHER: Yes. Students play the role of the ‘good child’ to their parents and teachers and to other people. A person working in an organisation strives to demonstrate his drive and obedience to his boss and senior colleagues. By doing so, he hopes to gain their praise. This is where it all starts.

YOUTH: But isn’t that a desirable thing? They’re being productive and not making trouble for anyone. They can make themselves useful to other people. I can’t find any reason to regard this as problematic.

PHILOSOPHER: Certainly, if each of their actions is treated as separate, they may appear to be good children or honour students who have no problems whatsoever. And with children who make great efforts in their schoolwork and athletics and such, or with company employees who devote themselves to their work, they are applying themselves, so one wants to praise them.

There is a great pitfall here, however. Their goal will always be to receive praise and, moreover, to gain a privileged position within the community.

YOUTH: Aha. So, since their motives aren’t pure, it’s unacceptable? What a simpleminded philosopher you are. Even if their goal is to receive praise, they’re still students pursuing their studies, aren’t they? I don’t see any problem here.

PHILOSOPHER: Then, what do you think happens when their efforts garner no praise at all from their parents and teachers, or their bosses and coworkers?
YOUTH: I suppose they become dissatisfied and maybe even resentful.

PHILOSOPHER: Right. Look, they are not doing good things. They are just being praised. And there is no point in making so much effort if they are not going to be praised by anyone or treated in a special way by anyone. So, they lose motivation right away.

They adopt a lifestyle, or worldview, in which they are essentially saying, ‘I won’t engage in proper behaviour unless there is someone who will praise me,’ and ‘I’ll engage in improper behaviour unless there is someone who will punish me.’
YOUTH: Well, I guess that’s true, but …
PHILOSOPHER: Furthermore, another characteristic of this stage is that, on account of trying to be the ‘good child’ who is full of promise, they begin to engage in cheating, deceptive tactics and other wrongdoing. Educators and leaders must ascertain the children’s goals instead of focusing only on their actions.

YOUTH: But if you don’t praise them at that point, they’ll lose their drive and turn into children who don’t do anything at all. And in some cases, they’ll start engaging in improper behaviour, won’t they?
PHILOSOPHER: No. You teach them continually that they have worth, even if they are not special. By showing them respect.

YOUTH: Concretely speaking, how do you do that?
PHILOSOPHER: Instead of focusing on whenever a child does some ‘good’ thing, turn your attention to the smaller everyday details of the words and actions of the person. And then, focus on and feel sympathy for that person’s concerns. That’s all.

YOUTH: Ah, so we’re back to that. Well, I guess I still don’t feel comfortable with what qualifies as problem behaviour. But let’s move on. What about the second stage?
PHILOSOPHER: The second stage of problem behaviour is ‘attention drawing’.

YOUTH: Attention drawing?
PHILOSOPHER: The child isn’t being praised, even though he has done a ‘good’ thing. He is unable to gain a privileged position within the classroom. Or he doesn’t have enough courage or tenacity to do things that will lead to praise in the first place. At such times, the person thinks, ‘It’s okay not to be praised, so I’ll just make myself stand out.’
YOUTH: So, he will do something bad? Something he will get rebuked for?
