YOUTH: Naturally, they’d both prefer to stick to their versions of what happened. But if both of them are able to think, ‘Maybe it’s partly my fault,’ I would let it go at that. There’s that saying, ‘In a quarrel both parties are to blame.’
PHILOSOPHER: I see. Now, suppose you had that triangular column with you.

YOUTH: The triangular column?
PHILOSOPHER: Yes. On one face are written the words, ‘That bad person’, on another, ‘Poor me’ and on the last one, ‘What should I do from now on?’ Listen to your students while visualising the triangular column, much in the same way as we counsellors do.

YOUTH: How do you mean?
PHILOSOPHER: The students’ reasons for fighting: ‘He said such-and-such’ and ‘He did this horrible thing to me.’ When you think about them with the triangular column, isn’t it just the same as ‘That bad person’ and ‘Poor me’?
YOUTH: Yes, I guess so.

PHILOSOPHER: You’re asking the students only about the cause. No matter how much you might delve into that, all you’re going to get is excuses and abdications of responsibility. What you should be doing is focusing on their goals and thinking with them, ‘What should I do from now on?’
YOUTH: The goal of the fight? Not the cause?
PHILOSOPHER: Let’s figure this out step by step. First of all, we humans usually communicate through language, right?
YOUTH: Yes. Like we are talking to each other right now.

PHILOSOPHER: Then, what would you say is the goal, or objective, of communication?
YOUTH: I’d say it’s transmission of intention—the conveying of what is on one’s mind.

PHILOSOPHER: No. Conveying is nothing more than the gateway of communication. The final objective is the establishment of consensus. Conveying does not have meaning on its own. It is only when the content of what is conveyed has been understood and a certain consensus has been reached, that communication has meaning. So, we are talking together in this way with the aim of getting to some point of consensus.

YOUTH: Okay, but it’s sure taking a long time!
PHILOSOPHER: Right. Language-based communication necessitates a great deal of time and effort to arrive at consensus. One doesn’t just get one’s own egotistical demands accepted. Rather, one has to collect persuasive material, such as objective data. Moreover, in terms of certainty and immediate effectiveness, it is rather poor for the costs incurred.

YOUTH: It’s exactly as you say. It gets tiresome.

PHILOSOPHER: What does the person who is finding a discussion tiresome, or feeling that they have no chance of winning the discussion, do at that point? Do you know?
YOUTH: Well, I suppose they wouldn’t just bow out, would they?
PHILOSOPHER: The means of communication they will choose in the end is violence.

YOUTH: Ha-ha! That’s great! That’s where you make the connection?
PHILOSOPHER: By resorting to violence, one can push through one’s demands without expending time or effort. To put it more directly, one can make the other party submit to one. In every way, violence is a low-cost, easy means of communication. But before deeming it morally unacceptable, we must say that it is a rather immature form of conduct for people to engage in.

YOUTH: You mean that it should not be rejected from a moral viewpoint, but rather because it is immature, foolish conduct?
PHILOSOPHER: Yes. Moral standards change with each time period or situation. Judging others solely on moral guidelines is extremely dangerous. After all, there have been times when violence is promoted. Now, what should one do? We humans have to get back to the basics: we must grow out of our immature condition. We must not rely on the immature communication that is violence. We have to search for other kinds of communication. It does not matter what the cause of violence may be, whether it is the thing the other person said, or their provocative attitude or what have you. Violence has only one goal. What we should be thinking about is ‘What should I do from now on?’
YOUTH: I see. That’s an interesting insight with regard to violence.

PHILOSOPHER: Can you really act as if this were just someone else’s business? What I am talking about can be applied to you, too.

YOUTH: No way, I don’t engage in violence. Stop making strange accusations!GETTING ANGRY AND REBUKING ARE SYNONYMOUS
PHILOSOPHER: You’re in a discussion with someone when things take a bad turn. You’re in a disadvantageous position. Or you’re aware from the start of the discussion that your arguments lack rationality.

Take, for example, the man who tries to push his arguments at such times, not with actual violence perhaps, but through attempting to coerce the other party, by raising his voice, slapping his hand on the table or shedding tears. These kinds of conduct, too, must be regarded as low-cost, violent communication … You understand what I am saying, yes?
YOUTH: You, you damn insect! Just because I’m getting excited and raising my voice, you ridicule me by calling me an immature person?
PHILOSOPHER: No, I really don’t mind at all how much you raise your voice here. The issue I am bringing up is the essence of the rebuking conduct that you are choosing.

You feel annoyed by having to communicate with your students with words, and you are rebuking them to try to force them into quick submission. Using anger as a weapon, wielding guns of reproach, brandishing the sword of authority. This is an immature and foolish attitude for an educator to have.

YOUTH: No! I am not angry at them—I am rebuking them!
PHILOSOPHER: Many adults justify it this way. But it does not change the fact that they are trying to keep another person down by using violent force. Indeed, one might even say it is a vicious excuse, as it contains the awareness of those adults who tell themselves, ‘I am doing a good thing.’
YOUTH: That’s not how it is! Look, anger is an explosion of emotion, when one cannot make calm judgements. This is what I mean—when I rebuke them, I don’t get emotional at all! Instead of getting bent out of shape, I rebuke them in a calm and calculated manner. Don’t group me with people who forget themselves and fly into a rage!
PHILOSOPHER: Or maybe that is how it is. You might say you are like a gun loaded with blanks. But there is no difference from the standpoint of the students—they have a gun pointing at them. Whether it is loaded with real bullets or not, you are communicating with a gun in your hand.

YOUTH: Okay, let’s try this: suppose the other person is some kind of brutal criminal who’s holed up with a knife. He’s committed a crime and is challenging you to battle. One of those battles for attention drawing, or struggles for power or what have you. What’s wrong with communication with a gun in your hand? How else do we maintain law and order?
PHILOSOPHER: What should parents and educators do when confronted with problem behaviour in children? Adler advises that we ‘renounce the standpoint of the judge’. You have not been granted the privilege of passing down judgements. Maintaining law and order is not your job.

YOUTH: Then, what are you telling me to do?
PHILOSOPHER: Rather than being concerned with law and order, what you should be doing is protecting the child right in front of you, the child who has engaged in problem behaviour. Educators are counsellors, and counselling is re-education. We spoke about this earlier, didn’t we? It would be peculiar for a counsellor to take out a gun or anything like that.

YOUTH: But still …
PHILOSOPHER: Violence, which includes reprimand, is a form of communication that reveals one’s immaturity as a human being. This is something that the children know well enough themselves. Whenever they receive reprimands, in addition to their fear of violent conduct, at an unconscious level they have the insight that ‘This is an immature person.’
This is a much bigger problem than the adults think. Could you respect an immature human being? And could you have a real feeling of being respected by someone who threatens you in a violent manner? There is no respect in communication with anger and violence. Rather, such communication invites contempt. That reprimand does not lead to substantive improvement is a self-evident truth. On this point, Adler states, ‘Anger is an emotion that pulls people apart.’
YOUTH: I am not respected by my students and, moreover, they feel contempt for me? Because of my rebuking them?
PHILOSOPHER: Unfortunately, that is probably the case.

YOUTH: What do you know, anyway? You don’t understand what it’s like in a real setting!
PHILOSOPHER: There are probably many things I do not understand. However, this real setting that you keep bringing up is basically another version of ‘That bad person’ and the ‘Poor me’ who is at their mercy. I do not imagine there to be any more value in those words beyond what is necessary. It will all just go in one ear and out the other.

YOUTH: Argh!
PHILOSOPHER: If you have gained the courage to face yourself and to consider the true meaning of ‘What should I do from now on?’, you will make progress.

YOUTH: So, you are saying that I’m just setting up excuses?
PHILOSOPHER: No. Excuse is probably not the correct word. You are simply focusing on only the things one cannot change and lamenting, ‘So, it’s impossible.’ Instead of clinging to the things one cannot change, look at the things one can change that are right in front of you. Do you remember the Serenity Prayer that has been passed down orally in Christian societies?
YOUTH: Yes, of course I do: ‘God grant me the serenity to accept the things I cannot change, courage to change the things I can and wisdom always to tell the difference.’
PHILOSOPHER: Reflect upon these words, and then think once more about ‘What should I do from now on?’ONE CAN CHOOSE ONE’S OWN LIFE
YOUTH: Okay, suppose I were to accept your suggestion: I refrain from rebuking, stop inquiring as to the causes of their behaviour and ask the students ‘What should you do from now on?’ What would be the result? I don’t even have to think about it. All I’d get would be lip-service statements of self-reflection, like ‘I won’t do it again’ or ‘I’ll do things correctly from now on.’
PHILOSOPHER: Whenever words of self-reflection are forced, nothing will come of it. That is to be expected. People are often made to write essays of apology or self-reflection, but their writings are written only with the goal of being forgiven and never lead to any self-reflection. It is unlikely that they become anything more than objects of self-satisfaction for the person who had them written. But be that as it may, what I would question here is that person’s way of living.

YOUTH: Way of living?
PHILOSOPHER: To paraphrase Kant, whose discussion of self-reliance is pertinent here, ‘Man’s juvenile condition is not due to lack of reason. It is that he has neither the resolution nor the courage to use his reason without direction from another. That is to say, man is responsible for being stuck in his own juvenile condition.’
YOUTH: Juvenile condition?
PHILOSOPHER: Yes, it is the condition of not attaining true self-reliance. One may understand Kant’s use of the word reason as referring to ability in general and to include everything from intelligence to sensibility.

YOUTH: It is not that we lack ability, but that we don’t have enough courage to use our ability. And that’s why we can’t get past our juvenile condition?
PHILOSOPHER: That’s right. And then Kant declares, ‘Have courage to use your own reason!’
YOUTH: Huh! That’s just like Adler, isn’t it?
PHILOSOPHER: Now, why do people try to keep themselves in a juvenile condition? Or, to put it more plainly, why do people reject self-reliance? What is your view?
YOUTH: Is it because of cowardice?
PHILOSOPHER: It may be, in some cases. But consider Kant’s words once more. It is easier to live according to ‘direction from another’. One does not have to think about difficult things, and one does not have to take responsibility for failure. All one has to do is swear a certain allegiance and someone will take care of all one’s troublesome tasks. From children in families and schools, to members of society working at companies and government offices, to clients who come for counselling. Isn’t it so?
