YOUTH: Well, I guess so …
PHILOSOPHER: Moreover, in order to keep children in a juvenile condition, the adults around them use every conceivable means to indoctrinate children regarding the dangers and risks and scariness of self-reliance.

YOUTH: What for?
PHILOSOPHER: To keep them under their control.

YOUTH: Why would they do such a thing?
PHILOSOPHER: This is probably something you should think over carefully and ask yourself. Because without noticing it, you too are getting in the way of your students’ self-reliance.

YOUTH: I am?
PHILOSOPHER: Yes, make no mistake about this. No matter what they do, parents, and then educators, engage in excessive meddling and nurturing of their children. As a result, they end up raising children who cannot decide anything on their own, and who need constant direction from others. They raise people who will always have children’s minds, and who will be incapable of doing things without direction from others, even if they are adults in terms of age. This is not self-reliance in any shape or form.

YOUTH: No way. At the very least, I am hoping that my students will become self-reliant! Why would I be actually hindering them?
PHILOSOPHER: Don’t you see? You are afraid of letting them become self-reliant.

YOUTH: What! How’s that?
PHILOSOPHER: If your students become self-reliant, and they assume a standpoint on equal footing to you, your authority will collapse. Right now, you are erecting a vertical relationship with your students, and you are afraid of that relationship collapsing. This is a fear held subconsciously not only by educators, but by many parents as well.

YOUTH: No, I don’t …
PHILOSOPHER: One other thing. When children fail, and especially when they disturb others, it is only natural that you, too, are held responsible. It is your responsibility as an educator and as a supervisor, and, if you are a parent, it is your responsibility as a parent. Do you see?
YOUTH: Yes, of course.

PHILOSOPHER: What can one do to evade that responsibility? The answer is easy: control the children. One allows the children to take only those paths that are safe and free from harm, without permitting any adventure. One keeps them under one’s control as much as possible. One does not do this out of concern for the children. It is all for one’s own self-protection.

YOUTH: Because one doesn’t want to be held responsible for the children’s failures?
PHILOSOPHER: That is how it goes. And this is precisely why people in positions in education, and leaders charged with the management of organisations as well, must always uphold the objective of self-reliance.

YOUTH: So as not to get carried away with self-protection.

PHILOSOPHER: It is the same with counselling. When we give counselling, we are always very careful not to put the client in a position of ‘dependence’ and ‘irresponsibility’. Counselling that allows the client to say, ‘Thanks to you, I’m all better’ is not solving anything. Because put another way, what they are really saying is: ‘I can’t do anything by myself.’
YOUTH: They are dependent on their counsellors?
PHILOSOPHER: Right. And the same thing can be said about you—that is to say, about educators. Educators who let their students say things like, ‘Thanks to you, I was able to graduate,’ or ‘Thanks to you, I was able to pass my exams,’ are failing to provide education in the truest sense of the word. It is necessary to have the students gain the awareness that they can accomplish things under their own power.

YOUTH: But …
PHILOSOPHER: An educator is a lonely creature. One’s students all finish school under their own power, and one isn’t praised or appreciated for one’s efforts. One does it without receiving gratitude.

YOUTH: So one accepts that loneliness?
PHILOSOPHER: Yes. Rather than expecting gratitude from the students, one has the feeling of contribution that one has been able to contribute to the grand objective of self-reliance. One finds happiness in the feeling of contribution. That is the only way.

YOUTH: … The feeling of contribution.

PHILOSOPHER: As I surely said to you three years ago, the essence of happiness is the feeling of contribution. If you are hoping to receive gratitude from your students—if ‘It’s thanks to you that …’ are words you are waiting to hear—then please know that, in effect, you are standing in the way of their self-reliance.

YOUTH: Then, concretely speaking, in what way can one provide an education that does not put children in positions of dependence or irresponsibility? In what way can one aid in real self-reliance? You have to show me concrete examples, not concepts! Otherwise, I can’t accept this.

PHILOSOPHER: All right. Suppose a child asks, ‘Can I go and play at my friend’s place?’ There are parents who will grant permission, ‘Of course you can,’ and then set the condition, ‘Once you’ve done your homework.’ And there are others who will simply prohibit their children from going out to play. Both are forms of conduct that put the child in a position of dependence and irresponsibility.

Instead, teach the child by saying, ‘That is something you can decide on your own.’ Teach that one’s own life and one’s everyday actions are things that one determines oneself. And if deciding things requires certain ingredients—knowledge and experience, for example—then provide them. That is how educators should be.

YOUTH: Decide on your own … Do they have that capacity for judgement?
PHILOSOPHER: If you doubt that, then you do not have enough respect for them yet. If you have real respect for them, then you should be able to let them decide everything on their own.

YOUTH: And what if that leads to an irreparable mistake?
PHILOSOPHER: It is no different with paths that are chosen for them by their parents and teachers. How can you say for sure that their choices will always end in failure, while the paths they are directed to will not?
YOUTH: But that’s …
PHILOSOPHER: When children make mistakes, your responsibility is called into question. But that is not the kind of responsibility that one would stake one’s life on. Responsibility, in the true sense of the word, is something that only that person can make themselves take. This is what has led to the idea of separation of tasks. The idea, in other words, that says, ‘Who ultimately is going to receive the end result brought about by the choice that is made?’ You, who are not in the position of receiving the final responsibility, must not intervene in others’ tasks.

YOUTH: You’re saying to just leave the children alone?
PHILOSOPHER: No, I am not. I am saying to have regard for the children’s decisions and to help them in those decisions. And to convey to them that you are always ready to help them, and to watch over them at a distance from which you can help them and which is not too close. Should those decisions end in failure, the children will learn from you the truth that ‘One can choose one’s own life.’
YOUTH: One can choose one’s own life …
PHILOSOPHER: Heh-heh. ‘One can choose one’s own life.’ This is the main overarching theme of our discussion today, so please be sure to remember it well. Yes, write it down in your notebook.

Now, let’s take a little break at this juncture. Please reflect on the attitude you have taken when approaching your students.

YOUTH: No way, I don’t need a break or anything! Let’s keep at it!
PHILOSOPHER: The dialogue from this point onward is going to require even more concentration. And concentration requires taking proper breaks. I’m going to fix some hot coffee, so it would be a good time for you to calm down a bit and sort things out.The objective of education is ‘self-reliance’. And the educator is a ‘counsellor’. At the beginning, the youth had understood these two terms by their conventional definitions and had not given them much thought. As the discussion progressed, however, his doubts with regard to his own educational policy had grown rapidly. Is my law-and-order-maintaining approach all wrong? Have I been fearing and standing in the way of my students’ self-reliance? … No, there’s no way … I’ve been supporting their self-reliance all along, there’s no doubt about it.The philosopher sitting before him silently stroked his fountain pen. Look at him, so aloof and triumphant!The youth wet his rough lips with coffee and began to speak in a tormented voice.NEGATE PRAISE-BASED DEVELOPMENT
YOUTH: The educator must not be a judge, but rather a counsellor who is always there for the child. And rebuking is a form of conduct that only reveals one’s own immaturity and gives rise to contempt. The final objective of education is self-reliance, and one must not stand in the way of that path. All right. For the time being, I will accept that one must not rebuke. But only if you acknowledge my next question.

PHILOSOPHER: And your next question is?
YOUTH: We often discuss with colleagues and parents whether rebuke-based childrearing and praise-based childrearing are right or wrong. It goes without saying that rebuke-based childrearing is unpopular. This is likely due to the trends of our time, and there are many people who reject it from a moral standpoint. I agree with this standpoint myself, for the most part, as I have no desire to rebuke. On the other hand, praise-based childrearing has an enormous following. Practically no one renounces it directly.

PHILOSOPHER: I suppose that is so.

YOUTH: However, Adler goes as far as to renounce praise. Three years ago, when I asked why, your answer went something like this: ‘Praising is the passing of judgement by a person of ability on a person of no ability, and its goal is manipulation.’ And therefore, that one must not praise.

PHILOSOPHER: Yes, I did say that.

YOUTH: I believed that, and I practised no-praising education faithfully. However, this only lasted until my mistake was noticed by a certain student.

PHILOSOPHER: By a certain student?
YOUTH: It was several months ago. One of the worst problem children in our school handed in a book report he had written. It was an open assignment for summer vacation, and to my astonishment, he had gone and read Camus’ The Stranger. Moreover, I was astonished by what he had written about the book. It was quite a wonderful essay, brimming with the fresh sensibilities that only a sensitive boy going through puberty could possess. Once I had read it, before I knew what I was doing, I praised him. I said, ‘Hey, great work! I had no idea you could write such a fine composition. It’s changed my opinion of you!’
PHILOSOPHER: I see.

YOUTH: The moment I said it, I knew I’d messed up. Those words ‘It’s changed my opinion of you’ in particular, were filled with that judgement from above that Adler talks about. I guess you could say that I was belittling him.

PHILOSOPHER: Yes, because those words would not have come out otherwise.

YOUTH: Regardless, I had actually praised him. Moreover, I had done so with words of undisguised judgement. Now, what kind of expression do you think this problem child had on his face upon hearing those words? Was he repelled? … Ah, if only I could show you the face he made. He gave me such a smile, the likes of which he had never shown me before, the smile of a truly pure and innocent boy!
