PHILOSOPHER: Heh-heh.

YOUTH: It felt just like my head had been in a fog, and now it was clearing before my eyes. And I said to myself, ‘What is up with Adler, anyway? Thanks to getting caught up in this quackery, I’ve been giving an education that could only take away such a smile, such joyfulness. What kind of education is that?’
PHILOSOPHER: So, then you started praising?
YOUTH: Yes, of course. I praised without hesitation. Not only him, but the other students, too. And when I did that, they seemed pleased with it, and they made progress with their schoolwork. The more I praised them, the more drive they exhibited. I could only think of it as a positive cycle of growth.

PHILOSOPHER: And you were getting excellent results.

YOUTH: Yes. But I wasn’t just praising all of them indiscriminately, of course. I praised them according to their level of effort and success. Because if I did otherwise, the compliments would just be lies. That problem child who wrote the book report is a total bookworm now. He just reads tons of books and writes essays on them. It’s really wonderful, isn’t it, how books can open up one’s world. I imagine that pretty soon the library room at school won’t satisfy him anymore, and he’ll start going to the university library. The library where I used to work!
PHILOSOPHER: If he does, that would be quite impressive.

YOUTH: I know. I’m sure you’ll dismiss this. You’ll say that it’s a demand for admiration and the first stage of problem behaviour. But you know, the reality is completely different. Even if his goal at the outset wasn’t to receive praise, soon enough he would have discovered the joy of learning and the pleasure of accomplishment himself, and I’m sure he’ll finish school and head out into the world on his own two feet. So, that leads to what Adler calls self-reliance!
PHILOSOPHER: Can you really say so for sure?
YOUTH: Please acknowledge this clearly! Whatever you may say, due to the praising, the students regained their smiles and their ambition. This is an education I am giving with all the heat of my body and soul, to flesh-and-blood human beings living in the real world. In Adler’s education, what warmth is there? What smiling faces?
PHILOSOPHER: Well, let’s think about this together. Why do we stick to the principle of ‘One must not praise’ in the education setting? There are children who enjoy and benefit from being praised, so why must one not praise? What are you risking by engaging in praise?
YOUTH: I wonder what quibble you’re coming up with next. Look, I’m not going to make any concessions here. If you’re going to revise your arguments, now is the time.REWARD GIVES RISE TO COMPETITION
PHILOSOPHER: Earlier, I brought up the subject of the classroom being a democratic nation. You remember, right?
YOUTH: Ha-ha, when you started calling people fascists? How could I forget?
PHILOSOPHER: Then, I made the point that ‘An organisation that is under the command of a dictator cannot escape corruption.’ When we think a little more deeply about why this is so, the reason ‘One must not praise’ should become clear as well.

YOUTH: Do tell.

PHILOSOPHER: In a community that has a dictatorship in place instead of an established democracy, all rules regarding what is right and wrong are determined at the sole discretion of the leader. This is the case for nations, of course, and corporate entities as well. And it is the same with families and schools, too. The rules in such communities are applied in a quite arbitrary manner.

YOUTH: Ah, companies with top-down management and such are the epitome of that.

PHILOSOPHER: Now, though one might think that dictatorial leaders are despised by their citizens, this is not always the case. Actually, there are probably more instances in which they enjoy their citizens’ ardent support. Why do you think this is so?
YOUTH: Because the leader has some charismatic appeal?
PHILOSOPHER: No, that is not why. That is only a secondary, superficial reason. The main reason is the presence of a cutthroat system of reward and punishment.

YOUTH: Huh! How so?
PHILOSOPHER: One is severely punished for breaking rules and praised for obeying them. And one is recognised. In other words, the people are not actually obeying out of support for the leader’s character or his thoughts and beliefs, but simply because they have the goal of being praised or not being rebuked.

YOUTH: Well, sure. That’s just how the world is.

PHILOSOPHER: Now, here is the problem: in that community where people gather with the goal of being praised, competition emerges. One finds it vexing when others are praised, and one is proud of being praised oneself. One is always concerned with how to be praised first and more frequently than everyone else. And beyond that, with how to have a monopoly on the leader’s favour. In this way, the community comes to be controlled by a principle of competition for reward.

YOUTH: You’re just beating around the bush. So you don’t like competition, is that it?
PHILOSOPHER: Do you accept competition?
YOUTH: I accept it wholeheartedly. It seems to me that you are focusing only on the negative aspects of competition. Think of it more broadly. Whether it is in our schoolwork, our arts and sports events or in our economic activities once we enter society, it is due to the presence of our rivals keeping up the pace beside us that we continue to step up our efforts. The principle of competition lies at the very root of the power that pushes our society forward.

PHILOSOPHER: Is that so? When children are placed within the principle of competition and driven to contend with others, what do you think happens? One’s competitor is one’s enemy. Before long, the children start to adopt a lifestyle in which they believe that ‘all other people are my enemies’ and ‘people are always looking for chances to trick me and must never be underestimated’.

YOUTH: Why do you think so pessimistically? You have no idea the degree to which the existence of a rival acts as a stimulus for human growth. Nor the degree to which a rival can be a close friend one can rely on. I guess you’ve spent all your days absorbed in philosophy and lived a lonely life without close friends or rivals. I’m starting to feel pity for you.

PHILOSOPHER: I accept wholeheartedly the value of having a sworn friend whom one may call a rival. However, there is no need whatsoever for one to compete with that rival, and one must not compete with him.

YOUTH: You accept rivals, but not competition? Oh my, you’re contradicting yourself already!THE DISEASE OF THE COMMUNITY
PHILOSOPHER: There is no contradiction or anything of the sort. Try to think of life as a kind of marathon. There are rivals running beside you. As this itself may act as a stimulus and feel reassuring, it does not present any problems. However, the moment one intends to defeat that rival, the situation changes completely.

The goal at the outset, which should have been completing the race or running fast, transforms into the goal of defeating that person. The rival, who should have been one’s sworn friend, turns into an enemy who must be crushed … And this brings out all manner of gamesmanship with regard to winning and even results in interference and unfair conduct. Even after the race is over, one is unable to celebrate the victory of one’s rival, and one struggles with feelings of envy and inferiority.

YOUTH: And that’s why competition is unacceptable?
PHILOSOPHER: Wherever there is competition, gamesmanship and unfairness arise. There is no need to defeat someone. If one can complete the race, isn’t that enough?
YOUTH: No way, you’re so naïve! You’re naïve if you have notions like that!
PHILOSOPHER: Then, let’s stop using this marathon example and get back to real society. Unlike a marathon, in which people vie for the best time, in a community run by a dictatorial leader, there are no clear criteria for winning. In a classroom, there are aspects besides schoolwork that can inform one’s decisions. And as long as the judgement criteria are unclear, the world will be rampant with people who hold their comrades back, take credit for other people’s work and flatter their leaders so as to gain recognition only for themselves. You’ve witnessed this kind of thing even in your workplace, haven’t you?
YOUTH: Uh, I guess so.

PHILOSOPHER: In order to prevent such situations from arising, an organisation must implement a real democracy that is without reward and punishment and without competition. Please consider that educating by trying to manipulate people with reward and punishment is an attitude that could not be any further removed from democracy.

YOUTH: Then, tell me this. What do you think democracy is? What kind of organisation or community would you call democratic?
PHILOSOPHER: A community that is run not on the basis of the principle of competition, but on the principle of cooperation.

YOUTH: The principle of cooperation?
PHILOSOPHER: Put cooperation with others above all else, instead of competition with others. If you can learn to run your classroom according to the principle of cooperation, your students are likely to adopt a lifestyle in which they see that ‘People are my comrades.’
YOUTH: Ha-ha! Let’s all get along and do our best? That sort of pipe dream doesn’t hold water even in kindergartens today!
PHILOSOPHER: Suppose there is a boy student who has engaged repeatedly in problem behaviour. Many educators would think to themselves, ‘What should I do about this student?’ They would think about whether they should praise, rebuke or ignore the boy, or if they should take some other approach. And then they would summon him to the teachers’ room and deal with him individually. But this way of thinking is wrong.

YOUTH: How so?
PHILOSOPHER: The problem here is the principle of competition pervading the entire classroom, not that the boy got involved in problem behaviour because he was bad. If he had pneumonia, for example, it would not be that he is suffering from pneumonia as an individual, but that the entire classroom had a serious case of it from the outset. His problem behaviour has appeared as one symptom of that. This is the way of thinking of Adlerian psychology.

YOUTH: A sickness of the entire classroom?
PHILOSOPHER: Yes, it is a disease called the principle of competition. What is needed of educators is to look at the community in which the problem behaviour is occurring, not at the individual who is engaging in it. And then, instead of attempting to treat the individual, to go about treating the community itself.

YOUTH: How does one treat an entire classroom that has pneumonia!?
PHILOSOPHER: One stops engaging in reward and punishment and continually nips competition in the bud. One rids the classroom of the principle of competition. That is the only way.

YOUTH: That would be impossible and have the opposite effect! Have you forgotten that I’ve already tried no-praising education and failed?
PHILOSOPHER: Yes, I know. At this point, let’s step back for a moment and take stock of our discussion points. First of all, the competition principle—to compete for strength and rank—always results in vertical relationships, because it creates winners and losers and the hierarchical relationships that exist between them.

YOUTH: Okay.

PHILOSOPHER: The horizontal relationships advocated by Adlerian psychology, on the other hand, are imbued with the principle of cooperation. One does not compete with anyone, and there is no winning or losing. It does not matter if there are differences in knowledge or experience or ability between oneself and others. All people are equal, regardless of scholastic achievement or work performance, and it is in the very act of cooperating with others that building community has meaning
YOUTH: So, this is what you are talking about when you refer to a democratic nation?
PHILOSOPHER: Yes. Adlerian psychology is a horizontal relationship-based psychology of democracy.LIFE BEGINS FROM INCOMPLETENESS
YOUTH: All right. The points of conflict are clear. You are saying that it is not a problem of the individual, but of the whole classroom—the principle of competition permeating the classroom is the root of all evil.

I, on the other hand, focus on the individual. Why is that? Well, to borrow your word, it’s respect. Each and every student, with his unique personality, exists as a splendid human being. There are all kinds of students: some quiet and well-behaved, some noisy and bright, some serious and some with fiery temperaments. They are not a gathering without individual traits.
