YOUTH: By not becoming everyone else?
PHILOSOPHER: That’s right. Their irreplaceable ‘this me’ must not become ‘everyone else’. They must secure a place to be that can be all their own at any time. They must not allow any wavering in their sense of belonging that ‘It’s okay to be here.’
YOUTH: If that’s the case, it proves my point even more. By praising them and fulfilling their earnest need for approval, one conveys to them, ‘You are not an incomplete being’ and ‘You have worth.’ There’s no other way!
PHILOSOPHER: You are wrong. Unfortunately, if they proceed in that direction, they will not be able to realise their true worth.

YOUTH: Why is that?
PHILOSOPHER: There is no end to approval. So, they get praised and approved by others. As a result, they might find some fleeting realisation of their own worth. Any joyful feeling thus gained, however, will be nothing more than something granted from outside them. They will be no different from clockwork dolls that do not move unless another person winds them up.

YOUTH: Uh … Maybe so, but …
PHILOSOPHER: The person who is capable of feeling truly happy only upon being praised will seek to get praised more until the very last moment of their lives. Such a person, having been left in a position of dependence, will lead a life of ceaseless seeking, a life without fulfilment.

YOUTH: Then, what should one do?
PHILOSOPHER: Instead of seeking approval, one has to approve oneself, with one’s own mind.

YOUTH: Approve oneself?
PHILOSOPHER: Having another person decide the worth of ‘me’—that is dependence. Or, determining the worth of ‘me’ oneself—which is called self-reliance. If one were to ask which choice leads to a happy life, the answer should be clear. Your worth is not decided by someone else.

YOUTH: That’s impossible! We don’t have confidence in ourselves, and that’s exactly why we need approval from others!
PHILOSOPHER: That is probably because we don’t have enough courage to be normal. It’s okay to be just as we are. Your place to be is there, without needing to be a special being or be outstanding in any way. Let’s accept our ordinary selves, ourselves as everyone else.

YOUTH: … I am an ordinary everyone else without any outstanding qualities?
PHILOSOPHER: Aren’t you?
YOUTH: Ha-ha. Making such insults comes perfectly naturally to you, doesn’t it? That’s the greatest insult I’ve ever received in my life.

PHILOSOPHER: It is not an insult. I am a normal person. And being normal is an aspect of individuality. It is nothing to be ashamed about.

YOUTH: Enough of your wisecracking, you sadist! What person today would not take being told ‘You are a common, ordinary human being’ as an insult? What person would be comforted by hearing ‘That’s individuality, too,’ and take you seriously?
PHILOSOPHER: If you feel insulted by these words, you are probably still trying to be a ‘special me’. Consequently, you seek approval from others. Consequently, you seek to gain admiration and draw attention and continue to live within the framework of problem behaviour.

YOUTH: Stop it! Stop messing around!
PHILOSOPHER: Look, instead of placing worth on being different from people, place worth on being yourself. That is true individuality. A way of living in which, instead of being yourself, you compare yourself to others and try to accentuate only your difference is just a way of living in which you deceive both others and yourself.

YOUTH: You’re saying, rather than laying emphasis on my difference from others, place worth on being myself, even if that’s mediocre?
PHILOSOPHER: Yes. Because your individuality is not something relative—it is absolute.

YOUTH: Well, let’s talk about the conclusion I have arrived at with regard to this individuality and such. It is a conclusion that would seem to indicate the limitations of school education.

PHILOSOPHER: Hmm. I would like to hear about it.THAT PROBLEM BEHAVIOUR IS DIRECTED AT YOU
YOUTH: I have been uncertain all along whether I should say this or not, but here we are. It’s time to come clean. Somewhere inside me, I am feeling that school education has limitations.

PHILOSOPHER: Limitations?
YOUTH: That’s right. For us educators, there is a limit to what can be done.

PHILOSOPHER: What do you mean?
YOUTH: In the classroom, there are bright and extroverted students, and there are modest, inconspicuous students, too. To use Adler’s terminology, everyone has their particular lifestyle or worldview. No one is the same. That’s individuality, right?
PHILOSOPHER: Yes.

YOUTH: Then, where do they get those lifestyles from? Without
question, it is from their families.

PHILOSOPHER: Indeed. The influence of the family is quite strong
YOUTH: The students spend the better part of each day at home. And they share everyday life itself with their families in impossibly close quarters, under a single roof. Some parents are passionate about education, and some are passive when it comes to childrearing. Many households have divorced or separated parents, or have lost a parent. There are differences in economic status, too, of course, and there are also parents who abuse their children.

PHILOSOPHER: Yes, unfortunately there are.

YOUTH: On the other side of things, the period of time that we teachers can commit to each student is the scant few years until they graduate. Compared to the parents, who can give almost a lifetime of commitment, the preconditions differ too greatly.

PHILOSOPHER: And what do you conclude from that?
YOUTH: First of all, the kind of broadly defined education that would include personality formation is the responsibility of the family. In other words, in the case of a violent problem child, it is the parents who must assume the unequivocal responsibility of having raised such a child. There can be no mistaking this to be the responsibility of the school. Therefore, the role that is expected of us teachers is one of narrowly defined education; that is to say, education on the level of curriculum. We cannot get any more involved than that. I feel quite ashamed about this conclusion, but it is the reality.

PHILOSOPHER: I see. Adler would probably reject this conclusion out of hand.

YOUTH: Why? How?
PHILOSOPHER: Because, it must be said, the conclusion you have drawn disregards the personalities of the children.

YOUTH: It disregards their personalities?
PHILOSOPHER: In Adlerian psychology, we regard all manner of human words and actions in terms of interpersonal relationships. For example, when we have a person who has been engaging in wrist-cutting or other self-harm, we do not regard that conduct as being directed at nothing at all. The act of self-harm is directed at someone, just as we saw with the revenge problem behaviour. In other words, we think that for all words and actions, there is another party at whom they are directed
YOUTH: And then?
PHILOSOPHER: How do the students in your charge behave within their families, on the other hand? This is something that we cannot know. It is doubtful that they have exactly the same face that they do at school. Because whether it’s the face they show their parents, the face they show their teachers, the face they show their friends or the face they show their junior and senior schoolmates, no one wears the same face all the time.

YOUTH: Well, maybe so.

PHILOSOPHER: And now, there is a student in your classroom who is repeatedly engaging in problem behaviour. At whom is that problem behaviour directed? At you, of course.

YOUTH: What!
PHILOSOPHER: When that student puts on the mask of the face they show you, they are repeatedly engaging in problem behaviour directed at you and no one else. It is not the parents’ problem. It is a problem that has arisen entirely within the relationship between you and the student.

YOUTH: Are you saying that their education at home doesn’t matter?
PHILOSOPHER: We cannot know about that and we cannot intervene. Regardless, right now they are facing you and resolving something to the effect of, ‘I’m going to disrupt this teacher’s class,’ or ‘I’ll disregard the homework this teacher assigns me.’ Of course, there are cases in which the student is continuing to engage in problem behaviour at school and at the same time resolving ‘I’ll be a good child in front of my parents.’ As this is behaviour that is directed at you, you have to take it in, first of all.

YOUTH: It’s a task that I have to solve in my class?
PHILOSOPHER: You’ve got it exactly. Because they are seeking help from you and no one else.

YOUTH: Those kids keep on engaging in problem behaviour directed only at me …
PHILOSOPHER: Moreover, they’re doing it right in front of you. And choosing times when it will be within your field of vision. They are looking for a place to be, in another world that is not their home, that is to say, in your classroom. Through respect, you have to show them that place to be.WHY A PERSON WANTS TO BECOME A SAVIOUR
YOUTH: Adler is utterly terrifying! If I hadn’t learned about Adler, I wouldn’t need to be struggling like this. I would have guided my students without a doubt in my head, yelling at the ones who should be rebuked and issuing high praise to the ones who should be praised, just as the other teachers do. The students would have been grateful to me, and I would have been able to fulfil the role of teaching as my vocation. More than ever, I wish I had never heard about all these ideals!
PHILOSOPHER: It is true that once one learns of Adler’s way of thinking, there is no turning back. There are many people who have been exposed to Adler who, just like you, try to brush it off by saying, ‘That’s an idealistic theory’ or ‘It’s unscientific.’ And yet, they can’t give up on it. Somewhere inside them, there is a feeling of incongruity that remains. They cannot help but be aware of their ‘lie’. Truly, one might call it a strong medicine of life.

