YOUTH: Let’s sort out the points of discussion up until now. First of all, one must not rebuke children. Because rebuking is conduct that damages each other’s respect. And anger and reprimand are low-cost, immature and violent means of communication. Do I have it right?
PHILOSOPHER: Yes.

YOUTH: And again, one must not praise, either. Praising gives rise to the principle of competition within the community and implants in the child a lifestyle, or worldview, of ‘other people are my enemies’.

PHILOSOPHER: That’s right.

YOUTH: Furthermore, rebuking and praising, or, in other words, reward and punishment, stand in the way of the child’s self-reliance. Because reward and punishment is a method of trying to keep the child under one’s control, and the adult who relies on this conduct is, somewhere deep inside, afraid of the child’s self-reliance.

PHILOSOPHER: They want the child to stay a child forever. Consequently, they use that reward and punishment to restrain children. Prepared with such excuses as ‘I’m doing it for you’ or ‘It’s because I’m worried about you,’ they try to make the child stay a child. This sort of attitude in adults contains no respect whatsoever and cannot lead to the building of good relationships.

YOUTH: That’s not all. Adler denies even the need for approval. He says that we should not seek approval from others, but instead switch to our own approval of ourselves.

PHILOSOPHER: Yes. This is a problem that should be considered within the context of self-reliance.

YOUTH: I know. Self-reliance is one’s own determining of one’s worth. The attitude of the need for approval, of trying to get another person to decide one’s worth, is just dependence. That is what you’re saying, right?
PHILOSOPHER: Yes. Some people, on hearing the term self-reliance, will only be able to consider its economic aspects. But there are ten-year-old children who are self-reliant. And there are people in their fifties and sixties who are not. Self-reliance is a matter of the psyche.

YOUTH: All right. It certainly is a wonderful logic. As a philosophy presented here in this study at least, it is completely beyond reproach.

PHILOSOPHER: But you are not satisfied with this philosophy.

YOUTH: Ha-ha! You’re right, I’m not. If it stops at philosophy and cannot be brought down to a practical, scientific level that will hold water outside the walls of this study, and in my classroom in particular, then I won’t be able to agree with it.

You are the one who got me into Adler. Of course, making the final decision is my job. But if you’re only going to lay out the prohibitions—‘One must not do this’ and ‘One must not do that’ and so on—without indicating some other choice, I’ll be at a loss as to what to do. As things stand, I can’t go back to reward-and-punishment education, and I’m not ready to put complete faith in Adler’s education, either!
PHILOSOPHER: The answer is probably a simple one.

YOUTH: Sure, maybe it’s simple for you. Because all you can say is ‘Believe in Adler, choose Adler.’
PHILOSOPHER: No. Whether or not you give up on Adler doesn’t matter at this point. The most important thing to do now is to move away from the subject of education for the time being.

YOUTH: Move away from education!
PHILOSOPHER: I am telling you this as a friend. You have been talking about education all day long, but that is not where your real troubles lie. You have not learned to be happy yet. You are not able to have the courage to be happy. And you did not choose the path of the educator because you wanted to save children. You wanted to be saved through the act of saving them.

YOUTH: What did you say?
PHILOSOPHER: By saving another person, one tries to be saved oneself. By passing oneself off as a kind of saviour, one attempts to realise one’s own worth. This is one form of the superiority complex that people who cannot dispel their feelings of inferiority often fall into, and it is generally referred to as a messiah complex. It is a mental perversion of wanting to be a messiah, a saviour of others.

YOUTH: Don’t mess around! What are you suggesting, all of a sudden?
PHILOSOPHER: Raising one’s voice in anger in such a way is also an expression of feelings of inferiority. When one’s feelings of inferiority are aroused, one tries to resolve them by using the emotion of anger.

YOUTH: Argh, you … !
PHILOSOPHER: The important thing is what we will get into next. Salvation by a person who is unhappy does not overcome self-satisfaction and does not make anyone happy. While you set about saving children, you are actually still in the midst of unhappiness yourself. You are hoping only to realise your own worth. And if that is the case, there is no point in bouncing around more education theory. Find happiness on your own, first of all. Otherwise, any discussion we engage in here is likely to end in a fruitless exchange of invective.

YOUTH: Fruitless! This discussion will be fruitless?
PHILOSOPHER: If you are going to choose to not change things as they are, I will respect that decision. It is fine to return to school just as you are now. But if you are going to choose to change, then today is the only day to do so.

YOUTH: …
PHILOSOPHER: This is something that goes beyond work or education and is about questioning your life itself.

Move away from the discussion of education. You don’t want to save the children—you’re just stuck in a vortex of unhappiness and want to save yourself through education.To the youth, these words amounted to a letter of recommendation to resign that negated his entire being as an educator. I had my eyes opened to Adler’s shining light and set my heart on the path of education in the face of all manner of hardship, and this is the treatment that was waiting for me?And then a thought occurred to him: I wonder if this is how the people of Athens felt when they informed Socrates that he was sentenced to death. This man is too dangerous. If he’s left to his own nefarious devices, the poison of his nihilism will spread across the world.EDUCATION IS FRIENDSHIP, NOT WORK
YOUTH: Ah, you’ve got to be thankful for my self-control. If it were ten or even five years ago, I wouldn’t have had the self-control for this, and I probably would have smashed this fist into your nose by now.

PHILOSOPHER: Heh-heh, well that wouldn’t be good. But I see your point. Adler himself experienced violence from his clients on occasion.

YOUTH: I’ll bet he did! It’s just reward for pushing such extreme views!
PHILOSOPHER: One of Adler’s patients for a time was a girl who suffered from severe mental illness. This was a girl who had been struggling with symptoms for eight years already, and two years prior to their meeting, it had been deemed necessary to commit her to an institution. Of their first encounter, Adler states, ‘She barked like a dog, spat, tore her clothes and tried to eat her handkerchief.’
YOUTH: That is beyond the scope of counselling.

PHILOSOPHER: Yes. Her symptoms were so serious that her doctor had given up on her case. So, the doctor reached out to Adler to see if he couldn’t do anything to help her.

YOUTH: And did he?
PHILOSOPHER: He did. In the end, she recovered completely and managed to return to society, earn her own living and live in harmony with those around her. As Adler relates, ‘No one who sees her now would believe that she had ever suffered from insanity.’
YOUTH: What sort of magic did he use?
PHILOSOPHER: There is no magic to Adlerian psychology. Adler only spoke to her. He spoke to her for eight days in a row, but she did not utter a word. He continued her counselling, and after thirty days she began to talk in a confused and unintelligible way.

Adler understood the reason why she behaved like a dog to be as follows: she felt that she had been treated like a dog by her mother. He did not know whether or not she really had been treated that way. But at the very least, she did feel as if she had. And as an act of rebellion against her mother, she had resolved subconsciously to really play the role of dog.

YOUTH: As a kind of self-harm, as it were?
PHILOSOPHER: Exactly—it was self-harm. Her dignity as a human being had been hurt, and she was keeping the wound open with her own hands. That is why Adler was speaking to her patiently, as an equal human being.

YOUTH: I see.

PHILOSOPHER: Now, after he had been continuing her counselling in this way for some time, one day she began hitting him all of a sudden. What did Adler do then? He put up no resistance whatsoever and allowed her to hit him. When, carried away by the impulse, the girl then broke a window and cut her hand on the glass, Adler quietly bandaged the wound.

YOUTH: Huh, it’s like an episode straight out of the Bible, isn’t it? You’re trying to make Adler out to be some kind of a saint. Ha-ha! Sorry, but I’m not so easily fooled.

PHILOSOPHER: Adler was not a saint, of course, and neither was he choosing the path of non-resistance from a moral viewpoint in this case.

YOUTH: Then, why didn’t he put up any resistance?
PHILOSOPHER: Adler explains that when the girl first began to speak, he had the feeling ‘I am her friend.’ And when she began attacking him for no reason, he simply ‘let her hit me and looked friendly’. In other words, Adler did not interact with the girl as part of his job or his profession, but as a friend.

Say a friend of yours, who had been mentally ill for a long time, suddenly became confused and started hitting you … If you can imagine such a scene, then maybe you can see that Adler’s actions were not in any way out of the ordinary.

YOUTH: Well, I can understand if the person is truly a friend.

PHILOSOPHER: Now. There is something we need to recall at this point. The statement: ‘Counselling is re-education for self-reliance, and the counsellor is an educator.’ And, further, the definition: ‘The educator is a counsellor.’
Adler, who was both a counsellor and an educator, would interact with each client as a friend. So you, too, should interact with each of your students as a friend, because you, too, are an educator and a counsellor.

YOUTH: Huh?
