PHILOSOPHER: The reason you have failed at Adlerian-style teaching and are still unable to find real happiness is a simple one. It is that you have been avoiding the three life tasks of work, friendship and love.

YOUTH: The life tasks?
PHILOSOPHER: You are trying to face your students as work, now. But as Adler shows from his own experience, your relationship with the students is one of friendship. You started off on the wrong foot, and if you don’t do something about it, there’s no way your teaching is going to go over well.

YOUTH: You’re talking nonsense! Behave like I’m a friend to those kids?
PHILOSOPHER: One does not behave as if that is so. One builds a relationship of friendship, in the truest sense of the word.

YOUTH: You’re wrong! I am proud to be a professional educator. It is precisely because I am a professional, and that it is work for which I receive remuneration, that I am able to bear the great responsibility.

PHILOSOPHER: I understand what you want to say. But my view remains the same. The relationship you should create with your students is one of friendship.

Three years ago, we did not manage to discuss the life tasks deeply enough. Once you understand the life tasks, I think you should be able to grasp the meaning of the phrase I began with today: ‘The biggest choice in life.’ And the meaning of the courage to be happy, as well.

YOUTH: And what if I’m not convinced?
PHILOSOPHER: Then, you should just give up on Adler, and give up on me, too.

YOUTH: It’s funny. You’re really sure of yourself, aren’t you?There was no clock in the philosopher’s study. How long had they been engaged in this discussion? How many more hours were left until daybreak? Even as he reproached himself for having forgotten his watch, the youth ruminated over the content of their discussion until now. A messiah complex? Build a friendship relationship with his students? This is no joke! You say that I misunderstand Adler, but you misunderstandme! Andyou’re the one who’s avoiding your life tasks and avoiding contact with other people, by shutting yourself up in this study of yours!ALL JOY IS INTERPERSONAL RELATIONSHIP JOY
YOUTH: I am in the midst of unhappiness now. I am troubled, not about school education, but only about my own life. And the reason for that is that I am avoiding my life tasks … That’s what you’re telling me, right?
PHILOSOPHER: If you are going to sum it up in a few words, yes.

YOUTH: Moreover, you are saying that instead of facing my students as my work, I need to build friendship relationships with them. Because, in other words, that’s what Adler did. Adler faced his clients as friends. That Adler did it, so I should do the same … Do you think I could find such a reason convincing?
PHILOSOPHER: If my stance were that you should do something simply because Adler did, I very much doubt you would find it convincing. The basis for my argument lies elsewhere entirely.

YOUTH: If you don’t reveal what that is, it will be nothing more than pretext.

PHILOSOPHER: All right. Adler called the tasks an individual must confront in order to live in society the life tasks
YOUTH: I know. The task of work, the task of friendship and the task of love, right?
PHILOSOPHER: Yes. The important point here is that these are tasks of interpersonal relationships. In a work task situation, for example, rather than treating one’s labour itself as the task, one focuses on the interpersonal relationships that are associated with it. In that sense, it may be easier to understand the tasks by thinking of them as work relationships, friend relationships and love relationships.

YOUTH: So, in other words, focus on the relationships, not on the actions.

PHILOSOPHER: Right. Now, why does Adler focus on interpersonal relationships? This is an aspect that lies at the very core of Adlerian psychology. Do you know the answer?
YOUTH: I suppose it’s his premise that ‘All problems are interpersonal relationship problems,’ that is to say, his definition of suffering.

PHILOSOPHER: That’s right. But this definition itself requires some explanation. In the first place, what reason could he have to assert that all problems are interpersonal relationship problems? Adler says …
YOUTH: Ah, get to the point! I’ll explain it succinctly, so we’ll be done with it. ‘All problems are interpersonal relationship problems.’ To get to the true meaning of this statement, you just consider the opposite.

Supposing there was only one ‘me’ existing in the universe, what would it be like? It would most likely be a world in which neither language nor logic existed. There would be no competition, no envy and no loneliness, either. Because it is only with the existence of another person who shuns me that a human being can feel loneliness. Loneliness cannot arise if one is truly alone.

PHILOSOPHER: Yes, loneliness exists only within relationships.

YOUTH: But the fact of the matter is that such a hypothesis is impossible. Because in principle, there is no way that we can live separated from other people. Every person is born from a mother’s womb and raised on her milk. We are born in a condition of not being able to turn over in bed on our own, let alone feed ourselves.

And then, the moment when we, as babies, open our eyes and confirm the existence of another person—in most cases, that would be the mother—society comes into being. With the appearance of the father, siblings and others from outside the family, society becomes increasingly complex.

PHILOSOPHER: Yes.

YOUTH: The birth of society is, in other words, the birth of suffering. In society, we are exposed to all manner of suffering, such as conflict, competition, envy, loneliness, not to mention feelings of inferiority. Between ‘me’ and ‘that person’, there is a resounding dissonance. Never again can we return to those days of tranquillity, when we were enveloped in warm amniotic fluid. We have no choice but to live in the incessant hubbub of human society.

If other people did not exist, no problems would exist, either. But there is absolutely no way that we can escape the existence of other people. Therefore, all the problems that people have are interpersonal relationship problems … Is there anything incorrect in this understanding?
PHILOSOPHER: No, you have done an excellent job of summing things up. But allow me to add one point. If all problems are interpersonal relationships, is it all right to just sever one’s relations with other people? Is it all right to just stay away from other people and shut oneself up in one’s room?
No, it is not all right. It is not all right at all. The reason it is not is that all the joy of humanity comes from interpersonal relationships, too. A person living all alone in the universe would have to lead a life that is utterly flat and featureless, with neither problems, nor joy.

Concealed beneath the statement put forth by Adler, ‘All problems are interpersonal relationship problems,’ there lies this definition of happiness: ‘All joy is interpersonal relationship joy.’
YOUTH: Which is precisely why we must confront our life tasks.

PHILOSOPHER: Yes, it is.

YOUTH: All right. Now, about that question: why do I have to build friendship relationships with my students?
PHILOSOPHER: Right. What is friendship, in the first place? Why are we assigned the task of friendship? Let’s use Adler’s words as our guide. Adler makes the following statement with regard to friendship: ‘In friendship, we see with the eyes of another, listen with the ears of another and feel with the heart of another.’
YOUTH: That’s what you mentioned earlier as …
PHILOSOPHER: Yes, it is the definition of community feeling.

YOUTH: What are you saying? That we learn human knowledge and gain community feeling through friendship relationships?
PHILOSOPHER: No, the word ‘gain’ is incorrect. Earlier, I spoke of community feeling as a feeling that resides within all people. It is not something one strives to gain, but something one digs up from within oneself. So, to be precise, it is a feeling that we dig up through friendship. It is in our friendship relationships that our contribution to others is tested. A person who does not embark on friendship can never hope to find a place to be within the community.

YOUTH: Hold on a minute!
PHILOSOPHER: No, I will continue until the conclusion. The point of concern here is this: where does one put friendship into practice? I am sure you already know the answer. It’s the place where children first learn friendship and begin to dig up community feeling. That place is school.

YOUTH: Hey, hold on, I said! You’re developing things too fast, and I don’t get what’s what anymore! If school is the place where children learn friendship, I should become their friend?
PHILOSOPHER: This is a point that is misunderstood by many people. The relationship of friendship is not something limited to the relationship between friends. Friendship relationships are often formed even when relations are not such that one would call the other person a friend. So, what is this thing that Adler speaks of as ‘friendship’? Why does it connect to community feeling? Let’s go into this in depth.DO YOU ‘TRUST’? DO YOU ‘HAVE CONFIDENCE’?
YOUTH: Let me make sure about this again. You are not telling me to be friends with those kids. Have I got it right?
PHILOSOPHER: Yes. Three years ago, on that last day when everything was covered with a blanket of white snow, I explained the difference between ‘trust’ and ‘confidence’. Do you remember?
YOUTH: ‘Trust’ and ‘confidence’? You just keep changing the subject. Yes, of course, I remember that, and I’ve always kept it in mind. It was a fascinating insight.

PHILOSOPHER: Now, let’s go back over it again, in your words. How would you explain ‘trust’?
YOUTH: All right. Simply put, ‘trust’ is believing in the other party with ‘conditions’, for example, when one borrows money from a bank. It goes without saying that the bank will not lend you money unconditionally. They will ask for some kind of collateral, such as real estate or a guarantor, and give you a loan that corresponds to the value of that. And they’ll slap on the interest, too. This is an attitude of ‘We’ll lend to you because we believe in the value of the collateral you’ve given us,’ not one of ‘We’ll lend to you because we believe in you.’ In other words, they are not believing in that person—they are believing in the conditions of that person.

PHILOSOPHER: What about ‘confidence’?
YOUTH: It is doing without any set conditions whatsoever when believing in others. Even though one might not have sufficient grounds for believing, one believes. One believes unconditionally without concerning oneself with such things as collateral. That is confidence. Instead of believing in the conditions of that person, one believes in that person. You could even say that one focuses not on material worth, but on human worth.

PHILOSOPHER: I see.

YOUTH: Furthermore, if I may supplement this explanation with my own interpretation, it is also to believe in ‘oneself who believes in that person’. Because how can one ask for anything like collateral if one does not have confidence in one’s own judgement? It is a confidence in others that cannot exist without self-confidence.

PHILOSOPHER: Thank you very much. You’ve summed it up wonderfully.

