YOUTH: I’m a pretty good student, aren’t I? Look, I spent a long time following Adler, and I gleaned a lot from his writings. And most importantly, I have put his ideas into practice in an educational setting. So, I am not rejecting Adler in an emotional way without a basis of understanding.

PHILOSOPHER: Of course you are not. But please do not misunderstand me here. You are neither my disciple, nor my student.

YOUTH: … Ha-ha! So, insolent fellows like me aren’t your disciples, is that it? What a masterpiece this is. I’m getting an Adler advocate angry.

PHILOSOPHER: It is clear that you are a lover of wisdom. Without shying away from doubt, or from thinking with your own words, you move forward to attain higher understanding. In other words, you are a lover of wisdom, a philosopher. And I am not a person who confers teachings from above—I am nothing more than a wisdom-loving philosopher on the same level as you.

YOUTH: You’re a philosopher, without a teacher or disciples, who is my equal? Then, it’s possible that you could recognise your errors and adopt my views?
PHILOSOPHER: Of course it is. I hope to learn many things from you, and, in fact, there are fresh discoveries each time we talk.

YOUTH: Huh. Just because you’re flattering me doesn’t mean I’m going to let up on the criticism. Now, why did you bring up ‘trust’ and ‘confidence’?
PHILOSOPHER: The life tasks of work, friendship and love that Adler upholds. They are delineated by the distance and depth of our interpersonal relationships.

YOUTH: Yes. You explained that before.

PHILOSOPHER: Even so, though one can say ‘distance’ and ‘depth’ in a single breath, these are things that are hard to grasp. There are many aspects that you have probably misunderstood. Please think about it in a simple manner, like this: the difference between work and friendship is, ‘Is it trust, or is it confidence?’
YOUTH: Trust or confidence?
PHILOSOPHER: Right. Work relationships are relationships of ‘trust’, and friend relationships are relationships of ‘confidence’.

YOUTH: What do you mean?
PHILOSOPHER: Work relationships are condition-based relationships that involve either some vested interest or external factors. Cooperating with someone because we happen to be at the same company, for example. Or there’s a person whose personality you don’t like but he’s someone you do business with, so you maintain and promote the relationship. But you have no intention of maintaining that relationship away from work. This is truly a relationship of ‘trust’ that is formed as a result of the vested interest that is your work. Regardless of your individual preferences, you have to form that relationship.

On the other hand, in friendship, there is no ‘reason to befriend this person’. It is not a vested interest, and neither is it a relationship that is compelled by external factors. It is purely a relationship formed out of the intrinsic motivation that ‘I like this person.’ To borrow the phrase you used earlier, one is believing in that person, not in the conditions of that person. Clearly, friendship is a relationship of ‘confidence’.

YOUTH: Ah, it’s getting tiresome again. If that’s the case, why did Adler use such words as ‘work’ and ‘friendship’? He could’ve just discussed interpersonal relationships in terms of ‘trust’ and ‘confidence’ and ‘love’ from the start. You’re just complicating things and trying to blow smoke!
PHILOSOPHER: All right. I will explain as simply as possible the reason that Adler chose the word ‘work’.

The youth was sure of it. Adler probably regards poverty as a virtue and economic activity in general as something vulgar. That’s why he can disparage work and say things like ‘Build friend relationships with your students.’ What a joke.The youth was just as proud to be a career professional as he was to be an educator. It is precisely because we engage in education as a profession, and not out of enjoyment or charity, that we are able to responsibly execute our professional duties.

His coffee cup had been empty for a long time, and the night was far advanced. Nevertheless, the youth’s eyes shone with burning intensity.WHY WORK BECOMES A LIFE TASK
YOUTH: Let me ask you this: in the first place, what was Adler’s opinion with regard to work? Did he look down on work or on the earning of money through work? You know, if Adlerian psychology, with its tendency towards empty idealism, is to become a true, grounded theory, this is a discussion that is absolutely necessary.

PHILOSOPHER: To Adler, the meaning of engaging in work was simple. Work is a means of production for staying alive in our Earth’s harsh natural environments. That is to say, he thought of work as a task quite directly linked to survival.

YOUTH: Hmm. Well, that’s rather banal. It’s just, ‘Work so that you can eat?’
PHILOSOPHER: Yes. When we think of surviving, of eking out a living, the fact that we humans must engage in some kind of labour is a self-evident truth. On that basis, Adler focused on the paradigm of the interpersonal relationship that establishes work.

YOUTH: The interpersonal relationship that establishes work? What do you mean?
PHILOSOPHER: In the absence of sharp teeth, wings for soaring the skies or sturdy shells, the human being in the natural world is basically physically inferior to all other animals. That is why we have chosen to live in groups and learned to protect ourselves from outside enemies. In groups, we have lived and raised our children while hunting, engaging in agriculture, securing our food supply and maintaining our physical security … The answer that Adler derived from this is embodied in a brilliant few words.

YOUTH: What conclusion did he come to?
PHILOSOPHER: We humans did not just herd together. Humans discovered the revolutionary way of working called ‘division of labour’. Division of labour is the incomparable survival strategy that the human race acquired in order to compensate for its physical inferiority. This is Adler’s final conclusion.

YOUTH: Division of labour?
PHILOSOPHER: If we only herded together, that would be no different from what most animals do. But humans herded together on the basis of an advanced system of division of labour. Or one could say that we created society in order to divide up the labour. To Adler, the work tasks were not mere tasks of labour. They were tasks of the division of labour that were premised on our connection with others.

YOUTH: So, it is because of its premise on our connection with others that work is a task of interpersonal relationships?
PHILOSOPHER: That’s right. Why do humans work? In order to survive. In order to stay alive in the harsh natural world. Why do humans create society? In order to work. In order to divide up the labour. Living and working and building society are all inseparable.

YOUTH: Hmm …
PHILOSOPHER: Before Adler the division of labour was explored by others, such as Adam Smith, who pointed out its significance from the standpoint of economics. Adler, however, was likely the first to recognise the division of labour in the field of psychology. Moreover, it was he who saw its significance as the paradigm of interpersonal relationships. It is thanks to this key concept that the meaning of labour to humans, and the meaning of society, have become clear.

YOUTH: Ah, this is an extremely important matter. Please go into a bit more detail.

PHILOSOPHER: Adler’s inquiries always start with the major points. To quote Adler, ‘Perhaps if we lived on another planet which gave everything easily and bountifully, working would not be a virtue. Perhaps it would be a vice and being lazy would be a virtue.’
YOUTH: He says some funny things! And then?
PHILOSOPHER: But there is no such environment on our planet. Our food supply is limited, and no one is going to provide us with dwelling places. So, what do we do? We work. And we do not work alone, but with our comrades. In conclusion, Adler states, ‘The answer that is logical and in accord with common sense is that we should work, cooperate and contribute.’
YOUTH: That’s a thoroughly logical conclusion.

PHILOSOPHER: The important thing here is that Adler is not stipulating that labour itself is ‘right’. Regardless of moral right and wrong, we have no choice but to work and no choice but to engage in the division of labour. We have no choice but to build relationships with others.

YOUTH: So, I guess it’s a conclusion that goes beyond right and wrong.

PHILOSOPHER: In other words, human beings cannot live alone. It is not that we cannot bear loneliness or that we want people to talk to, so much as simply not being able to live on the level of survival. And in order to divide labour with another person, one must believe in that person. One cannot cooperate with someone whom one doubts.

YOUTH: That is a relationship of trust?
PHILOSOPHER: Yes. Human beings do not have the choice of not believing in each other. It would be impossible for us to not cooperate and not divide up the labour. A relationship, not of cooperating because one likes that person, but of having to cooperate whether one likes it or not. You can think of it that way.

YOUTH: Fascinating! No, I mean it, this is wonderful! I’m finally getting the work relationship. Division of labour is necessary for living, and mutual trust is necessary in order to carry it out. And there is no alternative. We cannot live alone, and not trusting is not an option. We have no choice but to build relationships … That’s how it is, right?
PHILOSOPHER: Yes. It truly is a life task.ALL PROFESSIONS ARE HONOURABLE
YOUTH: Well, let’s really get to the heart of the matter. A relationship in which there is no alternative but trust, a relationship in which there is no alternative but to cooperate. This is something that goes beyond the actual setting where labour takes place, isn’t it?
PHILOSOPHER: Yes, it is. I suppose the most easily understood example would be the typical division of labour relationships among teammates at sports competitions and the like. In order to win a match, they have no choice but to cooperate regardless of their individual likes and dislikes. It is not an option to ignore someone because one doesn’t like them, or to sit out a game because one can’t get along with one’s teammates, or anything like that. You forget liking and not liking the moment the match begins. You treat your teammate not as a friend, but as one of the ‘functions’ of the team. And you yourself try to excel as one of those functions.

YOUTH: Ability is given precedence over good relations.

PHILOSOPHER: Such aspects are probably unavoidable. So much so that Adam Smith himself declares self-interest to lie at the very foundation of division of labour.

YOUTH: Self-interest?
PHILOSOPHER: Suppose there’s a man who is an expert at making bows and arrows. If you use the bows and arrows he makes, your rate of accuracy will improve drastically, and your ability to kill or wound will be enhanced as well. The thing is, he’s not an expert at hunting. He is slow on his feet, has weak eyesight and he’s just not good at hunting, even with his own excellent bows and arrows. And then, one day, it occurs to him: ‘I’ll devote my time to making bows and arrows.’
YOUTH: Huh. Why?
PHILOSOPHER: If he devotes his time to making bows and arrows, he should be able to make a few dozen of them per day. If he distributes them to comrades who are good at hunting, they will probably shoot down more game than they ever have before. Later, he can get his share of the game they bring back home. That is the choice that allows for the maximisation of profit for both parties.

YOUTH: I see, so it’s not just working together—it’s everyone being in charge of their own field of expertise.

PHILOSOPHER: From the hunting experts’ point of view, there would be nothing better than getting their hands on some highly accurate bows and arrows. They won’t have to make the bows and arrows themselves, and they’ll be able to concentrate on hunting. And then they’ll divvy up the game they catch with everyone. In this way, they will perfect a more advanced division of labour system that is one step beyond going hunting in a group.

YOUTH: That’s certainly rational.
