
PHILOSOPHER: The important thing here is that no one is sacrificing themselves. That is to say, the combination of pure self-interest is establishing the division of labour. As a result of having pursued self-interest, a fixed economic order is created. This is the division of labour that was devised by Adam Smith.

YOUTH: In a division of labour society, if we follow self-interest all the way, ultimately it connects to other-interest.

PHILOSOPHER: That’s right.

YOUTH: But Adler is recommending contribution to others, isn’t he? Three years ago, you asserted this point quite forcefully. That the aim to contribute to others is a grand compass of life, a guiding star. Doesn’t the idea of giving precedence to one’s own profit contradict contribution to others?
PHILOSOPHER: It does not contradict it at all. First, one embarks on work relationships. One is tied to other people and to society by interest. And so, it is only upon having pursued self-interestedness that one finds contribution to others.

YOUTH: Even so, surely superiority and inferiority will arise, won’t they? Say there’s one person who has an important job and another who has a job that doesn’t really matter. Doesn’t this deviate from the principle of equality?
PHILOSOPHER: No, it does not deviate from it at all. Viewed from the standpoint of the division of labour, all professions are honourable. Whether prime minister, business owner, farmer, factory worker or the oft-ignored profession of housewife, all work is something that has to be done by someone in the community, and all of us are just doing our share of that work.

YOUTH: So, all forms of work are of equal value?
PHILOSOPHER: Yes. To paraphrase Adler with regard to the division of labour, ‘A person’s worth is decided by the way in which they fulfil their role in assigning the division of labour in their community.’ In other words, a person’s worth is not something that is decided by what kind of work they engage in. It is decided by the attitude with which they undertake that work.

YOUTH: The attitude with which they undertake it?
PHILOSOPHER: For example, you quit your job as a librarian and chose the path of an educator. Today, you have dozens of students in front of you, and you truly feel that you have been entrusted with their lives. You feel that you have a really big job that is useful to society. Perhaps you even think that education is everything and that other professions are insignificant in comparison.

But when one considers the community as a whole, the librarian, the middle-school teacher and all other work is something that has to been done by someone in the community, and no superior or inferior can exist there. If anyone is going to be superior or inferior, it will only be in the attitude with which they undertake that work.

YOUTH: What is the attitude with which they undertake the work in such a case?
PHILOSOPHER: In principle, each person’s ability is treated as important within the division of labour relationship. When it comes to company employment, for example, the level of ability becomes a criterion. There is no denying this. However, after starting the division of labour, ability alone is insufficient for character evaluation or for judging how relationships should be. Rather, the question ‘Do I want to work with this person?’ becomes important, because if it does not, it will become difficult to help each other.

The major factor in deciding ‘Do I want to work with this person?’ or ‘Do I want to help when this person is having a hard time?’ is that person’s integrity and the attitude with which they undertake work.

YOUTH: Okay, so if one undertakes it with integrity and sincerity, there is no difference in worth between the person who performs lifesaving work and the person who takes advantage of others’ weaknesses and engages in usurious lending?
PHILOSOPHER: No, there is no difference.

YOUTH: Huh!
PHILOSOPHER: Our community has all manner of work available, and the presence of people who engage in each kind of work is crucial. That diversity itself is abundance. If the work is one that has no value, it will not be needed by anyone and will be done away with. If it has not been done away with and is still surviving, it must possess some value.

YOUTH: Does that mean that even usurious lending has value?
PHILOSOPHER: It is natural that one might think so. The most dangerous thing is to uphold a mediocre justice that declares what is good and what is bad. A person who is drunk on justice will be unable to recognise anyone else’s values and will end up crusading for the intervention of justice. What lies ahead with such intervention is a society of uniform greyness that is robbed of freedom. You can do whatever kind of work you like, and it does not matter what kind of work other people do, either.THE IMPORTANT THING IS WHAT USE ONE MAKES OF THA EQUIPMENT
YOUTH: Interesting. This thing you’re calling the Adlerian division of labour is certainly an interesting concept. The human being in the natural world is much too weak to live alone. That is why we formed groups and came up with the way of working called ‘division of labour’. When we carry out the division of labour, we can bring down a mammoth, and we can farm and build dwellings.

PHILOSOPHER: That’s right.

YOUTH: And the division of labour begins by trusting others regardless of one’s likes and dislikes. We cannot live if we don’t divide up the labour. We cannot live if we don’t cooperate with other people—which is another way of saying that we cannot live without trusting others. This is the division of labour relationship and the work relationship.

PHILOSOPHER: Yes. Take the rules of traffic on public roads, for example. It is on the basis of our trust that all people follow the rules of traffic that we pass through a green light. We are not having confidence in people unconditionally. We do look to the left and right first. But even then, we are placing a certain trust in other people whom we have never met. In a sense, this, too, is a work relationship, in that it is fulfilling a shared interest in the smooth flow of traffic.

YOUTH: I see, I guess that works. At this point, I can’t find anything about the division of labour that needs to be refuted. But you haven’t forgotten, have you? The departure point of this discussion was your remark that I should build friend relationships with my students.

PHILOSOPHER: No, I have not forgotten.

YOUTH: But considered in the context of the division of labour, your argument makes less sense than ever. Why on earth would I enter into friend relationships with my students? Clearly, it’s a work relationship, isn’t it? Neither I nor my students have any memory of having chosen each other. It’s just a relationship that was mechanically assigned between people who were originally complete strangers. We have no choice but to cooperate, in order to run the classroom and fulfil the objective of graduation. It is truly a work relationship that is entered into with a common interest.

PHILOSOPHER: I think it is only natural to have such doubts. Now, let’s go over each of the points we have discussed today. What is the objective of education? What is the work that is required of the educator? Our discussion began with these questions.

Adler’s conclusion is a simple one. The objective of education is self-reliance, and the work that is required of the educator is assistance towards self-reliance. I believe that you agreed with this point.

YOUTH: Yes, I’ll allow it, in any case.

PHILOSOPHER: Then, in what way can one assist children to gain self-reliance? In response to this doubt, I spoke about ‘starting from respect’.

YOUTH: Indeed, you did.

PHILOSOPHER: Why respect? What is respect? Here, we must recall the words of Erich Fromm. Namely, that respect is ‘the ability to see a person as he is’ and ‘the placing of worth on that person being that person’.

YOUTH: Of course I remember.

PHILOSOPHER: Have regard for the person as he is. You are fine just as you. There is no need to be special. There is value in you just being you. Through respect, and by conveying that, the children will regain the courage they had lost and begin climbing the steps of self-reliance.

YOUTH: Yes, that’s our discussion in a nutshell.

PHILOSOPHER: Now. This is the definition of respect that has emerged here: ‘To have regard for the person as he is.’ Is it trust that lies at the very root of respect, or is it confidence?
YOUTH: Huh?
PHILOSOPHER: One has regard for that person as he is, without imposing one’s own system of values. The reason one can do such a thing is that one is accepting and believing that person unconditionally. In other words, one is having confidence in him.

YOUTH: Respect and confidence are synonymous?
PHILOSOPHER: One could say that. Put the other way around, one cannot have confidence in someone whom one does not respect. Whether or not one can have confidence in someone depends on whether or not one respects that person.

YOUTH: Ah, I get it. The gateway of education is respect. And respect is confidence. Therefore, a relationship based on confidence is a friend relationship. It’s that sort of syllogism, right?
PHILOSOPHER: That’s right. One would not be able to respect one’s students in a trust-based work relationship. And that is exactly how it is for you now.

YOUTH: No. No, that is not where the issue lies. I can place unconditional confidence in my best friend, for example. I can accept him as the person he is. It is possible enough in such a case.

The issue is not the act of having confidence, but the target. You are telling me to build friend relationships with all my students and to have unconditional confidence in all my students. Do you think that such a thing is really possible?
PHILOSOPHER: Of course I do.

YOUTH: How?
PHILOSOPHER: Suppose, for example, a person who is critical of everyone around them, saying, ‘I don’t like this thing about so-and-so,’ and ‘This aspect of that person is unbearable’ and such. And then they lament over it. ‘Ah, I’m so unlucky. I’m not blessed when it comes to meeting people.’
Are such people really not blessed when it comes to meeting people? No. Absolutely not. It is not that they are not blessed with comrades. It is only that they have not tried to make comrades or, in other words, that they have not tried to embark on interpersonal relationships.

YOUTH: So, one can become a comrade to anyone?
PHILOSOPHER: One can. Maybe the relationship between you and your students is one of all of you, due to accidental factors, just happening to be in that place. Maybe, until that time, you were all total strangers who didn’t even know each other’s faces or names. And maybe you won’t become what you call best friends.

