But remember that statement of Adler’s: ‘The important thing is not what one is born with, but what use one makes of that equipment.’ Regardless of who the other person is, one can give them respect, and one can believe in them. Because that is something that is the product of one’s singleminded resolve and is not affected by the environment or the target.

YOUTH: So, it’s that again? You’re returning to the problem of courage? You’re saying it’s the courage to believe!
PHILOSOPHER: Yes. Everything comes back to that.

YOUTH: No, it doesn’t! You don’t know about real friendship!
PHILOSOPHER: What do you mean?
YOUTH: You don’t have true close friends, and you don’t know about real friendship, and that’s why you can talk about such pipe dreams! I’ll bet you’ve never had anything but shallow associations with people. That’s why you can say that anyone will do. You’re the one who’s been running away from interpersonal relationships and from your life tasks!
In the natural world, the human being is such a small and feeble creature. To make up for that weakness, humans created society and brought forth division of labour. Division of labour is an incomparable survival strategy that is unique to the human race. This was the division of labour conveyed by Adler. If the discussion had ended there, the youth would have applauded Adler enthusiastically. But when it came to the friendship that the philosopher began presenting next, he was far from convinced. This guy can talk about such a well-grounded division of labour, and then in the next breath change the subject to friendship and start espousing ideals, after all! And now he brings up courage again!HOW MANY CLOSE FRIENDS DO YOU HAVE?
PHILOSOPHER: So, you have a best friend, don’t you?
YOUTH: I don’t know how he feels about it. But I do have one friend in whom I would have what you call unconditional confidence.

PHILOSOPHER: What kind of person is he?
YOUTH: He was my classmate at university. The guy wanted to become a novelist, and I was always the first to read his work. Late at night when everyone else was sound asleep, out of the blue, he’d show up at the boarding house where I lived and say, his voice shaking with excitement, ‘Read this short story I just completed!’ or ‘Hey, I found this amazing passage in a Dostoyevsky novel!’ Even now, he still sends me new pieces of writing every time he finishes them, and when I got hired as an instructor, he celebrated with me.

PHILOSOPHER: Was this fellow a close friend of yours from the start?
YOUTH: How could he have been? Friendship is something that takes time to cultivate. He didn’t become a close friend overnight. We laughed together, marvelled at things together, and it grew into an ever so slightly complicit relationship. We cultivated the friendship gradually and became close friends, while also going through some intense conflicts at times.

PHILOSOPHER: So, in other words, at some point he was elevated from being a friend to being a close friend? Was there something that led to your thinking of him as a close friend?
YOUTH: Hmm, I wonder. If I had to, I guess I’d say it was when I felt sure that ‘With this guy, it’ll be okay to talk frankly about everything.’
PHILOSOPHER: You cannot talk frankly about everything with a normal friend?
YOUTH: That’s how it is for everyone. All people go through life wearing a social mask. People go through life hiding their true feelings. Even with a friend you exchange smiles and jokes with each time you meet, you never get to see his real face. We choose our subjects of conversation, our attitudes and our words. All of us interact with our friends while wearing a social mask.

PHILOSOPHER: Why can’t you take off the mask when you are with a normal friend?
YOUTH: Because if I did such a thing, the relationship would fall apart! You can talk all you want about ‘the courage to be disliked’ and such, but there’s no such thing as a person who would actually wish to be disliked. We wear the mask to prevent needless conflict from arising and to prevent the relationship from falling apart. If we don’t do that, society won’t operate.

PHILOSOPHER: To put it more directly, are we avoiding being hurt?
YOUTH: … Yes, I’ll acknowledge that. Certainly, I don’t want to get hurt, and I don’t want to hurt someone else. But you see, it isn’t only out of self-protection that we wear the mask. It’s actually more out of kindness! If we were to live only with our real faces and our true feelings, we would hurt too many people. Just imagine what the world would be like if everyone were crashing their true feelings into each other … It’s a perfect picture of Hell, with blood spattered all around!
PHILOSOPHER: But you can take off the mask when you are with your close friend, and even if that leads to you hurting each other, the relationship won’t fall apart, will it?
YOUTH: Sure, I can take it off and the relationship won’t fall apart. Even if he commits a faux pas once or twice, I don’t think that would be reason enough to sever my relationship with him. Because the relationship is based on accepting each other’s strengths and shortcomings.

PHILOSOPHER: That is a wonderful relationship.

YOUTH: And the important thing is there are precious few people in the world who will allow us to have such a sense of certainty. One would be lucky to find even five during one’s lifetime … Well, please get to my question. Do you have any true close friends? Because from the way you talk, you really sound like a person who doesn’t know anything about close friends or about friendship and only has comrades he knows from books and daydreams.

PHILOSOPHER: Yes, of course, I have several close friends. And to borrow your words, they are people with whom I can have my ‘real face’, or even if they commit a faux pas once or twice, I don’t think that would be reason enough to sever my relationship.

YOUTH: What kind of people are they? School friends? Comrades in philosophy, comrades in Adlerian research?
PHILOSOPHER: For example, you.

YOUTH: Huh! What did you say?
PHILOSOPHER: As I have said before, to me, you are an irreplaceable friend. I have never worn a mask in your presence
YOUTH: So, does that mean that you have unconditional confidence in me?
PHILOSOPHER: Of course I do. If I did not, this dialogue would not be able to take place.

YOUTH: No way!
PHILOSOPHER: It’s the truth.

YOUTH: This isn’t a joke! You think you can get away with manipulating a person’s heart this way, you phony wise man! I’m not the kind of person who’s taken in by such honeyed words!FIRST, BELIEVE
PHILOSOPHER: Why are you so adamant in your denial of confidence?
YOUTH: But it’s the other way around! I wish you’d tell me what is the point in believing in a complete stranger and in believing in them without conditions? To believe in someone unconditionally is to be unquestioning of others and to believe in them blindly. It’s the same as saying one should just become an obedient sheep!
PHILOSOPHER: You are wrong. Believing is not just swallowing everything one hears, hook, line and sinker. One is sceptical with regard to that person’s thoughts and beliefs and to the statements he makes. One steps back for a moment and thinks for oneself. There is nothing wrong with doing so, and it is important work. On top of that, even if someone is telling lies, one must believe in the whole person who lies to us.

YOUTH: Huh?
PHILOSOPHER: Believe in others. This is not the passive conduct of swallowing something hook, line and sinker. Real confidence is in all respects an active approach.

YOUTH: What are you saying?
PHILOSOPHER: For example, I would like as many people as possible to learn of Adler’s ideas. I hope to present Adler’s words. However, this wish is not something that can be realised through my labour alone. It is something that forms upon there being a will to listen on the part of the person who receives my words and on the part of the person who listens deeply to them.

Then, in what way can I get someone to receive and listen deeply to my words? I cannot force them and say, ‘Believe in me.’ That person is free to believe or not to believe. The only thing I can do is believe in the other party to whom I am speaking. That is all.

YOUTH: Believe in the other party?
PHILOSOPHER: Yes. If I were to speak to you about Adler with a sense of distrust, it’d just go in one ear and out the other. Regardless of the validity of my discourse, you would have no intention of listening from the very start. That would be perfectly natural.

But I want you to believe in me. I want you to believe in me and listen to Adler’s words. So, I will believe in you first, even if you yourself are trying not to believe.

YOUTH: You want me to believe in you, so you believe in me first?
PHILOSOPHER: Right. Take, for example, when parents who do not have confidence in their children are worrying about various things. Even if their arguments are quite reasonable ones, they do not reach the children. Actually, the more reasonable the arguments are, the more the children want to oppose them. Why do they oppose them? Because their parents aren’t actually seeing them at all, and even as the parents are in the midst of distrusting themselves, the children are getting all the standard lectures.

YOUTH: Reasonable arguments not being understood as such is something I am well aware of on a daily basis.

PHILOSOPHER: We try not to believe only in the words of ‘a person who will believe in me’. We do not judge the other party by the rightness of their opinion.

YOUTH: I’ll accept that that aspect exists, but the rightness of your opinion is going to be questioned in the end!
PHILOSOPHER: All conflicts, from a small quarrel to a war between nations, arise as a result of collisions of ‘my justice’. Justice is something that takes on all manner of forms depending on the era, the environment or individual standpoints, and, no matter where one may go, there is never only one justice or one solution. It would seem that it is dangerous to overestimate ‘rightness’.

Within that, we are looking to find common ground. We are looking for a connection with other people. We are hoping to join hands. If you want to join hands with others, you have to reach out with your hands, too.

YOUTH: No, that’s another arrogant notion! Why? Because when you say you believe in me, what you’re thinking is ‘So, believe in me, too,’ right?
PHILOSOPHER: No, I am not. It is not something one can force. I believe in you, whether you believe in me or not. I keep on believing. That is the meaning of unconditional.

YOUTH: How about right now? I do not believe in you. Even after being so firmly rejected and verbally abused with cruel words, can you still completely believe in me?
PHILOSOPHER: Of course I can. I believe in you just as I did three years ago. If I did not, we would not be able to engage in discussion for such a long time and with such earnestness. A person who does not believe in others cannot engage in direct discussion. Such a person would not think, ‘With this guy, it’ll be okay to talk frankly about everything,’ as you so admirably put it.

YOUTH: Argh! This is impossible! There is no way I can believe such words.

PHILOSOPHER: That is fine. I will just go on believing. I will believe in you, and I will believe in human beings.

