YOUTH: Oh, shut up! So, you’re a religious type, now?PEOPLE NEVER UNDERSTAND EACH OTHER
PHILOSOPHER: I have said this before, but I am not a follower of a particular religion. However, in both Christianity and Buddhism, in such ways of thought that have been cultivated and refined over a period of several thousand years, there is a power that cannot be ignored. It is because they contained uniform truths that they still survive. Yes, for example: do you know the ‘Love thy neighbour’ phrase from the Bible?
YOUTH: Yes, of course. It’s that neighbourly love that you enjoy talking about so much.

PHILOSOPHER: This phrase is in circulation with an important part left out. In the Gospel of Luke, in the New Testament of the Bible, it says, ‘Love thy neighbour as thyself.’
YOUTH: As thyself?
PHILOSOPHER: That’s right. He is saying not just to love one’s neighbour, but to love them as much as one loves oneself. If one cannot love oneself, one cannot love others. If one cannot believe in oneself, one cannot believe in others. Please think of the phrase as carrying that connotation. You are insisting that you cannot believe in other people, but that is because you have not managed to truly believe in yourself.

YOUTH: You’re making too many assumptions!
PHILOSOPHER: Being self-centred does not mean looking only at oneself because one likes oneself. In actuality, the opposite is the case, and it is because one is unable to accept oneself as one is, and because one is constantly beset with anxiety, that one has concern only for oneself.

YOUTH: So, you’re saying that because I hate myself, I look only at myself?
PHILOSOPHER: Yes. That’s right.

YOUTH: Oh, what an unpleasant psychology!
PHILOSOPHER: It is the same with regard to other people. For example, when recalling a lover one had a bad breakup with, for a while it’s only the bad things about the other person that come to mind. This is evidence that you want to feel ‘I’m glad we broke up’ and that some uncertainty remains about your decision. If you don’t tell yourself ‘I’m glad we broke up’, you might lose your resolve. See it as being that kind of stage.

And if you recall the good points about a former lover, that means you do not have the need to actively dislike that person and can be free from feelings towards that person. Either way, the issue is not whether one likes or dislikes the other person, but whether one likes oneself now.

YOUTH: Hmm.

PHILOSOPHER: You have not yet learned to like yourself. As a result, you cannot believe in others, you cannot believe in your students and are unable to embark on friend relationships. That is exactly why you are now trying to gain a sense of belonging through your work. You are trying to prove your worth by being successful in your work.

YOUTH: What is wrong with that? Recognition at work is recognition from society!
PHILOSOPHER: No. In principle, we may say that it is your ‘functions’ that are recognised as a result of your work, not you. If someone who possesses greater ‘functions’ appears, the people around you will turn to that person. That is the principle of the marketplace, the principle of competition. As a result of that, you will never be able to get out of the vortex of competition and never gain a true sense of belonging.

YOUTH: Then, how can one gain a true sense of belonging?
PHILOSOPHER: One has confidence in other people, and one embarks on friend relationships. That is the only way. We cannot gain happiness solely by dedicating ourselves to our work.

YOUTH: But … Even if I believe in someone, there’s no way to know if that person will have confidence in me or if that person will embark on a friend relationship with me!
PHILOSOPHER: This is the separation of tasks. How does that other person feel about you and what sort of attitude do they take towards you? Those are the other person’s tasks and are not something you have any control over
YOUTH: No way, that doesn’t make sense. Because if we are going to treat the separation of tasks as a prerequisite, wouldn’t that mean that we never really know each other?
PHILOSOPHER: It is a given that it is not possible to know everything that the other party is thinking. One believes in another person as an unknowable being. That is confidence. We humans are beings who cannot know each other, and that is exactly why believing is the only way.

YOUTH: Hah! So everything you’re saying is religion, after all!
PHILOSOPHER: Adler was a thinker who had the courage to believe in human beings. Actually, given the situation he was placed in, maybe he had no choice but to believe.

YOUTH: What do you mean?
PHILOSOPHER: This is the perfect opportunity for us to take a look back at the circumstances that led Adler to put forward his concept of ‘community feeling’. Why, in the face of criticism, did Adler advance this idea? Naturally, he had a substantial reason.LIFE IS MADE UP OF TRIALS OF ‘NOTHING DAYS’
YOUTH: The reason he came up with community feeling?
PHILOSOPHER: After parting ways with Freud, in 1913, the year before the outbreak of World War I, Adler named his psychology approach ‘individual psychology’. One might say that Adlerian psychology, at its inception, was drawn into the war.

YOUTH: Did Adler serve in the war?
PHILOSOPHER: Yes, he did. When World War I began, Adler, who was forty-four at the time, was conscripted as a medical officer and served in the department of neurology and psychiatry at a military hospital. His job as a medical officer was one thing and one thing only: to provide treatment to the soldiers in his care and to return them to the front lines as soon as possible.

YOUTH: To return them to the front? Well, the purpose of giving them treatment is pretty clear!
PHILOSOPHER: You’re quite right. The soldiers he treated were sent back to the front, and without that treatment there was no way they would ever have been able to return to society. For Adler, who as a child had lost a younger brother and had dreamed of becoming a doctor, the duties of a medical officer must have been distressing in the extreme. Later, Adler said of his time as a medical officer, ‘I felt throughout the war as a prisoner feels.’
YOUTH: I can barely imagine how difficult a role it must have been for him.

PHILOSOPHER: World War I, which was begun as the ‘war to end all wars’, progressed into an unprecedented all-out war that devastated Europe and involved even non-combatants. It goes without saying that this tragedy had a great effect on Adler and other psychologists of his time.

YOUTH: Concretely speaking, how?
PHILOSOPHER: Freud, for example, after his experience of the war, proposed the existence of the ‘death drive’, which would become known as ‘Thanatos’ or ‘Destrudo’. This is a concept that has been subjected to all manner of interpretation, but it may be best understood as the ‘destructive impulse with regard to life’.

YOUTH: Without considering the existence of such an impulse, there would be no way to explain the tragedies unfolding before them.

PHILOSOPHER: I suppose that is how it was. On the other hand, what Adler, who had experienced the same war directly, and from the standpoint of a medical officer, proposed was ‘community feeling’, which was quite the opposite of Freud. I would say that this is a particularly noteworthy point.

YOUTH: Why did he bring up community feeling at that time?
PHILOSOPHER: Adler was in all respects a practical person. One might say that he did not focus on war or murder, or the causes of violence, in the way that Freud did, but considered instead, ‘In what way can we put a stop to war?’
Are we beings who long for war, for murder and violence? Surely not. If we can nurture community feeling, that is to say, the awareness that all people must have of regarding other people as comrades, we can prevent conflict. And furthermore, we have the power to accomplish that … Adler believed in people.

YOUTH: In his pursuit of such empty ideals, however, he was criticised as unscientific.

PHILOSOPHER: Yes, he received a great deal of criticism and lost many comrades. Adler was not unscientific, however. He was constructive. His principle was that the important thing is not what one is born with, but what use one makes of that equipment.

YOUTH: But wars are still occurring all over the world.

PHILOSOPHER: To be sure, Adler’s ideals have yet to be realised. One wonders if they are actually realisable. Regardless, progressing towards those ideals is something that we can do. Just as a human being can always continue to grow as an individual, the entire human race should be able to continue growing. We must not use the unhappiness of our current situation as a reason for abandoning our ideals.

YOUTH: So, if we don’t abandon our ideals, some day there will be no more war?
PHILOSOPHER: Mother Teresa, on being asked ‘What can you do to promote world peace?’, gave the following reply: ‘Go home and love your family.’ It is the same with Adler’s community feeling. Instead of doing something for world peace, just have confidence in the person in front of you. Become comrades with that person in front of you. That everyday, small accumulation of confidence will some day get rid of even conflict between nations.

YOUTH: All you need to think about is what’s right in front of you?
PHILOSOPHER: For better or for worse, that is the only place we can start from. If one wants to rid the world of conflict, one has to free oneself from conflict first. If you wish your students would believe in you, you need to believe in your students first. Instead of engaging in the whole story while leaving oneself out of it, one takes the first step as a part of the whole.

YOUTH: You spoke of this three years ago. You said: ‘You should start.’
PHILOSOPHER: Yes. ‘Someone has to start. Other people might not be cooperative, but that is not connected to you. My advice is this: you should start. With no regard to whether others are cooperative or not.’ This was Adler’s answer to a question regarding the actual effectiveness of community feeling.

YOUTH: Will my first step change the world?
PHILOSOPHER: Maybe it will change, and maybe it will not. But one does not need to think now about what the results will be, or anything like that. What you can do is have confidence in the people closest to you. That is all.

Our trials and decisions as human beings do not come only with such symbolic life events as taking university entrance examinations, gaining employment or getting married. For us, it is our ‘nothing days’ that are our trial, and it is in everyday life here and now that the big decisions must be made. People who manage to get by and avoid those trials are unlikely to ever attain real happiness.

YOUTH: Hmm.

PHILOSOPHER: Before arguing over the state of the world, have some thought for your neighbour. Have some thought for your interpersonal relationships on ‘nothing days’. That is all we can do.

