YOUTH: Ha-ha. So, you mean, ‘Love thy neighbour as thyself.’GIVE, AND IT SHALL BE GIVEN UNTO YOU
PHILOSOPHER: It seems there are still some points that you find unconvincing.

YOUTH: Unfortunately, there are quite a few. As you so aptly put it, my students do look down on me. But the students aren’t the only ones who do that. Almost nobody out there acknowledges that I have some worth, and they just ignore my existence.

If they had regard for me and would listen to what I say, my attitude would probably change. And maybe it would even be possible to have confidence in them. But the reality is different. Those guys think little of me, and they always have.

If there is one thing that can be done in such a situation, it is this: to have my worth acknowledged through my work. That is all. Confidence and respect and such—all that comes later!
PHILOSOPHER: So, in other words, other people should have regard for one first, and one becomes successful in one’s work in order to gain the respect of others?
YOUTH: That’s right.

PHILOSOPHER: I see. Well, think of it this way. Having unconditional confidence in other people. Having respect for them. This is ‘giving’ conduct.

YOUTH: Giving?
PHILOSOPHER: Yes. It should be easy to understand if we use money as an example instead. Basically, it is people in a position of affluence who can engage in giving something to others. If one does not have enough saved up, one cannot engage in giving.

YOUTH: Okay, when it comes to money that makes sense.

PHILOSOPHER: And now, you are seeking only to have something given to you, without having given anything. Just like a beggar. It is not that you are poor financially, but that you are poor in spirit.

YOUTH: You disrespectful son of a … !
PHILOSOPHER: We have to keep our hearts abundant and give what we have saved up to others. We must not wait for respect from other people, but must ourselves have respect and confidence in them. We must not become poor-spirited.

YOUTH: An objective like that isn’t philosophy, and it isn’t psychology, either!
PHILOSOPHER: Heh-heh. Then, let’s take it even further and bring in a quote from the Bible. Are you familiar with the phrase, ‘Ask, and it shall be given you?’
YOUTH: Yes. At least, it’s a phrase I’ve heard on occasion.

PHILOSOPHER: Adler would probably put it like this: ‘Give, and it shall be given unto you.’
YOUTH: Wow!
PHILOSOPHER: It is because of one’s giving that one is given to. One must not wait to have something given to one. One must not become a beggar of the spirit. This is an extremely important viewpoint when considering one other interpersonal relationship, continuing from ‘work’ and ‘friendship’.

YOUTH: That one other, in terms of …
PHILOSOPHER: At the beginning today, I said the following: everything we are discussing may be summarised by ‘love’. There is no task that is stricter or more difficult, or more testing of courage, than the love that Adler speaks of. At the same time, however, the stairway to understanding Adler may be found by embarking on love. Actually, it is no exaggeration to say that that is the only way.

YOUTH: The stairway to understanding Adler.

PHILOSOPHER: Do you have the courage to climb it?
YOUTH: There is no way I can answer that unless you show me that stairway, or whatever it is. After that, I will decide whether to climb it or not.

PHILOSOPHER: All right. Then, let’s turn our attention to ‘love’, which is the final gateway in our life tasks and is also the stairway to understanding the ideas of Adler.The youth had to admit it was true. At the very beginning of the day’s discussion, the philosopher had informed him: all the issues you are experiencing now may be summarised in the discussion of love. They had spent many hours talking together, and, at long last, they had arrived at the issue of ‘love’. What is there to talk about with this man concerning love, anyway? What do I even know about love in the first place?Looking down, he found his notebook now filled with what appeared to be notes, written in a scrawl that he could barely make out himself. Feeling slightly unsure of himself, and finding the silence unbearable, the youth let out a laugh.LOVE IS NOT SOMETHING ONE FALLS INTO
YOUTH: Heh-heh. Still, it’s kind of funny.

PHILOSOPHER: What is?
YOUTH: I can’t help but laugh, you know. Two scruffy guys putting their heads together in this small study and trying to talk about ‘love’. In the middle of the night, no less!
PHILOSOPHER: Come to think of it, I suppose it is an unusual situation.

YOUTH: So, what will we talk about now? Maybe we should hear the story of your first love? The ruddy-faced young philosopher in love, what will become of him! Ha-ha, it sounds interesting.

PHILOSOPHER: Direct talk of romance and love brings about embarrassment. You are young, and I know well that desire to be facetious to cover it up. You are not the only one who does so. Many people fall silent when confronted by love and pass it off with lifeless generalisations. As a result, almost all the love that gets talked about does not quite grasp its actual state.

YOUTH: It’s easy for you, huh? So, tell me what’s this ‘lifeless generalisation’ about love?
PHILOSOPHER: For example, the lofty love that is unforgiving of defilement and deifies the other person. Or conversely, the animal love of succumbing to sexual drives. Or further, the biological love of intending to transmit one’s genes to a new generation. Most representations of love in the world revolve around one of these types.

To be sure, we can demonstrate a certain understanding of all these kinds of love. We can accept that there are such aspects. At the same time, however, we should be aware that something is missing. Because all we hear about is conceptual ‘divine love’ and instinctive ‘animal love’, and no one even attempts to speak of ‘human love’.

YOUTH: A human love that is neither divine nor animal.

PHILOSOPHER: Now, why does no one try to come to grips with human love? Why is it that people do not attempt to discuss real love … what is your view on this?
YOUTH: Well, I guess you’re right about feeling embarrassed when it comes to talking about love. Because it’s the private thing that one wants to keep concealed most of all. If it’s the kind of love for humanity that is steeped in religion, people are only too happy to talk about it. In a sense it’s someone else’s affair, and it’s nothing more than impracticable theory, anyway. But it’s not so easy to speak about one’s own love.

PHILOSOPHER: Because it is about an inextricably involved ‘me’?
YOUTH: Yes. It’s something that feels as embarrassing as it would be to take off one’s clothes and run around naked. And there’s another reason, as well. The moment of falling for someone is almost entirely the result of the action of the subconscious. So, no matter what, it is a bit of a stretch to explain it using logical language.

I suppose it’s the same as the audience member who is moved on seeing a play or a movie and cannot explain why he is crying. Because if the tears were so rational as to be explainable with words, they wouldn’t flow in the first place.

PHILOSOPHER: I see. Romantic love is something one ‘falls’ into. Love is an uncontrollable impulse, and we can only give ourselves over to being at the mercy of its tempest … Is that it?
YOUTH: Yes, of course. Love does not progress in a calculated way, and it is not something that can be controlled by anyone. And that’s why tragedies like Romeo and Julietend up occurring.

PHILOSOPHER: All right. I think that what you are talking about now is a view of love that is derived from normal social thinking. But the philosopher named Adler, who doubted the normal thinking of society, shed light from a different angle and in effect espoused antitheses to normal social thinking. His opinion with regard to love, for example, was that ‘Love is not, as some psychologists think, a pure and natural function.’
YOUTH: What’s that supposed to mean?
PHILOSOPHER: In short, love to the human being is neither something prescribed by destiny, nor something spontaneously generated. That is to say, we do not ‘fall’ in love.

YOUTH: Then, what is it?
PHILOSOPHER: It is something we build. Love that is just ‘falling’, anyone can do. Such a thing is not worthy of being called a life task. It is because we build it up from nothing by our strength of will that the task of love is difficult.

Many people try to speak of love without having any knowledge of this principle. As a result, they must resort to words like destiny, which is none of our human business, and animalistic instinct. They avoid looking directly at the task that should be most important to them, as if it were beyond the scope of their will or effort. One may even say that they are not engaging in loving.

YOUTH: They’re not engaging in loving?
PHILOSOPHER: That’s right. This is probably also the case for you, who talk of ‘falling in love’. We must think about the human love that is neither divine nor animal.FROM AN ‘ART OF BEING LOVED’ TOWARDS AN ‘ART OF LOVING’
YOUTH: I could refute that in all kinds of ways. Look, every one of us has been through the experience of falling for someone. I’m sure you are no exception. If you are a human living in this world, you experience again and again that tempest of love, that unstoppable impulse of love. In other words, falling in love definitely exists. You’ll acknowledge this fact, won’t you?
PHILOSOPHER: Think of it this way. Suppose there is a camera you want. You’re fascinated by a German-made, twin-lens reflex camera that you happened to see one day in a shop window. Though you have never touched the camera and don’t even know how to focus its lens, you crave to possess it some day. You would carry it with you all the time and take pictures whenever the spirit moved you … It doesn’t have to be a camera. Shoes, a car, a musical instrument—it could be anything. You can imagine the feeling, right?
YOUTH: Yes, I know it well.

PHILOSOPHER: At this time, your obsession with that camera will be just like your falling for someone, and you will be beset by a tempest of endless desire. When you close your eyes, its form comes to you, and in the furthest reaches of your ears you can even hear the sound of the shutter—your condition is such that no other thing can enter your head. If it were during childhood, you might have whined and cried about it to your parents.

YOUTH: Well, sure.

PHILOSOPHER: But when you actually get the camera, you get tired of it not even six months later. Why do you tire of it so soon after finally getting it? It isn’t that you wanted to photograph with a German camera. You just wanted to acquire, to possess and to triumph. The falling in love you speak of is no different from this desire to possess or this desire for triumph.
