
YOUTH: So, in other words falling for someone is like becoming obsessed with material things?
PHILOSOPHER: Of course, the other party is a living human being, so it should be easy to add in a romantic story. But essentially it is the same as the desire for material things.

YOUTH: Hah! What a masterpiece.

PHILOSOPHER: What’s wrong?
YOUTH: What do you know about people, anyway? Even as you preach neighbourly love, out seeps this ridiculous stew of nihilism! What human love? What antitheses to normal social thinking? You can take those ideas and feed them to the rats in the sewers!
PHILOSOPHER: There are probably two points you have misunderstood with regard to the premise of this discussion. The first one is that you are focusing on the story of Cinderella in her glass slippers, up until she gets married to the prince. Adler, on the other hand, is focused on their relationship after they get married, after the closing credits have passed and the movie is over.

YOUTH: Their relationship after they get married?
PHILOSOPHER: Yes. For example, even if their passionate love leads to marriage, that is not the goal of love. Marriage is really the starting point of their love. Because real life will continue, day after day, from that point.

YOUTH: So, the love that Adler talks about is married life?
PHILOSOPHER: Then, there is the other point. Adler devoted much of his energy to giving lectures, and apparently the majority of the requests he received from his audience were love-related consultations. There are many psychologists in the world who advocate the art of being loved by another person. On how to be loved by the person one desires. And that may have been the sort of advice that people were expecting from Adler, too.

But the love that Adler spoke of was something completely different. Consistently, he advocated an active art of loving, that is to say, the art of loving another person.

YOUTH: An art of loving?
PHILOSOPHER: Yes. To understand this way of thinking, one may turn not only to Adler, but to the words of Erich Fromm as well. He even published a book by the same name, The Art of Loving, which was a worldwide bestseller.

To be sure, it is difficult to be loved by another person. But loving another person is a task of far greater difficulty.

YOUTH: Who would believe such a joke? Loving is something any wretch is capable of. The difficult thing is to be loved! It’s no exaggeration to say that the anxiety of love is summed up in that phrase!
PHILOSOPHER: I once thought so, too. But now that I know Adler, and have put his ideas into practice in childrearing, and have come to know of the existence of a great love, I hold a view that is the complete opposite. This is an area that touches the core of Adler. When you know the difficulty of loving, you will understand everything about Adler.LOVE IS A TASK ACCOMPLISHED BY T WO PEOPLE
YOUTH: No, I am not going to concede! If loving were the only thing, it could be done by anyone. No matter how warped a person’s character, no matter how much of a failure they might be, that person has someone they long for. In other words, one can love another person. But being loved by another person is extremely difficult … I’m a fine example. I look like this, and whenever there’s a woman in front of me, I blush, my voice turns shrill and my eyes get jittery. I don’t have a good position in society and not much in terms of finances, either. And to make matters worse, I’ve got this cynical personality. Ha-ha! Who could possibly love someone like me?
PHILOSOPHER: In your life until now, have you ever loved someone?
YOUTH: Sure, I have.

PHILOSOPHER: Was it easy to love that person?
YOUTH: It’s not a question of it being difficult or easy! Before you realise it, you’re falling for someone, and then you’re in love with that person and can’t get them out of your head. That’s just the emotion called love!
PHILOSOPHER: And do you love someone now?
YOUTH: … No.

PHILOSOPHER: Why is that? It’s easy to love, isn’t it?
YOUTH: Damn it! Talking to you is like hanging out with a heartless machine. Loving is easy. Without a doubt, it is easy. However, finding the person one should love is difficult. That’s the problem—finding the person one should love. Once you find the person you should love, the tempest of love will start raging inside you. A violent tempest that there’s no way of stopping!
PHILOSOPHER: I see. Love is not a question of ‘art’, but of one’s ‘target’. The important thing about love is not how one should love, but who one should love. Is that it?
YOUTH: Of course!
PHILOSOPHER: Now, how does Adler define love relationships? Let’s go over that.

YOUTH: I’m sure it’ll just be another one of his tiresome idealistic theories.

PHILOSOPHER: First, Adler says this: ‘We receive education on the task that is accomplished on one’s own and on the work that is accomplished by twenty people. But we do not receive education on the task that is accomplished by two people.’
YOUTH: The task that is accomplished by two people?
PHILOSOPHER: For example, the baby who could barely even turn over in bed manages to stand up on his own two feet and walk around. This is a task accomplished on one’s own that he cannot get anyone else to do for him. Standing up and walking, and learning words and communicating. Moreover, philosophy, mathematics, physics and every other field of study would qualify as a task accomplished on one’s own.

YOUTH: I suppose they would.

PHILOSOPHER: By contrast, work is a task accomplished with one’s comrades. Even with the kind of work that would seem to be undertaken on one’s own—for example, that of a painter—there are always cooperators. The people who make the paints and paintbrushes, the people who make the canvases and easels and then the purchasers at the art dealer. There is no such thing as work that can come into being without connections with other people and without cooperation.

YOUTH: Yes, that’s true.

PHILOSOPHER: And we receive sufficient education in our homes and schools with regard to the tasks that are accomplished on one’s own and the tasks that are accomplished with one’s comrades. That’s how it is, yes?
YOUTH: Well, yes. We teach it properly at our school, too.

PHILOSOPHER: The thing is, we receive no education whatsoever on the task to be accomplished by two people.

YOUTH: And that task to be accomplished by two people is …
PHILOSOPHER: The love that Adler speaks of.

YOUTH: So, love is a task accomplished by two people. But we do not learn the art with which to accomplish that … Is it all right to understand it in this way?
PHILOSOPHER: Yes.

YOUTH: Heh-heh. You realise that I’m not convinced by any of this, don’t you?
PHILOSOPHER: Yes, this is nothing more than the gateway. What is love to the human being? What points are different between it and one’s work relationships and friend relationships? And then, why do we need to love other people? Dawn is fast approaching. We do not have much time left. Let’s think this over together and make every minute count.SWITCH THE SUBJECT OF LIFE
YOUTH: Then, I’ll ask you straight out. Love is a task accomplished by two people … This is an example of pretending to state something while not actually stating anything at all. What on earth do these two people accomplish, anyway?
PHILOSOPHER: Happiness. They accomplish a happy life.

YOUTH: Wow, you answered that right away!
PHILOSOPHER: We all wish to be happy. We live in the pursuit of a happier life. You will agree with that, yes?
YOUTH: Of course.

PHILOSOPHER: And in order to be happy, we have to take steps within our interpersonal relationships. All human problems are interpersonal relationship problems. And all human happiness is interpersonal relationship happiness. I have spoken about this several times before.

YOUTH: Yes. This is exactly why we have to embark on the life tasks.

PHILOSOPHER: Now, concretely speaking, what is happiness to a human being? That time three years ago, I mentioned Adler’s conclusion with regard to happiness. In short, that ‘Happiness is the feeling of contribution.’
YOUTH: Right. It’s a pretty bold conclusion to make.

PHILOSOPHER: As Adler puts it, for all of us, it is only when we can feel ‘I am of use to someone’ that we can have a true awareness that we have worth. We can have a true awareness of our worth and gain the sense of belonging that ‘It’s okay to be here.’ But on the other hand, we have no way of knowing whether our conduct is really useful. Because even if there is a person right in front of you who appears to be enjoying things, in principle, there is no way you can tell if they are really enjoying things.

This brings us to the term ‘feeling of contribution’. All we need is the subjective sense that ‘I am of use to someone’, or, in other words, a ‘feeling of contribution’. There is no need to look for any other basis. Try to find happiness in the feeling of contribution. Try to find joy in the feeling of contribution.

We gain a true awareness that we are of use to someone through our work relationships. We gain a true awareness that we are of use to someone through our friend relationships. And if we do that, then happiness is right in front of us.

YOUTH: Yes, I accept that. Frankly speaking, what you are presenting now is the most simply put, and most convincing, of the various theories of happiness I have encountered. And conversely, that is exactly why I can’t really get this argument that one can accomplish a happy life through love.

PHILOSOPHER: That could be the reason. Then, please stop for a moment and recall our discussion regarding division of labour. Lying at the very root of the division of labour was ‘my happiness’, that is to say, self-interest. Ultimately, my happiness in effect connects to someone else’s happiness. A division of labour relationship is established. In a word, there is a healthy give-and-take at work. That is what we were talking about.
