
YOUTH: Yes, it’s a very interesting discussion.

PHILOSOPHER: On the other hand, the thing that establishes a friend relationship is ‘your happiness’. One has unconditional confidence in the other party, without seeking collateral or anything in return. There is no idea of give-and-take here. It is through an other-interested attitude of wholehearted believing and giving that friend relationships come about
YOUTH: Give, and it shall be given unto you. Right?
PHILOSOPHER: Yes. In other words, it is by pursuing ‘my happiness’ that we build division of labour relationships and by pursuing ‘your happiness’ that we build friend relationships. So, what is it that we pursue that allows love relationships to come about?
YOUTH: I guess it’d be the happiness of the person one loves, a lofty ‘your happiness’.

PHILOSOPHER: No, it is not.

YOUTH: Oho! So, you’re saying that love is really egoism, that is to say, ‘my happiness’.

PHILOSOPHER: It is not that, either.

YOUTH: Then, what is it?
PHILOSOPHER: Rather than the self-interested seeking of ‘my happiness’ or the other-interested wishing for ‘your happiness’, it is the building of a happiness of an inseparable ‘us’. That is love.

YOUTH: An inseparable us?
PHILOSOPHER: That’s right. One upholds ‘us’ as being higher than ‘me’ or ‘you’. One maintains that order in all one’s choices in life. One does not give precedence to the happiness of ‘me’, and one is not satisfied with only the happiness of ‘you’. Unless it is the happiness of two of ‘us’, it has no meaning. Such is the ‘task accomplished by two people’.

YOUTH: So, it’s about being self-interested, while also being other-interested?
PHILOSOPHER: No. It is notself-interested, and it is notother-interested, either. Love has neither self-interest nor other-interest—it rejects both.

YOUTH: Why?
PHILOSOPHER: Because that changes the subject of life.

YOUTH: The subject of life?
PHILOSOPHER: From the time we are born, we go about our lives looking at the world with the eyes of ‘me’, hearing sounds through the ears of ‘me’ and pursuing the happiness of ‘me’. This is so for all people. When one knows real love, however, the subject of life changes from ‘me’ to ‘us’. It allows one to live by completely new guidelines that are of neither self-interest nor other-interest.

YOUTH: But wouldn’t that mean that the ‘me’ would vanish into nothingness?
PHILOSOPHER: Indeed. The ‘me’ should vanish into nothingness, if one is to find a happy life.

YOUTH: What did you say?SELF-RELIANCE IS BREAKING AWAY FROM ‘ME’
PHILOSOPHER: Love is a task accomplished by two people. Through love, two people accomplish a happy life. Then, why does love connect to happiness? In a word, it is because love is liberation from ‘me’.

YOUTH: Liberation from me?
PHILOSOPHER: Yes. When we are given life in this world, at first we reign supreme at the centre of the world. Everyone in our vicinity worries about ‘me’, soothes us day and night, provides food and even takes care of our excretions. Whenever ‘me’ smiles, the world smiles too, and when ‘me’ cries, the world hurries to our aid. In most cases, we are in a condition like a dictator who reigns over the household domain.

YOUTH: Well, that’s how it is today, at least.

PHILOSOPHER: This overwhelming, almost dictatorial power. What is the source of this power? Adler asserts that it is weakness. That in childhood, we control the adults by way of our own weakness.

YOUTH: Because we are weak beings, the people in our vicinity have to help us?
PHILOSOPHER: Right. Weakness becomes a frightfully powerful weapon in an interpersonal relationship. This was a crucial discovery that Adler arrived at on the basis of deep insights gained from clinical practice.

Let’s use the story of a certain boy as an example. The boy was afraid of the dark. At night, his mother would put him to bed, turn out the light and leave the room. And every time, he would begin to cry. Since he would not stop crying, his mother would come back and ask him, ‘Why are you crying?’ Once he had settled down, he would answer in a frail voice, ‘Because it’s so dark.’ The mother, having perceived her son’s goal, would ask him with a sigh, ‘So, now that I’m back, is it a little lighter?’
YOUTH: Heh-heh. I’m sure it would be!
PHILOSOPHER: Darkness itself isn’t the problem. The thing that the boy feared and wanted to avoid most of all was being separated from his mother. As Adler puts it, ‘By crying, calling her, not being able to sleep or by some other means, he turns himself into a troublemaker and endeavours to keep his mother near him.’
YOUTH: He controls his mother by calling special attention to his weakness.

PHILOSOPHER: That’s right. To paraphrase Adler again: ‘Once, they lived in a golden age in which everything they wanted was given to them. And among them, there are those who will still feel that if they cry enough, protest enough and refuse to cooperate, they will continue to be able to get whatever they want. They are incapable of focusing on anything aside from their own individual profit, and they cannot see life and society as a whole.’
YOUTH: A golden age! That’s certainly the case—it is a golden age for the children, all right!
PHILOSOPHER: Children are not the only ones who choose such a way of living. There are many adults who treat their own weakness or misfortune, their hurt, troubled background and trauma, as a weapon and plot how they will control other people. They will try to control others by making them worry and by restricting their own words and actions. Adler referred to such adults as ‘pampered children’ and was very critical of their lifestyle and worldview.

YOUTH: Ah, I can’t stand it, either. They always think they can fix things by crying and that laying bare their hurt lets them off the hook. And they regard strong people as evil and try to make their weak selves out to be good. According to their logic, it’s not acceptable for us to get strong, either. Because if you get stronger, it means you’ve sold your soul to the devil and fallen into evil.

PHILOSOPHER: There is one thing we need to keep in mind here, however, and that is the physical inferiority of the child, in particular, of the newborn baby who has just come into this world.

YOUTH: The newborn?
PHILOSOPHER: In principle, children are incapable of self-support. They control the adults around them by crying, that is to say, by calling attention to their own weakness, and if they cannot get the adults to do as they wish them to, they might not last another day. They are not crying because they are pampered or selfish. If they are going to live, they have no choice but to reign supreme at the centre of the world.

YOUTH: Hmm. Undoubtedly.

PHILOSOPHER: All human beings start off with an almost excessive self-centredness. They would not survive otherwise. However, one cannot reign supreme at the centre of the world forever. One has to make peace with the world and come to the understanding that one is a part of the world. If you are able to comprehend that, then the meaning of the term ‘self-reliance’, which we have discussed numerous times today, should become clear, too.

YOUTH: The meaning of self-reliance?
PHILOSOPHER: That’s right. Why the objective of education is self-reliance. Why Adlerian psychology treats education as one of the most important issues. What meaning is contained in the term ‘self-reliance’.

YOUTH: Please tell me.

PHILOSOPHER: Self-reliance is ‘breaking away from self-centredness’.

YOUTH: … !
PHILOSOPHER: This is why Adler called community feeling ‘social interest’ and also referred to it as concern for society and concern for others. We have to get past our obstinate self-centredness and stop trying to be the centre of the world. One has to break away from ‘me’. One has to break away from one’s pampered childhood lifestyle.

YOUTH: So, when we can break away from self-centredness, we can achieve self-reliance at last?
PHILOSOPHER: That’s right. People can change. We can change that lifestyle, that worldview or outlook on life. And love can change the subject of life from ‘me’ to ‘us’. It is through love that we are liberated from ‘me’, that we achieve self-reliance and truly accept the world.

YOUTH: Accept the world?
PHILOSOPHER: Yes. To know love and to change the subject of life to ‘us’. This is a new start to life. The ‘us’ that began as just two people will eventually broaden in scope to the entire community and the entire human race.

YOUTH: That is …
PHILOSOPHER: It is community feeling.

YOUTH: Love, self-reliance and community feeling. Lo and behold, all of Adler’s ideas are connected!
PHILOSOPHER: That’s right—we are now nearing a major conclusion. Let’s go down together to the very depths of the matter.

The ‘love’ that the philosopher had begun talking about was something utterly different from what the youth had been expecting. Love is ‘a task accomplished by two people’, and what we must pursue therein is not the happiness of ‘me’ or the happiness of ‘you’ but the happiness of ‘us’. Only thencan we break away from ‘me’. We can be liberated from self-centredness and achieve true self-reliance. To be self-reliant is to break away from one’s childhood lifestyle and to get past one’s self-centredness. In that very moment, the youth had the intuition that he was trying to open a large door. What could be waiting for him on the other side of that door—radiant light or inky darkness? All he knew for sure was that he had his hand on the doorknob of his own destiny.TO WHOM IS THAT LOVE DIRECTED?
