YOUTH: How deep are those depths?
PHILOSOPHER: When thinking about the relationship of love and self-reliance, the task one cannot avoid addressing is that of the parent–child relationship.

YOUTH: Ah … I get it, of course, of course.

PHILOSOPHER: Newborns are incapable of living by their own power. It is due to the constant devotion of other people—principally their mothers—that they are eventually able to sustain themselves. We are alive here and now because we had the love of our mothers and fathers and because there was devotion. The person who thinks, ‘I was raised without love from anyone,’ must not turn away from this fact.

YOUTH: That’s true. There was an unsurpassably beautiful, selfless love.

PHILOSOPHER: But if we change the viewpoint, the love here involves a very troublesome matter that cannot be completely settled with the special bond between parent and child.

YOUTH: What could it be?
PHILOSOPHER: No matter how much we reign supreme at the centre of the world during childhood, we are dependent on our parents to stay alive. Our parents have power over the life of this ‘me’, and if we are abandoned by our parents we will die. Children are intelligent enough to understand this. And at some point they realise: it is because I am loved by my parents that I can go on living.

YOUTH: Undoubtedly.

PHILOSOPHER: And it is exactly at that point in time that children choose their own lifestyles. What kind of place is this world in which they live, what kind of people inhabit it and what about the children themselves—what kind of people are they? They choose such attitudes towards life of their own accord … Do you understand what this fact means?
YOUTH: N-no, I don’t.

PHILOSOPHER: When we choose our lifestyle, its objective can only be to find out ‘How I can be loved.’ We all choose a ‘lifestyle for being loved’ as a survival strategy that is directly linked to our lives.

YOUTH: A lifestyle for being loved?
PHILOSOPHER: Children are excellent observers. They think about the environment in which they have been placed and take measure of the personalities and dispositions of their parents. If they have siblings, they surmise the positional relationships between them, take stock of their personalities and consider which ‘me’ will be loved; and on the basis of all these aspects, they choose their lifestyle.

For example, at this point, there are children who choose the lifestyle of the good child who obeys his parents. And, conversely, there are also those who choose the lifestyle of the bad child who opposes, rejects and rebels against almost everything.

YOUTH: But why? If they turn into the bad child, they won’t stand a chance of being loved, will they?
PHILOSOPHER: This is a point that is frequently misunderstood. Children who cry, get angry and shout in rebellion are not incapable of controlling their emotions. Actually, they control their emotions rather too well and turn them into action. Because they have the intuition that unless they go that far they will never gain their parents’ love and attention, and their very lives will be endangered.

YOUTH: So, that’s a survival strategy, too?
PHILOSOPHER: That’s right. A lifestyle for being loved is, in all respects, a self-centred lifestyle of garnering attention from others, however possible, and searching how one can stand, however possible, at the centre of the world.

YOUTH: It’s all coming together, finally. Briefly put, the various problem behaviours my students engage in are based on that self-centredness. So, what you are saying is that their problem behaviour comes out of having a lifestyle for being loved?
PHILOSOPHER: But that’s not all. That ‘How I can be loved,’ which is rooted in the survival strategies of your childhood, has probably become a criterion of the lifestyle you are adopting now.

YOUTH: What did you say?
PHILOSOPHER: In the truest sense of the word, you still have not achieved self-reliance. You are still stuck in a lifestyle of being someone’s child. If you want to assist in your students’ self-reliance and hope to become a true educator, first you must be self-reliant yourself.

YOUTH: How can you make such assumptions! And on what grounds? I have entered the teaching profession, and I live in that social circle. I have chosen my work of my own accord, support myself on my own earnings and I have never asked my parents for money or anything like that. I already am self-reliant!
PHILOSOPHER: But do you love anyone yet?
YOUTH: Argh!
PHILOSOPHER: Self-reliance is not an economic issue or a work issue. It is an attitude towards life, an issue of lifestyle … At some point, the time will come when you resolve to love someone. That will be when you achieve separation from your childhood lifestyle and achieve true self-reliance. Because it is through loving others that we at last become adults
YOUTH: We become adults by loving?
PHILOSOPHER: Yes. Love is self-reliance. It is to become an adult. That is why love is difficult.HOW CAN ONE GET ONE’S PARENTS’ LOVE?
YOUTH: But I am self-reliant! I am not reliant on my parents anymore! Wanting to be loved by them never even crosses my mind! Instead of entering the profession my parents had hoped for, I worked for low pay at the university library, and now I am moving forward on the path of the educator. I’ve resolved to myself that even if this creates rifts in our parent–child relationship, I don’t care and I am ready to be disliked. To me, at the very least, my choice of profession was a way of breaking away from my childhood lifestyle!
PHILOSOPHER: You have one sibling, an older brother, am I right?
YOUTH: Yes. My brother is taking over the printing plant that our father runs.

PHILOSOPHER: It seems that following the same path as your family did not sit right with you. The important thing to you was to do something different from everyone else. If you went into the same line of work as your father and your brother, you would not be able to garner attention, and you would not be able to realise your own worth.

YOUTH: What? What did you say?
PHILOSOPHER: But it goes beyond work. From early childhood onward, since your brother was older than you, no matter what you did, he had more power and more experience, and you never had the slightest chance of winning. Now, what could you do about it?
According to Adler, ‘In general, the youngest child chooses a path that differs completely from the other members of his family. In other words, if it is a family of scientists, he will become a musician or a merchant. If it is a family of merchants, he might become a poet. He must always be different from other people.’
YOUTH: That’s just an assumption! That is an assumption that makes a mockery of a person’s free will!
PHILOSOPHER: Yes. Adler himself only spoke of ‘tendencies’ with regard to sibling birth order. However, it is useful to know what sort of tendencies are brought about by the environment one is placed in.

YOUTH: Then, what about my brother? What sort of tendencies does he have?
PHILOSOPHER: For the first-born child, and also for the only child, the greatest privilege may be that one had a time in which one monopolised one’s parents’ love. Later-born children do not have the experience of monopolising their parents. They always have a rival who is ahead of them, and in many cases they are placed in competitive relationships.

The first-born child who has monopolised the parents’ love, on the birth of a brother or sister, will be forced to come down from that position. The first-born child who does not cope with this setback satisfactorily will hope to some day regain that seat of power. Adler refers to this child as being a ‘worshipper of the past’ who creates a lifestyle that is conservative and pessimistic with regard to the future.

YOUTH: Heh-heh. My brother certainly does have such tendencies.

PHILOSOPHER: It is a lifestyle in which one has a perception of the importance of strength and authority, enjoys wielding one’s power and places excessive value on the rule of law. It is a true conservative lifestyle.

Yet when a brother or sister is born, the first-born child who has already received education with regard to cooperation and assistance is likely to develop into an excellent leader. In imitation of the childrearing done by the parents, such a first-born finds joy in taking care of siblings and learns the meaning of contribution.

YOUTH: Then, what about the second child? In my case, I am the second child, but also the last-born. What sort of tendencies does the second child have?
PHILOSOPHER: Adler says that a typical second child is instantly recognisable. The second child always has a pacesetter running ahead of them. And at the heart of the second child, there lies the feeling of ‘I want to catch up.’ They want to catch up with their elder brother or sister. To catch up, they have to hurry. They are constantly pushing themselves and planning how to catch up with, overtake and even triumph over their elder brother or sister. Unlike the conservative first-born child who holds the rule of law in high regard, the second child wishes to overturn even the natural law of birth order.

So, second children aim for revolution. Rather than trying to be at peace with the existing powers-that-be as first-born children do, they place worth on overthrowing the powers-that-be.

YOUTH: You’re saying that I’ve got the tendencies of a rash revolutionary?
PHILOSOPHER: Well, I don’t know about that. Because this classification is purely an aid to human understanding—it does not actually determine anything.

YOUTH: Lastly then, what about the only child? Since there are no rivals above or below, the only child gets to always stay in the seat of power?
PHILOSOPHER: It is true that the only child has no siblings who would become rivals. But in this situation, it is the parents who become the rivals. The child wants so much to have his mother’s love all to himself that he ends up seeing his father as a rival. He is in an environment that is conducive to the development of the so-called mother complex.

YOUTH: Oh, that’s a rather Freudian idea, isn’t it?
PHILOSOPHER: But the issue that Adler regarded as more problematic here is the situation of psychological anxiety in which the solitary child is placed.

YOUTH: Psychological anxiety?
PHILOSOPHER: First of all, the child is exposed to the anxiety of always having to look around him, in the worry that a younger brother or sister will be born and that his position will be threatened. More than anything, he lives in fear of the birth of a new prince or a new princess. And beyond that, he needs to watch out for the cowardice of his parents.

YOUTH: The cowardice of his parents?
PHILOSOPHER: That’s right. There are couples who, on having one child, tell themselves that ‘Economically speaking, and in terms of the amount of work it would require, there’s no way we can afford to raise any more children,’ and refrain from having any more, regardless of their actual economic situation.

According to Adler, many such couples are cowardly in their lives, and pessimistic. Moreover, anxiety pervades the atmosphere in their homes, and they place an excessive amount of pressure on their only children and make them suffer. As having more than one child was the norm in Adler’s time, he laid more emphasis on this point.
