
YOUTH: So, parents can’t just be devoted to loving their children, right?
PHILOSOPHER: Yes. Limitless love so often transforms into a tool for controlling the child. All parents must uphold the clear objective of self-reliance and go about building equal relationships with their children.

YOUTH: And then, regardless of what sort of people their parents are, the children can’t help but choose a lifestyle for being loved.

PHILOSOPHER: That’s right. The fact that, in spite of your parents’ opposition, you chose to work as a librarian and are now choosing the path of the educator is not enough on its own to say that you have become self-reliant. Perhaps it is that by choosing a different path, you are actually trying to win the sibling rivalry and keep hold of your parents’ attention. And perhaps, by attaining something on that different path, you are hoping to be recognised for your worth as a human being. Perhaps you are attempting to overthrow the existing powers-that-be and to accede to the throne.

YOUTH: And if that’s true, what then?
PHILOSOPHER: You are all caught up in the need for approval. You live thinking about how you can be loved by other people, how you can be recognised by other people. Even the path of the educator, which it would seem you chose yourself, may be a life of ‘the me that others wish for’, a life that has the objective of being recognised by others.

YOUTH: This path, this life I’ve chosen as an educator?
PHILOSOPHER: As long as you hold on to a childhood lifestyle, you will not be able to wipe away that possibility.

YOUTH: Hey, what do you know anyway? I’m just sitting here listening quietly, while you go ahead and fabricate stuff about people’s family relationships and even try to negate me as an educator!
PHILOSOPHER: To be sure, one cannot realise self-reliance by gaining employment. Generally speaking, we live controlled by our parents’ love. We choose our lifestyle at a time when we can only crave to be loved by our parents. And further, we grow older and become adults while reinforcing that lifestyle of being loved.

To get out from under the control of the love one is given, the only thing one can do is have one’s own love. Loving. Not waiting to be loved or waiting for destiny, but loving someone of one’s own accord. That is the only way.PEOPLE ARE AFRAID OF LOVING
YOUTH: So, even though you usually reduce everything to ‘courage’, this time you’re trying to settle it all as being about ‘love’?
PHILOSOPHER: Love and courage are closely connected. You do not yet know love. You are afraid of love, and you are hesitant about love. Consequently, you are stuck in your childhood lifestyle. You do not have enough courage to dive into love.

YOUTH: I am afraid of love?
PHILOSOPHER: As Fromm says, ‘While one is consciously afraid of not being loved, the real, though usually unconscious fear is that of loving.’ And then he continues by stating, ‘To love means to commit oneself without guarantee, to give oneself completely. Love is an act of faith, and whoever is of little faith is also of little love.’ For example, the moment one has the slightest feeling that the other is showing goodwill towards one, one becomes interested in the other person and then starts to like them. This kind of thing often happens, doesn’t it?
YOUTH: Yes, it does. It would be no exaggeration to say that most love affairs happen that way.

PHILOSOPHER: This is a condition in which one has secured some guarantee of being loved, even if it is all one’s own misunderstanding. One feels some kind of collateral there: ‘That person probably likes me,’ or ‘They probably won’t reject my goodwill.’ And it is on the basis of that collateral that we can begin to love more deeply.

On the other hand, the ‘loving’ that Fromm speaks of does not provide any such collateral. One loves regardless of what the other person thinks of one. One throws oneself into love.

YOUTH: One must not seek collateral in love.

PHILOSOPHER: Right. Why do people seek collateral in love? Do you know?
YOUTH: They don’t want to get hurt or feel miserable. I guess that’s why.

PHILOSOPHER: No. Rather, it is that they think, ‘I’ll definitely get hurt.’ Or they half-convince themselves: ‘I’m definitely going to feel miserable.’
YOUTH: What?
PHILOSOPHER: You do not love yourself yet. You are not able to respect yourself or have confidence in yourself. That is why you end up assuming that in a love relationship, you will definitely get hurt or definitely feel miserable. Because you think that there couldn’t be anyone who could love someone like you.

YOUTH: But that’s just the truth, isn’t it?
PHILOSOPHER: I am a person without any outstanding traits. That is why I cannot build a love relationship with anyone. I cannot embark on love without collateral. This is a typical inferiority-complex way of thinking, because one is using one’s feelings of inferiority as an excuse for not resolving one’s tasks.

YOUTH: But, but …
PHILOSOPHER: One separates the tasks. Loving is your task. But how will the other person respond to your love? That is the other person’s task and is not something you can control. What you can do is separate the tasks, and just love first, from yourself. That is all.

YOUTH: Ah, let’s stop for a moment and sort things out. It’s true that I have not been able to love myself. I have deep feelings of inferiority, which have developed into an inferiority complex. I have not been able to separate the tasks that need to be separated. Objectively assessing the current discussion, that’s about the sum of it.

So, what can I do to dispel my feelings of inferiority? There’s only one conclusion. That’s to meet a person who will accept and love ‘this me’. Otherwise, there’s no way I can love myself, or anything like that.

PHILOSOPHER: So, in other words, your position is ‘If you will love me, I will love you?’
YOUTH: Well, I guess so, if you put it briefly.

PHILOSOPHER: So, after all, you are only seeing ‘Will this person love me?’ You seem to be looking at the other person, but you are only seeing yourself. If you are waiting around with such an attitude, who is going to love you?
If there is anyone who would respond to such a self-centred need, it would be one’s parents. Because one’s parents’ love, especially one’s mother’s love, is unconditional.

YOUTH: You think you can treat me like a child!
PHILOSOPHER: Listen, that golden age is over. And the world is not your mother. You must take a straight look at the childhood lifestyle you have been carrying in secret, and make a new start. Don’t wait for someone who will love you to appear.

YOUTH: Ah, we’re totally going around in circles!THERE IS NO DESTINED ONE
PHILOSOPHER: We must not stand still. Let us take another step forward. At the outset today, in our discussion concerning education, I spoke of two things that cannot be forced.

YOUTH: Yes, respect and love.

PHILOSOPHER: Right. No matter what sort of dictator I might be, I cannot force people to respect me. In a relationship of respect, the only way is for the respect to come from me first. That is the only thing I can do, regardless of what sort of attitude the other person might take in response. This is what I was talking about earlier.

YOUTH: Then, are you saying that it’s the same with love?
PHILOSOPHER: Yes. Love cannot be forced, either.

YOUTH: You still haven’t answered my main question, however. Look, I do have the feeling of wanting to love someone. In all sincerity, I do. Aside from my fear of love, I have the feeling that I am thirsting for love. Then, why don’t I launch into love?
It’s because I haven’t been able to meet that crucial person one should love. I haven’t been able to meet my destined partner, so my wish for love doesn’t come true. The meeting is the most difficult problem of all with regard to love.

PHILOSOPHER: So, true love starts with a destined meeting?
YOUTH: But of course it does. Because your partner is someone you devote your life to and who changes the subject of life. You can’t pretend you can offer up everything about yourself to just anyone!
PHILOSOPHER: Then, what sort of person would you call a ‘destined one’? That is to say, how would you sense that it is destiny?
YOUTH: I don’t know … I guess I’ll know when that time comes. It’s unknown territory to me.

PHILOSOPHER: I see. Then, let’s start by answering with Adler’s basic position on this. Whether in love, or in life in general, Adler does not accept the existence of a destined one of any kind.

YOUTH: There’s no destined one for us?
PHILOSOPHER: There is not.

YOUTH: Wait! That is not a statement I can just let pass.

PHILOSOPHER: Why do many people seek a destined one in love? Why do we entertain romantic illusions of our marriage partners? The reason, Adler concludes, is ‘To eliminate all the candidates.’
YOUTH: To eliminate the candidates?
PHILOSOPHER: People who lament that they can’t meet anyone, like you do, are actually meeting someone or other on a daily basis. Barring highly unusual circumstances, there is no one who has not met someone in the past year. You have met many people yourself, haven’t you?
YOUTH: Well, if you are going to include just being in the same place as them …
PHILOSOPHER: However, to grow that modest meeting into some kind of relationship requires a certain courage. To call out to people and send letters and such.

