YOUTH: Yes, it sure does. It requires not just a certain courage, but the greatest courage of all.

PHILOSOPHER: So, what does a person do when they lose the courage to embark on a relationship? They cling to fantasies of a destined one … Just like you are, now. Even though there often is a person to love right in front of them, they come up with all sorts of reasons to reject each one, and they lower their eyes and think, ‘There’s got to be a more ideal, more perfect, destined partner.’ They try not to enter into deeper relationships, and they unilaterally eliminate any and all candidates.

YOUTH: No way.

PHILOSOPHER: By bringing forward excessive and unrealisable ideals in this way, they avoid anything that may lead to interactions with real, living people. Please see that this is the truth of the person who laments that they can’t meet anyone.

YOUTH: I am running away from relationships?
PHILOSOPHER: And you are living within the realm of possibility. You think of happiness as something that will come from somewhere else: ‘Happiness hasn’t come my way yet, but if I can just meet the person of my destiny, everything will be fine.’
YOUTH: Dammit! Ah, what damn insight you have!
PHILOSOPHER: I am sure that this is not something that feels good to hear. But if you consider the goal of seeking a destined one, the discussion will always come to this point as a matter of course.LOVE IS A DECISION
YOUTH: Then, let’s hear it. If there is no destined one, on account of what do we decide to get married? Marriage is the making of a choice of only one person in the whole wide world, isn’t it? Surely you’re not saying it’s just a matter of choosing according to such things as appearance, finances and social position, are you?
PHILOSOPHER: Marriage is not a matter of choosing a target. It is a matter of choosing one’s way of living.

YOUTH: Choosing a way of living? Then, the target can be anyone!
PHILOSOPHER: Ultimately, yes.

YOUTH: Don’t mess around. Who would ever recognise such a statement? Retract that, retract it right away!
PHILOSOPHER: I recognise that this is a view that meets with a great deal of opposition. But we are able to love anyone.

YOUTH: I’m not joking! If that’s the case, could you just go out and find some woman walking by, without the slightest idea of who she is or where she’s from, and love that woman and marry her?
PHILOSOPHER: If I made the decision to do that.

YOUTH: The decision?
PHILOSOPHER: Of course, there are many people who felt destiny on meeting someone and decided to get married in accordance with that intuition. But that is not a previously established destiny. It is only that one decided to believe it was destiny.

As Fromm remarked, ‘Loving someone is not simply an intense emotion. It is a decision, it is a judgement, it is a promise.’
It doesn’t matter how the meeting happens. If one makes the firm decision to build real love from that point, and one confronts the task accomplished by two people, love is possible with any partner.

YOUTH: Don’t you realise? You’re spitting on your own marriage, right now! You’re saying, my wife wasn’t the person of my destiny, and anyone could have been my partner! Would you declare that in front of your family? If you would, then you’re an over-the-top nihilist!
PHILOSOPHER: It is not nihilism—it is realism. Adlerian psychology negates all determinism and rejects fatalism. There is no destined one or anything of the sort for us, and one must not wait for such a person to appear. Nothing will change by having waited. I do not intend to yield on this principle.

However, on looking back on the many years one has journeyed together with one’s partner, one may feel the presence of a destined something there. Destiny in that case is not a predetermined thing. Nor is it something that has rained down upon one by chance. It should be something that has been built up by the effort of two people.

YOUTH: What do you mean?
PHILOSOPHER: I am sure you understand already. Destiny is something you create with your own two hands.

YOUTH: … !
PHILOSOPHER: We must not become destiny’s servants. We must be the masters of our destinies. Rather than seeking a destined person, we build relationships of a kind that might be referred to as destined.

YOUTH: But, concretely speaking, what are you saying one should do?
PHILOSOPHER: One dances. Without thinking about a future one could never comprehend, or about a destiny that could never exist, one simply engages in a dance of the now with the partner before one.

Adler recommended dancing to many people, including children, as a ‘pastime of two human beings taking part in cooperative work’. Love and marriage are indeed akin to the dance that two people make together. Without ever thinking about where one would like to go, they take each other by the hand and, looking straight at the happiness of the day that is today, at just this moment called now, they keep on dancing round and round. People will speak of the tracks of the long dance you two have created as destiny.

YOUTH: Love and marriage are the dance that two people make together …
PHILOSOPHER: You are standing now at the edge of the dance floor of life and just watching the dancing people. You are assuming that ‘There couldn’t be anyone who would dance with someone like me,’ while in your heart you are waiting impatiently for your destined one to reach their hand out to you. You are doing everything you can to endure and to protect yourself, so that you do not feel any more miserable than you do already and so that you do not begin to dislike yourself.

There is one thing that you should do. Take the hand of the person beside you, and try to do the best dance that you can possibly do in that moment. Your destiny will start from there.RE-CHOOSE YOUR LIFESTYLE
YOUTH: The guy watching at the edge of the dance floor … Ha-ha! As usual, you treat people like they’re old rags. The thing is, I have tried to do the dance, of course—I have actually tried dancing. I mean, I have had someone who could be called a lover.

PHILOSOPHER: Yes, I am sure you have.

YOUTH: But it wasn’t the kind of relationship that could have ever led to marriage. Both for me and for her, we weren’t together to love each other—it was just that we wanted to be able to say that I was her boyfriend and she was my girlfriend. Both of us understood well enough that it was a relationship that would come to an end at some point. We never once talked about our future together, let alone getting married. It was a passing relationship.

PHILOSOPHER: In the days of our youth, we do have such relationships.

YOUTH: Moreover, I regarded her as a compromise from the start. I told myself, ‘I’ve got various complaints, but I’m not in the position to aim higher. With her, I’ll be living within my means.’ I think that she probably chose me for the same kind of reason. Well, thinking about it now, it’s a pretty embarrassing way of thinking. Even if it was true that I couldn’t aim higher.

PHILOSOPHER: It is a great thing that you have been able to face that feeling.

YOUTH: Then, I really want to ask you this: what was it that made you resolve to get married? No destined one or whatever exists, and there’s no telling what’ll happen to you in the future. There’s always the possibility that someone more attractive will come along. If you get married, that possibility disappears. But then, how do we—actually, I mean you—how did you resolve to get married to this person and no one else?
PHILOSOPHER: I wanted to be happy.

YOUTH: Huh?
PHILOSOPHER: If I loved this person, I could be happier. That’s what I thought. Looking back on it now, I realise that it was a mentality of seeking an ‘our happiness’ that went beyond ‘my happiness’. I did not know about Adler at the time, however, and I had never given any reasoned thought to love and marriage. I only wanted to be happy. That is all.

YOUTH: Well, me too! Everyone gets together in hopes of being happy. But surely that’s a different thing from marriage?
PHILOSOPHER: But your hope was not to be happy, was it? It was simply the desire for things to be easier.

YOUTH: What?
PHILOSOPHER: Awaiting a love relationship is not free of difficulty. The responsibility one must take on is great, and painful things and unforeseeable hardships may lie ahead. Is one still capable of loving, in the face of that? Does one have the resolve, no matter what troubles arise, to love this person and walk beside them? Can one make that feeling into a promise?
YOUTH: The responsibility … of love?
PHILOSOPHER: Suppose, for example, a person who says ‘I like flowers’, but lets them wither right away. This person forgets to water them, doesn’t think of transplanting them into a different pot or adjusting the amount of light, and just puts the flowerpot in a place where they look nice. To be sure, it may be true that the person likes looking at flowers. But one could not say that this person loves flowers. Love is a more dedicated approach.

It is the same with you. You were avoiding the responsibility that should be shouldered by the one who loves. You just devoured the fruit of your passion, without watering the flowers or planting the seeds. That is truly a fleeting, hedonistic love.

YOUTH: I know it! I didn’t love her! I just took advantage of her good intentions!
PHILOSOPHER: It is not that you didn’t love her. You didn’t know what ‘loving’ was. If you had known, I am sure you would have been able to build a relationship of destiny with that woman.

YOUTH: With her? I could have—with her?
PHILOSOPHER: As Fromm says, ‘Love is an act of faith, and whoever is of little faith is also of little love.’ Adler, in place of this ‘faith’, would use the word ‘courage’. You were of little courage. So, you were able to love only a little. Not possessing the courage to love, you tried to stay in the lifestyle of your childhood, the lifestyle of being loved. That is all.

YOUTH: With the courage to love, she and I could have …
PHILOSOPHER: Yes. The courage to love, that is to say, the courage to be happy.

YOUTH: You’re saying that if I’d had the courage to be happy back then, I could have loved her, and faced the task accomplished by two people?
