PHILOSOPHER: And you would have achieved self-reliance.

YOUTH: No, no … I don’t get it! Because is it just: ‘Love is all, love is all?’ Is love really the only way we can find happiness?
PHILOSOPHER: Love is all. The person who lives wanting an easy life or looking for the easy way may find fleeting pleasures, but they will not be able to grasp real happiness. It is only by loving another person that we are liberated from self-centredness. It is only by loving another person that we can achieve self-reliance. And it is only by loving another person that we arrive at community feeling.

YOUTH: But didn’t you say before that happiness is a feeling of contribution and that ‘If one has a feeling of contribution, one can find happiness?’ Was that a lie?
PHILOSOPHER: It is not a lie. The issue here is one’s method for gaining a feeling of contribution, or, rather, one’s way of living. By nature, a person should be able to contribute to someone just by being there. One is already contributing by one’s ‘being’, not by ‘acts’ that can be seen. There is no need to do anything special.

YOUTH: That’s a lie! There’s no way to really feel such a thing.

PHILOSOPHER: That is because you are living with ‘me’ as the subject. When you know love, and live with ‘us’ as the subject, that will change. You will gain the real feeling of an ‘us’ that includes the entire human race, in which people are contributing to each other simply by living.

YOUTH: … I will gain a real feeling of an ‘us’ that includes not only my partner, but the entire human race?
PHILOSOPHER: In other words, you will gain community feeling. Well, I cannot enter any further into your tasks. But if you were to ask my advice, I would probably say something like this: ‘Love, be self-reliant and choose life.’
YOUTH: Love, be self-reliant and choose life!
PHILOSOPHER: Look. The eastern sky has begun to get light.

The youth now understood with his entire being the love described by Adler. If I have the courage to be happy, I will be able to love someone, and I will re-choose my life. I’ll achieve true self-reliance.The thick fog that had been clouding his vision was clearing before him. But the youth did not know yet that awaiting him beyond the clearing fog was not some beautiful Eden-like meadow. To love, be self-reliant and choose life. It would be a difficult path.KEEPING IT SIMPLE
YOUTH: That’s some conclusion.

PHILOSOPHER: Let’s wrap things up here. And let’s make tonight our final meeting.

YOUTH: Huh?
PHILOSOPHER: This study is not a place where young people like you visit again and again. And, more importantly, you are an educator. The place you should be is in the classroom, and the comrades you should be speaking with are the children who will live in the future.

YOUTH: But I haven’t figured things out yet! If we just stop here, I’ll definitely lose my way. Because I haven’t made it to Adler’s stairway yet.

PHILOSOPHER: It’s true that you have not begun climbing the stairway. But you have made it to the point where you have a foot on the first step. Three years ago, I said, ‘The world is simple, and life is too.’ And now that we have finished our discussion today, I will supplement it with a few more words.

YOUTH: And they are?
PHILOSOPHER: That the world is simple, and life is too. But also, that ‘Keeping it simple is difficult.’ It is there that the passage of nothing days become one’s trial.

YOUTH: Ah!
PHILOSOPHER: Knowing about Adler, being in agreement with Adler and accepting Adler alone are not enough to change one’s life. People often say that the first step is crucial. That everything will be fine if you just get past it. Of course, it is true that the biggest turning point is the first step.

In real life, however, the trials of nothing days begin only after one has embarked on that first step. What is really being tested is one’s courage to keep walking on one’s path. Just as it is in philosophy.

YOUTH: It’s really so—it’s really those days that are a trial!
PHILOSOPHER: You are likely to run into conflicts with Adler on many occasions. You will have doubts. You may want to stop walking, and you may tire of loving and want to seek a life of being loved. And you may want to visit this study again.

But at that time, please talk with the children, with your comrades who will live in the coming era. And if you are able, rather than simply inheriting Adler’s ideas just as they are, please go about updating them yourselves.

YOUTH: We should update Adler?
PHILOSOPHER: Adler did not hope for his psychology to become didactically fixed in place and passed down only among specialists. His hope was that his psychology would be positioned as a psychology for everyone and continue to thrive, far from the world of academia, as a common sense of the people.

We are not a religion endowed with eternal scriptures. And Adler is not our sacred founder, but a philosopher who existed on the same level as us. Times change. New arts are born, new relationships and new worries also. The common sense of the people undergoes a slow transformation in tandem with the changing times. It is precisely because we value Adler’s ideas that we must continue to update them. We must not turn into fundamentalists. This is the mission entrusted to the human beings who will live in the new era.TO THE FRIENDS WHO WILL MAKE A NEW ERA
YOUTH: But what about you—what will you do from now on?
PHILOSOPHER: I suppose that other young people who catch wind of me will come. Because no matter how the times change, people’s worries stay the same. Please remember: the time we are given is limited. And as our time is limited, all our interpersonal relationships come into being on the premise of our parting. This is not a nihilistic term—the reality is that we meet in order to part.

YOUTH: Yes, undoubtedly.

PHILOSOPHER: And so, there is one thing we can do. It is to devote our ceaseless efforts, in all our meetings and all our interpersonal relationships, towards the best possible parting. That is all.

YOUTH: Our ceaseless efforts towards the best possible parting?
PHILOSOPHER: One devotes one’s ceaseless efforts so that when the day of parting comes, one will be able to be satisfied that ‘Meeting this person, and passing the time together with this person, was not a mistake.’ Whether it is in one’s relationship with one’s students, in one’s relationship with one’s parents or in one’s relationship with the person one loves.

If, for example, your relationship with your parents came to an end all of a sudden, or a relationship with a student or a friend came to an end, would you be able to accept it as the best possible parting?
YOUTH: N-no. That’s so …
PHILOSOPHER: Then, you have no choice but to start building now the kind of relationship that would make you feel that way. That is what is meant by ‘Live earnestly here and now.’
YOUTH: It’s not too late? It won’t be too late if I start now?
PHILOSOPHER: It is not too late.

YOUTH: But it takes time to put Adler’s ideas into practice. You even told me so yourself: ‘One needs half the number of years one has lived!’
PHILOSOPHER: Yes. But that is the view of an Adlerian researcher. Adler himself said something completely different in this regard.

YOUTH: What did he say?
PHILOSOPHER: In response to the question, ‘Is there a time limit for a person to change?’ Adler replied, ‘Yes, there certainly is a time limit.’ And then, with a mischievous smile, he added, ‘Until the day before you meet your maker.’
YOUTH: Ha-ha! Some friend!
PHILOSOPHER: Let’s embark on love. And devote our ceaseless efforts towards the best possible parting with that person we have loved. There is no need to worry about time limits or anything like that.

YOUTH: Do you think it is something I can do? Devote my ceaseless efforts?
PHILOSOPHER: Of course. Ever since we met three years ago, we have been devoting ourselves to those efforts. And now, in this way, we are approaching our best possible parting. We should have no regrets about our time together.

YOUTH: No, none at all!
PHILOSOPHER: I am proud to be able to part while having such a refreshing feeling. To me, you are the best possible friend. Thank you very much.

YOUTH: Oh, well, of course, I am thankful, too. I am thankful to hear that, I really am. But I’m not confident that I am a person who is worthy of those words! Is it really necessary to part forever here? Can’t we ever meet again?
PHILOSOPHER: It is your independence, your self-reliance, as a lover of wisdom, that is to say, as a philosopher. Didn’t I say it three years ago? That the answers should not be something you get from someone else, but something you arrive at on your own. You are ready to do that.

YOUTH: Independence, from you …
PHILOSOPHER: I have gained a great hope today. Your students will graduate from school, love someone some day, achieve self-reliance and become true adults. And one day, there will be dozens, even hundreds, of such students, and maybe the times will catch up with Adler.

YOUTH: That is truly the objective I had in mind three years ago, when I set forth on the path of education!
PHILOSOPHER: You are the one who will make that future. There is no hesitating. You cannot see the future because there are infinite possibilities in the future. We cannot see the future, and that is precisely why we can become the masters of our destinies.

YOUTH: It’s true, I can’t see a thing ahead of me. Nothing at all—it’s almost refreshing!
PHILOSOPHER: I have never once accepted disciples, and in all my interactions with you I have been very careful not to have any awareness of you as a disciple. But now that I have conveyed to you everything that needed to be conveyed, I have the feeling that I have understood something at last.

