YOUTH: And what would that be?
PHILOSOPHER: What I have been searching for is not disciples or successors, but a running partner. You will probably encourage me along my path, as an irreplaceable running partner who upholds the same ideals as me. From now on, wherever you are, I am sure I will continue to feel your presence close by.

YOUTH: Yes, I will run! I will run beside you, always!
PHILOSOPHER: Well, it is time to raise your head and go back to the classroom. The students are waiting. And a new era is waiting for all of you.

The philosopher’s study, separated from the outside world. One step outside that door, chaos awaits me. Noise and discord and unending everyday life awaits me.

‘The world is simple, and life is too.’ ‘But keeping it simple is difficult, and it is there that the passage of days become one’s trial.’ It’s true—there’s no two ways about it. But I’m going to throw myself into the chaos again, regardless. Because my comrades, my students, are living in the midst of great chaos. Because that is the place where I live.

The youth took a deep breath and with grim determination opened the door.AFTERWORD
This volume is the sequel to The Courage to be Disliked, which was co-written with Mr Ichiro Kishimi and published in 2013.

There were no plans to write a sequel at the outset. Maybe our book did not convey everything about the thinker Alfred Adler, known as the founder of Adlerian psychology, but it was a success in its distilling of the essence of his thought. The Courage to be Dislikedgenerated a favourable response, and I could not really see the significance of arranging a continuation of a book that already had its conclusion.

Then, one day about a year after the publication of that book, in the midst of a chat about trivial matters, Mr Kishimi let slip the following words: ‘If Socrates and Plato were alive today, they might have chosen the path of psychiatry, instead of that of philosophy.’
Socrates and Plato would have become psychiatrists?
The ideas of Greek philosophy could be brought into a clinical setting?
I was so taken aback, I could not speak for a moment. Mr Kishimi is the foremost specialist in Adlerian psychology in Japan and is a philosopher with enough of a familiarity with ancient Greece to be able to handle the translation of Plato. So, it was not a statement that made light of Greek philosophy, of course. If I were to specify one thing that led to the writing of The Courage to be Happy, I suppose it would have to be this particular comment from Mr Kishimi.

Adlerian psychology addresses all manner of life problems in plain language that can be understood by anyone, without ever making use of obscure terminology of any kind. It is a form of thought endowed with qualities more akin to philosophy than to psychology. It seems to me that The Courage to be Dislikedwas widely accepted as a life philosophy, rather than as a book on psychology.

But on the other hand, doesn’t this philosophical quality actually reveal the incompleteness of Adler’s thought as a psychology and point to its flaws as a science? Isn’t that why Adler became a forgotten giant? Isn’t the very fact that it is not complete as a psychology the reason it did not take root in the academic world? I had interacted with Adler’s thought without ever ridding myself of such doubts.

And it was that statement of Mr Kishimi’s that shed light on them.

Adler did not choose psychology in order to analyse the human mind. Inspired to set off on the path of medicine on the occasion of his younger brother’s death, the core matter of his thought was always ‘What is happiness to the human being?’ And at the beginning of the twentieth century, when Adler was alive, the most advanced approach to learning about human beings, and to inquiring into the true form of happiness, just happened to be psychology. One must not fall under the spell of the name ‘Adlerian psychology’ or spend too much time comparing him to Freud and Jung. Had Adler been born in ancient Greece, he may well have chosen philosophy, and had Socrates and Plato been born in our time, they might have chosen psychology. As Mr Kishimi often says, ‘Adlerian psychology is a way of thinking that follows in the same vein as Greek philosophy.’ At long last, I feel that I can grasp the meaning of these words.

And so, after a thorough re-reading of Adler’s writings as philosophy texts, I visited Mr Kishimi’s home in Kyoto once again, and we engaged in a lengthy dialogue. Naturally, the main subject of our discussion was happiness theory. It is that question consistently posed by Adler: ‘What is happiness to a human being?’
Our dialogue, which became even more impassioned than the previous time, explored education theory, organisational theory, work theory, social theory and even extended to life theory before reaching its conclusion with the grand themes of ‘love’ and ‘self-reliance’. How will the reader take in the love Adler speaks of and the self-reliance Adler speaks of? If the reader can feel, as I did, a great astonishment and hope of the sort that sends shockwaves through one’s entire life, I would know no greater joy.

Lastly, I would like to convey my heartfelt gratitude to Mr Ichiro Kishimi, who always tackled things head-on as the wisdom-loving philosopher he is, to our editors Yoshifumi Kakiuchi and Diamond Inc.’s Kenji Imaizumi, who gave their steadfast support throughout the lengthy writing period and, most of all, to all our readers.

Thank you very much.

Fumitake Koga
* * *
Alfred Adler, the thinker who was a hundred years ahead of his time.

Since the publication of The Courage to be Dislikedin 2013, the context of Adler and his thought in our country has gone through a remarkable transformation. Before, when speaking about Adler in lectures at seminars and universities and the like, it was always necessary to start with, ‘One hundred years ago, there was a thinker named Adler.’
Today, however, wherever I go in Japan, there is no need to present him in such a way. Moreover, the questions I receive during question-and-answer sessions are always astute and well-grounded. I have the strong sense that it’s no longer ‘one hundred years ago, there was a thinker named Adler’, and now instead, ‘Adler is present’ within many people
This is something I feel also with the first-place standing of The Courage to be Dislikedfor a record-setting fifty-one weeks, having reached million-seller status in South Korea as well as in Japan.

Adler has been widely known in Europe and America for some time. For me, as I have undertaken Adlerian research for many years, there is something deeply moving about his thought now becoming accepted in Asia after the passage of a hundred years.

The Courage to be Dislikedis a book that is like a kind of map for informing people of the existence of Adlerian psychology and for giving an overview of Adler’s ideas. It is a grand map that my co-writer Fumitake Koga and I put together over the course of several years, with the intention of creating a definitive introduction to Adlerian psychology.

This book, The Courage to be Happy, on the other hand, is a kind of compass for actually putting Adler’s ideas into practice and leading a happy life. And it may also be thought of as a collection of behavioural guidelines showing how one may progress towards the objectives laid out in the first book.

Adler was an oft-misunderstood thinker for many years.

With his encouragement approach in particular, there were innumerable instances of it being presented, or even abused, for purposes that could not be further removed from his original intentions. That is to say, it was used to control and manipulate other people in childrearing and school education settings, as well as in human resource development settings in corporations and the like.

This may be related to the fact that compared to other psychologists of his time, Adler was passionate about education. Deeply interested in socialism while at university, after experiencing the realities of the Russian revolution after World War I, Adler lost hope in Marxism. Thereafter, he sought the salvation of the human race not through political reform, but through educational reform.

One of Adler’s greatest achievements was the establishment of numerous child guidance clinics, the first in the world in public schools, under the aegis of the city of Vienna.

Furthermore, he used these child guidance clinics not only for providing treatment to children and their parents, but as places for training teachers, doctors and counsellors. In essence, it was from there that Adlerian psychology spread, from its start in schools, to the world.

To Adler, education was not something on the level of raising scholastic achievement, or reforming problem children, or that sort of thing. It was for moving the human race forward and changing the future. Thatwas education to him. Adler goes so far as to declare: ‘The teacher moulds the minds of children and holds the future of mankind in his hands.’
Then, did Adler have such expectations only for those in the teaching profession?
No, he did not. As is evident from his characterisation of counselling as ‘re-education’, for Adler, all people living in a community were engaged with education, and all people were in the position of receiving education. I, too, having first encountered Adler through childrearing, have actually gained a great deal of human knowledge from children. Of course, you too must be both an educator and a student.

Regarding his psychology, Adler stated: ‘Understanding a human being is no easy matter. Of all the forms of psychology, individual psychology is probably the most difficult to learn and put into practice.’
One cannot change anything just by studying Adler.

One will make no progress whatsoever just by knowing it as knowledge.

And though one may have gathered one’s courage and taken the first step, it won’t do if one stops there. Take the next step and then the next step after that. That accumulation of endless single steps is what we call walking.

Map and compass in hand, what sort of path will you walk from now on? Or will you stay in place? If this book can be of some help in gaining the courage to be happy, nothing would give me more joy.

Ichiro Kishimi
