tried using the defining edges by the cosine similarity of the like word embeddings of each page. And we do
get similar results. But these approaches should be complementary and generally converge, even though
there's we're losing information about the content of the page. Okay. So back to the two architectural
styles. We are going to think of hunters as kind of traversing a more local space of the underlying network.
Do you have an idea of this? Let's say someone in school that today researches physics,
tomorrow math just because they're doing homework, or someone who's just curious and browsing at 4 a.m.
Yeah. Other researchers have found diurnal effects of time. So people tend to browse different
things during the workday versus after work or on the weekends versus weekdays. We don't really go
into that here. And part of that is because one of our data sets was collected in a laboratory setting
where we just asked people to browse for 20 minutes continuously. Your question will apply much more,
I think, to the naturalistic data where we looked at mobile app users. But I'll try to get to that in a
second. Yeah. So the hunter, we actually had a person who just visited each of the Queens of England
and tried to explore their lineage when they were asked to browse whatever they wanted for 20 minutes.
But we would call this person more hunter-like. They really want to go in depth on one topic. Whereas
a busybody might explore more of the space, for instance, something about architecture or media or
politics. And they will generally create a broader network. But as you can see by the network, it can be
disconnected and it also contains less information per community. Okay, so the two data sets we'll be
talking about is one of them was collected in the laboratory in Philadelphia. We had around 150 people
browse Wikipedia for 20 minutes a day over three weeks. We also were able to ask them to do some
surveys about their personality traits, about curiosity, and kind of these ecological momentary
