to return to an edge. So just to give you an example, if we set reinforcement to one,
and we have this random walker that walks from node I to J. If you look at the transition matrix
entry for I to J, it'll be modified because we modified the edge weight to add one to it such
that there is a higher likelihood of taking this edge in the future. And it ends up being the case
that when we fit these to the laboratory readers, it correlates with personality trait preferences to
what's called deprivation curiosity, which is this personality trait that describes how tolerant you
are to uncertainty, ambiguity, ambiguity and incomplete information. So the survey, these are survey questions
that ask people questions like, you know, I can't go to sleep until I have the answers to the like
questions I'm thinking about at night, or I really need to, you know, find complete information about the
things I'm exploring and so on. And so this is this correlation between the model parameter to the
personality trait was to us a nice validation of conversion evidence for this preference for
familiarity. Okay, the second parameter, it was called regularity, and it was a preference for
similarity versus diversity. What we were inspired by was this kind of forging pattern, which is called a
levee flight, which maximizes the ratio of targets or resources visited to the ratio of distance traveled.
So you can kind of see a local random walk on the bottom left compared to the more expansive levee
flight that's able to cover more ground. The efficiency of this kind of foraging process might be why it's
been observed in humans and in birds foraging for berries and in mussels organizing themselves in
water and even in immune cells. For a network, so these are all defined in Euclidean space, but for a
network, we want to define the topological distance as the number of edges traversed. And so we can try to
do something similar by generating a levee flight according to the probability distribution of this of these
