distances. So a levee flight is approximated when the distance probability distribution has an exponent of
two. And this contrasts with the local random walk, which would have an exponent of three. So if the
probability distribution has a fatter tail due to having an exponent of two, then there's a higher
chance of taking these long jumps compared to a local random walk. And yeah, we're just going to refer
to that exponent value as regularity. So it turns out when we fit the regularity parameter to the Wikipedia
readers as a collective Wikipedia readers approximated levee flight dynamics. So the average was around
two. And we took that as kind of interesting evidence that if you have a group of people
exploring how they might do to their individual differences or preferences or personality traits,
if they could communicate the results to each other, that would be kind of like this kind of optimal
foraging pattern. Okay. So the distance measure there was, you said, the top logical distance and
just the number of edges. Yeah. It might be fun to do like a conceptual distance of how different the
web page was, the Wikipedia page was. Like a kind of like cosine similarity of the contents.
Yeah. Yeah. That would be fun. Yeah. We tried that and it does get similar fits. But again,
because we wanted to generalize eventually to this bigger data set, we didn't explore using text embeddings of
the pages. But that's definitely something we want to try. Yeah. And also, if we do text embeddings,
we can also look at things like sentiment and other nice things you get from having word vector embeddings.
So yeah, our next question was, does this model generalize? We fit this to 150 people in the
laboratory. And we want to test if it replicates in this group of 500,000 people. So here on the x axis,
I'm showing you several network data sets. And on the y axis, I'm showing you the difference in network
structure to the mobile app data. On the farthest left is the laboratory data. So I think it's
