in that country, and then correlate all of the browsers we have in a country, and how kind of busybody
like or hunter like to the country's reported happiness, positive affect or negative affect.
And what we find is something that's consistent with what we found in the laboratory, which is that
when people have higher negative affect, they tend to create these tighter, more hunter like networks.
Okay, so in this part of the talk, I tried to describe curiosity as an extended and open ended
search and foraging process. We found that this kind of model from the lab data is most similar
to the mobile app data compared to alternative models. And we can replicate the, like these tight
hunter like networks and the loose busybody networks that we found in the network, in the naturalistic
mobile app data. And we found that when people have higher depressed mood and anxiety, they tend to have
kind of these tighter, narrowed search patterns that are actually more efficient in some ways if they,
you know, were asked to remember, try to remember it later or try to, you know, navigate from one
page to another from what they browsed. We did a lot more stuff in this paper, if you're interested in,
we looked at topic preferences for hunters and busybodies. So we found that hunters tend to be tend to
gravitate towards STEM fields, maybe not surprisingly, whereas busybodies tended to gravitate more towards
like media, culture, history, geography. And so yeah, and then we also tried to identify other styles of curiosity.
Okay, so yeah, this kind of approach was really trying to talk about how we uncover novelties.
And this quote is kind of nice, in that it says like countless treasures are buried along the path
to nowhere in particular, we can still dig them out and enjoy them even if we can't control what they
are or when we find them. But in the next part of the talk, I want to get a little bit at this question
of how do we like excavate these treasures. And I'm going to be arguing that we need to selectively dig into
