older adults who want to test neurological risk for dementia. It turns out that when you have more
coarse-grained memory representations, it is seemingly a risk factor for developing a more severe form of
dementia and into Alzheimer's disease. And so you can kind of see that borne out in these curves where
if we look at like 70-year-olds, they generally have worse pattern separation performance than a 20-year-old.
However, what's nice is that about this approach is it suggests that if we present inputs that are more
compressible, there's actually a closing in this performance gap on the right. So it doesn't always
have to be it depends, I guess, on the stimuli and on the sequence of stimuli. Okay, finally,
I wanted to ask when is lossiness more helpful. So here's where we're applying the beta variational
autoencoders. We can construct this rate distortion curve using the objective function of the beta
variational autoencoder with the reconstruction loss. Some images are just easier to compress than others,
and this can be quantified using the beta variational autoencoder. So when we dial up beta,
we're producing more blurry and coarse-grained representations as shown in this curve on the
bottom left. And what we wanted to do is estimate the normalized rate of information per unit of loss in
the rate distortion function. So what this ends up looking like is we're just looking for the steepness of
the curve. And what this lets us kind of characterize is when you have a steeper decay or a more negative
slope, it means the image is more aggressively compressed. So one unit of loss discards more
information. Whereas when you have a shallower decay or a more positive slope, it means that an image is
less aggressively compressed, and we can retain more information. And it turns out when we retain more
information, we tend to do better on the pattern separation task, even when it's separated, the test
phase is separated by a week. You do worse, but it's still correlated with this kind of image property.
