is kind of what we'll be using as our distortion metric, the one minus the probability of having just
one random walker propagate along the shortest path. And because everyone has different individually
different like strengths of structural connectivity, everyone will have a different rate distortion curve
according to this definition. And then we also have measures of metabolic expenditure. So we can measure
the amount of glucose use, which is correlated pretty strongly with the amount of cerebral blood flow
in regions, we can test if when a region has more blood flow, if random walkers are able to propagate
more efficiently along shorter paths. We can also use neuroimaging methods to track myelin content of cells.
So this is basically like a sheath that makes electrical signals propagate more efficiently. And so the idea is
that it's very costly to myelinate axons. And so it should be, this process should be invested in places
where it most improves communication. And we're going to be checking if it improves communication
according to this random walk. So the idea is like, if we bias the random walker to have information
about metabolic resources or myelin in certain nodes, will it be, will it have a higher probability of
taking the highest fidelity shortest path? We tested this in around 1000 people. And basically,
we want to show that we can obtain a rate distortion functions that differs per person and per region,
and then show that these differences relate to things we care about like cognitive performance,
and also the compression or dimensionality of activity. And also whether we can show that the
brain is investing its resources to reduce redundancy according to the way we defined this rate
distortion function. So the results are that we can define a rate distortion function in this way per
person. And if you take a sliver of this rate distortion curve, you can see in blue in the Box and
Whisker plot that these are the empirical networks who had to propagate around 1800 random walkers across
