pairwise regions of the network to guarantee like 0.01 percent distortion, which is 99.9 percent chance of
taking one random walker taking the shortest path. This is more random walkers than expected according
just to random chance. So it suggests that if the brain is using this kind of repetition code,
it's using redundancy to correct for the possibility of errors. Okay, I'm just going to go here.
And then if we kind of take a similar approach, so now the red Box and Whisker plot is the blue Box and
Whisker plot and the other plot. And now if we bias the random walkers to have information about the
metabolic resources available in each region, or the myelin content in each region, we find that the
number of random walkers it needs reduces, which is consistent with this idea that we're investing
energy and resources to do redundancy reduction. So we also find that these rate distortion functions
predict performance and memory, complex reasoning, executive function. It predicts the dimensionality
of neural activity according to fMRI measurements. Strongly connected hubs tend to have the most
compressed activity. And what I find really cool, and I don't have time to get into it here, but I'm
happy to talk about it later, is that it seems to explain why different regions might have the
functions that they do. So this is the question I started out with in the beginning. Sensory cortices seem to
have less compression for maybe higher fidelity representation of our environment, whereas
association and frontal core disease tend to have more compressed representations or activity, which
might help with abstraction and generalization. And beyond that, we can find that if you look across
the field of neuroimaging, you'll see prefrontal cortex seems to be correlated with everything or so
many different things. But we can quantify the exact number of things that people have found it to be
correlated with. And then show that for regions with less compression, such as some areas of the
