Time to start writing. Take these statements that I'm about to say and use them as the
opening paragraphs or statements to feed a GPT-3 algorithm as a way to fill in a skeleton
or an outline of the titles. First book, Question Your Biases. This book was meant to be titled
Question Everything and Examine Your Biases, but after some consideration, I thought that was a
little too long. You may not know whether or not there is anything worthwhile inside this book.
Let me assure you that I have no idea.
Every one of us has an internal navigator that we can call our idio homunculus.
This is where, if you listen, you'll hear yourself talking to yourself in echopalaglossalalia.
Echopalaglossalalia. Echopalaglossalalia.
Argument. Let's look at the argument again.
I learned a new word today. Sesco. Sesco in Spanish means a slant or a tilt, what we call bias.
This is going to only list which way do you lean. I say Q means lean to the left and E means lean to the right.
You can illustrate the Q with a counter-clockwise circle with an arrow, and an E as a clockwise circle with an arrow.
Now there's something else I wanted to tell you that I thought at the time was very important, but I can't quite remember it.
It's going to say, cannot remove Seinfeld. It's a directory.
I want to reassure you that I'm doing the best I can to be creative.
I'm trying to prove to you, the reader or listener, that there's something worthwhile within.
Seinfeld directory is gone.
And I want you to recreate it again.
And kill the IR.
Well, I paused for a little while and thought to see if I had anything else to say, but nothing came to me.
So, I will begin anyways.
This first book, which as you know from having read the title, is called Question Your Biases.
In this lesson, will be a brief overview of the eleven books in this series.
The first book, which you are reading or listening to now, will tell you what's in the other books.
The next book, Universal Turing Machines, will be about the Lambda Calculus and the Church Turing Equivalents.
The next page, the next book in the series, I mean, will be called Automated Coverage Feedback.
And write ACF in parentheses at the end.
And it will be about an optimization algorithm that is not very widely well known.
I tried to make a Wikipedia page about it and was told it was not notable.
And so, by making a book about it, I can make it notable.
I know it was notable because it was an important part of the history of compilers.
If you hear a sound in the background, that's my cat.
I don't have a cat, but I'm house-eating one.
The fourth book in the series will be called No Such Thing as a Free Lunch.
It will be about stoicism and computer programming.
The fifth book, Truth, Beauty, and Shape Dynamics, will be about triangles in empty universes, vertices, edges, and gravitational attraction.
The sixth book, let's see, one, two, three, four, five, six, sixth book is Uses for Giant Kelp.
This is about things that you can make and do with giant kelp pulp and cellulose in general, lawnmower mulch, and bio-yougurts, microbial yogurts.
It will also give instructions on how to build giant kelp farms in the ocean and rainforest generators that are tidally powered vulsorial pediments.
And it will also have some recipes.
The seventh book, Music of Hedonia, Music of Hedonia, is about music in Hedonia, I guess.
Everyone who does not experience musical and Hedonia necessarily listens to the music of Hedonia.
It's a mixture of pop music, rap, classical music, and crap.
This is going to be the final book in the first series.
In the second series of four books, so there will be seven in the first, and four in the second.
In the second series, we'll start with Symmetry and Physics.
I think that you can probably figure out what that book is about.
It's about parsimony and Occam's razor and defining beauty, even though it's already been used in the fifth book of the series.
One.
Series two.
Book two.
Ontological Commitments.
It's about hierarchated lists that are thematically inscribed upon the engrams of the mind by ideologues.
It will also give a brief overview of basic formal ontology by Barry Smith of Buffalo
and Alison Kopnik's theory theory of Bayesian development of children and machines.
The third book in the second series, Unusually Potent Portables, would be about alchemy and
shamanism. The final book in the second series, the fourth, will be called Philosophy of Art,
if you've been adding. This is the 11th book. It will be about loving wisdom and creating
skilled artifacts. If that doesn't make any sense then read the book. If you are reading
along or listening very intently you will notice that this spells out quantum soup. It has
several references to food. Universal Turing Machines will have a lot about Haskell Curry.
Uses for Giant Kelp will have recipes for cream pies and simulation avocado and pumpkin
from kelp. And Music of Adonia will have a song about pizza, pasta and salad.
Symmetry and physics will talk about the innate internal symmetry of a banana at a banana plant.
Autological commitments will have a whole chapter on lentil stew. Unusually Potent Portables will have
a complete description of how to make beer and bread from barnacles.
and philosophy of art will have a photograph of an idyllic scene, a still life
with a bowl of fruit that kind of looks like everything. I think that's an overview. So I really have
nothing else to write about in this book except for questioning one's biases.
First we should talk about how everything is biased because of relativity.
Everything is biased because algorithms themselves are biased because an algorithm is a bias.
In fact intelligence is a bias. So what we should question our bias is we should not throw babies out
with bathwater. And we should not put the cart before the horse. There should be a chapter called
I Never Metaphor I Didn't Adore. In fact, we should start that chapter now.
Question Your Boss is chapter 2. I Never Metaphor I Didn't Adore. This chapter should start with an epigram from
Surfaces and Essences by Hothstadter.
And then a painting by Sharon Epic. And it will say in a little caption under the photo,
EP1C.
It will say something is going to happen in 57 days. Period.
It means X here because you could CD into that directory. Then I will say
So if I have this directory called Seinfeld, I could do a CD, Seinfeld, and I could log in and actually get
into the Seinfeld directory. Now let's go one step back. Diachronic armies of isologous
Exogenous, exogenous, plant-like lifeforms. Bright colors steaming from the can.
Colorless bonnets worn by chimps named Nimsky
And treated with a chemical that makes it harder.
This guy who wrote a book called A Portrait of the Artist as a Young Man also wrote a book
called Ulysses, wherein he experimented with a stream of consciousness, which really means
don't think about your grammar. Think about your thoughts. Write them out as they come
without over obsessing
over whether or not it's grammatically correct. In one of these books,
Joyce accidentally coined the word quark, when he said three quarks from a stark,
which is supposed to be a mispronunciation of a uneducated dialect. A mispronunciation of quark,
I suspect. Even though no one knew exactly what he was talking about when they found that this subatomic
particle came in threes, the three quarks seemed to make sense.
So it should be three quarks. But we say quarks, usually, because we're kind of quirky.
So I really have nothing more to say about this until I feed it to a GPT-3 algorithm.
I will say things like Hypercube, Tetra Orthodrome, Triarchalemnon, and the Julia programming language.
I will say the Beatles were a band who have their banners pasted on mugs. They have pasted a little
sticker with Sgt. Pepper's Lonely Hearts Club Band. Sgt. Pepper's Lonely Hearts Club Band.
So, uh, without further ado, the rest of the book will be written by a machine, and I will have a look
over it. That's all I have to say as a human being. Let's give it to the editor and see what we're getting.
