Who am I talking to, if not myself, in the future?
Who am I talking to, if not myself, in the future?
If this is the voice that is going on in my mind all the time, then why am I not aware of it?
And why does it tell me things I've never heard? Or does it?
It puts things together in a way that I've never been heard.
For example, I say, when you are creating a Cistercian numeral, you think of it as a tree with branches.
And so, you can use toothpicks to represent 9,999 possibilities.
I remember that when I was looking for the recorder, it was because I had said something interesting. Now what was it?
This is the voice, if this is the voice, that is going on in my mind all the time, then why is the first time? Why is this the first time I'm hearing of it?
Well, what did it say? In my voice? It said, with just three glyphs, you can represent any time.
I was thinking about how someone learning this in 1300 or 1400 was not aware.
I was thinking about where, just how many numbers you had to get to before you ran out.
Or else they would have used it like this.
They would have just thought four zeros if you wanted to represent something in Super Unix time.
So they would have laid out three, and then one, or that is four toothpicks, but they would have used branches.
And the shape that they would have drawn, and the shape that they would have drawn is a kind of race car.
You're saying 6,666 looks like a race car, and I'd say that 9,999 looks like a race car if you used your imagination.
And so in those days, no one was thinking of race cars.
And at first, when they wrote them down, they weren't using sticks.
They were drawing them, or is that just the only way we remembered them?
Because maybe this was a form of counting that used.
Actually, actually, if you think of a digital clock, and how you can use 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7 lines to represent an 8,
which means that you can represent all numbers.
But they didn't know how to do this before the digital era.
Not very well, at least, or else they would have constantly been etching it with chisels into rock,
and into wood, and they would have drawn it and written down.
And so what was the voice saying?
It said,
Colorless green ideas sleep furiously.
And that is not just a famous sentence that makes no sense.
But it is proof that grammar is emergent.
And that a child of 6 or 7 can already say things that have never been heard before.
Heard before.
Never heard before.
Never been heard before.
Heard before.
Heard before.
Heard before.
And so you can say to someone...
How far...
To Saturn.
And you are applying what...
On average, or at this exact moment, I mean, how long will it take to get there, or the distance in kilometers?
What's the difference?
I think I have really, really, really bad imposter syndrome about calculus.
I think I can't understand calculus, but I might know calculus better than most people.
I am determined to learn calculus, and to me, calculus means using pebbles to count.
And it is a synonym for calculating, but it also involves taking the derivative and tangents, and areas under curves,
and rates of change.
And, yeah, this is all things I have never exactly said before.
I certainly didn't hear it in my head, but instead I was thinking something more than Super Unix time.
I was thinking about how a Chinese character is a way of slicing up space.
And there are only a few strokes, and so you have a smaller alphabet in Chinese than in English, or in Latin.
But we need 26 letters.
Now, don't get me wrong, but if there are 10 basic strokes,
if there are 10 basic strokes, then that's 16 less, if it's 12 basic strokes, then that's 14 less.
And then I check it in my head by seeing if they add to 26, but I don't say that out loud.
Here's another thing I've maybe never heard, but I'm always thinking.
The impossibility of showing your work.
I think I was marveling at the very first time that I saw a multiple choice test.
multiple choice test or multiple choice test.
And the first time that I was ever told to show your work, it was written down, show your work.
I was probably in grade 11 by the time it was forced upon me.
But everything was showing your work when I had no teachers.
I only wrote my answers on blank lines in books.
This is not a multiple choice test.
And so yeah, the impossibility of showing your work always seems incredibly ridiculous.
Because I do like 500 things in my head before I write the first symbol.
And then 10,000 more before the second.
100,000 before the third.
And I can logarithmically scale time.
But I can't change the configuration space.
This is the voice that goes on in your mind all the time.
This is what really surprised me is when I said,
Who am I talking to if not myself in the future?
It was a reminder that all around me are notes.
They are dictionaries and encyclopedias.
They are reference books.
So that I do not have to contain this knowledge in my head in order to know it.
But I have to just know where to look.
This is the voice.
This is the voice.
In my head, what have I written down on the screen.
It says, type error, built-in function or method object is not subscriptable.
Then I said, y equals np.array, first I had said, let numpy equal mp.
But I technically said, import numpy as np.
Then after I created the array of 2525, I say, what's y?
It tells me exactly what I said.
Then I go y.t, that means transpose y.
So now, it's a column vector.
It was a row vector.
I had made it a matrix by double square bracketing a y.shape, I asked.
1, 3, that's a tuple that gave back.
y.t, transpose y.
Array.
I did it again and I got the same result because it's not changing y.
So I say x equals y dot t.
So I say transpose y as a capital T.
x dot shape.
See, it's impossible to show your work if you're thinking about 100,000 things at once.
You only have one hand.
But then again, if you can compress space, it doesn't take 9999 glyphs to know it.
You only need to know six glyphs and four rules approximately.
And that gives you a column of like a multiplication table.
If you know the multiplication table, you can easily remember Cistercian numerals.
And how can anyone remember 9999 things at one time?
You just read it like a z.
Go in at the bottom and then to the right and then up to the left as if you're going backwards.
And then forward to the right.
And then what did I say?
I said z equals np dot zeros.
So what did I say?
So what did I really say?
I said let z equals numpy's function zeros.
Which I passed in a three, meaning I wanted to have three elements.
Then I said what's z?
And it said array zero dot zero dot zero dot.
See I'm checking someone else's statement.
They said zero vectors have no effect if added to another vector.
And I tried it and it had an effect.
Z array do you already notice the effect?
It converted the zeros.
Now I haven't added it yet.
But after I added the array of zero dot zero dot zero dot.
I said z equals z plus y.
So I'm checking to see.
It says zero vectors have no effect if added to another vector.
So I've added them together and then I said what is z?
What is z?
What is z?
What is z?
And it's an array of 25 dot.
No, two dot and five dot.
And what did I give it?
At first I said 25, two and five.
So it did not have no effect.
It is a zero vector.
But it did not have no effect.
Because it converted an integer into a float.
But basically after that point if I had given it some floats,
then it would be true.
Then it would be true.
I need just the same thing as I do.
The vectors in PyTorch and TensorFlow.
X point equals torch tensor.
X.
I think it is a point.
X.
PyTorch.
E.
I think it is a point.
X.
PyTorch.
X.
PyTorch.
X.
X tensorflow. Okay, the PT was PyTorch, not point. I think I read it as a point.
X PyTorch equals torch.tensor of the list 25, 2, and 5.
Then X tensorflow is equal to, set it equal to, set it equal to, tf.variable 25, 2, 5.
This is the way, this is return to slides here. This is instructions for the teacher.
When he's giving the presentation, he wants to go back to the slides.
I think I sang here because I heard their voice, heard his voice.
I didn't know what it would sound like until I heard it.
So, he wants another question.
What is the transpose of ZZ?
It gives me a common vector 25, 2, and 5.
Hmm.
The light has flickered.
I'm boring myself to death now with my speech because I don't want to hear all of my thoughts out loud.
I can have way bigger thoughts if I don't use words because I think of things that are multi-dimensional.
It's just that I'm set.
It's back there again.
I couldn't have way bigger thoughts.
It could be and the last part of my head is to get large我也 generated.
