If there's no space available, you can't install your own system.
So in this case, I need to delete all the software to be installed in the system.
Each one of them on a basic environment allows me to select
If the disk is new, then I'll select whatever.
The next screen shown here allows us to configure this with all disks.
Or if you're running a physical disk, it'll show you all the physical disks that you have.
If there's no space available, you can't install the operating system.
So now that in this case, I need to delete the volume options.
This will be done manually by selecting the new mine route.
This is a great install.
In this lesson, if the disk is new, no information on it.
The installation class is very important.
This should not be used in general.
However, the task system automatically allows us to set up
the user default for the disk or the new media.
In this case, if you select the install, so I put the virtual disk
into the virtual disk.
It's going to show you the change of the disk.
And it's starting up the disk installation process.
Now that I've completed the basic installation screen that comes up
is the language.
Start the installation.
I'm going to select my language.
The less English in the background is it is installing.
The next screen that comes up is the installation.
All the software is needed based off the selections that we show
and is configuring the system in general.
In order to set the time of the game,
I need this installation is it allows us to set up
to make sure the keyboard is clocked for selection.
I'm going to select my OS or just this operating system.
comes with a few options that I can use for various software to be installed in the system.
We need to agree with them to base the terms of use.
Allows me to select.
So here's the license and software packages.
And it's going to ask me to accept it.
It's now going to finish the installation here.
The next screen shown here allows us to configure the virtual disk.
Or if you're running a physical disk.
Notice how the information that I've showed you all
of the user names that you have is already ready for me.
If there's no space available, you can't install the operating system.
So in this case, log in.
I'm going to get a couple of screens asking me
you want to review the system.
So I'm going to use English as the language.
The disk is new.
And make sure the keyboard is quick.
I can select.
I can connect my online accounts from this screen.
Click here and create them automatically.
Doing this will set the defaults for the disk.
If you've selected manual volumes.
It's going to show you the changes that you have made to the disk.
