The screen advantage of these options goes into the next thing at another configuration.
In order to set the time and date, I need to set this automatically.
So I need to turn my network card on, so it obtains an IP address.
Once the IP address is built in the key, I can go back to this.
Each one of them on the base environment allows me to select the software packages that will work with the server.
The next thing that I have shown here allows us to configure the virtual disk software selection.
CentOS, which is this operating system, comes with a few options that I can use.
In this case, I need to delete all of them.
Each one of them on the base environment allows me to select different disk software packages
that I can select.
The next screen, shown here, allows us to configure the virtual disk.
Or if you're running a physical disk, it'll show you all the physical disks that you have.
If there's no space available, you can install the operating system.
So now that I have completed the basic installation options, I can put the installation manually.
By selecting the new background on the screen.
This is a great install.
In this lesson, it's going to discuss the install view with no information on it.
The installation process is very, and the disk is running your system in general.
However, the task will create some automatic things about this installation.
This will set up the user default for the disk for those users.
In this case, if you select the install view with virtual disk, it's going to show you the change in the screen.
It's going to start the installation process.
Now that I've completed the basic installation, the screen options is the language.
I'm going to start the installation.
I'm going to select my language.
What I'm doing in the background is that it is installing the next screen that comes up.
I'm going to start installing the recording software.
There's only a few options on this screen, but each of these options is configuring the system in general.
In order to set the installation up, I need this installation now.
So I need to set up one card on the password so that it obtains an idea for users.
Once the IP is already in the P, I install.
So at the end of the installation, the problem I'm going to do,
I will automatically create a system by how it works to use this.
I'm going to select the software again to make sure the keyboard is clicked for selection.
I can contact my own regular class, which is this operating system,
comes with a few options that I can use for various software to be installed in the system.
Each one of them on the basic terms of use allows me to select the different software
and it's going to ask me to accept it.
Now I'm going to finish the installation here, allows us to configure the virtual disk.
Notice how the information that I've showed you all of the user names that you have is already ready for me.
If there's no space available, you can't install the operating system.
So in this case, when I log in, I'm going to get a couple screens asking me how to use the system.
So I'm going to use the English as the language.
The disk is new and make sure the keyboard is correct.
If I select, I can connect my online accounts on this screen, click here to log in to certain accounts.
Now the system is ready to go for the disk.
If you've selected manual volumes, it's going to show you the changes that you have made to the disk.
nationally is OK and people starting to track theaa Carlton Norfolk.
But it doesn't have any problem.
It doesn't exist.
It doesn't exist.
As to the gradientazar, of course, we can set the app around the app.
