...networking within OSX or Windows.
Traditionally, with Linux servers, we don't have a GUI,
so we need to operate everything from a command line interface.
That makes troubleshooting a little bit more difficult.
When we're a Linux system administrator,
we may be asked to statically set information on the network
so that we can get to our server all the time.
While DHCP provides us an IP address right away every time,
it may provide us a different IP address every time.
So we need to configure the IP address from the command line
to ensure that we get the same IP address every time we try to access that server.
Let's look at both the GUI side and the command line interface.
Different distributions handle networking different ways.
Some call things certain ways, and some display information other ways.
So, in order to find the GUI configuration for networking,
you'll have to search for it.
In this case, it was under Settings and then Network.
This is the Network Manager, which is traditionally the piece of software
that is used in GUI to manage your interface connections.
In order to modify these, we're going to click the wheel,
go down to IPv4, notice that it's set to Automatic, the HCP.
You may want to change the DNS address.
Here's where I'm going to change the static information for my server.
So I would type in the address, the net mask, and the gateway.
Now for the command line interface.
In order to see what the interface is called,
I need to look at what we have in the system.
So I'm going to type in ifconfig,
and you'll notice eno with a number after it.
This stands for Ethernet, on board, and then the arbitrary number after it.
Additionally, we have our loopback address,
and we may have other different addresses in here,
for virtualization, for example.
If I were to modify this interface,
I'm going to type in sudo ifconfig,
and then the IP address.
I need to have the IP address that I want to enter,
plus my net mask.
Those two need to be known.
I also need to enter in the actual interface
that I want to configure.
Once I hit the enter button,
it's going to change the system.
The other thing that I need to do,
I'm not going to actually modify that.
The other thing I need to do is change the route.
The route allows us to have a way to get to the next hub.
I can change the route by typing route add,
and then the information that I want to,
the router information that I want to add,
and the destination.
So if I want to change certain routes for certain interfaces,
I can do that by just typing the route add,
and then the information.
So if I wanted to add 192.168.122.1
for EN0.16777.177.36,
it's going to change the default.
It's going to change the route for that interface.
However, I don't want to do that
because it's working just fine right at the moment.
In order to see if things are working correctly,
I'm going to ping resources.
So I'll type in ping, and then a name.
I should receive a response back,
which means that both my route is working and my DNS is working.
If my DNS is not working,
I can try just pinning the gateway and see if I get a response.
If I don't get a response from the gateway,
then I know there is something wrong with my system.
Let's look at how we configure the network interface
if we need it to be persistent.
The way I just showed you will reset once I restart the server.
So I need to have that information saved.
This is located in etc.
sysconfig network scripts
and the interface that I need to configure.
So I fcfg-eno and then the number after it.
Here's the information on that interface.
If I needed to set a static address,
I'm going to change the boot protocol from DHCP to static.
I'm also going to need to add the IP address information in NetMask.
This is very easy where I would just type in
IP ADDR equals 192.0168.0, let's say,
.2,
and my NetMask
is 255.255.255.0.
However, since I don't want to modify this at this point,
I'm going to quit it.
Now let's say that we want to protect certain resources.
Within Linux, it's very easy to create another interface,
especially virtual,
and isolate certain resources.
I can do this with firewalls and my interfaces,
and by modifying the routes.
You may see this in a more secure environment.
In conclusion, troubleshooting with Linux is not difficult.
However, you may have to learn additional commands
in order to get familiar with the interface.
I'm going to turn my network card on so it obtains an IP address.
Once the IP address has been obtained,
I can go back into my time and date and select my time zone.
In this lesson, I will show you how to interact with the SUDU,
which is like,
grant SUDU privileges to certain users
and allow them to execute privileged commands with or without password.
SUDU is a program that allows users to run programs
on behalf of another user.
Typically, the super user or root,
and it can be configured by a SUDU file
that specifies how SUDU access is granted for a given user.
In order to view or modify the SUDU file,
you must have super user or root privileges.
I'm using the Greg account so that it is not privileged at the moment.
In order to elevate my privileges,
I'm going to log in as root.
The SUDU here allows us to configure the virtual disk.
Now I'm running a physical disk.
It'll show you all the physical disk.
The SUDU file is located at bed scene slash SUDU.
The SUDU file should not be edited with a normal file editor,
so we're going to use EI SUDU.
This could be done manually by selecting a minus sign.
I'm going to scroll down here
to where we actually modify parts of the SUDU file
to grant certain access.
Click this button here, which is...
This line right here where it says root all equals all
in parentheses and then as a tab for the disk
and it says all again means certain things.
This line means that any user with the username of root
has access to execute all commands
if the root password is entered.
Obviously, the root user should have these privileges already.
Each line should have the following elements.
First, the user, the line assigned to here, is called root.
Next, the host, which the line can be applied to.
In this case, alt.
This is useful if you're copied in a file from system to system.
Next, the equals all specifies the users
which the person running the SUDU command must be.
In this case, all users installed.
And finally, the commands which the specified user can run.
In this case, all commands.
Reboot the system and...
Let's add a user here.
You press I for insert because I'm in BI.
Then I'm going to type in Greg underscore test.
I'm going to hit the tab button, not the space button.
Tabs must be used here instead of spaces
in order for the files to work correctly.
So I'm going to execute the same commands.
We need to agree all equals all in parentheses, tab, all.
So let's break quit.
Now that I've saved the file, accept it.
Let's try to access the BI SUDU from what it just created.
SUDU or BI SUDU is a privileged process.
So we need to execute it as a root, as soon as you, Greg, underscore test.
The first time I log in, I'm...
Now, notice that my username is Greg underscore test.
So I'm going to use SUDU, BI SUDU.
And make sure the keyboard is correct.
Enter my password again for Greg test.
Hit enter, and now I have access to the SUDU or SWAT accounts.
Let's say that we don't want to have all the users
use full super user privileges all the time.
So now let's modify Greg test 2
in order to run FDIS without a password.
Go down to the line that we created just a little bit.
type in Greg test 2
all equals no PASSWD
tab, remember the all, this third string here
is for commands.
Type in SBINFDISC.
Now, let's switch users.
The first string that comes up is the language string.
And see if we can't run that command.
The next string that comes up is the installation string.
So notice how I didn't have to enter a password.
Typically when you run SUDU, we have to enter that password.
Now, let's look at what SUDU also provides.
SUDU also provides information on what we just entered.
So let's look at SUDU, let's exit out of here.
And we'll exit out of here for a test.
And let's look at SUDU tail-3 var log security.
Notice how all my commands are logged in.
SUDU provides information on everything
that the user types in
as long as they are using SUDU.
If we don't want them to SUDU,
then we have to not allow them to do that.
However, if they're in the SUDUers file,
we can lock those commands down as well.
In conclusion, SUDU provides a way
to provide access to users on behalf of the users.
SUDU. This is important to do
because sometimes we need to elevate privilege.
What this allows us to do as well
is make sure security is still intact.
So what if we accidentally type something in?
Well, SUDU prevents us from accidentally typing in a command
that we may not have meant to type in.
So anytime we type in SUDU space
and then the privileged command,
we're going to be probably for that password.
And think about it twice.
So in an enterprise environment,
it's best to enable SUDUers for your running systems.
So they have the ability to do administrative things.
However, lock down the system
to understand what they're doing.
Do you know what they're doing?
Logging information is important as well.
If you select a manual volume,
it's going to show you the changes that you have made.
And so listen, I'll discuss SSH or security.
I'll discuss what SSH do you know.
And that will be practically QC.
SSH is determined by people from those two systems.
We check their screen by typing in PS.
Opposites, correct, SSH.
The SSH team will, here, look at them.
These are SSH team who's running.
It's very easy for SSH to run a remote browser.
It's so easy because typically SSH runs on 422.
We'll discuss how to security and live.
SSH is an SSH user's built in.
SSH will show access to 531S2 to remote commands,
forwarding tunnel, creating commands,
forwarding access ways that are unique,
encrypting proxy graphs in the video
that sucks for a call, and mounting remote directories.
Typically, a system administrator
is going to use SSH to copy files.
This comes in the form of SCP.
SCP works nearly the same way as SSH,
but there's other things that we can do with SCP.
We can actually transfer files
and zip them up at the same time over SCP.
I've done this with numerous systems,
and it saves a lot of time in the long run
if we're backing up systems.
The command SSH looks like this.
SSH username at hostname.
And we can also issue command after if we want to.
So we can say,
and let's catch up.
So we'll link to the board.
We'll have the storage lines.
And it's going to ask you.
Copy copy.
We'll be a secret copy of SCP.
Is this simple as having SCP?
Finish the installation.
Defining.
User at hostname.
Colon.
Home.
Or wherever you want.
Where do your files look here?
Home.
User.
But here.
This is based on secure file
for protocol for SFTD,
but it's not meant to replace RCP.
Let's test this out.
We'll look at my IP.
Here, my interface is 192.168.18.131.
Then go over to another distribution called counting.
Counting likes the security distribution
can be at the information testing.
I'm going to go over here.
So we're going through this message.
Break.
At 192.168.18.131.
This way, the server,
and go on.
I'm going to go over here.
Report.
That's at stage 9.
In order to do that,
you're going to change.
I'm going to report.
Press Fox.
Grant.
SSH.
See if it comes back.
However, there's nothing listening on the report.
Which is okay, in this case,
until we actually don't need to move on the part.
So I'm going to,
this is called obfuscation,
where we're hiding things out of the inside.
If you have SSH turned on,
unfortunately, too,
on qualified papers,
you probably noticed that you're going to attack quite a bit.
If you change the report on SSH,
you'll now see that you're able to hide your report
and it's not going to be attacked.
Let's just make sure we can actually SSH and connect to that report.
So I'm going to type in SSH,
with cash case report,
and support number 227,
right?
At 122.168.128.138.
And notice that I can do that.
Understanding that you hide SSH intents are desirable
to make sure that your tax service is built.
Changing report numbers will help you
not allow the factors you want to try and reduce the service
over at the moment.
We'll change it.
In addition, changing report.
In this case,
of SSH.
SSH allows us to have a password for you.
However, SSH will compromise.
And in fact,
we're going to change the line of SSH.
They will be able to turn SSH into a lot more
and steal users' measures.
The next screen that comes up
is the installation summary screen.
The next screen that comes up
is necessary to ensure
the system is option correctly.
that has mentioned room
that we have written.
So,
the time that we have
grown the system,
you live here with
the emphasis.
It's not capable,
but you should expect
the reason we go
to make a littleNIE
single time
Where the playable process shall be?
Well, let's fly.
Okay.
So, if I want to receive chemics, I also need to type in that initial command backer.
So, if I want to receive chemics, I can delete and actually push that into what we call death note.
This can be done manually.
Push it to the side on the screen.
If this is new with no information, I can select this button here, which will also click here to create a lot of everything.
And we can see that we are executed for the disk.
If you select it manually, it's going to show you the changes that you have made to the disk.
Now that I've completed the basic installation options, I can start the installation.
What this is doing in the background is it is installing the system.
It's installing a little more conservative....
Well, it is, it's sold.
So it's going to be in the full time, so we're going to change the girl, I didn't change it
on the right way, the user, we're going to use the account in the account, basically,
if we want to, um, agree to the terms of use, and then, um, change the rule,
and then, um, change the rule.
So the commands that we use are bad.
So I need four of those annotations for the users when we have them to, however,
we need to modify something for other commands that we need to use.
In this lesson, we'll discuss those commands why we want to use, so only answer those.
Let's look first at what we already agreed.
So we'll type in Sue, Kat, Betsy, ask for all the first story we have for four,
against the degree, with the third time for you, let's say we want to launch our users.
So for the user Greg, instead of home, we'll use the license information.
Let's use Greg 10.
It's going to ask me to accept it.
So let's make sure there is type in the line of the operation,
and the other one.
Here's what the directive that is created, however, the user,
or both of those we need to change it.
So we'll type in Sue, channel, the user need to be going to change it too.
So now, in the kind of information I feel about for the user,
now, what is Greg?
So I'm going to use English as a language.
And make sure there is, that is only if I'm changing certain
other sources that might be used by an online account.
Now, I'm going to use the CI and the Google cache,
and that's, that would also be changed,
and a lot of people ask each other.
It needs to use something to explain what, uh, accounts.
Now, this system is ready to go.
In caring users not only,
to ensure that we are a security user,
making sure that they own files in need,
and looking up others who might have access to those files,
but also modifying the rules,
so that we can let other users make changes to other user strategies,
or if they are sharing files, to us or now,
so that we have other periods, and other people's files.
This is a common way to text you to request to allow other users,
to be able to text to the app.
And if you are having to change to the app,
and you should have a touch on the app,
and you should have a touch on the app.
Now, this is something that's an old machine.
It's an old machine to get to the machine.
However, the tabs that we have involved are pretty much the same.
We're going to try to command user depth.
I'm just going to break the test point.
First, you're getting the installation media.
In this case, I have a virtual machine,
so I put the virtual disk into the virtual browser,
and start it up.
Now, when we haven't used this for this,
I should not come across the picture of the alert,
with any cronials.
We need to remove the engine only.
The next screen that comes up is the installation summary screen.
So let's say that when you have that minimum that I have, let's create this and select the
options that I can use for various software to be installed in the system.
Each one of them on the basis allows me to select the software packages in our server.
So when you can't have links in your environment only, that's typically not available as an error.
When I tell people, they might start getting into links and say, okay, when you provide
a computer, you might have this, you might have to call me all the time and tell me how
to figure out other people cannot be frustrated.
There's something happening in the system as you can for the actual.
Those don't necessarily work on links.
So there's specific software that you can keep running applications for the actual.
Those don't necessarily work on links.
And authenticate into a lot of different things.
Depending on what we can create.
It serves for cloud sharing.
And it runs all for Windows.
And how it would be.
Linux can be authenticated into the active record domain or application in three different
ways to do this.
So first of all, LDAP, subject is active record, LDAP.
And the third one is active record, LDAP.
And curbers.
So curbers for Windows is the kind of standard for authentication.
And we've seen where Linux, in a later video, we are able to have close up and key
modules of hand modules that utilize different services to integrate into different parts.
So there's a perverse through the hand module that we can use for that into the active record
domain.
So Samba, for example, and .
So Samba, for example, and .
There are plenty of .
And .
And , and .
And we've seen where Linux, , and in a later video, we are able to have multiple
modules that utilize different services to integrate into the active record domain.
So if we're integrating users for an accurate domain domain, it can guarantee that we're
shutting, for example, a user account inside of that treasury, that that person is not
going to have access to our native system.
If auditing is also necessary.
So if we tie the two together, or tie multiple systems into Linux, we can apply the entire
environment to have a holistic picture always in line with our environment.
On first, a local campus should not be used within Linux, if it's an enterprise environment
to that's for screens to be used.
Whenever we install another open source software, it's typically going to integrate LDAP
for a client-based directory application protocol to look at application between a
some kind of application and our software.
Linux installation is being used for a third-party software for data application methods.
So, for example, Slump.
If you're looking at this specialization from Coursera, we have a Slump in the body.
So I use LDAP for Slump to authenticate my users in that directory domain.
However, my Slump is running on the server.
So software also requires some I-call application to enter.
Same conclusion of the quality of this system behind its own may not be the best use case
for a lot of benefits.
Perhaps, the latest system may be best used for web search or specialized
applications like the security.
We're possible to see that.
It's probably not going to be used very much in the end of the software environment
program.
So security is also a major consideration when we need to work with other systems.
So we need a holistic picture for an hiring manager to integrate all the services
such as Summit, Windmine, and Kerberos into our links and libraries to make sure
that security is ultimately installed.
We need a lot of accounts on this screen to automatically log in to certain accounts.
Now this system is ready to go.
Please take a minute here, please.
If you want to hear more information, please do you have any questions or questions.
Okay, that's great.
There you go.
We're seeing a lot of other questions.
We're not allowed to use today, without any request, make sure to ensure that you're
Rubén is added to your control body.
All the word code listed and define conditions.
It's a provision that obviously feeds 24 astrologers first, so that user actually
has Carly and Web editor.
You can do this in a longer on-necember storage model for what's forums
We also have access to change between the operating system, so for example, you have to compromise
the process, for example, it might do let each other parts of the system.
NECS was first designed by the National Security Council.
It stands for security and enhanced NECS, and it's the NECS answer to mandatory access control,
or what we call NECS, or NECS control, and NECS control, or mandatory access control.
It's the NECS kernel as a version of NECS.
Primarily, it's on RedNap distribution, but it also could be in other institutions as well.
However, the versions of RedNap, such as Southwest are in this control,
is the NECS program.
It's denied by people.
The NECS control says, I'm going to deny anything that I don't know.
It provides to each group.
So, if we change the file, for example, and we modify the ACL on that file,
we're only allowed to do what the NECS is allowed to do.
The NECS is allowed to do everything.
So, every change for the NECS to figure out what's going on,
you can only allow one issue at a time as well.
So, when we make a file change, we have to tell the NECS to look that file away.
So, we have three different modes of NECS.
The first one is the first one, and that one is the NECS control on the entire machine.
Users cannot bypass it.
Everything is logged in.
Everything is ready to do.
So, the next one is going to be our permissive vote.
Our permissive vote says, allow everything.
We don't want to set this at all.
We want to make sure that there is something that says,
well, here's what gets an access in.
Here's what gets done.
We're going to do the system.
So, again, I'm going to say, let's be an access control.
So, types of enforcement.
There are different types of enforcement.
That's going to be our type-based enforcement.
And that's using hard-headed policy.
Next is our base access control.
And that's based on users.
The next is multi-modal security.
And they run the multi-categories here.
These two types of enforcement aren't used as much.
They provide multiple ways to enforce new reactions to both on processes and models.
.
The features and methods are differences .
That's specifically perfect.
Policies are separate from .
We have .
Also to the region.
Also make .
So that's a mechanism.
We have processes and trials taken
,
.
We need .
And we need certain access tools to limit the integration we have.
The problem with SEMINX are also seen.
So, if you're making many applications in the operating system,
SEMINX tees time, you have to allow it for all the discussions we make.
There's a book on SEMINX that says here's all the context
that we need to think about and change,
that we're going to be modeling for another instance.
If you make a change to your paper process,
you still have to make sure that SEMINX will have to do this.
If you don't set conditions on the library process,
it's not going to be done.
But we definitions the work.
For example, that he has to push left-h supplicates
to the directly get process.
The solution SEMINX is very powerful necessarily
because the problem is .
Just think about different підble connections,
just going to be Pinotopundo.
And we question boom.
We've not seen this so insurers.
We can't see that.
And we see on those in our notebook,
the .
And then, we see that.
One nice thing about this installation is it allows us to set up users and passwords for those users.
So the question I have here is, is it nice to hear?
Well, no computer is kind of secure.
So computers may need security at one specific point, but it depends on how, where, all the software we have, a whole bunch of different things to make sure that your system is secure.
So when your computer may need a specific place to make sure that it is secure at one point in time.
If my computer is completely out of network, and I don't know what this happens, so, or it's in a lot of room, it's secure.
Maybe it may not depend on what the press that has against it.
Maybe it's made a break in the door.
If I have a password, or if the device is encrypted, I need to fully bypass a security device to get in.
There's a network that's on there, or not.
There's a network that's blocking the road.
So I need to make sure that I have layers of security protecting my devices.
There's no more secure than my system.
There's no more secure than my system.
There's no more secure than I'm at.
I'm at.
I'm at.
I'm at.
I'm at.
I'm at.
I'm at.
I'm at.
I'm at.
I'm at.
You can see.
I'm.
I'll get in.
My name is.
I'm at.
All right.
I'm at.
I'm.
I'm.
I'm.
I'm in.
I'm.
I'm.
I'm.
I mean, I'm.
But then.
I'm.
I'm.
I'm in.
And I'm.
I'm.
I'm in.
So where Windows, for example, has millions of machines running Windows machines, it needs
to be very little of those machines actually running languages, even though they are running
a majority of the bar cameras across the earth.
There are four different areas that we need to be concerned with when looking at languages
security.
First one is software buildings, second one is going to be configuration here, third one
is social engineering, and third one is social engineering, and third one is social engineering
in the .
So the one is long, say it's basically given the five boxes, all of those are
shocking, meaning that the less chance of you have that need of one of those
and there's one of those becoming small.
Developers of custom software may not have to manage the software for real,
for example, it's always good as to try most common structure, turn that in
for some application which may have been tapping the needle, or perhaps,
running, or maybe, or maybe, or maybe, or maybe, which may have been tapped,
or maybe, or maybe, or maybe, or maybe, or maybe, or maybe, or maybe, or maybe,
or maybe, or maybe, or maybe, or maybe, or maybe or maybe, or maybe, or maybe
or .
It's very important.
I will just set the time to date, I need to set this automatically.
So I need to turn on...
In this lesson, I will discuss last Firewalls.
There are several software-based Firewalls within the next.
Today, I'm going to discuss the Ubuntu version called UFID.
We're going to discuss the new Firewall, instead of us,
and we have systems called Firewall V, and eventually where we came from.
So let's start out with Ubuntu.
The two most common software Firewalls that I've been on,
are UFID and Firewall V.
Now, where we came from was what we call IP filter.
IP filter is a packet-filtered software that can be configured for a variety of different firewalls.
So we also then have IP tables, which enables a stable firewall.
We'll set into its systems.
However, IP filters are still around, and we can still be inundated.
It's still a little criminal firewall, and can be implemented.
It's a little problem with trying to configure IP filter and IP tables.
They are very complicated to understand.
They have many interesting things that makes it difficult for a normal user to try to configure.
So later, Firewall V allows us to really easily configure Firewalls within our hand servers.
Firewalls are extremely important to understand where our attacks come from within those attacks.
We can also walk information that comes in from these attacks.
So let's look at 1-2-1.
UFW stands for Uncomplicated.
It is named and disabled by T-plots.
There are also actors for different systems.
And it is still obligated to manage IP tables just within my teams.
We're going to see the status of the UFID student's home.
We're going to set the UFID system.
Status is not.
So let's enable UFID.
Anyway.
So now it says Firewalls have been enabled on system.
So we'll set the UFID status again.
We'll see that it's active.
And let's look at the same rules.
So UFID status for us.
See here?
Oh, 53.
N.
However, if UFID was essential as a lot more rule, UFID still manages IP tables.
This is not the case in Firewall D.
The right hat cases this.
So let's look over there.
And let's look at Firewall D.
We have Firewall dash CME.
State.
We'll see that's right.
Just like we did on UFID.
Let's have the concept of zones, which are similar to chains inside IP tables.
Interface.
Main point is search.
There are many different types of services.
Let's actually list this out here.
So let's say there's 54 words overall.
One line, 54 words.
One line, 54 words.
Four hundred and semi-line characters.
Now let's say that I wanted to add a service.
Add service instead of taking Firewall.
Dash min dash dash zone equals other.
Let's say the server I wanted to add a server.
Dash dash add dash service equals HTTP.
Stop.
Now let's think about that.
That means I can still add equals that I want to.
But I'm going to be really, really granular with trying to put Firewall into the system.
However, in Firewall D, there's no need.
And with Firewall D, we're less prone to make mistakes.
Firewalls.
Options.
I can.
N.
N.
N.
N.
N.
N.
N.
N.
N.
N.
N.
N.
You can.
It's like if there is a customer now to select Facebook next year to be the 1301 pack.
Be will turn that off again.
So checkbox one app.
I can do this with other services as well.
In order to see...
You need a system account.
They two use a system contains.
What services are currently building in thesters.
So let's turn this off, system, CTL, Bluetooth, that's a lot at the end.
Set the system, CTL, disable, Bluetooth.
And let's look at the same thing, but it's still running.
So you have to kill that process.
It's ready there.
It's empty, kill, Bluetooth, which means process kill.
And then the process name is Bluetooth.
So consider disabling such as Bluetooth, or you're doing, for example, this is a sort.
On first startup, we need to agree to the terms of use.
So here's the license information, and it's going to ask me to accept it.
So now I'm going to finish the installation of Linux.
Notice how the information that I've filled out for the username and the password
is already ready for me for the very first time I've moved the system.
The first time I log in, I'm going to get a couple of screens asking me how I want to use the system.
So I'm going to use English as the language, and make sure the keyboard is correct.
So now I can connect my online accounts on this screen to automatically log in to certain accounts.
Now the system is ready to go.
So now I'm going to use the sterling stuff.
We have ground floorboards on this screen.
So jakby, what does that no go away...
Let's keep going.
Let's go.
Oh, this is meant to go.
One萬年 on Linux.
Yeah.
So I am gonna use English as a corrupt woman.
I think about this one.
That's well asataraya before dog.
No, just not to know the Scrando о bagelers.
