Ring, rational number, root, second degree equation, sparse matrix, spectral theory, syllogism, symmetry, transformation, syncopated algebra, group, identity, indeterminate equation, field, commensurable, fifth degree equation, algebraic equation.
Algorithm, matrix, natural number, one to one correspondence, integer, third degree equation, polynomial, conic section, ellipse, Pythagorean triple.
Pythagorean theorem, quadratic formula, quadratic equation, real number, analytic geometry, deduction, fourth degree equation, prime number, coordinate
group theory, hyperbola, rhetorical algebra, combinatorics, geometric algebra, complex number, invariant, characteristic equation, coefficient, parabola,
fundamental principle of solid analytic geometry, fundamental principle of analytic geometry, axiom.
Shuffle them up a little.
Just kidding.
I'm going to read the backwards axiom.
I'm going to read the backwards axiom.
Fundamental principle of analytic geometry.
Fundamental principle of geometry.
Composite geometry.
Composite number, rational, algebra, parabola, coefficient, characteristic equation, invariant, complex number, geometric algebra, combinatorics, rhetorical algebra, hyperbola, group theory, eigenvalue, linear equation.
All right, last track.
All right, last track.
Detection.
Detection.
Analychometry.
Analychometry.
Real number.
Quadratic equation.
Had a large number.
Interfaithology.
Invariant.
matrix.
Invariant.
complex number.
Geometric algebra, combinatorics.
Rhetorical algebra.
Hyperbola.
Group theory.
Eigenvalue.
Linear equation.
All right, last track.
Detection.
Analychometry.
Analyse geometry, real number, quadratic equation, quadratic formula, pathetic variance, theorem,
peculiar theory in triple conic section polynomial, third degree equation, integer, one-to-one
correspondence, natural number, matrix, algorithm, algebra equation, fifth degree equation,
incommensurable field, indetermined equation identity group, syncopated algebra,
symmetry transformation, syllogism, spectral theory, as far as matrix, second degree equation, root, rational number, ring.
If you read a half hour a night, the calculation I came to is that you can read a thousand books in 50 years.
All of the components are there to engineer intimate experiences.
Extraterrestrial life is a true mystery, the most tantalizing mystery of all.
How many humans need to disappear for us to be completely lost?
The following is a conversation with Tim Urban, author and illustrator of the amazing blog called Wait But Why.
This is the Lex Friedman Podcast.
To support it, please check out our sponsors in the description.
And now, dear friends, here's Tim Urban.
You wrote a Wait But Why blog post about the big and the small, from the observable universe to the atom.
What world do you find most mysterious or beautiful, the very big or the very small?
The very small seems a lot more mysterious.
I mean, the very big, I feel like we kind of understand.
I mean, not the very, very big, not the multiverse, if there is a multiverse, not anything outside of the observable universe.
But the very small, I think we really have no idea what's going on, or very, you know, much less idea.
But I find that, so I think the small is more mysterious, but I think the big is sexier.
I just cannot get enough of the bigness of space and the farness of stars, and it just continually blows my mind.
I mean, we still, the vastness of the observable universe has the mystery that we don't know what's out there.
We know how it works, perhaps, like, general relativity can tell us how the movement of bodies works, how they're born, all that kind of things.
But, like, how many civilizations are out there?
How many, like, what are the weird things that are out there?
Oh, yeah, life, well, extraterrestrial life is a true mystery, the most tantalizing mystery of all.
But that's, like, our size.
So that's, maybe it's that the actual, the big and the small are really cool, but it's actually the things that are potentially our size that are the most tantalizing.
Potentially our size is probably the key word.
Yeah, I mean, I wonder how small intelligent life could get.
Probably not that small.
And I assume that there's a limit that you're not going to, I mean, you might have, like, a whale, blue whale-sized intelligent being.
That would be kind of cool.
But I feel like we're in the range of order of magnitude smaller and bigger than us for life.
But maybe not.
Maybe you could have some giant life form.
It just seems like, I don't know, there's got to be some reason that anything intelligent between kind of, like, a little tiny rodent or finger monkey up to a blue whale on this planet.
I don't know.
Maybe when you change the gravity and other things.
Well, you could think of life as a thing of self-assembling organisms, and they just get bigger and bigger and bigger.
Like, there's no such thing as a human being.
A human being is made up of a bunch of tiny organisms working together.
And we somehow envision that as one entity because it has consciousness.
But maybe it's just...
Kind of is made up of a giant body.
But maybe it'sھی than the nature of the world.
No...
Okay.
Mm-hmm.
So...
Listen to me, somebody in a course now knows that.
You won't be able to). yourself enough to view the meaning of field.
