This is Audible.
This is Study Guide, Circe, by Madeline Miller, Super Summary.
Written by Super Summary.
Narrated by Nicole Anders.
Overview.
Published in 2018, Circe retells the story of the eponymous Greek mythological figure.
Although traditionally viewed as a heartless, savagely beautiful witch who lures sailors to their deaths,
the Circe of Madeline Miller's imagining is quite different.
This Circe is a multidimensional, flawed, and empathetic character struggling to find meaning and worth in her immortal life.
Through Miller's detailed and honest first-person narrative, which takes place over thousands of years,
the evil witch becomes relatable.
The world seems stacked against Circe from the start.
No one expected much of the dime-a-dozen nymph, named Hawk, for her golden eyes and human voice.
She grows up in a cold, disinterested home.
The other nymphs, especially her siblings, mock her relentlessly, never allowing her to find any semblance of belonging.
When her uncle, the titan Prometheus, is whipped before the other gods,
Circe's gentle heart is saddened where the others are maliciously fascinated.
In bringing him succor, she discovers a life-changing fact.
She does not have to follow in the footsteps of the other gods.
Little does she know that she will go on to set herself apart from them more than anyone before.
As the years wear on, Circe meets a young mortal.
Desperate for companionship, she quickly falls in love.
His mortality, however, hangs over her head like a guillotine.
For all she loves him, he will one day die and leave her alone again.
Refusing to accept this, Circe searches for Pharmaca, an herb endowed with magical properties.
Using it, she transforms her would-be lover into a god.
But this does not herald her happy ending as planned.
Instead, he spurns her for a beautiful nymph named Scylla.
In her youthful jealousy, Circe decides to get Scylla out of the way,
for surely then she will marry her beloved and live happily ever after.
After using the Pharmaca on Scylla, Circe finds not marriage, but guilt.
Scylla has been transformed into a six-headed monster that feasts on mortal flesh.
When the guilt-ridden Circe confesses her sins,
her power is determined to be Pharmakeia,
witchcraft, which goes beyond even the gods' limits.
Fearing what they cannot control,
the gods decide to exile Circe on the lonely island of Aeia for all eternity.
There, Circe comes into her own, becoming a powerful witch,
but life is never simple, not even for a goddess with magic at her fingertips.
Over thousands of years, Circe meets many figures of legend.
Daedalus, Ariadne, the Minotaur, Medea, Jason, and Odysseus.
Odysseus, however, becomes not just a name, but her lover and dear friend.
In Miller's reimagining, the tale of the spiteful witch and the brilliant hero is reframed
as a complicated and compassionate yet doomed courtship.
Still, even when Odysseus leaves the island to return to his wife and child,
he leaves Circe with the child, and the hope that her loneliness is ending.
From her love of her child, Circe finds the strength to accomplish feats that stymied
all others before her, but she also learns the true depths of fear.
Her child is mortal and vulnerable, and even he will leave her alone once again
when he makes his inevitable journey to the underworld.
Despite this, Circe proves herself a force beyond reckoning, powerful and willful enough
to successfully stand toe-to-toe with the greater gods to protect her son.
Circe follows the goddess's extraordinary life as she matures and changes through suffering,
self-recrimination, life-changing relationships, and the persistent march of time.
She grows from a fearful yet compassionate nymph to an all-powerful witch.
Perhaps greater than all of this, Circe eventually finds it within herself to not only challenge the
gods, but to leave them behind forever, to live the life she always wanted,
surrounded by the love she was always denied.
Chapter 1 Summary
As the daughter of a naiad, Circe is considered a nymph, the least of all lesser goddesses.
Her father, Helios, the Titan, is just as beautiful and blinding as the son he personifies.
Her mother, Percy, is beautiful and clever enough to entice him into marriage with the novelty of her
imposed conditions. Helios decides their baby will make a fair match for a prince, but not a god,
with her strangely spotted hair and too sharp chin. Mere moments after her birth, Circe is deemed
inadequate and abandoned, as Percy invites Helios to her bed, saying, quote,
Let us make a better one. Page 6
Percy ignores the babe, who is reared by an ambitious aunt until she realizes caring for the
child will gain her no favor. Before departing, the aunt names her Circe, or Hawk, for her golden
eyes and strange voice. Circe quickly grows from infancy to adulthood with no one for company but her
parents, who range from disinterested to actively disdainful at any given moment. Her mother soon bears
two more children, Pasiphae and Perses, who consider cruelly tormenting others, especially Circe, a favored
pastime. Sadism is a common trait among the gods, as Helios enjoys being early or late whenever possible
to invalidate the predictions of human astronomers, who he punished with death. Unlike her family, Circe is shown to be
more empathetic to humans and gods alike, but her naivete and compassion do not impress the gods.
Their impression of her echoes her mother's, who calls her, quote,
Stupid Circe. Page 13
Chapter 2
Summary
The Titan Prometheus, Circe's uncle, is being punished for giving mortals fire. Unlike the others, Prometheus
not only disobeyed Zeus for the benefit of humans, but also confessed to the crime himself.
This is widely regarded as a stupid decision beyond understanding, but the Titans view his
punishment as a sign that Zeus intends to move against them. They secretly whisper about a mutiny
against the Olympians. To Circe's surprise, no one greets Prometheus, but all take pleasure in watching
him be whipped, except Circe, who empathizes with his pain. As the spectators grow bored of his pain and
leave to feast, Circe brings her suffering uncle a cup of nectar to drink. Circe asks what mortals are
like, and her uncle answers, quote, There is no single answer. They are each different. The only thing
they share is death. Page 22
Circe cannot understand death yet. She's never seen a mortal or experienced mortality or even physical
suffering. She reflects, quote, I did not know the color of my blood. Page 20. Despite her fears that
she will be caught, no one notices her absence, which forces her to confront her own insignificance
and childishness. She has a sudden rudimentary thought, like a child realizing its limbs are its own,
quote, All my life had been murk and depths. But I was not a part of that dark water. I was a creature
within it. Page 24.
Chapter 3. Summary
The nymphs, gods, and titans all discuss Prometheus's punishment with cruel fascination,
sickening Circe, who continues to endure taunts from her relatives about her undesirability and
worthlessness. Soon, her mother bears another child, whom Circe volunteers to raise. She names him
Aedes, or Eagle, and is overwhelmed by her love for him. Quote, Every moment he was with me, I felt a
rushing in my throat, which was my love for him, so great sometimes I could not speak. Page 27.
For the first time, Circe believes her love is returned, as his first word is her name,
and his second is sister. A precocious and insightful child, Aedes displays wisdom and
perceptiveness from a young age and swiftly becomes Helios's favored heir. As he grows up, he and Circe
remain inseparable, discovering an island and regularly escaping to it to avoid their family. In their
discussions, Aedes introduces a concept that will change the course of Circe's life, the existence
of herbs with magical properties called pharmaca. Circe tells him about Prometheus. Aedes then points
out that as a god of prophecy, Prometheus knew what would happen to him, and chose to do it anyway.
He tells her not to mention it to anyone else, as her kindness could get her killed.
Per Helios's orders, Pasiphae marries Minos, the king of Crete, who happens to be the son of Zeus.
At the wedding, Circe sees mortals for the first time, who seem, quote, weak as mushroom gills.
Page 32. Still, she acknowledges that despite the many tales of humans wronging nymphs,
there are also stories of the gods wronging humans, once again hinting at the gods' lack of empathy.
Aedes announces that Helios is giving him a kingdom, Colchis, and he will be leaving for
it after the wedding. Circe is heartbroken that the only person who loves her is throwing her away
for preeminence and freedom. He says nothing more to her before leaving, but Fae says it all,
she is not a good enough reason to stay. Percy's leaves for Persia, since his playmate sister is
gone, and Circe goes to the island she discovered with Aedes, lonely and desperate. She sees a boat
approach the island. CHAPTER FOUR SUMMARY
Circe meets Glaucus, her first up-close encounter with a mortal. She is initially cautious, as mortals
have been known to rape nymphs, but he is soft-looking and her father is in the sky, and she
trusts that Helios will protect her if needed. Circe is surprised to find that Glaucus fears her,
despite her comparative weakness as a goddess. Lonely and curious, she tries to assure him that
he is in no danger from her. She notes that, quote, it was her laughter more than her protestation
that seemed to ease him a little. Page 38. He returns every day with her permission to spend
time with her. For the first time, Circe feels, quote, warm, in the light of compassion and his
regard for her. Quote, I had stood beside my father's light, I had held Aedes in my arms,
and my bed was heaped with thick wool blankets woven by immortal hands. But it was not until that
moment that I think I had ever been warm. Page 38. With honeyed words, Glaucus finds himself in her
affections. One day he returns angry, saying that he cannot come back because he has wasted too much
time with her, instead of fishing to provide food and money for his father and mother. He says it is
his fault they will starve. Lacking the power to bless his nets herself, Circe goes to her grandmother,
Tethys, who agrees to fill his nets if Circe swears not to lie with him. Circe swears, the nets overflow,
and Glaucus is grateful and affectionate. His hints at love and marriage remind Circe that he is mortal,
and will therefore die. Frantic at the thought of losing her beloved, Circe returns to her grandmother
to beg that Glaucus be made a god. She insists there must be some way, some pharmaca, to make it so.
Tethys angrily demands Circe never mention such wickedness again. Ignoring the mockery of her
grandmother's attendants, Circe is determined to make Glaucus immortal.
Quote, I was too wild to feel any shame. It was true. I would not just uproot the world, but tear it,
burn it, do any evil I could to keep Glaucus by my side. Page 46. Based off her grandmother's reaction
to the word, Circe infers that Pharmaca must have powers beyond the gods, and resolves to find such a
plant, and make Glaucus a god so she can always be with him. Taking a page from her mother's book,
she plies her uncles with wine and compliments until they tell her of, quote,
places that had been sown with God's blood. Page 46. Where she can find Pharmaca. They mention one not
far from Glaucus's home. Chapter 5 Summary
Circe brings Glaucus to the island with the Pharmaca flowers under the guise of a picnic.
He takes a nap, and she tries using them to turn him into a god, but it doesn't work. Suddenly,
she has the revelation that the plant's strength was in its sap, which could transform any creature
into its truest self. She feeds it to the sleeping Glaucus, who becomes a sea god. Thrilled, Circe brings
him to Tethys. Everyone believes it to be the will of the fates, and they heap praises upon him.
Circe reflects that she, quote, saw nothing but the boy that she loved shining at last. Every honor
lavished on him, every altar built in his name, every admirer who crowded him. These felt like gifts
to her, for he was hers. Page 52. Circe expects that his implied promises of devotion made when
he was mortal will hold, and that she will marry him and be happy. Instead, he rejects her, and proposes
marriage to a beautiful nymph named Scylla. Heartbroken, Circe laments that her immortality means she cannot die,
and will have to live with her pain. Quote, I lay on the dirt, weeping. Those flowers had
made him his true being, which was blue and finned, and not mine. I thought I would die of such pain,
which was not like the seeping numbness Aedes had left behind, but sharp and fierce as a blade through
my chest. But of course I could not die. I would live on through each scalding moment to the next.
This is the grief that makes our kind choose to be stones and trees rather than flesh.
Page 55. Instead of wallowing forever in her misery, Circe decides that if Scylla is removed as an
obstacle, then she and Glaucus can be happy together. She puts the pharmacist sap into the waters where Scylla
bathes. Circe fully expects to be punished, whipped like Prometheus, but thinks that such injuries would
only prove her love to Glaucus. Chapter 6 Summary
Despite her initial worries that the sap has not worked, Circe soon discovers through the gossip
mill that Scylla has become a monster. She turned gray, sprouted twelve squid-like legs and five new
heads and swam away, baying like a hunting dog. At first, Circe is concerned that Scylla's friends
and relatives will harm her in vengeance. But everyone is fascinated by the events, cruelty,
and novelty. They insult the absent Scylla and tell the story over and over again for their amusement.
When Glaucus arrives, Helios takes him aside to explain what has happened,
reminding him that there are plenty of other pretty nymphs. Glaucus seems to agree, as he goes on to
sire countless children with a thousand nymphs, none of them Circe. Burdened by guilt over what she has
done to Scylla, Circe remembers Prometheus and tells herself she is not like those who would have
relish to turn at the whip. His voice, as her conscience, rings in her ears, saying,
Then you must think, Circe. What would they not do? Page 61. Immediately, she knows that she must confess.
At first, no one believes her. They mock her for being stupid enough to believe herself powerful,
saying, If the world contained the power you allege, do you think it would fall to such as you
to discover it? Page 63. When she insists she is speaking the truth, Helios rages at her,
insulting her and burning her for her audacity. Blistered, half-blind, and with melted hands,
Circe returns to the island where she found the flowers and considers taking the herbs. In the end,
she decides she cannot bear to know what she truly is. Aedes soon arrives, having heard of Circe's
power, and explains that her confession was true. He tells everyone about Pharmacea, the art of using
quote, herbs with the power to work changes in the world. Page 67. And how all of their siblings have
such power? Pasiphae has mastered poisons in Crete. Perses raises the dead in Persia. And Aedes demonstrates
his own power by healing Circe's wounds, something only the greatest gods can do.
This disruption of expectation terrifies them all. Aedes tells Circe that Pharmacea, witchcraft,
is not bound by the usual limits on the gods' powers. He also points out that it was her intention
that shaped Scylla and Glaucus's transformations, not the Pharmaca plants. He says, quote,
You do not think it convenient that their truest form should happen to be your desires?
Page 70. Percy gloats about being the mother of witches, and how she will have a hundred more
children who will take over Olympus, but when Helios returns from meeting with Zeus,
a very different future is planned. He states that most of his children are far away,
and did not search for their powers which are under control, except Circe, who sought her powers
despite warnings and used them to defy Helios and harm her own kind. As punishment, she is exiled to a
deserted island. To Percy's chagrin, Helios asserts that they will have no more children together.
Already an outcast, Circe packs her things. Aedes appears and tells her it's her fault for confessing.
Which is unfathomable to him. Circe thinks that if he had seen Prometheus whipped, he would understand.
Chapters 1-6 Analysis
In the hierarchy of the gods, there are distinct expectations for goddesses and nymphs. Nymphs are
so abundant that they are of no significance whatsoever. They are ignored and easily replaced
when desired. Circe reflects that she, quote, was nothing. A stone. One more nymph child among the
thousand thousands. Page 23. Early on, Circe says that the word nymph itself is synonymous with bride,
and they can claim no power beyond that of their husbands or sons. This is highlighted by Glaucus's
immediate change in behavior after becoming a god. He transforms from a doting mortal in awe of Circe to an
overpowered hedonist who looks down on her overnight, and happily trades her love for a more attractive
bride, Scylla. After Scylla's own transformation, he gives her up without much fuss, turning his
attention to bedding as many nymphs as he can. The introduction of witchcraft, or pharmakeia,
is a game-changer that upsets the natural order of things. Despite being half-Titan, Circe and her
siblings are not expected to acquire much power and social standing, especially not the nymphs.
Instead, they find unnatural, untamable, and unpredictable power. This is bad enough, but when
Circe confesses her power and malicious use of it on another nymph, she is immediately punished. Aedes
says it is her own fault for trusting, quote, too easily. Page 76. And failing to realize that the
only way to keep herself safe is to play by the god's time-honored rule of maintaining plausible
deniability. This norm allows the status quo to persist. Aedes pretends not to have worked for his
power. Helios pretends to believe him. Zeus pretends to believe Helios. And all is as it was. By refusing to
play along, Circe is not only the odd one out, but she becomes an exceptionally vulnerable scapegoat.
While her siblings remain unpunished, she is sentenced to eternal exile.
Witchcraft aside, Circe is further set apart from the other gods by her compassionate nature.
Through her empathy for a Titan's flogging, aversion to mortal suffering, and guilt for causing harm,
Circe is deliberately shown as a far cry from the cold, unfeeling culture she was born into.
The other gods not only use suffering to encourage sacrifice in their mortal worshipers,
but they also take pleasure in each other's suffering. When it comes to empathy,
Circe and Prometheus appear to stand alone. Even Aedes grows from a sweet, happy child whose first and
second words both refer to Circe, to someone who doesn't bat an eye at leaving her alone in misery
among their cruel relatives.
CHAPTER VII SUMMARY
Helios does not even speak to Circe as he drops her off on her island. She is surprised to find it has a
beautiful, self-cleaning house, until she realizes it is only another power play. By giving her such
luxury, Helios is making a statement to Zeus about how even the least of the Titans lives better than
King's. She reflects how, quote, that was her new home, a monument to her father's pride, page 80.
Although initially frightened, Circe soon learns that she is freer than ever,
and dives headlong into the study of magic. Ages pass as she learns that sorcery is dull work spent
picking, drying, chopping, grinding, cooking, speaking, and singing. She thinks she should despise it,
since the gods hate all forms of toil by nature. But it thrills her instead. A little retrospection
shows why, after a life of insignificance, she has tasted power. Quote,
Even those who had loved me a little did not care to stay. Then I learned that I could bend the world
to my will as a bow is bent for an arrow. I would have done that toil a thousand times to keep such
power in my hands. I thought, this is how Zeus felt when he first lifted the thunderbolt.
Page 84. Circe soon masters her powers, of which transformation is the strongest,
as Aedes predicted. Even the animals on the island are tamed to her, and she claims a lioness as her
familiar and companion. Still, she longs for company, even if it is contentious.
Chapter 8 Summary
Hermes, the messenger god and son of Zeus, arrives on the island, explaining that no one cares if she
is visited, she just cannot leave the island of Aea. He informs her that her voice, for which she has
always been mocked, is a mortal's voice rather than a goddess's. They soon engage in a casual sexual
relationship. Hermes is a shrewd god, more interested in a good story than connection,
but that is enough for Circe, at the moment. He was a poisoned snake, and I was another,
and on such terms we pleased ourselves. Page 95. He updates her on the news, if only to see
her reaction and gossip, and enlightens her of discomforting truths. He explains that the gods
love to intentionally make humans miserable to get more offerings. This surprises her at first,
but she comes to agree. He also tells her that Scylla has been eating sailors. Circe feels guilt
over their deaths, but she refuses to show him. Hermes goes on to tell her that he has heard a
prophecy that one of his descendants, a man called Odysseus, will one day come to her island. After he
leaves, Circe discovers the flower called molly, a famous, powerful, curse-breaking plant,
and counts herself lucky that it grows in the place of her exile.
CHAPTER IX SUMMARY
Daedalus, the famous inventor Circe had seen in Crete, sails to the island. He says that Pasiphae is
pregnant, and asking for her to attend the birth. This shocks Circe. There has never been love between
her and her sister, and me. Page 103. Then there is the matter of her exile, but Daedalus tells her
that Helios said her exile was lifted for this one case. Circe decides to go, to show her cruel sister
that she is now a powerful witch in her own right, and will no longer succumb to her traps.
Daedalus explains that Pasiphae ordered them to come through the strait where Scylla is,
and that she has already eaten twelve of his men. Circe realizes this is Pasiphae's cruel way of
ensuring that Circe will come, to prevent more mortal lives from being lost. As she boards the ship,
the figurehead, a touching image of a girl in a dancing dress with great depth of expression,
impresses her. This, too, is Pasiphae's boast, showing off her pet inventor, who makes such
wonders. Circe observes the sailors, seeing the differences in humans up close for the first time,
and wonders how anyone can stand the endless variations they present without going mad.
Daedalus mentions that Pasiphae has something of his, so he cannot leave, even if he could escape her
quote, employ. Circe considers herself the villain for what she did to Scylla, and reminisces about who
she was before she transformed Scylla into a monster. The old law states that quote,
no god may undo what another has done. Page 111. But she hopes that she can undo what she has done herself.
As they come upon Scylla, Circe creates an illusion of Percy's, whom Scylla had once loved. She throws a
cure into one of Scylla's mouths, but it does not work. They escape with their lives, but Circe realizes that
Scylla is insane, and cannot ever be restored to her original form. The sailors are grateful, and offer
to make sacrifices to Circe every day, but she is disgusted by their quote, imbecile gratitude, and explains that
she was the one who made Scylla into a monster in the first place, quote, for pride and vain delusion.
Page 117. In a fit of guilt, she wishes the sun would scorch her to the bone.
CHAPTER X. SUMMARY
When they reach the palace, Daedalus apologizes for offending her with his thanks, and for what
she is about to see. Despite the pain of childbirth, Pasiphae taunts Circe about trying to change
Scylla back, and the mortal lives lost in the journey, quote, You made a monster, and all you
can think of is how sorry you are. Alas, poor mortals, I have put them in danger. Page 120.
Then she insists that Daedalus cut the baby out of her because it has not moved despite days of labor.
At her sister's instruction, Circe reaches in to pull the baby out, but it bites her, so she panics and
pulls it out abruptly. The baby, which has the head of a bull, bites off two of Circe's fingers,
and part of a third, eating them immediately. She holds it down and sends Daedalus to fetch a cage.
Circe asks Pasiphae what the baby is, and refuses to stitch her up until she explains.
Instead, Pasiphae orders Daedalus to answer, attributing the fault to him.
He states that a sacred white bull was brought to them, but it was skittish and easily scared away.
He built a wooden cow for Pasiphae to climb into to observe the bull, but he had not expected what
happened. Pasiphae impatiently interrupts announcing that she had sex with the bull, resulting in the
monstrous child. Circe is horrified, and says the gods will punish her, but her sister only laughs,
saying, quote, Don't you know? The gods love their monsters. Page 126.
Feeling responsible, Daedalus sets about building a cage, and Circe seeks to determine if the monster
can be killed. In milling about her sister's workroom, she has a realization, quote,
My sister might be twice the goddess I was, but I was twice the witch. Page 127.
She goes to Mount Dicty, birthplace of Zeus, to collect the ingredients she needs to bind the
monster's taste for flesh. While there, she uses the prophecy gift from her father, and asks the
water to show her the creature's death. It reveals the monster's fate, and that it dies as an adult.
She meets her niece, Ariadne, a sweet, soft-spoken girl, and the model for the boat's figurehead.
Ariadne brings her to Daedalus, and Circe announces that a mortal can kill the creature,
but not until adulthood. She says that her spell can stop its hunger for human flesh,
containing it for three seasons a year, but it must be fed every year at the harvest.
Despite his monstrous ways, Ariadne pities the baby she considers her brother.
Circe finally understands that Pasiphae did all of this to rise to prominence again,
since her siblings are more famous than her. One brother raises the dead,
another tames dragons, and Circe transforms Scylla, so no one talks about the Queen of Crete.
But they will talk about her now, that she is the mother of a flesh-eating bull.
CHAPTER XI SUMMARY
Daedalus informs Circe that Minos named the monster the Minotaur,
making it seem as though he was not cuckolded by the
great king who begets monsters and names them after himself.
She uses the draught on the Minotaur, suppressing its hunger for flesh,
and feels sympathy for the creature born out of nothing but hatred and ambition.
She laments that there, quote, was nothing it might ever have in the world except hatred and darkness
and its teeth. Page 139.
Daedalus invites Circe to dine with him, and she meets his four-year-old son, Icarus.
His obvious love for his son is endearing, but Circe understands that his sister exploits it to keep him
trapped. He asks her how she deals with being responsible for a monster. She answers that she
just does the best she can. Circe realizes that her sister hatefully orchestrated everything,
creating the Minotaur for fame and to hurt Minos' pride, arranging Daedalus' unknowing complicity,
and ensuring Circe's return to clean up her mess and be subjected to mockery.
She confronts her sister, who scorns her for still naively believing that obedience
deserves reward, despite growing up under Helios. Pasiphae tells her that the gods only care for
power, quote, they take what they want and in return they give you only your own shackles.
Page 146. She says that she always thought Circe would finally say that enough was enough and bid
good riddance to the family, but she never did. To Circe's great surprise, Pasiphae hates their family,
too. She points out that Circe has no idea what her life has been like, or what she has had to do to
keep Percy's happy, or how Zeus and Helios would let Minos do whatever he wanted if she had no poisons
to keep him in check. She says Circe was too stupid to realize that Aedes never loved her or any woman.
He only tolerated her presence because she fawned over him. Further, Pasiphae says that Circe is just
like their father, quote, stupid and sanctimonious, closing your eyes to everything you do not
understand. Page 148. Daedalus becomes Circe's lover until she has to return to Aedes. He gives
her an ingenious, one-of-a-kind loom that he made as a parting gift. Years later, Hermes returns and
tells her that Daedalus built wings for himself and his son and escaped Crete. Icarus, however,
was too excited and flew too close to the sun, which melted the wax that held the feathers together.
He fell into the ocean and drowned. Daedalus died not long after his son. Circe mourns him in her own way.
Chapter 12. Summary
After her return from Crete, Aedes feels more like a cage than ever. Daedalus's words, quote,
A golden cage is still a cage. Page 155. Ring in her ears. She considers whether her mother was a
witch, with powers of charisma and seduction. She wonders what her sister hoped to gain by sending
for her, and how their relationship might be different if they had grown up elsewhere.
She hears her sister's voice in her mind, saying, quote, You are weak and blind, and it is worse
because you choose it. You will be sorry in the end. Page 157. Hermes returns and reveals that
Artemis has killed her niece, Ariadne. Unimpressed by Circe's grief, he reminds her that, quote,
If you cry every time some mortal dies, you'll drown in a month. Page 159.
Circe sends him away. She realizes that mortals, like her sweet niece, die no matter what, but cruel,
petty gods live forever. During his next visit, Hermes shares that Minos used to order women to
bed with him in front of Pisiphae. So, the spell she had proudly referenced in Crete was a curse that
turned his seed into snakes and scorpions that stung the women to death from the inside. Circe remembers
her sister saying she killed a hundred girls that way, and she's horrified by the cruelty of it.
Circe announces that she is done with her family, and that she will think of them no more.
Chapter 13 Summary
A ship arrives at Aaea, bearing a man and a woman who beg for catharsis,
the cleansing of smoke and prayer, water and blood. They are tainted by miasma,
the effect of deeds done against the gods and unsanctified spilling of blood. Circe has experienced
it herself, but was washed by the waters of Dicty. It is against the rules to ask to be cleansed for
their transgressions. She can only say yes or no. Circe agrees, and cleanses them.
After the ceremony, the woman reveals herself to be Aedes' daughter, Medea. The man is Jason,
a hero sent to get the golden fleece from Aedes, with whom Medea had fallen in love. She helped him
get the fleece with her magic, enraging her father, and took her little brother as they escaped. Aedes
pursued their ship, so Medea killed and chopped up her little brother, throwing the pieces into the
ocean so her father would have to stop chasing them to collect the body of his heir for a proper burial.
Circe is horrified, and says she would not have cleansed them if she had known. Medea goes on to
explain that her father is a sadist who is going to marry her off to Perseus, who is also a sadist.
Blinded by her love for Jason, Medea cannot see that Jason is already wary of her. Circe tries to warn
her that the future she insists will be, where she is queen and mother of his children, happy forever,
may not come to pass because she is a witch and a foreigner, so his people will despise her. Circe
invites Medea to stay and offers to teach her magic, but Medea calls her pathetic and lonely. Circe
realizes that this blind, childish stubbornness must have been what her grandmother saw when she pled
on Glaucus's behalf. Much like young Circe, Medea, quote, would fight the whole world, page 173,
for her dream of a future with her love. Medea will not hear the truth, and so they leave. Aedes arrives,
and Circe is instinctually thrilled to see him, but he is furious that she did not imprison his daughter.
He states that he should punish her. Circe shocks him by asserting he does not have the power to do
so on her island. Quote, No. In Colchis you may work your will, but this is Aeah. Page 175.
Chapter 7-13 Analysis
Circe is shown as a foil to the other gods. She is empathetic where they are selfish,
and naive where they are jaded. This is highlighted by her guilt over the men Scylla VIII, her grief for
Daedalus, Icarus, and Ariadne, and her horror at what Pasiphae did to Minos's lovers and what Medea
did to her brother. Still, Circe is maturing over time, and her naivete is being eroded by experience
and the hard truths her sister tells her. Her childish worldview is slowly replaced with more awareness
and understanding. Circe accepts responsibility not only for Scylla, but for the lives Scylla has taken
since her transformation. She realizes that her sister is cruel, but perhaps not exclusively by
choice. After all, cruelty seems to be a time-honored survival strategy among gods. In meeting Medea,
Circe also realizes how foolish and stubborn she was in her youth when she had blindly loved Glaucus,
and discovering how much she has changed since then. She also considers that her beloved little
brother, Aedes, threw her away so easily not because he stopped loving her, but because he never had,
just as Pasiphae said. His coldness and arrogance during his visit to her island all but confirm this.
For the first time, Circe asserts her own power and will, refusing to kowtow to her brother. Circe is
confronting her naivete while maintaining her propensity for compassion as she comes into her own as a witch.
There is a notable contrast between Circe's power over magic and over her life. Exiled on the island,
she comes into her own as a witch. She studies and labors until she is extremely powerful,
more so than her sister, but she is also completely alone until Hermes arrives. His appearance reminds
her so strongly of what she so longs for, companionship, that she accepts his affectionless
attentions partly out of boredom, but mostly out of isolation. Her loneliness is better slaked through
her short-lived relationship with Daedalus, but she is powerless to free him from her sister's keeping
and has nothing to offer him beyond exile anyway. When she returns to the island, she is lonelier than
ever, and keenly aware of what she has been missing. For all her power as a witch, Circe is still
powerless against the god's cruelty and her own loneliness.
CHAPTER XIV SUMMARY
Circe is driven to distraction by her loneliness, but a nymph named Alky is sent to serve Circe as a
punishment. Alky is the nymph daughter of a lesser river god, and serving a daughter of Helios is
desirable to her. Instead of understanding Circe's power and generosity toward her, Alky behaves like
a spoiled child. Circe realizes Alky will never understand, and decides she is done trying to teach.
She tells Alky that she will serve unseen and unheard, or be transformed into a worm and thrown into the
ocean. Unfortunately, word spreads that Aeia is a good place to send unruly daughters for punishment.
Circe hates it and asks Hermes to get them to stop, but he refuses. She sends him away, and he goes because
she now bores him. Her lioness dies, and Circe's magic cannot resurrect her. Circe is jealous of humans' ability to
live on in the underworld. When men arrive on the island, she is excited at the prospect of visitors.
The fact that they are mortal is all the better, as she believes that mortal fragility results in
kindness, a value of friendship. Warmth runs through her, and her fingers, quote, itched as if for needle
and thread. Here was something torn that she could mend. Page 184. She invites them in, feeds them, and gives
them wine laced with herbs she can call on. As a woman she fears being alone with them, but she's
certain the fear is irrational, considering that she is giving them hospitality. Circe is proven wrong.
The captain rapes her, as the others wait their turn. She thinks to herself, quote, I am only a nymph,
after all, for nothing is more common among us than this. Page 188. She uses her magic to turn them into
pigs, and kills them all.
Chapter 15 Summary
Circe scrubs herself raw, trying to remove the feeling of her rapist. She expects Helios to come
and yell at her if nothing else, but he does not. She considers how expected rape is among nymphs,
and how even in her father's halls one of her relatives could have paid her father after assaulting her,
and all would be considered honorable. She considers Daedalus' stories of constructing houses on faulty
foundations, and decides the only thing to do is, quote, tear down and build again. Page 192.
More sailors come to the island, again, with the same story. They always claim to be tired, hungry,
and grateful. She does not appear to be human anymore, but, quote, none of it made a difference.
She was alone and a woman. That was all that mattered. Page 193. They drink her wine and turn
to her, eager to attack, but are shocked when she shows no fear. Instead, she turns them into pigs as
they scream and beg for mercy. They claim they are sorry, but she knows better, saying, quote,
sorry you were caught. Sorry that you thought I was weak, but you were wrong. Page 195.
On rare occasions, pious men arrive who do not view her as, quote, dinner. In such cases,
she sometimes takes them into her bed and assert agency over her body after the trauma of her rape.
She muses, quote, it was not desire, not even its barest scrapings. It was a sort of rage,
a knife I used upon myself. I did it to prove my skin was still my own. And did I like the answer I
found? Page 193. More men arrive, and she turns them into pigs without waiting for them to attack.
Odysseus soon arrives. He notices Circe's loom, and speaks of his wife. No one else had ever done
that before. Despite knowing Circe is a goddess, Odysseus does not seem in awe of her. He knows who
she is, and has molly from Hermes so she cannot harm him. But she has turned his men into pigs,
so they are at an impasse. She offers a truce via sex. He says he will accept if she swears an oath on
the river Styx, not to harm him. She agrees.
CHAPTER XVI SUMMARY
Odysseus shares the stories of his great adventures and misfortunes, from the Trojan War to his stymied
attempts to return home to Ithaca. Circe thinks, quote, No wonder he limped. No wonder he was gray.
This is a man who has faced monsters. Page 207.
Their relationship begins as a dare, but becomes affectionate, and Circe feels that old urge to
mend him as she does all torn things. She turns the pigs back into men, and they stay on the island.
Odysseus does not sugarcoat the horrors of war or his actions, but he does paint himself as a necessary
leader, making tough choices for the greater good. Quote, A mind to guide the purpose and not flinch
from war's necessities. Page 213. Circe shares no stories of her own so that he cannot collect her
weaknesses as he has for so many others. Quote, A door that did not open at Odysseus's knock was a
novelty in its own right, and a kind of relief as well. All the world confessed to him. He confessed to me.
Page 218. Circe's relationship with Odysseus grows and opens her mind to hope for true happiness and
love. She remembers, quote, I had once told Daedalus that I would never marry, because my hands were
dirty, and I liked my work too much. But this was a man with his own dirty hands. Page 221. Odysseus asks
to stay the winter, and she agrees. Circe realizes that his time with her is practice transitioning
from war to domesticity. Their relationship is a dress rehearsal for when he goes home to his wife,
Penelope.
Chapter 17 Summary
Apollo appears and forcefully delivers a prophecy about Odysseus to Circe. She's furious and laments
that she still forgets that her entire life is subject to the whims of the gods. Quote,
How many times would I have to learn? Every moment of my peace was a lie, for it came only at the gods'
pleasure. No matter what I did, how long I lived, at a whim, they would be able to reach down and do
with me what they wished. Page 230. Odysseus announces that he is leaving, and she tells
him of the prophecy. He will make it home, but first the gods demand he speak with the prophet
Tiresias in the house of death. She advises him on what to do when he speaks with Tiresias.
She asks him to bring back a vial of blood touched by the shades of the underworld as a part of the
summoning ritual, but she regrets it as she considers it something one of her heartless
siblings. Quote, Someone with only rich craft in their veins and no warmth, page 234, would ask for.
When he returns, she welcomes him back and gives him advice on how to survive the dangerous journey
home. Circe does not take contraceptive drafts in the last month she shares with Odysseus.
The casual and pervasive misogyny underlying the lives of nymphs comes to a head as Circe is raped
by a mortal to whom she gave food and wine. No one comes to her aid, or even acknowledges her
suffering, not even to chide her for, quote, allowing such dishonor to befall the line of Helios.
Circe not only loses her sense of agency, control over her own body, safety, trust in men, and
hopeful worldview, but she also learns that not even Helios's great pride can make anyone care
what happens to her. She considers how mortals and gods raped nymphs so often that it was expected,
quote, I remember what I thought, bear against the grinding stone. I am only a nymph after all,
for nothing is more common among us than this, page 188. She resents that though nymphs are called
brides, quote, that is not really how the world saw us. We were an endless feast laid out upon a table,
beautiful and renewing, and so very bad at getting away, page 195. The dehumanizing nature of misogyny
cuts her to the core, and she realizes that the only person with any interest in protecting her
is herself. In the aftermath of her rape, Circe becomes colder and more ruthless, turning any men
who might harm her into pigs, though some of her compassion lingers, as she spares the occasional
pious man who does not try to attack her. Unfortunately, such men numbered fewer than ten to the hundreds of
potential abusers caught by surprise and overpowered by the woman they intended to prey on. As time passes,
Odysseus eventually arrives as prophesized. To her surprise, Odysseus renews her old desire to fix broken
things, and she notes that, quote, this is something torn that she can mend, page 208. In this clever,
ruthless mortal she finds comfort, acceptance, compassion, and even love. Through the stories of
his misdeeds she finds a sense of acceptance for her own trials, though she does not speak of them.
Odysseus's checkered past comforts her, and she reflects, quote, I had once told Daedalus that I would
never marry, because my hands were dirty, and I liked my work too much. But this was a man with his own
dirty hands, page 221. However, Odysseus is married and cannot stay on her island forever.
Apollo's appearance is a painful reminder that she lives at the sufferance of the gods who care
nothing for her life or happiness. Although she feels she has finally retaken control of her life
after her rape, the gods still disrupt her life and move her as they see fit, undermining her autonomy.
Apollo's prophecy for Odysseus threatens to take him from her. Initially, Circe refuses to deliver the
message, but having matured since her youthful obsession with Glaucus, Circe not only tells
Odysseus of the prophecy and allows him to leave, but she also offers him priceless advice to avoid
the dangers that await him on his journey back to Ithaca and Penelope. However, before he goes,
Circe intentionally becomes pregnant with his child.
CHAPTER XVIII SUMMARY
Circe sends her nymphs away, not trusting anyone near her vulnerable, mortal child. Since Circe will
be incapable of defending herself against sailors while ill from her pregnancy, she casts an illusion to
make her island appear dangerous to any passing ships. She is thrilled about her unborn son,
certain that with him her solitude, quote, would never be loneliness again. Page 240.
The birth is difficult, and Circe prays to Alethea, the goddess of childbirth, but she does not come,
presumably held back by a god. In furious defense of her baby, Circe cuts the infant out of herself.
She names him Telugonus, and he is an exceedingly difficult baby, always crying and never satisfied,
but she is fully committed to protecting him at any cost. Quote,
I felt each breath in his thin chest, how improbable it was, how unlikely that this frail creature,
who could not even lift his head, could survive in the harsh world. But he would survive, he would,
if I must wrestle the veiled god myself. Page 243. Circe is terrified that a god wants her baby dead,
and is riddled with anxiety over his mortality, because for all her magic she cannot stop a
thunderbolt. She asks the pool if a god wants to harm her son, and it shows an image of his dead body
in confirmation. When she asks for the god's identity, it does not answer, which means it is a greater god,
as only they can escape her vision. Circe also realizes that for all she has suffered so far,
she has never been more vulnerable to the gods. Now she has something they can use against her,
her love for her child. Given this fact, she resolves to discover the danger and learn from history,
using every clever trick that worked against greater gods in the past to protect her son.
Circe orders the god who wants her child dead to show themselves. It is Athena, daughter of Zeus and
greater goddess of wisdom in war. Circe realizes that the fates bind Athena, and she cannot directly
harm Teligonus herself. The two trade threats and come to an impasse. Circe will not give up her baby,
and Athena cannot kill him herself or kill Circe without jeopardizing the fragile peace between the
Olympians and the Titans. Changing tactics, Athena offers sworn friendship in trade for the baby,
promising to find a good man to father another son whom she will personally bless. This would mean a
prosperous, plush life with no hardship or fear, but Circe refuses to give up her child. Athena is
shocked and furious that Circe would stand against her, ridiculing her, quote,
weed, and, quote, little divinity, but Circe does not falter. After Athena disappears in anger,
Circe defiantly declares, quote, you do not know what I can do. Page 251.
Chapter 19 Summary
Circe makes two spells, one to block Athena from coming to the island, and one to mark the island
with her son's name so that everything on it, every piece of it, will defend him if Athena somehow
bypasses the first spell. She thinks, quote, Athena would kill my child, and so I defend him. Be witness
now to the power of Circe, witch of Aeia. Page 254. She believes her son is safe, and they can finally
be happy, but she soon remembers that ordinary things can harm him too. Teligonus is a difficult child for the
first few years. The sea is the only thing that calms him. When he asks about his father, Circe spins
tails to make Odysseus sound better, but sees no harm in it, privately admitting, quote, I would have done
much, much worse to make my son happy. Page 262. At fifteen, Teligonus sees a sinking ship and begs his
mother to save the sailors. She agrees, but when they ask who Teligonus is, he announces himself as
demigod, and the sailors are enchanted by his natural charisma. Circe wonders if this is his power,
as he never had any interest in spells. Circe realizes his disinterest in witchcraft is because
he never wanted to change the world, quote, only to join it. Page 266. On his sixteenth birthday,
Teligonus reveals the boat he has built, and tells Circe that he means to sail to Ithaca to meet his father
with Hermes's help. She is furious, and tries to tell him that he does not understand the danger
that Athena poses, but he is young and stubborn, incapable of true comprehension. Teligonus insists
that he would rather die than stay on the island forever, and Circe announces that she does not care
that she could take away his desire to leave if she had to keep him safe. He runs away, horrified by his
mother's power, and the possibility that she would use it against him for his own safety. Circe realizes
that by shielding him from unpleasant truths, she has left him completely ignorant and unprepared for
the dangers of the outside world. She laments, quote, I had wanted him to walk freely in the world,
unburnt and unafraid, and now I had gotten my wish. He could not conceive of a relentless goddess with her
spear aimed at his heart. Page 271.
Chapter 20 Summary
Circe begrudgingly decides that Teligonus can leave the island, but only after she casts spells to protect
him. He agrees, but it is apparent he has no comprehension of the dangers, and naively expects
his heritage to protect him. Circe realizes it is too late to make him understand the horrors and
dangers of the world. In shielding him from unpleasantness, she has left him naive and
unprepared. Quote,
I kept the face of the world veiled from him. I had painted his history in bright,
bold colors, and he had fallen in love with my art. And now it was too late to go back and change it.
If I was so old, I should be wise. I should know better than to howl when the bird was already flown.
Page 276.
Circe breaks her exile to visit the old god in the deep sea,
a stingray called Trigon, whose tail's poison could torment even a god. She tries to challenge him
to win his tail as protection for Teligonus, but he makes it clear that she cannot hope to fight him
and win. She asks to trade instead, and he tells her that the only way for her to gain his tail is for
her to stab herself with it and feel the agony of the poison, pain that will linger eternally. Out of
love for her son, she reaches to do so. To Circe's great surprise, Trigon decides that her willingness
is enough. At his instruction, she cuts off his tail. As he swims away, she thinks that she cannot bear the
world anymore. He responds, quote, Then child, make another. Page 283.
Circe fits the tail to Teligonus's spear, creating a weapon that should protect him against even
Athena. Her son sails away, full of boyish excitement to go on his adventure and meet his father.
Chapter 21 Summary
Missing her son to distraction, Circe is surprised by his early return. Distraught,
Teligonus tells her that when he met Odysseus on the beach of Ithaca, his father attacked him,
and in the jostling the spear grazed Odysseus, killing him with its poison. He had finally met
his father only to hold him in his arms as he died, desperately trying to tell him who he was.
Circe is certain the fates are laughing at her. Quote, It was their favorite bitter joke.
Those who fight against prophecy only draw it more tightly around their throats. The shining
snare had closed, and my poor son, who had never harmed any man, was caught. Page 291.
Teligonus also informs her that he has brought back Odysseus's wife and son, Penelope and Telemachus,
back to Aeaea with him. Circe grieves for Odysseus and tries to comfort her son,
who blames himself for his father's death. Circe allows Penelope and Telemachus onto the island,
but privately suspects them of plotting to kill Teligonus in vengeance. To Circe's surprise,
Telemachus explains that Odysseus returned from war alone, angry, and paranoid. He killed anyone
who opposed him and suspected his child of conspiring against him. As she listens to
Telemachus recount his father's instability, Circe realizes that he has no intention of harming
Teligonus. Similarly, Penelope is a gracious guest, grateful for Circe's hospitality to them now,
and to her husband in the past. An unlikely friendship buds as the two share stories,
and weave at the loom Daedalus made.
CHAPTER XXII SUMMARY
Telemachus asks Circe for all of her stories about his father. Unlike when she told them to a young
Teligonus, Circe spins them to make Odysseus sound better than he was. Through their conversation,
it becomes clear that Odysseus' praised, brave heroics could also be seen as self-indulgent,
glory-hungry, and warmongering. Telemachus states that the stories sound like, quote,
a bad life, and that his father had, quote, made life for others a misery. Page 321. He shrewdly
observes that so many lives were lost and ruined, including Odysseus' own, for the sake of his pride.
Quote, He would rather be cursed by the gods than be no one. Page 321.
In speaking with Penelope, Circe learns that Athena caused Odysseus' madness by stirring up his
longing for battle and glory whenever he started to calm. Penelope admits that she came to Aeae to
protect Telemachus from the same fate, though they are not currently on speaking terms. Circe realizes
that Penelope's civility toward her is not hiding any aggression. Penelope views Athena as the goddess
who stole her husband, not Circe. She agrees to house them on the island for the moment,
thus keeping Athena away with the magic she cast to protect Telegonus.
CHAPTERS 18-22 ANALYSIS
Circe's longing for companionship is finally fulfilled through the birth of her son, but this love comes
with vulnerability and anxiety. When Athena wishes her son dead for reasons unknown, all of Circe's
protective instincts rise to defend him. Through her cleverness, tenacity, witchcraft, and will,
she protects her child even from the wrath of an angry war-goddess. Her magic bars the greater
goddess from the island, and her maternal love gives her the courage and wherewithal to succeed
in retrieving Trigon's tail where all others had failed since the dawn of time. Circe's naivete is
long dead and buried, but she unwittingly allows its folly in her son. In making Telegonus the center
of her world, keeping him safe and content at all times, she has rendered him incapable of
comprehending the danger that he is in. In granting him privacy, she opens him up to Ermes's manipulations.
When she capitulates to his begging, she sparks his desire to meet his father and introduces him to
sailors who teach him the skills necessary to leave her. Despite her intent to keep Telegonus safe and
happy, he will never be content on the island without adventuring to Ithaca and perhaps beyond.
Circe understands that her knee-jerk threat to use magic to take away his desire to leave
would be abuse. She wants true happiness for her son, and resolves to make it safe for him to have
his heart's desire. As Circe's efforts to keep Telegonus safe and close led to his insistence upon
leaving Aaea, the prophecy of Odysseus' death on a beach is fulfilled through Athena's attempt to
circumvent it. Without Athena's intent to kill Telegonus to prevent Odysseus' death, Circe never
would have needed Trigon's tail, the instrument of that death. Ultimately, neither the powerful
witch of Aaea nor the greater goddess of war can stop Odysseus' death at the hands of his son.
Instead, they fulfill the prophecy themselves, each playing a role in Odysseus' demise. The fates,
much like the gods, seem to love their cruel ironies.
CHAPTER XXIII SUMMARY
Circe tells Penelope that magic is more about will than bloodlines and teaches her about herbs,
while Telemachus goes to work fixing things about the house.
Medea, for all her stubborn insistence that Jason loved her and they would rule happily forever,
has been proven wrong. As Circe predicted, Jason has set her aside at the urging of his people.
Furious, Medea kills her children and takes a dragon chariot back to her father's home.
As unexpected as this news is, Circe supposes that it makes sense,
Aedes wanted an heir and there was none more like him than Medea. She had grown up trained around his
cruelty. And in the end, it seemed she had not learned how to hold any other shape.
Page 338
Circe considers Telemachus to be innocent because he is direct and has no hidden agenda.
I mean that he was made only of himself, without the dregs that clog the rest of us. He thought and
felt and acted, and all these things made a straight line. No wonder his father had been so baffled by
him. He would have been always looking for the hidden meaning, the knife in the dark. But Telemachus
carried his blade in the open. Page 340. She notices his attraction to her, but believes nothing can
come of it given the circumstances. Hermes arrives on Athena's orders. He relays the message that she
wants Circe to lower the spell to allow her onto the island to talk to Telemachus. Athena offers an
oath of protection for Telegonus to convince Circe to do so. Penelope is concerned that Athena will
ruin her son's life as she did her husband's. Circe tells Hermes that it will take three days
to lower the spell to buy time for Penelope to speak to Telemachus.
CHAPTER XXIV SUMMARY
Circe regrets not telling all her dirty secrets to Odysseus when she had the chance. She believes that
he was the only one who would have not judged her. Quote,
I had kept from Odysseus, Aedes, and Scylla, and the rest. I had not wanted my history to be only an
amusement grist for his relentless intelligence. But who else would have tolerated it? With all
its ugliness and errors, I had missed my chance to speak. And now it was too late. Page 349.
Athena arrives and offers Telemachus the chance to found his own city, which will prosper under her
patronage. To Athena's shock, he declines. She reminds him that without her, he will be no one,
not a great hero like his father, but someone history would never notice. She warns him,
quote, there will be no songs made of you, no stories. Do you understand? You will live a life
of obscurity. You will be without a name in history. You will be no one. Page 352.
Even though he knows she is right and is grateful for the offer, he states, quote,
I choose that fate. Page 352. Athena then makes the same offer to Telegonus. Who takes it? Athena's
patronage comes with protection and notoriety, representing a chance to live his dream of
being a heroic demigod leader. Cersei knows he wants to take it. She observes the irony of the
situation, quote, I had let Penelope stay on my island so she would not lose her son. I would lose
mine instead. Page 353. For the sake of his happiness, Cersei gives him her blessing to leave
and does her best to hide her agony. Telemachus gives Telegonus their father's sword, and Cersei
notices the obvious difference in their ages and maturity levels. After Telegonus leaves, Cersei falls
into a depression. Penelope and Telemachus walk on proverbial eggshells around her and express concern,
which she dismisses, saying, quote, Of course I am well. What could be wrong with me? Immortals do not
take sick. Page 357. She realizes that all mortal lives, even her son's life, are destined to end,
while hers is not, making all relationships with mortals fleeting. Cersei remembers Trigon's words
about making a new world and calls to her father.
CHAPTER XXV SUMMARY
Cersei tells Helios to ask Zeus to release her as a favour. When he considers the idea ridiculous,
she threatens to tell Zeus about giving relief to Prometheus, for which he would be blamed,
and about the Titans' conspiracies. Dumbfounded, Helios states that this would bring war. Cersei asserts
that she would gladly cause war and his ruin, before remaining trapped on the island for the
sake of his convenience. He threatens to kill her, but she responds boldly, quote,
You can. But you have always been cautious, father. You know I have stood against Athena. I have walked in
the blackest deeps. You cannot guess what spells I have cast, what poisons I have gathered to protect
myself against you. How your power may rebound upon your head. Who knows what is in me? Will you find
out? Page 361. Helios once again tells her that she is the worst of his children, and reminds her not to
dishonour him. For the first time, Cersei gets the last word. Quote, I have a better idea. I will do as
I please, and when you count your children, leave me out. Page 361. Cersei offers to take Penelope to
Sparta, but Penelope states that she would rather stay on Aaea, so Cersei tells her about the poisons
and drugs that she can use without magic to protect herself from sailors. Telemachus has fixed the ship
and added the figure of a growling lioness to the prow. He states that he wants to go with Cersei,
wherever she is going. She prepares her spells, and they set off. They come across
Scylla, who nearly destroys their ship, but this time Cersei turns Scylla into stone. In the process,
she accidentally drops the spear with Trigon's tail into the ocean, where it will return to Trigon,
as agreed. Cersei realizes that she doesn't have to be the same stern and regretful person she has
always been. She tells Telemachus the whole truth about Scylla, but he does not judge her. This forces
her to realize that she has denied them both love without sufficient cause. Quote, I had kept away
from him for so many reasons, his mother and my son, his father and Athena, because I was a god and he a
man. But it struck me that at the root of all those reasons was a sort of fear, and I have never been
a coward. Page 374. With this revelation, Cersei kisses Telemachus.
Chapter 26 Summary
Cersei and Telemachus' relationship grows, surpassing even her love for his father. Although they have
only spent a month together, Cersei reflects that, quote, he seemed to know her better than anyone who
had ever walked the world. Page 376. The two travel, Cersei pretending to be a human healer,
while Telemachus fixes boats. They find and retrieve the flowers that Cersei used to transform Glaucus and
Scylla before returning to Aea. Penelope has become a witch in her own right, and Cersei suggests she take
over the, quote, Witch of Aea mantle. She also suggests telling the gods that she'll take on their
misbehaving daughters if she wants company. Penelope asks if she will take Telemachus with
her when she leaves. Cersei says that she will if he will go with her, but she has to take care of
something first. Telemachus is supportive of the mysterious task, and assures Cersei that if she
does not succeed, they will simply try again until she does. Cersei is deeply moved by unwavering support
and loyalty, quote, is there a moment that a heart cracks? But a cracked heart was not enough,
and I had grown wise enough to know it. I kissed him and left him there. Page 381.
Chapter 27. Summary. Cersei fantasizes about using the flowers to turn herself human. In her vision,
she is mortal, married to Telemachus and mother to his two daughters. They have a simple mortal life
and grow old together. Cersei remembers how she had once feared that the flowers would reveal that she
was a monster at heart. She now has the courage to face who she truly is with hope for a better future.
Cersei muses that the gods are stagnant by nature, unable to hold on to anything due to their immortality,
but recognizes that she has always been progressing and evolving. She drinks the bowl of flower sap in
the hopes of becoming mortal, quote, I thought once that the gods are the opposite of death, but I see
now they are more dead than anything, for they are unchanging and can hold nothing in their hands. All my
life I have been moving forward, and now I am here. I have a mortal's voice. Let me have the rest. I lift the
brimming bowl to my lips and drink. Page 385
Chapters 23-27 Analysis
In the last section of the book, the status quo and expectations for the characters shift irrevocably.
Athena offers peace and blessing to Telegonis, whom she once sought to kill as a babe. Penelope
studies witchcraft, Telemachus denies his birthright, and Telegonis accepts the destiny of a city-founding
demigod. For the mortals, these are all steps toward a new life, but for Athena it is only a
lateral move. When one son of Odysseus has the Gaul to refuse her blessing, another will suit her plans
just as well. Cersei moves closer the path of the mortals, ending Scylla's torment, returning Trigon's tail,
accepting love where she finds it, and finally attempting to become mortal. The former two
acts close the open loops of her immortal life by addressing her mistakes and fulfilling her
agreement with Trigon. The latter two demonstrate her attempts to truly leave her past and divinity
behind to find a happier life. This reflects Cersei's own revelation that the gods are unchanging to their
detriment. She believes that mortality allows for life in the true sense, which is not existence without
death, but existence with love.
Character Analysis
Cersei
Cersei, a nymph and the novel's protagonist, is the daughter of the Titan Helios and a naiad Percy.
Odysseus once said of her that, quote, he had never met a god who enjoyed their divinity less,
page 380, an observation that's upheld by her disdain for the cruel immortals. Frequently painted as
sensitive and empathetic to the pain of others, particularly of mortals, Cersei is unlike the
other gods. Over time she discovers that she is a witch, capable of changing the world by drawing out
the magical properties of herbs. In youthful pride she transforms her would-be lover into a god,
and the nymph he chooses over her into a monster. After confessing her misdeeds she is exiled on the
island of Aia. Over thousands of years she masters her craft, struggles with monsters, makes enemies,
falls in love, suffers heartbreak and abuse, raises a child, and chooses her own destiny.
Helios. The strongest Titan alive and god of the sun, Helios sided with Zeus during the great war,
and keeps a tenuous peace with the Olympians, though he is not fully averse to the uprising.
Austere, proud, and commanding, Helios tolerates no perceived disrespect, quote,
however gold he shies, do not forget his fire. Page 6. His children tend to share his golden
appearance and gifts of prophecy. His children by Percy become the first witches.
Pesiphae. Beautiful and cruel, Pesiphae is sister to Cersei and queen of Crete. Her magic is focused
on poisons, though she also curses her husband so that all other women he has sex with die grotesque
deaths. To rise to further preeminence, Pesiphae has sex with a sacred white bull and gives birth to the
Minotaur. She is also mother to many mortals, including the kind-hearted dancer Ariadne.
Aedes. Clever and perceptive, Aedes was raised by Cersei, his sister, and was her closest companion in
youth. However, this does not stop him from leaving when Helios grants him his own kingdom,
called Colchis. There he works his magic, achieving powers beyond the abilities of the gods. When he hears
of Cersei's transformations, he returns to announce the skills of his siblings and the rise of Pharmakeia
to demonstrate his own power. He fathers at least two children, including the witch Medea.
Daedalus. Daedalus is a genius inventor serving Pesiphae and Minos in Crete, unable to leave while
they hold his son Icarus hostage. He is considered to be, quote, one of the wonders of the mortal world,
a craftsman almost equal to a god, page 33. An unwitting conspirator in the birth of the Minotaur,
he creates a labyrinth to contain it. He finds a kindred spirit in Cersei and becomes her lover for
a time, giving her a parting gift of a unique loom that she treasures for centuries.
Odysseus. A famous warrior-prince known for his involvement in the Trojan War, Odysseus is charming,
perceptive, prideful, and volatile. He is a descendant of Hermes, and finds his way to Aaea,
where he becomes Cersei's lover and unknowingly fathers a child before returning to his wife and
son in Ithaca. Athena is his patron goddess.
Telegonus. The child of Cersei and Odysseus, Telegonus is a demigod with captivating charisma
and nave optimism. Sheltered from painful truths and the realities of danger by his mother and her
witchcraft, Telegonus is confident in all he does.
TELEMACHUS.
Telemachus is the son of Odysseus and his wife Penelope. Unlike his father, Telemachus is simple,
speaking and acting in direct accordance with his thoughts, without artifice. This does not mean he is
unintelligent. He is clever and skilled in trades from goat herding and sailing to craftsmanship.
THEMES
THE NATURE OF POWER AND VICTORY
One of the book's main themes is the concept of power, which begs the question,
what is true power? The most obvious answers are the god's power, political or social power,
and magical power, but identifying true power from these options is not so simple. The god's power
can be overcome by magic, as seen through Aedes' ability to heal Cersei from Helios' wrath. It can
also be circumvented by political power, as proven by Cersei's extortion of her father's assistance,
as well as Athena's unwillingness to risk war with the Titans by killing Cersei. However, political power
does not always triumph over witchcraft, as shown by Helios' fear of Aedes' magic and Pasiphae's
control over her husband. Still, magical power does not stop Cersei's exile or Medea's divorce.
Throughout the book, these different types of power are often in contrast. When a character finally
achieves one kind of power, they discover that they are still at the mercy of another. Inherently
lacking political power as a woman and a nymph, Pasiphae uses her magical power to threaten her
husband so she can live in relative safety. Similarly, Medea lacks the political power to
create a life of her choosing. Her magic enables her to escape with Jason, thwarting her impending
marriage to a sadistic uncle, but Medea's magical power cannot buy the love of her husband or his people,
and her life crumbles before their political strength. Daedalus' genius allows him to build
a labyrinth that can contain a terrible monster, but his love for his son traps him in Crete. Cersei
becomes unquestionably powerful, developing into twice the witch her sister is, one strong enough to
challenge even Aedes, but she has no control over her exile. She cannot choose where to go without
invoking the wrath of the gods. Through this tale, power is presented less as a hammer and more as a
set of lockpicks, each requiring its own technique which may or may not work depending on the lock in
question. Ultimately, power is generally defined as the ability to cause change in one's own benefit,
so it must be determined by victory or advantage. It then follows that the most effective power
depends on the situation and perspective on what would be considered victory. This is not as black
and white as it might appear. Was Prometheus defeated when sentenced to torture, or was he
victorious in his refusal to be selfish like the other gods? Was Pasiphae victorious in keeping her
husband under threat of her poisons, or did she only mitigate her suffering, still unable to choose a
decent husband or even one at all? Did Daedalus conquer Pasiphae's political power by escaping Crete,
or did she win by ensuring his only means of escape would cost his son's life, the thing he held most
dear in the world? When Circe finally takes control of her life, turning herself mortal, does she win,
or do the gods who gain a future without her troublesome existence? The question of victory is subjective,
and so is the question of power. What the book does make clear is that power comes in many forms,
but rarely several at once, and that a single type of power may not be enough.
MISOGYNY AND FEMALE SUFFERING
The story is littered with casual, pervasive misogyny, from the sailors who balk at the
instructions of a woman even if she is a goddess, to the expectation that unruly daughters be punished,
but never sons, to the regular immortalization of female suffering and supposed weakness in song.
As Circe puts it, quote,
Humbling women seems to me a chief pastime of poets, as if there can be no story unless we crawl and weep,
page 206. This pattern applies especially to nymphs, who are regarded as property to be,
quote, traded for something better, page 5, such as wealth through marriage.
Among nymphs, nothing was considered more common than rape, whether by an uncle,
who would later pay her father for the privilege, quote,
HONOR ON ALL SIDES, page 191, or by a mortal she could not outrun. Unfortunately,
that expectation is fulfilled when a guest rapes Circe in her own home. Afterward,
she finds control by reenacting her rape with a different ending, transforming her would-be attackers
into pigs. When the innumerable sailors come into her home and drink her wine, she does not hide her
divinity or the wolves at her hearth, but it does not matter whether she's mortal or not, only that
she is, quote, alone and a woman, page 193. Both mortal men and gods view nymphs and mortal women in the
same degrading and dehumanizing way. The message is clear, quote,
Brides, nymphs were called, but that is not really how the world saw us. We were an endless feast,
laid out upon a table, beautiful and renewing, and so very bad at getting away, page 195.
EMOTIONAL DIFFERENCES BETWEEN GODS AND MORTALS
Circe's compassion sets her apart from the start. Except for Prometheus, the other immortals seem
incapable of genuine empathy or even sympathy. Aedes, whom Circe adored and pampered as a child,
cares only for his own power and legacy. Even Athena, arguably the best of the gods,
treats children as though they are interchangeable. This callousness is also noticeable in Glaucus's
behavior after he becomes a god. He quickly goes from praising Circe with shy admissions of
admiration, quote, I have never known such a wondrous thing in all my life as you, page 38,
to refusing to marry her when there are prettier nymphs about. As Circe puts it, quote, you can teach
a viper to eat from your hands, but you cannot take away how much it likes to bite, page 97.
Instead of compassion or even solidarity, the gods express unabashed sadism and glee during
Prometheus's whipping, quote, someone pushed at my back, trying for a better view, page 19,
and make light of Scylla's disfigurement for their amusement, quote, I wish I'd seen it,
can you imagine, page 59. The text suggests this propensity for cruelty stems from their immortality,
whereas humans must work for their excellence, the gods are born with it, quote, so they find
their fame by proving what they can mar, page 135. The inherent limitations and fragility of mortal life
are more likely to result in kindness. Circe notes, quote, if there was one thing I knew in all the world,
it was that there was no mercy among gods, page 247. Unlike the other emotions shared between mortals and
gods, such as anger, lust, defeat, and self-indulgence, guilt and remorse require someone to care about
how their actions affect others. This the gods have no interest in. Unlike other gods, Circe not only
feels her guilt, but also owns it. This is first shown when she imagines the astronomers who may be
killed for Helios' amusement. She also feels guilt for failing to help Prometheus beyond offering him
nectar and conversation. Her deepest regret is changing Scylla into a monster. Circe takes responsibility
not only for the atrocity of the act itself, but also for the countless lives Scylla claims over the
centuries. Circe eventually turns Scylla into stone to end her suffering and prevent more sailors' deaths.
When Telemachus tries to comfort Circe by dismissing her responsibility, she explains that this guilt
is what separates her from the other gods who feel no remorse for their cruelties. She insists, quote,
Do not try to take my regret from me. Page 374.
Symbols and Motifs
Molly
Molly, meaning root in ancient Greek, is a sacred plant worshipped for its ability,
The unyielding power of apotropy, the turning aside of evil. Page 100.
Molly grows on the island of Aea, and unlike other pharmaca, its purpose is fixed, breaking and guarding
against curses. Odysseus uses Molly to protect himself from Circe's magic. It appears to be
undefeatable, and its magical properties are entirely defensive.
Irony of Prophecy
Throughout the book, prophecies are presented as fundamentally self-fulfilling. Even actions taken
to circumvent them end up completing them instead. This is seen in Circe's references to Oedipus and
characterized by Odysseus' death. In both cases, the men kill their fathers. Athena does not want her
favorite hero to die, so she threatens Telegonis' life to protect Odysseus. This causes Circe to
retrieve the tale of Trigon. Telegonis takes it to defend himself against Athena, and its poison
kills Odysseus in the scuffle incited by Odysseus due to madness riled up by Athena. Athena is the
architect of the death she sought to avoid, and Circe and Telegonis are equally unwilling accomplices.
Circe observes and resents this irony, quote,
The fates were laughing at me, at Athena, at all of us. It was their favorite bitter joke.
Those who fight against prophecy only draw it more tightly around their throats.
The shining snare had closed, and my poor son, who had never harmed any man, was caught. Page 291.
THE GODS LOVE THEIR MONSTERS
Pesifei announces a dark truth about the gods. They, quote,
LOVE THEIR MONSTERS. Page 126. Although they look down upon anything that is not a greater god,
monsters are a part of their religious ecosystem. Gods want worship and sacrifice,
which humans give, and as Hermes points out, mortals in peril offer more prayers than satisfied ones.
The monsters, then, provide a necessary level of encouragement for the mortals to worship the gods.
They are also a means by which demigods can achieve glory. Without any monsters to fight,
who would Heracles be? And who would offer sacrifices to the gods in the hopes of emulating him?
This bitter truth explains why the gods allow even their favorites to suffer and choose not to intervene,
even as the Minotaur and Scylla take their followers' lives. The limit is not in their ability to slay the
beasts, but in their desire to do so. As such, Pesifei's expectation that the gods will not harm her for
creating the Minotaur is proven right. Be careful what you wish for.
Several characters receive their heart's desire only to be disappointed, or worse,
subjected to the very hardship and suffering they strove to avoid. Percy wants to marry Helios to
gain social advantage and notoriety, and she plans to bear him powerful children. Eventually, she becomes
known as the mother of witches, but then is forbidden to have any more children, and is therefore married
but cut off from her husband and the influence that comes with being his wife. Pesifei wants to
marry a powerful son of Zeus and escape her family, but Minos proves to be an abusive, arrogant man.
Medea leaves her father's kingdom and marries Jason, but he divorces her. She ends up killing their
children and returning to her father. Daedalus wished to escape Crete to give his son a better life,
but Icarus dies in their escape. Odysseus wants to return to Ithaca, but when he does,
he longs for adventure. He also wants more children, but his second son kills him. Telemachus wishes for
his father to return from war, but Odysseus returns a bitter shell of a man, whose return
ruins his kingdom and his marriage. Telegonus wants to meet his father, but at their first meeting,
Odysseus attacks him, and Telegonus accidentally kills him. This irony is especially apparent in
Cersei's character arc. She wants freedom from her family, but is exiled in solitude, without any
meaningful relationships for thousands of years. She wishes for Glaucus to be a god so they might marry,
but in elevating him she gives him the ability to abandon her. She wants to ruin Scylla's good looks,
but creates a monster that kills mortals. She wants to see Aedes again, but when he visits,
it is only to blame and threaten her. Cersei hopes for companionship, but is raped by the mortals who
finally visit her island. She longs for her child to be safe and unafraid, but shields him so much that he
cannot understand the danger he is in. Transformation. Cersei's power lends itself
to transformation from her very first foray into witchcraft. Through Pharmaca and Cersei's will,
Glaucus becomes a sea-god. Through the same plant and Cersei's jealousy, Scylla becomes a horrific beast.
Berries change, flies become toads, scorpions become mice, would-be rapists become pigs,
and fish become sheep. However, Cersei's largest transformation is her own. She grows from a
powerless, meek girl, too naive to understand the world, into a wise witch who ultimately trades her
divinity for mortality. Important Quotes. 1.
Quote, You cannot know how frightened gods are of pain. There is nothing more foreign to them,
and so nothing they ache more deeply to see. Chapter 2, page 17. Context for the quote.
The gods have a morbid fascination with pain, and appear to enjoy the suffering of others,
but as their lives are fundamentally endless, they do not understand the nature of death or pain.
Fear of the unknown is also a present theme, even among the gods, as shown by their reaction to
witchcraft. It follows that Cersei's perception of the gods' love and fear of pain may be right.
2. Quote, Not every god need be the same. Chapter 2, page 22. Context for the quote.
Prometheus's words to a young Cersei shape her personal development. Her uncle becomes her
conscience and gives her the critical, fundamental lesson that she does not have to be cruel and
vicious like the other gods. Instead, she can choose to be like him. This revelation is the
foundation of the story and Cersei's moral character. 3. Quote, That is one thing gods and mortals
share. When we are young we think ourselves the first to have each feeling in the world. Chapter 4,
page 43. Context for the quote. After feeling love for the first time, Cersei believes nothing could
possibly stand against it. When her grandmother dismisses her certainty that her love for Glaucus
will have a happy end, she is stubborn and selfish. Later, seeing her niece Medea demonstrate the same
behavior, Cersei recognizes it as the childish arrogance of youth. 4. Quote, I was too wild to
feel any shame. It was true. I would not just uproot the world, but tear it, burn it, do any evil I could
to keep Glaucus by my side. Chapter 4, page 46. Context for the quote. Confident that her love will guarantee a
happy ending with Glaucus, Cersei feels no guilt for her rebellion. She will regret the consequences of
this all-consuming focus for the rest of her very long life. 5. Quote, What could make a god afraid?
I knew that answer, too. A power greater than their own. Chapter 4, page 46. Context for the quote.
When mentioning Pharmaca to her grandmother Tethys, Cersei notes her fear and rage. She takes this
reaction to mean that Pharmaca does exist, and with powers greater than a god's, it could be used to
turn Glaucus immortal. 6. Quote, A knowledge woke in the depths of my blood. It whispered that the
strength of those flowers lay in their sap, which could transform any creature to its truest self.
Chapter 5, page 49. Context for the quote. When kneeling next to the sleeping Glaucus,
distraught over her failure to make him a god, Cersei has a moment of revelation that sets the course
of her destiny. This epiphany of how to use the Pharmaca is her first step in becoming a witch.
7. Quote, But of course I could not die. I would live on through each scalding moment to the next.
This is the grief that makes our kind choose to be stones and trees, rather than flesh.
Chapter 5, page 55.
After Glaucus spurns her for the beautiful Scylla, Cersei despairs. Unlike mortals, who only have to
carry their pains until death, the gods have no such expiration date. The all-consuming grief she feels
is agonizing and seemingly without end, prompting her to do more witchcraft in a jealous rage in the
hopes of attaining the happy ending she believes she and Glaucus deserve together.
8. Quote, What was I truly? In the end, I could not bear to know.
Chapter 6, page 65. Context for the quote. Having confessed to her crimes, Cersei has been disfigured by
her father. She returns to the island where she found the Pharmaca, and plans to use it to reveal what she is
at her core, whether it's a god like Glaucus, or monstrosity like Scylla. Ultimately, she decides
that she would rather not have confirmation that she is a monster, and does not use the flower sap to
transform herself. 9. Quote, I had made so many mistakes that I could not find my way back through
their tangle to the first one. Was it changing Scylla? Changing Glaucus? Swearing the oath to my
grandmother? Speaking to Glaucus in the first place? I felt a sickening unease that it went back further
still. Back to the first breath I ever drew. Chapter 6, page 72. Context for the quote. Cersei is tormented
by her guilt for setting tragic events in motion, but cannot decide where she went wrong. She suspects
that she should never have been born at all to avoid such evils coming to pass. 10. Quote,
Yet because I knew nothing, nothing was beneath me. Chapter 7, page 86. Context for the quote.
In studying witchcraft on her island, Cersei is able to learn through her humility. Rather than aiming
for impressive and powerful spells, she begins slowly and accrues knowledge in the basic principles
of sorcery. As such, she becomes a powerful witch through her hard work, building on the fundamentals
after she masters them. 11. Quote, I had no right to claim him. I knew it. But in a solitary life there
are rare moments when another soul dips near yours, as stars once a year brush the earth. Such a
constellation was he to me. Chapter 11, page 152. Context for the quote.
The solitude of her exile weighs on Cersei, and her brief reprieve in Crete is unpleasant due to the
presence of her sister and the Minotaur. However, being around others also reminds Cersei of what she
lackscompanionship. Her time with Daedalus is precious to her, and will remain so long after his death.
The solace they find in each other gives Cersei hope that she might not spend all of eternity desperately alone.
12. Quote, I had walked the earth for a hundred generations, yet I was still a child to myself.
Rage and grief, thwarted desire, lust, self-pitythese are emotions gods know well. But guilt and shame,
remorse, ambivalencethose are foreign countries to our kind which must be learned stone by stone.
Chapter 12, page 156. Context for the quote.
After returning to Aeah from Crete, Pesiphae's accusations as to Cersei's characterspecifically
her naivete and willful ignorancesting. Still, Cersei acknowledges that she had not noticed her
mother's power or her sister's suffering, and that this does not speak well of her. Cersei's trip to
Crete scrapes away more of her naivete and teaches her that remorse is a learned response to a godsomething
she has to work for. 13. Quote,
Every moment mortals died, by shipwreck and sword, by wild beasts and wild men, by illness, neglect,
and ageit was their fate, as Prometheus had told me, the story that they all shared. No matter how
vivid they were in life, no matter how brilliant, no matter the wonders they made, they came to dust
and smoke. Meanwhile, every petty and useless god would go on sucking down the bright air until the
stars went dark. Chapter 12, page 159. Context for the quote. Hermes informs Cersei that her kind-hearted
niece, Ariadne, was killed by Artemis over some unknown, quote, incomprehensible slight. Page 159.
Though she knows she lacks the power to do so, Cersei wishes to use her magic to take vengeance on
Artemis. As she mourns for Daedalus, Icarus, and Ariadne, she bitterly laments that those who do not
deserve death receive it, but the cruel and selfish gods are eternal. This represents another step that
distances Cersei from the other gods. 14. Quote,
That old, sickening feeling returned, that every moment of my life I had been a fool.
Chapter 14, page 177. Context for the quote. After Medea's insults and her brief reunion with Aedes,
Cersei is circumspect about her loneliness. She reviews her memories of her beloved brother in their
youth, and suspects that Pasiphae's accusations that he never loved her was true. She worries
that she has never once been loved in her life, that she has always been truly alone, and that she
will be alone for all eternity. 15. Quote,
No, I thought. I was not careful. I was reckless, headlong. He was another knife. I could feel it.
A different sort, but a knife still. I did not care. I thought, give me the blade. Some things are worth
spilling blood for. Chapter 15, page 205. Context for the quote. When Odysseus and Cersei meet and reach
their impasse, Cersei suggests they make a truce over sex. He agrees on the condition that she swear
on the river Styx not to harm him, and calls them both careful. Cersei acknowledges the risk she takes
in inviting Odysseus into her life, but believes his companionship will be worth the inevitable pain it
causes. 16. Quote,
When I had taken him to my bed, it had been a kind of dare. But the feeling that flickered in me now was
much older. There he was, his flesh open before me. This is something torn that I can mend.
Chapter 16, page 208. Context for the quote. Cersei's newfound relationship with Odysseus is a balm to
her loneliness. Once again she finds herself longing to fix something, him. This represents a
turning point and revival of the lighter side of Cersei's personality, which had given way to
ruthlessness after her rape. 17. Quote,
How many times would I have to learn? Every moment of my peace was a lie, for it came only at the
gods' pleasure. No matter what I did, how long I lived, at a whim they would be able to reach down
and do with me what they wished. Chapter 17, page 230. Context for the quote. When Apollo arrives and
forces a vision of prophecy for Odysseus into her mind, Cersei is reminded that whatever semblance of
control she finds on the island is an illusion. The gods have her under their power, and while they
will not protect her from rapists, they can and will drop in on her to violate her mind or whatever
else they pleased. She acknowledges that she has no ability to stop them.
18. Quote, Odysseus, son of Laerdes, the great traveler, prince of wiles and tricks and a thousand ways,
he showed me his scars, and in return he let me pretend that I had none.
Chapter 17, page 237. Context for the quote.
Cersei's relationship with Odysseus is precious in its novelty. He shares all his stories, but she
gives none in return. To him she was, quote, the golden witch with no past. Page 215. Not the woman who
made the monster Scylla. Their companionship and collaboration in the shared delusion of her lack
of negative experiences seem to be just what Cersei wants. 19. Quote, my whole life I had waited for
tragedy to find me. I never doubted that it would. For I had desires and defiance and powers more than
others thought I deserved. All the things that draw the thunderstroke. A dozen times grief had
scorched, but its fire had never burned through my skin. My madness in those days rose from a new
certainty, that at last I had met the thing the gods could use against me. Chapter 18, page 244.
Context for the quote. Although her son is the solution to her profound loneliness, Cersei realizes
that he is also her vulnerability. The gods could kill her, but that would have consequences. They
could exile her, but she would live. Her son, however, can be used against her, just as her
sister used Icarus against Daedalus. The fear that her innocent child will be harmed to control or
punish her, overwhelms Cersei. 20. Quote, I had wanted him to walk freely in the world,
unburnt and unafraid. And now I had gotten my wish. He could not conceive of a relentless goddess
with her spear aimed at his heart. Chapter 19, page 271. Context for the quote. Through Cersei's desire
to ensure her child's happiness and safety, she has left him unprepared to understand the danger he
will face if he leaves the island as planned. Ignorance may be bliss, but it is also a
vulnerability. Cersei profoundly regrets fostering that ignorance in her mortal son.
21. Quote, At the time I had been boasting, showing off my ruthlessness. I had felt untouchable,
filled with teeth and power. I scarcely remembered what that was like.
Chapter 21, page 310. Context for the quote. In recounting her conversation with Odysseus about not
caring whether the sailors she turned into pigs would attack her or not, that their entrance to
her house was enough. Cersei remembers how fearless and arrogant she felt in those days.
As a mother, she no longer has that luxury of feeling invincible. She now has a vulnerability
named Telegonus. 22. Quote, But perhaps no parent can truly see their child. When we look,
we only see the mirror of our own faults. Chapter 21, page 311. It is clear to Cersei that Odysseus's
suspicious mind, always searching for hidden agendas, would have never understood Telemachus's openness.
She considers that all parents' view of their children is inherently skewed to reflect the
worst of the parents' flaws. 23. Quote, It was my oldest fear, that white annihilation. I felt it
shiver through me. But enough. At last. Enough. Chapter 25, page 361. Context for the quote.
Cersei confronts her father, extorting him into asking Zeus to lift her banishment. Helios reacts
with fury and threats, but Cersei holds her ground, finally refusing to live under the control and
expectations of the gods and her family. Having faced down Athena for her son's life, she is now
empowered to face her father for the freedom of her own. 24. Quote, I had been old and stern for so long,
carved with regrets and years like a monolith. But that was only a shape I had been poured into.
I did not have to keep it. Chapter 25, page 373. Context for the quote. Cersei realizes that the weight
of her mistakes, bitterness, and disillusionment is not necessarily permanent. She suddenly understands
that she can decide for herself who she will be and how she will live from now on. This foreshadows
her decision to use the pharmaca to become mortal. 25. Quote, I thought once that the gods are the
opposite of death. But I see now that they are more dead than anything, for they are unchanging,
and can hold nothing in their hands. All my life I have been moving forward, and now I am here.
I have a mortal's voice. Let me have the rest. I lift the brimming bowl to my lips and drink.
Chapter 27, page 385. Context for the quote. Immortality's endless days lend a constancy to life,
but Cersei believes it comes at the cost of truly investing in the moment and living life
fully. Her journey has led her to a place where she can go wherever she wants and be whoever she
wants with her new love. She decides that she is ready to drink the pharmaca sap that once turned
Scylla into a monster in the hopes of becoming mortal and creating the life she has always wanted.
Essay topics. 1. Cersei is unable to determine whether her first mistake was changing Scylla,
changing Glaucus, or speaking to Glaucus. Which, if any of these acts, do you think set her future in
motion? Why? 2. Cersei has relationships of various forms with Glaucus, Hermes, Daedalus, Odysseus,
and Telemachus. Which do you think has the largest impact on the story? Why?
3. Pacifae states that Cersei's ignorance is willful. Do you agree? Why or why not?
4. Cersei believes that her remorse makes her different from the other gods. Is she right to
refuse absolution for her mistakes? Why or why not? 5. Pacifae tells Cersei that
Aedes never loved her. Do you agree? Why or why not? 6. Aedes states that Prometheus,
as a god of prophecy, knew how he would be punished before he confessed. Why do you think Prometheus
confessed anyway? Was this the right or wrong decision? Why? 7. Aedes believed that the flowers
transformed Glaucus and Scylla transformed Glaucus and Scylla not into their truest selves but in
accordance with Cersei's wishes. Do you agree? Why or why not? 8. Who is most responsible for
Odysseus's death? Why? 9. Does Cersei deserve to become mortal? Why or why not? 10. Cersei regrets not
telling Odysseus all her secrets. Is this really a mistake? Why or why not?
This has been Study Guide, Cersei by Madeline Miller, Super Summary. Written by Super Summary. Narrated by Nicole
Anders. Copyright 2020 by Super Summary. Production Copyright by Super Summary.
Audible hopes you have enjoyed this program.
