world. To complement the densiﬁcation processes inherent to these two theories, we propose
the conformational change theory, wherein we posit that the practice of curiosity results in
mental models with marked conceptual ﬂexibility. To validate these three theories, we must
overcome the fundamental challenge of constructing formal models of mental representations of
knowledge. Here, we address that challenge by formalizing curiosity as the process of building
a growing knowledge network.
We then quantitatively investigate information gap theory,
compression progress theory, and the conformational change theory of curiosity. In knowledge
networks, gaps can be identiﬁed as topological cavities, compression progress can be quantiﬁed
using network compressibility, and ﬂexibility can be measured as the number of conformational
degrees of freedom.
We leverage data acquired from the online encyclopedia Wikipedia to
determine the degree to which each theory explains the growth of knowledge networks built
by individuals and by collectives. Our ﬁndings lend support to a pluralistic view of curiosity,
wherein intrinsically motivated information acquisition ﬁlls knowledge gaps and simultaneously
leads to increasingly compressible and ﬂexible knowledge networks. Across individuals and
collectives, we determine the contexts in which each theoretical account may be explanatory,
thereby clarifying their complementary and distinct explanations of curiosity.
Our ﬁndings
oﬀer a novel network theoretical perspective on intrinsically motivated information acquisition
that may harmonize with or compel an expansion of the traditional taxonomy of curiosity.
2

1
Introduction
Humans must manage uncertainty and embrace change to thrive in a complex and dynamic envi-
ronment [1]. To this end, we continually consume information to construct and maintain accurate
mental models of the world [2, 3]. Information-seeking behavior may be driven by a variety of in-
trinsic and extrinsic factors. Arising from the latter, information acquisition is an intermediate step
towards attaining a speciﬁc goal—such as increased wealth or social recognition—that is ultimately
rewarding [4]. By contrast, the intrinsic motivation to seek information is commonly conceptualized
as curiosity [1, 5, 6]. In silico work suggests that curiosity may have evolved to maximize long-term
evolutionary ﬁtness in rapidly changing environments [7]. Additionally, studies have shown that
humans are driven to know, even when information is costly to obtain [8, 9] and may have no
immediate tangible utility [10, 11]. Curiosity-driven information gathering is, therefore, inherently
rewarding.
Given the signiﬁcant role that it plays in our daily behavior and decision making, several theories
have sought to explain how individuals practice curiosity. The information gap theory views curios-
ity as the drive to obtain information that is missing from a mental model of the world [5]. In this
account, perception of a gap in one’s knowledge of the world creates an aversive state of uncertainty
