that, in turn, motivates a search for information to close the gap [12]. In the complementary per-
spective of compression progress theory, curiosity is the drive to obtain information that improves
the compression of a mental model and thereby lowers its cost of representation [13, 14]. Both
theories provide several important explanations for curiosity-driven information-seeking behavior.
On the one hand, curiosity that explicitly modulates uncertainty levels by opening or closing in-
formation gaps as needed can facilitate lifelong learning. On the other hand, compression progress
enables the extraction of essential latent structures of knowledge, oﬀering greater capacity for gen-
eralization [15, 16]. Low-cost representations also allow for greater functional capacity by freeing
cognitive resources that would otherwise be dedicated to information storage and retrieval [17].
However, theoretical constructs for curiosity, such as the information gap theory and compression
progress theory, are diﬃcult to validate quantitatively. A fundamental challenge is constructing
formal models of mental representations of knowledge. In the absence of such models (and the
conceptual frameworks that accompany them), it is unclear how to translate theoretical concepts
such as knowledge gaps and compression progress to well-deﬁned variables that can be measured
in experiments.
One such model that has shown promise is a network model where knowledge is composed of
discrete and yet interconnected concepts [18, 19, 20, 21, 22, 23, 24]. In graph learning studies,
volunteers are shown sequences of images on a screen, where, unbeknownst to the volunteers, each
image corresponds to a node in an underlying network [25]. Based solely on observed transitions,
and despite being unaware of the underlying network’s structure, participants successfully infer
statistical regularities from the temporal order in which images appear [20, 26, 27, 28, 29]. Cru-
cially, the structure of the pre-deﬁned experimental graph can be recovered from neural activity by
decoding simultaneously acquired functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) data [27, 30]. The
sequential manner in which stimuli are presented in graph learning tasks can be conceived of as a
walk prescribed by the experimenter in a limited knowledge space of objects, images, concepts, or
movements. Curiosity, too, can be conceived of as a walk, but one that is largely self-directed and
purposeful across the vast landscape of knowledge. To evaluate curious walks, recent work gathered
browsing histories from individuals who freely explored the online encyclopedia Wikipedia. Struc-
3

Figure 1: Connectional approach to curiosity. (A) A participant constructs a growing knowl-
edge network through curiosity-driven self-directed exploration of Wikipedia, a vast networked
landscape of information. Nodes represent unique Wikipedia pages. Edges represent hyperlinks
between nodes. Nodes are colored to denote the order in which they are visited. (B) Gaps in a
knowledge network can be formalized using algebraic topology and tracked in several topological
dimensions. The green and blue gaps represent a 0-dimensional and 1-dimensional cavity, respec-
tively. (C) Compression progress aims to construct internal representations of the world that are
both storage eﬃcient and generalizable. In a knowledge network, all concepts that belong to the
same cluster can be represented parsimoniously at a higher level of abstraction using their cluster
identity. The unclustered network has 9 nodes and 12 edges, while the clustered network only
