has 3 nodes and 3 edges. (D) A mechanical network can possess several spatial conﬁgurations,
any of which can be arrived at from any of the others through a series of conformational changes.
We formalize and measure knowledge network ﬂexibility as the number of available conformational
degrees of freedom.
4

tural features of the knowledge networks that participants walked upon (Fig. 1A) were found to
be associated with curiosity, as measured by an independent index of participants’ sensitivity to
information deprivation [31].
Here, we leverage this framework and cast curiosity as a network building process. This approach
allows us to take qualitative explanations for information-seeking behavior, such as the information
gap theory and compression progress theory, and operationalize them in quantitative statistics.
Information gap theory posits that humans add information to regulate uncertainty by ﬁlling gaps
[1, 5, 6]. This theory can be operationalized by treating gaps in networks as topological cavities,
and by tracking their evolution using techniques from applied algebraic topology [32, 33, 34] (Fig.
1B). In contrast, compression progress theory posits that humans subtract or discard information
[13, 14, 35] due to limited cognitive capacity [14, 36, 37]. Compressing a network while maintaining
meaningful latent structure requires that we discard some irrelevant information while maintaining
important information about past experiences and present priorities [14, 35, 38, 39]. This theory
can be operationalized by measuring the compressibility of a network, an information-theoretic
quantity that captures the ability of a network to be compressed [35] (Fig. 1C). Via the network
operationalization of these two theories, we come to see that curiosity is marked as a process by
which networks of knowledge densify and simplify, raising the question of what alternative process
might drive them to sprawl and become complex.
To address this question, we expand beyond historical accounts to operationalize our own confor-
mational change theory of curiosity. The conformational change theory suggests that information-
seeking behavior results in the creation of expansive knowledge networks [40] embedded in a con-
ceptual geometry (Fig. 1D). The notion of a conceptual geometry is motivated by prior studies of
neural population geometry and the fact that information can be embedded and processed in locally
Euclidean geometric representations to solve complex tasks [41]. The geometry provides a key af-
fordance for curiosity—conceptual ﬂexibility—as the knowledge network can mechanically conform
into diﬀerent shapes. While some concepts are separated from other concepts by ﬁxed distances
of shared-versus-unshared meaning, other concept pairs can move closer together or farther apart
as inter-concept relations shorten or lengthen depending on time and context [42]. This ﬂexibility
allows us to draw from past experience, cohere the past with newly learned information, monitor
conﬂict, and respond appropriately in diﬀerent contexts [15, 43, 44]; it may also subserve the un-
expected conceptual combinations that accompany imaginative thought and support serendipitous
discoveries [45, 46]. Mechanically akin to conformational change in proteins, the ﬂexible reshaping
of the knowledge network can only occur if concepts are sparsely connected; densely connected
linkage networks embedded in a Euclidean geometry are rigid. Hence, the conformational change
