theory of curiosity posits a drive for conceptual ﬂexibility that leads networks to sprawl and become
complex.
As is now evident, each of the three theories is motivated by a distinct and uniquely important
psychological drive: to reduce uncertainty by learning a missing piece of information, to discover
latent patterns by distilling fundamental epistemic elements, and to reshape information by ﬂexibly
reconﬁguring knowledge networks. Here, we test each theory through parallel analyses of the growth
of individual and collective knowledge networks derived from Wikipedia. At the individual scale,
we construct knowledge networks for 149 individuals using their Wikipedia browsing histories [31]
(Fig. 1A). At the collective scale, we extract Wikipedia networks to assess knowledge growth in 30
disciplines such as calculus, economics, and linguistics [47]. We treat Wikipedia pages as nodes in
both sets of networks and add edges between them according to the presence of hyperlinks between
5

pages. For the data on individuals, we specify network growth using the order in which individuals
visit pages; for the data on collectives, we use the years in which diﬀerent concepts originate. To
model the random growth of knowledge in both data sets, we create 25 degree-preserving edge-
rewired versions of each network.
We test the predictions of the three theories by comparing
measurements of relevant features from empirically observed knowledge networks to those from the
related null networks. First, considering the information gap theory, we expect to ﬁnd fewer-than-
chance topological cavities in growing empirical knowledge networks due to people’s hypothesized
drive to close knowledge gaps when they are perceived. Considering compression progress theory,
we hypothesize that growing knowledge networks will exhibit greater-than-chance compressibility
due to people’s hypothesized drive to distill fundamental epistemic elements [14]. Third, considering
conformational change theory [40], we hypothesize that knowledge networks will possess greater-
than-chance capacity for conformational changes due to people’s hypothesized drive for conceptual
ﬂexibility.
In testing these hypotheses, we demonstrate the utility of the network approach in
quantitatively validating existing theoretical constructs of curiosity as well as in formulating new
ones.
2
Results
2.1
Network growth formalism
Before testing the predictions of the three theories, we clarify the network formalism upon which
they are operationalized. Consider a graph G = (V, E) with node set V and edge set E ⊆V ×V. We
deﬁne a growing knowledge network with the tuple (G, s), where s denotes a map s : V →N that
speciﬁes the rank order in which nodes are added to the network. For networks built by individuals,
s is determined by the order in which Wikipedia pages are ﬁrst visited. For collective networks, s
is determined by the years in which diﬀerent concepts originate. With N nodes in a network, we
