construct a sequence of graphs
G0 ⊂G1 ⊂· · · ⊂GN = G,
(1)
where Gp is a subgraph of G comprised of the ﬁrst p nodes in s and all q connections between them
that exist in E. Such a sequence—in which each element is a subset of the next—is an example
of a ﬁltration.
We index each subgraph in a ﬁltration by the number of nodes in the network
at that stage.
We identify topological cavities, measure network compressibility, and compute
conformational ﬂexibility for all subgraphs in ﬁltrations of individual and collective knowledge
networks as well as in ﬁltrations of related null model networks.
We perform non-parametric
permutation tests to examine diﬀerences between feature curves for empirical and null model data
(see Sec. 5.5 for details). Since networks in a given data set may have diﬀerent sizes, we normalize
ﬁltration indices to span the range [0, 1], and align values of interest to be deﬁned on the same
points before computing the mean for a feature-of-interest across all individuals or topics [48]. For
completeness, we also report results with unnormalized values in the Supplement.
2.2
Information gap theory
The information gap theory posits that curiosity is the drive to collect units of knowledge that
ﬁll gaps in one’s internal representation of the world [5]. When we model internal representations
as networks, the missing information can be usefully operationalized as topological cavities, which
can be tracked in a principled manner using tools from applied algebraic topology (see Sec. 5.2
6

Figure 2:
Probing information gaps as topological cavities in growing knowledge net-
works. We operationalize information gaps as topological cavities (also referred to as cycles) and
track their evolution in growing individual and collective knowledge networks. We plot the number
of cycles as a function of time. (A) Topological cavities in dimension 0, or 0-cycles, represent discon-
nected network components. (B, C) Individual and collective knowledge networks tend to possess
fewer disconnected components than expected in edge-rewired null model networks. (D) In dimen-
sion 1, a topological cavity represents an enclosed loop formed by edges. (E, F) Growing individual
and collective knowledge networks tend to possess fewer loops than expected in edge-rewired null
model networks. (G) A topological cavity in dimension 2 constitutes a void enclosed by 3-cliques,
or triangles of interconnected nodes. (H, I) Growing individual and collective knowledge networks
tend to possess more 2-dimensional cavities than expected in edge-rewired null model networks.
Shaded regions in panels B, C, E, F, and H, I represent standard error. Purple curves denote the
average number of cavities in edge-rewired null model networks.
7
