
for methodological details) [32, 33]. This operationalization follows prior work demonstrating that
domains as diverse as language development in toddlers [49], the introduction of characters in
Dostoyevsky’s novels [50], and the presentation of concepts in linear algebra textbooks [48] exhibit
a systematic creation and closing of such cavities. By employing this approach, we can determine
whether curiosity-driven exploration is motivated by a preference for gap closure. In a network,
except for dimension 0, a k-dimensional cavity, also known as a k-cycle, is identiﬁed as an empty
enclosure formed from (k + 1)-cliques, where cliques are deﬁned as all-to-all connected subgraphs
of k + 1 nodes. The k-th Betti curve records the number of k-cycles present at each stage of a
network’s growth. Cycles of dimension 0 represent disconnected network components (Fig. 2A),
whereas those of dimensions 1 and 2 represent loop-like holes (Fig. 2D) and pocket-like voids (Fig.
2G), respectively.
Considering information gap theory, we hypothesized that empirical knowledge networks would
contain fewer cavities than topologically similar edge-rewired null model networks. To test this
hypothesis, we compute persistent homology for ﬁltrations of individual and collective knowledge
networks in dimensions 0, 1, and 2. We ﬁnd that the number of 0-cycles, or disconnected network
components, increases as individual knowledge networks grow, and does so at a steeper rate in null
networks than in empirical networks (Fig. 2B). For collective knowledge networks, we ﬁnd that the
number of disconnected components ﬁrst increases and then decreases both in the empirical and in
the null model networks, albeit with signiﬁcantly diﬀerent peak values (Fig. 2C). In both data sets,
for a signiﬁcant duration of growth, Betti curves for observed networks are lower than those for null
model networks. In dimensions 1 and 2, we ﬁnd that the number of cycles increases as individual
and collective knowledge networks grow (Fig. 2D-I). This temporal trajectory could arise from the
fact that ﬁlling gaps by forging new connections can open new gaps, making it prohibitively diﬃcult
to track (and ﬁll) gaps among an increasingly large number of items. In support of information
gap theory, the rate at which 1-cycles increase is lower for the empirical networks than for the null
networks (Fig. 2E,F). In contrast to information gap theory, the rate at which 2-cycles increase
is higher in the empirical networks than in the null networks (Fig.
2H,I). The marked growth
of 2-dimensional cavities could reﬂect an alternative drive to expand and complexify knowledge
networks. All empirical Betti curves are signiﬁcantly diﬀerent from the Betti curves for the null
model data (pperm < 0.001) as determined via permutation testing.
In summary, across both
individual and collective knowledge networks, our ﬁndings suggest that information gap theory
explains how separate areas of interest (0-cycles) grow and then are subsequently linked together,
and how loop-like holes (1-cycles) within speciﬁc areas of interest grow and are subsequently ﬁlled.
However, the extent and longevity of larger pocket-like voids (2-cycles) remains unexplained by the
information gap theory, motivating an assessment of alternative psychological drives.
2.3
Compression progress theory
