Considering compression progress theory, we hypothesized that growing knowledge networks would
be more compressible than topologically similar edge-rewired null model networks. We test our
hypothesis by computing network compressibility for each subgraph in ﬁltrations of individual and
collective knowledge networks. We ﬁnd that compressibility increases monotonically as knowledge
networks grow. At all stages of growth, and in support of our hypothesis, networks for individ-
uals exhibit greater-than-expected compressibility (Fig.
3C). This same trend holds, but to a
much weaker extent in the collective knowledge networks. While the early stages of growth evince
greater separation between empirical and null compressibility values, the two curves overlap in later
stages of growth (Fig. 3D). Based on non-parametric permutation testing, compressibility curves
for individual and collective knowledge networks are signiﬁcantly diﬀerent from their null model
counterparts (pperm < 0.001). These data provide evidence that is critical for an evaluation of
compression progress theory. Consistent with the theory, for individuals, a preference for greater
compressibility indicates that curiosity is driven to construct parsimonious mental representations of
knowledge. For collectives, a similar-to-expected compressibility could reﬂect (i) the group’s nature
as constituted by the diverse voices and expertise that comprise it, which can enhance the relevance
of details and preclude their compression, and (ii) the fact that groups may not be constrained by
the same cognitive capacity limitations that constrain individuals.
2.4
Conformational change theory
A curious learner practising curiosity solely according to information gap theory strives for growth
and completeness of knowledge.
By contrast, a learner practising curiosity solely according to
compression progress theory strives to uncover the latent organization of the world. In the process,
neither individual can keep pace with the growing complexity of the environment; with a rapidly
expanding frontier of ignorance as new unknowns become accessible. Crucially, both theories suggest
how we can usefully add or relinquish information but neither acknowledges the worth of what
we already possess.
Prior work has shown that curiosity-driven information acquisition is not
only about growing or shedding knowledge, but also about retreading and reconsidering what
one presently holds [14, 31]. Following Zurn et al. [40], we propose that such reﬂection entails
moving concepts ﬂexibly in relation to one other. Speciﬁcally, we deﬁne curiosity as the process of
constructing knowledge networks with a ﬁnely arbitrated balance between local internal rigidity and
global external ﬂexibility. Rigidity and ﬂexibility are mechanical notions that require an object of
interest to be embedded in physical space. Therefore, drawing inspiration from a rich literature on
cognitive maps (see Supplement for background), we assume that knowledge networks are embedded
in Euclidean space where they possess several degrees of freedom.
We then measure ﬂexibility
as a network’s ability to undergo conformational changes [42] and formalize our account as the
10
