
conformational change theory of curiosity.
Figure 4:
Conformational change in mechanical networks. (A) In two-dimensional space,
a network with three nodes and three edges has three rigid-body degrees of freedom: horizontal
translation, vertical translation, and rotation. (B) In addition to the three rigid-body motions, a
quadrilateral frame also possesses a conformational degree of freedom, depicted here via the angle
parameter θ, which allows it to change shape from a square to a diamond. (C) Rigid and ﬂexible
sub-units can be combined to construct networks capable of undergoing large-scale conformational
changes. Diﬀerent conﬁgurations of the same network can be reached by propagating conformational
changes through its structure. (D) A network chain with 338 nodes and 672 edges folds to form a
quadrifolium (panel D reproduced with permission from Kim et al. [51]).
Before measuring the conformational ﬂexibility of growing knowledge networks, we oﬀer a brief
introduction to mechanical networks. Consider a triangular network in two dimensions. Each of
its nodes can be located with two coordinates (Fig. 4A). This network has three available rigid
body motions: horizontal translation, vertical translation, and rotation. Next, consider a network
comprised of 4 nodes and 4 edges (Fig. 4B). This network possesses the same rigid-body motions
as are available to the triangle. Additionally, the quadrilateral possesses a conformational degree of
freedom. A conformational change in a network alters the Euclidean distance between unconnected
pairs of nodes. For instance, if a pair of adjacent nodes in the quadrilateral is held ﬁxed in space,
the remaining nodes can be moved freely while sweeping across an angle θ with respect to the ﬁxed
pair (Fig. 4B). Through this process, this simple network exhibits a conformational change from
a square to a diamond. Mechanical networks can exist in several conﬁgurations, each of which can
11

be reached through a series of conformational changes from any of the others (Fig. 4C-D). The
number of independent conformational motions available to a network with p nodes and q edges
embedded in a d-dimensional space is dp−q. Among these dp−q degrees of freedom are d(d + 1)/2
rigid body motions, which include translations and rotations. The rest, given by
DoFC = dp −q −d(d + 1)
2
,
(2)
are the available conformational degrees of freedom, or conformational motions.
Crucially, Eq.
2 relies on the linear independence of edges.
Linear independence entails that
there are no redundant edges that over-constrain a set of nodes beyond the formation of a rigid
cluster yielding a state of self-stress, and that the network does not exist in a rare and pathological
geometry known as a kinematic bifurcation [42, 52]. States of self-stress imply that edges within
