a network bear internally balanced forces.
A negative value for the number of conformational
degrees of freedom would indicate that the network—when considered in its entirety—is over-
constrained. In our framework, we assume that such states result in a form of cognitive dissonance
whereby competing constraints between concepts cannot be resolved. We alleviate this tension by
incrementing the dimensionality by 1 when needed. Speciﬁcally, we increment d by 1 until DoFC
is no longer negative. This approach yields the minimum dimensionality required at each stage of
growth to avoid over-constraining the network. Fig. 5A depicts this process for a representative
ﬁltration of a growing network. When node 3 is added to the network, which is initially embedded
in a 1-dimensional space (green), the number of conformational degrees of freedom evaluates to
(1 × 3) −(3) −1 = −1, indicating the presence of self-stress and requiring that the embedding
dimensionality be incremented to 2 (orange). This process repeats when node 6 is added, resulting
in an increase in dimensionality to 3 (red). To compute the number of conformational degrees
of freedom for growing knowledge networks, we assume that they are initially embedded in a 1-
dimensional space; whenever the quantity in Eq. 2 becomes negative, we increment dimensionality
by 1.
We hypothesized that knowledge networks would possess greater conformational ﬂexibility than
corresponding null model networks. We test this hypothesis by computing the number of confor-
mational degrees of freedom in ﬁltrations of individual and collective knowledge networks (Fig. 5C,
E). In parallel, we track the minimum embedding dimensionality required to prevent self-stress from
developing in the growing networks (Fig. 5B, D). We ﬁnd that individual knowledge networks need
greater dimensionality and possess greater conformational ﬂexibility than null model networks (Fig.
5B, C). By contrast, measurements of dimensionality and ﬂexibility for collective networks cannot
be as easily distinguished from their corresponding null model data (Fig. 5D, E). However, for both
data sets, the empirical curves for dimensionality and conformational ﬂexibility are signiﬁcantly
diﬀerent from the corresponding curves from the null model data (pperm < 0.001). Our ﬁndings
suggest that individuals value the ability to reconsider what they already know in light of newly
acquired information. On the other hand, collective knowledge displays less capacity for global
reconﬁguration over the long time scales evaluated in this study; future work could investigate the
existence and dynamics of internal sectors that change shape over diﬀerent time scales or during
paradigm shifts.
12

Figure 5:
Conformational change theory of curiosity. We propose that in the networked
space of the mind, while some concepts and their relationships have ﬁxed locations, others can
move ﬂexibly in a context-dependent manner. Such ﬂexibility aﬀords curious humans the ability to
rethink and reconﬁgure what they already know in light of new information. We formalize ﬂexibility
as the number of conformational degrees of freedom (DoFC). In a network in d-dimensional space
with p nodes and q edges, DoFC = dp−q −d(d+1)/2. Assuming d = 1 initially, we compute DoFC
