for ﬁltrations of growing knowledge networks. A negative value for DoFC indicates the presence of
self-stress, which we resolve by incrementing the d by 1. (A) In the example ﬁltration, when nodes
3 and 6 are added, the network becomes over-constrained and develops self-stress. Consequently,
dimensionality ﬁrst increases from 1 to 2 and then from 2 to 3.
(B, C) Individual knowledge
networks require greater dimensionality and possess greater ﬂexibility than null model networks.
(D, E) Collective knowledge networks do not exhibit greater dimensionality or conformational
ﬂexibility than null model networks. Shaded regions in B-E represent the standard error.
13

3
Discussion
In this work, we formalize curiosity as the process of constructing a growing knowledge network.
We leverage tools from network science to quantitatively examine several theoretical constructs for
curiosity such as the information gap theory and compression progress theory. Information gap
theory suggests that curiosity is the drive to obtain units of knowledge that ﬁll gaps in under-
standing [5]. Compression progress theory posits that curiosity is the drive to uncover the latent
organization of the world [13]. We probe information gaps as topological cavities in growing knowl-
edge networks and quantify compression progress using network compressibility. The two theories
oﬀer complementary perspectives on curiosity; the information gap theory suggests that new in-
formation is acquired to ﬁll knowledge gaps, whereas the compression progress theory suggests
that new information is used to distill the essential epistemic elements of knowledge. While these
perspectives describe how knowledge networks become denser and simpler through information ac-
quisition, an alternative formulation is needed to explain how they become expansive and more
complex. Therefore, we build upon a recently proposed conceptual framework [40] to develop the
conformational change theory of curiosity. We posit that knowledge networks are embedded in a
Euclidean geometry, which allows concepts to move ﬂexibly in relation to one another. We then
view curiosity as the practice of constructing mechanically ﬂexible knowledge networks. Formally,
we measure conceptual ﬂexibility as the number of conformational degrees of freedom available to a
growing knowledge network. Throughout our investigations, we take a multi-scale view and probe
evidence for each theory in individuals and in collectives. Across the two scales of granularity, we
determine the precise contexts in which each theoretical account is explanatory, thereby clarifying
their complementary and speciﬁc aﬀordances.
Information gap theory and topological cavities in knowledge networks. Information gap
theory suggests that humans tolerate a ﬁnite amount of uncertainty in their knowledge of the world
[5]. Exposure to a small amount of previously unknown information brings into focus the presence
of a knowledge gap, pushing the level of uncertainty past an acceptable threshold. This increased
uncertainty then prompts a search for information to ﬁll the knowledge gap and resolve the unknown.
In this work, we formalize gaps as topological cavities in growing knowledge networks and track
their evolution in dimensions 0, 1, and 2 [34, 47, 49]. Each dimension is characterized by a diﬀerent
