kind of topological gap: 0-dimensional gaps correspond to disconnected network components, 1-
dimensional gaps correspond to loop-like holes, and 2-dimensional gaps correspond to pocket-like
voids. Across all dimensions, we ﬁnd that the number of cavities increases as individual knowledge
networks grow. Stated diﬀerently, associations between familiar concepts remain undiscovered even
as we acquire more information. Hence, in addition to the common view of an expanding frontier
of ignorance, knowledge growth is accompanied by an ever-expanding interior of ignorance [47].
Except for the 0-th dimension, we report similar results for knowledge networks built collectively.
Filling a 0-dimensional cavity entails adding an edge between two disconnected network components.
Such edges may be easier for collectives to add than for individuals since interdisciplinary sub-ﬁelds
within scientiﬁc domains are motivated to link disparate sub-areas of knowledge [53]. Importantly,
and in support of the information gap theory, the number of 0- and 1-dimensional cavities is lower in
observed individual and collective knowledge networks than in the corresponding null model data,
reﬂecting a downward pressure on the number of gaps created, consistent with a gap-ﬁlling drive.
Therefore, from a networks perspective, gaps—as envisioned by information gap theory, those that
are prioritized for ﬁlling—may best correspond to topological cavities of dimensions 0 and 1. Stated
diﬀerently, information gap theory provides an explanation for the markedly damped growth of lower
14

dimensional cavities; however, a diﬀerent account is needed to explain the contrasting proliferation
of higher dimensional cavities, both in individuals and in collectives.
Compression progress theory and eﬃcient network representations of knowledge. To
gain a deeper intuition, we turn to compression progress theory, which derives inspiration from
resource limitations that underpin brain function [13]. We represent knowledge as a network of
concepts and their inter-relationships, and we compute network compressibility [35] to determine
whether curiosity drives compression. We ﬁnd that growing individual knowledge networks consis-
tently exhibit greater-than-expected compressibility, consistent with the theory. This ﬁnding can
be contextualized by considering the fact that as we interact with the world, we encounter and
consume large quantities of information.
Constructing perfectly accurate mental models would
entail storing each unit of acquired knowledge separately. However, ﬁnite resources constrain us
to build compressed or eﬃcient abstractions of observed data that can generalize across contexts
[15]. According to compression progress theory, information that—when acquired—facilitates such
abstraction is more valuable [13]. Our results support this proposition and suggest that individuals
preferentially seek such information. By contrast, the compressibility curve for collective knowl-
edge networks tends to align with the curve for the corresponding null model data in later stages of
growth. This ﬁnding can be contextualized by considering the fact that collectives can store vast
quantities of detailed information in a distributed manner and, hence, do not face the same resource
limitations that individuals do. In summary, while compression progress theory is supported by our
data from individual knowledge networks, the building of collective knowledge networks appears to
require a diﬀerent account.
