Conformational change theory and the mechanical ﬂexibility of knowledge networks.
The conformational change theory of curiosity is an alternative account that is built on two as-
sumptions.
First, we assume that humans encode conceptual knowledge in cognitive networks.
Second, we assume that knowledge networks are embedded in Euclidean space, where they possess
several degrees of freedom. Both assumptions are predicated on how humans encode spatial and
abstract knowledge [23, 24, 27, 54]. Evidence from spatial navigation studies demonstrates that
mental representations of space take the form of labeled cognitive graphs. Each node represents
a physical location and is accompanied by local metric information such as angles and Euclidean
distances to its immediate neighbors [18, 23, 54]. Furthermore, hexadirectional modulation, which
is the telltale signature associated with an underlying map-like neural code, is observed in the neu-
ral signals when individuals navigate discrete and continuous abstract concept spaces [55, 56] (see
Supplement for details on mental representations of spatial and non-spatial knowledge). Building
on Euclidean cognitive graphs, we operationalize conceptual ﬂexibility in knowledge networks as the
number of conformational degrees of freedom. We ﬁnd that growing individual knowledge networks
have greater-than-expected embedding dimensionality and conformational ﬂexibility.
According
to conformational change theory, embedding dimensionality increments when growing knowledge
networks become over-constrained and develop self-stress. We ﬁnd that such stress arises more
frequently in individual knowledge networks than in null model data. This observation is consistent
with the conformational change theory of curiosity, and suggests that individuals’ idiosyncratic
acquisition of information leads to a frequent reshaping of concept relations based on context. By
contrast, in knowledge networks built collectively we ﬁnd that the evolution of mechanical features-
of-interest cannot be distinguished from their evolution in null model data. Collective networks
grow through a dynamic interplay of consensus and dissensus between large groups of individuals.
Therefore, it is possible that due to the long time scales that we focus on in this study, dynamic
15

events associated with collective knowledge growth, such as paradigm shifts, are simply concealed
from view in local sectors of each ﬁeld.
Using computational measures to operationalize conceptual theories. Our study of cu-
riosity theories stands on the backdrop of signiﬁcant work in psychology that delineates diﬀerent
types of information acquisition. Classical perspectives from psychology separate notions of cu-
riosity into two broad categories [57]. Perceptual curiosity is the desire for increased perception
of speciﬁc sensory stimuli and is reduced via continued exposure to such stimuli.
By contrast,
epistemic curiosity is a more general desire for non-perceptual knowledge. Based on the breadth
of knowledge sought, epistemic curiosity is further classiﬁed as speciﬁc or diversive [58]. Speciﬁc
curiosity is associated with the desire to reduce uncertainty about an ambiguous stimulus and leads
to exploration in search of a particular piece of information.
