and other nodes already present in the network. It is possible that future eﬀorts could gain greater
granularity in the constructed ﬁltrations by assigning ranks to both nodes and edges. For instance,
edges (hyperlinks) that individuals click may be ranked higher than edges that individuals do
not click. Second, we construct knowledge networks for individuals based on Wikipedia browsing
data acquired for ﬁfteen minutes each day for three weeks. However, in reality daily knowledge
acquisition is continuous and not limited to Wikipedia as a source. Furthermore, participants may
act on their curiosity about a speciﬁc concept during un-tracked sessions and continue to explore
related ideas during tracked sessions. The KNOT study, where the data for individuals are sourced
from, implicitly mitigates such discontinuities by linking the last page of each browsing session to
the ﬁrst page of the following session. Third, in the conformational change theory of curiosity, we
resolve states of self-stress by incrementing d by one until DoFC is no longer negative. Importantly,
we only consider self-stress in the entire ensemble of nodes and edges. It is possible, however, that
certain subsets of the network may be over-constrained, even if the entire network, as a whole, may
not appear to be. Such over-constrained subgraphs can be identiﬁed using algorithms such as the
pebble game [71]. Self-stress may also occur due to pathological geometries in networks referred
to as kinematic bifurcations [42]. To address such geometries, we require a precise embedding of
concepts in Euclidean space, which remains an important area for future work.
4
Conclusion
We conceptualize curiosity as a process of knowledge network building in order to examine three the-
oretical accounts: information gap theory, compression progress theory, and conformational change
theory. Formalizing curiosity in terms of networks helps us to quantitatively operationalize predom-
inantly qualitative theoretical constructs. Information gaps can be identiﬁed as topological cavities,
compression progress can be quantiﬁed using network compressibility, and ﬂexibility—as premised
on the conformational change theory—can be quantiﬁed as the number of conformational degrees
of freedom. We use data acquired from Wikipedia to construct growing knowledge networks for
individuals and for collectives. We ﬁnd that as networks grow, knowledge gaps increase in number,
suggesting an expanding interior of ignorance. Yet, in support of an aversion to gaps predicted
by information gap theory, we also ﬁnd fewer-than-expected disconnected network components
(or 0-dimensional topological cavities) and fewer-than-expected loops of edges (or 1-dimensional
topological cavities) in growing knowledge networks. This set of ﬁndings suggests that knowledge
“gaps” as conceptualized by information gap theory may best translate, in a network theoretical
sense, to 0 and 1-dimensional cavities. We also ﬁnd that growing individual knowledge networks
possess greater-than-expected compressibility, indicating that information acquisition is driven to
construct parsimonious mental world models. In addition, we ﬁnd that knowledge networks built
by individuals become increasingly ﬂexible with growth, foregrounding the longstanding relevance
of conformational change in the mind. Our results lend support to a pluralistic view of curiosity,
wherein intrinsically motivated information acquisition ﬁlls knowledge gaps and builds increasingly
compressible and ﬂexible mental representations of the world. Our ﬁndings oﬀer a novel network
theoretical perspective on intrinsically motivated information acquisition that may harmonize with
