or compel an expansion of the classical taxonomy of curiosity.
17

5
Methods
5.1
Data
5.1.1
Knowledge networks built by individuals
Knowledge networks for individuals are constructed with data obtained from the “Knowledge Net-
works Over Time” (KNOT) study [31, 72, 73]. These data are comprised of Wikipedia browsing
histories of 149 individuals (121 women, 26 men, 2 other) collected between October 2017 and
July 2018. At the time of data acquisition, participants were aged between 18.21 and 65.24 years
(µ = 25.05, σ = 6.99); 6.71% identiﬁed as African American/Black, 25.50% identiﬁed as Asian,
5.37% identiﬁed as Hispanic/Latino, 49.66% identiﬁed as White, 5.37% identiﬁed as Multiracial,
5.37% identiﬁed as Other, and 2.01% provided no racial or ethnic information. Every evening for
21 days, participants were prompted to open a browser and navigate to wikipedia.org. They
were then instructed to engage in 15 minutes of self-directed information search with no restrictions
placed on how they could traverse from one page to another. At the end of each session, participants
used tracking software (Timing), pre-installed on their personal computers or laptops, to export
and upload their browsing histories.
We treat all pages visited by an individual as nodes in a knowledge network. Edges between nodes
are speciﬁed based on the presence of hyperlinks. Prior work has found that pairs of pages connected
by hyperlinks are signiﬁcantly more similar to each other compared to pairs that are not connected
by hyperlinks [31]. Thus, we add an undirected and unweighted edge between Page 1 and Page 2
if either Page 1 links to Page 2 or Page 2 links to Page 1. Hyperlinks are not required to exist
bidirectionally for an edge to exist between two nodes. We determine the presence of hyperlinks
based on how Wikipedia appeared on August 1, 2019 and adapt code from the wikinet package for
network construction [47]. Each node (or page) in the browsing data is accompanied by an index
that denotes the temporal order in which it was visited. For every individual, the nodes and edges
as well as the order of node visitation is used to specify a growing knowledge network.
5.1.2
Knowledge networks built collectively
In its role as an encyclopedia, Wikipedia represents a large repository of knowledge acquired over
thousands of years through collective human eﬀort. Building on prior work, we construct domain-
speciﬁc collective knowledge networks by taking subgraphs of the larger Wikipedia network [47].
Information in Wikipedia is organized in a hierarchical manner, which makes it possible to identify
articles that pertain to a particular domain of interest. We capitalize on this structure to construct
knowledge networks for thirty topics: abstract algebra, accounting, biophysics, Boolean algebra,
calculus, cognitive science, commutative algebra, dynamical systems and diﬀerential equations, dy-
