namical systems, earth science, economics, education, energy, evolutionary biology, geology, geom-
etry, group theory, immunology, linear algebra, linguistics, meteorology, molecular biology, number
theory, optics, philosophy of language, philosophy of law, philosophy of mind, philosophy of science,
sociology, and software engineering. All pages listed under a topic are treated as nodes in the topic’s
network. For instance, the network for molecular biology contains pages for ‘allele’, ‘lymphocyte’,
and ‘antibody’ as nodes. Similar to knowledge networks for individuals, edges between nodes are
added on the basis of hyperlinks. Typically, articles also contain information about the year in
which the concept they describe ﬁrst became known; the year attribute is used as an index to
specify node order in a growing graph. More details on the network construction process (such as
18

the procedure followed when a page has no year attribute) are available from Ref. Ju et al. [47].
5.2
Detecting topological cavities
In order to identify cavities of various dimensions in a network, we construct a higher-order relational
object known as a simplicial complex. While a graph is comprised of a set of nodes and a set of edges,
a simplicial complex consists of simplices. A simplex represents a polyadic relationship among a
ﬁnite set of k nodes. Geometrically, a k-simplex is realized as the convex hull (enclosure) of k + 1
generally placed vertices. For 0 ≤k ≤2, a node is a 0-simplex, an edge is a 1-simplex, and a ﬁlled
triangle is a 2-simplex. Simplices follow the downward closure principle, which requires that any
subset of vertices, known as a face, within a simplex also form a simplex. For instance, a 2-simplex
(ﬁlled triangle) has three 1-simplices (edges) as its faces, each of which in turn is comprised of two
0-simplices (nodes). In graph theoretical terms, a k-simplex corresponds to a (k+1)-clique, which is
an all-to-all connected subgraph of k +1 nodes. We can construct a simplicial complex by assigning
a k-simplex to each (k + 1)-clique in a binary graph. Thus, the resulting combinatorial object is
sometimes also referred to as the clique complex of the graph. We denote the clique complex of the
graph Gp as X(Gp).
In a clique complex, a k-dimensional topological cavity is identiﬁed as an empty enclosure formed by
k-simplices. Whether a collection of simplices encloses a cavity is determined in part by its boundary.
The boundary of a k-simplex σ is deﬁned as the set ∂σ of its (k −1)-faces. The boundary of a
set of simplices K = {σ1, σ2, · · · , σm} is obtained by taking the symmetric diﬀerence ∆of the
boundaries of its constituents,
∂K = ∂{σ1, σ2, · · · , σm} = ∂σ1 ∆∂σ2 ∆· · · ∆∂σm.
The symmetric diﬀerence is an associative operation that returns the union of two sets without
their intersection. A set of k-simplices with an empty boundary is called a k-cycle. At ﬁrst glance,
it may seem adequate to identify cycles of various dimensions in a simplicial complex and treat
them as topological cavities. However, note that any collection of (k + 1)-simplices has a k-cycle
as its boundary. For example, the boundary of a 2-simplex is a 1-cycle that is “ﬁlled in” by the
2-simplex. Thus, it is necessary to distinguish non-trivial cycles that constitute true cavities from
those that trivially belong to the boundaries of higher-dimensional simplices. Finally, we introduce
