the notion of equivalence. Two k-cycles K1 and K2 are equivalent if K1 ∆K2 is the boundary of a
collection of (k + 1)-simplices. Homology refers to the counting of non-equivalent cycles of various
dimensions in a clique complex. It is customary to refer to non-equivalent cycles simply as cycles
for brevity.
The graph ﬁltration from Eq. 1 induces a related ﬁltration of clique complexes
X(G0) ⊂X(G1) ⊂· · · ⊂X(GN) = X(G).
(3)
At each stage in the ﬁltration, we add a node and replace all cliques that may result from its addition
with relevant simplices. While some newly added simplices create cavities, others close older ones.
Equivalence allows us to compute persistent homology wherein we track the evolution of each cavity
from the moment it is ﬁrst born to the moment it is completely ﬁlled in by higher simplices. At
any index p of the ﬁltration, the k-th Betti number βk(p) records the number of active cavities
of dimension k. We then deﬁne the k-th Betti curve as the sequence of numbers {βk(p)}N
p=0. We
19

compute persistent homology for all knowledge networks using the Ripser.py package in Python
[74]. Visualizations of persistent homology results are generated with code adapted from [48].
For a more comprehensive treatment of topological data analysis, we direct the interested reader
to Refs. [32, 33, 34, 75, 76, 77].
5.3
Computing network compressibility
In order to estimate the compressibility of a network, we consider a binary graph Gp with p nodes
and q edges, which can be represented by a symmetric adjacency matrix M ∈Rp×p. A message
containing information about the network’s structure can be conveyed to an arbitrary receiver by
encoding it in the form of a random walk x = (x1, x2, . . . ). The walk sequence is generated by
transitioning from a node to one of its neighbors uniformly at random. Thus, for a random walk on
Gp, the probability of transitioning from node i to node j is Pij = Mij/ P
j Mij. Since the random
walk is Markovian, the rate at which such a message transmits information (or its entropy) is given
by
H(x) = −
X
i
πi
X
j
Pij log Pij.
(4)
Here, πi is the stationary distribution representing the long-time probability that the walk arrives
