DANGEROUS MEMORY
COMING OF AGE IN
THE DECADE OF GREED
CHARLIE ANGUS
Copyright © 2024 Charlie Angus
Published in Canada and the USA in 2024 by House of Anansi Press Inc.

houseofanansi.com
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced or
transmitted in any form or by any means, electronic or mechanical,
including photocopying, recording, or any information storage and retrieval
system, without permission in writing from the publisher.

House of Anansi Press is a Global Certified Accessible™ (GCA by
Benetech) publisher. The ebook version of this book meets stringent
accessibility standards and is available to readers with print disabilities.

28 27 26 25 24 1 2 3 4 5
Library and Archives Canada Cataloguing in Publication
Title: Dangerous memory : coming of age in the decade of greed / Charlie
Angus.

Names: Angus, Charlie, 1962- author.

Description: Includes bibliographical references.

Identifiers: Canadiana (print) 2024040632X | Canadiana (ebook)
20240406354 |
ISBN 9781487012885 (softcover) | ISBN 9781487012892 (EPUB)
Subjects: LCSH: Angus, Charlie, 1962- | LCSH: Social action. | LCSH:
Social justice. | LCSH: Environmental justice. | LCSH: Equality. | LCSH:
Nineteen eighties.

Classification: LCC HN18.3 .A54 2024 | DDC 361.2—dc23
Cover design: Greg Tabor
Cover image: haruki yui/Shutterstock.com
Book design and typesetting: Alysia Shewchuk
Lyrics from “Bad Time to Be Poor” by Rheostatics on p. 135 used with
permission.

Lyrics from “Time and Place” by Andrew Cash on p. 257 used with
permission.

Epigraph reprinted with permission: Z’’L, Plague Poems.

Ebook developed by Nicole Lambe
House of Anansi Press is grateful for the privilege to work on and create
from the Traditional Territory of many Nations, including the Anishinabeg,
the Wendat, and the Haudenosaunee, as well as the Treaty Lands of the
Mississaugas of the Credit.

We acknowledge for their financial support of our publishing program the
Canada Council for the Arts, the Ontario Arts Council, and the Government
of Canada.

For my mother, Anne-Marie, who continues to teach me lessons in faith,
hospitality, and awe. Special thanks for schooling a young punk in the
original outlaw musical canon—Irish rebel songs, Hank Williams, and
Johnny Cash.

Do not leave the task
of remembering
to the historians
they will do it, it is their job
they will sit in the archives
they will write the books
they will give the lectures
but remembering
is not a task that can be left
to the historians
for you are obligated
to remember as well.

—@plaguepoems, January 27, 2022
Author’s Note
This book relies on a wide array of sources and interviews. I have included
excerpts from the handwritten diary I kept during the six years I worked
with the homeless at the Toronto Catholic Worker house in the 1980s. More
than a hundred people came through the house during that time, and I kept
notes and observations of my interactions with many of them, often people
who were in difficult situations. I have chosen to tell the stories that provide
context for the larger social changes that were underway at the time.

Wherever possible I have changed people’s names out of respect for their
privacy.

Punk Rock Dishwasher: The author at eighteen working Emilio’s
Restaurant, Queen Street, Toronto. Credit: Author’s collection.

Introduction
THE LONG SHADOW
OF THE 1980S
“Memory produces hope in the same way that amnesia produces despair.”
—Walter Brueggemann, Hope in the Dark
I’ve been obsessing about an old banker’s box. It’s tucked away in a spare
bedroom. There isn’t much in it: some punk rock posters, letters,
photographs of a long-closed homeless shelter, and a handwritten diary.

After decades of disinterest in the box, I find myself seeking it out,
particularly the diary. Hoping that it can help me make sense of what is
happening in the world around me.

The fact is, I just can’t seem to get my bearings. I search for signposts
and familiar patterns, but it’s like looking through the distortions of a
funhouse mirror. My political, social, and environmental certainties have
been knocked off their axes. The world is in uncharted territory. These are
troubled times. Disorienting times. Frightening times. Blame it on the fire
tornados or the COVID-19 pandemic or the data-driven AI that is poisoning
the well of human conversation. Blame it on toxic capitalism.

I know many in my age group (Generation X and Boomers) who are also
increasingly obsessed with their younger lives. Nostalgia for the 1980s is
everywhere. In popular culture, the ’80s has become shorthand for a simpler
and more fun time—A Flock of Seagulls hairstyles, catchy pop songs, and
Breakfast Club brat pack tropes. It is Hawkins, Indiana, in the Netflix hit
Stranger Things—a landscape of well-stocked shopping malls, morning
paper routes, and social cohesion. In Hawkins, the youth stand up to the
darker forces threatening middle-class America—an “upside down” world
of monstrous Demogorgons. Airbrushed from ’80s nostalgia is the real
Upside Down that confronted people—the political and corporate counter-
revolution that killed the American dream. This is what brings me back to
the banker’s box. Not nostalgia. I am looking for clues. I want to know how
that Upside Down created the dystopian world confronting us today.

Media commentators are also doing a major rethink of the 1980s.

Whether it’s the economy and rising labour unrest, or nuclear brinkmanship
and a new Cold War, the 2020s feel like an ’80s redux. The obsession with
the ’80s isn’t new. There has long been a superficial fixation on the era. In
Evil Geniuses: The Unmaking of America, Kurt Andersen writes, “We
[aren’t] experiencing ‘an eighties revival’ … in fact the ‘eighties never
ended’ … the character of the American 1980s [was] ‘manic, moneyed,
celebrity obsessed.’ None of that really changed in the 1990s or in the 2000s
or in the 2010s.”

But the crisis of the 2020s is something different than a lingering cultural
stasis. The reality is that the political, environmental, and economic forces
unleashed in the 1980s have finally caught up to us. This historical frame is
essential for making sense of the dissonance of our times. As Stephen Stoll
writes, “Seeing the world without the past would be like visiting a city after
a devastating hurricane and declaring that the people there have always
lived in ruins.”

The 1980s was the hurricane. The hurricane’s path has been difficult to
track because many of the most damaging impacts took decades to play out
—more like a slow-moving disaster. But the hurricane has finally touched
down and we are picking up the pieces in real time. We are being forced to
confront the great lies of the era that have cast a shadow over the last forty
years: that an international race to the bottom was the natural order of the
universe; that cities would become more livable if we turned our
neighbourhoods over to capitalist speculators. And the great petroleum-
driven lie that assured us that dealing with the climate crisis could be put off
for another day.

To find our way out of this mess it is necessary to confront the false
history of the 1980s. Historical amnesia is not accidental—it is a political
construct. If you scratch the sheen of ’80s nostalgia, the underlying socio-
economic fractures are readily apparent. These contradictions in the
popularized narrative constitute a dangerous memory. Theology professor
Candace McLean at the University of Portland explains, “Dangerous
memories … are the subversive memories of the victims of history … They
are dangerous to those in positions of power because they are the seeds of
resistance and change … and hope to the marginalized.”

This book is an offering of dangerous memories to a young generation.

They are living in the ruins of a state-sanctioned pillaging of the economy,
the environment, and the common good. They deserve to be told that there
was nothing natural about the rise of the billionaire oligarchs. This inequity
was a deliberate construct, a staged crisis that broke the back of the North
American working class. And they also deserve to know that people fought
back.

Amid the urgency of the climate crisis, young people are struggling with
the fear, denial, and grief of living on a planet that may have no future. The
1980s was also a time when the dark shadow of annihilation hung over the
lives and dreams of a generation. In the face of nuclear madness, people
took to the streets. At first, they came in the hundreds, then in the
thousands, and then in the millions. People organized and resisted. The
1980s witnessed incredible acts of solidarity that put an end to the Cold War
and brought down the brutal apartheid regime in South Africa. Grassroots
activism scored impressive victories for the environment as well as gender
and LGBTQ rights.

But obviously we didn’t come far enough. So what the hell happened?
How did an era of activist resistance end up being labelled the “decade of
greed”?4
 Clearly, this turbulent era deserves a second look.

This book didn’t start out as a memoir, but the 1980s defined who I am:
the politics I champion, the lifestyle choices I continue to make. My
journey began with punk rock. As a teenager, I knew nothing of the dark
economic and political Upside Down. But punk rock taught me that I didn’t
need to accept the world the way it was. I could forge my own path. The
discovery of this DIY (do it yourself) manifesto was life-changing. It gave
me the confidence to drop out of school and go on the road with a political
punk band. This was my teenaged attempt to resist the global forces that
were dramatically reshaping society.

And then, at nineteen, I met the love of my life. Brit Griffin was a student
active in feminist politics. Brit and I challenged each other to make a
credible stand in a world that seemed beset by injustice. We were also both
born and raised Catholic. The Church that existed at the beginning of the
1980s was very different from the one that existed at the end of the decade.

It had yet to shred its credibility with crimes, scandals, and cover-ups. The
Church I knew then preached a gospel of liberation and economic justice. I
took that message seriously.

With no money and even less experience, we became deliberate dropouts
from the decade of greed. We opened our home to addicts, runaways, and
the homeless. The goal was to create an alternate way of living based on the
anarchist principles of mutual aid. Our model was the Catholic Worker
Movement, founded by New York social activist Dorothy Day. We didn’t
have a clue what we were doing, and many of the people who helped us
were as young or younger than we were. But the urgency of the times made
us feel like we could take on the world.

IN SETTING OUT to reframe a history of the 1980s, I found myself turning to
my banker’s box of memories. Admittedly, relying on the diary of a punk
rock kid from Canada might seem like an odd way to anchor a broad work
of social history. But it might be as good a place as any to start making
sense of the numerous social Rubicons that were crossed in those
tumultuous ten years.

The fact is today’s young people are being threatened by what went down
on my watch. Could I have done more? Is it possible to do more now? As I
see the world unravelling around me, I need to reconnect with the young
man who fervently believed that individuals have a responsibility to
respond to the crises of the day. He believed that people can change the
world. I hope he can help me make sense of how we got here. How things
got so fucked up. Maybe that punk rock kid can help chart a path out of this
apparent dead end.

And this is the real reason for unpacking dangerous memories. I want the
young generation to know that an alternate future was envisioned in the
1980s. Seeds were planted that could still sprout today. What was made can
be unmade. What was decreed can be overturned. This book is not a lament.

It is a call to arms.

Therein lies the real power of dangerous memory—it offers lessons in
resistance. It tells us that our individual and collective actions can make a
difference. If there were ever a time to take to the streets, it is now.

Rock against Racism Dance Poster, June 5, 1982, St. Paul’s
Church, Toronto. Credit: Author’s collection.

Part 1
DIY
1980–1984
“The destruction of labour’s bargaining power … was the essence of
the entire [neoliberal] project: it was a means to all the other ends.

Neoliberalism’s guiding principle is not free markets, nor fiscal
discipline, nor sound money, nor privatization and offshoring—not
even globalization. All these things were byproducts or weapons of its
main endeavour: to remove organized labour from the equation.”
—Paul Mason, Postcapitalism
