Chapter 1
BORN IN FLAMES
1980 was a year “born in turmoil, strife and change.”1 That’s the way
President Jimmy Carter put it to the American people in his State of the
Union Address in January 1980. American diplomatic staff were being held
hostage in Iran, a new energy crisis was on the horizon, and the economy
was tanking. But Carter’s focus was on the Soviets. Over Christmas 1979,
the Soviet 40th Army had crossed the border into Afghanistan. In response,
President Carter took to the airwaves on January 4, 1980, to announce he
was tearing up the Strategic Arms Limitation Treaty II (SALT II).

The world was shocked. The 1970s had been a decade of quiet diplomacy
to de-escalate the nuclear threat between the superpowers. SALT II was the
second phase of a major nuclear disarmament initiative and had just been
signed in Vienna to great acclaim. It had given people hope that the world
might somehow avoid the nightmare of nuclear annihilation. Carter’s
January 4 speech stopped all that hopeful work in its tracks. Suddenly, the
long-standing Cold War threatened to become dangerously hot.

I barely even knew where Afghanistan was, but I felt the urgency of that
time. I was on the eve of my eighteenth birthday, and I was fed up with high
school. It seemed as if the world was rushing past me, and I feared that I
would stumble before even getting out of the gate. Perhaps it was just the
urgency felt by any youth on the cusp of adulthood.

But my eighty-four-year-old grandmother felt the urgency as well. Jenny
Boyd Angus lived upstairs in our small townhouse in north Scarborough,
Toronto. She had lived with us since her husband, Charlie Angus, had died
on the job at a gold mine in Timmins, Ontario, in 1962. I was born five
months later. Jenny had come to Canada from the Hawkhill tenements of
Dundee, Scotland, and she never lost her thick Dundee accent. She had a
powerful Celtic memory that seemed to knit the world into a singular story
of history, politics, and gossip. When I was five, Jenny taught me to box in
preparation for what she said would be my first schoolyard fight. She was
always very protective of me.

And now, as I turned eighteen, she poured me a cup of tea and warned
me about the dangers of a much bigger fight. She insisted that I make her a
promise. She wanted me to refuse to enlist if war came.

I was dumbfounded. “Nanny, there is no war. What are you talking
about?”
“I have been here before,” she said firmly. “These are bad times, and
there are politicians who are getting ready to send young boys to die. You
promise me that, no matter what happens, you won’t listen to them. I don’t
want you to go die in some needless war.”
I had been raised on Jenny’s stories about the senseless savagery of
World War I. She often spoke of the neighbours, cousins, and friends who
had died for nothing in the mud of Flanders. The war had traumatized her
and shaped her radical politics.

I tried to reassure her that this was a modern era, and nothing like the
world she’d known back in the summer of 1914. But Jenny just shook her
head. She saw the rising tensions of the Cold War and recognized the
belligerent talk coming from politicians.

She put her hand on mine and said, “You need to be able to identify the
kind of politicians who send boys to die.”
It wasn’t President Carter that worried her. It was the other ones—newly
elected Margaret Thatcher in the UK, a militant Cold Warrior with a deep
hatred of the British labour unions. And, of course, Ronald Regan, the
former actor running in the 1980 American election under the slogan “Let’s
Make America Great Again.”

For much of the 1970s, Ronald Reagan had been written off as too old,
too fringe, too extreme. But as the election loomed, Reagan was upending
the consensus politics in the Beltway through his reliance on the so-called
New Right. These were militant young ideologues bankrolled by oil money
and invigorated by an influx of previously unaligned evangelical Christians
—the self-styled moral majority. They operated on a very different political
calculus than traditional Republicans. The Republican GOP acronym stood
for “Grand Old Party”—a nod to its broad base of conservatives, moderates,
and Eastern Seaboard progressives. But the New Right activists weren’t
interested in arguing the merits of the GOP’s big tent approach. They were
focused on exploiting hot button issues like feminism and gay rights.

And abortion.

At the beginning of the 1970s, the pro-life movement was a minor
political force rooted in Catholic parishes. It had a small base of support
among some liberal and Catholic Democrats who believed that providing
abortion services was a strategy that undermined support for poor families.3
Leaders of the American evangelical community, however, were ambivalent
about taking a position on the issue of unwanted pregnancies. Even W. A.

Criswell, the deeply conservative head of the Southern Baptist Convention,
was wary of taking on the abortion issue. He was more than ready to
denounce colleges as “infidel institutions” and liberalism as the work of the
devil, but in 1973, he issued a statement supporting the court ruling Roe v.

Wade.

4
The New Right, however, turned women’s reproductive rights into a
political battleground. The culture wars were on, and their toxic seeds were
sprouting throughout the 1980 election year. Dangerous memories remind
us that the overthrow of Roe v. Wade in 2022 had its origin in cynical young
ideologues pressing hot button issues in 1980.

IN 1980, REAGAN and the New Right were also fanning the flames of militant
anti-communism by declaring the need for the United States to be much
more militarily aggressive. The world was becoming a more dangerous
place, and my grandmother wasn’t the only one fearing a rising military
threat. On their 1980 Sandinista! album, the British punk band the Clash
warned young people about the need to resist the call-up for military
service. Echoing my grandmother’s urging, Joe Strummer sang of young
men through the ages who were sent off to die to further the aims of self-
serving politicians.5
But where the Clash saw danger in this new decade, there were others
who saw hope. In October 1980, John Lennon came out of five years of
retirement with the release of the single “(Just Like) Starting Over.” The
song was his way of encouraging people to turn the page on the cynicism of
the 1970s. “Let’s try and make the ’80s good because it’s still up to us to
make what we can of it,” Lennon told a journalist on December 8, 1980.6 A
few hours later, he was murdered on the streets of New York in a senseless
act of violence.

It’s hard to describe the emotional shockwave that followed Lennon’s
murder. More than 14 million people around the world took to the streets to
grieve. They tried to comfort each other by singing “Imagine,” Lennon’s
anthem of world togetherness. But the words rang hollow, and everyone
knew it. Lennon’s hopeful idealism belonged to an era from which we had
been cut adrift. The 1980s had arrived, birthed in turmoil and strife.

Historians love to define eras as decades, but there is no reason why an
era has to begin with a year that ends in zero. After all, didn’t the Dirty
Thirties begin with the economic crash of the late 1920s? Most cultural
writers tag the Swinging Sixties as the six years between 1964 and 1969.

And forget Y2K, everyone knows the millennium really began on 9/11. But
there is something about the 1980s that seems easily definable as a distinct
epoch. It exploded out of the gate on January 4, 1980, when President
Carter tore up the SALT II treaty and came to an even more dramatic
conclusion in November 1989, with the fall of the Berlin Wall. Those years
saw major political, economic, and cultural upheavals. Struggles that
defined the era and set the course for the decades that followed.

But a decade as consequential as the 1980s didn’t suddenly appear when
the calendar turned over. Throughout 1979, events were underway that set
the stage for the seemingly sudden confrontation of the superpowers. One
of the most consequential pressure points was the emergence of a powerful
new political force in world—militant Islam. Incidents in Iran and
Afghanistan in 1979 saw the rise of a volatile combination of religious
certainty and political resistance to colonialism, capitalism, and
communism. Almost overnight, political Islam upended the binary world of
Cold War politics. Both the Soviets and the Americans were completely
unprepared for the power of this movement. As they scrambled to come to
terms with it, they stumbled into a dangerous showdown in January 1980.

The West first became aware of the power of political Islam in February
1979, when the secular state of Iran was upended by mass protest marches.

The roots of the Iranian Revolution can be traced back to the CIA overthrow
of a democratically elected government in 1953 and the installation of the
puppet regime of Mohammad Reza Shah Pahlavi. The Shah engaged in the
ruthless repression of writers, dissidents, and community activists—all to
protect the oil interests of the UK and the United States. This made Iran a
good ally against the Soviets.

As Iranians watched their social institutions wither, they fell back on the
one element that the Shah could not destroy—their Shiite Muslim faith. The
revolution of 1979 was led by a cross-section of civil society, but it
coalesced around the idea of inviting the religious leader Ayatollah
Ruhollah Khomeini to act as a figurehead ruler. The idealists mistakenly
thought he would be a unifying force. They soon learned he was as
militantly opposed to democracy as he was to the Shah.

The overthrow of the Shah threw the United States’ Cold War aspirations
in the Persian Gulf into chaos. When President Carter gave sanctuary to the
deposed Shah, he put the US on a collision course with Khomeini. On
November 4, 1979, Iranian students stormed the American embassy,
capturing fifty-three diplomats and staff members. The United States was
completely unprepared to deal with this unprecedented violation of
diplomatic immunity, and an attempted rescue by the American military
was a disastrous failure. Media commentators wondered how it was
possible that the world’s most powerful country could be held hostage in
such a manner. The blame was put on the shoulders of the president, who
was portrayed as weak and indecisive. Jimmy Carter had come into office
on the promise of a global policy of human rights and peace. Now he was a
politician living on borrowed time.

As the Carter administration fumbled about trying to deal with the rise of
the militant Shia revolution in Iran, a Sunni revolution was exploding in
Afghanistan. American fingerprints were all over this uprising, but, once
again, those in the West knew little of the backstory.

In 1978, the nationalist People’s Democratic Party of Afghanistan (PDPA)
had seized power in Kabul. The PDPA had a vision of modernizing what they
considered to be a corrupt and backward nation. They vowed to outlaw
child marriage, codify rights for women, and create opportunities for
secular education.

The Soviet Union wasn’t keen to have an activist progressive ally on
their border. They warned the PDPA not to make changes too fast, lest they
alienate the fundamentalist Sunni leaders in the rural regions.7 The White
House immediately saw an opportunity to destabilize the Soviets by stoking
dissent among the fundamentalists, and the CIA was given the clandestine
job of supplying aid to the chieftains. President Carter’s foreign policy
hawk Zbigniew Brzezinski boasted that the White House could exploit
Afghanistan to drag the Soviets into the same kind of military quagmire that
had humiliated the Americans in Vietnam.8
The CIA paid little attention to the hardline religious views of the men
who made up the Islamist resistance militias known as the mujahideen
(many of whom later became leaders in the Taliban). The Americans simply
saw Afghanistan as the latest in a long and dismal series of proxy wars that
had defined the Cold War conflict since 1945. As the insurgency spread,
embattled leaders in Kabul begged the Soviets for military support. Initially,
the Kremlin refused. “The entry of our troops in Afghanistan would outrage
the international community, triggering a string of extremely negative
consequences,” Soviet premier Alexei Kosygin wrote to the Afghan
government.9
But the violence reached a point at which the Soviets felt obligated to re-
establish order. On December 24, 1979, the Soviet army entered
Afghanistan. The invasion created a crisis for both the Soviets and the
Americans. The Carter administration was reeling from the hostage crisis,
and with Reagan rising in the polls, the president needed to reposition
himself as a militant Cold Warrior. Hence, Carter took a hard line. He
warned the Soviets that if they didn’t immediately withdraw from
Afghanistan, he would walk away from SALT II.

The Soviets were shocked that the treaty was being trashed. They offered
to withdraw their new generation of SS-20 nuclear missiles that had been
deployed in Europe if Carter would agree to put the treaty back on the table.

But Carter upped the ante. Not only was SALT II dead, he also insisted that
the Soviets immediately withdraw their SS-20s. If not, he would initiate a
massive deployment of the new class of American Pershing and cruise
missiles.

European leaders were outraged by Carter’s threats. German chancellor
Helmut Schmidt warned that the Americans were putting Europe’s future at
risk over Afghanistan and said, “We will not permit ten years of détente and
defense policy to be destroyed.”

Carter’s hard line didn’t help his re-election chances. In November 1980,
Ronald Reagan trounced Carter with convincing wins in forty-four states.

The rupture with the diplomatic efforts of the 1970s was complete. Reagan
became the driving force behind the dangerous sabre-rattling that marked
the 1980s.

THE SHOWDOWN BETWEEN the superpowers over Afghanistan in January 1980
has long been relegated to the black-and-white microfiche of history. But
the Islamic revolutions that set that crisis in motion continue to reverberate
in the twenty-first century. British author Michael Axworthy has described
the Iranian Revolution as the third great revolution of the modern era, after
the French and Russian. He writes, “We can no longer work on the
assumption that the history and culture of the Middle East are irrelevant …
We are still living through the consequences of the Iranian Revolution of
1979, and the longer-term outcomes remain hard to assess.”

In September 2022, Iran was rocked by a massive non-violent uprising of
women and youth. They were protesting the state murder of Mahsa Ahmini,
a young Iranian Kurdish woman who dared defy the law Khomeini initiated
that ordered Iranian women to wear headscarves. This social upheaval and
domestic dissent remind us that the struggle is ongoing to establish a post-
revolution Iran. On the global stage, numerous flashpoints of political
confrontation between Iran and the West remain—the Iranian nuclear
program, the state funding of proxy military groups, the shooting-down of
passenger airline PS752 in 2020.

In Afghanistan, four brutal decades of conflict have resulted in
unimaginable losses for the Afghan people. But they have also led to the
destruction of the Soviet military machine and the defeat of the post-9/11
military coalition by the United States and their Western allies, including
Canada and the United Kingdom. The upheaval caused by Sunni
fundamentalism remains far from settled. Bruce Hoffman, senior fellow for
counterterrorism and homeland security at the Council on Foreign
Relations, states, “I don’t think anyone understood that this [the Soviet
invasion] was a remarkable turning point in history. And no one could have
ever foreseen that this would have become such a pivotal event not only on
the rest of the twentieth century but on the opening decades of the twenty-
first as well.”

People have long forgotten President Carter’s warning about a decade
born in turmoil, strife, and change. But those dangerous memories continue
to mould our world today.

