Chapter 2
OPERATION BREAK
THE WORKING CLASS
As 1980 dawned, I had a simple plan—quit school, play in a band, and get a
job. Except in 1980 there weren’t many jobs out there. The older brothers of
some of my friends said that the best way to make good money was to get
hired at a factory or warehouse. The suburbs of Toronto were built around a
multitude of industrial operations, such as the General Motors van plant and
the numerous factories along Scarborough’s Golden Mile. But those
factories weren’t hiring. Many were closing.

Since the mid-1970s, Toronto had been undergoing a major wave of
deindustrialization as garment factories, slaughterhouses, and warehouses
closed. Empty factories and warehouses dotted the neighbourhoods of
Riverdale, the Junction, Liberty Village, and the garment district along
Spadina Avenue. Blue-collar Toronto was disappearing, and this led to a
plethora of opportunities for young artists to renovate loft spaces. Lorraine
Segato of the feminist band Mama Quilla II (and, later, the Parachute Club)
moved into the heart of the emerging Queen Street arts scene because she
could afford to rent a large loft for $266 a month. “Artists originally moved
into those derelict buildings as a result of the recession,” she told an
interviewer in 2016.1
I was anxious to get out of my parents’ house in Scarborough and join
this exciting world that was emerging. But the only jobs to be had were
washing dishes or taking dodgy commission gigs hustling magazine
subscriptions and vacuum cleaners door-to-door. There was no point calling
the want ads. Nobody ever called back. So I put on a skinny black tie and
went downtown, stopping in at every restaurant and shop to ask if they were
hiring. This went on for weeks.

I didn’t comprehend that I was coming of age during the bleakest
economic crisis since the Great Depression. It was bad across Canada and
even worse in the United States, where a huge number of steel mills,
garment factories, and manufacturing plants closed. Millions of well-paid
union jobs were gone forever. The crisis created a panicked race to the
bottom, as workers who were still hanging on were given the untenable
option of accepting wage cuts and the erosion of benefits or seeing their
employment disappear altogether.

But there was a major difference between the job crisis of 1980 and the
Great Depression. In 1929, the world was hit by an unexpected economic
collapse that defied the understanding of politicians and economists. In
1980, however, the economic shock was planned at the highest level, and it
had the fingerprints of Milton Friedman all over it.

You can name all the people who personified the excess or the austerity
of the 1980s—Ronald Reagan, Margaret Thatcher, Madonna—but it was
Friedman who defined the era. On January 1, 1980, he and his wife, Rose
Friedman, released a provocative manifesto called Free to Choose: A
Personal Statement.

2 A little more than a week later, he followed it up with
the launch of a syndicated weekly television series extolling his simple
message: government is bad; capitalism is good. Get government out of the
way and the natural order of the universe will be restored by the magical
“invisible hand” of the market. It was a form of economic fundamentalism
based on the pseudo-scientific claim that an economy driven solely by
greed and those with the most money is the natural order.

Friedman was the key spokesperson for the Chicago School, a group of
economic counter-revolutionaries who pushed this fundamentalism to its
hardest conclusion.* They openly challenged the economic consensus on
which the post–World War II economy had been based: that a balance of
public and private interest was essential for creating a prosperous society.

Instead, they argued that the only business of business was to make as much
money as possible, with none of the hindrances of social responsibility.

Democratically elected governments needed to be limited to the function of
providing tax breaks for the wealthy while cutting public spending and
stripping regulations.

This was a total repudiation of the factors that had made the great
economic miracle of postwar North America possible. The American labour
movement tagged the birth of the twentieth-century middle class to the
famous sit-down strike by autoworkers in Flint, Michigan, in 1936–37. The
strike galvanized w orkers across the country and signalled an end to the
days when the working class would accept precarious employment and low
wages. The subsequent union victories were backed up by the progressive
idealism of President Roosevelt’s New Deal, which put in place a slate of
public programs to guard against a repetition of the economic disaster of the
Great Depression. The improvements for blue-collar workers could be
easily measured—strong wages and solid pension plans. The working class
achieved unprecedented social mobility as workers gained the ability to
own a house, send their children to university, and retire with dignity.

The postwar era represented the golden age of American life and social
advancement, but Friedman derided this economic miracle as the road to
“tyranny and misery.”

 His attack on the New Deal, government
investment, and workers’ rights made him a fringe economic figure for
much of the 1960s and early ’70s. But in 1975, Friedman was given a
chance to try out his theories when he was invited to give advice to Chilean
dictator Augusto Pinochet. It is ironic that Friedman’s experiments in
“economic freedom” were undertaken against a backdrop of brutal
repression and terror that came in the wake of the CIA-manufactured coup.

And the experiments didn’t go well. Under Friedman’s direction, Chile’s
economy went into free fall. Inflation spiralled to 375 percent, and more
than 177,000 jobs were lost in the manufacturing sector between 1974 and
1983. Both the middle and working classes suffered a huge loss of
economic stability.

4
The Chilean upper class, however, viewed Friedman as a miracle worker,
because his economic policies resulted in a massive transfer of public assets
into the hands of the super-wealthy. In her book The Shock Doctrine, Naomi
Klein writes: “Chile never was the laboratory of ‘pure’ free markets that its
cheerleaders claimed. Instead, it was a country where a small elite leapt
from wealthy to super-rich in extremely short order—a highly profitable
formula bankrolled by debt and heavily subsidized (then bailed out) by
public funds … Chile under Chicago School rule was offering a glimpse of
the future of the global economy … a huge transfer of wealth from public to
private hands, followed by a huge transfer of private debts into public
hands.”

Friedman saw an opportunity to import these extreme methods to the
United States. The New Deal cooperation between labour, big business, and
government had been severely weakened by inflation, economic stagnation,
and the dramatic energy price shocks that came as a result of the 1973
Arab–Israeli war. On top of this, North American manufacturing was being
forced to contend with Asian competition, and they were losing. By the late
1970s, there were a number of corporate leaders and politicians, such as
Ronald Reagan, who thought the United States was ready for the Friedman
touch. “The tide is turning,” Friedman wrote in his January 1980 manifesto.

“In the United States, in Great Britain, the countries of Western Europe …
there is growing recognition of the dangers of big government … It is
becoming politically profitable for our representatives to sing a different
tune.”

Friedman’s disciples knew full well that any attempt to introduce the
Chilean “miracle” to the US would face significant social and political
resistance. Their solution was audacious. They wanted to force an economic
crisis of the magnitude of the Great Depression so that workers would have
no choice but to accept the Friedman solution. The proposal was put
forward by Friedrich Hayek, founding father of the Chicago School.7
Writing in the New York Times, he promoted the notion of engineering an
economic collapse to create wage insecurity and restore the power of
capital. He derided American politicians for being too “afraid” to take such
an obviously destructive approach.8
But there were those in power who saw the brutal efficacy of Hayek’s
proposal, and the plan was put into action in two phases by Federal Reserve
chairman Paul Volcker. The first was an initial interest rate spike to 13
percent that hit hard in January 1980. This sudden increase caused the
economy to stumble badly and led to a massive loss of jobs. Volcker
followed up with an even more severe shock in 1981, when he drove rates
above 21 percent. The American economy went into a tailspin. People
stopped purchasing vehicles and appliances. Families defaulted on their
mortgages. Small and midsized companies were hollowed out and left as
easy pickings for the emerging face of mercenary capitalism—the corporate
raider.

Volcker knew exactly what he was doing. Speaking before Congress, he
laid out the strategy: “The standard of living of the average worker has to
decline.”9 Volcker’s move was a punch in the face to unsuspecting blue-
collar America. In his book Reaganland, Rick Perlstein notes that “elite
opinion was largely ecstatic” about the “radical shock treatment” being used
to teach American workers their true place.10
But interest rate hikes were only the first part of this shock to the system.

The second was political. And unionized workers were completely
unprepared for the destructive forces that were suddenly being turned on
them.

In 1981, the Professional Air Traffic Controllers Organization (PATCO)
went on strike. Newly elected President Reagan gave them a two-day
ultimatum to return to work. He then fired more than 11,000 of these highly
skilled workers in a single shot and blacklisted them permanently from
being hired by the federal government. The union movement was staggered
by Reagan’s harsh penalty. Nothing like this had been done in the postwar
world. Volcker was impressed. He believed that Reagan’s decision to
publicly destroy such a powerful union was the most significant move in
the battle to bring the working class to heel.11 The obliteration of the air
traffic controllers union was a signal to corporate America to begin the
rollbacks of wages, security, and benefits—launching a full-scale attack on
the unionized workforce.

These attacks on workers’ security took place amid widespread job
losses. In 1980, more than 188,000 jobs evaporated at auto plants for the
Big Three—GM, Ford, and Chrysler. The hit to the American steel industry
was equally traumatic. It had begun in the late 1970s, when steel mills
began to close across the United States. In the face of these catastrophic job
losses, heroic efforts were undertaken to create community-based economic
alternatives. When 50,000 steelworker jobs were lost in Youngstown, Ohio,
two local Roman Catholic bishops—James Malone and John Burt—led a
coalition of workers and Church leaders to push for a community takeover
of the immense steelworks.12
The son of a steelworker, Malone personified the social-action bent of a
generation of American priests who had come up in the age of the New
Deal. He represented a fascinating and rare moment in the American
Catholic Church when religiously conservative Church officials worked
with and protected union organizers. Even in the paranoid anti-Red
McCarthy era, the powerful Chicago Catholic archdiocese had given
political cover to the left-wing Jewish community organizer Saul Alinsky
because of his ability to improve lives for the Catholic working class.

Malone was one of those bishops inspired by Alinsky’s radical grassroots
activism.13
Youngstown could have been a symbol of American resilience and
community spirit, but Democrat and Republican legislators preferred to let
the immense industrial tools in Youngstown turn to rust than allow worker
control of America’s industrial engine. Bruce Springsteen summed up the
bitterness of this political betrayal in his song “Youngstown,” in which he
lamented that the “big boys” (politicians and capitalists) were able to
destroy the arsenal of American democracy in a way that Hitler never could.

What was happening to communities like Youngstown and workers
across the United States could be called Operation Break the Working
Class. It was a broad policy to undermine worker confidence by destroying
the capacity of organized labour to offer resistance. This took place in
tandem with a large transfer of wealth to the financial elite. Reagan’s first
budget represented a giveaway of more than $750 billion to the super-rich
in a mere five years. This drove the federal debt to $2.8 trillion and turned
the United States into the world’s largest debtor nation.14 At the same time,
Reagan cut basic services to the underclass such as the food stamps
program.15
But the lasting impact of “Reaganomics” came from the full-scale attack
on the regulations and protections that had maintained the economic
balance in postwar America. Key to this was stripping the oversight
governing America’s financial and banking sector. The result was a flurry of
high-risk borrowing and speculation. It brought an unprecedented flood of
wealth to financiers, but the working and middle classes paid the price. The
market was soon flooded with junk bonds and risky debt leveraging that led
to a series of financial disasters.

The Savings and Loans Crisis of the late 1980s was a direct result of this
casino economy. Banking deregulation had created a culture of increasingly
reckless financial speculation in the historically prudent savings and loans
industry. In a few short years, the industry suffered an unprecedented
collapse that wiped out a third of the institutions where millions of
Americans held their mortgages and family savings. Taxpayers were stuck
with paying a $132 billion bailout to cover the collapse.

This was nothing compared to the 2007–2010 subprime mortgage crisis
that obliterated the savings and home ownership of millions. This later
crisis can be directly traced to a Reagan-era scheme that allowed
speculators to gamble and offload bad debt in the form of a derivative
known as a credit default swap.

Looking back more than forty years, we can see how the
Reagan/Friedman counter-revolution dramatically altered the entire social,
economic, and political landscape of the United States. As author William
Kleinknecht writes: “The bitter legacy of Reaganism—the subprime
mortgage scandal, the near collapse of the financial system, widening
income inequality, the emergence of Lockdown America, the obscene
inflation of CEO compensation, the end of locally owned media, market
crashes, blackouts, drug company scandals, rampant greed and materialism
—is all around us.” 16
Such clarity is often obscured amid the toxic political rhetoric and
disinformation of a nation increasingly defined by red state/blue state
culture wars. Dangerous memories of the real history are sorely needed.

And the statistical data is indisputable. Across all economic indices,
American workers have faced a shocking level of lost opportunities over the
last four decades.17 A 2020 study by the Rand Corporation undertaken to
identify the links between economic disparity and political instability of
American life in the twenty-first century found massive losses to workers
since 1980. For example, in 2018, a working-class Black man was making
$26,000 a year less than he would have been paid if the income patterns
prior to 1980 had held constant.18 A college-educated worker earned
between $48,000 and $63,000 a year less.

The authors of the Rand report tracked these lost wages as a direct
conduit to the bank accounts of the 1 percent. They valued the loss of
income for every worker as $1,144 a month, for every year over the last
four decades. The final price tag for this looting of the American worker
comes to $50 trillion in accumulated lost wages and benefits.19
There is nothing natural about this wage theft. Operation Break the
Working Class has created a generation of billionaire oligarchs from the
stolen wages of the American working class.

*So-named because they were members of the economics
department at the University of Chicago.

