Chapter 3
A PUNK KID AT THE EDGE
The recession of 1980–82 hammered the working class, but for young
punks and art students in Canada it was a boom time. In the emerging
Toronto arts scene, the economic uncertainty served as a backdrop for a
cultural renaissance. Among those on the front line of this transformation
were the “two Garys”—promoters Gary Topp and Gary Cormier. In the
mid-1970s Topp, a young film promoter, took a lease on the Roxy Theatre
on Danforth Avenue. There wasn’t much of an underground scene in the
city, but the Roxy became an important cultural incubator, regularly
packing in 700 or 800 people a night to watch whatever arthouse, foreign,
or rock movie Topp felt like charging patrons ninety-nine cents to see.1
When the Roxy lease fell apart, Topp and his business partner Gary
Cormier took over the New Yorker Theatre on Yonge Street. That’s where
they started exposing Toronto to the growing underground music scene
from New York City. Top of their list was putting on a concert by a
relatively unknown band called the Ramones. It was a seminal moment for
Toronto’s nascent punk scene. Diodes singer Paul Robinson recalls, “The
first punk show I saw was the Ramones at the New Yorker. I think everyone
who started a band was there.”

 Soon after, Robinson and his bandmates
released Toronto’s first punk single, “Tired of Waking Up Tired.”
Punk rock upended the politically disengaged entertainment world of the
late 1970s like a peasants’ revolt. The 1960s idealism of peace, love, and
youth culture had long since dissipated into excess and mediocrity. Rock
stars were presented as an elite class of jet-setters disconnected from the
realities facing their young fans. Punk ridiculed the rock-superstars as out-
of-touch dinosaurs. It spurned the notion of the artistic virtuoso: you didn’t
even need to be good-looking; all you needed was passion and initiative. A
poster from the early days of the movement summed up this rough-and-
ready attitude: it depicted the musical fingering for three guitar chords and
stated: “This is a chord, and this is another, and this is a third, now go form
a band.”
Gary Topp remembers how this DIY sensibility opened up a world of
cultural possibilities in the city. “The kids began coming in leather jackets.

These people started forming bands. Some went on to open restaurants,
clothing stores, art galleries. Some went into real estate.”

In 1977, the Garys took over the Horseshoe Tavern, a country bar at
Queen and Spadina. At the time, Queen Street West was a cultural dead end
of warehouses and rundown storefronts, but the Garys turned it upside
down. They booked unknown British bands like the Police and the
Stranglers while also promoting legends like Etta James. And, in between,
the club provided a stage for a new crop of local groups such as the Mods,
Teenage Head, and Johnny and the G-Rays. The Horseshoe went out with a
bang in late 1978 with the police being called to clear out what was known
as the Last Pogo—a final hurrah for the punk scene before the building’s
owners kicked the punks out.

On New Year’s Eve 1979 the Garys opened a new punk club—The Edge
—in a big old downtown house at Church and Gerrard. The Edge took its
name from the home’s previous owner: nineteenth-century educator and
minister Egerton Ryerson, who was a key architect of the brutal residential
school system that set out to destroy Indigenous identity and language in
Canada. I doubt any of the white kids dancing around Ryerson’s former
living room knew anything about the horrors of that system. At the time all
we knew was that this house was a great location for three-chord punk
bands, reggae artists, and spoken-word poets. It would take many years
before our generation and the nation confronted the systemic horrors
Ryerson had initiated.

The first wave of punk had hit Toronto in the summer of 1976. I was
thirteen, too young to seek out the downtown clubs. But that year I met
Andrew Cash, who went to the same parish as me—Holy Spirit Catholic
Church in Scarborough. We bonded over our love of Neil Young and a
desire to learn how to play guitar. The discovery of artists like the Sex
Pistols, Elvis Costello, and the Clash was a revelation. I loved the music’s
sound, attitude, and above all, uncompromising desire to challenge the
status quo. My inspiration was Joe Strummer because he challenged punk
kids to reject nihilism and get engaged. He responded bluntly to the
cynicism of establishment voices that ridiculed punk idealism: “People can
change anything they want to; and that means everything in the world …
It’s time to take that humanity back into the centre of the ring and follow
that for a time … Think on that. Without people you’re nothing.”

In grade eleven, Andrew and I formed a band that we called L’étranger
after the novel by Albert Camus. We weren’t very good at playing other
people’s songs, so we decided that, in punk rock style, we would write our
own. Andrew and our other bandmates—Phil Cochrane and Peter Duffin—
attended Neil McNeil High School, an all-boys school run by the Holy
Ghost Fathers. For a time, we were able to practise in the school music
room. We made our first public appearance at the Neil McNeil Christmas
talent show, where we sang a cover of the Ramones’ “Sheena Is a Punk
Rocker” and the first original song we had written, “In the Darkness.”
In February 1980, we scored our first bar gig, at the Turning Point punk
bar on Bloor Street. Most of the audience were kids from our high school;
nobody bothered to card for age there. It was a total dive, and at one point
in the evening, the owner threatened to throw our equipment down the
stairs. I can’t remember what we had done to cross the line, but at the
Turning Point such threats from the bar owners weren’t unusual.

By the summer we had come a long way and Canadian rock legend Greg
Godovitz took us under his wing. In those days there was a huge cultural
divide between the long-haired rock fans and the short-haired punk kids.

We gave the “rocker” bars on the Yonge Street strip or in the suburban
enclaves of the city a wide berth. Whenever the two groups met, the punk
kids always came out on the losing end. Godovitz’s band Goddo was a
regular at those rocker bars, but he didn’t seem to notice or care about the
musical divide. Our first professional show was opening for his band at a
St. Catharines bar that was a hangout for a motorcycle gang. The owners
were so freaked out by the presence of these skinny teenage punks that they
wouldn’t even let us go to the washroom without one of the bouncers to
keep an eye on us. We went on stage expecting to get killed. However, the
biker women seemed to think the way we jumped about nervously through
our set was cute. They made sure their boyfriends were nice to us. We
weren’t very good, but Godovitz was patient with us. He taught us how to
be professional and put on a proper live show.

By the end of that summer we had scored our first of many gigs at the
Edge. It was an opening slot on a Sunday night. The deal was simple. If we
brought out enough fans, the Garys might give us our own night. And if we
did well on our first Sunday night headlining, we might get a Monday. We
were determined to get to the point of having our own weekend gig and
treated every show as if it were the most important night of our lives.

The Edge put Toronto on the map as an important musical port of call for
touring artists. In November 1981, our band played at the club during a
week that included shows from British reggae band Steel Pulse, punk
pioneers the Slits, Nona Hendryx of Labelle, rocker Joan Jett, the
Psychedelic Furs, and Alex Chilton of the underground band Big Star. The
ticket price to see L’étranger was two dollars, $3.50 for Alex Chilton, and
$5 to see Joan Jett. It was an extraordinarily dynamic scene and people
could take part in it on the cheap.

In an age before social media, people learned about clubs, bands, and
political activism through posters affixed to downtown walls and signposts.

Whether it was an organizing meeting against apartheid in South Africa or
promoting a show at the Cabana Room, a glue bucket and five hundred
posters was the most effective means of drawing people in. Postering was
total DIY communication. The brash art and bold typography of punk posters
soon covered the mailboxes, telephone poles, and boarded-up spaces of
downtown Toronto. A formerly dull and clean city became vibrant with
urgency.

Those who wanted more information on the scene could stop by one of
the many record shops to pick up local publications called fanzines.

Visually, the zines resembled cut-and-paste ransom notes that had been run
through a photocopy machine. Nick Smash of the band the Rent Boys Inc.

was the dean of alternative publishing. Fourteen-year-old Deanna Shinde
launched her publication in 1981 with a first issue that included an
interview with our band, along with features on Adam and the Ants, D.O.A.,
and the Viletones. Within two years, she had the largest circulation of any
zine in the city.

5
Dave MacIntosh, a young British kid from Brampton, Ontario, began
publishing his zine thanks to a big batch of Letraset (expensive stylized font
sheets) that his dad brought home from his job at the military defence
company Litton Systems. For MacIntosh, playing the role of DIY journalist
led to him promoting his own underground music festival—the Sounds
from the Street. Now living in Scotland, he puts it simply: “The best thing I
did in Toronto was be fuckin’ twenty years old and, in some small way, a
cool mover-shaker. My teenage dream was realized.”

Kingi Carpenter was a high-school student attending the private girls
school Havergal College. After seeing the homemade posters for bands,
clubs, and dances, she began sneaking out of her dorm at night to explore
this world: “All the other girls wanted to go to parties with the boys from
Upper Canada College. I hated that stuff. Then I discovered the downtown
scene. I loved the music. The fashion. There were cute guys and there was
politics—anti-racism, anti-nukes, socialism. It was all DIY. You created your
own look. It was before things were commercialized.”

In his book How Music Works, David Byrne writes that music and
cultural movements are created from a symbiotic relationship between the
artist, the audience, and the physical spaces in which the music is heard. In
the 1970s, commercial rock acts were filling hockey arenas and baseball
stadiums. To hold their own in such large venues, artists relied on elaborate
light shows, glittering costumes, and sonic overkill. You couldn’t get away
with such excess in small venues like the Edge or New York’s iconic CBGB.

The spaces were too intimate.

Byrne writes: “The range of preexisting performative models … [was]
artistically invalid because those tropes had already been taken. So the only
sensible course was to avoid all of it, to strip everything back and see what
was left … no rock moves or poses, no pomp or drama, no rock hair, no
rock lights … The lyrics too were stripped bare … It was mathematics;
when you subtract all that unwanted stuff from something, art or music,
what do you have left? Who knows? With the objectionable bits removed,
does it become more ‘real’?”

Trying to make it “real” was a key dynamic that connected bands and
audiences at clubs like the Edge. The musicians were on a stage that was
barely raised above the cramped dance floor. The distance between artist
and fan was nil. We dressed the same as the audience. They felt that they
were as much a part of the scene as any guitar player or singer.

The mainstream music establishment was hostile to the punk scene, so
the few clubs that were willing to let punk bands play were commercial
netherworlds such as dodgy backrooms or basements in sketchy beer
parlours. Larry’s Hideaway was a club run out of the basement of a four-
storey hotel that could have been the setting for a Tom Waits song. It was a
notorious hive of sex work, drugs, and illegal activities. But the basement
boasted a large bar with a huge sound system, and the bouncers rarely
checked IDs. Nora Daisy Fannin worked the punk shows as a waitress even
though she was underage. She did her high-school homework at the bar,
watched over by the bouncers who often had to go upstairs to throw
trouble-causing johns down the stairs.

I met sixteen-year-old Marcy Rohn when she was one of four punk rock
kids who showed up at a rocker high-school dance at Bramalea Collegiate
in Toronto’s West End, where we were playing with Goddo. These stray
punk kids immediately sought us out. She ended up finding her place in the
world on the second floor of a beer parlour called the Beverly Tavern,
which was next door to a chicken slaughtering plant on Queen Street. The
downstairs was for old-timers and serious drinkers. They turned a blind eye
to the underage kids and art students who transformed the upstairs room
into a lively venue for bands like the V-Necks, Rent Boys Inc., and Vital
Signs. “The Bev was our home, our tribe,” Marcy explains. “You were
always welcome, no matter how shitty you might feel about yourself. It’s
where we gathered when tragedy struck. It’s where we fell in love, flirted,
dreamed, and drank too much. It was always there.”

From its earliest days, punk was dismissed as a caricature of mohawks,
mosh pits, and studded leather jackets, but the movement was a much more
complex intersection of experimentation in fashion, art, music, and gender
rights. Punk was inherently political because as soon as you cut your hair
and adopted any kind of punk accessory you became a cultural outsider, a
target, a freak. Punk was both anti-capitalist and resistant to
commercialization. This was what attracted me; I believed that punk was a
way to opt out of consumer society.

And within this world other options became available to alienated youth.

Rock ’n’ roll was an inherently misogynist domain, and punk could have
been the same way if not for the determination of women and queer people
to force it in a more progressive direction. In the early days of the Toronto
scene, a rock band attempted to cash in on the supposed shock value of
punk by calling themselves the Battered Wives and leaning heavily into
misogynistic imagery. Young women were not having it. A feminist
collective known as Women Against Violence Against Women (WAVAW)
picketed their shows. Young punk guys quickly learned that wearing a
Battered Wives button was not cool. Long before the advent of cancel
culture, young feminists put the run on the Battered Wives.

This resistance may have been down to the fact that, from the beginning,
the Toronto scene had a strong feminist presence. The scene gave birth to
the first two all-female punk groups in North America—the Curse and the
B-Girls. Strong women performers like Michaele Jordana (the Poles),
Martha Johnson (Martha and the Muffins), and Maja Bannerman helped
define the emerging music scene. Feminist groups like Word of Mouth
Band (WOMB) pushed their way onto stages that otherwise would have been
the domain of guy rockers.

Queer voices also claimed their turf. Mama Quilla II released a driving
anthem called “Angry Young Woman.” Fifth Column was a pioneering
feminist band that used music and a zine called J.D. to challenge the
mainstream male rock world with defiant queer punk attitudes.10 They
were pioneers of the punk subgenre “queercore.” In his history of Canadian
punk, Perfect Youth, Sam Sutherland writes that Toronto’s punk scene was
marked by an openness to queer and feminist voices that was more
pronounced than in the major punk centres of London, Los Angeles, and
New York. This broader vision was encouraged by crossover connections
between musicians and art collectives like General Idea, who were pioneers
of queer activism and cultural engagement.

So it’s not surprising that it was Toronto band Rough Trade that blew
through the straight barrier of pop radio with the 1980 hit “High School
Confidential.” Being an out gay woman in the music industry was unheard
of at the time, but singer Carole Pope pushed the boundaries to the point
that Toronto rock station CHUM-FM paid for the band to record a cleaned-up
version of the single. Pope’s defiance inspired a young country punk singer
named Kathryn Dawn (k.d.) Lang to embrace who she truly was. Lang had
been hanging out in the Edmonton hardcore scene, and in the mid-1980s
she exploded onto the world stage as the wild cowgirl with a 1950s boy’s
haircut and a voice like Patsy Cline’s. Lang went on to win four Grammys
and six Junos and was named to the Order of Canada.

ALL THIS CULTURAL activity was happening amid the brutal economic crisis
hammering North America in the early 1980s. So how was this possible?
Getting a job wasn’t easy, but for artists who did secure a part-time gig
dishwashing or waitressing, it was possible to pay the rent and still have
time to explore creative interests. University students were able to dabble in
art, politics, or music, because if they failed a course, the debt load was
nothing to worry about. They could pay their university fees with a summer
job. Gary Topp says the cultural revolution of the early 1980s was driven by
the privilege of being able to take chances without the fear of financial ruin:
“The whole gist of it was trying things, and it didn’t matter if we failed.”

Cheap rent created an explosion of art spaces. Clubs like the Cameron,
the Rivoli, and the BamBoo offered live music to increasingly varied
audiences and subcultures. Some of those clubs and art spaces flourished.

Others, like the Queen City Tavern, the Club with No Name, and 100 Bond
Street, were mere flashes in the pan. But all of them were made possible
because people could afford to take a chance on doing something creative.

Kingi Carpenter took that chance. She had gone to university to study
political science and pursue a respectable career. She remembers attending
lectures on the failed SALT II treaty and thinking, What am I doing here? So
she quit school and set up a silk-screening business for fashion design. “In
the early ’80s no bank wanted to give a loan to a young woman starting her
own business,” she remembers. “They thought I was a dumb girl. But I
opened my own space that I called Peach Berserk, and then moved into a
storefront at Queen and Spadina.”12 She became a pioneer in the growing
cultural hub on Queen Street West.

Industrial Toronto was disappearing, and a new city was being born. As
young people, we had little awareness of the larger economic forces that
had been put in motion. But within a few short years, those economic forces
would begin to turn on the young bohemians.

