Chapter 4
LINE IN THE SAND
ON HIGHWAY 401
In 1980–81 the devastating impacts of Operation Break the Working Class
seemed like a world away from the punk clubs of Toronto. But once my
band began to hit the road to play across Southern Ontario, the brutal
realities of the economic crisis became all too apparent.

Outside of Toronto’s downtown, the punk world of Central Canada was
strung along the Highway 401 corridor from Windsor to Montreal. The
punk communities were isolated outposts where small groups of fans found
ways to put on shows in rented halls or dodgy bars. Many were in blue-
collar towns heavily dependent on auto supply and manufacturing. In 1980,
these towns were getting the shit kicked out them. Canada’s manufacturing
sector was a branch plant of the American economy, and the shock of 1980
hit it like a piledriver. There were multiple plant closures and huge job
losses. Canadian banking policy followed the Americans and obediently
jacked up interest rates. By 1982, there were officially 1.5 million
unemployed Canadians, but this number did not include nearly 1 million
other people who were so dispirited they had given up looking for work.1
One summer night in 1982, our band was booked to play a punk show at
the Italian wedding hall in the Southern Ontario town of Welland. Prior to
1980, Welland had the highest per capita income in the country from its
plethora of unionized factory jobs, but those jobs were being wiped out by
the recession.2
 Our band arrived in town oblivious to the economic
devastation hitting the region. As soon as we began the first song, a group
of local working-class guys rushed the dance floor and jumped the punk
kids. They started slugging it out. We stopped playing and attempted to
mediate. The wedding hall’s manager screamed at us to start playing again
and to play louder. He pointed to the disco ball above the dance floor and
said, “When you see the disco ball turning, you play fast and loud.” For the
rest of the night, every time a fight broke out, the disco ball started spinning
and we played fast and loud. This was how Saturday nights in Welland went
down in the great recession.

In the auto worker town of Oshawa, local record store owner Mike “Star”
Shulga rented various locations like the local Orange Lodge to host punk
shows at what he called the Star Club. He brought in bands like the Demics,
D.O.A., and Shadowy Men on a Shadowy Planet. The Star Club shows were
packed with kids who just wanted to dance and have a good time. There
were no fights, no tension.

But as our band was playing the Orange Lodge the parents of those punk
kids were getting ready for battle at the Houdaille auto supply factory just
down the road. This was where the Canadian working class had drawn the
line against the seemingly unstoppable power of Operation Break the
Working Class.

For decades, Houdaille Industries, founded in Buffalo, New York, had
been a reliable supplier of parts for the Big Three on both sides of the
border. But in 1979, Houdaille was subject to a new form of predatory
capitalism—the leveraged buyout. Corporate raiders Kohlberg Kravis
Roberts (KKR) set their sights on Houdaille because it had low debt and
strong profits. KKR used junk bonds to cover the purchase of the venerable
company. This resulted in a huge profit for KKR while Houdaille was left
holding the massive debt. What followed was a sell-off of assets that led to
the eventual destruction of the company.

3 The Houdaille takeover became
emblematic of the smash-and-grab economy that defined Wall Street in the
1980s.

Houdaille’s Canadian branch plant paid the price. Even though they had
been the recent recipients of an impressive grant of taxpayers’ money to
ensure competitiveness, KKR management decided to shut the plant and
keep the money. After paying their CEO a million-dollar bonus, KKR
announced that they were moving the plant to a “right-to-work” state in the
American South, where state law kept out unions and forced down wages.

Further, KKR announced that they were not going to pay the severance or
pension top-ups owed to the five hundred Canadian workers. The plant
workers, members of the United Auto Workers (UAW) Local 222, knew their
jobs were going south permanently. But they were not going to go down
without a fight.

On August 18, 1980, the workers came in for the morning shift and
occupied the factory. They blocked the plant gates, placed Canadian flags in
the windows, and hung a banner out front that read: Day 1—Until Hell
Freezes Over.

Bob White, the newly elected president of the Canadian wing of the UAW,
understood the powerful symbolism of a plant occupation. It reminded auto
workers of their roots in the famous Flint sit-down strike. Sam Gindin, who
was an economist for the Canadian UAW remembers, “It was a perfect storm
—we were facing an attack from the state, attack from the corporations. The
[Canadian] union understood that to give in was to give up. We had to fight
and take this on.”

At first, the Houdaille occupation garnered little attention. Then the
workers announced they would not allow the dependent automobile plants
to remove parts that were needed to keep the assembly lines running. If
those parts were not shipped out, Ontario’s powerful auto industry would
shut down. This stand-off threatened to spiral into massive layoffs across
the Highway 401 manufacturing corridor.

Hemi Mitic joined the Canadian auto workers union at sixteen and spent
forty years as an organizer. Asked if the union actions at Houdaille were
illegal, Mitic replies, “You have to do what’s right by your membership.

And sometimes that means breaking the law. When you shut down a plant
that is a part of the supply chain for one of the Big Three, it is serious. But
once you shut down an automobile assembly line, that’s when things start to
tingle. That’s when you get somebody’s attention.”

Despite the threat they posed to a fragile economy, the union leadership
was unwavering—no parts were coming out of the plant unless there was a
deal in place for the workers. Union workers from across the region came
out to Houdaille to make sure the plant gates stayed shut. After fourteen
days, the provincial Progressive Conservative government of Bill Davis
stepped in on the side of the UAW. They announced that KKR was going to be
forced to pay the severances owed. And the government went further, by
changing the labour laws of Ontario to ensure that all workers facing job
loss were legally entitled to receive proper severance and payout. It was a
huge victory at a time of deep uncertainty. And decades later, workers in
Ontario still benefit from the change in severance laws that was forced by
the Houdaille activists.

The Houdaille occupation represents a powerful and dangerous memory
of a time when resistance was possible in the face of huge economic odds.

But despite the win, there was little opportunity to celebrate. Operation
Break the Working Class was hitting hard as plant after plant in the
industrial belt shut down.

In response to this worsening economic crisis, UAW president Bob White
shocked the business class when he announced a “no concessions” policy in
any negotiations with companies that were claiming economic difficulties.

The danger of such a policy was obvious. The pattern had been set by the
manufacturing company Columbus McKinnon when they shut their plant in
St. Catharines and moved to the United States, following a ten-month strike
where the union refused to accept concessions.6 At White Farm Equipment
in Brantford, workers went on strike for nine long months rather than accept
major wage cuts. The company was hammered by economic uncertainty,
but in 1981, management negotiated a proper settlement to keep the plant
running.

UAW economist Sam Gindin says that, given the brutal reality of the
times, the no-concessions policy actually made the most strategic sense. “It
was a dicey strategy, but we had to walk through this and defend workers.

We were realistic. We knew we were going to lose some battles. With 18
percent interest rates there is going to be zero cars sold, there is going to be
unemployment. There will be jobs lost. We understood this, but we weren’t
being given an alternative that could work. If we accepted the concessions,
it wouldn’t stop the bleeding. The union movement would be destroyed.”

When Chrysler chairman Lee Iacocca negotiated a bailout with the US
government to save Chrysler from bankruptcy, the terms of the deal were
clear—all workers had to make financial concessions. American workers
coughed up $125 million in pay cuts. The Canadian workers refused. This
put them at odds with politicians, corporate leaders, and the union
headquarters in Detroit, who feared that renegade action by the Canadians
would put the future of the Chrysler corporation at risk. But White stuck to
his guns. He pointed out that Chrysler’s Canadian operations were in a
better position than the American operations because they had increased car
sales, and the concessions would be used to sweeten payouts to stock
investors.

Finally, the Liberal government of Pierre Trudeau offered to help the
Canadian plants with a bailout without asking for any concessions from
workers. Despite this big win, more trouble was looming. In 1982, Iacocca
demanded concessions as the bottom line to a new Canadian deal. Rather
than accept the cuts, 9,600 Chrysler workers in Canada walked off the job.

The Montreal Gazette captured the mood of the establishment by accusing
Bob White of being “remarkably short-sighted … the effect will be
devastating … tough talk will set a regrettable example for unions.”

Canada’s manufacturing sector had already lost more than 400,000 jobs,
and the striking Canadian workers were in open defiance of their American
parent union. Chrysler threatened a permanent shutdown of Canadian
operations. But White had the backing of the union members. As Gindin
explains, “Bob White talked to the membership. He said we had to make a
decision and take responsibility for what was happening [to workers]. He
knew that if we accepted concessions, we would be the vehicle for taking
this shit [Reaganomics] into Canada.”
Chrysler blinked. It was another victory for the Canadian auto workers.

In 1984, American workers at General Motors gave up wage increases
and accepted a one-time payment, but the UAW in Canada turned the offer
down. On October 17, 1984, more than 36,000 Canadian workers walked
off the job at General Motors. The New York Times predicted that the
renegade Canadian workers would force the shutdown of all GM
production in both countries. Canadian media attacked White, with the
Toronto Star writing: “The only way the attitude of Bob White and the UAW
toward GM would make sense would be if they believed they were
travelling on the Titanic and might as well go first class … It’s hard to see
what they hope to accomplish with this strike … The strike shouldn’t have
happened. It should be settled quickly.”

GM management threatened to permanently close their Canadian
operations, but the move backfired. The public began to cheer on the union.

Some in the media denounced GM for treating Canada as a “banana
republic.” Journalist Peter Trueman warned GM that companies had been
nationalized for less than their threat to shut the plants.10 In the end, GM
came back to the table and negotiated a fair settlement.

By now the breach between the UAW headquarters in Detroit and its
militant Canadian wing was so great that the Canadian workers broke away,
forming the Canadian Auto Workers (CAW). Soon after, the newly formed
union announced its intention to merge with Canadian unions outside of the
traditional automobile and manufacturing sectors.

At a time of deep economic insecurity, Bob White became a folk hero to
many Canadians. He marched in peace rallies and spoke up for women’s
rights. He used his position as the leader of one of Canada’s largest
industrial unions to promote a broader class-based response to the economic
forces targeting Canadian workers. White inspired people because he
embraced the strong nationalist spirit that was flourishing in the early
1980s. This was not a boorish, flag-waving nationalism, but rather spoke to
the progressive social values that were deeply ingrained in both the labour
movement and Canadian society. Resistance to Reaganomics was rooted in
a widely held belief that Canada could still choose an independent path—
economically, socially, and politically.

Canadian workers suffered grievously in the 1980s but not nearly as bad
as workers in the United States. Shock doctrine was resisted in Canada
because of the solidarity that existed between the union movement, the
progressive left, and elected politicians (the New Democratic Party). In the
United States the powerful consensus of labour, the Democratic Party, and
the left that had driven the New Deal had broken apart in acrimony during
the Vietnam War. By the time Reagan launched his war on union rights,
American workers stood alone.

This is one of the reasons that in the United States Operation Break the
Working Class succeeded beyond anything the ideological right could have
imagined. In 1970, the unionized workforce in the US stood at 25 percent.

By the 2000s, it had been whittled down to 6 percent.11 The right
succeeded in pushing back rates of unionization to what had existed in the
early 1900s, during the vicious “Gilded Age” of robber-baron capitalism. In
Canada, however, the drop in union representation was from 31 percent in
the 1970s to 28.4 percent in 2003.12 This remarkable difference between
the two countries can be traced directly to the resistance of the Canadian
working class at plants like Houdaille in the 1980s.

Yet in the 2020s, echoes of the 1980s Reagan/Volcker doctrine were
being felt by a new generation of Canadian workers as inflation began to
rise during the post-pandemic recovery. The factors were many: the influx
of government spending required to keep people going through the
pandemic, the impacts of the war in Ukraine, and outrageous price-gouging
by both oil and grocery store giants. And yet Bank of Canada governor Tiff
Macklem blamed workers, who were demanding better wages after years of
stagnant pay, insecure employment, and the huge losses they had suffered
during the pandemic. Taking a cue from the 1980s playbook, he vowed to
use interest rate hikes to force down worker expectations. The goal was to
engineer a mini recession to drive up unemployment.13
Business leaders lauded Macklem’s call. They accepted the premise that
it was “good” fiscal policy to use interest rates to cause people to lose their
jobs or default on their mortgages. Though no such thinking targeted the
record CEO compensation packages or the excessive profits being made by
grocery giants like Loblaws during the pandemic.

But dangerous memories persist, reminding younger generations that
labour resistance can turn the tide. In response to the call from corporate
Canada to target workers, Lana Payne, president of Unifor (the descendent
union of the CAW), accused the Bank of Canada of declaring a class war.

She vowed that Canadian workers would fight back against attempts to
drive down their expectations for a better deal. The business press may have
forgotten the history of the 1980s, but those memories survive in the labour
halls of the auto workers, and they are determined not to let this history be
repeated.

As for me, I feel like I am a lifetime away from the punk halls near the
Houdaille occupation, but I still show up at picket lines. Although these
days I tend to wear a suit and tie.

