Chapter 5
REFUSE THE CRUISE
I spent Good Friday 1981 in a bleak industrial park near Highway 27 and
Dixon Road in Toronto’s far West End. The parking lot was full of peace
activists and church types who were there for a mixture of religious service
and protest. Some carried homemade crosses; others walked with banners
urging the government to beat swords into ploughshares. Another group
engaged in civil disobedience by sitting down on the roadway to block
traffic.1
This was the parking lot for Litton Systems, a subsidiary of a major
American defence contractor. The Canadian division had just secured a
lucrative contract with the US military to build the guidance system for the
cruise missile. The deal between the US government and Litton Systems
was the largest US military contract awarded outside the United States at
the time. It was underwritten by $49 million in federal government grants
and interest-free loans to ensure that Canada got a piece of the immense
cruise missile budget.

A group of Christian pacifists who called themselves the Cruise Missile
Conversion Project (CMCP) had chosen the important religious holiday of
Good Friday to protest this contract.

Joe Mihevc was one of those activists. He was a young Catholic inspired
by the social justice teaching of the Church to get active in the fight for
change. Mihevc had started out in the Toronto Catholic organization Youth
Corps, which engaged teenagers in faith and social justice activism. His
faith and commitment to social justice drew him to a weekly dinner
gathering of activists who wanted to take their activism to the next level.

This led to the establishment of the Cruise Missile Conversion Project.

Conversion is a deeply Christian concept; however, Mihevc says the
CMCP interpreted conversion beyond the narrow religious notion to include a
larger concept of economic conversion: “We wanted to pull Canada out of
the military-industrial complex and convert the plant to production that
helped Canadians. We were influenced by a much broader international
issue. We watched how Germany’s economy was pulling ahead because it
wasn’t tied to military investments, while the American economy was
stagnating under the intense pressure of the military-industrial complex.”

The idea that this small group of Christian pacifists could push back
against the machinery of the Cold War must have seemed quixotic at the
time. The first Good Friday action at Litton, in 1980, was a small prayer
service initiated by the religious department at Neil McNeil High School.3
The CMCP transformed this religious witness into political action with steady
pickets outside the plant. The weekly dinner meetings led to the creation of
numerous subcommittees to initiate outreach to a multitude of other
progressive organizations.

By the time Good Friday 1981 arrived, the movement had grown
considerably. As a young idealistic punk, I was keen to use our band to
build support for the emerging peace movement. We participated in
marches, helped organize fundraisers, and spoke continually at gigs about
the need for young people to engage in non-violent resistance to the war
machine.

The cruise missile represented a dangerous new phase in the nuclear arms
race. More than 70,000 nuclear warheads had been built in the United
States since World War II. Each missile or bomb carried a payload many
times more powerful than the weapons that had destroyed Hiroshima and
Nagasaki. What restrained the superpowers from launching these weapons
was the doctrine of mutual assured destruction (MAD), wherein any pre-
emptive attempt to launch a nuclear war by either side would be met by a
counter-response of intercontinental ballistic missiles (ICBMS) that would
lead to global destruction.

SALT II had been an attempt to de-escalate this military insanity, but by
1981 the treaty was history and the introduction of the cruise missile
threatened to further destabilize the delicate balance. A single B-52 bomber
could carry twenty of these weapons—light self-guided rockets with the
capacity to fly more than 2,000 kilometres, hugging the terrain to avoid
radar. The Litton guidance system was so sophisticated it could land a
missile within yards of its target. A sudden launch would easily overwhelm
the slower and less technically sophisticated Soviets. One journalist wrote,
“Except for gunpowder and the atomic bomb, no weapon has threatened a
greater effect on war and peace than the cruise missile.”

The Litton protest took on increasing urgency as it became clear that
Ronald Reagan’s love for the cruise missile knew no bounds. He ordered
the purchase of 3,000 ALCMs (air-launched cruise missiles), 3,994 SLCMs
(sea-launched cruise missiles), 560 GLCMs (ground-launched cruise
missiles), and 3,000 to 5,000 MRASMs (medium-range air-to surface
missiles). The price tag was a staggering $30 billion.5
Reagan’s rhetoric about challenging the “Evil Empire” of the Soviet
Union put the world on edge because people didn’t know how far he was
willing to go. While doing a microphone test for a radio broadcast, he joked
darkly, “My fellow Americans, I’m pleased to tell you today that I’ve
signed legislation that will outlaw Russia forever. We begin bombing in five
minutes.”6 When he learned that his comments had actually been broadcast,
he thought it was funny. Others saw it as proof that the man in charge of the
nuclear codes was a lunatic cowboy. This was the president who stated
solemnly, “I would rather see my little girls die now, still believing in God,
than have them grow up under communism and one day die no longer
believing in God.”

The Soviets, fearing that Reagan was serious about a first strike, moved
their forces onto high alert.

REAGAN WASN’T THE first nuclear gunslinger. From its earliest days, the
nuclear arms race was defined by a reckless willingness to gamble with
deadly forces beyond human comprehension. In The Doomsday Machine,
Daniel Ellsberg recounts how, as a young analyst for the Rand Corporation
in 1959, he was handed a secret memo that laid out a plan of unprecedented
mass murder. The memo set out to answer the question of how many people
would be killed if the United States launched a unilateral nuclear attack on
the USSR and China. The chart listed 325 million dead within 6 months of
the attack. But the analysis went deeper, predicting a long-term death toll of
600 million in adjacent countries.

Ellsberg writes, “I remember what I thought when I first held the single
sheet with the graph on it. I thought, This piece of paper should not exist. It
should never have existed. Not in America. Not anywhere, ever. It depicted
evil beyond any human project … [it proposed] the extermination of over
half a billion people.”

As Ellsberg continued his work for Rand, he confronted a casual
indifference in the military to the danger posed by these weapons. Nuclear
readiness was based on the principle of always having nuclear bombers in
the air, yet the planes tended to crash, on average one for every 20,000
hours of flying time. He examined the accident reports of nuclear-laden
planes and found that twelve nuclear bombers had crashed, while another
seven planes had been forced to jettison their bombs.9
 In 1950, an
American B-50 bomber accidently dropped a nuclear bomb three hundred
kilometres from Montreal. The bomb’s high explosive charge blew, but it
was lacking the essential plutonium core. Nonetheless, the bomb scattered
one hundred pounds of uranium onto the neighbouring countryside.

These accidents were covered up in the name of national security, but one
near-catastrophe couldn’t be contained. In March 1958, a B-47 bomber
travelling from Georgia to an air force base in the United Kingdom
accidently dropped its H-bomb on a family farm. The family was injured,
but the bomb didn’t detonate. Such accidents were termed “broken arrows.”
Since the 1950s, there have been at least thirty-two broken arrows. From
1980 to 1992 there were seven serious broken arrow incidents.10
One of the most frightening took place in the middle of the 1980 US
election. On September 18, 1980, two young air force servicemen—twenty-
one-year-old David Powell and nineteen-year-old Jeffrey Plumb—were
doing maintenance work on a Titan II nuclear missile in a silo near the
small town of Damascus, Arkansas.11 The missile was nine storeys tall and
carried a payload greater than all the bombs used in World War II—
including Nagasaki and Hiroshima. One of the men dropped a socket
wrench that fell down the length of the massive missile and hit the side,
causing a major rupture of deadly gas. The resulting explosion killed one
and injured twenty-one. The W-53 nuclear warhead atop the rocket was
blown out of the silo and was later found in a nearby ditch. If it had gone
off, millions could have been killed, including Governor Bill Clinton and
Vice President Walter Mondale, who were attending a Democratic
convention fifty kilometres away.

12
Across rural America, there were numerous silos hosting monstrous
weapons like the one that had blown apart in the town of Damascus. In
Arkansas alone there were eighteen Titan II missile silos.

In the same month that the Titan missile nearly destroyed Arkansas, two
Catholic priests, the brothers Daniel and Philip Berrigan, led six Catholic
activists into a nuclear silo at King of Prussia, Pennsylvania. They pounded
hammers on the re-entry vehicle of a Minuteman ICBM, poured blood on the
missile, and then sat down to pray and await arrest. This was a major
escalation in the protest against the nuclear war machine, and the state
responded accordingly. The clergymen were given prison sentences, but
their actions sparked a campaign known as the Ploughshares movement, in
which Christian activists following the call of the prophet Isaiah to “beat
swords into ploughshares” began breaking into nuclear complexes to host
non-violent protests. The American political establishment saw the
Ploughshares activists as deluded or dangerous, but to others, particularly
those on the Catholic left, they became heroes for standing up to nuclear
madness.

PRIESTS LIKE THE Berrigans weren’t the only ones willing to take action in
the face of the dramatic escalation of the nuclear threat in the 1980s. In
Britain, the Campaign for Nuclear Disarmament, which had been moribund
in the 1970s, was gaining 500 new members a week. By 1983, the CND had
more than 100,000 members and was hosting enormous rallies against both
the cruise missile and the Soviet SS-20 missile.13
A British feminist offshoot targeted the deployment of cruise missiles at
the Greenham Common air force base. In September 1981, four women in
Wales came together at a kitchen table to share their anguish about how to
save their children from the threat of nuclear war. They proposed a mothers’
march to Greenham Common, which was preparing to receive the cruise
missiles. A group of thirty-six women, four men, and their children walked
the 120 miles (193 kilometres) to the base. A number were arrested when
they chained themselves to the fence. The women were ridiculed by the
military guards, who told them they could stay forever but it wouldn’t make
a bit of difference. And so, some of the women decided to stay.

14
The encampment at Greenham Common became a symbol of resistance
for women in the UK. Within a year, the movement was able to deploy
30,000 women, who joined hands to surround the base. The following year,
70,000 women formed a fourteen-mile (twenty-two-kilometre) human
peace chain. The Greenham Common campaign developed into a tent city
that held its ground outside the base for nearly twenty years. They faced
threats of rape, and state disinformation attempted to paint them as having
been infiltrated by Soviet agents. The mainstream media was deeply
misogynist in its coverage, but the reality was that Greenham Common was
a school of political action that opened the eyes of many ordinary working-
class and middle-class women. It also provided gay women with a public
space for activism at a time when they faced laws that could take their
children away from them just for coming out.

Looking back, some might wonder why so many women would walk out
on their jobs and homes to live in tents for years in harsh conditions while
facing arrest and harassment. But in the early 1980s, many people felt they
needed to put their lives on the line to save a world facing disaster.

There is a great deal of talk today about the anxiety and grief of a young
generation facing climate catastrophe, yet a similar anxiety clouded the
hopes of youth in the 1980s. Journalist Zoe Williams recalls the dread that
hung over her youthful imagination: “Across the years of 1983 and 84, I
thought every plane going over my head contained a nuclear bomb that
would be dropped, or not dropped, according to the mood of the pilot. [At
the age of 10] I knew a huge amount about the impact of a nuclear blast. I
was all over the skin peeling, the radiation sickness, the nuclear winter, the
relative horrors of being at the centre of the blast radius (ideal) or on its
outer edges (you would limp on for a few weeks with your teeth falling out
of your gums, creeping toward death).”

It is worth noting that nostalgic 1980s playlists focus on the seemingly
innocent fun of the era’s pop charts while overlooking the heavy political
element of songs that focused on the threat of war and mass death. Prince’s
1981 song urged Ronnie to talk to Russia before blowing up the world.

Frankie Goes to Hollywood produced a video of the superpowers wrestling
over the future of the planet. Ultravox described a hopeless last night where
two lovers weep for a world that will soon be no more.16 Kate Bush sang
of a baby in the womb breathing in deadly radiation in the aftermath of a
nuclear explosion.17
The hit song of the summer of 1983 was Nena’s German-language single
“99 Luftballons,” an immensely danceable song about how a flock of
balloons accidently provoked a nuclear war.

* The song was all over the
airwaves as more than a million people in West Germany took to the streets
to march against the war machine. In Stuttgart, peace activists formed a
human chain sixty-five kilometres long from the US army headquarters to
the missile base at Neu Ulm.18 These protests were fundamentally different
from traditional left-wing rallies because they included a broad coalition of
ordinary citizens, including a strong contingent of Protestant and
evangelical Church leaders.19
The idea for “99 Luftballons” stemmed from a Rolling Stones concert in
West Berlin, where a flock of balloons was released into the air. Nena’s
guitarist Carlo Karges watched the balloons float over the Berlin Wall into
East Germany and wondered how they might register on the Eastern Bloc’s
warning monitors.

Much has been written about the Cuban Missile Crisis of 1962 as the
most dangerous flashpoint in the long Cold War. And yet two events in
1983 brought the world to the edge of catastrophe. Nena’s song anticipated
one of those near disasters. Though the trigger that almost launched a world
war wasn’t a flock of balloons but a civilian airliner.

On September 1, 1983, Korean Air Lines Flight 007 was on a routine
journey from New York to Seoul via Anchorage when it accidently crossed
into Soviet airspace. At the time, NATO had a policy of continually flying
their bombers directly at Eastern Bloc airspace, and then diverting at the
last possible moment, keeping the Soviets on perpetual high alert. When
Flight 007 accidently crossed over the line, the Soviets, fearing an
American bomber incursion, shot the plane out of the sky. The deaths of
269 civilians shocked the world. On September 22, 1983, the Toronto
Disarmament Network issued a public warning of the danger of escalating
tensions: “A miscalculation, a computer error, an itchy trigger finger could
lead to the murder of not hundreds but millions of innocent civilians.”

In the immediate aftermath of the Korean jetliner disaster, the Soviets
anticipated a retaliatory action, and their radar crews were trained to
respond quickly in the event of a serious incursion. The crews knew that if
they hesitated, the Soviets would be wiped out in a first-wave attack. On
September 26, 1983, Soviet radar crews detected a large group of incoming
missiles. But Lieutenant Colonel Stanislav Petrov broke protocol by
refusing to immediately launch the counter-strike. He suspected the blips on
the screen might be some kind of computer error. Petrov was proven
correct. In the 2014 documentary The Man Who Saved the World, Petrov
explained how close the world came to destruction that night: “Our world
has never been closer to complete catastrophe than it was in 1983. The
tiniest spark could have meant the destruction of our civilization.”21 But,
rather than being rewarded for his cool-headedness, he was forced to retire
and suffered a nervous breakdown.

The US government had no knowledge of the near miss that had just
occurred. They continued to ramp up the pressure. A little over a month
later, NATO launched a military exercise that mimicked a full-scale attack on
the Warsaw Pact forces. Able Archer 83 was a practice run for Armageddon,
as NATO mobilized troops, bombers, and nuclear weapons to full military
readiness. They wanted to test their ability to respond to a theoretical
ground war. The rattled Soviets didn’t see anything theoretical about it.

In response, military units in Poland, the German Democratic Republic
(GDR), and Russia were put on battle orders.22 When NATO saw the flurry of
military activity from the Eastern Bloc, it dawned on them that the Soviets
didn’t know this was merely an exercise. Suddenly the nuclear arsenals of
both military powers were primed for war.

23 A single wrong move would
have plunged the world into catastrophe.

Able Archer 83 was a state secret, so the public had no idea that this was
the second time in two months that the world had nearly stumbled into
nuclear disaster. And as the crisis was playing out in real time, the ABC
made-for-TV movie The Day After brought this scenario into the living
rooms of millions of families across North America. The premise of the
film is that a border confrontation in Eastern Europe spirals out of control,
leading to an all-out nuclear war. The story is told through the experience of
a Missouri family who are forced to confront the horror and chaos of the
aftermath.

More than 100 million people watched The Day After. It was the largest
viewing audience for a television program up to that point in American
history. The movie terrified the public, and ABC set up a 1-800 line to help
viewers who were overcome by fear and dread. A special pamphlet with
facts on nuclear weapons was released to accompany the film. But most
significant of all was that it was given a special airing for the president and
the Joint Chiefs of Staff.

Ronald Reagan was shaken by the movie. “It’s very effective and left me
greatly depressed … My own reaction was one of our having to do all we
can to have a deterrent and to see there is never a nuclear war.”24 The Joint
Chiefs of Staff were equally shocked by the horrors depicted in the
movie.25 It is very sobering to think that it took a made-for-TV movie to
force military leaders to finally come to terms with the dangers of nuclear
brinkmanship. Reagan was so rattled that he changed his rhetoric on
fighting the “Evil Empire.” For the first time, he worked to reassure the
world that he was committed to finding a way out of the nightmare of the
escalating Cold War: “A nuclear war can never be won and must never be
fought … [I hope to] live to see the day when nuclear weapons will be
banished from the face of the earth.”

Across the Eastern Bloc, various peace groups pushed for de-escalation.

In East Germany, mass resistance took the form of punk rock. Johnny
Rotten had no idea how prescient his lyrics were when in 1977 he sang
about being at the Berlin Wall and seeing people looking back at him from
the other side.27 Teenagers in the GDR who dressed like the Sex Pistols
faced constant threats from the secret police. The state repression escalated
with jailing, beatings, and mass police actions. Lutheran Church leaders
stepped up to offer church halls as venues for punk gigs. These church
basement gatherings developed into organizing opportunities for youth
resistance. The result was a movement called the Church from Below,
which infused human rights, peace activism, and environmentalism with the
hardcore, anarchist edge of punk.28 As the 1980s progressed, the East
German punk movement became the youth vanguard that openly questioned
the legitimacy of the communist state.

In Canada, the Litton protests were drawing increasing attention, as
people feared that war could come at any moment. While the Christian
peacemakers used non-violent witness at the gates of Litton, a group of
punks in the Vancouver scene chose another path. The urban guerrilla group
Direct Action, also known as the Squamish Five, turned to violence to
challenge the system. This included bombing a hydro-generation plant and
firebombing Vancouver pornography stores known for promoting videos
depicting sexual violence.

One of Direct Action’s key members was Gerry Hannah, bass player for
the Vancouver band the Subhumans. I had met him casually during the
Subhumans’ first trip to Toronto. They were proponents of the emerging
West Coast hardcore sound that was much more confrontational than the
punk scene in Toronto. Similarly, their notion of political confrontation was
at odds with our belief in peaceful protest. Direct Action member Ann
Hansen recalls, “We never took a break, never went to the beach for a day
of doing nothing, never took a casual walk in Stanley Park, never slept in or
hung about the house lazily reading a book on a rainy day. Our group was
on a mission, and we lived each day with the zeal and fervour of people
who believed that their every action was so important that the survival of
the planet depended on them.”

On October 14, 1982, the Vancouver activists drove a stolen van packed
with explosives to the Litton plant in Ontario. The blast took out a wall of
the plant and injured seven people.30 The actions of the Squamish Five had
hugely negative implications for non-violent activists. Joe Mihevc
remembers that “in the coming months we were infiltrated [by police], our
phones were bugged. But we didn’t stop. We recommitted ourselves to the
work of non-violence.”

Despite the Litton bombing, non-violent resistance across Canada
continued to grow. By Remembrance Day 1983, the Litton protests had
morphed into a week-long set of actions led by feminists, gay rights
activists, and solidarity organizations from the Global South. It culminated
in a November 18 “Stop Cruise Production Day,” when the various groups
came together to encircle the Litton management building with a sit-down
blockade that led to multiple arrests.32
Mihevc, who later became a city councillor, says that the Litton protests
served as a school of activism. “I learned how good organizing happens.

You build networks, coalitions. The activists came from faith and political
[roots]. There were students, unions, feminists. Salvadoran activists, pro-
choice women, the NDP, and the communists. You cannot control the agenda
in these meetings. To make this broad coalition work, you have to allow for
space. You have to leave room in your ideological world view for other
points of view.”

What started as a brainstorming session over a shared meal had
transformed into a national resistance campaign. On Easter Sunday 1982,
more than 35,000 people marched in Vancouver against nuclear arms. And
when, in 1983, the Pierre Trudeau government announced their intention to
allow the cruise missile to be tested in low-level flights over Cold Lake,
Alberta, the peace movement exploded across the country. Grassroots
organizations, including Against Cruise Testing, Alliance for Non-Violent
Action, and the Toronto Peace Alliance, took up the work. The Canadian
Labour Congress, which represented more than 2 million workers, also
came out strongly against Canada’s involvement in cruise missile
development.

Did those peaceful protests make a difference? Absolutely. Litton
executive Ronald Keating complained in the Globe and Mail, “They (the
protestors) are an irritant. They get a lot of publicity and the Americans read
every bit of it … Pressure from these people is making Americans look
twice at secondary-sourcing (military investment) in Canada.”34 In 1984,
Litton Systems was excluded from the second phase of the cruise missile
development project. And a 1985 analysis prepared for the United States
Air Force admitted that the mass public opposition in Europe had a
seriously negative impact on the deployment of the cruise. “An active
antinuclear movement is forcing western politicians to rethink the NATO
deployment decision [of the cruise missile].”

Military planners boasted that the cruise missile was a “miracle” weapon,
but grassroots resistance reframed it in the public eye as an unacceptable
death machine. This was the power of mass action by ordinary people to
create change in the 1980s.

According to the history books, it was the determination of the Cold War
hawk Ronald Reagan that forced the Soviets to the table that ended the
nuclear arms race. Little is said of the fact that it took a made-for-TV movie
to make Reagan realize he needed to broker a settlement. And when Soviet
leader Mikhail Gorbachev was asked why he agreed to attend the historic
Reykjavík Summit that finally found a peaceful path forward in 1986, he
stated that he was inspired by the women of Greenham Common. He said
their determination to put it all on the line for peace made him believe that
it was possible for the two belligerent superpowers to find common
ground.36
The fact that four young mothers in a small town in Wales could build a
movement that inspired the leader of a superpower to end the arms race is a
dangerous memory that can show a path forward for a young generation
facing similar existential threats.

*The English version, “99 Red Balloons,” hit number 2 on the North
American music charts.

