Chapter 6
REBEL MUSIC
In the 1980s, the global centre for white supremacist conspiracy theories
was a house, turned into a bunker, in Toronto’s Cabbagetown district. This
was where Ernst Zündel ran a Holocaust-denial publishing house, and his
publications had worldwide reach among neo-Nazi hate groups. Attempts
by Canadian authorities to shut down Zündel’s publishing business failed
miserably. Twice he was brought up for trial, and both times he turned the
court into a circus by putting the Holocaust itself on trial.1 The failure of
the Canadian courts to address his hate messages created serious concern
among international human rights organizations about Canada’s ability to
contain the rise of antisemitism.

Zündel wasn’t working in a vacuum. In 1981, white supremacist Paul
Fromm established the Canadian Association of Free Expression to defend
the white power movement. The far right hosted a white supremacist rally
in the Toronto working-class neighbourhood of Riverdale, where self-styled
Grand Wizard of the Canadian Knights of the Ku Klux Klan James
McQuirter opened an office. His supporters boasted of their organizing
efforts at local high schools.2
In addition to proselytizing teenagers, McQuirter was involved in a plot
with Toronto-based neo-Nazi Wolfgang Droege and a group of American
mercenaries to violently overthrow the government of Dominica.

McQuirter’s arrest in 1981 was a vivid wake-up call that the extremist base
in Canada was not a harmless fringe.

The notion of Canada as a multicultural land of tolerance was far from
certain. Toronto newspapers were awash with stories of violent hate crimes
—particularly against South Asians.3 An NBC documentary described
Toronto as a “time bomb of racial tension.”4 The documentary focused on
the white anger festering in a city that had been a bastion of Anglo-Saxon
identity but was becoming increasingly multiracial. The Canadian political
establishment was quick to condemn the NBC coverage as needlessly
sensational. After all, how could a country that had a stated national policy
of multiculturalism be racist? And yet, the same week the show aired,
Toronto suffered three vicious racial attacks.

The city was also dealing with the rising tensions caused by a number of
race-based police shootings. Since the 1960s, Toronto had been transformed
by growing numbers of immigrants from the Caribbean, but conflicts with
the overwhelmingly white police force were becoming a major problem. In
1979, police gunned down Jamaican immigrant Albert Johnson. Two
thousand Black residents marched in the city streets against police violence
and racism.5
When Mayor John Sewell suggested the formation of an independent
board to deal with the concerns of the Black community, he was pilloried in
the press for being anti-cop. The Toronto Sun and municipal politicians like
Art Eggleton set out to ensure Sewell served only one term. At the time, the
police were popular and trusted figures in straight, white Toronto. The “our
cops are tops” campaign included buttons, banners, and rallies that built
widespread white support in the city.

6
The local head of the Catholic Church, Cardinal Emmett G. Carter, was
asked by the city to reassure the Black community that their concerns
would be addressed, but even the cardinal was shocked by what he found.

He stated that the police targeted those who might speak up about police
abuse and said “it was dangerous” for a Black man to attempt to put a
complaint in writing.7
Before his death, Albert Johnson had chosen to go ahead with an official
complaint at the Ontario Human Rights Commission over the constant
police harassment he was receiving. Four days after the police received a
copy of the complaint, Johnson was gunned down in murky circumstances
in his own living room, with his young daughter watching.8
The local Black music scene was galvanized by the killing. Lillian Allen,
the godmother of Canadian hip-hop/dub, called out the police in her piece
“Riddim an’ Hardtimes.” Toronto reggae band Truth and Rights denounced
systemic police racism in their 1981 album Metro’s No. 1 Problem. British
reggae band Black Uhuru mythologized Black youth resistance in Toronto
with the 1981 song “Youth of Eglinton.” Among white bands, the new wave
group the Sharks recorded a song called “Albert Johnson Is Dead.” And
L’étranger wrote a song about Toronto police violence entitled “Metro
Police.”
Yet despite these attempts by the local punk scene to show solidarity with
Toronto’s Black community, it was unclear where the punk movement was
going to land when it came to confronting the disturbing racist currents that
were bubbling up in the early 1980s. Punk was an overwhelmingly white
subculture, and it could be either progressive or reactionary in its challenge
to the status quo. Hamilton band Forgotten Rebels chose the latter when
they ridiculed the plight of Vietnamese immigrants with their song “Bomb
the Boats (And Feed the Fish).” The shock value of Nazi imagery also
appealed to some in the movement. Toronto’s first-wave punk leader Steve
Leckie wore swastikas and called himself “Nazi Dog.” It is said that Kiss
frontman Gene Simmons confronted Leckie on the streets of New York
over his embrace of fascist imagery and a chastened Leckie stopped
wearing the Nazi symbol.9
In the UK, the far-right National Front political party was organizing
among skinheads and fans of the Oi! punk movement, which drew its
influences from football violence and street gangs. As punk dancing moved
from the pogo (up and down) style to slam dancing, the mosh pits in front
of the stage became more violent and testosterone-driven. This provided an
opportunity for neo-Nazi white power punks to bring violence into the
hardcore scene.

The line between youths who ascribed to white power extremism and
those who simply loved more aggressive punk was not always clear. Our
band set up a straightforward policy—anyone wearing a swastika was not
allowed at our shows. Teenage promoter Vera Bigall, who sponsored mod
dances at various Toronto community halls, also made it known that no
fascist symbols would be allowed in her dance hall.

On September 25, 1981, L’étranger opened for California punk band
Dead Kennedys on their first North American tour. We were paid seventy-
five dollars for the gig, and the fee included the obligation to make the
posters and put them up around town. When I arrived at the Masonic
Temple on Yonge Street, I learned that the promoter hadn’t bothered to hire
any security. This was not a problem for most punk events, but this show
felt different. There was a distinct element of menace emanating from a
small segment of fans that included young men sporting swastikas. They
had been drawn to Dead Kennedys because of two provocative songs
—“California Über Alles” and “Nazi Punks Fuck Off.”
Our band hit the stage and the crowd cheered loudly, but I could see kids
being pushed around and hit by some aggressive idiots. At the end of the
first song I thanked the crowd, and then said, “We came here to play for the
kids. We didn’t come to play for fucking Nazis.”
Bedlam ensued. We were showered with spit and multiple projectiles.

The safe thing to do would have been to quit the stage, but we held our
ground. Our road crew spent the whole set ducking bottles, knocking
attackers off the stage, and helping kids who were getting hurt in the front
rows. My face was covered in gob, but the band didn’t flinch.

After our set, our singer Andrew Cash and I stormed into the Dead
Kennedys’ dressing room to confront lead singer Jello Biafra.

“What kind of band welcomes fucking Nazis to their show?” I
demanded.

Jello was a pretty cool guy, but he seemed taken aback by our anger.

When Dead Kennedys took to the stage, a kid with a swastika jumped
onstage to challenge the band and Jello shouted, “Nazism went out years
ago, you little asshole! You’ve got to be an absolute moron to sensationalize
a sickness that literally destroyed millions of innocent people. This song is
dedicated to you and all the other asshole punks out there who think they’re
tough wearing Nazi regalia.”10 With that, the band tore into “Nazi Punks
Fuck Off.”
Marcy Rohn was in the crowd with her new Instamatic camera. She
snapped a few photos of us during our chaotic set but put the camera away
when Dead Kennedys began to play. “It was too dangerous,” she says. “The
Dead Kennedy fans were a bunch of blockheads and Jello pissed me off, as
he was always on his high horse about educating the masses and this crowd
wasn’t progressive at all.”

The show opened my eyes to the need to push back against fascist
elements in the punk scene. Around that time, I came across a pamphlet
calling for music fans and bands to establish a Toronto chapter of Rock
Against Racism (RAR), a movement that arose in response to racist attacks
on the streets of the UK. The pamphlet quoted the RAR manifesto, written
by British activist David Widgery: “We want rebel music, street music.

Music that breaks down people’s fear of one another. Crisis music. Now
music. Music that knows who the real enemy is.”

Nicholas Jennings was one of the people who put the pamphlet together.

He explains why he decided to start RAR in Toronto: “In the early 1980s,
there were all kinds of looming threats. When my friends and I found out
that the KKK had not only set themselves up in Toronto but were leafleting
local high schools, we felt we had to do something.” Jennings looked to the
success of RAR in Britain, which used the influence of musical groups like
the Clash, the Specials, and Steel Pulse to fight the rising power of the
National Front. “We were music fans and it seemed that music could bring
people together and raise issues in a way that nothing else could.”
The founding meeting of RAR in Toronto drew 150 people. The
movement quickly spread with shows at nightclubs, church basements, and
then large halls. “We weren’t concert promoters; we were just volunteers,”
recalls Jennings. “The movement was encouraged by the trends that were
happening all around us. There was openness to new sounds, and it was a
very DIY culture. We called in favours to get a flyer printed or called on
friends to put them up all over town.”

RAR created a powerful crossover of white and Black artists working
together. The shows featured local reggae legends like Leroy Sibbles,
Messanjah, and Horace Faith, along with white punk bands like Rent Boys
Inc. and Young Lions. Political speakers were invited to raise awareness
about related issues such as peace, poverty, and Indigenous rights. The RAR
shows were part of a broader use of punk and reggae to build support for an
array of social movements, from standing in solidarity against the apartheid
regime in South Africa to raising money for feminist work against gender-
based violence.

RAR provided youth with a political education through its zine—Rebel
Music. It also produced a multimedia show that was presented at some city
high schools. As RAR grew, the extremist right in Toronto was pushed into
the margins by numerous grassroots efforts, including the Riverdale Action
Committee Against Racism and other forums that used culture and music to
raise awareness. Music played a key role in driving down any appeal the
extreme right might have had for disaffected white youth.

The activism of the early 1980s in Toronto reflected a much broader level
of political engagement within the music scene. In 1984, Boomtown Rats
singer Bob Geldof and Midge Ure of Ultravox rallied some of the world’s
top musicians to raise funds to alleviate the brutal Ethiopian famine. Their
single “Do They Know It’s Christmas” launched in November 1984 and
was the biggest-selling single in British history to that point. On July 13,
1985, they hosted Live Aid, a sixteen-hour super-concert at both Wembley
Stadium in London and JFK Stadium in Philadelphia. New satellite
technology made it possible to air the concert for an estimated 1.9 billion
viewers around the world.14
In 1985, E Street Band guitarist Steven Van Zandt launched a musical
campaign to enforce the boycott of the South African apartheid regime by
shaming top pop acts like Queen, Linda Ronstadt, and Rod Stewart, who
had accepted huge sums to perform at the exclusively white Sun City resort.

The song “(I Ain’t Going to Play) Sun City” featured the defiant sounds
coming out of the emerging hip-hop scene, with performances by Run-DMC,
DJ Kool Herc, Grandmaster Melle Mel, Afrika Bambaataa, and Kurtis
Blow.

The Sun City campaign represented a dramatic shift in the international
fight against the apartheid regime. For much of the 1960s and early ’70s,
the human rights abuses against the Black population in South Africa had
been conveniently ignored in the West. This began to change following the
brutal repression of the Soweto student uprising of 1976 and the murder of
activist Steve Biko in 1977. As the 1980s dawned, increasing public
pressure came to focus on the fate of African National Congress leader
Nelson Mandela, who had been jailed for life in 1963. Major artists took up
the anti-apartheid struggle in songs like “Biko” by Peter Gabriel, “Nelson
Mandela” by the Specials, and Stevie Wonder’s anti-apartheid anthem “It’s
Wrong (Apartheid).” On June 11, 1988, a seventieth birthday party
featuring some of the biggest acts in show business, including Whitney
Houston, the Eurythmics, and Dire Straits, was held for the imprisoned
leader at Wembley Stadium. More than 600 million people tuned in to the
live satellite feed. This was a high-water mark of musical political activism
that has never been replicated.

The rise of resistance music brought the rich tradition of African artists
into the largely white world of pop. Now cassettes and albums from artists
like Youssou N’Dour, Sipho “Hotstix” Mabuse, Miriam Makeba, and Hugh
Masekela began to be shared and played as part of a growing awareness of
“world” music. Paul Simon cashed in on this awareness with his 1986
album Graceland, featuring Ladysmith Black Mambazo. Even though he
was criticized for breaking the cultural boycott, Simon’s album went on to
sell 16 million copies and won a Grammy.

But the solidarity campaign wasn’t simply about music. There was a
major organizing drive led by NGOs, students, and churches to shame
corporations into divesting from the racist state. In Canada, activist nuns
purchased shares in companies like Alcan so they could show up at
shareholder meetings to challenge corporate investment in South Africa.

Activists took on Canadian banks over loans to South Africa, and the
Eldorado mining corporation for importing uranium from illegally occupied
Namibia.15
L’étranger released a video called “One People” that connected the
struggle in South Africa and the RAR work we were doing in our own
community. The release came as we were finally being featured on
commercial radio thanks to the rise of an upstart radio station in Brampton,
CFNY-FM. DJs Liz Janik and Peter Goodwin were doing groundbreaking
work to promote independent bands. CFNY spearheaded an alternate awards
ceremony known as the U-Knows, a play on the annual industry event the
Juno Awards, which was focused on the corporate rock world in Canada. In
1983 L’étranger was nominated as the most promising independent band.

The nomination was a huge validation and promised to open a lot of doors,
but then we learned that the corporate sponsor for the awards show had
investments in South Africa. As word got out that we were considering
boycotting the ceremony, the organizers called to ask us to reconsider, as we
were going to be announced as the winner. A no-show would send a very
bad message.

Our band were nobodies in the global struggle against apartheid, but it
came down to the question of individual commitment and responsibility. In
the end, the CFNY people who had gone out of their way to support us were
left trying to explain why we had snubbed the ceremony. It left an
impression with some people in the music industry that our band was
difficult and grandstanding. Our refusal to participate was a serious
detriment to our band’s success, but the lines over apartheid had been
drawn. That’s just the way it was in the music world in the early 1980s—
you were either on the side of justice or complicit with racist oppression.

IT HAS BEEN more than forty years since the Toronto march against the police
killing of Albert Johnson. Black music and hip-hop culture dominate the
cultural airwaves. Yet the ghost of Ernst Zündel lives on through a
profusion of online influencers, bot farms, and conspiracy-driven social
media campaigns. The North American Black and Indigenous communities
continue to face injustice at the hands of police and the criminal justice
system. A 2023 report found that 90 percent of Canada’s Black community
believes there is systemic racism in the justice system, with 22 percent of
Black male respondents stating they had been unfairly stopped by police in
the previous 12 months.16 This reality has been made tragically clear to us
again and again with the deaths of Trayvon Martin, Breonna Taylor, George
Floyd, and so many others. In Canada, twenty-five Indigenous people were
killed by the RCMP in the three years between 2017 and 2020.17
To make sense of where we are as a society, it is important to remember
the dangerous memories of the victories of RAR and the activism of the
Toronto Black community that marched for justice for Albert Johnson.

These are early examples of the resistance that has grown into Black Lives
Matter and Indigenous activism for missing and murdered women and girls.

But there is one very concerning difference between then and today. In the
early 1980s, it was possible to push back against Zündel and his ilk because
they were operating from the political margins. Today’s racial justice
movements must struggle in an increasingly toxic environment in which
even elected political leaders amplify hate messages.

Dangerous memories are desperately needed to remind us how ordinary
people and artists can offer a better way.

