Chapter 7
POWER DYNAMICS IN
MARGINAL SPACES
I loved travelling with the band. I saw Canada as a vast and fascinating
land. An adventure. That feeling about this country has never left me.

Playing the various punk rock enclaves wasn’t just about packing a
nightclub; it was an education in building community through the lessons I
learned in each scene. But the majority of time on the road was
monotonous. The band filled the hours on long drives to and from gigs
playing word games or debating the merits of the latest records, the state of
hockey (the Maple Leafs under owner Harold Ballard), and politics.

One time, there were seven of us—four musicians and three roadies—
driving home from a gig in a van supplied by a company called Rent-A-
Wreck. The vehicle lived up to the name. It only had two seats, so the driver
and co-pilot focused on road conditions while the rest of us sat on sleeping
bags amid the amps, drums, and guitars, with no seat belts. And because we
were young and stupid there was a case of beer to help kill the tedium of the
long drive.

When we hit the road, we found ourselves driving straight into a major
winter storm. About one hour into the trip, the wiper-blade mechanism on
the van died. There was no money in the band kitty for a hotel room. It was
a Sunday and there were no garages open anywhere along the highway.

Necessity being the mother of invention, we pulled the laces out of our
combat boots and tied them to the blades. It took almost ten hours to cover
the five-hundred-kilometre distance, each of us taking shifts kneeling
between the driver and co-pilot while pulling the laces back and forth to
clear the blinding snow.

By the time we were a hundred kilometres from Toronto, we were down
to our last pair of laces. Suddenly, Pete, our driver, said, “Ah shit,” and
pulled over to the side of the snowy highway.

“Why are we stopping?” I asked.

“We’ve been flagged down by a cop,” he said dejectedly.

But it turned out that the man with a flashlight and an official-looking
peaked cap wasn’t a cop but an air force officer. His car had slid off the
road in the storm. He had flagged us down in order to catch his flight to
Germany.

We opened the side panel door, and our roadie Big Nick Baljak—who
was wearing his leather jacket and a sleeping bag wrapped around him for
warmth in the barely heated van—said, “If you’ve got laces, we’ll find
room for you.”
Touring is perhaps the quickest way for a young musician to realize why
it’s important to stay in school. Long drives, crappy food, bumping up
against the same five or six guys for days on end; shows where no one turns
up or the management rips you off, and you’re left without a dime in your
pocket. But John Armstrong of the Vancouver band the Modernettes points
out that it was the fans in small towns that made it all worth it: “We were
welcomed like long-lost relatives. In those days, the punk rock community
in every town always seemed to be composed of the best and the brightest.

The scenes were always filled with really smart and interesting people.

There wasn’t a bunch of thuggishness and nihilism. It was just a bunch of
really cool young people having a good time.”

Ottawa, the so-called town that fun forgot, was a great punk rock locale.

The scene was much smaller than in Toronto, which meant there was no
room for cliques and snooty hierarchies. If a band came to town, everyone
went—the hardcore punks, the mod kids, and the artsy types. Many just
came for the music or the fun, but there were a number of local leaders who
believed that being punk was about something more than just buying
records. It was a statement of how to live one’s life. Vig Laliberté (real
name Greg Foise) was an anarchist idealist who inspired youth to work
together on everything from participating in peace marches to putting on
all-ages shows. When there were no punk venues available, Vig and his
gang from the No Pigs collective organized their own shows.

Christine Keess was a tough-looking punk girl with cropped hair. She
appeared to be as hard as nails, but she was the heart and soul of the Ottawa
punk scene. Christine passionately believed in putting her life on the line to
make a difference. One night, we sat together in a freezing squat, talking
into the early morning about how we had a duty to change the world. When
she died in 2015, her obituary stated that she was a social activist who never
gave up on her commitment to effect change both locally and globally.

2
Perhaps the reason the Ottawa scene was so engaged was because it was
supported by some incredible local promoters who were committed to
building an inclusive community. There was journalist Roch Parisien; club
owner Eugene Haslam, who opened the Underground and later Zaphod
Beeblebrox; radio DJ and show promoter Joe Reilly; and Paul Symes, the
founder of the Roxy Club. The first time L’etranger showed up to play the
Roxy, there was a lineup around the block. In Toronto we were just one of a
hundred bands vying for attention; in Ottawa we were feted like stars.

Another huge advantage helped the local punk scene in Ottawa grow—
CKCU-FM, the university radio station with a signal strong enough to reach
the whole city. They played our first recording, “Innocent Hands,” in heavy
rotation. Local commercial rock stations wouldn’t touch our band, but CKCU
helped us and many other artists to flourish. They promoted local acts like
the Restless Virgins, the Randypeters, and Porcelain Forehead.

Ottawa was a great punk rock town, but nearby Montreal was much
harder ground. Montreal may have been Canada’s coolest city, but
according to Sam Sutherland in his punk retrospective Perfect Youth,
“Montreal … was an inhospitable punk landscape … it was disco or
death.”

 In the club scene, punk bands had to be offstage by 10:30; then the
big sound system and lighting rack was turned on for the disco dancers. But
there was a strong small core of punk fans. We played some killer gigs with
groups like Deja Voodoo, Conditioned Response, and the Dub Rifles, who
had left Winnipeg for the punk squats of Montreal.

Our band played one extraordinary show in Montreal opening for
Milwaukee’s Violent Femmes at a roller rink called the Palladium. My bass
stopped working on the first song, and as I fiddled with the amp, Andrew
shouted at me to just keep going. “This audience will kill us if we stop
playing,” he warned. And so, for the next half hour, I jumped around the
stage in a pantomime of aggression and passion, without a note coming
from my amp. The crowd didn’t seem to notice.

But there was another element to Montreal nightlife that made it a
difficult place for punks—the mob. The first punk club in the city was 364
Sound in Old Montreal. Hundreds of kids congregated there to see the few
local punk bands hit the stage and drink illegal beer sold from a makeshift
bar. But the young punk entrepreneurs didn’t realize that the street they had
set up on was part of the patch of one of Montreal’s main crime families.

One day a limousine pulled up to the club and some very tough men in suits
stepped inside and explained that if they were going to stay in operation,
they needed to become part of the family business. Since saying no wasn’t
an option, the club’s owners quickly closed up shop.4
My exposure to the Montreal mafia happened at a show at La Pleine
Lune on Avenue du Parc. Between sets, a well-dressed young music
promoter came up and began raving about the band. He said he had access
to a good recording studio and contacts in radio across North America. He
seemed to have the money to make it all happen. We were thrilled. Until a
punk kid took me aside to say, “Don’t you know who this guy is? He’s with
the Montreal mob. Stay the fuck away.”
We also found ourselves brushing up against some darker criminal
elements in various communities along the 401. Hamilton was a mob and
biker town, with both forces to be found at a restaurant/club called the
Golden Garter. From the outside it looked like a high-end steakhouse—a
hangout for mobster Johnny “Pops” Papalia. But if you went in the back
way, you found yourself in a barroom that was the domain of the local
motorcycle gang. They rented out a spare room in the back to punk kids,
who called it the Golden Gutter. The rule was simple: stay off the bikers’
patch. No kid dared peek into the steakhouse side where Johnny Pops held
court. On our first trip to Hamilton, our manager advised, “You boys aren’t
in Toronto anymore. You’re going to the big city. Keep your mouth shut
onstage because Hamilton is a rough place.” One day on our way to the
Golden Gutter, we learned that the manager had suddenly shut the
establishment and hightailed it out of town. The Hammer was indeed a
rough place.

In the late 1970s and early ’80s, the bars in blue-collar Southern Ontario
were the focus of turf wars between biker gangs like the Outlaws, Banditos,
Satan’s Choice, Para-Dice Riders, and Hells Angels. A gangland biker
killing at a bar in Port Hope in 1978 was the basis for Steve Earle’s song
“Justice in Ontario.” At stake was the trade in drugs, violence, and women
being trafficked through the industrial belt of Ontario.

Our band were naive kids. We regularly played the Kent Hotel in
Waterloo without knowing it was a hangout for the Henchmen Motorcycle
Club, who were on the losing end of a gang war with the Outlaws. The
punk kids hung out upstairs while the main floor was reserved for the
strippers. Once again, the rules were simple—we kept our nose out of what
was going on with the dancers, and the bikers made sure nobody bothered
the punk and college kids who were going upstairs. But this isn’t to say that
trouble didn’t happen. The Kent was the first place where someone threw a
bottle at my head. One of the reasons the band travelled with a crew of
roadies was to protect us, and to ensure we got paid at the end of the night.

Big Nick Baljak, Pete Cash (later of the Skydiggers), Phil “Glueboy”
Cochrane, and my barely teenaged brother Mike were the nicest guys, but
when they were decked out in leather jackets and combat boots, they made
a formidable impression on any skinhead or rocker looking to start a fight.

This came in handy at dives like the Cedar Lounge in London.

In Have Not Been the Same: The CanRock Renaissance, guitarist and
vocalist for the Grapes of Wrath Kevin Kane writes, “I remember the whole
naïveté of everything back then when we were doing our early tours. Half
our shows were in peeler [striptease] bars, because they’re the only ones
that would let a band who dared to play original songs get up on stage.”

“Slumming” at dive bars across the southern industrial belt spoke to a
certain element of privilege, and none of us were aware of the signs of
inequity that were growing in these places. I had no idea of the dynamics
whereby powerful men with strong political connections exploited women
who had no power. In these marginal spaces, our band had little interaction
with the women who made their living doing burlesque or strip dancing to a
jukebox soundtrack. But their world was quickly disappearing.

The changes began in the early 1980s, when Réal Simard, a hitman for
the Montreal-based Cotroni crime family, moved into Southern Ontario.

According to author Stevie Cameron, “Simard felt the Toronto clubs were
run by rank amateurs who were missing the truly lucrative part of this
business: the opportunity to run cocaine into the city through the network of
dancers.”

Simard’s partner was Montreal businessman Frank Majeau, who supplied
nude table dancers from Quebec through his company Prestige
Entertainment. The importing of Quebec table dancers was part of a deal
brokered between the Controni mob, Ontario bike gangs, and Johnny
Papalia’s mobsters. But this expansion into Southern Ontario and the heavy
focus on sex and cocaine quickly drew criminal competition. Simard was
jailed for trying to kill a drug dealer who had attempted to muscle in on his
turf.

Majeau, however, was untouchable, as he was the chief political adviser
to Conservative cabinet minister Roch LaSalle. When LaSalle was elevated
to Minister of Public Works, first under Prime Minister Joe Clark and then
Brian Mulroney, Majeau served as his political point man. The Public
Works portfolio is a plum gig—the government trading space for large
public construction projects and real estate dealings. Majeau had the day
job of chairing the minister’s weekly meetings with key political advisers
and cabinet ministers. His political connections to the Conservative
government gave him serious cache with the mob. In his testimony to the
Montreal police anti-rackets squad, Simard stated, “Johnny Papalia was
seeing a lot of Frank Majeau because organized crime are always interested
in putting their money into legitimate things and investing in land. Majeau
was a very good prospect because he was connected to LaSalle so that he
could always know what bids the government will accept for this land or
this building.”

While artists were able to benefit from the recession of the 1980s, the
rising economic precarity had a severe impact on young working-class
women. A report by the Sex Trade Advocacy and Research (STAR) group
notes that the economic crisis drove many young women to work as nude
table dancers in what was becoming an increasingly exploitative
environment.8
 By the 1990s, the sex industry embraced globalization, as
traffickers began bringing in young women from Eastern Europe and the
Global South. According to the STAR report, “Typically, these women knew
little of Canadian law and labour standards or local expectations, and
arrived with a sizable debt-burden owed to the agent or club owner who
paid their travel and sponsored their work visas or immigration. Their
movement between clubs was restricted, they were responsible for their
debts, and they were expected to comply with the demands of the club
owners and managers.”

Punk kids and art school students had the privilege to peek into the
rougher elements of this twilight world, but we were largely cocooned from
the darker realities. The vulnerable women who worked in those marginal
spaces had no protection. I try to keep this in mind as I find myself, at
times, looking back nostalgically on my youth on the road. Nostalgia is a
symptom of privilege. Dangerous memories challenge us to dig deeper. The
marginal spaces of the twenty-first century are all around us. They exist in
the online world of abuse and harassment. They are manifest in the
exploitation of people through human trafficking, a menace that cuts
through all elements of society.
