Chapter 8
THE GOSPEL OF
LIBERATION
L’étranger was one of the more political bands in the Canadian punk scene.

During one of our shows at the Edge, promoter Gary Topp commented to
his business partner, Gary Cormier, that Andrew and I should become
politicians because we spent so much time onstage talking about issues like
the peace movement and social justice. In time, both of us would be elected
to Canada’s parliament.

My political education began in high school. I was walking through the
busy hallway of L’Amoreaux Collegiate in north Scarborough when grade-
ten history teacher Mr. Mike Naemsch called me over to his classroom.

“Hey, Angus,” he said. “You’re a Catholic, right? What do you know
about the situation in El Salvador?”
I shrugged.

He gave me a photocopied newsletter from the Roman Catholic
Archdiocese of San Salvador, but it wasn’t like any Church bulletin I had
ever seen before. It was a list of human rights violations, disappearances,
and killings in various parishes across El Salvador. The bulletin listed the
names of Church workers, peasants, and priests who had been murdered or
imprisoned. Those photocopied pages blew my mind.

The history teacher had pegged me right. Being a Catholic wasn’t so
much about individual piety; Catholic identity existed within a broad
cultural network, from the schools we attended to the parish system, with its
large outreach program of clubs, dances, and reflection groups. And
underpinning it all was a sense of social obligation. As individuals, we were
called to work for a better world for all. Most often, Sunday sermons were
bland exhortations about being nice, but occasionally more activist theology
was on display. One Sunday, the priest at my suburban parish came out on
the altar wearing a button in solidarity with the United Farm Workers union,
who were fighting for justice for the Mexican and Filipino fruit pickers in
California. He told us that it was our duty as Catholics to boycott grapes to
show our support for the workers engaged in a long struggle for fair wages
and safe working conditions. My mother stopped buying grapes that day;
we didn’t eat grapes for years.

This social activism wasn’t seen as left-wing or right-wing but was
viewed as part of the religious obligation to practise the works of mercy—
feeding the hungry, housing the homeless, giving drink to the thirsty and
clothes to the naked, and visiting the prisoners.

In handing me the bulletin from San Salvador, my history teacher was
presenting me with a challenge. What was I going to do to help make this
situation right? What responsibility did I have to make a difference in the
world?
I didn’t have a clue.

But I started to notice posters glued and stapled to walls throughout
downtown Toronto, inviting people to organizing meetings for various
Central American solidarity groups held in community-based centres like
Bloor Street United Church. I was both excited and nervous to attend my
first event, where I encountered many Latin American activists and older
hippies who had long-term experience in political action. The solidarity
networks in Toronto organized marches, letter-writing campaigns, and
fundraising concerts.

Thus began my education in the brutal history of economic exploitation
in Latin America. I learned that a peasant activist group known as the
Sandinistas had recently overthrown the dictatorship of Nicaraguan leader
Anastasio Somoza. The Sandinista revolution had given hope to people
across Latin America who were under the thumb of numerous American-
backed dictatorships. The leaders in those countries had no intention of
letting either democracy or social revolution get off the ground.

El Salvador was controlled by the Fourteen Families oligarchy that used
the violence of the military to maintain their dominance of the sugarcane,
coffee, and cotton industries. Following the cautionary example of the
Nicaraguan revolution, the Salvadoran military established a “public order”
law allowing them to target, arrest, and kill anyone involved in
“subversive” activities. These activities included holding public meetings,
providing education, organizing peasant groups, and engaging in
humanitarian work. The very kind of meetings I was attending in Toronto
would have marked me for death in El Salvador.

The Fourteen Families outsourced terror through the use of privatized
death squads.1 As the army and terror gangs murdered their way through
the few democratic and social justice forces in the country, people fell back
on the only institution that was left—the Catholic parishes serving people in
every village and barrio in the country. And, in response, the murder squads
targeted the Church.

ACROSS LATIN AMERICA, military juntas were struggling to contain the
influence of a grassroots religious movement known as liberation theology.

It was a theology rooted in the principle that the God of history was on the
side of the poor and oppressed. In 1969, Church leaders from across Latin
America gathered in Medellín, Colombia, and issued a declaration that
every Catholic was required to commit themselves to the spiritual and
economic liberation of all people.

The generals denounced liberation theology as a Marxist threat, but
liberation theology drew its inspiration from the texts of Jesus, the writings
of Catholic saints, and the teachings of Old Testament prophets like Isaiah,
Amos, and Hosea. Brazilian bishop Dom Hélder Câmara was an outspoken
advocate of liberation theology. “When I feed the poor,” he said, “I am
called a saint. When I am asked why they have no food, they call me a
communist.” In North America, there were parallels with the Protestant
Social Gospel movement of the early twentieth century, and with Martin
Luther King’s fight to bring Black liberation from segregation.

Liberation theology became possible because of dramatic changes in the
Catholic Church. In 1962, Pope John XXIII stunned the secretive Vatican
Curia when he announced he was inviting Church leaders from all over the
world to discuss what changes were needed in the 1,900-year-old Catholic
Church. The process, commonly known as Vatican II, transformed
Catholicism and led to a dramatic increase in social activism, ecumenism,
and empowerment for women, youth, and lay people in the Church. It was a
heady time, when ordinary Catholics felt that a medieval institution had
finally arrived in the modern world. It was in accord with this spirit of
renewal that bishops from around the world gathered in Rome in 1971 to
support the Latin American call for liberation of the poor. The official
statement from the bishops was bold: “Listening to the cry of those who
suffer violence and are oppressed by unjust systems and structures … we
have shared our awareness of the church’s vocation to … [proclaim] the
Good News to the poor, freedom to the oppressed, and joy to the afflicted
… Action on behalf of justice … [is] a constitutive dimension of … the
Church’s mission for the redemption of the human race and its liberation
from every oppressive situation.”

In rural El Salvador, Jesuit priest Rutilio Grande was practising liberation
theology through the establishment of base communities in various villages.

These were rural study groups run by priests who worked alongside the
peasants in the day while offering evening courses in religion, economics,
and community organizing. The Jesuits taught the people to reflect on how
their poverty and unpaid wages were not the will of God but the result of
economic oppression.

Grande faced serious threats from the military, but he reassured his
volunteers by saying, “They have never killed a priest.”

 But in March
1977, Grande was murdered by security forces. This created an immense
crisis for Óscar Romero, the newly appointed Archbishop of San Salvador.

Romero was not a supporter of liberation theology; he was well connected
with the aristocratic families and hoped he could serve as a moderate voice
to smooth out divisions between the military and Church activists. But
Romero was unable to hold back the rising tide of violence, and Grande’s
murder was the beginning of a full-on assault on Church workers. More
deaths, kidnappings, and torture quickly followed. Graffiti began to appear
on the walls as a warning: Be a patriot—kill a priest.

While many in the Salvadoran Church hierarchy kept quiet, Romero
spoke out, but he was scrupulous in trying to appear unaligned. He
denounced both the military killings and the left-wing kidnappings of junta
supporters. He hired young lawyers to track the killing of peasants and
community leaders; they put together dossiers on the murder and torture
campaign being waged by the death squads. Romero set up his own radio
show where he spoke out against the killings. In a nation where the press
was silenced, the radio sermons became an important news source to
understand what was happening in the country.

4 The parish bulletins served
as an alternate media that threatened the narrative of the power structure.

Romero begged Pope John Paul II to help end the violence. The pope was
youngish and energetic, and he seemed ready to take on the challenges of
the time. His nomination as pope had come as upstart dockworkers in
Gdańsk, Poland, were confronting the communist authorities with their
grassroots solidarity movement. To the Poles—and North Americans, who
were looking for a strong line against the Eastern Bloc—the Polish-born
pope was a charismatic rock star.

At the time of John Paul II’s 1979 visit to Latin America, state violence
against Church workers had exploded, with more than 850 clergy arrested,
tortured, or murdered.5 There was immense optimism that the pope would
send a strong message against the killings; instead, he publicly lectured the
nuns and priests about their obligation to stay out of politics. Political and
religious observers saw the pope’s trip as a resounding rejection of
liberation theology.

6
When Romero was finally given a chance to meet John Paul II, he
showed him photographs of the priests who had been murdered by the death
squads and pleaded for him to address the growing state violence. But the
pope brushed him off. “Well, now don’t exaggerate it,” he said. “It is
important that you enter into a dialogue with the government … find
common ground with them … We should not only be concerned with
defending social justice and love of the poor; we should also be concerned
with the danger of the Communists exploiting the situation, that would be
bad for the Church.”

On March 24, 1980, an assassin gunned down Archbishop Romero while
he was at the altar in the cathedral in San Salvador. It was clear that he had
been murdered by a right-wing death squad whose links ran directly to the
CIA and the White House. The fact that he was killed so publicly at the
holiest moment of the Catholic Mass was a shocking afront. The
assassination has been called one of the most notorious killings in the long
and dark years of the Cold War.

8 Yet there was silence from the Vatican.

Pope John Paul II’s failure to condemn the death squads came as
incoming US president Ronald Reagan was making it clear he was
committed to a “splendid little war” against the “communists” in El
Salvador.

9 The pope’s silence and Reagan’s enthusiasm for a dirty war in
Latin America unleashed a bloodbath. Just one month after Reagan’s
election, the Salvadorean military raped, beat, and murdered four American
women. Three of the women—Maura Clarke, Ita Ford and Dorothy Kazel
—were nuns. The fourth woman, Jean Donovan, was a twenty-seven-year-
old Catholic volunteer who worked at a rural aid station. Donovan was
engaged to be married, and was growing increasingly terrified by the
violence in the country. She wanted to go back to the United States but felt
an obligation to stay; as a white American, she thought she was in a position
to help families who otherwise had no support. The photographs of the
brutalized bodies of these American women being unearthed from a
makeshift grave brought the horrors of El Salvador home to North America.

To the average Catholic it was inconceivable that nuns would be abused
in such a manner. Yet Reagan’s secretary of state Alexander Haig falsely
claimed that the women were killed in an exchange of gunfire. The White
House was sending a message that the Reagan administration was willing to
overlook murderous criminality against American church women if it
served the Cold War interests of Washington. Once again, there was silence
from the pope.

In 1981, Canadian bishops met with Liberal foreign affairs minister Mark
McGuigan to demand the government speak out against the violence in
Latin America. In the middle of the meeting, McGuigan informed the
Church leaders that he had received a message from the Vatican’s Canadian
representative that when it came to the issue of the murdered and raped
women, the bishops did not speak for the Catholic Church.10 The next day,
the Papal Nuncio Angelo Palmas held his own special meeting with
McGuigan. He made it clear that the Church’s only function in the world of
politics was to speak out against “abortion or birth control.”

The White House appreciated that, while John Paul insisted his priests
keep silent about economic injustice in Latin America, he was more than
willing to challenge the Soviet power structure in Eastern Europe. This
made him a potent Cold Warrior. To Reagan, the political quid pro quo
came down to the issue of women’s reproductive rights. To build their
alliance with the Vatican, the Reagan administration announced it was
cutting funding to any international aid project that provided birth control or
abortion services to women.12
The idealistic days of Vatican II were over, and the dark stars of the
1980s sky were beginning to align on political and religious lines.

But dangerous memories of this era have proven stubbornly resistant.

Four decades after Romero’s murder, Pope Francis began the process of
recognizing Romero as a saint of the Church. Father Grande was also
named a saint and martyr. The calls to make Romero a saint had been
ignored for decades by John Paul II and his successor Benedict XVI, a
doctrinaire conservative. But Francis was a Jesuit and the first pope from
Latin America. His decision to recognize Romero and Grande as saints of
the Church was widely interpreted as an effort to restore the social justice
vision of liberation that had been sullied by the Church in the 1980s.

