Chapter 9
THE CRUDE HARD FACTS
To be a punk in the early 1980s was to hate Margaret Thatcher. The decade
was a time of larger-than-life political figures, but Thatcher stood larger
than them all. In an era of defiant counter-revolutionaries—Reagan,
Khomeini, John Paul—she was by far the most defiant. Thatcher treated
those standing in her way as personal enemies—even those in her own
party. She responded to the call for justice from the working class,
racialized youth, and Irish nationalists with undisguised venom. And they
hated her back.

When the British ska band the English Beat played their first Toronto
show on October 3, 1980, every kid in the Masonic Temple boisterously
sang along with the anthem “Stand Down Margaret”—a call for the newly
elected British prime minister to resign. It was the first in a long litany of
punk songs denouncing Thatcher’s reign; no other politician has drawn
anywhere near the cultural vitriol and rage. There was a multitude of songs
about the “Iron Lady,” from the Poison Girls’ “Another Hero” (1981) to
Morrissey’s “Margaret on the Guillotine” (1989). Elvis Costello promised
to stand over the PM’s grave and “Tramp the Dirt Down” (1989), while
indie rock band Hefner predicted that people would dance in the streets on
“The Day That Thatcher Dies” (2000).

In Canada, it would have been unthinkable to express such personal hate.

Bruce Cockburn could accuse political leaders of not giving a flying fuck
about the poor, but he didn’t mention any of them by name.1 This was
Canada, after all. Real politics happened elsewhere.

Canada and the UK seemed worlds apart in 1980, but ironically, Prime
Ministers Thatcher and Pierre Trudeau were equally focused on the same
issue: deciding who would reap the benefits from massive increases in oil
production. Thatcher opted for privatization; Trudeau attempted to ensure
that production benefited the Canadian people. They were radically
different approaches, but both policies ended in roughly the same place:
selling off the public interest, another destructive political tactic of the
1980s.

Anthony Barnett writes that Thatcher’s economic “revolution” was only
made possible by the huge oil revenues coming in from the North Sea oil
fields. “Her ‘conviction’ would have been nothing but folly without the
North Sea’s black gold. It was oil revenues that bankrolled the
unemployment, the destruction of manufacturing, the high exchange rate,
the termination of British coal mining, and the big-bang that turned London
into a capital of global neo-liberalism.”

In 1970, British Petroleum hit huge reserves of oil in the Forties Field of
the North Sea. By the late 1970s, as the first revenues began to flow, it was
apparent to Labour prime minister James Callaghan that the offshore rigs
represented a once-in-a-century opportunity to resurrect economic and
social life in Great Britain. But Callaghan wasn’t the one who would get to
decide how that revenue was spent. On the eve of the 1979 general election,
British labour unions launched a series of strikes that became known as the
Winter of Discontent. This sank Callaghan’s pro-worker government and
led to the election of the militantly anti-union Margaret Thatcher.

When Thatcher came to power, the price of oil was a modest $13 a
barrel. But the Iranian Revolution caused the price to jump to $39.50 a
barrel.3
 (This would be the equivalent of $150 a barrel in 2024.) It was a
price jump that dwarfed the shock of the 1973 energy crisis and caused
chaos in an economy already struggling with a recession. But it provided a
spectacular windfall for Thatcher’s treasury, and was the key to the
revolution she was about to unleash.

At the time, the British media was focused on a series of race riots that
had begun in Bristol in April 1980 and spread to cities across the island.

Photos of young Black and white youth fighting police in the streets of
Liverpool, Brixton, Leeds, Birmingham, and Manchester captured the angry
hopelessness of the inner cities and became iconic images of 1980s Britain.

Oil revenues gave Thatcher the opportunity to invest in the inner cities to
deal with the crisis of unemployment and alienation. Many British
Conservatives urged her to take this approach. Consensus and solutions to
Britain’s problems could be found, they argued. But Thatcher was not
having it. She was determined to implement the shock doctrine of the
Chicago School and tear down the foundations of the postwar welfare state.

Her manifesto was blunt: “There is no such thing as society.”4 She was
determined to promote individualism and self-interest over the common
good.

Like in the United States, the shock came quickly to the United Kingdom
with the imposition of high interest rates and cuts to government programs.

The nation tumbled into mass unemployment, but the economic crisis was
only one of a multitude of problems confronting British society. In the
infamous Maze Prison, prisoners from the Irish Republican Army (IRA)
began a series of hunger strikes that led to the harrowing deaths of ten
young men. Compromises could have been reached to save their lives, but
Thatcher was not going to blink. The needless cruelty of their deaths
shocked people, and the global Irish diaspora portrayed Thatcher as an
unfeeling monster.

To Conservative Party members who were increasingly concerned about
her refusal to compromise, she was unwavering: “To those waiting with
bated breath for that favourite media catchphrase ‘the U-turn,’ I have only
one thing to say. You turn if you want to. This lady’s not for turning.”

As 1982 dawned, some Conservative stalwarts were convinced Thatcher
needed to be replaced. But then, in April 1982, the Argentinian military
junta launched a surprise invasion of the Falkland Islands. The ownership of
the Falklands/Malvinas had been disputed ever since the British Empire
took control in 1841. Conservative cabinet colleagues were worried that
Thatcher’s bellicose response would lead to a military disaster. It seemed
highly doubtful that the British navy could succeed halfway around the
world against a well-armed enemy fighting in their own backyard. The
Pentagon also predicted a humiliating defeat for the British.6
But Thatcher invoked the spirit of Winston Churchill and sent the Royal
Navy to retake the islands. It could have gone either way, until the sinking
of the Argentinian cruiser General Belgrano that drowned more than three
hundred Argentinian sailors. The British public was galvanized. Thatcher’s
victory in the Falklands made her politically untouchable.

She now brought the fight to the British working class. In 1984, Thatcher
stared down the militant National Union of Mineworkers. What began as a
fight over the closure of some depleted coal operations exploded into a total
war between the trade unions and the British prime minister. By the time
the strikes were over, an economic and regional rift had been driven into
British politics that has never healed. A way of life for broad sections of
England, Scotland, and Wales was systematically destroyed during the
Thatcher years. During the 1980s, the once-mighty British coal industry
shed 200,000 jobs, or nearly 90 percent of its workforce.

And that was just the beginning. With the industrial unions in retreat,
Thatcher rewrote labour laws to strip British workers of the ability to
maintain the closed-shop system that secured union presence in the
workplace. Worker precarity was now official state policy.

BUT THATCHER’S REAL legacy was the way she squandered petroleum
revenues. During her tenure, more than £70 billion flowed in from the
North Sea rigs. She had the wealth to build a truly modern and inclusive
state. Investments could have been made in the economically devastated
towns of the north, where an entire generation of workers had been pushed
to the margins. But she had no interest in upgrading hospitals, diversifying
the economy, or fixing decaying infrastructure.

Instead, the enormous oil wealth was given away in an orgy of winnings
for speculators.7
 By the end of Thatcher’s reign, the British treasury had
nothing to show for the boom years as she systematically cut petroleum
royalties down to nothing. She then sold off the public share in BP and
Britoil. The public utility British Gas was sold off, as was British Telecom,
in what was at the time the “largest privatization the world had ever seen.”

British Airways was sold for £900 million. British Steel for £5 billion.

Thatcher sold off public water utilities and a vast stock of public housing.

These sales gave the illusion of robust government finances, but without
reinvesting the funds, the public lost in the long term. Former Conservative
Prime Minister Harold Macmillan said that Thatcher’s economic vision
amounted to little more than a “selling of the family silver.”

Privatization was promoted as the means to promote greater investment
in the private sector. An economic review in the Cambridge Journal of
Economics notes that privatization was an “ideological” exercise that failed.

During this frenzied yard sale of public assets, “the UK’s rate of gross
investment by business was one of the lowest in the OECD.”10 The flush of
oil money, coupled with huge tax cuts and the privatization of public
utilities, created an overheated economy that resulted in the disastrous side
effects of artificially high unemployment and low investment.11
At the end of Thatcher’s term, Britain had more unemployed people than
when she came to power. But the wealth of those who benefited from the
sell-off of public assets had skyrocketed. This was the so-called economic
miracle of Thatcherism. Like Friedman, like Reagan, her “miracle” was to
shift public wealth to the bank accounts of the emerging 1 percent while
leaving public institutions weak and underfunded. She became a hero to an
upcoming generation of young right-wing activists who believed the only
role of government was to accelerate the accumulation of private wealth
while reducing investments in public infrastructure.

THATCHER’S DECISION TO sell off the “family silver” came from a hardline
ideological motivation. In Canada, a similar sell-off took place, but it
started from a very different place. Where Thatcher pushed a privatized
vision of resource development, the Trudeau government attempted to put
in place “an energy program for the people of Canada.”12 At issue was the
immense oil wealth of Alberta.

The Canadian oil industry was largely run out of boardrooms in Houston.

Nonetheless, Canadian taxpayers played a big role in supporting its
expansion. When the industry expressed its wariness about sinking money
into the Alberta tar sands, the federal government joined the provincial
government of Peter Lougheed in using huge amounts of public money to
build the infrastructure to make the tar sands viable. When the fledgling
Syncrude oil sands operation looked like it would fail, the federal
government stepped in with a 15 percent ownership stake.13
The Trudeau government put forth a plan to drive a pipeline to the
Beaufort Sea to break the stranglehold of American control. The problem
was that it ran through the environmentally sensitive Mackenzie Valley and
the ecologically fragile Arctic waters. The pipeline faced fierce opposition
from Indigenous communities, church groups, and civil society. When
Frank Blair, president of Foothills Pipe Lines Ltd. of Calgary, went north to
smooth things over, he was confronted by Dene chief Frank T’Seleie, who
didn’t mince words. “You are the 20th-century General Custer,” he said.

“You are coming with your troops to slaughter us and steal land that is
rightfully ours. You are coming to destroy a people that have a history of
30,000 years. Why? For 20 years of gas? Are you really that insane?”

The public backlash against the pipeline was so sustained that the project
was shelved in 1977. Justice Thomas Berger, who was tasked to find a
solution, reported that Canada needed to get serious about the obligation to
undertake proper Indigenous consultation. For the first time, Canada’s
petro-state agenda was blocked by Indigenous resistance. This was the first
of many historic Indigenous wins that would redefine Canadian resource
policy in the coming decades.

Even with the failure of the Mackenzie Valley project, the Trudeau
government was convinced that the oil fields of Western Canada could be
developed to benefit the larger national interest. On October 28, 1980,
finance minister Allan MacEachen stood in the House of Commons and
announced the creation of the National Energy Program (NEP) to “establish
the basis for Canadians to seize control of their own energy future … [to]
offer to Canadians, all Canadians, the real opportunity to participate … and
to share in the benefits of [oil] industry expansion.”15 The NEP limited the
price that Canadian consumers could be charged for oil and natural gas
while imposing an export tax on sales to the United States. A poll noted that
75 percent of the public supported government efforts to use state power
and investment to increase Canadian ownership of the western oil fields.16
The government tasked the publicly owned company Petro-Canada with
securing a larger Canadian stake in petroleum projects. This came in the
form of a buyback clause giving Petro-Canada a 25 percent ownership stake
in every project on federal Crown lands. Special tax incentives were put in
place for any company that had more than 50 percent Canadian ownership
to explore on federal lands.

The response from the American oil giants was immediate. One oilman
remembers that the morning after MacEachan’s speech, the oil companies
in Alberta “just shut ’er down.”17 Companies like Exxon, Gulf, Texaco,
Mobil, Amoco, and Chevron suspended projects and froze investments that
had been underway in the oil fields. Behind the scenes, Houston oil
executives were working closely with the Reagan administration to send a
message to Canada. Reagan made it clear that he wanted the NEP “buried.”
By August 1981, seven bills had been introduced to Congress to target
Canada for economic retaliation.18
The NEP was established as oil prices were at a peak, but oil production
was overextended, and the world soon faced a major glut in production. By
1982, oil prices were falling globally. In Alberta, thousands of workers were
laid off, leading to an exodus from the province. With mortgage rates at the
already precipitously high rate of 15 percent, the shutdown of the oil sector
caused a housing disaster that forced thirteen Alberta financial institutions
into bankruptcy.

19 The economic shock was never forgotten in Alberta, as
successive right-wing governments reframed the larger economic crisis of
the time as being caused by meddling from the federal government. Even
forty years later, right-wing interests continue to use the Pierre Trudeau
government’s intervention in the NEP to inflame regional alienation and
conspiracies.

Overlooked in this version of history is the role played by the corporate
sector in putting an end to a nationalist and public interest focus on the
Canadian economy. Their mouthpiece was the Business Council on
National Issues (BCNI), which had been recently established to advance
corporate interests. The founding chairs were picked from Imperial Oil and
Noranda Mines, a testament to the political muscle of Canada’s resource
industries.

In 1981, as the Friedman doctrine took hold in the United States and the
UK, the BCNI hired an aggressive young conservative named Thomas
d’Aquino to chart a more militant path for corporate Canada. D’Aquino’s
lobbying efforts were immense, amounting to what many felt was the
construction of a parallel government. Business writer Peter C. Newman
described him as the “Prime Minister in waiting.”20 D’Aquino was
determined to get the federal government out of the way of capital.

Challenging the Trudeau government’s stumble over the NEP was a crucial
first step. He then began to push for a free trade agreement that would limit
Canada’s ability to set a national agenda for the economy. In 1981,
d’Aquino’s free trade message was still considered too radical for any of
Canada’s political parties, but the times were dramatically changing.

In 1982, as unemployment in Canada ran between 13 and 19 percent,
Prime Minister Trudeau held a series of “fireside chats” where he laid out
what he considered to be the new realities of the Canadian economy. Gone
was the nationalist talk of using government economic policy to build an
independent resource strategy. Instead, he spoke of the “tough new world of
competition” and the need for Canadians to focus on the emerging global
economy.

21 As activist Tony Clarke writes, “Trudeau’s ‘sermonettes’ [as
the Globe and Mail dubbed them at the time] had sent a signal about
economic policymaking in Canada for the eighties … it was becoming clear
that the interests of capital would predominate over labour and other sectors
of society in the future. These trends signified the dawn of a new corporate
agenda in the eighties.”

The 1980s counter-revolution had arrived in Canada, and d’Aquino’s
parallel government was in charge.

SO WHERE ARE we, forty years from Thatcher’s privatization rush and
Trudeau’s NEP? In the 1980s, the long-standing belief that government
should have a say in how resources are developed and services are
delivered was soundly trashed. With the NEP dead, successive Canadian
governments followed the Thatcher road map of selling off the public stake
in our petroleum resources. At the same time, the government provided
billions in public money to sustain the expansion of the Fort McMurray tar
pits, even though they have been identified as the dirtiest and most carbon-
intensive petroleum source in the world.23 The only public stake that
remains in the ownership of Canada’s oil fields belongs to communist
China, as the Harper government approved two state-owned Chinese
companies taking a 16 percent stake in Canada’s Syncrude operations.24
Attempts by Prime Minister Justin Trudeau to rein in the massive
emissions increases from the Alberta tar sands have been heavily resisted by
the oil lobby and western premiers who continue to exploit the forty-year-
old alienation caused by the NEP. Canada remains the only country in the G7
whose emissions have not decreased, despite our numerous international
commitments to address the crisis of rising methane and CO2
 emissions
from oil and gas.25
In the UK, the ghosts of the 1980s returned to haunt the 2020s when the
nation faced a massive energy crisis and families found themselves unable
to pay their energy bills. The situation became so dire that former Prime
Minister Gordon Brown mused about the need to bring the nation’s energy
companies back under public control.26 Brown was just one in a chorus of
voices pushing the Conservative government to rethink the privatized
model as insufficient to protect public interest and need. The slow-moving
hurricane of the 1980s has hit Britain with gale-force winds.

