Chapter 10
THE MOMENT THAT
CHANGED EVERYTHING
The Cabana Room was a faded 1940s-style beer parlour on the second floor
of the Spadina Hotel in Toronto. It had small square red tables, a tacky
painting of a tropical island on the wood-panelled wall, and a TV that was
never on. Still, it was a great live music venue. Bands like Lowest of the
Low, Sturm Group, and Kinetic Ideals called the Cabana Room home. The
Skydiggers were just one of many great acts that built their sound doing
Monday acoustic nights. Bartender Jimmy Scopas booked the bands and
played the role of loud Greek uncle to every young musician in the city.

If you complained that you weren’t getting gigs on a weekend, Jimmy
would respond gruffly, “You guys think you’re fucking rock stars.” His
taste in music was simple—there was good music and bad music. Good
music sold beer. Bad music didn’t, and got the band fired. Jimmy explained
the quid pro quo: “If you don’t put up fucking posters all over the city to
bring in the crowd, why should I hire you? And tell your fans that I don’t
sell water or pop. I sell beer.”
Jimmy liked our band. We filled the room and the crowd bought beer.

The fact that many of our fans were underage didn’t seem to matter. Jimmy
didn’t put up with bad behaviour and there were rarely any problems.

We were booked for a gig on August 20, 1982. That was the night a
young woman from Edmonton walked into the club and my world stood
still.

Brit Griffin was a postgrad university student who had arrived in town
only days before. She was brought to the club by writer Michael
Glassbourg, who was doing some work with Rock Against Racism. He
invited Brit out to see the political band that was helping drive the RAR
agenda in Toronto.

Brit came up to me during the break and introduced herself.

“Brit?” I responded. “That’s a funny name.” She wasn’t like any of the
punk fans I knew. She had long red hair, wore no makeup, and didn’t try to
mimic the cool mod fashions of the other girls in the club.

“It’s a nickname,” she said.

“Who gave it to you?”
She shrugged. “My real name is Lauren.”
“That’s pretty.”
She winced. “My mother named me after Lauren Bacall.”
“No shit? Lauren Bacall?”
She shrugged again. She wasn’t interested in talking about her name. And
music wasn’t really her thing. She wanted to ask me questions about the
stuff I was saying onstage. She wanted me to clarify what I meant. Brit had
strong feminist politics from her work with a Woman Against Violence
Against Women (WAVAW) collective in Alberta. She had volunteered at the
rape crisis centre and done workshops on sexual violence in the Fort
MacMurray oil camp. This woman was a badass. So much so that I
panicked, spilled my beer, and started talking stupidly like the boy I was.

We became inseparable. Talking. Arguing. Exploring the city. Falling in
love. Within two months we moved in together. It was Halloween 1982 and
I brought all my worldly possessions—a desk I’d had since grade six, a big
army coat that doubled as a bed, and my bass guitar. I was nineteen; she
was twenty-two.

I brought in between forty and sixty dollars a week through washing
dishes at Emilio’s restaurant on Queen Street East and playing in the band.

As she was finishing her studies, she earned money as a house cleaner.

Nonetheless, it was still possible for us to afford an apartment on the second
floor of a house downtown. Brit was finishing her master’s degree in the
philosophy of education, but she had no interest in teaching. Like me, she
felt there was something else out there that we needed to take on.

I had been drawn to punk rock by the belief that the fight for justice
wasn’t simply theoretical or about going to rallies; it had to be lived in one’s
everyday life. Other than wearing a leather jacket and sporting an anarchist
button, where could punk take you? Vancouver’s hardcore band D.O.A. had a
slogan: “TALK – ACTION = 0.” I felt the same way but wasn’t sure what
taking action actually meant in reality. That’s why I was drawn to liberation
theology.

I read books by the monk Thomas Merton, the philosopher Søren
Kierkegaard, and the Brazilian theologian Leonardo Boff. At one point I
even went to visit a Trappist monastery. It was kind of cool to wake up at
two in the morning to hear the monks singing in the chapel, but by the
second day the overall silence of the place drove me up the wall.

Contemplation was not for me.

One night, Brit and I were sitting in our roach-infested apartment on
College Street. I was pontificating about the state of the world when Brit
interrupted.

“So, what do you actually want to do?”
“I don’t have a clue,” I admitted.

“Well, let’s start looking around and find a way that we can make a
difference,” she said.

“Maybe we should volunteer overseas,” I suggested.

“Maybe we should do something right here,” she countered.

“Well, like what?”
“We could start a community. Live with like-minded people. Start a
garden.”
I wanted to do something dramatic like overseas service. Brit was more
rooted in trying to build something from the ground up.

We put up a few notices at the university and at St. Michael’s Cathedral,
inviting people to come together to talk about setting up some kind of
intentional community. We weren’t looking for roommates but wanted to
find people who shared our interest in questions of faith and how to make
the world a better place. The only person who responded to our ad was an
uptight religious guy who was totally freaked out when he realized that Brit
and I weren’t married.

So much for that idea.

This period of blue-skying ideas for changing the world went on as Brit
carried on with her studies and I continued to tour with the band. L’étranger
now had two records out and we were gaining more attention. It felt like a
dream come true, but I kept asking myself whether I should be doing more
than just singing about the problems of the world.

This combination of guilt and curiosity led me to buy an autobiography
of Dorothy Day, the founder of the Catholic Worker Movement. I knew
very little about Day other than the fact that many were calling her the most
influential Catholic in North America. On the streetcar home from the
bookstore, I read that the Catholic Worker Movement had established
houses for the homeless across the United States. But these weren’t just
charity institutions; they were centres for social activism. Day said that we
needed to rebuild society from the grassroots up, and this meant living with
the poor. By the time I got home, I was on fire. This was it. This was what
we were going to do. I waved the book around, telling Brit she had to read
it. The truth was, I hadn’t gotten past the first two chapters.

A PHOTOGRAPH OF Dorothy Day taken just a few years before her death
shows an old woman in a sun hat staring resolutely up at police officers
whose weapons are clearly visible. The photograph was taken in 1973 when
she was on a picket line supporting striking farm workers in the San
Joaquin Valley in California. She arrived at two in the morning and spent
the day in the hot sun, patiently lecturing the police on their need to show
solidarity with the grape workers. Instead, the cops hauled her off to jail.

Day was no stranger to arrest. She had first been arrested, and badly
mistreated, at nineteen, as a suffragette. In her early twenties she had been
subjected to deplorable treatment by Chicago police after being arrested at a
safe house for the Industrial Workers of the World (Wobblies). She had been
arrested numerous times since in peace demonstrations.

In terms of a radical American activist pedigree, Day’s resumé couldn’t
be beat. She was immersed in the revolutionary politics of the Wobblies,
anarchists, and communists. Day had no religious background but was
drawn to the mystery of darkened Catholic churches lit by candles. She
watched in fascination as her immigrant neighbours got up on Sunday
mornings to go to Mass. “It was the great mass of the poor, the workers,
who were the Catholics in the country and this fact in itself drew me to the
Church,” she wrote.1
The birth of her daughter Tamar in 1926 pushed this left-wing journalist
to take a step toward formal association with the Catholic Church. One day
she was out with her infant when she stopped a nun on the street and asked
how she could have her daughter baptized. Joining the Church set her adrift
from her left-wing community, yet she had little in common with the
Catholic mainstream. It was the dark days of the Depression, and fascism
was on the march across Europe. Day was appalled that churches and
religious charities, whose mission was to help the poor, often treated the
unemployed as the authors of their own misfortunes. The Church provided
charity but ignored the structural issues that had caused millions to lack the
ability to feed themselves. As a journalist and a social revolutionary, Day
decided that the one thing she could do to address the moral and economic
crisis of the age was to start a newspaper.

On May Day 1933, Dorothy Day stepped into Tompkins Square Park in
New York City with a small group of youthful supporters to sell her
newspaper, the Catholic Worker. Her first editorial had a simple approach
that avoided stridency and piety: “For those who are sitting on park benches
in the warm spring sunlight. For those who are huddling in shelters trying to
escape the rain. For those who are walking the streets in the all but futile
search for work. For those that think there is no hope for the future, no
recognition of their plight—this little paper is addressed.”

 In the
newspaper, she laid out a bold vision of economic justice and non-violence
that was a challenge to both the state and the Church over their failure to
address massive economic inequities. In another article she wrote, “Where
were the saints to try to change the social order, not just minister to the
slaves but to do away with slavery?”

The paper was soon producing 100,000 copies a month. The most notable
sign of the publication’s success was that unemployed and homeless men in
the Bowery took her at her word and began showing up at her office and
apartment looking for help. Day rented out a floor to put people up for the
night. When this overflowed, she rented a building, then set up a soup
kitchen. In the pages of the Catholic Worker, she implored readers to
respond to the crisis of the Depression by establishing similar front-line
centres for assisting the homeless and unemployed. She called them Houses
of Hospitality. Soon, other Catholic Worker houses began springing up
across the United States.

Dorothy Day preached the anarchist (and later punk rock) ethic of direct
action. In a Church defined by hierarchy and rules, she encouraged young
people to practise the works of mercy—feeding the hungry, getting clothing
for the homeless, giving beds to the poor. “Youth demands the heroic,” she
said, quoting the French poet Paul Claudel, and she called for young people
to begin building a more just world through grassroots activism.4
Day infused these anarchist philosophies such as mutual aid with
religious mysticism. She wrote that the true face of God was to be found in
the poor and needy. To serve God in the poor was both holy and an act of
mutual aid—a theory that had been proposed by Russian anarchist Peter
Kropotkin, who wrote that evolutionary progress wasn’t driven by
competition and the survival of the fittest, but by cooperation. It was about
people stepping up to care for each other by creating social structures in
which all were able to contribute.

This approach touched a deep chord in me. I began to read more about
various Houses of Hospitality. They seemed like street universities of social
action for generations of young activists like author James W. Douglass,
singer Utah Phillips, socialist Michael Harrington, and abuse victims’ rights
activist Barbara Blaine.

At that time, Brit and I knew nothing about the social problems facing
the poor in Toronto. We knew even less about the difficulties faced by
people with addictions or young runaways or people in the prison system or
women escaping abusive relationships. It never entered my mind that we
should go and volunteer to learn the ropes at an established Catholic Worker
house. This punk rock dishwasher and student were determined to open our
own house of hospitality. We were going to make it happen. The house
would be a refuge for people who had been cut adrift from mainstream
society. We would live with them, not as social workers but as friends. We
figured we would learn while we were doing.

This is a chord, and this is another, and this is a third, now go form a
band.

That was punk rock.

That was the Catholic Worker.

That was the times.

Charlie Angus and Brit Griffin at Angelus House Catholic
Worker, 1986. Credit: Taman Bradette.
