Part 2
DIRECT ACTION
1984–1988
“The greatest challenge of the day is: how to bring about a revolution
of the heart, a revolution which has to start with each of us.”
—Dorothy Day, Loaves and Fishes
Chapter 11
HOUSE OF HOSPITALITY
In the summer of 1984, Brit and I decided to move beyond talk and finally
take action. I was constantly talking about ideas for the future, starting with
the phrase “When we finally do this thing …”
One day, Brit shut me down. “Listen,” she said. “We are either doing this
or we’re not. There’s no point talking about ‘when.’”
TALK – ACTION = 0.

Brit was right. There was no use talking about “when”—the time was
now.

And so we set out to open our own house of hospitality.

For me, that meant quitting the band. They were like my family and we
had committed to doing this project together, but that nagging question
remained. Was it enough to speak out against injustice, or did I have a
responsibility to put myself on the line to create a better world?
Even though we had no money and only low-paid employment, Brit and I
took the first step by renting a three-bedroom apartment at Ossington and
Dupont. The plan was to use the extra two bedrooms to provide hospitality
to whoever came our way.

A young student from Newfoundland lived with us for a time. Peter
Jellard, who later joined me in the band Grievous Angels, showed up at our
place from Edmonton and stayed until he got settled. I invited a very
intense homeless man to move in with us. He lived in the front room for a
time, but that didn’t work out. Then there was a manipulative elfin youth
named Fergal who clocked me in a subway station and began pouring out
his life problems. He hit me up for money, for support. He led me on a
bizarre nighttime journey through some very unsafe downtown spaces,
while claiming he needed to find some mysterious person who was missing
and needed my help. Fergal taught me a quick lesson in how easy it is to get
taken for a ride if you’re too naive.

But Eddie was the person who really set Brit and me on our journey. He
showed up at a peace rally concert where L’etranger was playing. He was
eighteen and dealing with learning disabilities. Eddie talked relentlessly and
had an incredible knowledge of maps, weather patterns, town names in the
United States, and licence plates. He could be funny or really grating, and
that seemed to be dependent on our mood, not his. Eddie didn’t want to live
in a group house for people with learning disabilities because he wanted to
make his own decisions.

Eddie came over for dinner. And then for another dinner. We talked about
him moving in with us, not as a client or someone needing support but as a
friend. In turn, he would have the responsibility of paying his share of the
rent. Mutual aid.

Eddie had a job at a manufacturing plant in the north of the city, where he
made low wages and suffered continual bullying. It was hard to motivate
him to take the long bus and subway ride each day to get to work. Every
day was a struggle. I quickly learned that living with people meant
becoming part of their complex and sometimes difficult lives.

One night Brit came home and found that Eddie had smashed the front
window and trashed the living room. He just couldn’t take the harassment
and intimidation at work anymore. The landlord and upstairs neighbours
were freaked out. They wanted us to kick Eddie out. Brit and I didn’t have a
clue what to do.

Fortunately, there were a few mature adults who checked in on us and
provided advice. The Jesuit community on West Avenue in Riverdale had
taken us under their wing. They were a group of priests who were deeply
engaged in community action and solidarity work in Latin America. On the
issue of Eddie, our friend Father Ted Hyland got straight to the point: “You
can’t invite people like Eddie into your lives and then change your mind. If
you are going to open your door to people, you need to be willing to
commit to a long-term relationship and find a way to make it work.”
Our other mentor-muse was Mary (Manning) Mullins, who had lived in
the New York Catholic Worker house and had known Dorothy Day. Mary
was originally from Atlanta, Georgia, and had roots in Toronto’s community
of American Vietnam War resisters that had congregated on Baldwin Street.

Mary was much, much larger than life. She showed us the basics of swing
dancing and initiated me in the secrets of some wonderful blues gospel. She
encouraged us not to fret about making mistakes, and taught us, instead,
that the only way to survive the work was to make our house a place that
was full of fun and laughter.

“My, my, my,” she would say in her beautiful Georgia accent, “you two
are the perfect people for this work.” I didn’t know if she was right, but
Mary made us believe we could take on the world.

Gayle Catinella, whom I met on a trip to the Chicago Catholic Worker,
shared the same drive as we did. “I wanted to quit talking about the world’s
problems and do something,” she said in an interview. “I was so sick of
conferences and hearing people say the same thing every year with nothing
happening. They would get really angry and say our government was a
bunch of fascists and then go home and cook dinner and watch television. I
was also 21 and wanted to find myself.”

As the challenging realities of opening a house of hospitality became
clear, I realized that we needed a crash course on issues in the inner city.

Brit set up meetings with various groups working downtown. Much of what
we encountered was a social-agency approach to poverty in which the staff
referred to the homeless as “clients” and ranked them by their clinical
problems. These professionals were nice to us, but they didn’t take us very
seriously. We weren’t into their approach either. I wasn’t a social worker; I
was trying to find something more grassroots that was about building
relationships with people on their terms.

We were taken under the wing of John Laurie, a big, bearded advocate
for the street people in Moss Park he affectionately called “skids.” Carmel
Hili at the Christian Resource Centre invited us to get practical experience
by working in the soup kitchen in Regent Park. This is where I met some
great people like Reg Baker, a tough Korean War vet with a prosthetic leg.

He was determined to wise us up quickly to the ways of the streets.

Neither Brit nor I had any real financial smarts. Our plan was to find a
five-bedroom house to rent. Sharing the cost of renting a house with
roommates was a commonplace strategy with musicians and students I
knew. We figured we would use the same approach for starting a house of
hospitality. But activists in the inner city were adamant that renting wasn’t
an option. The poor and the working class were being pushed out by a new
phenomenon known as gentrification. If we were going to play any positive
role in working with the marginalized, it was essential for us to buy a house
to act as a buttress against the relentless process of evictions that were
taking place in the city’s rooming houses and working-class
neighbourhoods.

In a very real way, becoming owners, rather than mere renters, was a
political act.

THE IMPACTS OF gentrification on affordability and urban life have been
understood as a twenty-first-century issue, the so-called Brooklynization of
urban neighbourhoods. But the process was already well underway in
Toronto at the beginning of the 1980s. In its first phase, gentrification was
driven by the demographic impact of boomers, as young hippies
transitioned into thirty-something yuppies. The yuppies, or young urban
professionals, created a massive shift in how home ownership was
understood. After World War II, owning a home was the sign of having
“made it.” Couples tended to live in the same home for their entire lives. In
the 1960s and ’70s, the houses of choice were in the suburbs. In Toronto, as
in other North American cities, there was an explosive growth in suburban
subdivisions farther and farther from the city core.

But by the late 1970s, many young professionals were more interested in
renovating older houses in inner-city neighbourhoods than living the
suburban dream. The more entrepreneurial yuppies realized that it was
possible to make a healthy profit by purchasing more than one house in
order to create investment opportunities. They would pay for a quick
renovation, and then flip the property to new buyers. The notion of the
housing market as a place for speculation represented a profound change in
how people perceived home ownership. What was once a symbol of family
and neighbourhood stability had become an asset.

In a city with a housing stock as large as Toronto, such efforts weren’t on
the economic radar, but the impacts were soon being felt by the poor and
lower classes. The fundamental principle of making a killing on real estate
is to buy low and sell high, and this made the rooming houses of
Cabbagetown a perfect target. The gentrification of the neighbourhood
transformed multi-unit dwellings into stylish homes for millionaires, which
resulted in the poor being put out on the street. The Cabbagetown effect
quickly spilled east across the Don River to the working-class homes in the
De Grassi Street neighbourhood and through other previously low-rent
neighbourhoods south of Gerrard at Broadview Avenue. West of the Don
River, gentrification moved quickly through the Annex, Grange Park, and
Bloor West neighbourhoods.

At this point gentrification was considered a positive influence on the
city, restoring old buildings and bringing value to neighbourhoods that had
become shabby over the years. But as academic Jessa Lingel writes,
gentrification isn’t about slapping on a new coat of paint; “gentrification is
fundamentally about power … It’s a contest between people with different
levels of power and resources … Gentrification changes who lives in a
neighborhood, what businesses will thrive, and who’s likely to find work.”

By 1985, city councillors like Jack Layton were warning that
gentrification was beginning to impact the livability of downtown by
driving up costs and making the neighbourhoods unaffordable to working-
class and young people.3
 Brit and I were setting out to buy a house at a time
when the city was in the early stages of an economic upheaval that would
turn Toronto from one of the most livable cities in North America to one of
the most exclusive. Our focus was to find a way to stay ahead of the ever-
increasing housing prices. The only two neighbourhoods where such an
option seemed remotely possible were Parkdale in the West End and South
Riverdale, close to Queen and Eastern Avenue.

I fell in love with South Riverdale. It was a solidly working-class
neighbourhood with a small-town feel. Despite the fact that gentrification
was moving steadily eastward from the Don River, the presence of factories
such as the Colgate-Palmolive plant on Carlaw Avenue, the toxic pollution
from the Canada Metals plant at Eastern Avenue, and the soy sauce factory
at Queen and Leslie acted as a buttress against real estate speculators.

Riverdale had its share of tough working-class country music bars and strip
joints. The Para-Dice Riders biker gang (who later joined the Hells Angels)
watched over their n eighbourhood patch from their clubhouse just down
the road from Canada Metals.

Brit and I began scouring the real estate listings even though we had zero
money in the bank. Nonetheless, I was convinced that we would somehow
find a way to buy a house. That opportunity came in the spring of 1985,
when I learned that the Diocesan organization Youth Corps had raised
money to start a Catholic Worker house in the city, but the project had never
gotten off the ground. I called Youth Corps director Father Tom McKillop
and he confirmed there was $14,000 sitting in a bank account. He invited
me to meet their team to make my pitch. I stopped in at the Youth Corps on
my way to my dishwashing job and kept my delivery direct: “We are going
to open a Catholic Worker house. You can give us money to help us, but
that doesn’t give you any say in how we operate. If you don’t give us the
money, we will be opening anyway.”
Much to my surprise, the Youth Corps team agreed. The only stipulation
was that if we closed the house, we would pay them back. We didn’t sign
any documents, and they cut me a cheque for the full amount. It turned out
to be exactly what we needed for a down payment.

That summer we purchased a three-storey semi-detached house on a
small dead-end street near Greenwood and Queen. It had been a group
home, so it was listed way below market value at $85,000 (a similar house
would sell for $1.8 million in 2024). This put the monthly mortgage
payment at around $1,500. If everyone, including the guys living with us,
chipped in, we could afford it.

We were so excited about getting the house that we didn’t wait to get the
keys from the real estate agent. Brit and I pushed in a back window to the
empty house and opened a bottle of wine. Friends from the Queen Street
scene helped move in our donated furniture, and some young punks tried
their hand at plastering and painting the old house.

There were two bedrooms on the top floor. Eddie moved into one, with
his collection of licence plates and maps. Kelly, a young woman that I’d
met at a gig at the Golden Garter in Hamilton, moved into the other room as
our first volunteer. She was twenty-one. On the second floor, Brit and I took
the smallest bedroom, leaving two other larger rooms to hold beds for two
or three people. On the main floor, we had a front room that could serve as
an emergency overnight bedroom.

We called our place Angelus Catholic Worker House. The Angelus is a
traditional call-and-response prayer based on the gospel passage of Mary’s
reply to the angel when she was asked to give birth to the Son of God. The
line “And the Word was made flesh, and dwelt among us” reflected my
belief in making a tangible difference by being rooted in the
neighbourhood.

It had been one year since we had decided to open our own house of
hospitality. I was twenty-two. Brit was twenty-five.

There was no plan, no structure. We didn’t put our number in the
phonebook or in a directory of social agencies. People found out about us
through word of mouth. From our earliest days at Angelus House, we were
never short of people asking for help. Some stayed overnight. Others
remained until they got on their feet and could find more permanent
housing. Some, like Eddie, lived as part of the family. Those who stayed for
more than a month pitched in with rent. We shared cooking and cleaning
responsibilities in an idealistic belief that the house was making mutual aid
a reality.

Even as we began to welcome people into the house, the face of the
urban underclass was undergoing a dramatic change. When I first began
working at the soup kitchen, the people I encountered were mostly transient
men suffering from various addictions. The few women who came tended
to be older, alone, and struggling with various mental health issues. I never
saw young people, children, or families. Our work was to supply a meal, a
coffee, a sympathetic ear and, if needed, help them get stabilized by renting
a room in a local rooming house. From there, it was possible to transition to
social and co-operative housing. Since World War II, the Canadian federal
government had invested heavily in social housing. Federal housing could
be counted on for 10,000 to 20,000 new units every year. These were clear
stepping-stones from precarity to stability.

But the world was quickly changing around us. Our idealistic attempt at
making mutual aid a practical reality became increasingly difficult as we
struggled with the rising numbers of people looking for help. There were
two key reasons for this. Gentrification was driving up the asset value of
downtown properties, making it more and more difficult for people on the
margins to find low-rent accommodation. At the same time, the federal
government abandoned its responsibility for social housing investment. The
first major cuts to federal housing came when the Conservative government
of Brian Mulroney was elected in 1984.

As the waiting lists for available units grew longer, more and more
people began falling through the cracks. Caroline was the new face of this
changing demographic. She came to our house in 1986. She was in her
early sixties, with an impeccably crisp British accent. She claimed that she
had been a headmistress at a British boarding school. She had a wonderful
personality, and as soon as she moved in, she set herself up as the den
mother for the young women volunteers in the house. Caroline liked going
about the neighbourhood dressed in a nineteenth-century hoop skirt and
bonnet. She also liked to flirt—so much so that we had to ask her not to
model her lingerie in the upstairs window. In the evenings, she held court at
the dinner table, telling ridiculous stories and keeping people laughing.

Caroline flourished when there was space for her eccentricities.

There were seven of us in the house at the time, but every day the phone
rang with someone desperately looking for a place to stay. A man named
Reggie moved in for a time. He was a quiet guy but very strange. He
walked the halls of the house all night long, turning on all the lights. He
seemed harmless enough, but it made people nervous. Another young man
who had just gotten out of jail was referred to us by a group of local
religious brothers. He also made people uneasy, but we agreed to let him
stay in the front room on the main floor until he could get himself an
apartment.

A woman named Jo-Anne showed up with her five-year-old son, George,
who had serious asthma. She was a recovering alcoholic and was unable to
find a place to live. We called every shelter in the city, but no one would
take her. They were all full. So now she was homeless. And we were full as
well. But rather than putting them on the street, we invited them in.

Everyone pitched in to make the best of it. Another young woman who was
living with us really took to the boy, baking cookies with him and playing
board games. When Jo-Anne woke us up in the middle of the night in a
panic because George was suffering a terrible asthma attack, Julie, one of
our volunteers, drove them to the hospital. Julie stayed with them into the
next day as George underwent a series of tests.

We got through this scare, but life at the house was becoming more and
more complicated with so many needs around our table. Caroline was
getting lost in the shuffle.

And then, one Saturday evening, as Brit and I were making dinner, there
was a knock at the door. A haggard young woman was standing there in the
rain. Her name was Sandy, and she had baby twins in the car and no place
to go. I told her we had absolutely no room, and she burst into tears. At a
loss, I invited them into the house. Brit got on the phone to the local
women’s shelters, but everywhere was full. So now we were fourteen, with
everyone doubled up in the bedrooms.

At another time it might have been possible for us to provide support for
Sandy and her twins, but there was simply too much going on in the house.

She started leaving for long periods, saying she was looking for a job or an
apartment. The reality was that she was having an affair with a married
man. This left the care of the infants to the rest of us. They were in poor
shape: small, sickly, and colicky. They cried all night. People took turns
walking the infants up and down the halls so that others could get some
sleep.

In frustration, someone at the house called Children’s Aid and a city
nurse showed up. She said the twins were undernourished and very behind
in their development. The nurse took the twins to the Hospital for Sick
Children for an assessment, but the mother’s doctor was on duty when they
arrived. He insisted that the babies were fine. That threw the issue back to
us. People were now snapping at each other in the kitchen or at the
breakfast table. Sandy ended up leaving with her twins one day without
telling us where she was going. It appeared she was trying to stay one step
ahead of the social workers.

Caroline also walked out. In my journal I noted, People are getting lost
in the chaos. Caroline has become increasingly combative with people. It’s
like I don’t even recognize her anymore. She came down this morning and
said she was leaving. I should have said something to her, but truth be told,
I was just relieved to have space in the house. It was just getting too hard.

There were too many moving pieces, too much tension, and people had
turned on each other. Caroline had a long history of mental health issues,
but she had flourished for a time in the stability of the house. Once that
stability was lost, she spiralled. I never saw Caroline again. But I still think
of her and wish I had done more.

This was a time when I quickly learned that it wasn’t enough to offer a
flophouse bed or a soup kitchen meal. Our house should have been a way of
helping people like Caroline and Sandy settle and transition to a more stable
life, but as housing became more elusive, and the numbers of the homeless
increased, it meant making hard decisions about who could stay and who
would be turned away.

A FEW YEARS ago, I revisited the East End of Toronto where I worked with
the homeless in the early 1980s. At the time, my oldest daughter, Mariah,
was working at a homeless shelter in Moss Park. I was shocked at how
much more desperate conditions had become. Where once there had been a
mixture of incomes and housing opportunities, I found myself in a
neighbourhood defined by the super-wealthy and the very marginalized.

The homeless were living in doorways, alleyways, and the local park.

But you don’t have to go into the inner city to see such disparity. It exists
in every community across this country. On any given night there are
upwards of 35,000 people sleeping on the streets of our communities. It
takes dangerous memories to understand that there is nothing normal about
this. Homelessness was a crisis manufactured in the 1980s and
institutionalized through deliberate government neglect in the decades that
followed.

David Hulchanski, a professor of housing and social work at the
University of Toronto, writes that, prior to 1980, the issue of homelessness
didn’t exist as a social phenomenon.4
 Every city had downtown shelters
and charities, but they were focused on a small group of mostly transient
men with substance-use issues who were relegated to inner-city skid rows.

In Toronto, the male homeless population could be contained at the Seaton
House shelter on George Street or the Salvation Army flop house on Queen
Street. This population, according to Hulchanski, was known more by the
term transient than homeless. Many of those transient men could find more
permanent accommodation if they sobered up long enough to rent a cheap
room in a boarding house. The broader term homelessness simply wasn’t
part of the lexicon of social work.5
By the end of the 1980s, the rising numbers of homelessness became an
identifiable social problem. The crisis exploded in the early 1990s, when
Liberal finance minister Paul Martin completely axed the federal
government’s role in public housing. Following his 1993 walkaway, $600
million in planned new housing simply evaporated. Martin assured the
public that the private sector would pick up the slack. It was a lie. The
privatization of home construction favoured real estate speculation, high-
end condo development, and luxury home construction.

The federal government’s decision to abandon its responsibility for social
housing was a signal to the provincial governments. What followed were
serious cuts to basic welfare and disability pensions. Mental health services
and addiction services were also put under the knife. Picking on the
homeless became a new political sport. Alberta premier Ralph Klein
stormed into a homeless shelter one night to insult the men for being
unemployed.6 When Ontario premier Mike Harris’s provincial government
slashed the minimal remaining welfare supports by 21 percent, one of his
ministers suggested that the poor could still feed themselves if they showed
initiative and purchased dented cans of tuna on sale. The Toronto band
Rheostatics summed it up in a song: “It’s a bad time to be poor, ’cause we
don’t give a shit no more.”

Angelus House was there during the first wave of the abandonment of
social investments in housing. Since then, this reality has spread to include
students, the elderly, and working couples. Dangerous memories are needed
to challenge the policies that made it normal that in any given year 235,000
Canadians suffer the trauma of homelessness.8
 Contrary to the ideological
claims of the right wing, investments in public housing and mental health
are not giveaways; they are fundamental to what makes a country civilized
and humane. And as for the economic argument, the cost of homelessness to
the country is estimated at $7 billion a year. It is a cost paid in lives and
broken dreams.

