Chapter 12
LESSONS IN ADDICTION
In a journal entry dated September 22, 1985, at 11 p.m., I wrote about
Jimmy O’Reilly standing outside our bedroom door and swearing at us.

Jimmy was an old Newfoundland sailor. I had taken a liking to him at the
soup kitchen at the Christian Resource Centre. And so he moved in with us.

There were nights when we sat at the kitchen table and played cards.

Sometimes he told stories about being a sailor, in his softspoken lilt.

We had just opened Angelus House and there was so much work to do.

Jimmy offered to help with the renovations. He set out to plaster part of the
wall on the second floor and fix an old door frame. He would cut the wood
carefully and put it in place, only to take it all apart again. Then he would
start over. The door frame became an obsession. It never seemed perfect
enough for him. If I told him that the door looked great, it would send him
into a smouldering rage. His personality was changing, and he started
disappearing from the house to go drinking.

One night, he came home drunk and found that the final coat of plaster
had been put on the wall and the door frame finished. A friend had stopped
by and offered to help us get the second floor ready for painting. Jimmy
was furious that someone had finished what he considered to be his work.

Alcohol was changing his behaviour and creating a major problem for our
community. I just didn’t know what to do about it. And so, I found myself
shouting at Jimmy to go to bed as he stood outside our bedroom door
swearing at Brit and me. As he stomped off, he said he was going to call the
“fucking priest” because Brit and I were living in sin. He had a point. We
had intended to get married but had been too focused on getting the house
set up. Jimmy didn’t stick around to see us married. He stormed out of the
house just prior to the wedding and his drinking increased.

We were married at the Jesuit parish of Our Lady of Lourdes on
November 2, 1985—the Day of the Dead. I wore a silver zoot suit I had
picked up at the Frankel Clothing Exchange for $100. Brit wore a 1960s-
style purple prom dress with paisley stockings. We were married by Jesuit
Father Michael Czerny, who had just returned from working with the
liberation theology movement in El Salvador. The reception was held at the
soup kitchen in Regent Park, with free food and drinks and great music,
including local Irish band Tip Splinter and a DJ.

In the middle of the party, a homeless woman in serious distress came
into the hall. Brit spent a large part of the evening with her. Efforts were
made to find her a shelter, but to no avail. In the end, a friend drove the
woman to our house and put her to sleep in our bed. Brit and I spent our
wedding night in a hotel room paid for by my older sister Kathleen.

The next day the city was hit with a hard, relentless November rain. We
went by the hall to clean up the mess from the party. Our friend Reg Baker
from the soup kitchen was there waiting. He was very drunk. He had
skipped the wedding even though he had been telling us for weeks how
much he was looking forward to it. Apparently, his date had stood him up,
so instead of coming to the wedding as an honoured guest, he’d blown up
two years of hard-fought sobriety with a binge.

I stood outside trying to talk to him in the miserable freezing rain. He
was so drunk and volatile that I didn’t want to leave him there on the street.

My former bandmate Andrew Cash hailed a cab while his brother Pete and I
struggled to hold Reg up. When we finally got him back to our place, I felt
like I’d been in a brawl.

In my journal entry for November 3, 1985, I note that the woman from
the wedding was still sleeping off her intoxication in our bedroom while
Reg was passed out in the front room. With no beds for us, Andrew, Brit,
and I drank a bottle of champagne left over from the party and fell asleep on
the couch.

REG AND JIMMY exemplified just two of the patterns of addiction that I was
beginning to recognize. Some of the guys who stayed in the house drank
and became stupid or surly. Others kept it together for a while, and then
went on a two- or three-day bender when their welfare and disability
cheques came in. They didn’t stop until they were sick and dead broke, but
then they went back to keeping it together until the next cheque.

There were cycles to the behaviour. Some people sobered up after
causing mayhem, and then pleaded with us to help them turn their lives
around. We would work with them on a plan, help them get set up with a
job and the possibility of a new apartment. They would talk about what they
were going to do with their earnings—save for a motorbike, or head out
east for Christmas to patch things up with their family. But such plans never
came to pass. Just when it looked like they were turning things around, they
skipped work and took to the bottle in a spectacular act of self-destruction.

By the time they sobered up, they were on the street with nothing to their
name. My journal from this time is a long record of our hopes, plans,
crashes, and betrayals with these remarkable and tragic cases of self-
sabotage.

The lack of clear rules in the house added to the chaos. We were trying to
be egalitarian, but it wasn’t working. I had come into this project with
enormous idealism and naïveté. My thinking had been that if we were going
to truly live a life of mutual aid, then why should I have the power to
impose rules on those who were living with us? If I occasionally wanted a
beer, why couldn’t the guys staying with us have one too? And just because
I liked going to bed at a decent hour, why shouldn’t they be allowed to stay
up late into the night? After all, we were all adults.

I soon found out that some of those adults were driven by addictions that
were so overwhelming they threatened to tear apart not just their lives but
the very fabric of the community. Mutual aid is a great concept, but it
requires some rules and boundaries. For example, we were robbed of the
mortgage payments six times in our first eight months. Asking the guys to
leave their rent money in an unlocked cash box on the main floor was a
really dumb idea. Trusting that men on the margins who were suffering with
addictions would not take advantage was simply not fair to them or us.

Fortunately, we never missed a mortgage payment, thanks in part to the
donations that were always arriving at the house. One night, while I
contemplated the disappearance of $500 in mortgage money, there was a
knock at the door and a man I had never seen before gave us an envelope
and left. Inside were ten crisp $50 bills.

Over time, I slowly but steadily learned my way through the dark world
of addiction. Frank and Robert were my guides. Both men lived at the
house for long periods of time and had addictions that were so out of
control they were literally brought to the brink of death. One made it. The
other didn’t.

For a time, Frank played a huge role in our community. I had got to know
him at the soup kitchen. He came from New Brunswick and could have
been an extra from the 1970 Canadian movie Goin’ Down the Road, a
misplaced Maritimer with 1950s greaser-style hair atop an aging face.

Frank was a sweetheart, and he had skills. He had done some prison time
but wouldn’t hurt anyone. I thought we could ride out the waves of his
alcoholic binges, but those waves became increasingly high and the spaces
between them increasingly small.

At first, Frank did his best to rebuild his relationships in the periods
between the storms. When he was sober, he would get up early and start
baking bread. He would be in the kitchen all day trying to keep his mind off
the drink. He loved to make small talk as he kneaded the dough. After
supper, we would watch the hockey game and talk about the merits of each
player. But the drinking got harder and the abusive behaviour more
pronounced.

We took turns going with him to Alcoholics Anonymous, which is where
I began to learn from survivors about the patterns of deception and self-
destruction. The survivors came from all walks of life and all age groups.

What they shared was an addiction to a substance that destroyed marriages,
careers, health, and lives. They told stories of how they used every guilt
trick and emotional lever to keep feeding the addiction—and, in so doing,
burned through the trust of family and friends. More than one survivor said
that it wasn’t until they stared death in the face that they took the first step
to break the addiction.

Night after night, we were in and out of detox centres, emergency wards,
and psychiatric hospitals with Frank. For the longest time, I believed that it
would be possible to reach through the addiction to find the Frank we knew
and loved, but the sad truth was that he was pulling the whole community
under in an increasingly destructive cycle. One morning when I came
downstairs to a broken window and blood all over the floor, I knew things
were only going to get worse. Brit and I sat down with Frank and told him it
was time for him to leave the house. He wasn’t surprised. His addiction had
separated him permanently from his wife, daughters, and relatives. And
now he was on his own again. I later heard that Frank died homeless in a
park.

WHERE FRANK HAD been easygoing, Robert was like sandpaper: abrasive,
always rubbing me the wrong way. He was in his fifties, with a voice that
was a cross between Humphrey Bogart and a cartoon character. For the first
few days he stayed at the house, Robert was well behaved, sober, and funny.

Then he plunged our community into chaos. In a journal entry dated
November 14, 1985, I wrote, Happy birthday to me. Robert hit the bottle
about a day and a half ago. He came home last night while I was at work.

He was totally plastered. He drank 20 beers—one after another. He spent
the night throwing up. Robert was riding a seemingly endless wave of self-
destruction, and we were being dragged along.

One evening, I was making spaghetti in the kitchen when Robert came in
drunk and asked me to go with him to AA. I thought it was going to be
another dead end, but it still seemed better to spend the evening sitting in a
circle of plastic chairs than having him throw up on the porch. When the
time came for the standard introductions at the meeting, he said, “My name
is Robert, and I am an alcoholic. I have been sober for two hours.” Brit
went with him to another meeting the next day at noon, and then I went
with him again that evening.

Over the next month people in the house took turns going with Robert to
AA meetings, often twice a day. He managed to stay sober. After a time,
Robert rented a room in a low-rent boarding house near Broadview Avenue,
on a block slated for gentrification. Staying sober in that dilapidated
rooming house wasn’t easy, but he got on the waiting list for social housing.

Robert called Brit every day to complain about his roommates, but at least
he had a place to call his own. He saved some money. He started to collect
stamps. He then got into better housing. When Robert received a medallion
for his first year of sobriety, we held a big celebration.

Robert went on to more than twenty years of healthy living. He called
Brit every day and sent birthday cards to our daughters. When he died, the
people who came to his funeral remembered him not as an alcoholic but as
a loyal friend.

Robert’s addiction had put an enormous burden on the health system,
racking up staggering costs in ambulances, police services, and time spent
in detox, emergency wards, and psychiatric units. The ability to rent a cheap
room had literally been a lifeline. It was a stepping stone to public housing,
and once there, he never set foot in an emergency ward again. He had the
stability he needed to turn his life around. In terms of public investment, a
public housing strategy will always be much cheaper and more sensible
than leaving addicts on the street.

AS WE WERE struggling at Angelus House to deal with the destructive
impacts of alcohol abuse, the world of addiction was undergoing a dramatic
and deadly transformation. It had poisoned roots in the dirty battles of the
Cold War and corporate greed of the 1980s. The Cold War connection came
through massive amounts of crack cocaine funnelled into American inner
cities as a by-product of the CIA’s counter-insurgency in Latin America.1
Crack arrived at a crisis moment for Black and Latino communities in
America. If Reaganomics had been bad for the white working class, it was
disastrous for racialized Americans. Crack flooded into economically
devastated communities with the false promise of creating a new means of
advancement for people being pushed to the economic margins.

As the drug money began to flow, Reagan declared an all-out war on
drugs. This set the stage for decades of overheated political posturing,
vastly increased police budgets, and exponential increases in incarceration
rates. In 1980, there were 41,000 Americans jailed for drug crimes. By
2014, that number had jumped 1,000 percent, to 488,000 people.2
While the crack epidemic was a by-product of the dirty war in Latin
America, the opioid crisis of the 1980s was fuelled by the secret American
war in Afghanistan. As the CIA were moving weapons in the mountains
along the Pakistan border, their mujahideen allies were setting up heroin
labs along the same routes to shift poppy production onto the international
market. Annual opium production in the 1980s jumped from 100 tons to
more than 2,000 tons.3 The flood of cheap heroin hit the UK particularly
hard; the 1996 movie Trainspotting captures the bleakness of the heroin
epidemic in late-1980s Scotland. In Toronto, there were a number of heroin
overdose fatalities, including Toronto rockabilly singer Robin David
Masyk, a.k.a Handsome Ned, in 1987.

Heroin was the illegal face of opium production, but opium derivatives
had two legal streams for use in medical treatments. The first was
morphine-based medication for cancer patients, which was strictly
regulated, and the second was a painkiller called Percocet. It provided a
relatively low dose of the opioid oxycodone mixed with acetaminophen.

Given its much lower dose, Percocet was easier to obtain by prescription.

The guys who came to our house from the Don Jail always seemed to
make their first stop at the office of a certain doctor on Queen Street East
who gave them a generous prescription for Percocet. It was widely traded
on the street, and on more than one occasion, Brit flushed some guy’s stash
of Percs while telling him to go downstairs, get a coffee, and sober up.

When compared with the deadly effects of heroin or the gangster-driven
trade in cocaine, Percocet was small-time stuff. But this changed when the
pharmaceutical company Purdue Frederick (later Purdue Pharma) decided
to challenge the market in Percocet by pushing for a vast expansion in the
legal market for opioid painkillers.4 The medical consensus at the time was
that opioids should only be used in the most extreme pain situations, most
notably for patients with stage 4 cancer. Purdue, however, wanted to
convince doctors that the potential for addiction was overblown, by placing
the focus on the subjective nature of pain. Purdue reframed opioids as just
another tool in a doctor’s toolbox.

A key moment in this rebranding campaign was a 1984 Toronto
conference on treating pain partially organized by Richard Sackler of
Purdue.5 The keynote speaker was Dr. Russell Portenoy, who became a
regular on television talk shows where he promoted the right of ordinary
people to live without pain. Portenoy’s advocacy was key in reassuring the
medical community that opioid prescriptions could be a solution for all
manner of pain and discomfort. Only much later did it become known that
Portenoy was receiving payments from Purdue.6
In the early 1990s, Purdue launched OxyContin as an all-purpose
painkiller to compete with Percocet. But a single OxyContin tablet is
equivalent to sixteen Percocets. Such a strong medication should have been
listed as a restricted drug for serious cancer pain, but the sales department at
Purdue knew that such a designation would limit its sales potential. They
argued that the pill’s slow-release mechanism made it safe. OxyContin was
marketed as an all-purpose pain reliever for everything from surgery
recovery to back pain to dental work.

The company hired an extensive sales team to sell doctors on the false
promise that the drug was not addictive. OxyContin was hugely
overprescribed to patients who otherwise would have had no exposure to
opioids. Company salesmen targeted working-class and poor rural regions,
where opioid addiction subsequently exploded. Even as evidence of
massive addictions and overdose deaths mounted, Purdue brought in top-
priced marketing strategists McKinsey Consulting to “turbocharge” sales of
OxyContin by focusing on doctors who were already known for
overprescribing.7
In 2021, McKinsey was forced to pay almost $600 million in damages
for their role in poisoning America through promotion of OxyContin. In
addition to their role in the OxyContin nightmare, McKinsey has been
accused of being the company that destroyed the American middle class
through its role in offshoring jobs and downsizing worker expectations in
the years following the Reagan revolution.8
 Ironically, a map of the hot
spots of mass addiction and deaths caused by opioids fits almost perfectly
over a map of communities hammered by deindustrialization and the
economic destruction of previously stable blue-collar communities.

In my role as a Member of Parliament I first became aware of the
devastating impacts of OxyContin in 2008–09. People in my region who
would have no means or reason to be exposed to opioids were becoming
badly addicted from minor visits to ERs and doctor offices. Routine
problems like a broken wrist or back pain were enough to be given a
generous prescription for Oxy. And this was creating a dangerous level of
dependence. As I struggled to make sense of this phenomenon, I had no
idea that Purdue was facing multiple class-action lawsuits in the United
States for the devastation caused by opioid addiction. None of that
information was shared by their company reps as they moved into rural
Canada.

When OxyContin was finally pulled from the Canadian market in 2012,
opioid addictions had cut a destructive path across demographics and
backgrounds. The void was filled by even more deadly opioids, such as
fentanyl, carfentanil, and purple heroin. The nightmare of addiction has
been compounded by homelessness, creating a social disaster zone at the
heart of every community across the continent. It has been estimated that
more than half a million people have died from the opioid crisis in the
United States.9 This represents a medical catastrophe of unprecedented
proportions. Dangerous memories help us understand that those who suffer
and die from poisoned drugs are not people with weak wills or
compromised morals. They are innocent victims of corporate mercenaries
who saw an opportunity to exploit the market for an obscure prescription
painkiller in the 1980s.

