Chapter 13
THE AIDS EPIDEMIC
Brian Terrell, a veteran of the New York and Iowa Catholic Worker
Movement, once told me that one of the great benefits of living in a
Catholic Worker house is that it allows you to witness history unfolding—
not in an academic way, but with a view from the streets. And so it was with
the AIDS epidemic in 1980s Toronto. As a straight young man in those times,
I had minimal understanding of the paranoia and hatred gay people faced. I
had even less understanding of the incredible acts of solidarity and
resistance that brought the LGBTQ community from the darkest part of the
night toward a brighter new era of pride. My education began as I saw the
devastating health and social impacts in some of the people who came
through the house.

At the beginning of the ’80s, anti-gay violence was common. Young
suburban men went gay-bashing on the weekends. Toronto police were
notorious for picking up gay men without a reason and driving them to
Cherry Beach at the bottom of Parliament Street, where they subjected them
to a vicious beating. The practice was so common that it spawned a slang
expression: “taking a ride on the Cherry Beach Express.” The cops at 52
Division, the downtown precinct, were less than impressed when the song
“Cherry Beach Express” by the Pukka Orchestra began to receive
widespread radio play in Toronto in 1984.

The highlight of the gay calendar was the annual Halloween drag queen
parade at the St. Charles Tavern on Yonge Street. The notion of Halloween
as an adult event had been first embraced in the early 1970s thanks to a
festival in the gay Castro neighbourhood of San Francisco.1
 Gay Halloween
festivities quickly spread to other North American queer communities,
including Toronto’s. But the St. Charles parade was also a magnet for anti-
gay violence. In the queer, activist monthly magazine The Body Politic,
Hugh Brewster described a typical Halloween night in Toronto in the late
1970s: “As soon as the parade is over in front of the St. Charles and the
drag queens have gone inside, the mood of the crowd quickly becomes
surly and vicious. Gangs of tough adolescents egged on by their girlfriends
go looking for ‘queers’ to beat up. The police have an increasingly difficult
time controlling the crowds. Ink is thrown and faces get smashed. Last year
one sixteen-year-old in semi-drag was tied to a post and left there until
morning. Each year the situation becomes more ugly and potentially
explosive.”

In 1981, anti-gay violence took the form of a brutal police action known
as Operation Soap. On February 5, police launched simultaneous raids on
gay clubs the Barracks, the Club Baths, the Richmond Street Health
Emporium, Roman II Health, and Recreation Spa. In what has become
known as the Toronto Bathhouse Raids, 286 men were arrested. Police had
been raiding gay bars and clubs for years, but the violence of the 1981 raids
was so extreme that the problem of anti-gay harassment made it to the front
pages for the first time. The Toronto Sun took the side of the police, with
editor Peter Worthington boasting that the paper would publish the names of
the arrested men to shame them into staying in the closet.3
 But CHUM radio
news director Dick Smyth took a different tack, calling the police “pigs” on
the radio for their “ham-handed brutality and lunk-headed vandalism.”

 In
one raid, the police told the men that they wished they could gas them and
be done with it.

The night after the bathhouse raids, 3,000 people marched from the gay
village at Yonge and Wellesley to 52 Division on Dundas Street, where the
crowd was confronted by hundreds of police officers spoiling for a fight.

City councillor Jack Layton witnessed the police violence and called on
straight community leaders to stand up to defend gay rights. In Canada, the
march against the 1981 raids is a defining moment of gay resistance, similar
to the Stonewall riots in Greenwich Village, New York, in 1969.

But even in the face of this unprecedented public show of support for the
gay community, police harassment continued. There were multiple raids at
clubs like Dudes and 18 East. The owners complained that this wasn’t mere
harassment but an open attempt to force them out of business.5
 In
November 1981, Metro Council’s Neighbourhood Committee tried to
broker peace between the gay community and the police. But in the end, the
committee gave up on the “sweeping recommendations” that activists felt
were needed to address police harassment. Alderman Pat Sheppard said the
committee had been hoping the police would at least “make a verbal
commitment on the legitimacy of the gay community and state that they
have the full rights and privileges of any other minority in the city.”6 When
the media asked police chief Jack Ackroyd for his response to this request,
they were informed he was not available to comment.

In the face of this systemic harassment, Toronto’s gay community came
together to form the Lesbian and Gay Pride Day Committee, to organize a
Pride march through downtown. The first Pride rally was held on Sunday,
June 28, 1981, with more than 1,500 people. They marched past 52
Division and then to Grange Park, where parade participants declared their
intention to celebrate an afternoon of community pride. This first Pride
event in Toronto was a milestone in a long journey to claim public space so
that gay people could live without fear or ridicule.

But even as Toronto Pride was celebrating this victory, the gay
community was plunged into the nightmare of the AIDS epidemic.

IN THE EARLY days at Angelus House we worked with a homeless young man
in his midtwenties who was dying of AIDS. Kelly, a volunteer at our house,
had met him while working at a soup kitchen on Queen Street East. The
young man was terribly thin and his skin was so pale it almost glowed. He
was homeless because the stigma and fear around AIDS was so strong that he
had been cast adrift from his family and community. At the time, none of us
knew much about the illness and how it spread.

AIDS first appeared in a small cluster of young gay men in Los Angeles in
June 1981.7
 In the first identified case, the cause of death was Kaposi
sarcoma (skin cancer). Other men were dying from compromised immune
systems that made them susceptible to all manner of illnesses. Nobody had
seen a virus like this before.

Human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) targeted the immune system. As
the patient weakened, HIV then moved into the more deadly AIDS (acquired
immunodeficiency syndrome). This was the phase of the illness when the
patient became a target for all manner of horrific infections that broke the
body down. In those days, few people lived past fifteen months.8 AIDS was
killing previously healthy young men at a staggering rate. The number of
AIDS cases shot up five times in 1982, tripled in 1983, and then tripled again
in 1984.9
 In 1985, there were more cases than in all other years put
together.

10
Another man with AIDS came to our house through a volunteer working
the AIDS hotline. Forty-year-old Nicholas told us that after his lover had died
in Vancouver, he’d packed his bags and come home to his parents, who
lived in Ontario. They had rejected him. He had no job and no money, so he
lived with us for a time. He presented himself as a tough, can-do kind of
person, but in my journal I noted that he seemed lost and unable to deal
with what was happening. I don’t think he wanted us to get close. We were
straight, healthy kids. What did we know? After a few weeks he moved on
without giving us any sense of where he was going.

In the media, the issue of the rising death rates in young men was often
driven by ridicule and fuelled by paranoia. President Reagan’s press
secretary Pat Buchanan opened White House press briefings by making
jokes about AIDS. At the 1984 Republican convention, the president of
American Airlines began his speech by saying “gay” was short for “got AIDS
yet?”11 This ignorant comment was met with loud laughter. The mayor of
Houston ran a re-election campaign with the promise: “If you want to stop
AIDS, shoot the queers.”

The UK’s Daily Mail stoked fears with a headline declaring it the “Gay
Plague.” Parents at a school pulled their children out of class when they
learned that a nine-year-old classmate had become HIV-positive after
receiving a blood transfusion.13 In New York, parents held a strike and kept
their children out of school after a grade-two student with HIV was allowed
to attend class. President Reagan stated he sympathized with the parents
leading the strike, even though it had been proven that casual contact could
not spread the illness.

Conspiracy theories were given free rein. CNN Crossfire invited AIDS
activist Bill Bahlman onto their show, but they weren’t interested in the
work the gay community was doing to fight AIDS. They wanted him to
comment on allegations about a gay plot to dump AIDS in the water supply
of a Texas town.14
Artists played a vital role in pushing back against the paranoia and hate.

Toronto arts collective General Idea, who had helped open up the local
punk scene to diversity, launched the Imagevirus project. The art came to
the streets through posters put up in cities aournd the world. It forced a
public conversation about a virus that was killing thousands.

When right-wing pundit William F. Buckley Jr. mused that “everyone
detected with AIDS should be tattooed in the upper forearm, to protect
common-needle users, and on the buttocks, to prevent the victimization of
other homosexuals,”15 a group of gay artists decided they had taken
enough abuse. They formed the human rights group AIDS Coalition To
Unleash Power (ACT UP) and chose the pink triangle with the slogan
“SILENCE = DEATH” as a symbol. The pink triangle was as provocative
as one could get, because it was the symbol the Nazis had forced gay people
to wear in the concentration camps. ACT UP covered New York City with
posters of this image and slogan, and this grassroots campaign was
replicated in cities around the world. The pink triangle was transformed
from a symbol of shame into a symbol of resistance.

Those suffering from the illness faced a heartbreaking situation as
political leaders ignored or downplayed the devastating human toll of the
epidemic. In his harrowing account of the crisis, artist David Wojnarowicz
writes of the desperate steps AIDS sufferers took in experimenting with all
manner of unproven and highly questionable cures: “People with AIDS
across the country are turning themselves into human test tubes. Some of
them are compiling so much information that they can call government
agencies and pass themselves off as research scientists and suddenly have
access to all the information that’s been withheld and then they turn their
tenement kitchens into laboratories, mixing up chemicals and passing them
out freely to friends and strangers to help prolong lives.”

In the 1980s, the Canadian government was engaged in a campaign to
deny potentially lifesaving information on safe sex practices. Canada
Customs targeted and censured books on gay sex and health. Bruce Walsh
was a young gay man from Nova Scotia. He remembers the fear of the
times. “Anti-gay bigotry and violence was considered normal. Being
homosexual was considered deviant and perverted. Books were a lifeline in
understanding more. Arts played an incredible role in fighting back and
helping to transform identity.”
Walsh became an activist to fight the censorship of gay publications. “We
didn’t get safe sex information from health pamphlets. We got it from the
porn magazines. They began publishing a list of safe sex practices. And yet
Canada Customs was blacking out any information on anal sex from the
magazines. The stakes at this time were so high. We had no medicine to
help us. It was information that was keeping people alive.” Walsh says the
fight against censorship transformed how he saw social activism and
change. “I realized that we needed to get active and be willing to be in your
face. We couldn’t be the quiet nice Canadians when Canada was targeting
and discriminating lesbians and gays.” So he began organizing fundraisers
and releasing education pamphlets. Community radio station CIUT-FM gave
him a show to discuss the issues facing the gay community.

17
Victoria Fenner, who was active in community radio, remembers the role
that campus radio played in disseminating crucial information that was
being ignored in the mainstream press. “Community radio addressed issues
of equity, inclusion, and justice,” she says. “Our stations were places where
LGBTQ people felt accepted and welcomed. The volunteers at our stations
were way ahead of the rest of the media in getting the word out. Quite
probably, the stations saved lives.”

As other allies began to speak up, they also became the focus of
government censorship efforts. Walsh explains, “A book distributor in
Peterborough came forward to support us. Then they were censored. Other
bookstores joined the fight and they too were censored. Canada Customs
began targeting the women’s bookstores, then the left-wing bookstores.

Mail was seized and opened. We were the enemy of the Canadian
government.”
These acts of resistance transformed the queer community, and then
society as a whole. Out of a very dark time, tolerance, pride, and inclusivity
were forged. “We were dealing with these legal battles while we were going
to funerals, while we were channelling the grief of watching friends die in
hospitals, while we house-sat their pets as they went to emergency wards,”
Walsh remembers. “AIDS brought people together. It softened a lot of hearts,
and it enraged a lot of people. It made us realize as gay people, ‘I don’t give
a flying fuck what people think about me, I need to stand up.’ AIDS turned us
into warriors. I remember being in hospital rooms where we would be
weeping in each other’s arms. We thought everyone was going to die so we
committed ourselves to making it better for the young gay kids that would
be coming. And we did.”

I CAME TO understand the power of this statement through the lessons
learned watching history unfold from the streets. At Angelus House, we
were often asked to take in young runaways or youth in precarious
situations. Josy was a young woman who came out of the hardcore,
anarchist, queer community. She was very mixed-up and fragile but also
incredibly funny. I wrote in my journal about her first night in our house: I
came upstairs and Josy was trying to plug a phone into the jack in the
hallway. She couldn’t seem to make it work. She didn’t see me coming up
the stairs, and I heard her say to herself, “What can I expect? I’m living in
a fucking convent.”
Sometimes Josy spent the whole day sitting at the dining room table
drawing intricate designs with a pen on paper. Other days I’d come home
and find the black burn pattern of a frying pan on the countertop. Or all my
tools laid out across the staircase. Or a bathroom towel left in the kitchen
covered in dye.

We had a tradition at the house of saying evening prayers before supper.

The prayers were in the form of the traditional reading of the evening office
used by monks and nuns. It is a back-and-forth reading of psalms, with the
opportunity for people to offer up prayers or express concerns they might
want to share. It was open to everybody, but we never asked anyone to
participate, unless they wanted to join. Proselyting was not our thing. And
those who came to the house assuring us of their deep religious convictions
were red-flagged as probably having something dodgy to hide. On this
point, we were rarely wrong.

On one of these evenings, Josy came down and sat on the landing and
listened as we recited the psalms. She stayed quiet, but later she took Brit
aside and said, “Those were some beautiful words you guys were saying.”
It was the high point of the week.

On a bright morning in June 1988, Josy came downstairs wearing plastic
vampire teeth and holding a broken violin that had a plastic skull attached
to it.

“Today’s a big day,” she declared. “I’m going out.”
“Where are you going?” Brit asked.

“I’m going to the gay pride celebration.”
I didn’t know much about Pride then, but I could see that Josy saw it as a
place where she could be herself.

“Do you have some guitar strings I could use for my violin?” she asked.

“I don’t think guitar strings will work on a broken violin,” I replied.

She shrugged, and I watched her skip out the front door like a grade
school kid on graduation day. She was headed to participate in a festival
that in just a few short years had transformed from a protest against police
violence into a mass celebration affirming youth like Josy.

Toronto’s is now the largest Pride celebration in Canada. It ranks as one
of the biggest in the world, with more than 1.6 million people participating.

Back in the dark days of the Cherry Beach Express, it would have seemed
impossible to imagine a time when there would be Pride events held in
cities, towns, and villages across the country. It makes for a wonderful
dangerous memory of how change can be made real.

