Chapter 14
A HARD RAIN FALLS
The Chernobyl nuclear power station in Pripyat, Ukraine, blew up in the
early hours of April 26, 1986. Not that anyone in North America knew
about it. This was at the height of the Cold War. A time of state secrets.

I remember that weekend, but for different reasons. There was a beautiful
synergy among a great cast of characters in the house that month. On April
25, I was sitting at the table in the living room trying to capture some of that
magic in my journal: It is a quiet Friday night. A cool spring breeze drifting
in through the window. Jerry, who has been living with us for the last
month, is downstairs teasing Samantha (our new house guest). Kelly is out
with some friends. The boys (Eddie and Gilles) have gone to bed.

We never insisted on hearing much of a backstory from those who came
to stay, as people often gave all kinds of fantastical autobiographies. Jerry’s
story was unusual, but he seemed sincere. He was in his late forties and said
he had adopted a family in Quebec City because the children’s mother was
dying of cancer. To ensure their financial security, he had come to Toronto
to find a job. Jerry was one of the few stable adults to come through our
house, and he played the role of a gentle uncle. He also had a car. Whenever
we needed to be someplace, he made himself available. He would
encourage Brit and me to go out for a night on the town, and then he would
pick us up and drive us home afterward.

Samantha was another new member of the Angelus House family. I’m
not sure how she ended up at our house. She was in her early twenties and
didn’t come from poverty. It was her first time in the big city, but she didn’t
seem all that interested in spreading her wings. She liked hanging out and
talking with the guys in the house. And she was opinionated. On her first
day, Samantha declared her hatred of Bruce Springsteen and hockey—we
were superfans of both! It was playoff time and the guys followed the
Toronto Maple Leafs religiously. This brought Samantha in line for a lot of
good-natured ribbing.

That weekend in the spring of 1986 began on a good note for the people
at the house, as I had finally agreed to kick out a wealthy young runaway
who had worn out his welcome. Darren had shown up at our house from his
home in the exclusive neighbourhood of Rosedale. At first, he played the
part of a troubled youth, but more and more it seemed like he was taking us
for a ride. He expected other people to pick up after him or do his share of
the chores while he partied with his friends. When I finally told him it was
time to leave, the other residents celebrated.

There is another reason that weekend stands out in my memory—there
was a huge peace march against the frightening threat of nuclear
Armageddon. We were joined for the march by a contingent of students
from Cardinal Newman Catholic High School. Through numerous talks at
local high schools, Angelus House had become a magnet for student
volunteers.

Saturday morning, April 26, 1986, dawned a magnificently sunny day in
Toronto. A large group of students met us at the house prior to the march.

They were proud of the banner they had made for the event—TORONTO
CATHOLIC WORKER: BEAT YOUR SWORDS INTO PLOUGHSHARES.

The march included a large cross-section of political groups, labour unions,
youth activists, and ordinary citizens. That same weekend more than
100,000 people marched in Vancouver. These were unprecedented numbers
for peace activism in Canada. What none of us yet knew was that a nuclear
nightmare was unfolding halfway across the world.

It was also a beautiful weekend in Pripyat, Ukraine. Many locals wanted
to get out into the country to go hiking or fishing. On Friday night, at the
Specialized Military Fire Department No. 2, the crews were on their normal
twenty-four-hour shift. If they got to Saturday morning without incident,
they would have the rest of the weekend off to enjoy time with family.

1
But at 1:23 a.m. a huge fireball exploded over Unit No. 4 at the nearby
Chernobyl nuclear power plant. The blast was so powerful that it blew the
1,000-ton roof of the seventeen-storey-tall reactor to pieces. The firefighters
rushed to the scene of the explosion and tried to contain the fire. They had
no idea they were running toward a storm of death. The air was filled with
radioactive elements such as iodine-131, cesium-137, and xenon-133. A
nuclear physicist could have told those firefighters that 500 roentgens of
radiation sustained over five hours will break th e body’s cells apart,
causing a brutal death. The firefighters at Pripyat were setting up their hoses
amid radiation levels of 10,000 roentgens per hour.

The first inkling that a disaster was unfolding came from Sweden. At 7
a.m. on April 26, a worker at a nuclear power plant north of Stockholm
tripped the radiation warning system when he went to change in the locker
room. At first, he worried that he had somehow been contaminated by a
problem in the plant. And then it became clear that the workers coming in
for the day shift were also setting off the radiation warning sensor. The
radiation wasn’t coming from within the plant; it was being brought in on
the shoes and clothes of the workers.2 The Swedish plant was more than
1,100 kilometres away from Chernobyl, yet they were already being
affected by fallout.

As Sweden’s nuclear industry was sounding the alarm, the emergency
ward in Pripyat was filling up. There were 132 men in the hospital suffering
from toxic levels of radiation. Emergency vehicles continued to speed
toward the plant, with no one having any real idea of the deadly dangers
they faced. A number of residents watched the fire from a bridge
overlooking the plant. Everyone on that bridge suffered radiation poisoning,
which resulted in a number of deaths.

Officials wanted to keep people calm by downplaying the risk. And so, as
Saturday morning dawned, the community carried on normally. There were
seven outdoor weddings underway as radiation blanketed the region. But by
8 p.m. it was clear that a full-scale evacuation was required. None of the
people who left on the evacuation buses ever returned to their homes. At
one point, it was feared that a second blast in the neighbouring reactors
could happen. This would have spread enough radiation to make Western
Europe uninhabitable. The risk was extreme.3
Nuclear accidents were carefully guarded secrets in the Soviet Union, but
this catastrophe was too big to contain. On May 14, 1986, Premier Mikhail
Gorbachev gave a state television address laying out the true nature of the
catastrophe.4
 Pripyat was permanently abandoned and more than 335,000
people were displaced. It is estimated that the region near the plant will be
uninhabitable for 20,000 years.

Gorbachev’s speech was hailed as the beginning of the Soviet “glasnost”
period of greater openness and transparency. The Chernobyl disaster had
forced the secretive Soviet state to lay out the details of the tragedy to the
world. To restore trust with the people, Gorbachev introduced a series of
reforms to make it possible to criticize the Soviet system while also opening
the economy up for innovation.

Without Gorbachev, it is highly doubtful whether the United States and
Soviet Union would have been able to negotiate a peaceful end to the
mounting nuclear threat. For this, he merits recognition as one of the key
political leaders of the 1980s. Not that this helped him in his own country.

He was unable to contain the suspicion over the scale of the disaster, or the
growing public distrust of the Soviet leadership. In Ukraine, anger and
blame over Chernobyl pushed the independence movement forward. This
led to the December 1, 1991 referendum vote by the Ukrainian people to
formally break away from the Soviet Union. Without Ukraine, the USSR
disintegrated. In Russia, a series of strongmen were elected, leading to the
victory of ex–KGB agent Vladimir Putin in 2000.

In February 2022, the ghosts of Chernobyl returned with the Russian
military invasion of Ukraine. At the beginning of the invasion, Russian
president Putin drove his forces straight through the nuclear exclusion zone
at Chernobyl. There followed a series of dangerously provocative battles
fought near the Chernobyl site and at the Zaporizhzhia nuclear power plant.

The world held its breath out of fear that either plant would be hit by
rockets, initiating another nuclear catastrophe. Ukrainian president
Zelensky declared Putin’s move to take Chernobyl “a declaration of war
against the whole of Europe.”

It was as if the Russians wanted to punish Ukraine for the political
damage inflicted on the once-mighty Soviet Union by the Chernobyl
disaster. But the real punishment was most likely experienced by the young
Russian conscripts, none of whom would have been born at the time of the
blast, who were ordered to dig in the badly contaminated Chernobyl soil to
fill sandbags for trench defence works.

Four decades after that spring day in April 1986, the toxic political winds
of Chernobyl continue to blow.

