Chapter 15
THE BALLAD OF
BILLY AND ROSE
There was a poster on the living room wall of Angelus House that featured
a quote from Dostoevsky’s novel The Brothers Karamazov: “I am sorry that
I can say nothing more to console you, because love in practice is a harsh
and dreadful thing compared to the love of dreams.” Dorothy Day often
used the quote as a message to her idealistic followers that when working
with those living on the margins, happy endings were rare.

This was a hard lesson to learn. Brit and I believed that we could bypass
the social welfare system in which the lives of marginalized people were
compartmentalized into file folders on the desks of social workers,
therapists, and doctors. I was convinced we could build a better world one
relationship at a time. Sometimes it worked; more often it didn’t. In my
idealism I hadn’t considered how so many on the street had been marked by
complex layers of abuse and trauma.

I came from a life of privilege compared to most of the people at Angelus
House. The privilege of family cohesion—parents who loved me, a home
that was stable, relatives who may have had some drinks on a Friday night
but went to bed without shouting, fighting, or getting violent. Having grown
up with that kind of security and safety, I didn’t have the capacity to
recognize the patterns of intergenerational abuse that often played out
before me. It took me some time to understand that these weren’t simply
adults who made bad decisions; these toxic patterns had been imprinted on
them when they were still children.

Billy was our gateway into this world. Brit remembers the good times
with Billy. She remembers his positive spirit before the drink and demons
blew it all apart. I only remember the darkness that came with Billy and his
wife, Rose. And I remember their children.

I first met Billy soon after he was released from Guelph Correctional
Centre. He was staying at a nearby farm that was run by the Jesuits, where
guys coming out of prison mixed with young volunteers and people with
various disabilities who were nurtured in a family-like environment. The
Guelph farm was a huge inspiration to us. I loved the sense of community it
fostered and hoped that we could imitate it.

Billy was in his early thirties, with long, scraggly hair and a beard. He
was funny and charming, when he needed to be. A few months after our
first meeting, he called and said he was “on the run” and needed a place to
stay. I didn’t stop to ask who he was running from. Billy moved in and
quickly became a positive force in the house. He cooked and suggested
regular house meetings to divide up chores. When we watched a hockey
game or played silly board games, Billy was always one of the most
animated participants.

But money was going missing. Eddie, who had been living with Brit and
me since our apartment days, had his coin collection stolen. Gilles, a young
man with cerebral palsy who lived with us, came home to find $200
missing. Billy was always there to help try to figure out what had happened.

He said we needed to start locking the doors and keeping watch.

And then, one night, Brit and I came home after going to a movie and
found Billy very drunk and sitting at the kitchen table. He was crying about
his children. Billy had never mentioned children in the months he had been
with us, but it turned out he had three. His oldest, Billy Junior, who was
fourteen, had been taken into foster care the year before. Billy said he was
worried about his two other children: Cassie, who was eleven, and Danny,
who was eight. They were with his ex-wife, Rose, who was living in
Montreal with an abusive boyfriend named Dwayne. Brit and I stayed up
into the night talking with him.

Billy disappeared as soon as his welfare cheque came in. I was frustrated
and angry at him because I didn’t think he was being truthful with us, but I
had many other issues to deal with at the house and so I let the matter drop.

After a week, Billy called from Montreal. He had gone there to try to find
Rose, but now he was broke. He asked us to wire him money for a bus
ticket home. After he came back to Toronto, his friend Jesse started hanging
around. Billy was scrawny, but Jesse was a real tough guy, wiry with big
Popeye arms. He acted friendly and offered to help around the house, but I
was feeling more and more uncertain about where all this was headed,
especially since Jesse and Billy were often going out drinking in the
afternoon.

Then Rose called from Montreal. I had never spoken with her before. She
said her boyfriend, Dwayne, had beaten her up and she had nowhere to go.

She wanted to come to our house. I told her it wasn’t a good idea and that
she should get some help from a Montreal women’s shelter. Instead, she
took an all-night bus to Toronto with her children and showed up at our
door.

Rose was a blond woman around thirty, but she looked much older. As
soon as she arrived, Brit and I did our best to move her into different
housing. We sensed there would be serious trouble if she stayed. We called
around to various women’s shelters, but no one had room for her family.

Rose pleaded with us to put her up. She said Dwayne would kill her if she
ended up on the street. I was very reluctant to get drawn further into this
vortex but didn’t know what else to do. So we tried to make things right for
the two children while looking for a safe space for Rose.

The son, Danny, had a sweet disposition, but there was a lot of
unresolved rage in him. Cassie was very needy and latched onto Brit and
our volunteer Kelly. It was obvious that her parents had broken her heart
too many times. Billy and Rose began disappearing from the house, leaving
us to look after the kids. One night I went upstairs to sit with Cassie as she
cried quietly in her room.

“Don’t worry,” I said. “Your mom will be home soon.”
I didn’t believe it, and I don’t think Cassie did either.

Early on I noticed that Cassie had developed some unhealthy passive-
aggressive traits. In a world where she had little control, she had some
measure of power over her little brother. She knew all the buttons to press
to drive this youngster into a rage. Meanwhile, Danny didn’t know how to
articulate his feelings of betrayal by the adult world. He often lashed out
and did stupid things that got him into trouble at school. It felt as if I was
dealing with young versions of Billy and Rose.

Billy and Rose weren’t bad people, but they were very damaged. And
most damaging of all was that their children understood very clearly that
the adults in their life would put their own dysfunctional dramas ahead of
their needs every single time. Billy and Rose never talked about the kind of
upbringing they’d had, but both had obviously learned some very toxic
behaviours along the way. And there were unhealthy signs that the patterns
of intergenerational trauma were being replicated in their frightened and
insecure children. Cassie and Danny needed a safe and loving home, but all
they had was chaos.

We were outsiders in this drama. The best we could do was try to shield
the children in what was spiralling toward an increasingly dysfunctional
showdown.

As the children looked to us for protection, Billy started playing some
very ugly head games. One night I heard Danny crying in the kitchen and
found Billy stalking him with a big black coat. I stepped in between them. It
was the first time I had found myself in a potential physical confrontation in
the house. Billy laughed it off as if he were just having fun with his son.

Nobody else laughed.

Billy, Jesse, and Dwayne were abusive and self-centred men. And they
were now hovering around our house. Rose was the victim of their abuse,
yet she often played them off against each other. She left Billy to go out
with Jesse. This made Billy suddenly become a champion for Dwayne.

When nobody was paying attention, Rose would call Dwayne to reassure
him of her love and tell him that Brit and I were preventing him from seeing
her.

One night, Dwayne showed up at the house. Kelly was home with Eddie
and Gilles. Dwayne forced his way in the front door and demanded to see
the children, who were in bed. Kelly blocked the stairs, refusing to let him
past. Dwayne pushed her, but she refused to move. There was a tense stand-
off. As this was happening, I was coming up the back stairs from my
evening shift as a dishwasher. Through the window, I could see Dwayne
standing menacingly at the bottom of the stairs. And as I came in the back
door, I could see Kelly holding her ground halfway up the staircase.

I had only one chance to make this right. I walked very slowly through
the kitchen into the living room as if I didn’t have a care in the world.

Dwayne watched me the whole time. I didn’t bother to take off my leather
jacket, because I figured doing so would make me look as skinny as I really
was. I put myself between Dwayne and the stairs, and then told him that he
had to leave. We locked eyes and I slowly walked him backward to the door
without ever breaking eye contact or raising my voice, even though he was
swearing and trying to intimidate me. I knew that any misstep would send
us plunging over the edge into violence. I acted calm and determined.

As soon as I had gotten him on the other side of the door, I quickly bolted
the lock and shouted at Dwayne through the glass to never come back. I
was rattled, as was everyone else in the house. Then, at midnight, I was
awoken by a call from the police station. It was Dwayne. He had been
arrested on an outstanding warrant.

“Why are you calling me?” I demanded. “You just broke into our house
and threatened people here.” I was furious.

Quietly, Dwayne said he had no one else to call.

Dwayne’s home invasion was the incident that made Brit and I recognize
we needed to take responsibility. We had failed to establish clear limits, and
this was putting other people in our community at risk. If I invited people
into our house, I had a responsibility to ensure a safe environment.

The next morning, I told Billy to leave and never come back. Brit and I
also told Rose that we couldn’t let her stay any longer. This was very hard
to do because it meant we were also turning away Cassie and Danny. For
them, this was just one more in a long series of heartaches and betrayals.

After Rose left, she called and said she had been unable to find room at a
women’s shelter. She was living in a motel on Kingston Road. There was a
string of motels at the edge of the city that were the last refuge for folks
with no place else to go. This was the last place any kid should be living. I
should have immediately called child protection services, yet I was still
terribly naive about recognizing the moments when we needed the
professional social welfare system to intervene. Jesse took care of this
problem for us. He called Children’s Aid, who apprehended the kids at the
motel. Jesse wasn’t interested in the well-being of Danny and Cassie; he
just wanted to screw Rose over.

Billy disappeared from our lives, but not before sneaking back to rob the
house one last time. I never saw my beautiful punk bass guitar again.

Rose came by a couple of months later. She had been living on the street
and her arm was bandaged. She had badly burned herself after passing out
in front of a fire underneath a bridge. We gave her coffee and twenty
dollars. She never did get her children back.

A few months after this chaos, I was on the front porch of our house
when I saw a young teenage boy walking on our street. He was the spitting
image of Billy. It was his oldest son, Billy Jr.

“Hey,” the boy said, “you looked after my little sister and brother, didn’t
you?”
I nodded.

“Thank you.”
He told me he lived a few blocks over with a foster family. I asked him
how Cassie and Danny were doing, and he said they were doing okay. He
didn’t mention his parents.

He pulled out two photographs from his coat pocket. They were the latest
school photos of Danny and Cassie. “They asked me to give these to you.”
I found it heartbreaking that they wanted us to have their school pictures.

Who knew where their parents had disappeared to?
I still have those photos. They are dangerous memories of a tumultuous
time. Two innocent kids with bright smiles and crooked teeth sitting in front
of a grey studio backdrop. They must be close to fifty now. They have
probably become parents. Maybe even grandparents. Did they escape the
intergenerational abusive patterns of their parents? I don’t know. But I
certainly hope so.

