Chapter 16
THE MEANS OF PRODUCTION
There was a big dining room table on the main floor of Angelus House.

Someone was always sitting at it having a coffee. That was where we
gathered for evening meals. During the day the table served as our planning
board for changing the world. People were always coming by with their
different ideas. Some were Catholic idealists; some were anarchists. Some
just thought we were interesting and funky neighbours. I saw the house as
an experiment in charting a different way of living.

We pulled our money out of the banks and invested in the local Bread
and Roses Credit Union. We purchased food in bulk from a co-operative
warehouse in the West End. Brit was keen to try out a fledgling barter
system known as LETS (local exchange and trading system) that had first
been done in the Comox Valley, BC, in 1983. Friends came over to debate
books like E. F. Schumacher’s Small Is Beautiful and the back-to-the-land
bible The Good Life by Helen and Scott Nearing.

But what Brit and I wanted to do most was run a newspaper to spread the
ideas of social justice, simpler living, and aid to the poor. Neither of us had
any journalistic training, but we wanted our newspaper to look professional.

Sitting around the big table at Angelus House, we discussed whether to
employ the new technology offered by the emergence of the home
computer. Thanks to the advent of the Commodore 64 and the Atari, the
world was on the cusp of a digital revolution, but people had not yet been
totally beguiled by tech. It was still possible to talk about whether new
technology improved life or diminished it. In a 1984 essay, author Thomas
Pynchon wondered if it was “OK to be a Luddite.”

In a twenty-first-century world dominated by the billionaire frat boys of
Silicon Valley, the term Luddite has become synonymous with close-
minded people afraid of progress. But the Luddites represent a very
dangerous memory. The Luddite rebellion of 1811–16 was sparked by
craftspeople who understood that machines were being used by the rising
capitalist class to destroy their economic independence and way of life. The
uprising began after the British parliament made it illegal for workers to
join trade unions that could have played a role in mitigating some of the
damages being inflicted by the emerging capitalist economy. The Luddites
targeted the machines as an act of resistance against a system that was
leaving them dispossessed.

Few in the 1980s saw much threat in the desktop computer; they simply
questioned whether the technology was needed. To most, it was either a
glorified way to play games, add up mathematical sums, or serve as a
substitute for a typewriter. It was impossible to imagine the role these
machines would soon play in upending the economy, communications, and
our relationships to each other.

The story of the computer revolution of the 1980s has been rendered as a
hero’s tale of visionary mavericks like university dropouts Bill Gates and
Steve Jobs. But these men didn’t conjure the computer out of thin air.

Silicon Valley was born as a research project of the United States military-
industrial complex.2
 Much of the technology that drove the computer
revolution was developed for the Cold War. The first large-scale digital
computer was built to plot artillery shells. From there MIT developed the
Whirlwind computer system to automate air defence warning systems. The
earliest use of what became internet technology was the military SAGE
(Semi-Automatic Ground Environment) warning system that used
telephone lines to transfer analog information into digital form. As
journalist Eric Schlosser writes, “In many respects SAGE created the
template for the modern computer industry … analog to digital conversion,
data transmission over telephone lines, video monitors, graphic displays,
magnetic core memory, duplexing, multiprocessing … a handheld early
version of the mouse.”

 In 1984, Frank Rose observed, “The
computerization of society … has essentially been a side effect of the
computerization of war.”

These military advancements helped drive the development of office
computers, which by the late 1980s were beginning to radically alter office
work. The publishing industry was particularly affected. Almost overnight
the long-standing use of large linotype blocks and printing presses was
made redundant.

Brit and I called our publication the Angelus and launched the first eight-
page edition using MS-DOS computers. The program was slow, and far from
intuitive. Our first issue had a hodgepodge layout and editorial approach.

There was an article about our work at the house, a letter from a young
Jesuit working in rural El Salvador, and an editorial on the death of forty-
one-year-old Drina Jobert, who froze to death on the streets of Toronto. I
threw in a speech by Irish revolutionary leader Padraig Pearse after hearing
it recited on a Dubliner’s album. I also wrote up an Angelus House hit
parade of the most inspiring music from the previous year, including “Sun
City,” Bruce Springsteen’s “Born in the USA,” and U2’s “Pride (In the Name
of Love).” The music review concluded, “1984 may have been full of
chicanery and high-powered capitalism but some artists gave us reason to
hope and aspire for a passionate existence.”
Brit and I were pleased at our first effort, but we received a failing grade
from both the Jesuits and our anarchist friends. The Jesuits pushed us to
have a focus, with a coherent political or religious analysis in order for
readers to be able to make sense of our vision. The anarchists just thought
our publication looked like crap.

Ottawa punk organizer Vig Laliberté hooked us up with a group of young
anarchists who were serious about making social change. Ted Dyment and a
group of friends had started a Toronto chapter of the Industrial Workers of
the World (IWW). Ted was a digital pioneer who had no time for the
homespun, photocopied pamphlets the left-wing progressive community
used to get their message out. He believed in the potential of digital
technology to shake up the status quo.

Ted saw the revolution coming with the introduction of a competing
technology to MS-DOS—the Apple computer. Apple launched the Macintosh
computer in a dramatic Super Bowl commercial in January 1984. The ad
was directed by blockbuster film director Ridley Scott and showed a
woman using a hammer to smash the screen image of an Orwellian tyrant.

The tag line “You’ll see why 1984 won’t be like 1984” was smart, literary,
and spoke to DIY empowerment.5
We took the plunge and purchased the expensive Mac Plus model. It
featured a layout program called PageMaker that was simple, intuitive, and
fun. For our second issue of the Angelus, we covered labour strikes in
Toronto, provided an update on the deteriorating situation in Latin America,
and featured articles on co-operatives and economic transformation. Like
the American Catholic Worker newspaper, the Angelus included articles
about the Catholic saints who defended the interests of the poor and
explanations of Church writings on social action. The heart of the
publication was the stories we told about the people who came through our
house. We were trying to make the notion of hospitality seem like
something that anyone could do. It was about building neighbourhoods and
community. The publication began to pick up readers from a wide variety of
locations across the United States and Canada.

In its first year, the publication had text that resembled typewriter font.

Since this was the type I had grown up with, I thought it looked normal,
even professional. Ted pushed us to do better. Over dinner at the house,
he’d lecture us about the fonts and styles that were becoming possible with
digital technology. “We have the means of production in our hands,” he
liked to say. “We need to seize this moment.”
Taking control of the means of production is a foundational principle of
left-wing thought. Karl Marx wrote of the societal transformation that
would happen when workers and artisans took control of the means of
production from capital. The anarchists looked to computer technology as
the means to gain independence from the corporate structures that
controlled the dissemination of information. “Freedom of the press is only
guaranteed to those who own one,” A. J. Liebling had written in 1960.6
Ted’s response was cocky: “We can leave those dinosaur publishing
industries in the dust.”
But the computer revolution wasn’t simply changing the tools we used, it
was also transforming how we related to each other. I got my first inkling of
this rapidly changing world view when a man called and said he had picked
up a copy of our paper and was interested in sharing the information in our
articles. He wanted the digital text files so that he could post them on a
computer platform called Bulletin Boards. It allowed people to share
information computer to computer through a phone line. The information
was posted on sites known as chat rooms. He said this online information
sharing would revolutionize communication, but I was skeptical.

“What is it about our newspaper that intrigues you?” I asked. “Is it the
articles on the homeless, the peace movement, or Church issues?”
“I’m not really interested in the articles themselves,” he said casually.

“I’m interested in the fact that you guys are creating content, and in the
world of Bulletin Boards, content will be king.”
The fact that someone was looking to promote “content” regardless of the
ideas it contained struck me as bizarre. I politely sent this man on his way. I
wasn’t the only one who didn’t get the potential of the internet. Bill Gates
missed it as well. He had focused on selling the home computer. But by
1995, he was scrambling to catch up to the revolutionary potential of the
Netscape Navigator interface. Gates described interconnectivity as a “tidal
wave” of change.

WE ARE FOUR decades into the digital revolution, and it is still difficult to
step outside of this whirlwind to make sense of the long-term impacts of
having our words, ideas, and human interactions flattened into the zeros and
ones of digital code. It’s not simply a question of how much society has
been changed, but how much we as individuals have been altered. At first,
the digital revolution felt like a wonderful vehicle for empowerment,
enabling everyone in the world to communicate with one another. Tech guru
Jaron Lanier, who later became a vocal critic of the digital revolution,
described its initial idealism: “The rise of the web was a rare instance when
we learned new, positive information about human potential … In vast
numbers, people did something cooperatively, solely because it was a good
idea, and it was beautiful … At the core was a sweet faith in human nature.

If we empowered individuals, we believed, more good than harm would
result.”

What’s more, surfing the web was fun and the gadgets were cool. How
could this not be inherently progressive? Writer Clay Shirky has promoted
this optimistic vision of an empowered digital commons: “When we change
the way we communicate, we change society. The tools that a society uses
to create and maintain itself are as central to human life as a hive is to bee
life … bees make hives, we make mobile phones.”

Of course, the reality is that we as individuals don’t make mobile phones.

The phones are made by immensely powerful corporate entities who
offshore the work to the Global South. In 2017, it was reported that workers
at the iPhone factory in China were so stressed and underpaid that they
began killing themselves in significant numbers. The contractor put up nets
to catch the bodies as they fell from the building.9
But the darker side of mercenary capitalism was lurking behind the
screen from the beginning. Long before Milton Friedman proposed
breaking the back of the American working class, Silicon Valley pioneers
were leading the way. They were intensely anti-union and as early as 1963
began offshoring production to Asia, where workers were paid as little as
twenty-five cents a day.

10 By the 1980s, Silicon Valley had solidified into a
culture of toxic alpha-male libertarians deeply rooted in “the unashamed
capitalism of the Reagan ’80s.”11 The tech giants believed they had a right
and a duty to arbitrarily rewire democracy and society. What could go
wrong?
The 1984 Mac ad promised individual autonomy in the face of mass
conformity and state surveillance. What we failed to consider is that
unprecedented conformity and surveillance was written into the very codes
of Silicon Valley. Everything we do, everywhere we go, everything we buy
is tracked by powerful machine-driven algorithms, to the point that the cool
urbanite texting on their phone is not creating the digital hive—they have
become a worker in the hive. The hive exploits the ten-year-old labourer
risking their life in the mines of Congo to obtain the metals for the
phones,12 the factory worker making the phones in China, and the North
American user addicted to screen time.

Shoshana Zuboff, who has studied the unprecedented power of digital
platforms like Facebook and YouTube, writes that “in surveillance
capitalism … the means of production are subordinated to an increasingly
comprehensive ‘means of behavioral modification’… on every aspect of
every human’s experience.”13 That behavioural modification manifests as
digital addiction—keeping our eyeballs glued to the screen. Our online lives
have been reduced to an endless series of individualized echo chambers
created and curated by machine-driven artificial intelligence. The machines
quickly figured out that people can be engaged most effectively to stay
online through offerings that drive anger, fear, and paranoia. This deliberate
manipulation of human behaviour has resulted in the real-life consequences
of increased alienation, youth anxiety, tribalism, political violence, and even
genocide.14
For the longest time it was possible to ignore the darker realities of the
digital realm. Then came Trump, Brexit, and the election of previously
marginalized right-wing extremists like Jair Bolsonaro of Brazil. How did
these Orwellian strongmen rise so easily? In 2018, digital whistleblower
Christopher Wylie exposed the privacy breaches that allowed digital
mercenaries from the far right to engage in online manipulation that have
upended democratic elections.15
Then came the horrific stories of how the exploitation of Facebook/Meta
had been used in the genocide in Myanmar and other regions suffering from
sudden flare-ups of ethnic violence. This is not a case of idealism gone
wrong; the reckless manipulation of our private and public space was built
into the digital revolution from the beginning. Sean Parker, who became
Facebook’s first president at twenty-four, boasted that he and Mark
Zuckerberg designed the platform to “exploit a vulnerability in human
psychology…. [we] understood this … we did it anyway.”

In 2024, we find ourselves in the first stages of an AI upheaval that could
dwarf anything accomplished in the previous phases of the digital
revolution. What this means for society is beyond any ordinary person’s
ability to fathom. Geoffrey Hinton, one of the “godfathers of AI,” warns
that the capacity of AI to create mass unemployment, supplant human
decision-making, undermine political conversation, and launch militarized
death machines poses a more urgent threat to humanity than climate
change.17
In the 1980s, I was convinced that digital technology would give us the
tools to become more connected, more democratically empowered. It would
make us all smarter. What if it has done the opposite? Consistent polling
suggests that conspiracy theories have become deeply ingrained in both
Canadian and American voters.18 Little wonder that trust in democracy is
more challenged now than at any time since the rise of fascism.

Writing on the fortieth anniversary of the launch of the iconic 1984 Apple
ad, Siva Vaidhyanathan stated that this ad was the moment when the long
twenty-first century began. And forty years on from that bold and inspiring
declaration, the future we find ourselves in looks so much bleaker.

“Democracy is in tatters around the world. Networked computers drain
pleasure and humanity out of relationships, communities, and societies.

Economies are more stratified than ever. Politics are evacuated of any
positive vision of a better future.”

I write these words on my Mac laptop as addicted to technology and
screen time as anyone else. I think back to a group of idealists who sat
around that big table at Angelus House talking and dreaming of building a
more equitable future. The computer seemed to be a tool to make this dream
come true. In a world before the algorithm and the rise of the tech
billionaires, all things seemed possible.

