Chapter 17
THE NIGHTMARE IN
GUATEMALA
One day I got a call from a guy in our neighbourhood who was working
with a Latin American solidarity group. They needed a place for a
Guatemalan refugee to stay until he could get settled. The house was pretty
full then, with about eight or nine people already living with us, but they
said it would only be for a week or so, until they found something else.

“Sure, why not?” I said. “Is there anything about his story I should know
about?” The contact simply replied he was a deserter from the Guatemalan
army.

By the mid-1980s, Reagan’s “splendid little war” in Latin America was
spilling out across regional borders as refugees fled the mounting violence.1
El Salvador and Nicaragua suffered horribly, but nothing matched the
bloodshed in the hills of Guatemala. In 1982, born-again religious fanatic
and militant anti-communist General Efraín Ríos Montt had seized power in
Guatemala and launched a war against progressive elements in the country.

Ríos Montt targeted Indigenous Mayan villages in the hills, accusing
them of being hotbeds of sedition. Military advisers from the United States
encouraged him to “pacify” these villages using the same scorched-earth
tactics that had failed so miserably in Vietnam.

The military relied on helicopter gunships to attack the isolated villages.

They destroyed crops, killed animals, murdered village leaders, and
assassinated community development workers. They received clear orders
to target the very communal life of the Indigenous people: “In addition to
trying to destroy the subversive groups completely, their collective farming
enterprises must be destroyed, once they are identified or when they are in
areas where their encampments are suspected to exist, with the aim of
cutting them off … forcing them to surrender out of hunger.”2 People who
fled into the forest to escape the violence were hunted down as enemy
combatants. Atrocities and mass rapes were common. Over 440 Mayan
villages were destroyed and more than 100,000 people killed. It was a
genocide.

In 1984, Toronto artist Bruce Cockburn shocked the Canadian music
scene with his call to use a rocket launcher to shoot the military gunships
out of the Guatemalan skies.3
 In the face of global condemnation of the
atrocities, Ronald Reagan declared that Ríos Montt was “getting a bum rap”
and assured the world that the Guatemalan dictator was “totally dedicated to
democracy.”

The mass killing created waves of refugees attempting to escape the
conflict. Reagan’s push to deport Latin American refugees who made it into
the United States put immense pressure on Canada, as the refugees
congregated near border towns like Buffalo, hoping for refugee status north
of the border. In response, Prime Minister Brian Mulroney’s government
announced changes to Canada’s refugee policy to bring it in line with the
Reagan administration. It took an enormous campaign of grassroots
activism and solidarity work to push the Mulroney government to change
their policy of sending the refugees back. This was a significant victory in
Canada, but the larger crisis remained. The Jesuit Centre for Social Justice
and Faith in Toronto was one of many organizations that stepped up to help
address the refugee crisis, and they hired Brit to work on their team.

As part of her work, Brit travelled with a Jesuit group to meet with the
refugees who had ended up in camps in Chiapas, Mexico. In a 1987 issue of
the Angelus, she described what she saw there: “We drove the length of the
barbed wire fence, and as we approached a raggle-taggle group of children
began to appear and watch us. Then the young mothers, many with babies
in the arms and toddlers clutching their skirts, peeked out from the doors of
their huts. And then the men came to greet us, white shirts, straw cowboy
hats and proud, broad faces … as the flies buzzed the men told us the story
of their community. It is a story now worn and reshaped by telling and
retelling. It is one fragment of a larger tale about a modern holocaust.”

The trip to Chiapas was organized by labour lawyer Enrique Torres. He
had fled to Canada with his wife, Maria, after receiving death threats for his
work on behalf of the workers at the Coca-Cola bottling plant in Guatemala
City. Eight union leaders were murdered for defending the workers’ rights.

Despite these killings, the workers maintained their links to the union
movement. In response, Coca-Cola management announced plans to shut
the plant down, and the military junta was firmly on their side. In a country
with few stable industrial jobs, this was a serious blow to the working class.

The workers challenged Coca-Cola by occupying the plant. What
followed was a thirteen-month siege. To build labour support, an
international boycott of “Killer Coke” was undertaken. In Norway, thirteen
out of fifteen bottling plants were shut down as Europeans refused to buy
the product. The United Food and Commercial Workers (UFCW) launched
fundraising drives across North America. International pressure on Coca-
Cola forced the American head office to negotiate a solution. Despite the
threats of violence and intimidation, the workers won.

JORGE, THE DESERTER from the Guatemalan army, arrived at Angelus House
on Friday, October 31, 1986. He seemed like a shy man. We didn’t like
prying into people’s backgrounds, so I didn’t ask him whether he had been
involved in the terror campaigns in the Guatemalan highlands. All I knew
was that things were bad in Guatemala, and he wanted to get away. That
seemed good enough at the time.

It was the weekend of our first wedding anniversary, and Brit and I
planned to spend a night at my sister’s place. The house had been pretty
overcrowded and intense lately, and as a newly married couple we rarely
had privacy or the chance to be alone.

When Brit and I Ieft on Saturday afternoon for our romantic getaway, the
house was relaxed and people were in good spirits. But early the next
morning I received a panicked call from our twenty-year-old volunteer
Julie, who was in charge of the house when we were gone. She explained
that the previous night Jorge had come home very drunk and full of rage.

He had terrified people and made them feel like hostages. I asked Julie
where Jorge was now, and she said that two of the guys in the house had
tried to de-escalate the situation by offering to take him out for beers. As
soon as they stepped out, Julie had locked the doors.

Brit and I came home to find people very frightened. I called the
solidarity group that had sent Jorge our way and spoke to an elderly Quaker
woman who was distressed by the news but was of little help. They didn’t
seem to have protocols for dealing with this kind of situation. We were on
our own.

I made sure the doors were locked and the windows secure, and then we
sat around and nervously waited for Jorge’s return. At around 8:30 that
night there was a pounding at the full-length glass front door. Jorge had a
bottle in his hand. I explained that because he was drunk, I couldn’t let him
in the house.

He exploded and hissed, “I am going to fucking kill you.” He threw the
beer bottle as hard as he could at the space where my head was. The bottle
smashed against the glass, but the door held. Frustrated, he tried to force the
door open.

Brit was immediately on the phone to police. Within fifteen minutes,
officers from 55 Division at Coxwell Avenue and Dundas Street showed up.

They were pretty aggressive with Jorge, who seemed to go into a catatonic
state. It was as if he didn’t understand what was going on. I tried to broker
some peace and told the police I could handle things now. As they started to
get into their car, Jorge looked at me and quietly threatened, “You are going
to fucking die.” I quickly called over to the police and they put Jorge in the
cruiser and took him away. I was shaken up. We all were.

Fifteen minutes later a police officer called to get some information on
Jorge. After I explained what I knew, the officer said, “Yes, he seems pretty
rageful, but we have no reason to hold him, so we’re letting him go.” I
pleaded with them to keep him there as he could be at the house in minutes.

But all the officer said was “If he shows up again, call us.”
What the hell were we going to do?
At that moment Brit remembered that we had been given an old prayer
card with an ancient prayer to St. Michael that supposedly had the power to
bar evil from crossing the threshold of our house. Earlier in the year the
local motorcycle gang had offered us free protection, but Brit had politely
declined their phone number. With no other options, we turned to the prayer
card. It instructed us to dab holy water on each door and window and at
each spot recite the prayer to St. Michael to cast out the evil from our
house. Fortunately, a nun had given us some holy water when the house
opened. Since we didn’t really have any better ideas, we diligently followed
the instructions. Then we sat down in the dark to wait.

Brit and I slept in in the front room underneath the large glass window. I
woke in the early morning wondering if it had just been a bad dream. I
slowly peeked over the windowsill and almost died of a heart attack when I
saw Jorge standing at the edge of the front lawn staring at the house. I
panicked and ducked down. But then I looked up again, trying to make
sense of it all. He was standing at the edge of the grass, but he hadn’t set
foot on the property. Had he been there all night?
I could hardly breathe. I have no idea how long I watched him, but
eventually Jorge turned and slowly walked away. For the rest of the day, we
were on pins and needles. Nobody went out, and the door stayed locked, but
Jorge had walked out of our lives for good.

IN 2012, LAWYER Enrique Torres was murdered in Guatemala. His family
believe that he was targeted for his work defending workers and the people
in his home country.

6
In 2013, the Guatemalan court convicted Ríos Montt of genocide and
crimes against humanity. He was sentenced to eighty years in prison. Within
days, the conviction was thrown out by the Guatemalan high court
following intense pressure from the country’s political and business elite.

In 2018, Guatemalan refugees were back in the international news as
Donald Trump announced a zero-tolerance policy toward people fleeing
Central America. The civil war was long over, but violent gangs and drug
cartels had flourished in the chaos of the post-genocide world created by
Ríos Montt, causing multigenerational conflict and trauma. The photos of
children being seized at the border, separated from their families, and kept
in cages in American detention centres shocked the world. Of the 3,900
children who were imprisoned, 60 percent were Guatemalan.7 The Trump
border crackdown only added to the trauma and dislocation of these people
on the run. It has been reported that children who were pulled from their
families have been identified as having high levels of PTSD and anxiety.

More than 500 children who were taken from their parents were still
without access to family three years after their apprehension.8 The horrific
patterns of violence and terror can be directly traced back to the lessons
taught in the military death squads of El Salvador and Guatemala during the
brutal years of the 1980s.

When I look back, I realize that I had no clue what we were dealing with
in Jorge. Sure, I knew about the geopolitical struggle in Latin America, but I
had no understanding of the damaging impacts of PTSD, dislocation, and
mass violence. Knowing what I know now, I would have insisted on having
more information on Jorge before he stayed in our house, and I would have
tried to put support in place to deal with the cultural, linguistic, and
traumatic realities of his life.

The front line for refugee aid remains with the families, community
groups, churches, and mosques that step up to help. Many have little more
backup than we did. This dangerous memory is worth remembering, as the
twenty-first century has witnessed unprecedented forced migrations in the
face of violence and climate catastrophe, from Syria, Ukraine, Yemen,
Sudan, and other zones of conflict. In 2022, the United Nations put the
number of displaced persons at more than one billion.9 This is a staggering
level of human misery. Many refugees suffer from PTSD as a result of
complex physical and psychological traumas. Yet without the willingness of
volunteers to step up and take a risk, these refugees from brutal wars and
catastrophes would never have a chance at safety and a new life. At a bare
minimum, we should put more support in place to deal with the emotional
and physical damages suffered by so many people fleeing violence. But the
reality is that many, many more are simply not getting through to safety at
all.

