Chapter 18
FOLK DEVILS AND
MASS SHOOTERS
Dinner was always an adventure at Angelus House. It was a time for people
to gather around the table, to talk and tease. One evening a lawyer called,
looking for a home for a young man who needed a supportive community in
order to stay out of jail. As I started talking, she interrupted to ask if I was at
a party.

“No,” I replied. “Why do you ask?”
“It sounds like there’s a lot of music, talk, and laughter behind you,” she
said, perplexed. “I thought it must be some kind of party.”
No, that was just suppertime at Angelus House.

There was always a mix of folks around the dinner table. Manuel was a
young Mexican man whose efforts to learn English drew the help of
everyone in the house. Dean was a less positive presence; he had a scar
from a bullet in his face and was always hitting on the women in the house
with his claims of being a hairdresser. Maria was an Italian woman in her
fifties who had walked out of an abusive marriage in North Toronto. Not
knowing where to go, she went to the Eaton’s Centre, where she sat in the
department store. Someone from the store called us and she came to stay for
a while. Helping her was a challenge because she was convinced that she
was the Virgin Mary reincarnated.

Keeping the dinner conversation going meant finding common ground.

This is why we often fell into talk about hockey or baseball with the guys
from the street. But the subject they really loved was delving into the latest
sensationalist and lurid crime news. And there was no topic they loved more
than serial killers. The living room was awash with well-thumbed
paperback biographies of the famous serial killers of the day—Ted Bundy,
John Wayne Gacy, and the mysterious Green River Killer.

Every era confronts its cultural insecurities through the creation of so-
called folk devils and moral panics.1 The 1980s had no shortage of moral
panics. Sensationalist media fed their audience conspiracy theories about
satanic cults, ritualistic child abuse, and the false myth of a generation of
zombie “crack babies.” Many of these folk devils were conjured to fan the
emerging culture wars of the decade. But nothing fuelled cultural panic like
the figure of the serial killer. Popular culture obsessed over the grotty and
horrific nature of the crimes while mythologizing serial killers as brilliant
outsiders. The personification of the human predator as misunderstood
genius reached its apex with Thomas Harris’s 1988 novel Silence of the
Lambs, which portrays serial killer Hannibal Lecter locked in an intellectual
chess match with the police. The movie adaptation won five Academy
Awards.

The fascination with the psychopathic killer spawned an entire
Hollywood industry in the 1980s, thanks to the rise of the slasher genre.

Movies like Halloween, Friday the 13th, and A Nightmare on Elm Street
launched multimedia franchises of movies, comic books, television series,
and of course, lots of merchandise. Serial-killer slasher films also helped
kick-start the careers of many famous actors, including Tom Hanks, Kevin
Bacon, Johnny Depp, Brad Pitt, George Clooney, and Jennifer Connelly.

As twisted as it may seem, the 1980s are considered the “golden years”
for serial killers.2
 Research shows a steady rise of serial killings starting in
the 1960s and peaking in the 1980s, with at least two hundred murderers
operating in the United States alone. Following this peak, the numbers
began to drop off as the twentieth century ended.

Canadian researcher Peter Vronsky believes the “golden age” can be
attributed to some key factors. The first is the effects of family trauma and
dysfunction in the postwar baby boom. Many of the identified serial killers
came from homes where the father suffered severe PTSD from wartime
experience. The second is the fact that the killings happened at a time when
many young people were still hitchhiking, cell phones and DNA evidence
were a thing of the future, and police databases consisted of papers in filing
cabinets.

It is also necessary to point out that police and public attention was on
white victims and white killers. Murders of racialized people were rarely
given anywhere near the same level of public scrutiny. In Canada, the
mainstream public paid little attention to the disturbing numbers of
murdered and missing Indigenous women. On the notorious Highway of
Tears in British Columbia, at least three serial killers exploited the
vulnerability of Indigenous women. In 2023, the refusal of the provincial
Manitoba Conservative government to search a city landfill for the bodies
of Indigenous women killed by a serial killer became a major election issue
and led to their defeat. The red dress campaign raises awareness of the
horrifying levels of violence against Indigenous women in Canada.

THE 1980S MAY have been the decade of the serial killer, but another folk
devil was emerging—the mass shooter. The implications of this twenty-
first-century nightmare weren’t fully understood at the time. My journal
from August 20, 1986, notes a spirited discussion around the Angelus
House dinner table about one of the first major cases of this new
phenomenon. Eddie, who had been the first person to move in with us, liked
to dominate discussions with the latest shock news he had seen on
television. He loved disasters, big storms, and wild true-crime dramas.

That dinnertime, he was determined to share with us every detail
emerging from a tragic mass shooting in a post office in Edmond,
Oklahoma. On the afternoon of Wednesday, August 20, 1986, Patrick
Sherrill walked into his workplace and murdered fourteen people. The
media coverage was intense. And then it was discovered that this wasn’t a
one-off incident. In fact, between 1983 and 1993 there were eleven mass
shooting incidents at postal offices in the United States.3 The idea of post
office shootings seemed so strange and inexplicable that it became the
punchline of a joke. “Going postal” was a 1980s expression for losing your
cool. Author Mark Ames, however, places these killings within the context
of the 1980s economic counter-revolution: “The post office was one of the
earliest and largest public agencies in the post–New Deal to be subjected to
what was essentially a semi-deregulation and semi-privatization plan …
workers were pushed harder to produce and fined or reprimanded for small
violations.”

During the Reagan era, workplace shootings were presented as examples
of the breakdown of society and the family. But they were actually
manifestations of the growing stress facing the working class in Reagan’s
America. A tragic example was the 1989 mass killing at the Standard
Gravure printing company in Louisville, Kentucky. Joseph “Rocky”
Wesbecker had worked relentless overtime at the plant, where it was likely
he was being slowly poisoned by the toxic chemical toluene. Management
was demanding wage cuts from the unionized employees and was in the
process of shifting work to a new plant in Tennessee that offered no union
protection. Management also raided the workers’ pension fund.

Wesbecker, who was becoming increasingly sick, was told that his
benefits were being cut. This was the final straw. He went into the plant
with an AK-47, a Smith & Wesson, two MAC-11 pistols, and a gym bag full
of ammunition. He systematically murdered eight and seriously injured
twelve more.5
In the 1980s, mass shootings in schools were almost unknown. The first
major incident was considered a bizarre anomaly. In 1979, sixteen-year-old
Brenda Ann Spencer shot up a grade school in San Diego. The young
woman had been the victim of incessant bullying. When Spencer was asked
why she targeted students and teachers, she said it was because she didn’t
like Mondays. Like “going postal,” the line “I don’t like Mondays” became
a cultural touchstone. It also gave the Irish punk band the Boomtown Rats
the fodder for a number-one single.

In Canada, the defining school shooting occurred in December 1989,
when Marc Lépine murdered fifteen young women at École Polytechnique
in Montreal. The massacre led to major changes in Canadian gun laws and
became a defining symbol in the struggle to end violence against women.

In the United States, the transition from mass workplace shootings to
mass school shootings was marked by the Columbine massacre of 1997.

Since Columbine, more than 352,000 American students have experienced
mass shooting events.6
 In addition to multiple copycat incidents at schools
across the United States, mass shooters have targeted places of worship and
public gatherings. In the US, the symbol of the mass shooter has become a
lightning rod in a major culture war over guns, political ideology, and even
the perception of reality itself. Multiple traumatic mass killings have
become an obsession point for conspiracists, who denounce them as “false
flag” operations with hired child actors pretending to be victims. Families
who have lost children in mass shootings have been targeted on extremist
right-wing platforms.

There is a tendency to regard these mass killings as a reflection of the
deeply dysfunctional American relationship with guns. In 2001, there were
seven mass shooting events.7
 In 2023, that number had reached 627
incidents, with the numbers having risen every year.

8
 But there are
disturbing patterns that are worth considering. A number of the killings
have been linked to the proliferation of racist and sexist hate in online
forums. Discussion forums like 8chan have turned some mass murderers
into folk heroes. The Walmart murderer in El Paso, Texas, posted his hate
screed to 8chan, calling on fellow racists to take up mass murder. The killer
at the Christchurch Mosque in New Zealand posted footage of his horrific
murder sprees. It was reposted 1.4 million times in twenty-four hours on
Facebook.9
 Canada’s mass killer Marc Lépine has been celebrated as a
“saint” by some incels.10
Although Canada has much stricter gun laws than the US, it has suffered
a series of brutal mass killings in recent years. Across North America and
Europe, these incidents are blamed on the modern folk devils of “incels,”
“loan wolves,” and “white nationalists.” All these terms are folk devil
euphemisms for the root cause—the rageful male misogynist.

