Chapter 19
THE BANQUET OF THE
CORPORATE CARDINAL
In 1987, our crew at Angelus House decided to attend the annual charity
banquet of Cardinal Emmett G. Carter. Not as paying guests but as polite
gatecrashers. The cardinal knew everyone in Canada’s corporate and
political establishment, and he wasn’t shy about tapping them for a good
cause—the various Catholic charities in the city. The banquet was a tuxedo
and evening gown affair, attended by the political and business leaders of
the country. We naively thought we could engage the most powerful man in
Canada’s Catholic Church in a discussion about increasing economic
disparity. After all, Jesus had been pretty clear about who should get invited
to banquets: “When you host a banquet do not invite the rich who can pay
you back … invite the poor, the crippled, the lame, the blind.”

But Carter didn’t get Jesus’s message. When he held his first banquet in
the darkest days of the 1981 recession, it was chaired by the corporate elite
of Canada. And since then, the event has only grown in stature.

Prime Minister Brian Mulroney was a featured guest at Carter’s head
table. Mulroney was elected in 1984 on the promise of using his skills as a
corporate executive to get Canada’s stagnant economy moving again. At the
time there were more than a million Canadians out of work,2
 but that
number stayed constant throughout Mulroney’s nine years in office.

However, it was a boom time for those on the make. Reporter Carol Goar
describes the Mulroney years as a time of “condos and jaguars.” That so
many remained unemployed as the economy roared back to life was an
indication that the Canadian economy was undergoing a radical
restructuring. Like in Reagan’s America and Thatcher’s Britain, Canada
was no longer focused on the rates of employment but on the wealth
generated by the emerging 1 percent. Goar writes, “The 80s were years of
heady growth, fueled in large measure by real estate speculation, leveraged
buy outs and frantic consumer spending. Mulroney and his wife Mila set the
tone flaunting their wealth and status in the way they dressed, travelled, and
lived.”

Author Stevie Cameron notes that the Mulroney government was
obsessed with wealth, insider access, and deal-making: “Until the Mulroney
government came to office, lobbying was a discreet profession in the city
[of Ottawa], practiced by a few well-connected Ottawa hands … When
Mulroney came to Ottawa, he was followed by a flock of cronies who were
brazen in their determination to cash in on the friendship.”4 The Mulroneys
hosted black-tie dinners for those willing to make maximum donations to
the party. In return, those donors were given access to the top cabinet
ministers and government officials. Access was all about who could pay, as
was made clear in an internal party report identifying the targets to hit up:
“chartered and other banks, insurance companies, trust companies, CA
firms, lobbyist firms, major oil companies, automobile manufacturers, most
wealthy Canadians (individuals), breweries, pulp and paper and major
American corporations.”

The Mulroney government was riding the wave of a new ideology—
greed is good. This celebration of greed was enunciated in 1986 by New
York financier Ivan Boesky.

6 And it was transformed into the culturally
defining “greed is good” speech by the character Gordon Gecko in the 1987
hit movie Wall Street. By then, Boesky was in jail for his larcenous tastes.

But it didn’t matter. There was a long lineup of corporate sociopaths ready
to take his place in what was increasingly becoming a “casino” economy of
high finance and reckless speculation.

For much of the twentieth century, the monied class relied on the loyalty
of dour and dutiful corporate managers who prided themselves on building
the brand of established corporations with a view to long-term success and
growth. But that world was shaken up in the 1980s by the emergence of a
new predatory force in business, the flamboyant corporate raider. Graham
Stewart describes how in the mercenary environment of ’80s capitalism, a
“business empire carefully built up over generations could be decapitated
and sold on by financiers who had never worked in the business sectors
they intruded into … corporate raiders were indifferent to custodianship and
were merely asset-strippers, pocketing for themselves and their
shareholders whatever sums could be extracted from companies they were
content to reduce to a carcass without regard for the workforce.”

Nobody in Canada personified predatory capitalism like Conrad Black.

In 1978, Black took control of Dominion Stores, Canada’s largest and most
successful grocery chain. Dominion was a flagship Canadian institution
worth $2.4 billion, with twice the sales of its nearest rival, Loblaws.

Dominion workers not only enjoyed good wages but had a strong pension
plan, and it was common at the time for employees to work their entire
career for the company. Once Black got hold of Dominion, the sell-off of
assets began. Black wanted control of the $37.9 million surplus that had
been built up by Dominion workers for their retirement years.

The playbook was being written in Reagan’s America. In 1980, more
than 60 percent of American workers had defined company pension plans,
but by 2006 this number had dropped to 10 percent, which meant that
people were often working well past retirement because they lacked the
means.8
 Dominion’s corporate stability became so undermined that
shareholders complained that “the buccaneers have climbed aboard the
Dominion Stores ship and, slowly but surely, they are sinking it.”

 Black’s
raiding of the Dominion pension fund was a watershed moment in postwar
Canadian labour relations.

It is highly significant that Canada’s most notorious corporate raider was
not only a guest of honour at the banquet but also a religious soulmate to
the cardinal. Carter baptized Conrad Black at the cardinal’s estate in 1986
and served as his personal spiritual adviser. The two men shared a common
goal in shutting down the progressive wing of the Canadian Catholic
Church that had been trying to hold capitalists like Black to a higher moral
standard.

The Canadian Conference of Catholic Bishops (CCCB) had an
international reputation for speaking up on social justice, Indigenous rights,
and economic reform. On New Year’s Eve 1982, the bishops had released a
statement on the economic crisis facing the nation. It was a bold attack on
the economic ideology that promoted mass layoffs as a necessity for
fighting inflation, and the bishops denounced the austerity measures as a
“moral disorder.” They accused the federal government of a “continuation
of the catastrophic influence” of Milton Friedman’s Chicago School,
writing: “By placing greater importance on the accumulation of profits and
machines than on the people who work in a given economy, the value,
meaning and dignity of human labour is violated.”

This Church condemnation of the austerity economy sent shockwaves
through Canada’s political and business elite. Over the coming weeks, the
bishops’ statement dominated national discussion about the economic crisis.

Bishops Remi De Roo and Alphonse Proulx met with representatives from
the labour movement, anti-poverty coalitions, and feminist groups, in an
unprecedented outreach between Church leaders and civil society. Tony
Clarke, who helped write the document, remembers feeling “struck by the
prospect however remote that the bishops’ manifesto could actually serve as
a catalyst for the building of a people’s movement for democratic social
change in this country.”

Cardinal Carter was outraged when he read the bishops’ statement, and
held an impromptu press conference where he publicly denounced the
findings of his fellow clerics. This public fight between clerics was
unprecedented in the Catholic Church. Bishop Faber MacDonald of
Newfoundland warned brother bishops that Carter was acting as a “fifth
columnist,” undermining the work of the Canadian Church’s justice
efforts.12
Carter’s attack on the progressive Catholic Church was two-pronged.

Behind the scenes, he was lining up clerical allies to shut down the
progressive bishops. The public assault was led by Conrad Black and his
wife, Barbara Amiel, who had cut her teeth in Canada’s trashy right-wing
press. True to form, she accused the bishops of being dupes of Marxist
revolutionaries “who were flirting with the deadly forces” behind the
“global communist agenda.”13 The couple openly mocked both the
progressive efforts of Church reform and the concern for the growing
underclass. At one event, Black came dressed in the opulent robes of the
French kingmaker Cardinal Richelieu and Amiel came decked out as Marie
Antoinette.

Black subjected Bishop De Roo, spokesperson for Canada’s bishops, to
constant ridicule, and demanded that the much-loved Church leader be
“sacked.”14 In another spat he called Bishop Frederick Henry a “twerp,” a
“useful idiot,” and a “pinko commie.”15 Publicly insulting a bishop was
also something that had not been done before, but Black was unconcerned.

As he was trashing Bishop De Roo’s reputation, he was vacationing with
Carter at his mansion in Palm Springs.

On May Day 1985, the Canadian bishops further angered Black and
Carter when they came out in solidarity with women walking the picket line
at the Eaton’s department store chain. The women had been on strike for six
hard months when the bishops issued their statement against the “job
ghetto” to which lower-paid women were relegated. They warned of a
disturbing trend toward “part time, low wage and insecure
unemployment.”16 Carter accused the bishops’ conference of failing to get
“both sides of the story.”17 He was a close friend of CEO John Craig Eaton,
and his friend Conrad Black sat on the board of the Eaton’s corporation.

AGAINST THE BACKDROP of these struggles in the Canadian Catholic Church,
the idea of crashing the cardinal’s banquet was conjured up at our big
planning table at Angelus House. I wrote up a manifesto that asked why the
cardinal was choosing to celebrate with the country’s elite at a time “when
the disparity between rich and poor is becoming so glaring … it is the
primary responsibility of the Church to seek out these victims of the profit
economy, to affirm their worth by inviting them to sit at table with us. Will
we ignore this opportunity to meet Christ in the poor because it is more
respectable to dine with the wealthy?”

The plan was simple: we were going to walk into the Toronto Convention
Centre as if we belonged and begin giving out pamphlets. I borrowed my
brother’s black suit. Kelly came downstairs in what she thought was her
most stylish outfit. It was a homespun affair from a local second-hand store.

I told her she would likely get nabbed before she got through the door.

“Look at me,” she said, blushing. “I look like a fucking angel. Who will
stop me?”
I doubt Cardinal Carter even noticed our protest. His plan to shut down
the progressive Church was well underway. It began with the move to slash
funding for various social justice outreach programs at the parish level.

More than $600,000 in funding was cut from the international solidarity
work undertaken by the Catholic Development and Peace organization.

The next target was the social justice research department at the bishops’
council. At the time, the Canadian bishops were putting out 10 percent of
the global Catholic Church research on social justice issues. The attack on
their work was sold in the language of the 1980s—the need to find
“efficiencies” in the organization. A consulting firm was hired that had
worked for the Thatcher government on privatizing public services. The
consultants advised firing the social justice research team and outsourcing
the work.19
With the social justice wing shut down, Carter and his right-wing allies
managed to push out Bishop De Roo. Black’s taunts to have the
troublesome bishop sacked had been fulfilled.

In 1988, Cardinal Carter retired. He was immediately appointed to the
board of Conrad Black’s Argus Corporation.20 In 2007, Black was
convicted and jailed in the United States for corporate fraud. Carter’s
replacement, Aloysius Ambrozic, was a hard right-winger in the mould of
Pope John Paul II. One of his first acts was to shut down Youth Corps, the
diocese’s youth outreach program. Then he terminated six of the eleven
regional social justice ministries.

A massive retrenchment was taking place across the Catholic world. The
bubble of progressive action that had been made possible by Vatican II had
burst. Canadian civic politician Joe Mihevc explains, “Vatican II had
created an opening for lay people and women. John Paul II put an end to
this with the rise of clericalism. Women were shut out. Lay people were
shut out. They recentred power in the clerics.”

Like Khomeini, like Reagan, like Thatcher, John Paul II led a religious
counter-revolution in the 1980s. His focus was shutting down the
progressive developments that had taken root since the 1960s. The message
of where the Church was headed was delivered clearly during the pope’s
first visit to North America, in 1980. His tour manager Archbishop Paul
Marcinkus shocked local Church officials when he announced that no
women were allowed on the altar with the pope. “No broads,” he declared.

“That’s out.”

But the Catholic Church was about to be rocked by an even bigger storm:
widespread allegations of systemic sexual abuse. The scandals of the late
1980s would shake this two-thousand-year-old institution to its core.

