Chapter 20
FIRE ON BABYLON
Tuesday was the big night at Angelus House. Every week we held an open
Mass in the living room before hosting a communal dinner. The Mass was a
casual but beautiful gathering. For the folks in the house, there was no
pressure to attend. Some did. Some didn’t. But all manner of people showed
up to come together to reflect on scripture and share their thoughts.

One time, Jesuit Father Jim Webb invited a young Jesuit named Martin
Royackers to the house. “The first impression Martin made on people was
often not a good one,” Webb later admitted.1
 But I took a liking to this
outsider.

Martin had an edge. He poked us to get a response, and we poked back.

Martin had issues with authority, and serving at a suburban parish didn’t
suit him. Someone who knew him described his mess of contradictions as a
cross between the deeply conservative faith of Opus Dei and the radical
politics of British mine leader Arthur Scargill. He moved to Jamaica to
work in an impoverished parish where he soon learned that the crushing
poverty and social problems his congregants faced stemmed from having
been evicted from the rich surrounding farmlands. He launched a campaign
to pressure the powerful landowners to give people access to unused land.

He was popular with his parishioners, but the wealthy saw him as a
troublemaker. Death threats began to mount. In 2001, he was gunned down
on his porch by hired killers.

Father Royackers represented the kind of priests I knew at that time.

They were inspiring and engaged individuals. I trusted them. They were as
likely to go for a beer with us to the local biker bar as to give thoughtful
spiritual advice. And perhaps because of this deep trust in these men, I
failed to recognize a pattern of darker and more criminal behaviour that
could be hidden by a Roman collar.

And so when I received a call from a priest who ran a treatment centre
called the Southdown Institute, I didn’t think twice. He explained that
Southdown had been established by the Church to help clergy who were
dealing with alcoholism, depression, and other problems.2
 He wanted to
know if he could bring some patients to our weekly Mass as a step toward
reintegrating them into their pastoral work. I said they were more than
welcome.

Our first Southdown visitor was a tall, thin priest who spoke with a slow
and distinct Louisiana accent. At one point in the evening he went off by
himself into the front room. He was staring out the window.

“Is there something wrong?” I asked.

He shrugged. “I seem to have a problem with celibacy,” he said. And
with that he rejoined the group.

At the time it never occurred to me that his “problem with celibacy” was
the sexual abuse of children. Nobody from Southdown had explained to me
that they were treating priests hiding out from an unprecedented sexual
abuse scandal that was rocking Louisiana. The abuse of sexual power is
perhaps one of the oldest and most hidden crimes of patriarchal religion, but
the crimes in Louisiana were about to blow the doors off this secrecy. Its
genesis was there in the living room of Angelus House. I simply didn’t
know how to read the signs.

THE LOUISIANA CRISIS began in 1983, when Father Gilbert Gauthe from the
Lafayette diocese was called to a meeting with Monsignor Alex Larroque,
the Vicar General of the region.

“Gil,” the monsignor said. “We have a problem. It’s with young boys.

Lots of young boys, Gil. The bishop is very angry with you and wants you
out of the parish right now.”

Gauthe had been sexually assaulting children since his ordination in the
early 1970s, but the Church had no intention of turning him over to the
police. The standard practice was to cover up the crimes and protect the
priest. The Church used its immense moral power to pressure the parents of
violated children into silence. The primary goal was protecting the
reputation of the Holy Church, and there was a battalion of top-notch
lawyers experienced in dealing with the police and other officials to keep
matters under wraps.

If parents threatened to go to the police, the bishop promised to put the
priest into treatment. The priest was quietly removed from the parish and
sent to Church-run institutions like the House of Affirmation in
Massachusetts and Southdown outside Toronto. Following their treatment,
the priest was moved to another parish with no warning to the parishioners.

It was a policy of “out of sight, out of mind.”
In 1962, the Vatican instituted a protocol for ensuring these crimes were
kept under the control of the Church. If the victim failed to make a
complaint within a thirty-day period, their case was considered null and
void and they faced excommunication if they later tried to go after the
priest. They were also ordered to absolute secrecy, once again under the
threat of excommunication.4
 For Catholics, the threat of excommunication
—being denied the spiritual and moral support of their faith community—
was a powerful tool in ensuring compliance with the cover-up.

In the first cases coming out of Louisiana, nine families were pressured
to accept a payment of $4.2 million in exchange for their silence.5
 But the
parents of one boy went public. Their story was picked up in the media and
a grand jury was convened. Gauthe was indicted on thirty-four counts of
aggravated sexual assault with allegations that as many as one hundred boys
had been raped. The Gauthe case convinced more families to come forward,
and a number of other priests in Louisiana were identified as sexual
abusers.

And one of those priests had been in my home, hiding out from justice.

When the news of the Louisiana crimes first emerged, it was still possible
for Catholics to believe that it was just the work of a few bad apples. But
one after another, stories of horrifying abuse broke in the media. In New
Mexico, Father David Holley was sentenced to 275 years in prison for a
relentless pattern of rape and abuse of children.6
 Reverend William
Autenrieth was charged with serial sexual abuse, starting in Brooklyn and
continuing after his move to a parish in Florida.7 There was a clear pattern
of systemic complicity, as Church officials knowingly moved these abusers
multiple times to cover up their crimes.

The scandal hit the Boston archdiocese with particular severity when it
was revealed that Father James Porter had assaulted at least 100 children
and had been consistently protected by the Boston Church. Another Boston
priest, John Geoghan, was accused of the abuse of 130 children. A Boston
Globe investigation revealed that the Boston archdiocese had covered up
numerous cases of sexual assault that families had brought against
Geoghan. When necessary, the Church paid hush money and moved him to
the next parish. Then, the Boston Globe revealed that the Church had
secretly settled abuse cases to protect at least seventy other sexual
predators.

Unable to contain the scandals behind closed doors, the Boston
archdiocese opted for a brutal legal strategy of countersuing the families of
victims. In court, their lawyers trashed the credibility of survivors in vicious
legal questioning.8
 Legal professor Erwin Chemerinsky said, “They
[Church officials] are signalling that they are willing to litigate very
aggressively, and if they win … it could deter others from coming forward.

If they lose it’s a public relations disaster.”9 The Church lost and Cardinal
Law, the most powerful cleric in America, was forced to resign just steps
ahead of a Grand Jury indictment. He escaped to the Vatican, where he was
treated with special privilege. When Pope John Paul died, Bernard Law was
chosen as one of the key cardinals to lead the funeral remembrances for the
pope.

THE ABUSE SCANDAL hit Canada with the 1989 investigation into the Mount
Cashel orphanage in Newfoundland. For decades, the abuse of boys by the
Christian brothers had been covered up by clergy, police, and public
officials. Bishop Alphonsus Penney of Newfoundland had long turned a
blind eye to allegations of sexual abuse by priests under his authority, and
he was the first Canadian Church leader forced to resign in disgrace. Then
Bishop Hubert O’Connor of Prince George, BC, was criminally charged
and jailed for his sex crimes during his time overseeing the Williams Lake
residential school.10
In 1992, a second major Canadian investigation began when survivors of
the St. Anne’s Residential School in Fort Albany, Ontario, came forward
with allegations of rape, forced abortions, and torture committed against
Indigenous children by the priests, brothers, nuns, and staff. Over the next
five years, the Ontario Provincial Police took witness statements from nine
hundred survivors. The testimony exposed a horrific house of terror that
was protected by Church and government officials for the better part of a
century.

Some of the methods of torture revealed in the St. Anne’s evidence, such
as a homemade electric chair and forcing children to eat vomit, mirrored
similar abuses carried out at other Catholic-run institutions abroad, such as
St. Ninian’s Catholic school in Stirling, Scotland.11
In Canada, St. Anne’s became symbolic of a nationwide pattern of abuse
in the Church-run residential schools. Faced with a flood of lawsuits, the
federal government agreed to the establishment of a Truth and
Reconciliation Commission and a process for compensation. This was done
to keep the government and churches out of the court system, where the
financial damages would likely have been enormous.

In 2009, St. Anne’s survivors, sometimes without legal representation,
began to appear before the compensation hearings that were set up as
closed-door arbitration panels. The government lawyers had the task of
preparing the evidence records for each case, but they were also there to
represent the other defendant in the abuse—the federal government.

One of the most notorious abusers was Father Arthur Lavoie. He had
engaged in a four-decade reign of terror against the children at St. Anne’s,
yet when one of the survivors came forward, his case was thrown out. The
Justice Department had suppressed upward of 10,000 pages of evidence on
180 known abusers—including bishops, priests, nuns, and school workers
—that had been prepared by the Ontario Provincial Police. In the case of
Lavoie, the government lawyers held back a 2,472-page report documenting
Lavoie’s abuse of children.

The survivors’ fight for justice from both the Canadian government and
the Catholic Church has gone through multiple legal battles, facing
institutional defiance at every level. I spent a good part of my political
career trying to unravel the mystery of why the Government of Canada
helped perpetuate the cover-up and abuse of rights of the survivors of St.

Anne’s.

In 2018, I led the push in Parliament for a calling on the pope to issue an
official Church apology on Canadian soil for the crimes committed against
Indigenous children at residential schools. I also challenged the Catholic
Church for being the only Christian institution involved in the residential
school crimes that walked away on millions of dollars that were owed in
compensation to survivors.

This wasn’t my first political run-in with the Catholic hierarchy. Shortly
after I was elected in 2004, the Timmins diocese declared that they would
deny me Communion and have me defeated in the upcoming election if I
did not change my vote supporting the right of same-sex couples to marry. I
refused. This led to open attacks from the pulpit, and I was vilified in the
right-wing Catholic media for taking a position that amounted to
“renouncing God … [by voting] in favour of a law that is so harmful to the
common good is gravely immoral.”

The election threat failed, as I received an outpouring of support from
voters across my working-class constituency. Many Catholic residents,
including local priests and nuns, went out of their way to show their
solidarity with me. Nonetheless, I never approached the Church and
organized religion the same way after that.

There have been times over the years when I have felt angry about how
this tradition that I trusted led to so much betrayal. I think of “Fire on
Babylon,” the haunting song by Sinéad O’Connor, who was one of the first
truth-tellers about the systemic nature of the abuse perpetrated by the
Catholic Church.

Nonetheless, there are times when I still feel the urge to sit in a darkened
church and light a candle. There are moments in my busy life when I feel a
strange sense of awe. But faith is pretty thin gruel if the best thing it can do
is offer momentary flashes of personal comfort.

Christianity through the centuries has had a very mixed record. And in
the case of the sexual abuse scandals, the Church squandered its moral
leadership to protect the reputation of a few very bad men. And yet, given
the magnitude of the climate crisis and economic inequality of our chaotic
era, moral and spiritual leadership is needed now more than ever. As a
teenager, I could name multiple religious leaders who were bold and
unafraid in challenging systemic injustice—Dorothy Day, Dom Hélder
Câmara, Desmond Tutu, Óscar Romero, Martin Luther King. And yet I
doubt that any of my daughters’ young friends could name a single religious
leader showing a moral way forward.

This, to me, is the greatest scandal and tragedy. Faith should be the
source of dangerous memories providing comfort, healing, and resistance. It
can offer hope when hope seems impossible to imagine. It reminds us of a
sense of a greater duty to those who would otherwise feel defeated and
demoralized. It tells us that the world still can produce miracles.

I used to look inside church walls for those signs of hope. Today I seek it
out in the people I meet who are doing their best to make a difference.

