Chapter 21
THE SUMMER THE PLANET
COULD HAVE BEEN SAVED
The summer of 1988 was brutally hot. The oppressive heat hung over the
city streets. Brit said our neighbourhood smelled like raw hamburger and
urine. We didn’t have air conditioning at the house, just some small fans I’d
picked up at the discount department store on Carlaw Avenue. Everything
moved slow, but Brit most of all. She was nine months pregnant.

The news media stated that 1988 was the hottest summer on record, and
that six of the previous hottest records were set in the 1980s. This was no
meteorological anomaly. In late June, the US Senate launched special
hearings into the greenhouse effect. Dr. James E. Hansen of the National
Aeronautics and Space Administration gave riveting testimony on how the
scientific community was certain that man-made carbon dioxide was
affecting the planet’s atmosphere. Hansen presented scientific modelling
that backed up his troubling claims. Democratic senator Timothy E. Wirth
declared, “The scientific evidence is compelling: the global climate is
changing as the earth’s atmosphere gets warmer. Now, the Congress must
begin to consider how we are going to slow or halt that warming trend and
how we are going to cope with the changes that may already be
inevitable.”

The news that we were in danger of burning our planet landed like a
bombshell in Washington. But in the oil company boardrooms of Houston
and Calgary, this was old news. Companies like Exxon had spent decades
quietly amassing cutting-edge climate research on the impacts fossil fuels
were having on the planet.2 The knowledge dated back to the 1950s, when
Edward Teller, father of the hydrogen bomb, warned the petroleum lobby
that increased oil production would lead to the melting of the ice caps,
plunging the world into environmental catastrophe.3
 By 1968, the American
Petroleum Institute was able to plot out the timelines of this seemingly
slow-moving disaster. They predicted that “significant temperature changes
are almost certain to occur by the year 2000,” which would put in motion
the eventual collapse of the Antarctic ice shelf.4 A 1982 internal memo
warned that time was running out. If steps weren’t taken to lower emissions,
the damage to the planet “may not be reversible, and little could be done to
correct the situation.”

But the companies didn’t release any of these reports to the public. They
used them to protect their own interests. In 1988, Shell Oil received an
analysis that backed up the previous studies. It put the countdown clock as
beginning in or around the year 2000. The report stated, “Many scientists
believe that a real increase in the global temperature will be detectable
towards the end of this century … However, by the time global warming
becomes detectable it could be too late.”

Shell suppressed the report but opted to rebuild their offshore oil rigs to
withstand a six-foot rise in ocean levels.7 The oil giant then launched a
widespread publicity campaign to undermine the research of climate
scientists. The industry spent billions spreading disinformation through
bogus studies, paid influencers, and false front groups to question the
science they knew to be true. In The Petroleum Papers, Geoff Dembicki
writes that the “big lie … partially came from Canada,” as oil interests
ramped up production in the heavily polluting oil sands north of Fort
McMurray.

8
The lie succeeded spectacularly. At the beginning of the 1990s, 88
percent of the American public believed that climate change was a serious
problem. By the end of the decade, that number had dropped to 28 percent.9
Government research lagged far behind what was known by the oil
industry. In the late 1970s, the Carter administration had established a
scientific panel to investigate the possible connection between carbon
burning and climate instability. The 1979 report Carbon Dioxide and
Climate: A Scientific Assessment confirmed the connection between man-
made carbon dioxide and the changing climate. The report stated that the
world was on track to see a disastrous rise in global temperatures, from 2 to
3.5 degrees Celsius.10
President Carter took the issue seriously. He promoted the development
of renewable energy technologies, even going so far as to install solar
panels on the roof of the White House. At the beginning of his term, the
price of solar energy was $77 per kilowatt-hour. By the time he left office,
the price had dropped to $25 per kilowatt-hour. Those costs are now down
to .06 cents per kilowatt-hour.

11 The incoming Reagan administration,
however, was not about to do anything to challenge the dominance of Big
Oil and King Coal. In a serious setback to the role of the United States in
developing renewable technologies, Reagan killed Carter’s tax incentives
for solar technology.

The 1988 Senate hearings came at a time of growing global
environmental activism. Across the United States, grassroots campaigns
backed up by legal action were forcing the clean-up of environmental
disaster zones. In 1980, the militant environmental group Earth First! was
formed to promote direct action campaigns of “monkey wrenching,” or
sabotage, of industrial infrastructure against corporate logging interests.

Civil disobedience also came to the fore in a number of other environmental
battles. More than eight hundred people were arrested and put on trial as a
result of the Clayoquot Sound protests in British Columbia, to stop the
clear-cutting of old-growth forests. In Temagami, Ontario, Indigenous
activists stepped to the forefront to defend and lay claim to their traditional
lands.

In the late 1980s, it was possible to believe that science, activism, and
government would come together to respond to the growing climate crisis.

The New York Times describes the decade as the time when we could have
stopped climate change.12 There are many reasons why it could have been
possible. Following Hansen’s testimony, a global conference was held in
Toronto looking to bring about solutions. The Conservative government of
Brian Mulroney promised to find a way to stabilize greenhouse gas
emissions, and Mulroney also joined the fight to stop the destruction of
North American lakes by industrial pollution. He pushed the Reagan
administration to negotiate a treaty limiting the damaging impacts of acid
rain that were being caused by the burning of sulphur dioxide in smelter
stacks.

As young, soon-to-be parents during that scorching summer of 1988, Brit
and I weren’t paying much attention to reports of the emerging climate
crisis. Our focus was on bringing a new life into our family, and that meant
figuring out how to raise a child in a community as chaotic as Angelus
House.

Our first daughter, Mariah, was born at the house on the brutally hot
evening of July 16, 1988. She was attended by two midwives. Our house
was on a little dead-end street across the road from a booze can run by
Shirley, a very large woman from somewhere far south of the Mason-Dixon
line. She once told me that she had done time for shooting a man in Detroit.

The windows were open, and we could hear the sound of men arguing on
the street below. At one point, Brit gave out a sharp cry and the arguing on
the street suddenly stopped.

She gave out another loud cry, and Shirley shouted, “Don’t you worry,
honey! I’m coming to help.”
Shirley came storming into our house with the intention of delivering the
baby. Fortunately, this was the moment that Mariah chose to come into the
world.

I looked out the window and saw Shirley walking back to the men sitting
silently on the sidewalk waiting. She told them everything was going to be
all right. Soon after, their drinking, arguing, and fighting resumed—just
another Saturday night in South Riverdale.

Since 1988, the record for the hottest summer ever has been broken
multiple times; the eight years leading up to 2021 were the eight hottest
ever recorded.13 Then 2023 blew all those previous records away.

14 And
by 2024, climate scientists were warning that global temperatures were “off
the charts.”15 This relentless rise in heat has caused unprecedented
wildfires, drought, and storms. The steady rise of temperatures matches
closely the predictions made in the report to Exxon and Shell executives
forty years ago.

But there is concern that the crisis is moving faster than anticipated. The
oil lobby predicted the collapse of the ice shelves would be noticeable
sometime after 2000. They were off by five years. In 1995, environmental
researchers were shocked when, over the course of a few days, 4,200 square
kilometres of the Larsen A Ice Shelf A collapsed.16 Then the Wilkins Ice
Shelf collapsed. In 2002, the Larsen B shelf disintegrated. In March 2022,
temperatures in the Antarctic hit 70 degrees Fahrenheit above normal and
an ice region the size of Los Angeles collapsed.17 This put serious stress on
the remaining parts of the Larsen C shelf. It is feared that a disappearance
of the western Antarctica ice fields could raise sea levels twenty feet,
creating an irreversible disaster for life on the planet.

FORTY YEARS AGO, the fossil fuel companies knew they were burning the
planet and lied about it. And even as we confront the undeniable effects of
climate change, Canada’s oil industry continues to promote the “sense of
urgency” in doubling down on oil production.18 UN Secretary-General
António Guterres has called out the oil giants for knowingly putting the
future of humanity at risk. “Just like the tobacco industry, they rode
roughshod over science,” he said. “Big Oil peddled the big lie … today
fossil fuel producers and their enablers are still racing to increase
production, knowing full well that their business model is inconsistent with
human survival.”

More than five billion people have been born since the record-breaking
summer of 1988. Since then, the planet has transitioned into a new and
frightening, unstable geological epoch. In Fire Weather, John Vaillant
writes: “By almost any measure, anyone born after 1990 is finding
themselves in a new geological era, navigating a world fundamentally
different from the one Baby Boomers and Gen Xers inherited. The chances
of anyone alive today experiencing a year as relatively cool as 1996 are
effectively nil.”20 I grew up thinking that geological time was measured in
millions of years, yet an exceptional and terrifying planetary shift happened
on my watch, and I barely noticed.

But there are dangerous memories from the 1980s that we can use to save
the planet today. In 1987, representatives of fifty-five countries gathered in
Montreal to address the damage chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs) were causing to
the earth’s fragile ozone layer, which protects us from deadly radiation from
the sun. The chemical companies that produced CFCs were purposely
undermining the science. And, like the climate crisis, deterioration of the
ozone layer was happening much faster than expected. The United States
announced they wouldn’t be bound by the agreement, and environmental
activists denounced the agreement as weak and a sellout.

Yet the Montreal Protocol succeeded, proving that the global community
could come together to address human-caused threats to the planet. Even
though the original agreement had only twenty-four signatories, the treaty
contained two major provisions that ensured its success. The first key factor
was that it committed participants to annual meetings to discuss objectives
and benchmarks. This ongoing process led to eventual ratification by 197
nations. The second and crucial factor was that the Montreal Protocol
legislated a cap on CFC production that included a commitment to work
toward a total phase-out. As it stands now, the oil industry in Canada,
backed by right-wing provincial governments, is not only fighting
vigorously to oppose a cap but also looking to dramatically increase
production.21
Recent studies by NASA have shown that if the Montreal Protocol had
failed, life would be unlivable on the planet today.

22 I think of the
incredible life of my first-born daughter, who came into the world as this
agreement was going into effect. If it had not been signed and acted on, she
would not be here today. Nor would any of us.

We saved the planet once. Can we do it again?
In 2023, the International Energy Agency (IEA) reported that thanks to
huge investments in clean energy technology, we may be witnessing “the
beginning of the end of the fossil fuel era.”23 There is a global shift toward
renewable energy and EV technology. But will the promised investments by
government and industry be enough?
Clearly not.

And this is where another lesson from the 1980s could make the
difference. The mass protest marches against the nuclear threat put
enormous pressure on politicians to find a solution. This activism can force
governments and industries to halt the expansion of fossil fuel production
and start making more dramatic investments in a renewable non-carbon
future.

Yes, the window is narrow and the odds against success appear high. But
they are as high as they were in Montreal almost four decades ago. This is a
dangerous memory that must be shared, because despite it being such a
close call, the fragile ozone layer continues to heal. We can do the same to
cool a burning planet.

Protesters taking over the Berlin Wall, November 11, 1989.

Credit: InterFoto/Alamy Stock Photo.

