Part 3
THE FUTURE’S
SO BRIGHT
1988–1990s
“Stirb nicht im Warteraum der Zukunft—Don’t die in the waiting room
of the future.”
—East German punk graffiti, 1980s24
Chapter 22
ECONOMIC REFUGEES
AND THE CREATIVE CLASS
In the summer of 1988, a song dominating pop radio captured the
desperation in the growing underclass of Reagan’s America. Cleveland
native Tracy Chapman sang of a young couple living in a shelter, working
dead-end jobs, and dreaming of escaping somewhere in a fast car.

1
Shannon could have stepped out of that song. But she didn’t arrive in a
fast car; she called Angelus House from the bus station. In a strong Texas
accent, she explained that she had just arrived in Canada from Michigan
with her three children—sixteen-year-old Ted, fourteen-year-old Jack, and
twelve-year-old Carrie. They had no place to stay, no knowledge of the city,
and no work papers. I tried to explain to her that prospects in Canada were
bleak. If she tried to access public services, she would be likely to face
deportation. The chance of getting status as a landed immigrant was remote.

Yet Shannon was undeterred. She assured me that all she needed was
somewhere to stay for a few days and she would be fine.

In my journal I wrote, Shannon won’t say what she’s on the run from, but
for some reason she hopped a bus for Canada with her children and
nothing more than $20 in her purse. Somehow, she found our phone number
and ended up here. She is either the most courageous woman I have met or
the most the foolish.

In a post-9/11 world, it might seem surprising that a family was able to
cross the US–Canada border with no money and little identification, but the
border was much more porous in those days. Shannon was from Cisco,
Texas, but her last port of call had been Kalamazoo, Michigan. With
nowhere else to go, she took a bus to Canada.

Despite the immense uncertainty they were living under, Shannon’s
children were remarkably well behaved. The two boys presented themselves
as the men of the family. They assured me they were not afraid of hard
work and would find jobs. Carrie immediately latched onto Brit, Kelly, and
Julie, and began helping in the kitchen. She should have been in school, but
she was trying to help bake and wash dishes so her family wouldn’t be put
out on the street. In my journal I wrote that it was like having The Grapes of
Wrath right there in our living room.

It wasn’t just their strong southern accents that suggested The Grapes of
Wrath. In the Steinbeck novel, the Joad family were economic refugees
from the Dust Bowl and the Depression. Shannon and her children were
economic refugees from the Reagan counter-revolution.

One of the defining features of Reaganomics was the slashing of
programs that helped millions of Americans avoid destitution. Reagan
totally repudiated policies that both Democrats and Republicans had
maintained for assisting the American underclass. In the early 1970s,
President Richard Nixon had boasted that, despite tough economic times,
his government had tripled nutritional support to the working poor.

2
 Nixon
wanted to show that a Republican White House would not leave people
behind, even if tough choices had to be made.

Reagan turned this argument on its head. He exaggerated and belittled the
federal spending on basic programs like food stamps and medical coverage
for the poor. He claimed that spending on the underclass had gone up
16,000 percent, and blamed the excess on government “waste” while
accusing the poor of fraud.3
As the country was hit by the biggest job losses since the Depression,
Reagan revelled in telling the story of Linda Taylor, the so-called Welfare
Queen who had recently been convicted of welfare fraud in Chicago.

Reagan claimed Taylor “had eighty names, thirty addresses, twelve social
security cards and … her tax-free income is over $150,000.”4 At times he
claimed she had made as much as a million dollars in defrauded public
money.

5 The fact was that Taylor had been found guilty of the much lesser
crime of defrauding $8,000 by using four aliases. Reagan used the story of
the “Welfare Queen” to stoke suburban backlash and white grievance. His
first budget slashed food stamps, access to medical services, disability
pensions, and support for poor families. He increased taxes on the working
poor at a time when the wealthy were being given massive tax cuts.

Barbara Cordaro of the Catholic Worker house in Des Moines, Iowa,
noted, “When Reagan came … there were more and more people on the
street. More and more kinds of people would come to the Worker house to
eat, to get some food. Young married couples with two or three kids, out of
a job, very clean … they just didn’t have enough money to carry them over.

It just broke my heart.”

As Shannon crossed the border to escape the Reagan counter-revolution,
she was confronted with another kind of economic revolution taking place
in Toronto—one that was equally unforgiving to the working poor. As I
recorded in my journal: Shannon and her family have uprooted themselves
on the minuscule chance that pastures might be greener on this side of the
border. But what will they find here? Rents have moved so far out of range
for poor people that there is little opportunity for them even if they weren’t
facing the threat of deportation. This is no longer a city for the poor.

By the late 1980s, the emerging phenomenon of homelessness was
exacerbated by widespread real estate speculation. Gentrification was
causing housing prices to rise month after month, and the pressure of
speculation had expanded to include the rental market. Aging apartment
buildings were torn down to make room for high-end condos. This had a
huge impact on renters as the vacancy rate dropped from 4 percent to .04
percent.7
Yet these were heady times and Toronto was pitching itself as a “world
class city” in a marketing ploy to invite international investment and
growth.8 Toronto was promoted as the ideal place to invest capital in the
massive redevelopment of urban neighbourhoods. Gentrification in the
early 1980s had been about individual yuppies flipping properties. By the
late 1980s, “cool” neighbourhoods were being marketed to global
capitalists. In their study Condominium Development and Gentrification,
Ute Lehrer and Thorben Wieditz write: “Gentrification has turned into a
‘global urban strategy’ and is closely connected to neo-liberal inspired
urban policies … that ensure the taming of targeted neighbourhoods,
making urban space safe, clean, and secure for real estate capital, investors,
and the new urban middle classes.”

The working and lower classes were being pushed out of a city focused
on “taming” its mix of low- and middle-income neighbourhoods. Shannon,
who had the additional problem of trying to work under the table, never had
a chance. She tried to work around these monumental odds by doing what
desperate women are often forced to do—set herself up in a marriage of
convenience. She got together with one of the street guys in our house, and
they moved to a cheap motel with the three kids. Shannon’s new boyfriend
promised to find work, but he ended up drinking away his first week’s pay
because, as he later told us, having a family was too much hassle. It was so
sad. We packed sandwiches for Shannon and her kids and paid for their bus
tickets back to Michigan. After they left, we learned that the child welfare
agency in Michigan was after Shannon. It is probable that she lost custody
of her children.

IN THE LATE 1980s, I thought gentrification was a Toronto problem. When I
visited the Catholic Worker houses on the Lower East Side of New York,
the impacts of global real estate investment seemed to be a million miles
away. The Catholic Worker Movement maintained two large buildings: one
on East 1st Street and a shelter on 3rd Street. Both operations were only a
few blocks from the infamous Bowery, New York’s derelict strip that had
been ground zero for the 1970s punk explosion.

In the summer of 1987, I joined a group of squatters who had taken over
a building in Alphabet City in the East Village. The Alphabet streets had
beautiful six-storey brownstones that were mostly abandoned and rundown.

People were living in the streets under makeshift sheds. The Catholic
Worker crew were helping a group of self-styled “homesteaders.” They
occupied one of the brownstones on Avenue C and began cleaning out the
building to turn it into co-operative housing.

Nobody from the city paid much attention, as those properties were
considered financially worthless. Within a few short years, however, the
gentrification of Lower Manhattan hit like a hurricane. So much so that by
2008 the Lower East Side was put on the list of America’s 11 Most
Endangered Spaces by the National Trust for Historic Preservation.10 In the
years since, that hurricane has not abated. The Bowery, now given the civic
honorific Joey Ramone Way, has become an exclusive avenue of fashion
and tourist attractions. As for Alphabet City, a studio apartment in the East
Village has become unaffordable even for urban professionals.

In the twenty-first century, gentrification is one of the key indicators of
urban inequality. In a 2022 study of the most unaffordable cities in North
America, four Canadian cities were in the top five—Vancouver, Toronto,
Mississauga, and Hamilton. 11 The fact that three of the five most
unaffordable cities are tied to the Greater Toronto Area (GTA) reveals the
extreme impact of gentrification emanating from Toronto. A 2023 study
found that the dream of a family starter home is now dead, as a young
working family would need to save for twenty years just to raise a down
payment.12
In the 2000s, Richard Florida, of the Rotman School of Business in
Toronto, urged politicians to compete on the international stage to attract
“high bohemians” who would bring with them the entrepreneurial power to
transform cities like Toronto, Madrid, and Dublin into global centres.

Florida pitched gentrification as the means for creating a new “creative
class” urban economy.

13 But pandering to global speculators only drove
urban inequality to unprecedented levels. In the Guardian, Oliver
Wainwright writes: “Florida’s formula has proven to benefit the already
rich, mostly white middle class; fuel rampant property speculation; displace
the bohemians he so fetishised; and see the problems that once plagued the
inner cities simply move out to the suburbs.”

In Toronto, like so many other North American cities, young workers,
artists, and the middle class have been displaced in the same way the
working class and urban poor were displaced in earlier manifestations of
gentrification.

University of Toronto professor Jason Hackworth frames the crisis within
the larger economic counter-revolution that emerged in the 1980s:
“Gentrification is much more than the physical renovation of residential and
commercial spaces. It marks the replacement of the publicly regulated
Keynesian inner city … with the privately deregulated neoliberalized spaces
of exclusion.”

In the 2000s, Kingi Carpenter’s clothing and design store Peach Berserk
was an anchor location in the flourishing cultural scene at Queen and
Spadina, but she was forced out by high rents and the takeover of the
neighbourhood by big-name brand operations. “Rich people want to live in
cool places and so they pushed the artists out,” she laments. “Some have
gone to Hamilton. Others moved to small towns where they can afford to
live. I’m going to fight and stay in this city, but I have to work like hell to
make a go of it. I will never be able to retire. I spend more time trying to get
work than actually working, but this is what I do.”16 Kingi describes
perfectly the precarity faced by urban creative workers who struggle to hold
their own in a world defined by short-term contracts, gig work, and sky-
high rents.

Although some individuals manage to hang on, many of the interesting
subcultures have been broken up by economic necessity. Former scenester
Marcy Rohn says her alternative punk tribe disintegrated as one by one
friends left the city to find more livable options in other parts of the country.

She opted for a piece of rural Northern Ontario because it was affordable.

“If I had stayed, I would have been struggling to survive in a bachelor
apartment wondering where my life had gone,” she explains. “Being ‘world
class’ has its drawbacks. The places people can go to be creative are
dwindling and the music scene we loved is disappearing.”

Toronto music historian Nicholas Jennings notes that high real estate
values have had a devastating impact on the thriving club and arts scene
that made the punk rock revolution possible. “One of the great tragedies in
terms of the rich music culture of the city is how politicians have failed to
recognize the importance of music and culture. It is the lifeblood of the
city,” he asserts. “When you see the venues closing in the numbers they’re
closing at, it’s time to start thinking outside the box—offering incentives,
tax breaks, supporting culture. This is not just a question of dollars and
cents. It is about making a livable city. This cannot simply be left to the
private sector and investors to make these decisions about what kind of city
we will have.”

Gentrification creates extreme divides. Toronto is facing a massive
shortfall of affordable housing, yet in the early 2020s it was reported that 40
percent of its condos were either unoccupied or used as short-term rentals
by absent investment owners.19 In New York, 50 percent of apartments are
now left empty for a good part of the year.

20
Dangerous memories are required to remind us that it wasn’t the urban
artist who destroyed the livability of urban spaces. This levelling of
dynamic urban life was the direct result of the predatory nature of capital
and the willingness of politicians to allow the shameless sell-off of the
public interest. It is shock doctrine delivered under the guise of a
cappuccino and a yoga mat. As geographer Neil Smith writes, gentrification
is about “the reach of global capital down to the local neighbourhood
scale.”

The oppressive nature of this shock doctrine was on full display in 2021,
when the city of Toronto spent more than $2 million for police to come out
with batons and pepper spray to clear homeless encampments in city parks.

Officials claimed it was about keeping residents in the surrounding
neighbourhoods safe. Cathy Crowe, a nurse who works in the inner city,
noted that the money spent on police would have been more than sufficient
to house the people who were being beaten and forced out.22
Across North America, police batons and pepper spray have become part
of the urban arsenal for dealing with the homeless. Other tools in the war
against the unhoused are just as effective if not more subtle: bus shelters
that offer no protection from the rain, park benches with spike belts,
shopping malls with nowhere for people to sit. This redesign of public
space into zones of exclusion even has its own term—“hostile
architecture.”

There is a Toronto that still exists in my mind. A place that existed before
the neighbourhoods were tamed and the parks made unwelcoming. I can
still conjure this place on my playlist: Murray McLauchlan inviting me to
hang out by the Henry Moore sculpture at Dundas and Grange Street.24 Or
Lowest of the Low cashing their unemployment cheque and heading
downtown to read Henry Miller and hang around.25 Bruce Cockburn
watching the punks and the bikers dancing on Yonge Street on the Coldest
Night of the Year.

26 Listening to those songs, I can still embrace a city that
is open and optimistic. I keep this city in mind as a dangerous memory of
what our urban spaces were and could be again.

