Chapter 23
THE LAST 45
The music scene in the early 1980s was driven by the cultural
experimentation bubbling up in a multiplicity of urban petri dishes like
Toronto, the Bronx, London, Manchester, Vancouver, and LA. By the end of
the decade, the music industry had been utterly changed by technology,
money, and the rapidly evolving nature of the ’80s. In Canada, it was an
exciting time, as the isolated punk communities spread across the nation
became the foundation stones for an increasingly large and diverse music
scene.

In 1984, the Hi-Fis, who had started out playing power pop at the Edge,
donned Western shirts and became Blue Rodeo. Toronto band Hunger
Project had gone to New York to try to make it big. They returned to
Canada in 1985 and renamed themselves the Cowboy Junkies. They
recorded their first album in a garage with a single microphone, but it put
them on the road to stardom. Scarborough kids Barenaked Ladies released a
cassette demo that sold 80,000 copies, knocking Michael Jackson off the
top of the charts at HMV music in Toronto.1 Whereas a great deal of the
early punk scene had been derivative of New York, Los Angeles, or
London, by the late 1980s a diverse and distinct Canadian sound had
emerged. Artists like Spirit of the West, Jane Siberry, and the Tragically Hip
were creating a musical mythology of the nation.

There were many reasons for this incredible musical blossoming.

Government regulations ensured that Canadian artists were featured on the
radio, and this built the commercial base of a homegrown industry.

Canada’s national broadcaster CBC was in a golden period of promoting new
talent, which helped create national audiences for formerly regional acts.

Touring and recording support came in the form of numerous federal and
provincial government programs.

The authors of the book Have Not Been the Same write that the years
1985 to 1995 represent a unique renaissance in Canadian music. It was
driven by the growing openness of the punk movement to explore more
traditional musical forms—Celtic, country, folk. “By the mid-’80s,
maturing punks began to realize the similarities between the folk
community and the idealistic side of punk, starting with the DIY and anti-
elitist aesthetics in both.”

Angelus House played a small part in this transformation. Music was
never far removed from our house. Guitar music was commonly heard in
the living room as friends from the Queen Street scene came by to
volunteer, drink coffee, or play music. Canadian independent music icon
Jason Collett was a young volunteer in our community. We started a small
carpentry business together. Josh Finlayson of the band Skydiggers often
worked on our crews. His bandmate Pete Cash often hung out at the house.

I formed a street busking band called the Grievous Angels that got its
start in the living room of Angelus House. We were soon getting offers to
play folk festivals around the country. And even though I was still spending
nights taking men to detox centres, our group was picked up for distribution
by Warner Bros. Records. The Grievous Angels have gone on to release
nine albums.

But the most distinct Angelus House influence came with a song that hit
Canadian radio in the spring of 1989. “Boomtown” was about the housing
crisis that was forcing so many poor, young, and working-class people out
of the city. I wrote the song with former L’étranger singer Andrew Cash,
who had just been signed to Island Records.

The album Boomtown was released on the new CD format, but the single
was released as a seven-inch 45 RPM. It was one of the last 45s issued in
Canada. The seven-inch single had dominated pop culture since the 1950s.

Now the labels were switching from analog format to the more lucrative
digital compact disc. Promotion of songs shifted from radio to the emerging
video market. Island Records laid out an impressive budget to shoot the
video for “Boomtown,” and it went into heavy rotation on the newly
established Much Music Network. It won a Juno Award for the top video of
the year. The fact that pop television was showing a music video about the
homeless crisis facing young workers proved that the once-underground
Canadian punk scene had moved into the mainstream.

The disappearance of the 45 was hardly noticed in the huge technological
upheaval hitting the music industry in the late 1980s. At the beginning of
the decade, the DIY punk movement had relied on the 45 and the cassette as
a cheap means for getting music to fans. The shift from analog to digital in
the second half of the ’80s drew a defining line between the music world
that had gone before and the one to come.

But the shift from analog wasn’t merely a technological transition; it
drove a huge economic boom. Albums that had previously sold for $8.95
could be reissued as CDs at the markup of $16.95, even though production
costs were cheaper. The industry flooded the market with back catalogue
reissues, greatest hits packages, and compilations, as they attempted to
capitalize on fans overhauling their music collection in digital format.

The sudden flush of profit unleashed by the CD revolution brought the
music scene into the orbit of ’80s hyper-capitalism. In 1986, the German
multimedia giant Bertelsmann bought RCA Records for $300 million. Sony
took out Columbia Records for $2 billion. EMI swallowed Chrysalis for $75
million, and then absorbed Virgin Records for $1 billion. In 1989,
PolyGram bought out Island Records for $300 million and A&M Records
for $500 million.3
 PolyGram was eventually picked off by the booze
conglomerate Seagram, which folded the whole catalogue into Universal
Music.

The corporate raiding in the music industry was just one of the key
markers separating the first half of the decade from the second. In the early
1980s, there was an incredible outpouring of political activism and social
solidarity in the pop world. And punk sensibilities were anti-commercial.

But by the late 1980s, artists discarded the political solidarity buttons and
second-hand clothing. Bling and stretch limos were back in a big way.

Greed was good.

This transformation was tied to the rise of music videos. MTV launched in
1981, with the very first song being “Video Killed the Radio Star” by the
Buggles. Video not only killed the radio star, it wiped out the DIY ethos of
grassroots music. To win market share on television, record labels invested
in huge video budgets. Bands that had been club acts had to be rebranded
like characters in a glossy commercial. British author Graham Stewart
writes that music videos reinforced the ideology of the Thatcher revolution
because they shifted the cultural frame from the artist as working-class
iconoclast to television celebrity promoting wealth and lifestyle: “The
expensive values of these videos … was a betrayal of pop’s proletarian
roots—to say nothing of punk’s cheap, do-it-yourself ethos … Now it was
pop stars who performed in dinner jackets and swung on chandeliers as if
they were Oxford undergraduates.”

The shift to MTV left the AM radio dial an overlooked dead zone. In June
1986, Toronto’s 1050 CHUM-AM issued its last weekly Top 40 singles chart,
with Madonna, George Michael, Janet Jackson, and Pet Shop Boys in the
top four slots. But by then nobody was listening to the AM dial.5
In this vacuum, a new form of low-cost programming moved in—talk
radio. The format was simple. Instead of spinning records, DJs turned the
show over to the listeners through call-in shows on an array of subjects. The
successful DJs kept their audience engaged by fanning the flames of
controversy or engaging in misogynist and harassing behaviour for the
entertainment of a largely male audience.

In 1984, KMBZ Kansas City sent Rush Limbaugh, an obscure AM talk
jock, to cover the Republican convention. Limbaugh realized the immense
power of mixing locker-room talk with right-wing politics. His show
quickly became a sensation as he delved into fringe right-wing political
conspiracies mixed with sarcastic attacks on Black and gay people, as well
as outspoken women whom he referred to as “femi-nazis.” At first, nobody
in the political world paid much attention to the rantings of the shock jocks,
but a new political demographic was metastasizing on the AM dial—the
angry white male.

In 1987, President Ronald Reagan led the fight to abolish the regulatory
provisions known as the Fairness Doctrine. Under the rules of the Federal
Communications Commission (FCC), broadcasters were legally obligated to
ensure balanced news coverage and a platform for alternate perspectives.

Freed from any obligation to have “balanced” coverage, talk radio redefined
the political landscape. Limbaugh, with a regular audience of 20 million
listeners, became a right-wing superstar. At the 1992 Republican convention
he was feted as a “kingmaker.” The ultimate symbol of Limbaugh’s
influence was a personal letter from Ronald Reagan crowning him the
leading voice for the Conservative movement in the United States.6
 Reagan
knew what he was doing. He had begun his own political career as a TV
and radio voice for fringe right-wing causes. Limbaugh represented the
future of the American right because he knew how to exploit the rising tide
of white male alienation.

On talk radio, disenfranchised blue-collar America had a forum to
express their rage against Operation Break the Working Class. Perhaps they
didn’t have the analysis of how Reagan, Friedman, and Volcker had set
them up, but they knew that economic “elites” were responsible for
stripping their pensions and health benefits. Economically decimated
communities like Flint, Michigan, and Gary, Indiana, became fertile ground
for conspiracy talk about betrayal by the elites, globalism, and the new
world order.

By the millennium, the shock jocks had become increasingly powerful in
redefining the American political landscape. Some of the most influential
and extreme Republicans have come out of talk radio: Glenn Beck, Sean
Hannity, Tucker Carlson, Laura Ingraham, and Alex Jones. All of this paved
the way to the 2016 election of Donald Trump as the ultimate political
shock jock.

It’s unlikely that establishment leaders like George Bush, Barack Obama,
or Hillary Clinton ever gave a second thought to the rage fomenting on the
AM dial. They continued to promote the benefits of economic rules that
favoured corporate interests. Trump blew this narrative apart. He became
the voice for an increasingly large segment of the American population,
who knew that global economic rules had fucked their future and their
communities. The fact that they put their trust in a corrupt billionaire
indicates just how deep-seated the false narratives of conspiracy radio had
become.

In the twenty-first century, technology shifted from the shock jocks of
AM radio to online forums like YouTube, 4Chan, and TikTok. These
platforms have erased the regulatory border protections that until now have
kept Canada largely outside of the extremist grip. It has become a serious
question whether democracy has the resilience to survive in a world of
pumped-up algorithms and political disinformation. It takes dangerous
memories to remember a time before media and online spaces became
forums of rage and disinformation. A time before the working and middle
classes were sold out by the toxic capitalism of the 1980s. A time when AM
radio was the sound of innocent teenage summers.

