Chapter 24
OPERATION RACE
TO THE BOTTOM
In my journal I find many references to attending protests. Many were to
support workers in strikes taking place across the city. These were dismal
showdowns in isolated industrial parks far from the attention of media or
politicians. Often it was a group of women or racialized workers being
threatened with job losses if they didn’t accept major cuts to their wages or
benefits. Too many times I watched these desperate workers banging on van
windows in a vain attempt to stop scab labour from crossing the line to take
their jobs.

Those were grim times.

But I do remember one solidarity rally that was fun. It was when the
Catholic Worker crew engaged in street theatre outside the high-class Park
Hyatt Hotel on Bloor Street. Inside, Simon Reisman, Canada’s main
negotiator for the proposed free trade agreement with the United States, was
holding court with Canada’s business elite. A number of us showed up
wearing toques and lumberjack jackets. We set up a table hockey game
outside the hotel. A cop asked us what we were doing, so I explained that
Reisman was selling out our country and we were there to challenge him to
a table hockey showdown to decide the outcome. The cop laughed and said
we could stay as long as we didn’t block the limousines.

In 1988, there was no shortage of limousines and no shortage of people
protesting them. This was the height of the free trade debate. Prime Minister
Brian Mulroney was determined to make the free trade agreement his
defining political act. Just a few short years before, he had won the
Conservative leadership race by assuring party members that he would
never allow free trade on his watch. “Don’t talk to me about free trade. Free
trade is a threat to Canadian sovereignty. You won’t hear any more about
free trade.”

 Such a position was perfectly reasonable for a would-be leader
of the Progressive Conservatives in the early 1980s. The party had been
founded on a principle of protecting the Canadian border from the
economic power of our much larger neighbour.

And for their part, the Liberal Party had long benefited from policies that
promoted nationalist interests. In 1965, Prime Minister Lester B. Pearson
signed the Auto Pact with the United States, which ensured that vehicles
built in the US could be sold duty-free in Canada if the US auto giants
committed to clear quotas for Canadian production. Canadian plants were
soon producing many more cars than were required under the agreement.

As union activist Hemi Mitic explains, “We weren’t entitled to all those
jobs and the plants weren’t here because we were good or nice. They [the
Big Three] could make more money here. We had public health care and
that saved the companies a fortune. Our workers were punching way above
our weight.”

The Auto Pact was a huge driver for the Canadian economy, but soon
after winning the 1984 election, Mulroney made it clear he was willing to
offer up the agreement to entice the Reagan administration into a dramatic
rewriting of the trade rules between the two countries. So much for the
promise he had just made to the Conservative faithful.

Three months after winning the election. Mulroney flew to New York
City to promote the idea of a single integrated market.3
 He followed up
with a personal letter to President Reagan calling for free trade. Not only
was Mulroney ready to renegotiate the Auto Pact, he was also prepared to
put Canada’s huge petroleum reserves on the table. President Reagan was
more than willing to talk.

Under a free trade agreement, the ability of the Canadian government to
establish energy policies that favoured national interests would be illegal.

Future governments would be unable to prioritize Canadian access to our
own energy resources. Activist Maude Barlow says, “The heart of the free
trade agreement was the proportional sharing clause on energy resources.

The provision forbade us from lessening export of oil to the United States
even if we were facing shortfalls. We would have to cut Canadian access at
the same rate we cut back to American consumers. Canadian energy became
North American energy.”

The agreement also put Canada’s huge natural water supply, including ice
and snow, up for grabs. If any company could secure a licence to divert lake
or river water to the parched American southwest, the government would be
unable to stop them.

In March 1985, the promise of free trade was presented as a staged fairy
tale at the Shamrock Summit in Quebec City. The American and Canadian
participants paraded through an orchestrated television pageant of hokey
Irish Canadiana, complete with singing and dancing. The highlight was the
performance of “When Irish Eyes are Smiling” by Brian Mulroney and
Ronald Reagan in expensive tuxedos, alongside their wives in green
evening gowns.

In response to the Shamrock Summit community groups, artists and
labour activists hosted their own Maple Leaf Summit. This led to the
formation of the Pro Canada Network to fight the free trade negotiations.

Protests sprang up all over the country.

Despite the huge levels of public opposition to the free trade deal,
negotiations continued at a frantic pace behind closed doors. In late 1987,
the government announced they had an agreement. It would be put to the
people in a vote in the 1988 federal election. Maude Barlow crisscrossed
the country calling on voters to reject the deal. “It was about the soul of our
country,” she recalls.5
Free trade was the defining issue of the 1988 election and the Canadian
public voted against the agreement. NDP leader Ed Broadbent, from the auto
worker town of Oshawa, was deeply opposed to free trade. But Liberal
leader and Bay Street lawyer John Turner also came out against the deal. As
a result of vote splits between the two opposition parties, however,
Mulroney was re-elected with a narrow majority. Free trade was now a done
deal.

Corporate Canada was exuberant. Exports between the two countries
took off from a value of US $116 billion in 1985 to US $240 billion by
2002. This represented a 221 percent increase in Canadian trade to the
American market.6
 But the cost in Canadian jobs was enormous, as branch
plant operations like the Inglis washing machine plant in Port Credit and
General Tire in Barrie shifted production to the United States. An estimated
334,000 jobs (17 percent of the Canadian manufacturing sector) were lost.

The agreement had promised a massive influx of investment into Canada,
with a reciprocal opportunity for Canadian companies to bid into the
American market. The reality was that the vast majority of American capital
that came into Canada was in the form of corporate takeovers and leveraged
buyouts. From 1985 to 2002, more than 96 percent of foreign investment in
Canada was spent on takeovers of Canadian companies, while only 3.4
percent was dedicated to new investment. Canadian companies, for their
part, ended up owning less than 0.6 percent of American industrial
capacity.

7 This was not a two-way street.

Canadians had given up sovereignty over our economy, but American
domestic interests continued to push protectionist measures such as the
never-ending softwood lumber dispute. Within three years of the agreement,
negotiator Simon Reisman admitted that when it came to respecting their
side of the deal, “the Americans are bastards.”

Canada is a trading nation. Trade between Canada and the United States
is an essential component of life between the two countries. When
Mulroney sent his negotiators to meet with Reagan’s team, there were many
options for how trade between the two nations could develop that would
empower local economies. But free trade was never about making it easier
for medium-sized furniture companies to sell across the border, or about
regulating the trade in wheat and soybeans. It was about entrenching the
counter-revolution that had been launched in 1980 to break the working
class.

The belief that Canadians could chart their own course was stopped dead
in its tracks. Corporate capital had set the terms for the coming decades. As
economist Sam Gindin explains: “The left played a good role in Canada
during the 1980s, but it couldn’t sustain itself. In the auto sector we felt
there was a space within capitalism to fight back. We had a decade where
we fought back very successfully. But eventually you get worn down. You
can’t do it as just one union. The left became more marginalized. Social
democracy everywhere became about accommodating capitalism. In the
face of this, what was there to give workers hope and make them believe
they can win?”

THE 1980S BEGAN with Operation Break the Working Class and ended with
the corporate victory of free trade. But the appetite of big capital had only
been whetted. They were determined to shift production to lower-paid
jurisdictions and free capital from any social, corporate, or labour
obligations. This second phase of selling out the economy to the highest
bidder—let’s call it Operation Race to the Bottom—came in stages. The
first step was to establish a continent-wide trade agreement. This began in
1989 when Washington opened talks with Mexico.

Mulroney joined the talks for a free trade deal with the United States and
Mexico in 1991. The problem with such an agreement was obvious: there
was a huge imbalance between the wages and expectations of Canadian and
American workers in comparison with the much lower-paid Mexican
workforce. How was it possible to establish a continental trading block
without demanding a level playing field? But a level playing field was
never on the agenda of the North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA).

Incoming Democratic president Bill Clinton had the option to turn down
NAFTA. The traditional Democratic base of union workers was deeply
opposed to the deal. On the far right, populist Ross Perot, the so-called
father of Trump politics, warned that NAFTA would result in a “giant sucking
sound” as manufacturing jobs were shipped to Mexico.10 But the days
when the Democrats believed in a New Deal for workers were over. Now
there was a newer deal, and it was with Wall Street.

Clinton signed NAFTA and the big sucking sound of jobs could be heard
across the Democratic heartland. More than 766,000 manufacturing jobs in
the United States disappeared as corporations shifted operations to take
advantage of the low-wage economy in Mexico.

Many of those jobs simply moved over the border to the so-called
maquiladora zones that provided huge corporate tax breaks to attract North
American manufacturing. The incentives included the use of government
power to keep worker rights to a minimum. The deal was no benefit to
Mexican workers; in the 1970s their wages had been 23 percent of
American wages, but this had dropped even further to 12 percent by the
millennium.11 The deal also destabilized Mexican agriculture, which was
flooded by American products. The result was a huge increase in the drug
trade and migration to the United States, as dislocated farmers and workers
looked for better options elsewhere.

On the American side of the Rio Grande, the agreement drove down
wages and led to rising job insecurity. The Economic Policy Institute notes
that “as manufacturing jobs disappeared, workers were downscaled to
lower-paying, less-secure services jobs. Within manufacturing, the threat of
employers to move production to Mexico proved to be a powerful weapon
for undercutting workers’ bargaining power.”

In Canada, the impact of NAFTA was quickly felt in the auto
manufacturing towns of Southern Ontario. Hemi Mitic says the Canadian
advantage that had been negotiated in the Auto Pact was blown away. “The
free trade agreement shipped the jobs to Mexico. The auto industry had
made good money in Canada, but in northern Mexico there were lots of
young workers who would work cheaper.”

But the real power of the continental free trade agreement was that it set
out to radically reorder the power of capital in relation to democracy. At the
heart of the expanded deal were the investor–state dispute settlement (ISDS)
provisions, which provided extra-legal rights for corporations to challenge
domestic laws if they were perceived to be a possible threat to profit. These
challenges were adjudicated in secret tribunals that put corporations on the
same footing as democratically elected governments.

The ISDS provisions were then embedded in numerous international trade
deals that followed. This was the beginning of globalization. ISDS was
imposed on many emerging economies of the Global South. It was
promoted as a means to create a “level playing field” to protect companies
from arbitrary state seizure, but the reality was that corporations used ISDS
tribunals to override the democratic rights of citizens. In 2021, there were
twenty-three outstanding ISDS claims totalling $55 billion, and they were all
rooted in corporate claims against government policies on environmental,
public health, energy, and land use planning.14
The working class in Canada knew full well that Mulroney had sold out
Canadian workers. In 1993, his Conservative Party was almost wiped out as
Liberal leader Jean Chrétien won a majority on the promise to renegotiate
the treaty. But within two months of taking office, Chrétien admitted he had
no plans to challenge NAFTA.

15 Instead, he became a champion of
globalization, leading huge Team Canada trade missions to sign deals with
corporate entities in China and other Pacific nations. The China initiative
was promoted as an opportunity to let Canadian companies compete in the
emerging markets of Asia, but the real opportunity lay in shifting
production offshore.

Globalization allowed corporations to offshore jobs to countries with low
wages and minimal environmental standards. Offshoring wasn’t simply
about shipping out North American manufacturing capacity, but all manner
of work—from tech support to computer research, call centres, and even
airline mechanics. The proponents of offshoring claimed that the global
“free market” would inevitably bring democracy to totalitarian regimes like
China and result in higher wages, better lives, and political stability around
the globe. As Maude Barlow explains, “We were told that globalization is
going to be good for everybody. It will raise all boats, from the big yachts to
the little fishing boats. It is going to bring employment for everyone, and
corporate profits will be passed on to consumers … The language was all
about trickle-down. We were told that corporations were more efficient than
government and we should get out of their way.”

Boats certainly rose—but they were the yachts of the oligarchs as the
super-rich abandoned their legal obligations to the nations in which they
lived.

In countries in the Global South that were subjected to globalization,
inequity and repression grew. In Egypt, for example, billions in public
assets were privatized and the wealth was shifted to the new 1 percent class.

In his analysis of the wave of protest movements of the 2010s, Vincent
Bevins writes, “neoliberal reforms did not magically deliver
democratization as the liberal teleologists would have assumed; to the
contrary, they required the repression of dissent to be implemented, just as
they had in Chile in the 1970s.”17 Such repression set off waves of
resistance around the globe. Author Jeff Faux describes a “global class war”
launched by the same elites who helped push the Reagan revolution.18
In the United States, the policies that supported globalization resulted in
the loss of more than 5 million jobs and the closure of 70,000
manufacturing operations.19 Such outsourcing was a huge benefit to the 1
percent but was predicated on driving down the expectations of workers
across the globe. Yet these negative outcomes were often overlooked in the
1990s and 2000s, as the binge economy of excessive spending and the
flaunting wealth of the super-elite had become the cultural story of the age.

But the extent of this economic looting was unsustainable.

The 2020 COVID-19 pandemic blew these myths away. As supply chains
faltered, national governments suddenly found themselves unable to
produce basic supplies to keep people safe. And then industry began
struggling to keep employees, as workers—tired of low-paying jobs and
insecurity—simply walked away or began organizing unions. Hemi Mitic
notes that labour has returned to a place of activism unseen in decades.

“Look at the US, where the right wing was so successful in cutting and
smashing the ability of labour to make progress. The union movement gave
away so much they disintegrated. But now wages are so low young people
are saying screw you, we’re not buying into this shit. Workers are just
walking off the job.” The 2020s have seen more labour activism than at any
time since the famous sit-down strike at Flint, Michigan.

The political class is sensing the shifting ground. For the first time in
decades, politicians are talking about union rights and protecting good-
paying jobs. In the fall of 2023, the United Auto Workers led an
unprecedented strike against all Big Three auto companies at the same time.

They were joined on the picket line by the President of the United States. In
Canada, labour action in the auto sector has led to the biggest wins in the
history of the union. Militant labour action is rewriting the social contract
between labour and capital. Among the most radical activists are from Gen
Z, who know the only sustainable future they will have is one that they
make. An article in Fortune warned that Gen Z is determined to upset the
business-as-usual model by bringing a new era of labour activism to the
workplace.20
Dangerous memories remind us that there was nothing natural or
inevitable about the way free trade was exploited to the detriment of the
working and middle classes. And there is nothing that says that such a state
of economic disparity must continue. But in order to imagine an alternate
future that restores worker rights and secure lives, dangerous memories of
the struggles that won those rights and changed attitudes will be essential.

And then, perhaps the long, dark shadow of the 1980s may finally
disappear.

