Chapter 25
SPENDING THE PEACE DIVIDEND
The only telegram I have ever received arrived at Angelus House in
November 1989. Well, to be truthful, the telegram was addressed to my
one-year-old daughter, Mariah. It was from her godfather and my former
bandmate, Andrew Cash. He was on tour in Berlin and he wanted her to
know that a new era was being born. An era of hope and opportunity. The
seemingly impregnable Berlin Wall had just come down.

On November 9, 1989, hundreds of thousands of German citizens who
had been congregating at the militarized checkpoints separating East and
West Germany simply walked through to the other side. And that was it—
the Berlin Wall was history. The monolithic concrete divide that personified
the fear and paranoia of the Cold War gave way under the irresistible
pressure of human hope.

The 1980s could not have scripted a more spectacular and unexpected
ending.

Change had been in the air in the communist world since the nuclear
disaster of Chernobyl. In Estonia, the country announced its domestic laws
would take precedence over Soviet law. In June 1989, Poland’s Solidarity
movement won a resounding victory in the first open election. That same
month, communist Hungary began dismantling the Iron Curtain to allow
free passage to its non-communist neighbour Austria.

But the threat of violent state repression was ever present. The world
watched in horror when Chinese authorities sent tanks into Beijing’s
Tiananmen Square in April 1989 to crush a non-violent student protest. The
students had set themselves up in the square, voicing calls to reform the
communist system. The authorities responded with a bloodbath, mass
imprisonment, and executions.

A similar response was feared in the eastern German Democratic
Republic under the hardline leadership of Erich Honecker. Yet in May
1989, the Church from Below—a coalition of punks, peace activists, and
Lutheran Church volunteers—began to openly oppose the communist
leadership. The punk activists were not interested in tearing down the Berlin
Wall or joining West Germany; they wanted to create a more democratic
and truly socialist country.

It began with the May elections in the GDR, in which communist
representatives had always won an overwhelming percentage of the vote.

The Church from Below activists monitored the elections and began to
challenge the results as indicative of widespread voter fraud. In June, they
moved their meetings from church halls into the streets.

In some cities these vigils were little more than a weekly gathering of a
dozen or so protesters, but their challenge to the state was met with violence
and harassment. And still their numbers grew. The Stasi secret police
responded with batons and arrests. And then something unprecedented
happened—ordinary workers, mothers, and grandparents came out to stand
alongside the punks. By September, protests that had been lucky to gather
sixty activists had turned into rallies of more than a thousand people.1 And
the protests grew even larger.

On October 9, 1989, more than 70,000 people marched in Leipzig. A
week later the numbers were at 120,000, and then 300,000 took to the
streets to defy the government. The GDR Communist Party called on
Honecker to resign. As a leadership vacuum opened up, the crowds began
descending on the militarized checkpoints separating east and west. Until
recently these had represented death zones for people daring to cross, but
the soldiers were unnerved by the determination of unarmed citizens to
challenge the long-standing order. By 11 p.m. on the evening of November
9, the crowds were so overwhelming that the guards simply walked away.

My friend Andrew Cash was touring Germany at this historic moment.

On November 14, 1989, he joined musicians from both sides of the city at a
huge concert of celebration and resistance held in the wall’s shadow. He
was invited to sing his new single, a song that had been written in the dying
days of L’étranger and featured the hopeful words: “There is a time and
place and it could be today.”

 From the punk activism of Toronto to the
punk squats of Berlin, it really did seem as if we could change the world.

My generation had grown up in the dark shadow of the wall. It had been
built in 1961, as American and Soviet tanks faced off in the centre of Berlin.

The massive concrete and barbed-wire structure became the visual image of
Winston Churchill’s “Iron Curtain” of repression that divided Europe into
two nearly warring camps.

I grew up assuming the Cold War would last through my lifetime. It
seemed that the only way it would end would be through the violence of
war. But ultimately, the wall was dismantled by the non-violent
determination of millions of ordinary people who were no longer willing to
live in the fear of nuclear annihilation.

In the months that followed, there was a great deal of excitement and
idealism about what was now possible. Staggering levels of public
investments had been spent perpetuating the Cold War, and the superpowers
had wasted enormous sums on missiles and weapons. Now those immense
military budgets could be diverted as a “peace dividend” to build a better
world. Writers speculated on how this would usher in a decade of
transformation.

The fall of the wall gave other reasons for optimism. Former enemies
who had spent so much energy planning to kill each other could now come
together to tackle the global problems of the climate crisis and inequity. The
problem was that Western leaders were giddy with the false belief that
capitalism had won the day. American media often showed footage of
Ronald Reagan standing at the Brandenburg Gate in West Berlin in 1987
demanding, “Mr. Gorbachev tear down this wall.” But Reagan hadn’t
brought down the wall; his Cold War rhetoric had made him equally
despised on both sides of the German divide. The wall had been taken down
by ordinary people, including Greenham Common feminists and German
punk rock activists.3 The failure to acknowledge these basic facts led the
West to assume a dangerous level of hubris.

Take, for example, the situation in Afghanistan. The final defeat of the
Soviet army in February 1989 played a significant role in the collapse of the
Soviet Union. Through the ten-year Soviet war in Afghanistan, the United
States exploited the fundamentalist factions and used the country as a
testing ground for all manner of weapons, to level the field between a
peasant insurgency and a modern army.

As the Soviets were withdrawing, Gorbachev warned the White House
that a dangerous new future was emerging in the ruined villages of
Afghanistan. “The Soviet Union was willing to work with the United States
[to deal with the rise of religious fundamentalism], but the US seemed
uninterested or unwilling to work cooperatively,” he stated.4
The result was the rise of Osama bin Laden, who morphed from local
mujahideen leader into the founder of al-Qaeda. When the horrific violence
of 9/11 hit New York, few bothered to look back to see the clear line that
connected the violence in Manhattan with the chaos caused by America’s
Afghan project. The brutal efficiencies of the pipe bombs and IEDs that the
CIA had developed for the mujahideen went on to play havoc with the lives
of American, Canadian, and British personnel in the 2000s. In 2021,
American forces were forced to retreat from Afghanistan, in a collapse as
ignominious as the Soviet defeat of thirty years earlier.

Yet the fall of the Berlin Wall made it possible to think that the dark
counter-revolution of the 1980s had run its course. In the United States, the
Republican revolution finally sputtered to a halt with the election of
Democrat Bill Clinton in 1992. The Conservatives in Canada were replaced
by Liberal leader Jean Chrétien in 1993. In the United Kingdom, eighteen
years of Tory rule came to an end in 1997, when Tony Blair was elected on
a wave of hope and optimism. These leaders had an extraordinary
opportunity to reset the political clock and make use of the peace dividend
to re-establish a global economy based on principles of equity and fair
investment.

But Clinton, Chrétien, and Blair were the ideological children of the
1980s. They accepted the new orthodoxy that government should get out of
the way of corporate interests. Clinton instituted a welfare reform bill that
went even further in its attack on the poor than the cuts championed under
Reagan.5
 On his watch, a new billionaire class was given free rein over the
global economy, with little obligation to citizens.

Chrétien promoted austerity and globalization. And in retirement,
Margaret Thatcher boasted that Tony Blair was her greatest political
achievement because he embraced her politics of privatization and
deregulation.6
The potential to create a democratic state in the Soviet Union was
frittered away as capitalists and former party apparatchiks quickly divided
up the spoils of public wealth to the benefit of rapacious privateers.

Russians were subject to such an extreme shock doctrine that the life
expectancy of ordinary citizens dropped almost six years in the four years
following the collapse of the Berlin Wall.7
In his study of the Cold War, Arne Westad writes, “Internationally the
1990s was a lost opportunity for institutionalizing cooperation, as it was for
using the peace dividend globally to combat disease, poverty and
inequality.”

But nobody in the West noticed or cared. In 1992, American political
scientist Francis Fukuyama declared that history was over: the good guys—
the capitalists—had won. Such was the hubris of the times.

History was far from over. The looting of the post-Soviet state gave rise
to the oligarchs, a degraded democracy, and eventually the strongman
politics of Vladimir Putin. The horrific violence unleashed by his 2022
Russian invasion of Ukraine has been called the “revenge of history.”

 It
could be more accurately called the revenge of Chernobyl or the revenge of
1989.

As a Member of Parliament, I had numerous meetings with European and
American politicians about the devastating impacts of the invasion of
Ukraine on the global economy. In November 2022, I met in Berlin with a
senior German politician who said bleakly, “I can’t believe that Europe is
once again being plunged into a cold war. It is like we’re back in the darkest
days of the 1980s.”
There are similarities to the 1980s, but there are also profound
differences. This was brought home to me in Washington in early 2023,
when a general made an off-the-cuff comment during a meeting on the war
in Ukraine. “Russia,” he admitted, “might be the hurricane, but China and
its immense economic and military power is like confronting political
climate change.”
In the 2020s, we are facing an increasingly destabilized globe—from
climate crisis to a renewed Cold War with Russia and China, to the failure
of the world to stop the appalling war crimes and genocides in Gaza,
Yemen, and Sudan. It didn’t need to be like this. Dangerous memories bring
us back to the decision to cash in the peace dividend for the benefit of
profiteers and ideologues.

But dangerous memories also remind us of the incredible heroism of the
punks in the “church from below,” and the ordinary people who faced down
armed soldiers as they crossed the seemingly impregnable divide of the
Berlin Wall. Peace was made real. A world on the brink was saved. And not
a shot was fired.

