Chapter 26
A NEW DECADE
Angelus House closed its doors in May 1990. Brit and I packed up our ratty
second-hand furniture and moved north to the mining town of Cobalt,
Ontario. Brit had just given birth to our second daughter, Siobhan, and said
the time had come for us to begin again. I was twenty-seven years old and
knew that she was right.

Perhaps we were tired. Perhaps it was the need to focus on raising our
babies. Brit had never felt comfortable living her life so publicly. There was
no such thing as privacy at a Catholic Worker house. She wanted space to
live a life of more simplicity.

I was an extrovert but was beginning to question the weight of the
distorted social dynamic in which we found ourselves. When Angelus
House opened, I was determined to show that it was possible to live outside
the dominant economic paradigm. One of the reasons I accepted multiple
invitations to speak to community groups and churches was because I
wanted to put forward the proposition that everyone had a part to play in
making a fairer society. But this challenge was rarely picked up.

People wanted to hear from the young “saints” who were living on the
“streets” with the “poor.” I wasn’t a saint. And the folks that I lived with
weren’t the faceless “poor” but people who had their own agency and
rights, like Caroline, Robert, Frank. Nobody thanked them for living with
us.

A central part of these public speaking engagements was the opportunity
for groups to bestow charitable donations in the form of food, used
clothing, or a pass-the-hat offering. Some of these donations were very
helpful in making it possible for us to continue offering hospitality. But,
ironically, our attempt to opt out of commercialism made us a magnet for
guilt offerings of bags of used clothing or contributions of old furniture.

Whether we wanted this stuff or not, we were expected to gratefully accept.

Then we would be stuck with the job of figuring out what to do with other
people’s leftovers. I remember a phone call where I tried to tell an irate
woman I wasn’t going to take a long subway ride across town to clear out
her late father’s suits.

“But they are good quality,” she said indignantly.

“I’m sure they are,” I said. “But nobody in our house needs a suit.”
My growing discomfort with hand-me-down consumption grew as right-
wing ideologues were promoting the notion that the state should walk away
from obligations to the underclass. President George H. W. Bush claimed
that volunteers and charities would fill the gap. The last thing I wanted to be
was one of Bush’s “thousand points of light.”
The small former mining town of Cobalt might seem like a strange
choice as a place to start again. We didn’t know anybody and had no job
prospects. It was hard to explain to friends why we were starting from
scratch in an economically depressed region. We arrived just as all the local
mines shut down, the grocery store went out of business, and the high
school closed.

But Cobalt was a community that had survived all manner of hard
knocks. It had a deeply ingrained culture of hospitality and mutual aid.

Folks didn’t talk about it; they just did it. In our first winter in the north, as I
was trying to eke out a living as a chimney sweep, there was a knock at the
door and local firefighters brought in a turkey, potatoes, and gifts for our
baby girls. Every year after, I made sure to provide a good Christmas
hamper in return. This was mutual aid in action. I knew we belonged here.

Brit and I didn’t completely leave Angelus House behind. Pierre moved
with us. He was an older man who had come out of prison to live with us in
1986. Pierre was the prodigal son of a respectable bourgeois family in
Quebec City. As a teenager he had drifted to the mob-run streets of
Montreal, and then worked his way through the United States as a carnival
barker and petty criminal.

By the time he came to live with us he had a prison record of more than
thirty years, spent in various jails and penitentiaries across North America.

Pierre had even done time in the notorious Louisiana State Penitentiary, or
“Angola.” One day while he was living at Angelus House, Pierre received a
letter from an inmate he had known there. It was a sobering litany of the
guys who had been on the ward with Pierre back in the day. Most of them
had died, either from violence or addiction. Others had been lost to the
bowels of America’s industrial prison system. The writer of the letter had
been thrown in Angola as a young hippie hitchhiker in the late 1960s on the
charge of vagrancy. He had never gotten out.

Pierre could easily have become another dark statistic of Angola. It
wasn’t that he was a dangerous con; he had committed a series of dumb
crimes and robberies, often to feed his heroin habit. But Pierre knew the
odds of survival in such a world got bleaker every year. When he came to
Angelus House, the support of his adopted family gave him a reason to get
serious about not using drugs. It wasn’t always easy, but we all worked hard
to support each other. When our third daughter, Lola, was born in Cobalt,
Pierre became an unorthodox grandfather figure. He loved taking her to the
nearby town to watch the matinees at the local movie theatre.

Pierre lived with our family for seventeen years. One bright summer
morning, Brit went upstairs and found he had died of a heart attack. It was
quick and peaceful. About Pierre’s loss Brit wrote: “Pierre died suddenly,
right here in our home on a very beautiful June morning. His death left a
gaping hole in our family. I miss him in the morning when he would come
down for his coffee leaving a trail of drips and spills behind him. I miss him
sitting under the big cedar tree watching our daughter Lola play. I just plain
miss him.”1 The plan at Angelus House had been to build a lasting
community. Pierre made it last with us. Like Brit, I still miss him all the
time.

When we first moved to Cobalt, I found work doing odd jobs or working
as a roofer and a carpenter. In 1995, Brit and I returned to the dream that
had excited us at the Catholic Worker—starting our own publication. We
launched HighGrader Magazine to examine the class, political, and
environmental struggles happening around us. This brought me into the
loop of some of the major political and environmental battles taking place
in Northern Ontario in the 1990s.2
 I became deeply involved in a major
grassroots battle to stop the importation of urban garbage to Northern
Ontario. During this fight I connected with Toronto city councillor Jack
Layton. I had first met Jack when I was twenty. At the time he was an
idealistic professor making his first run at city politics. He came to see our
band in the hope of encouraging Andrew Cash and me to organize young
people for the New Democratic Party. I was polite, but my answer was a
firm no. As a cocky young anarchist, I didn’t want to get my hands dirty by
engaging in organized party politics.

But those views changed through the 1990s as I watched governments
walk away from basic obligations to the poor and the unemployed while
slashing investments in public health and environmental protection. When
Layton became leader of the federal New Democratic Party in 2003, he
talked me into running for office. I still believed in the duty to take
responsibility at the local level, but I had come to realize that housing, the
environment, and social justice were fundamentally issues of public policy,
and there was no giving up this ground to the ideological children of
Thatcher and Reagan.

Dorothy Day said that the role of the Catholic Worker Movement was to
build a society where it was “easier for people to be good.” It is much easier
for people to choose to be good if they have access to quality housing, a
secure income, and a stable environment. And so, in 2004, I made the shift
from consumer dropout to political candidate.

At the time, I didn’t even own a suit. But I started knocking on doors and
talking to people across a constituency bigger than the United Kingdom.

Few expected me to win, but with the hard work of a team of great
volunteers, I won my first mandate. I went on to win seven terms in
Canada’s parliament.

But that is another story for another time.

Conclusion
DREAD, LUCK, AND HOPE
“This is not a time to be dismayed. This is punk rock time. This is what Joe
Strummer trained you for.”
—Henry Rollins, 2017
As I write this, I can smell the smoke of the burning boreal forest wafting
through the open windows. The planet is on fire. It is burning in regions that
have never seen wildfires before. Politicians have thrown in the towel on
keeping the temperatures from crashing though the dangerous red line of a
1.5-degree global increase. As governments continue to tiptoe around the
corporate culpability of Big Oil, the talk is about “adaptation.” Yet there is
no adapting to suffocating heat domes or disappearing river systems. These
are the symptoms of planetary breakdown.

The climate crisis is the cumulative effect of sixty-plus years of excess,
failed leadership, and corporate conspiracy. It is a hurricane that has
followed me since I was a child. For the longest time, I hoped that this
hurricane might stay on the other side of the horizon. But it has touched
down, and the storm is only beginning.

I spent my whole life waiting for the future, and now it is here. I just
thought there would be more time. But I’m not the only one. This has been
our collective story for the last four decades. History didn’t end in 1989; it
was deliberately cut adrift. The 1980s was a manufactured chasm that set us
irrevocably apart from the world that was before, while promoting the
chimera that we had no responsibility for what was yet to come. In the
1990s and the millennium, life got faster and memory grew shorter. The
response to climate anxiety was to buy ever-bigger gas guzzlers. Statements
of defiance and excess. But to what purpose?
Globalization promised just-in-time delivery for all manner of cheap
electronics, clothes, furniture. Stuff we didn’t need but purchased anyway.

No point repairing. Good for a year. Good for a couple of washes. Pre-
landfill. How was it possible to make a shirt that cheap?
Greed was still good. Better, it seemed, than ever. And we were all
bewitched by the next generation of gadgets. Wasn’t it neat how they easily
supplanted human autonomy—making the need to remember phone
numbers, addresses, and directions redundant?
The dopamine hits of shared selfies anesthetized anxiety about rising
credit-card debt and lack of long-term job security. Working 24/7 was
normal. As normal as an early January getaway to a fenced-off tropical
beach at an exclusive resort. But, seriously, how was it possible to offer
packages that cheap that included the flights, the pool, the beach, and an
unlimited bar and meal tab? This was normal.

But it never was, was it? And inside we all knew it.

The forty-year-long fever dream ended as abruptly as the fall of the
Berlin Wall. It happened in the first months of the 2020s, when the COVID-19
pandemic quickly spread around the world. At first, the lockdowns seemed
like a timeout from the rat race. In the long months that followed, we
dreamed of what we would do once life got back to normal. But then it
became increasingly clear that there was no normal to go back to. And then
came the brutal Russian invasion of Ukraine and the horrific genocide in
Gaza. And then the fire storms and climate chaos. The future is here and it
ain’t pretty.

You can grieve, get anxious, or embrace conspiracy theories, but there is
no getting around the fact that the era between the end of the 1980s and the
beginning of the 2020s was a mirage. The most abnormal time in history.

The era when we pissed it all away.

SO WHERE DO we go from here? Each of us has the responsibility to decide
how we as a species go forward in this uncharted land of the future.

This is where lessons from the 1980s might help us find our way. I think
back to the eighteen-year-old who believed that ordinary people could stop
a nuclear holocaust. He was convinced that boycotts and marches could
bring down the South African apartheid regime just as they brought down
the Berlin Wall. At the time, these goals seemed like unattainable fantasies,
yet that young man embraced the fight to achieve them because the
alternative of doing nothing was too much to bear. He learned that when
enough people come together, what once seemed impossible becomes very
possible.

I take hope from the student climate strikes and Indigenous youth
protests. There are those who would tell us that such youthful acts of
defiance mean nothing in the larger scheme, but from such gestures and
actions the seeds of transformation grow.

Bruce Walsh, who came of age as a young gay activist in the darkest days
of the AIDS epidemic, told me that the fundamental lesson he learned in the
1980s was that change is possible. “We are always told that people don’t
change. Bullshit they don’t. They do change. Look at how much things
have changed by people becoming empowered. I saw how it changed for
queer folk. I see it changing for Indigenous people.”
And then he added an unexpected piece of advice: “To win these
campaigns for change you need some luck. How do you get that luck? You
need to show up. You need to get your hands dirty. If you do this, it will
change your life. It will give you the confidence to make change possible.”

Luck might seem like a pittance to offer a young generation dealing with
the massive problems of climate and economic upheaval, but these forces
are not monoliths or immovable facts of history. When people fight back
and build movements of solidarity, there are moments when gaps appear in
the seemingly impenetrable wall. If you are there at that moment and you
are ready, you can blow that wall apart.

Luck? Perhaps. But it’s about being willing to try, because you know that
not trying is a much, much worse alternative.

This is why young workers across North America are pushing back.

They’re forming unions and setting up picket lines at coffee shops and
grocery stores and taking on corporate digital behemoths like Apple and
Amazon. Activist Sam Gindin, who was there on the front lines in the battle
against Operation Break the Working Class, says: “These non-union
workers are taking enormous risks. There is no easy way to respond when
we have lived with forty years of this system. It is going to be a real tough
fight … but there is a zeitgeist to this time because once people start taking
on the corporate power, they begin to see all kinds of other possibilities.”

Maude Barlow, who has spent her life campaigning for a better world,
believes that even in a world of climate fires, people are being presented
with a unique opportunity. “There is an incredible amount of good stuff
happening,” she says. “We are winning fights. The need to protect
biodiversity is being heard at levels of government that wasn’t heard of
before. There is reason for hope, and we need to embrace wise hope. This is
not about a ‘don’t worry and be happy’ false hope. Wise hope requires that
we look the situation in the eye, learn as much as we can about the crisis,
and then take action anyway.”

But other forces are looking to exploit the winds of change by stoking
fear in a toxic world of conspiracy, culture war, and blame. Democracy
seems to be losing out to disinformation and propaganda. Political
extremism, antisemitism, and transphobia are on the rise. Where we go
from here is far from certain.

And this is why dangerous memories are so important. Dangerous
memories remind us that these malignant forces have been fought and
beaten before. Better choices are within reach.

In Hope in the Dark, Rebecca Solnit writes: “The status quo would like
you to believe that it is immutable, inevitable, and invulnerable, and lack of
memory of a dynamically changing world reinforces this view… when you
don’t know how much things have changed, you don’t see that they are
changing or that they can change.” She ties it all together with a beautiful
phrase: “The branches are hope; the roots are memory.”

Joe Strummer would put it more bluntly: “The future is unwritten.”
There are days when I look at the world and feel more dread than hope,
but there are many other days when I am simply overjoyed by the beauty of
life around me. And this beauty is worth fighting for.

It brings me back to those times at Angelus House, when hope and
humour came from some of the most unlikely people who knocked on the
door asking for help. Opportunity appeared in the most unexpected
moments. Angelus House taught me that in order to be transformed, you
have to be willing to open the door.

And when I felt burned out and bruised, wanting to give up the work, I
would remember a quote from Dorothy Day that gave me a kick in the arse:
“No one has the right to sit down and feel hopeless. There is too much work
to do.”
There is a hell of a lot of work to do now. Some of that work will need to
be systemic and political. But there is work that can be done in our
communities, in building up our own fragile relationships and local
ecosystems.

Call it climate mutual aid.

Call it punk rock time.

And so, yes, I am full of both dread and hope. And I really, really hope
we will be lucky at a time when the odds are stacked against us.

It may not seem like much to offer a young generation facing the collapse
of Antarctic ice shelves. But if you look at history, you quickly learn that
hope and luck in the face of dread is all we have ever had.

They can’t fail us now.
