Hello, everyone. Welcome to a new episode of The Dissenter. I'm your host, as always,
Ricardo Lopes, and today I'm joined by Grace Blakely, author, journalist, political commentator,
and we're talking about her latest book, Vulture, Capitalism, Corporate Crimes,
Backdoor Bailouts, and The Death of Freedom. So, Grace, welcome to the show. It's a huge
pleasure to have you on. Thanks for having me. It's great to be here.
Okay. So, the first thing I would like to get into when it comes to your book is that
one thing is how capitalism actually works, and another thing is what people commonly think,
I mean, what are their common ideas about how it works? So, before we get into some of the examples
you explore in the book to illustrate how capitalism works and some of the tactics that capitalists have
to sort of exploit the system or make the system work in their favor, what would you say are perhaps
some of the most common ideas that people have about or what they think, how they think capitalism works?
Yeah. So, I suppose I wanted to write this book to address some of those misconceptions about how
capitalism works. And I think the first and most prominent one is this idea that capitalism is like
a free market system, and a system in which the state is completely separate from the market.
So, you have this idea that in capitalist societies, you have economies that are governed by the principles
of free market economics, and then you have governments that exist separate to those economies
that kind of regulate the free markets. And the idea is that if the government gets too big relative
to the economy, then that becomes socialism, effectively. So, this idea that capitalism is a free market economy,
and socialism is a big state deciding everything. And I think those misconceptions come back to the legacy
of the Cold War, basically, when you had the US, which painted itself as this kind of free market
utopia, and the USSR, where you did have a centrally planned economy, where the state kind of determined
the production and allocation of resources. So, I wanted to kind of really respond to that misconception
that a lot of people have. And I did that by looking both at whether or not capitalism is a free market
system, and also the role of the state within capitalist economies. So, in the book, I show that,
you know, capitalism isn't a free market system, and that the state actually has a very significant role
in determining what goes on in capitalist economies. And the example I use is, to start the book, is Boeing.
Boeing. So, some of your readers, some of your listeners, sorry, might remember the Boeing 737 Max
disasters, which took place in about 2018, 2019. And in those disasters, two Boeing planes fell out of
the sky, killing nearly 350 people in two separate plane crashes. And there were lots of investigations
that went on into why this had happened. It ultimately transpired that senior executives at Boeing had known
about the problems with this plane before the crashes took place, and had done nothing about it.
Despite the fact that there had been whistleblowers coming forward, there had been people within the
firm saying, this plane is unsafe, we cannot bring it to market. But the senior executives within this
company said, nope, we're going to do that anyway. And to understand how this disaster and this kind of,
you know, corruption of what was once a kind of great American firm took place, you have to understand,
firstly, that Boeing wasn't operating in a free market context. And secondly, that it is deeply enmeshed
with the American state. So, firstly, Boeing doesn't operate in a free market, it is, it operates in a
duopoly. So basically, there are two large firms, Boeing and Airbus, that dominate the aviation
industry. There's, you know, there is competition between those two firms. But it is a very specific
type of competition. It's not the kind of competition that you would expect within a free market system,
where there's lots of small producers competing to produce things, and the pressures of competition
keep prices down. And, you know, it's a maximally efficient system. Instead, you have these two big
firms, and they are competing to keep costs down as low as possible. So that means kind of underpaying
workers, making sure unions don't get recognized, cutting corners in production, as we saw with Boeing,
and generally kind of stripping out as much cost as possible to maximize their profits.
It also means that they pursue other avenues to try and consolidate their market power. So,
for example, you know, getting favorable deals with governments, making deals with airline carriers.
So Boeing had this deal with Southwest, an airline provider, that basically kind of, you know,
allowed it to maintain production and ensure demand was maintained. So you kind of have deal making
that goes on quite a lot within this context. And also, this close relationship with the state. Now, Boeing
was one of the biggest recipients of corporate welfare in the US in 20, I think it was 2018. And that has
continued. So it receives massive subsidies, tax breaks, huge amounts of support from the American
state. It also has a lot of contracts with the US states with different parts of the state, with,
you know, the Pentagon Department of Defense, etc. And so the US government has been very involved in
in the Boeing scandals since they've since they've started in the sense that, you know, the regulator
was really asleep at the wheel during the 737 MAX disasters. Boeing was actually being regulated
by a unit of the Federal Aviation Authority that sat inside Boeing and whose workers were being paid
by Boeing. So it was effectively regulating itself. And it was receiving all this money from the
government even after the 737 MAX disasters during the COVID-19 pandemic. The US states distributed a
huge amount of money to Boeing after all of these scandals had come to light, even after it had been
charged with a criminal conspiracy to defraud the United States, it still got all this money from the
government. And so I think what this shows, you know, this is the context in which the disasters took place,
right? It was a monopolistic market structure in which Boeing was operating, where it had no real
discipline from the market, no accountability from regulators, because regulators were so close to it,
and no democratic accountability from the US state because, you know, Boeing's lobbyists were working
in all different areas of the United States government to get contracts to change legislation,
to change regulation. And all that means is that you have this massive powerful firm that is effectively
insulated from any accountability. It doesn't have accountability from the market because there's not
as much competition, and it doesn't have accountability from the state. And it just means that basically the
senior executives of these really big firms are able to kind of plan who gets what, even though this is
supposed to be a free market economy where nobody can plan anything because the market is supposed to
decide. So that I think in a number of other examples shows this lie that capitalism means free markets. It
doesn't. It means basically massive corporate power, the power of large firms over the rest of society
that isn't constrained by the market, and that isn't really constrained by the power of the state as
well. It's kind of this toxic fusion of public and private power in service of maximizing the wealth and
power of people at the top. So let's talk more about that idea or that misconception that people have
or that capitalists promote that we actually have a free market. I mean, whatever that means, because
for me at least it's always been weird how an actual free market would work without any state
intervention and the state regulation enforcement of contracts and all of that. But anyway, we can
also get into that later. But in what ways are businesses planned? And I think it's very important
for us to address that question here, because since this is a very common misconception, people actually
tend to believe that businesses are not planned just because business owners and other people like that
salespeople. Yeah. So to understand this argument that I have about planning, we need to understand,
as you were saying, what a free market should look like, right? And like, if you pick up an economics
textbook, what are they going to tell you the free market looks like? And the idea is that you have
lots of similar producers all producing the same commodity, let's say in a market for, I don't know,
like cars. So you've got lots of different producers all producing their own cars.
And they are competing with each other on costs and on prices. So that if one firm produces cars less
efficiently than another firm, there are loads of other car firms that produce cars more efficiently
at a lower cost. So no consumers buy the car of this inefficient firm. And the pressures of competition
mean that the inefficient firm goes out of business, and only the efficient firms survive.
And that is supposed to be how a free market economy maximizes efficiency. It's the pressure
of competition means that only the most efficient producers are able to survive,
because the others out-compete the less efficient ones. So anything that kind of gets in the way
of that competitive pressure undermines this kind of free market idea, basically. And what we see in
kind of modern capitalist economies is that it doesn't look like that at all. So we don't have lots and
lots of little firms all competing to produce things. You know, the only context in which that's
really true is if you look at like a local market in your town, there you have little producers competing
to produce things, right? That is like a kind of free market. But if you look at production of the
most important commodities, like cars, for example, like airplanes, whatever, then you have a number of
large and powerful producers that have very close links with governments and which are to a greater or
lesser extent insulated from competition. So, you know, there are barriers to entry, which mean that
new firms struggle to come in. There are regulatory barriers. There are cost pressures. And there are these
kind of these links between firms and states that keep existing firms within the market and mean that
even if you aren't the most efficient firm in your sector, you can often survive anyway because you can
ask the government for a bailout or you can just buy up your competitors. For example, if like a new
competitor threatens you, you can use all your cash to buy that firm and integrate it into your firm.
You have better access to finance because you probably have a very close relationship with
big banks. So the banks will be more likely to lend you money. And all of these things mean that
you're kind of insulated from competition. So you don't have this pressure of the market that is keeping
firms operating at the most efficient level and which is kind of making sure that
competition continues to hold sway over the economy. You lose that. And in its place,
rather than having kind of competition, you have a form of economic planning, basically. Because in
this competitive scenario, nobody can really plan. Like the leaders of all these little firms, they can't
plan, they can't make long term decisions because they don't know what the future of that free market
system is going to look like. They don't know what all of the other actors in that system, they don't
know how they're going to behave. And if they make a decision that goes against the market that kind of
undermines efficiency, for example, then they'll go out of business. Like if a manager makes the wrong
decision, let's say he starts producing cars in a way that's more expensive than his competitors,
then his firm will go under. So he doesn't really have any power within that system. He's very much
constrained by what the market says you should do. Whereas in the economy that we live, because you
have all these barriers around firms that come from politics, that come from finance, that come from
their relationship with other firms, economies of scale, all of these things, it means that the
managers within those firms have a lot of power to plan, even if they make the wrong decision,
and they mess up, like, for example, they did at Boeing, the firm isn't going to collapse,
because it can rely on the fact that it's got friends in the government, it can rely on its size,
it can rely on its relationship with financial institutions, to make sure that that firm stays
alive, even if everything has kind of, even if its managers have made a series of really bad decisions.
And so that idea that the people at the top of the most powerful firms have the power to plan,
kind of undermines this idea that we live in a free market system. And it also,
it really kind of undermines this idea that we live in a true democracy, right? Because firstly,
a huge amount of decision making about the world in which we live takes place within firms. Now,
in a free market scenario, it doesn't really matter, because the market is telling everyone what to do,
they don't have any power. But in the world that we live, these people do have power, they're making
decisions over what innovations are taking place, where investment is going, which country they're
being located in, the wages they're paying workers, all of these questions are being decided by powerful
people at the top of big firms, without any accountability. So they don't have discipline
for the market, and they don't have democratic accountability, because they also use their power
to lobby governments to make sure that those governments do what they say.
So instead, you have really big, powerful firms that don't have market accountability,
don't have democratic accountability, and are instead just planning our world based on their
own interests. You see this in the fossil fuel industry, for example. ExxonMobil is one of the
biggest fossil fuel producers in the world. Scientists at ExxonMobil knew about climate breakdown,
knew about the impact that burning fossil fuels would have as far back as the 1970s.
So instead of spreading the word about that, ExxonMobil took funding out of its climate research team
and used that funding to spread climate denialism, so to say, burning fossil fuels doesn't cause climate
breakdown, and to lobby the US government. Exxon's former CEO eventually got a very senior position
in the US government under Trump. So there was this really close link between Exxon and the US state.
And now, you know, they're still, they were caught, an Exxon lobbyist was caught on camera talking to a
Greenpeace reporter saying, we've won massive results by lobbying various different governments.
They were saying that they were lobbying for a carbon tax on the basis that they knew a carbon tax was
never going to happen. So it was a way of kind of undermining the fight against climate breakdown.
I'm sorry for interrupting you there. But I mean, actually, it's not that we do not have
several different examples of that same sort of thing you're describing there, because,
of course, the biggest ones tend to come from the US. But another example would be how tobacco
companies dealt with what they already knew were the health consequences of smoking cigars, smoking
tobacco, cigarettes, and all of that. And they hid it from the public, right?
Yeah, exactly. And so, you know, that decision was taken by leading figures within the tobacco industry
industry to push smoking. And everyone else has had to deal with the consequences of that decision.
And there's been no accountability. There's been no way to say, you took the wrong decision,
we're holding you to account, right? You know, instead, they were just able to, they made billions
and billions of dollars off basically making people really ill. And it's the same with with climate
breakdown. So basically, this creates this problem, we don't live in a free market economy,
there's not enough democratic accountability. So how do we hold the powerful to account? How do
we start to take control over our economy and over our society?
Yeah, and we're going to get into that question later on in our conversation. But let me just ask
you because this is also a topic that you explore in the book, and I'm personally also very interested in
when it comes to relations between employers and employees between capitalists and labor in a
capitalist system and the history of labor movements. Please correct me if I'm wrong, but it seems very
obvious to me that particularly from the 19th century onwards, if it wasn't for workers organizing
themselves, organizing collectives to strike protest and try to pressure capitalists and governments to
create labor laws to create labor laws to increase minimum wages to ameliorate working conditions to
get more benefits and stuff like that, that would have never happened alone. I mean, at least that's
what it seems to me looking back in history and the common idea that we hear from many capitalists, from
many people who economically fall more on the liberal side of the spectrum, is that, oh, if the market was just
more, it was just freer, if we were able to do things more freely, then it would just so happen eventually
that workers would get higher wages, more benefits, and all of that kind of good stuff. But is that really true?
Yeah, so this idea, again, relies on the world view that liberals have, which rests on this idea of
the free market. So it doesn't just apply to consumers, it also applies to workers. You know,
the idea is if one firm offers lower wages, bad conditions, and another firm offers higher wages and
better conditions, workers will leave this firm and go to that firm. Now, that kind of doesn't really
account for a lot of different factors, like, you know, whether or not this firm is hiring enough
workers, whether or not there's enough jobs to go around, whether or not, you know, what kind of
employment contracts these workers are under, whether or not they're able to move around the
country, like around the world, all these different things, because workers have far less power. But,
you know, this is allegedly how free markets are supposed to work. The issue with the kind of economy that we
live in is that we have not only monopoly power, but also what's called monopsony power. And that means
when a firm is not just the largest seller in the market, but it's by far the largest buyer in a
market, including a buyer of labor. So when one firm dominates the labor market in a particular area,
it basically has the power to just set wages to just set conditions. Amazon, for example, in certain
areas of the country employs, you know, nearly 50% of workers in a particular small area. So all the
working conditions will be set by Amazon in that area, because basically it has such power over the
labor market. And that really undermines this idea that, you know, you have this free market for labor
where workers can kind of move around. But the kind of deeper and more fundamental issue here
is the question of the balance of power within society. So I don't have this free market liberal
interpretation of the capitalist economy. I have a Marxist interpretation of the capitalist economy,
which means that rather than seeing it as a system that's based on free markets and exchange and that
sort of thing, I argue that capitalism is a system based on the class division of society. So Marx
starts his argument by like looking at Adam Smith, David Ricardo, all of these theorists who said,
capitalism is great because it creates, you know, it's based on this free market system, which,
you know, maximizes efficiency, you know, creates wealth for everyone, creates progress, etc.
Because they were all studying exchange, they were studying what takes place within markets. Marx said,
it's not enough to study what takes place within the market, you have to look at how the commodities
that are being sold in that market were produced. So you have to go back into the firm and look at
what goes on within the firm, which is not something that the early political economists did. And so
when Marx looked at the firm, he discovered this division of labor. So there's this division between
owners who own all of the means of production and workers who are forced to sell their labor power
for a wage, and then a kind of strata of managers on top who are paid by the owners to kind of manage
the workforce. And this is like, this is the class division of society, it's the social division of
labor. And it creates, it is based on an inherent balance imbalance of power. So there are a small
number of people who for whatever reason, own everything, they own the land, their resources,
they have, you know, political power, and they are able to use that to, you know, create businesses
that other people are then forced to work in. Now workers don't have that power, they have to
sell their labor power in order to survive, right? Because you know, we don't have services in
agriculture anymore, whatever. So they're forced to work for these people who own the means of production.
And that imbalance is the basis of a capitalist society, it's what makes capitalism work. If you
didn't have some people who had all the power, and other people who could be forced to work,
then you wouldn't get commodity production, and you wouldn't get exchange. You know, that system
would not have emerged in the same way. So this imbalance of power sits at the heart of capitalist
societies, it's the source of exploitation. So capitalists' profits come from the fact that they
don't pay workers the same as the value of the goods that they produce, that's exploitation,
and the kind of oppression of workers. So you know, keeping them in their place, dividing workers
into different kind of categories, dividing them geographically, so that some workers in very poor
countries can be paid very little, whereas other workers can be paid slightly more. You know,
all of these strategies are designed to kind of exploit and oppress workers, keep them down,
stop them from organizing, to like, kind of even out that imbalance of power. This imbalance of power
basically is like the foundation of capitalism. It has to be that some people are in control,
and some people are oppressed and exploited. So when workers start to come together and organize in trade
unions, you know, organized politically and political parties, as they do in the kind of
late 1800s and early 1900s, that becomes a real threat to the development of capitalism. Because
suddenly, you know, you have workers who can say, we want higher wages, we want better conditions,
or we're going on strike, and you won't have any labor to produce the commodities that you're selling for
a profit. So when this starts to happen, this is, you know, around the time that Marx is writing as
well, he realizes that this, you know, organizing, worker organizing is this massive threat to the
social division of labor. Because when workers have real power, they're able to really kind of make
demands of capitalists. And ultimately, he argues, if they get enough power, workers will be able to
take control of the production process, and just do it themselves, right? And this is what I look at
in the book is this question of, do workers need to be managed and controlled? Because it's like a key
part of capitalist ideology to say that workers are stupid, kind of irrational, like lazy, they need someone
telling them what to do. And actually, there's lots of examples of workers kind of organizing
themselves and managing themselves, and doing so better than the people who have been managing them
before. So this idea that you can move from this society based on just a really sharp imbalance of
power. So some people up here with all the power, all the wealth, some people down here forced to just do
as they're told, through to a democratic, egalitarian system, where power is shared, where decisions are
made collectively, where production is undertaken by workers working together. That's the kind of
socialist argument, really. And it all rests on workers being able to organize themselves and take that
power back from the people at the top of the economy. So before we get into how workers have
and can organize themselves, let me just ask you about this, because it's another thing that really
bothers me a lot when I hear it on the news. And then when I hear politicians saying that
whenever there is an economic crisis, and in 2008, for example, we heard a lot of that, we constantly hear
politicians and business owners and people like that saying on the media, for example,
how common citizens should be more mindful about the way they spend their money, how public spending
should be cut, how we are spending too much on state subsidies, state support for the most vulnerable
people and stuff like that. But doesn't that happen for businesses and companies? I mean, don't they
get public subsidies, state support, and sometimes they also get bailouts, as happened a lot in the 2008
financial crisis, actually? So, I mean, isn't that a thing?
Yes, it's a really big thing. And it really undermines the argument that is made by free
market neoliberal economists and policymakers. They say that they want free markets and a small state,
right? So they want less state spending, and they want greater competition, all of these sorts of things,
things. Because that is supposed to be a good thing, that maximizes efficiency, it makes everyone
more wealthy, it spurs innovation, etc. They have these great arguments for free market systems that
also rely on this idea that free markets make us all free, because we're free to choose what we consume,
where we work, etc. Now, there's problems with that argument in itself. But the biggest issue is that
that that is not how capitalism works. It's like a veil. That argument is designed to obscure
what's really happening. So neoliberals will use this argument, we want free markets,
but when they get power, they will undermine the free market when it comes to subsidies for big
businesses, bailouts for banks, bailouts for large corporations, tax cuts for large corporations.
And they'll, you know, undermine regulation for big businesses, they'll create a very
uncompetitive market, almost corrupt environment, a lot of the time, for big businesses that often fund
these these politicians, right? So the free market doesn't apply to those at the top. But they'll impose
very, very rigidly, these free market principles on those at the bottom. So they will cut state spending on
health care and social security, on public services, they'll often raise taxes on the less well off,
they will, you know, undermine union organizing, they'll impose anti union legislation, all of this
stuff aimed at imposing very, very rigorous competition on workers and removing state support for
workers, whilst undermining competition and increasing state support for big businesses and
financial institutions. Now, from a free market perspective, that doesn't really make sense.
It's like incomprehensible. It means like competition for some people and no competition for others.
But when you understand the economy from a Marxist perspective, which is about who has the power,
right? And it's actually capitalists and bosses, you have a huge amount of power over our society
and over our politics, it makes a lot more sense. Because what the capitalists have done is effectively
manipulated the government to make sure that they get the support, and that workers don't get any
support. Now, this is kind of always how things have worked, right? Like, you know, this is how things
have worked from since the origins of capitalism. The issue is that today, we have this ideology that
says, you know, the government is just promoting efficiency, it's just enforcing competition.
It's just, you know, making sure that we don't spend too much money, right? So people believe that the
government is acting in everyone's interests, when actually, it's generally acting in the interests of
those at the very top. So let me ask you now, because the things we've been talking about here are
mostly about what happens, mostly within societies within countries. But in the book, you also talk a
little bit about how countries from the global north continue to exploit in different ways countries from
the global south and their respective populations, even after the supposed end of colonialism. So
could you tell us a little bit about that? Yeah, so empire and imperialism is a really important part
of how this system works. And the kind of starting point for that is the fact that, like, large,
powerful businesses, and the people who own them are concentrated in rich countries, whereas the
workforce now is concentrated in poor countries. So you'll often hear people saying Marxist analysis
doesn't apply anymore, because most people in say, England or Europe or the US are middle class. So
they're not workers, they're not bosses, they're kind of middle class managers, or, you know, professional
managerial workers, right? What this argument misses, is that this class divide still works,
it just works at the level of the global economy. So when you look at the global economy, it's very,
very divided between a very, very tiny class of people who own everything, who own the businesses,
who own the land, who kind of, you know, distribute all the money, then a slightly larger, but still very
small class of professional managers, accountants, lawyers, you know, financiers, you know, a managerial
class, who manage the production process on behalf of those people at the very top, and then a massive
class of workers. And those workers are generally located in very, very poor countries, and are still
paid very low wages, still face really horrendous conditions when they're producing things. And, you
know, are not well off and don't have very many prospects. So this divide between workers and bosses,
it exists within all societies, but it's clearest at the level of the global economy. And the way that
this is enforced is basically rich companies are located in the US, the UK, you know, all around
Europe, they list on stock markets in those countries, they lobby the governments of those
countries, they rely on banks that are located in those countries. So owners are concentrated in the
global north, whereas workers are concentrated in the global south. And to an extent, those powerful
companies have like bought off the governments in the rich countries, and concentrate slightly higher
paying jobs in those countries, so that workers don't rebel. So in the US, the UK, Europe, there are
lots of kind of managerial jobs that are all about managing a global production process that pays slightly
better, and mean that those relatively more powerful workers who live in democracies, who
you know, have like a significant amount of power of production process, they're paid slightly better
wages. Whereas the people who are doing the most kind of dirty, horrible, low paid jobs are less
powerful, have lower wages, but also are under authoritarian regimes, they don't have many rights,
they kind of struggle to organize, because they're often kind of, you know, beaten down and
prevented from doing that. And they're not able to move. So this is the thing, there's a big wage gap
between the global north and the global south. But because borders are so rigidly police, poor workers
can't move to rich countries, but businesses can move everywhere. So rich, powerful businesses can produce
all their commodities with low paid workers in the global south, then sell those commodities to relatively
better paid consumers in the global north. But the two can't move around, this capitalist can move around
everywhere, then they can offshore the profits to a tax haven somewhere, so they don't have to pay any tax.
And generally kind of, you know, make use of the fact that capital can move all around the world,
but labour is stuck. That's the kind of foundation of imperialism. It's like the global division of
labour, basically, the international division of labour, and the way it's enforced. But what I look
at in the book is how this system is policed and enforced by international institutions and by very
powerful governments. And this is, you know, really interesting, because we think that we have this kind
of liberal rules based international system that's governed by international law, that's about kind
of promoting the free market and all that sort of stuff, when actually, we have a highly unequal global
economy, in which international institutions are used to kind of beat down poor countries and enrich
powerful countries. And an example of this I have is the case of a vulture fund that bought up the debt
of the government of Zambia in the like, just after the financial crisis. So the Zambian economy was really
struggling, the revenues for the government were falling, and it was obvious that Zambia was going to
default on its debts. So this Irish fund bought Zambian debt, knowing that the country was going
to default. And when the country did default, they sued the Zambian government. So basically took money
out of the one of the poorest countries in the world to pay these powerful investors. And this is
a tool that's used to keep poor countries poor and enrich countries, enrich rich countries at their expense.
And there's loads of other examples I look at in the book that show that the international,
you know, the international rules-based system is all about maintaining that divide between the rich
world and the poor world. So just before we get into the last part of our conversation here today,
and I ask you in what ways can people fight back against, or perhaps try to change the system in the
ways that are possible that people can do it. And perhaps you can also give us a few examples of how
people can collectively organize and stuff like that. What do you mean by freedom in the book? Also,
to contrast it with what capitalists usually mean by freedom.
Yeah. So I think, you know, those on the right have this pretty individualistic view of freedom.
And the idea is that you're free if there's not very much kind of standing in your way.
Um, so, uh, you know, if you are able to work wherever you want, if you're able to consume
what you want to buy the products that you want, um, to kind of have, you know, free to free speech
and all those sorts of things. Um, and that individualistic view of freedom has some merit,
but it's very limited because it allows you to make decisions within your life, but it doesn't
allow you to have an influence over the structure of society. So, you know, you can choose what
products you consume, but you can't choose, you know, what products are on the shelves or how much
carbon has been used in producing those products, the working conditions of the people who have been
producing those products. You're faced with a bunch of different products made by all these huge
multinational corporations that have little democratic or competitive accountability, and you're
just presented with an option. And actually today, most of the products that you see on your shelves,
when you go to the supermarket, say they're all produced by like five different companies.
So you don't even have that kind of very limited view of freedom, but that's like the view of freedom
that they have on the right. And that is supposed to underpin this idea that we need a free market economy.
I argue that the kind of the Marxist view of freedom is much more expansive than that. So it's like,
yes, you have freedom and autonomy within your life. You are free to make decisions,
but you also have freedom over the structure of society. So you have the freedom as a worker to
shape the decisions that are being made by the firm within which you work. So, you know,
you have democratic control over the economy, basically. As a citizen, you have real democracy.
So not the kind of like semi-democracy that we have here, where you have, you know, you vote once
every four or five years. But you don't get to choose the candidates. You don't get to choose
the policy agenda. You struggle actually to kind of hold politicians to account once they get into
office. And you actually aren't able to influence democratically large areas of what goes on in the
state. So there's real democracy politically. And there's also crucially democratic control over
where you live and over your community. So, you know, you have control over how your local municipal
budget is spent. You have control over kind of community institutions. You're like engaged in
what goes on in your place, basically. And all of these things require just a massive transformation
of the way society works. It requires decentralization of power. It requires a transformation of political
parties, a democratization of the state, and crucially, a democratization of the economy.
So giving people power and ownership over the economy, basically. And what all this is supposed
to do is shift the balance of power in favor of workers. So take power away from capitalists and
give it to workers. And the only way to do that, because they're not going to give power away willingly,
the government isn't going to take power away from them because politicians are in the pockets of big
corporations. Workers have to organize. Citizens have to organize. Everyone has to organize,
you know, get into a union, organize to like, you know, in your community, even get out onto the
streets and, you know, take part in protest movements. There are lots of different ways that
you can organize, but basically people have to come together to demonstrate their power. And,
you know, what I like to say is that we should be living in an economy, in a country where politicians
are as scared of the people voting for them as they are of the people who are giving them money.
So tell us then about ways that you think people can organize themselves in this context to try to
take back control over planning and democratize certain institutions and perhaps even businesses
themselves. Yeah. So the first and most important thing is to recognize that we live in highly
individualistic societies. Now, this is the big difference since Marx was writing. You know,
in Marx's time, people were still kind of quite community oriented. They were kind of other oriented.
You had to cooperate in order to survive with other people within your community, with other people
within your workplace. So it was kind of easier to convince people, join a union, you know, join a
political movement, like really kind of take part in what's going on. The biggest triumph of neoliberalism
has been to convince us that we are these isolated atomized individuals who can't trust each other,
can't work with each other. We have to be governed by someone else because we can't cooperate.
And what this does is it, it kind of breaks us up and it makes us less powerful and it makes us feel
powerless. Because if you think about it, if you're part of a big union, right? And there's like loads of
you, it's your whole workplace and you're organizing for higher wages, telling your boss, we're going to
go on strike if you don't give us higher wages. You feel powerful. You feel part of something,
right? If you're just one worker and you aren't getting paid enough, but you go to your boss and
you ask your boss as an individual for a raise, they're probably going to say no. And then you're
going to blame yourself. You're going to feel powerless. You're going to be like, I don't have
any control over my life. I don't have control over, you know, the conditions in which I work.
And so that like powerlessness is a really important part of what keeps our system functioning.
It's basically people think I can only rely on myself. I can't organize other people. I can't
trust other people. So it's all up to me. And it's just on me to kind of compete and to struggle
and to push other people out of the way in order to get what I want. Right. And that undermines our
capacity to hold those at the top to power because they're not going to listen to any one person. It has
to be a kind of collective movement and the collective process of kind of organizing and of
struggle. And like individualism has really undermined our capacity to do that, or even to imagine that
you could be part of a political movement that would change the conditions of your existence. And like
it's been, that's been pushed in a number of different ways. So Margaret Thatcher in the UK famously said,
there's no such thing as society. There was a big effort to break up the unions. So to use the police,
use force basically, and the law to like pull people apart. There's been a lot of centralization
in big cities. So communities have been kind of broken up. And all of this, along with kind of mass
consumerism has really promoted this ideology of individualism. So kind of pushing back against that
and encouraging people to trust each other and to work together and to organize is like the number
one priority for anyone who wants to see social change happen. And, you know, there are lots of
examples as to how that can be done. And I look at a load of those examples in the book. So one of my
favorite examples comes from the UK, and it's the Lucas plan. So there was this firm called Lucas
Aerospace that was kind of potentially going to go under. It wasn't, you know, competing internationally.
So the workers went to the government and said, we need, we need you to nationalize this firm
so we can keep our jobs. But the government said, we can't do that. But why don't you try and put
together, you know, a plan to save the firm. So these unionists all basically like worked together
and they consulted all of the workers within this firm and said, how can we save the firm? What can
we start producing that will make us competitive again? And they came up with this plan with the
Lucas plan, which was designed entirely by workers. All of the workers within this firm said, we're going
to stop producing weapons, which is primarily what they were producing. And we're going to start
producing healthcare equipment, environmental equipment, like wind turbines, just socially
useful products that we can feel proud to make. And they then designed a whole business plan about
showing how they would transition from the current model to the new model. You know, basically saying
that, you know, the workers would be with the owners of the firm, they would run the firm, and just kind
of designing a whole new system for operating this giant company. And what that shows, I think,
is it really undermines this idea that people need to be managed and controlled. And that's really the
foundation of a capitalist economy. It's the idea that we can't trust each other, we can't work together to
achieve our collective goals. We have to give our power to someone else so that they can tell us what to do.
It's also that very common idea that we hear many times that there's supposedly an elite of people who
are highly intelligent, highly capable. We just need to give them all the money because they will make
all the right decisions and they will grow the economy and everything will be better forever. I mean,
something like that. Yeah, exactly. And that's actually what a lot of kind of neoliberal and
free market economists believe. You know, I start the book by looking at this quote from Hayek, and he
says, freedom of thought will only ever be of relevance to a small minority. Basically, most people are too
stupid to take advantage of the freedoms on offer to them. Whereas, you know, the kind of socialist view
is that everybody has intelligence, the capacity to control their lives, to work with other people,
everybody has skills, you know, everybody has these unique capabilities that just need to be kind of
encouraged and developed so that everyone can flourish and that we can all work together. And the best way to
do that is for us to come together and teach each other, right? So a lot of like the workers movement
in the UK and like around the world comes from groups of workers who would come together and study
capital. They would study the Communist Manifesto. Often this was, you know, they would learn how to read
in this context, right? It was through cooperatives of workers that would teach each other and would learn
from each other and would work together to develop themselves and to strengthen the group. And that,
I think, is something that has definitely been lost as we've moved to this individualistic society.
And if we're ever going to get out of the mess that we're in today, we have to move away from
individualism. You know, there's not going to be a powerful workers movement or a powerful social
movement capable of resisting the power of capital if we all are just focused solely on ourselves.
We need to have this open collective consciousness that is going to kind of drive forward progressive
social change. Yeah, it's actually very interesting that at a certain point you mentioned there that
of course workers have their own expertise and skills because, I mean, isn't that obvious?
Isn't it obvious that in different industries the workers are the ones who actually have the expertise
in the specific kind of area they've been trained on and they work on? Because many times the higher-ups
are just there to try to extract money from labor and they know nothing about how the products are created
and anything about, I don't know, engineering, computer science or whatever it might be, right?
Yeah, exactly. I know someone who's a management consultant and they say, you know, whenever they're
hired to go into a firm, the first thing that the consultants do is go and ask the workers how is the
product made? What goes on around here? They don't, you know, waste their time asking managers what's going on.
They try and, like, you know, they try and kind of please the managers, so they'll spend a lot of
time talking to the managers being like, this is what we're going to do, but they get their information
from the workers because those are the ones who are actually kind of producing the commodities and
understand how these firms work. And, you know, there's loads of examples that I look at in the
book of, like, workers who have taken control of the firms that they work in all throughout history and
have done so to great effect. There's lots of examples of worker cooperatives and not also just
in commodities production. Also, when it comes to house building, for example, we have this idea of
community land trusts where a community comes together, buys a parcel of land, builds housing on
that, and then the houses are all owned by the community and support all the people living in that
community. And all of this, I think, you know, the biggest, one of the biggest things that underlies
individualism is this idea that we're all kind of competitive individuals who are just desperate
to push each other out of the way to get to the top, right? And if you look at human psychology and
anthropology and sociology, that isn't how human societies work. You know, we have learned to
cooperate. We're one of the most cooperative species alive. We compete between groups, so you see that quite
a lot. You know, there is competition between groups. But as groups, we have learned how to cooperate
and to work together to survive. That's one of the, like, distinguishing features of humanity. But those
cooperative impulses have basically been crushed by a system that realises that if we cooperate,
then we'll have power, and that will undermine the power of those at the top. So individualism is this
really important feature of most capitalist economies. And it's particularly important in the
wealthy capitalist economies, because those are the places that workers have potentially a lot of power.
But, you know, if, like, the workers in America, say, were able to form powerful unions, powerful
political parties, and take, you know, put into government a political party that was on the side of
organised labour, that would transform the global economy, not just the American economy. So it's very, very
important to the development of capitalism that they don't do that, that they're divided by, you know, race, by
geography, by this ideology that tells them that they can't cooperate with one another. Because if that
wasn't the case, capitalism basically wouldn't survive. So let me ask you one last question, then.
Looking at the current state of global capitalism, and particularly, for example, something that I'm very
worried about, the rise of the far right across many countries in Europe, the US as well, or at least some
of the far right discourse that we hear now very commonly. Are you optimistic about, I mean, people
organising themselves to really try to take over the system? Because it's, I mean, I would like to be a
little bit more optimistic myself, but over and over historically, and we're seeing it again right now,
people seem to fall very easily for this sort of extreme right wing sort of narratives about, oh,
it's immigrants fault, it's the fault of poor people, they're taking too much from the states,
like that. And they never, ever, ever point the finger at the ultra rich, the company owners and stuff
like that. So, I mean, are you optimistic or not? And particularly also, let me just add one last
thing, the current levels of economic inequality that are rising, I mean, that also worries me. So
what are your thoughts on that? Yeah, so I wouldn't say I'm optimistic that if things continue, we'll end up
in a good place. But I am optimistic that we can change things. I believe if we start now, we can change
the economies and the societies in which we live. And I think the reason that we're seeing the rise of the
far right at the moment, is that we're in this unique historical situation, where the vast majority of
people recognize that capitalism isn't working, that democracy isn't working in a lot of places,
because it's been undermined by extreme inequality. And so they know that this system is broken, that
they're living in, but they feel powerless to do anything about it. So, you know, there's lots of
people who feel very angry about inequality, about the fact that they're not paid enough to feed their
family. They are, you know, angry about that they don't have housing, they're anxious about the state
of the world and everything that's going on. But they don't have a sense of their collective power
to change anything, because everything is as you as an individual. So you as an individual feel very
powerless, because you're not paid enough money, you can't afford your house, you know, the world is
collapsing around you. And you don't think, oh, I need to organize with other people to change things.
You think, you look at other individuals, and you think, oh, that person has more money than me,
that person has, you know, more money than me, or whatever. And you think, oh, I'm going to blame
that, you know, those, those individuals over there, or that group over there, for taking something away
from me, right? Because you don't think the people at the top of society need to be held to account.
That's not because you don't think that, like, taxes should be higher, or there should be more public
services, or that, you know, billionaires should, you know, should be constrained and kind of controlled
a bit more. You do think those things, but you don't feel powerful enough to take on those at
the top of the economy. You know, you look at politicians, and you think they're all the same,
they never listen. You look at kind of the owners of big businesses, and you just think, well,
they're operating on a different planet from me, there's nothing I could do to kind of control
them, or control businesses. So you just think, how can I control my little world? And all you see
in that little world is you, and then a few other people who are kind of poorer than you,
but you think, oh, they're taking something away from me, right? So migrants, or people who are on
social security, or whatever. You don't feel powerful enough to actually change the structure of the
system. You just think, I just want to, you know, move some pieces around in the very unfair world
that I inhabit. So if we want to tackle the rise of the far right, we need to confront this sense of
powerlessness that makes people feel angry, and angry enough to say it's migrants, it's benefits
scroungers, and also angry enough to elect politicians who say, I'm going to drain the swamp. I know that the
system isn't working, so I'm just going to burn it to the ground. It's quite like a nihilistic,
conspiratorial ideology that people on the far right often have, which is that they know that
the system isn't working. They know it's really unfair, but instead of trying to organize together,
they project their political agency onto someone else, like a Donald Trump or Marine Le Pen. And that
person says, I'm going to save you. I'm going to kind of tear down the whole system and build
something better in its place. So it's, again, a very individualistic thing. It's like that person
over there is going to rescue me. And, you know, I think the only way to push back against that is
to give people, to respond to that sense of powerlessness by giving people a sense of belonging
in social movements. And that could be any different kind of social movement. So it can be like
organizing in your workplace as part of a union. It can be organizing in your community.
It can be, you know, getting involved in a protest movement, in the environmental movement,
in attendance union, whatever. As soon as you start pulling people out of this individual
box mindset and start encouraging them to see much more openly the system in which they live
by organizing with other people, by realizing that they're not alone, that when they work with other
people, they have power. You start to chip away at that individualism and you start to encourage people
to think, well, actually, if I can, let's say, get involved in this campaign to save my local
library, why can't I get involved in a wider political campaign to change the structure of
the society in which I live? So that's why I think it's so, so, so important to start attacking
individualism by getting people involved in almost any kind of collective organizing to shift their
consciousness. Great. So, Grace, let's perhaps wrap up the interview here. Let's end on that
positive note. And the book is, again, Vulture Capitalism, Corporate Crimes, Backdoor Bailouts,
and the Death of Freedom. I'm, of course, leaving a link to it in the description of the interview.
And would you like to tell people where they can find you on the internet?
Yeah, so you can find me on Twitter, X, at Grace Blakely, on Instagram, at Grace Blakely,
and on TikTok, at Grace Blakely Zero. Great. So, Grace, thank you so much again for doing this.
It's been a really fun conversation. Yeah, thank you so much for having me. It's been great. Thanks,
Ricardo. Hi, guys. Thank you for watching this interview until the end. If you liked it,
please share it, leave a like, and hit the subscription button. This show is brought to you by
Enlites. Learning and Development Done Differently. Check their website at Enlites.com. And also,
please consider supporting the show on Patreon or PayPal. I would also like to give a huge thank you
to my main patrons and PayPal supporters. Per Ergo Larsson, Jerry Mullerens, Fredrik Sunda,
Bernardo Seixas, Olaf Alex, Adam Kessel, Matthew Whittingbird, Arno Wolf, Tim Hollis, Eric Alenio,
John Connors, Philip Forrest Connelly, then Demetri, Robert Windega, Ruinassio, Zup, Mark Neves,
Colin Holbrook, Philip Gavanagh, Mikkel Stormir, Samuel Andr, Francis Ford,
Tiago Nunes, Fergur Cousin, Hall Herzog, Nunn, Machado, Jonathan Leibbrandt,
John Linares, Tentante, Samuel Correa, Eric Heinz, Mark Smith, John Leire, Tom Hamel,
Sardis France, David Sloan Wilson, Yasiel Ades Arauj, Romain Roach, Diego Londono Correa,
Yannick Puntara, Dana Rosman, Charlotte Bliss, Nicole Barbaro, Adam Hunt,
Pavel Stasevski, Nellek Bakka, Madison, Gary G. Allman, Sam Afzal, Adrian Jaeger, Paul Tolentino,
John Barbosa, Julian Price, Edward Hall, Eden Bronner, Douglas Fry,
Franca Bortolotti, Gabriel Ponce-Cortez, Ursula Litsky, Scott, Zachary Fish, Tim Duffy,
Sonny Smith, John Weisman, Daniel Friedman, William Buckner, Paul George Arnault,
Luke Lovaki, George Ostefonos, Chris Williamson, Peter Wolosin, David Williams,
Diogo Costa, Anton Eriksson, Charles de Morey, Alex Shaw, Maury Martinez, Coralie Chevalier,
Bangalore Atheists, Larry D. Lee Jr., Old Erringbone, Steri, Michael Bailey, Dan Sperber,
Robert Grassis, Igor N., Jeff McMahon, Jake Zuhl, Barnabas Radix, Mark Campbell, Thomas Dovner,
Luke Nissen, Chris Storek, Kimberly Johnson, Benjamin Galbert, Jessica Novickel,
Linda Brandon, Nicholas Carlson, Ismael Bensleyman, George Eccoriatis, Valentin Steinman,
Per Crowley, Kate Van Goghler, Alexander Hubbard, Liam Dunaway, B.R. Masoud Ali Mohamadi,
Perpendicular, Jonas Ertner, Ursula Goodenough, Gregory Hastings, David Pinshoff, Sean Nelson,
Mike Lavigne, and Jos Necht. A special thanks to my producers, Isar Webb, Jim, Frank,
Lucas Tafiniak, Tom Vanegden, Bernardi Gnick, Curtis Dixon, Benedict Muller, Thomas Trumbull,
Catherine and Patrick Tobin, John Carlo Montenegro, Alny Cortese, and Nick Golden,
and to my executive producers, Matthew Lavender, Sergio Quadrian, Bogdan Canivetz, and Rosie.
Thank you for all.
