Hey everyone, welcome back to the Asset Horizon podcast.
I will keep today's intro quick.
If you're listening on the weekend of January 18th or 19th, on Monday at 11am, for those
people who get up early in the morning on a weekdays, maybe have that weekday off, we're
going to do something called libidinal lunch in the Discord server called the Schizoanalysis
Project.
And we're going to have an informal discussion of themes from Chapter 1 of Anti-Oedipus, including
desiring production, the body without organs, and so forth.
I have a link to the Schizoanalysis Project in the show notes, and please go ahead and
click that to join, and as you do so, become a member of our Patreon, where you can then
join the Anti-Oedipus Files.
Today we have a fantastic guest, someone who many of you already know, and that is Jason
Babak Mohageg, to talk about his new short book, Evil, A Study of Lost Techniques.
Let's hop in.
Welcome to Acid Horizon, the evil podcast.
For millennia, philosophers pondered the problem of evil, probing the paradoxes looming behind
the notion of a negativity infusing every corner of the cosmos.
And despite any of their achievements, or perhaps even because of some of them in some cases,
the image of evil persists, or should I say, it thrives in our world, enjoying an apocalyptic
tenure in our predominantly secular age.
But rather than probing the essence of evil ontologically today, our focus turns to a
different research.
The lost techniques of evil.
Its organization as a series of principles, its diagrammatic coordinates, its archival aspect,
and its correspondence with clandestine geographies.
With us today, we have the inimitable Jason Babak Mohageg, who has returned to our podcast
to guide us on another descent into the underworld with a glimpse of his newest piece of writing,
Evil, A Study of Lost Techniques.
Forthcoming from Scarlet Press, Jason is also the author of Omnicide One and its companion,
Omnicide Two, out on Urbanomic Press, among many other fantastic books we have discussed
in the past.
Jason, it's a pleasure to have you back on the podcast.
We have been craving a dose of your magic for more than a minute.
Be careful what you wish for, but thank you very much.
I'm honored to be among good friends again.
Well, for this particular podcast, I made a certain promise to myself coming to this
episode that I would try to avoid bringing up any philosophers or any named prior knowledge
coming to this text on evil, because one of the things that I think your work intimates
to me is its own demand for a kind of innocence or vulnerability, but also that the tools that
have been imparted to me by most of the philosophy that I focused on throughout my life is in some
ways inadequate with respect to the unadulterated encounter with the kind of intensities that
you try to evoke in your books.
And that's something that I really appreciate about your writing.
But part of the reason that I want to suspend my philosophical predilections is that, well,
sometimes philosophy itself is evil and may even be included among or seen as an inheritor of some
of the evil techniques that we may discuss today, which I think brings me to my first question.
What compelled you to write a book on the techniques of evil?
And given that we're a philosophy podcast, maybe you could comment about how this work
differs from the metaphysical approaches familiar to various figures in schools in the history
of philosophy that has taken evil as one of the objects of its study.
Absolutely.
So the first thing, if you're looking at techniques, I always like to elevate the acute specificity
of a concept.
If you put evil before a space, all of a sudden it transforms the space, it casts a kind of
enigmatic shadow that makes that space operate distinctly.
So, I mean, for instance, the evil of the garden, the evil of the mountain, the evil of the desert,
they're going to be wildly different things phenomenologically, sensorially, narratively that emerge just from
that coupling of the term evil with a particular spatial zone.
If you did that with an object, and you imagine the evil of the box, the evil of a diamond, the evil of sort of a blade,
you know, and all of that, which you see in mythologies and storytelling throughout history,
all of a sudden you transfuse it with different potentials and intensities.
So it's almost, it makes it impossible then if you take that approach to speak of evil in some
all-encompassing definition, which has been what philosophy and religion have attempted to do,
you know, throughout history.
Evil is X.
Well, the evil of the experience of the ocean in Moby Dick, for instance, you know what I mean?
The possibility of the shipwreck, of drowning, of being devoured alive by the white whale,
is not the same as the evil of someone, for instance, Michelle Serre talks about when he had to escape a ship that
was on fire and half his body was in flames as he was trying to go through a window and he got stuck
in one of the sort of the panes of glass and half his body is in frozen temperatures outside
and half is in sort of this inferno.
And he describes it as unbearable and incomprehensible to have sort of the equator of his own physicality split
into two extremes and all that.
So these are wildly different sort of possibilities.
And then there's the evils of the figures, you know what I mean?
Widows have been tied to evil throughout history.
Albinos have been tied to evil throughout history.
Kings, there are kings and queens who are evil.
There are rebels who become evil.
So there's all different typologies here.
So just to say that right there already puts you in a matrix and a labyrinth that is so intricate
and full of singularities sort of in a sense that you have to treat each one of them like
its own kind of vital little music box that plays on its own, never mind genres.
So if you want to know, actually, I never gave the origin story to my interest on evil.
It actually came through the prism of lullabies.
I was looking at the genre of lullabies and I adore lullabies because it's one of the,
a lot of people don't know this, it's one of the most ancient genres of writing.
So there's an ancient Babylonian lullaby that's from 2000 and something BC where it says,
and who has angered the house God?
The child has angered the house God.
Come before me, says the house God.
It's like this very threatening, ominous refrain that's warning of sort of offense and violation
of dark forces and all that and the possibility of wrath and punishment.
It opens up all kinds of things.
You have to wonder why the first civilizations on earth would, one, have such sort of evil
sort of tales, but then two, why they would mask them in these sing-song, seemingly innocent
children's genres.
And so that intrigued me.
And the reason is I honestly think, I think lullabies are brutally honest.
I think they're ruthlessly clear about our material condition in the world in the way
that political ideologies, social discourses, religions are not.
So lullabies are about pretending.
Pretending to me is not metaphysical or transcendent the way that religion or politics or society
are.
If you watch children play, and I have a good chance of doing that all the time, I have
a two-year-old daughter.
So I watch her play all the time.
I play with her all the time.
Play is about engagement with material conditions.
You play in a space, whether it's the forest or the pool or the room, you know, or the corner
even, and you play with the things that you have at your disposal.
Just like magic in its origins is actually, sorcery in its origins, is all based on material
combinations.
You look at witches' brews.
You look at cauldrons.
They're not otherworldly substances.
They're eyes of creatures.
They're the skins of other creatures.
They're certain herbs and toxic sort of botany properties.
So for me, the lullaby actually confronts our mortality.
It confronts death in the way that politics and religion differ and disavow by providing
sense of progress or destiny or a prime mover to the universe or an afterlife.
You know, the wonderful thing about children's games and lullabies is that they end and they
know they're going to end.
The whole point is that they end soon because it allows the possibility of return, but also
of a new game.
And that's something that societies have never gotten right.
You know, despite the bloodiest revolutions, civilizations have not learned that lesson,
which is that regimes should consider themselves games or forms of pretend.
And if they did, then at least all of the ceremonies and rituals and spectacles we see in society
would have a little bit of a dose of creativity and lightness to them rather than the totalitarian
severity that we see.
So I started looking, just again, to make the point, I started looking at the genre of lullabies,
started going way back in time to seeing how the ancients structured them and, you know,
seeing sort of their really amazing ones, by the way.
One figure in a lullaby from, this is a Sumerian one, wears your face and then goes around doing
terrible things in your name and then ransoms your face back to you, but only if you do something
terrible.
So they implicate you, talking about evil, they implicate you sort of by necessity in this,
they corner you.
That's why it's a book about techniques.
That's a technique of manipulation, right?
It places you with no options but to surrender to the opponent's strategy.
And by the way, just to say quickly, that's the book of Job too.
That's what the devil does to God in the gamble.
Says, hey, give me a shot at your creation over here and I'll mess with him, I'll disturb
his life.
And God falls for the bet.
Doesn't matter if God wins the bet or not.
But the fact that he's wagering with evil means he's doused and drenched in evil, playing
the game.
But anyway, I'm sorry, you were going to say something.
No, I just wanted to say like, there's also something about, especially in the cadence
of contemporary lullabies.
We don't have to go back to 4,000 years necessarily, but the function of the lullaby is a very placid
command.
You know, and I think I love what you write where when you ask, why is a lullaby evil?
And you don't, you decide on the, you forego on the entire style of this book just for one
moment and you just go, because it is manipulative.
And I think that the calming cradle of melodies, not just as a game of soothsaying, but of directing
and of creating out of nascency a vessel for the continuation of evil is really a remarkable
anecdote, but I also wanted to, to, to talk to you about what the relationship in, in this
lullaby, you speak a little bit about the lullaby being futuristic rather than just in
that moment, right?
We think of, we think of, if we think about, if we're singling out this technique of the
lullaby, we think about it as a necessary intervention in the behavior of a child in this instance,
in order to create this outcome.
Can you talk a little bit about why there's this futural part here?
Absolutely.
Well, so, and I make this strange technological jump from, you're right, from an ancient genre
to a futuristic destiny, because evil in almost every tradition that I've encountered is tied
to intelligence.
And so when we're entering an age of, of artificial intelligence and all of the paranoia surrounding
the possibilities of this incomprehensible leap in sentience, in consciousness, in scale,
right?
Obviously, then we're, we're talking about something that definitionally meets one of the
criteria of evil, you know, that evil has been linked to knowledge, has been linked to
intelligence.
It's, you know, if you even look at the fact that, I know that you, you all talk about societal
issues a lot of the time as well, sociopolitical issues, and then you have me on to do the,
the wonderland strange things, but I'll talk about society for just a second and say something,
which is that if you've ever noticed, for centuries, premeditated murder gets exponentially more
severe punishment than manslaughter, which is killing someone in the heat of the moment,
in a state of rage, in a state of super emotion.
Now, this empirically makes no sense whatsoever, because a dead body is a dead body.
To the corpse, it's the same outcome.
To the family, it's the same outcome.
And so why is there death penalty extended in many instances to someone who plans and plots
a death, as opposed to someone who has an uncontrollable burst of anger or something like that?
And the reason is because society punishes intelligence.
It fears intelligence.
It wants a society that is full of ignorant people, and that's the Garden of Eden.
And so the serpent in the garden is not wrong to whisper in Eve's ear, and that's why I named
my daughter Eve, by the way, to whisper in her ear that, you know, what kind of God doesn't
want you to know the secrets of the universe that you're in, you know?
And so to some extent, we're talking about that when we talk about technology and the
unbound sort of thresholds that we are about to cross with it.
By the way, you know, I mean, when you just look as an academic, I say that somewhat shamefully,
but as an academic, I can tell you that most people, when they do comparative research,
they look at one, two, three examples, you know, of something, whether they're looking
at corruption in local politics around the world, or they're looking at climatological
examples, they look at two, three.
Can you imagine a force of analysis that can track everything in real time and also the
entire history leading up to it?
The things that AI will reveal about human behavior, human society, they're going to be
deeply troubling to every paradigm and every assumption that we've based our house of cards
of reality principles upon.
We're not going to like what we see about ourselves when we're actually watched by a
semi-omniscient gaze.
This is why Nietzsche says the death of God happens.
God has to die because you can't bear this ultimate witness who sees everything.
Can I interject with a question then about, you know, you said earlier, and I think it
was, I just want to put a pin in it where you say every evil I've encountered is tied
to a notion of intelligence.
And I was just joking with Craig, I was spamming him, Nietzsche and Jason, Nietzsche and Jason.
But we often represent AI as a black box.
Of course, it's very helpful to the technicians and technocrats who are promoting this for personal
reasons for it to be seen as the obelisk in the movie, you know, 2001, A Space Odyssey.
And you're talking a lot about intelligence.
And I'm wondering if maybe you can talk about the relationship between the representation of
intelligence and information and where you speak about the archive in zone seven of your book
on evil.
So you're right.
The whole third section of the book on evil is a library of evil with a catalog sort of
of various types.
And I just couldn't help myself from trying to be the architect of a library of evil.
It just sounded like such a great task.
And, you know, one of my favorite short stories of all time was Borges, Jorge Luis Borges, his
library of Babel.
And so it's such an amazing, elegant, you know, universe that he constructs of people looking
for the answer, the ultimate text and what bizarre strategies and methods they come up
with.
That's why it fits into a book on techniques, because if you're in a library that's an
infinity machine, you know, how do you go left or right?
You know, and some people, they resort to throwing dice and they just use chance and
luck.
And some think that they develop a very sophisticated criterion of navigation, you know, through
and they see clues.
So when we're talking about information, it's a wonderful question, because to me, you know,
I just taught another seminar on madness.
And this time around, you know, it's a seminar that goes from mania, schizophrenia, hysteria,
obsession, melancholia, and then we try to find new typologies of those that weren't
covered in the psychoanalytic literature.
But the one for me that this time around hit me as my absolute favorite, and it's just,
it's the sort of the flavor that got me this time around was paranoia.
And you cannot find, you can call it a pathology or a state of mind that is more about information
collection than paranoia.
Deeply paranoid subjects are looking at everything and archiving every modality, every appearance,
every individual that passes them on the street, and almost instantaneously classifying them
in the most complex ways.
And this is interesting to me because actually there's a psychoanalytic literature on states
of emergency, so how people behave, for instance, when a house is burning, right?
And what intrigues me about that is that it's discovered that actually people make amazingly
elaborate decisions as they're fleeing burning flames.
So category one in your hierarchy are living things.
You grab the baby, you grab the dog, right?
Category two, valuable things.
You grab the diamonds, you grab the, you know, whatever, whatever is the money and all of that.
Three sentimental things.
You grab that necklace that your grandmother gave you.
You grab something that is a memento or is irreplaceable.
Four documents, things that are hard to go and get again, your driver's license, your wallet,
your passport, things of that nature, right?
So all of you, and on and on and on.
Meanwhile, you are cross-dividing and cross-analyzing those complex categories with categories of portability.
Can I carry it?
So if the most, you know, sort of valuable thing in your house is an antique table, good luck.
It's going to go up, you know, in flames.
But also distance from the fire.
So if that necklace of your grandmother is on the third floor and you're on the first,
it's also a lost cause.
And you do this instantaneously.
And so this is the interesting thing that Barsav found out.
He's the psychoanalyst who looked at this, is that very few people regret what they didn't
take from a burning fire.
They seem to have made the correct decisions.
And he says, this is not reason or rationality, which is plagued by doubt, plagued by misgivings,
plagued, I mean, the fact that we even think shows that we have a kind of schizophrenic consciousness,
all of us universally.
Otherwise, who are you talking to?
You know, I mean, if you ever watch the way a cat moves through a house, it is the pure
symmetry of thought, action, movement, sensation, desire.
It knows exactly what it wants.
It knows exactly how to synchronize its musculature to its awareness.
There's no doubt.
There's no guilt.
There's no mommy, daddy issues.
There's no bad psychology.
Right?
We are plagued by all these rifts and schisms.
And we give ourselves credit and call that profundity.
But in the state of emergency, you notice that it's the animal that wins.
It's the animality in us that guides us, the instinctual level.
So, and that's why, intriguingly, just without going off on a ledge, but just as a thing to
that, if we look at who is the most, the next step in evolutionary progress in our horror
imagination, it's the vampire.
Vampires are superior to us.
They're smarter than us.
They're more agile than us.
They're more ferocious than us.
They're more beautiful than us in many ways.
They're mesmerizing, hypnotic, seductive creatures.
But they're more powerful than we are at almost every register.
And they're more animal than we are.
Right?
They obey the laws of their thirst.
They synchronize everything through the fangs.
Right?
And yet, that allows them to read minds, to teleport, to levitate, to walk up walls, to
invade your dreams, to manipulate you.
So, extreme intelligence and extreme animality or sensoriality are actually not mutually exclusive
the way that, in our Enlightenment modernity, we're taught that we're only, you know, knowing
subjects if we split ourselves.
And so, I've always said it's a kind of pitiful consequence of modernity that we can think
something we would never say, say something we would never do, do something that we don't
dare think about.
I mean, that's wretched.
It's an absolutely weak condition.
You know, and that's what, when Deleuze and Guattari talk about schizophrenia, that's
actually what they're talking about.
Antonin Artaud does not hesitate.
There's no slack in his act.
There's no split second of lapse in his game.
When he wants something, he goes after it.
What he thinks is what he says is what he does.
That's what Badiou later would call the event.
But he would never dare incarnate it in a human being.
But all you have to do is watch videos of Artaud and you see there is no separation between
his mind, his body, his nerves, you know, and the way he moves on the world.
And so, for me, that's actually one of the criterion of evil as well.
Look at how stylish the devil is.
God is abstraction.
God is vanished.
God has no face, no body.
The devil knows how to work every facet of the world of appearances and the world of thought
and the world of language, right?
So, there's the informational sort of dimension.
Yes, it reminds me a lot of something we did a long time ago, which was go through our
friend of Vernon Sisney's sort of lecture course on the history of Satan, especially
a free and also an embodiment of really in both the gender sense and the general sense
of man.
And I wanted to ask, insofar as intelligence is always correlated to a certain technique
of evil, I mean, one of the ways that human intelligence has tried to grapple with evil,
and you deal with this a lot, particularly in the sequence that derives itself from mystical
and theological literature on evil.
And this is the idea of theodicy, the idea that humans have tried to explain evil either
as a lack of good or as a dialectical contrary to good, but instead, in looking at it in terms
of techniques, especially in terms of looking to literature as far back as possible as well,
evil becomes something much more concerned with, I think, if I insert narrative, and it's
a narratological technique, possibly even a technique of intelligence trying to explain
its own capacity and its own failures to itself in this schizophrenic kind of mode.
So, I guess I got to ask her, and I'm going to break Craig's rule and mention one philosopher,
which is Bataille, of course, because he wrote, you know, literature and evil.
And in a sense, you know, his argument that literature gives us a kind of complicity in the
knowledge of evil, because it is all literature is manipulating us to think of, to bear witness
to things of evil or the possibility of evil.
How does, I guess, literature and narrative feed into evil?
And indeed, to understand techniques of evil, how does that amount to the knowledge of evil?
And does this implicate us in evil in the sense of knowledge is inherent disposition towards it?
It's an excellent question.
And so, I don't mind saying this, just because I, you know, there's that old line that bad
artists plagiarize and great artists steal, right?
So, I don't mind confessing my influences and my adoration for certain figures.
Nietzsche, obviously, is the prime one for me, has always been, for instance, a young age.
But Bataille is probably my second favorite philosopher ever to walk the earth and just absolutely stunning
writer, one of the most elegant thinkers that one could ever encounter.
And an impassioned, intense sculptor of words to his fragments are like no one else's.
So, I adore these figures, for sure, among many, many others.
The only thing that I would say, you know, this is an interesting one for me.
And why is it that, I don't want to start a territory fight here, but why is it that
Deleuze and Guattari, but particularly Gilles Deleuze, has almost no interest in George Bataille's
work?
Now, he cites almost everyone under the sun, right?
And they run in the same crowds and circles, even though Bataille is one generation before
him, right?
They're bridged by, you know, their mutual friendships with figures like Foucault, their knowledge
of Lacan and all that stuff, and their adoration of Nietzsche.
They both claim to be kind of right in the house of Nietzsche.
So, this is a strange omission that Deleuze almost never talks about Bataille.
Some would accuse it of the fact that Deleuze didn't like the concept of death.
He thought it had become overly abused, you know, in the history of philosophy, even since
Socrates is saying that it's an art of learning to die well.
He thought death was a cliche at that point.
Maybe Bataille was too death-obsessed for him.
That's one theory.
But I think the actual reason is, and it makes sense at some level, and this is maybe the
only place that I would, as much as I have immense respect for Deleuze as a thinker, but
this may be the only place that I would side with him over Bataille, is that he thinks Bataille
is still caught in the awe for transgression, and that he loves the idea of this forbidden
border that, you know, if you cross it, it's just saturated with all of this rich metaphysics
and damnation and punishment and the fall from ecstasy and all of that, which to him
is too religious, perhaps, and just also too dialectical.
And, you know, so if you look at the fact that Deleuze loves Kafka.
Now, Kafka, I would say, is a writer of evil.
I would definitely say Kafka is an...
No, I wouldn't say he's a writer.
I'd say he's an evil writer.
If you look at the way he manipulates, you know, and his techniques and all of that,
the way he strands the reader and ambiguity in worlds that don't make sense, I mean, it's
a plague to read the castle, you know?
It's a plague to read the trial.
It's nothing but restlessness and questions.
It's a book of questions and obscurity.
But what Deleuze loves about figures like that, he also loves Melville, who, you know, who writes
Moby Dick, which is a figure of evil, you know, and all of that.
In many ways that I mentioned earlier.
So what's the reason is that Deleuze likes amoral characters, not immoral ones.
And for me, that's also why the lullaby is an interesting one.
That's why when you mentioned Satan, you know, one of the things that I hold against the monotheistic
tradition for all of its beauty and horror, from the Inquisitions to, you know, Michelangelo
sculptures, you can run the, you know, back and forth on a pendulum that swings from the
most, the most wondrous to the most awful, you know?
And actually, it's interesting.
I always say this, the etymology, if you look at the word awesome and awful, they both are
composed of awe.
It's just some, some awe is really good and full of awe is really bad.
So, so religion can kind of do both historically.
But one of the things I don't like that it does, monotheism, is that it steals so much
good material and content from paganism and from the things that came before it.
And it doesn't, it doesn't admit that it's done that.
And then it simplifies and reduces it in order to make it more universal.
Like anything you do, you know, if you want to, if you want a movie that is a, is a blockbuster,
you have to work at kind of the most basic emotions.
If you want a pop song, you have to simplify melodies.
So I think religion does that with Satan as, as interesting a figure as Satan is, and
you can read Paradise Lost, you know, and there's, there's one wondrous possibilities
within there, but Satan comes from the Egyptian God set and set is much more intriguing to
me in some ways because set who is the, he's the God of the desert storms foreigners and
the color red already an amazing conceptual combination there, but set is not considered by the Egyptians
an evil God in the monotheistic sense of being pure evil.
He is a trickster God.
He's a volatile God.
He's a mercurial God.
He's a moody God who half the time helps you and half the time kills you.
And it just depends on what night you meet set, you know, and Caribbean traditions have
figures like that with Papa Legba and others and all that where they can help you out.
He helps gamblers who are down on their luck, but then sometimes he steals their money afterwards.
So it's a kind of cutthroat God who, a whimsical God, a temperamental God, which actually is
kind of the God of the Old Testament.
That's what they inherit from paganism, you know, a God who's envious and can be wrathful
and, and all of that stuff.
But the, the last thing that I would just say that, so set is amoral.
He's not immoral.
He's not good or evil per se.
He's an amalgamation of potentials.
And it just depends how you unlock them or how you play into them.
And that's a really interesting thing that you don't see in monotheism.
It matters how you approach set.
It matters how you speak to set.
Meaning the outcome is contingent upon your gamesmanship at some levels.
So it's not just the enslaved follower of monotheism who has these 10 commandments that they must
observe, even though they don't understand them necessarily, or perform certain rituals,
you know, ablutions, prayers, ceremonies, and all of that pure submission to the one.
Instead, this is, and I don't know if any of you have ever had people in your lives who
are psychologically temperamental, you know, or, or manic even, right?
Oh, it's always a minefield.
You step into the room and you, it's a very delicate tightrope to know what to say, how
to orchestrate and orient, how to get out of a situation when you offend and you don't
realize what a trigger could be.
So it's just endless provocations.
You can win the game, but the odds are stacked that you're going to, you're going to hit some,
some turbulence along the way.
And those are the gods that, that I find intriguing.
And those are the gods who got scapegoated as evil later, just very complicated ones that
demanded that you refine a methodology of how to play.
And by the way, in East Asian, just to say this quickly, in East Asian mysticism, if you
look at Taoism, you look at Buddhism, the question of how you move within the universe, right, is
a really, a universe that can, and they were very aware of this, can equally destroy you
as it does, you know, redeem you, you know, what moves you make matter there.
You know, that's why monks are so, you know, Buddhist monks, for instance, are so consumed
by motion, by rhythm, by the way they step, by, you know what I mean, all these different
sort of ways of doing things, because they know it matters.
It's not just some transcendent, omniscient being who makes the decision.
It's, you've got to play your hand too.
You can't cheat your turn, so at any rate, just a quick answer, or not so quick answer.
No, I mean, also just on the point of actually, yeah, it's weird I've never actually thought
about the fact that we've been doing Bataille and D and G for so long, and yet, yeah, they've
never actually had a confluence.
I think it's partially, I wonder if it's because Tye somewhat presupposes Hegel, I think, and
maybe there's too much of a stain there, or too much of a lack base there.
But for him, this evil force, the absence of myth is itself the myth that motivates everything.
And I wonder, in that extent, just go back to something you said before about how animality
and God can be united in the figure of evil.
Does this also work in the sense of a transgression?
Does evil have to move through humans?
Is it sort of an animality that moves through humans in order to have a divine character?
Because for Bataille—
Great, great question.
Look at the—way before Bataille, Bataille was interested in tribal associations, but,
you know, and he did kind of his own anthropological work in really fascinating ways here and there.
But if you look at the first gods, they are hybrid combinations of human and animal.
And I trust the instincts of those first civilizations only because they were in survival mode.
Their extreme vulnerability before the elements—they froze to death, they starved to death,
they suffered famines, they suffered, you know, common colds would wipe out entire tribes.
They had to be on edge, vigilant like no one else, and they couldn't afford to do what we can do
in our air-conditioned mall culture of today.
They couldn't lie to themselves about where they were.
They couldn't pretend they were in a utopia while the whole world is on fire,
you know, and going towards a dystopia.
They had to face their finitude, their mortality, their desperation, their helplessness,
the fact that they were freezing cold and scorching, you know, heat,
the fact that predatory animals were around every corner.
And so the fact that they saw their gods as these ruthless amalgamations—that's the Sphinx,
that's the Centaur, that's the Minotaur—it's there even before those first civilizations,
it's there in the cave paintings and the hieroglyphs.
The gods are these one-third alien, one-third beast, one-third human,
which means that they're seen as the perfect, again, sort of synchronization of all the powers
of each category, which I think is, again, where we're headed right now.
You know, interestingly, in what you're asking, I mean, when we talk about the machine-human
interface, it's not just machine of what we think of machine.
That machine also contains ghostliness, it contains all kinds of other forms of being.
But I did forget—I did a dishonor to you, my friend—you asked about storytelling real quick,
you know, and there's an interesting figure just when you're talking about evil and stories,
and you just think about the rich histories of folklore, you know, from all parts of the world,
from Eastern Europe to Latin America to East Asia to Mongolian folklore about demons and, you know,
and witches and all these sorts of things, and how evil just lends itself to storytelling in the most
amazing ways that the good doesn't. Like, stories about good people tend to be very,
very boring and archetypal, and they become kind of lessons, moral lessons.
But there's a figure—since we're naming wonderful dead philosophers and trying to honor them—there's
also a figure who kind of played in the, you know, in the playground with figures like Bataille,
and that's Walter Benjamin. But he comes from a different angle altogether. Benjamin kind of,
you know, an obvious on the surface Marxist, but intrigued by mysticism, you know, hid that from
his Marxist colleagues that he was deeply intrigued by mysticism. And actually, I don't know if you all
know this, how it is that Benjamin, Bataille, and Jacques Lacan all know one another. But, you know,
not—they're not—just not that they're hanging out in France. It's that they used to attend secret
sessions on mysticism taught by Alexander Koyev, the great Hegelian. So in a time when mystical
thought was considered, you know, Sartre had no patience for it, and he kind of ran and dominated
the throne of French intellectual circles. Surrealists under Breton hated it for a number of reasons.
So there were a lot of figures who were banishing it as sort of this irrational Freud-hated mysticism,
and almost disowned Jung partially because of his interest in some of those things or misunderstandings
of what that meant. So there were these secret gatherings where Benjamin, Lacan, and Bataille used
to go to Alexander Koyev's house and listen to him talk and lecture on mysticism and discuss it together.
And that's why Benjamin famously gave his last manuscripts to Bataille to hide in the floorboards
of the National Library in Paris, where he worked. But it's Benjamin who figures something out there,
that this—the responsibility of ancient storytellers—and I've said this in other places,
sorry for anyone who's hearing it repeated—it's Benjamin's theory is that the storyteller exists
in order to confront the child with death. It's to teach death. Because no parent—I look at myself,
again the father of a two-year-old, there is absolutely no impulse in me that wants to teach
my daughter that I'm going to die on her one day. And then even worse and unbearable for me that she
will die one day, right? So this is an awful lesson. And so you need a third neutral party to come in. And the
way that the storyteller instructs and mediates this encounter with death is by telling a story that has a
beginning, middle, and end. And acquaints them with the fact that things end. That phenomena end. That
we are in an impermanent world. And that not only do things cease and perish, but that they're irreversible
when they do. You can't go back. You can go back and read the story, but the outcome is the same. Your
favorite character dies. You can't reclaim them or recover them. That's a way of instructing them in
the experience of loss and mortality that's going to hit them soon enough, right? So that's where I
think the storyteller has always been linked to fear and to evil as well. If death is part of the game
of evil. I want to ask you, Jason, what inspired you to organize this book the way that you did? What
inspired you to begin the book on evil with a set of principles and then move on to diagrams and then
to talk about libraries? Because I see that there might be an implicit evil even in doing that. In
the sense that to create a set of principles is almost to create a canon, which in some sense delimits
activity delimits insights, if you will, diagrams, a series of typologies, libraries, archives, here's
the knowledge of importance. And of course, there's an outside, there are things that are excluded from
that. And I've been thinking a lot lately about the ways in which our archives, the Western canon,
our favorite philosophers, those who I'm not talking about here today, often become these,
these kind of anchors or stables, whatever metaphor we want to use, that keep us sort of
locked in a kind of inactivity or suppress our thinking and creativity. And I don't know if that's
implicit in the organization itself, but something like that does seem to be taking place here.
So I was hoping that maybe you could speak to the organization. And then if there are any attendant
insights on how maybe philosophy itself, or the archive itself might be evil, if you could talk
about that. Absolutely. So let's let's start with so as you as you nicely, and I appreciate all of you
reading through this, this strange treatise, and all three parts of it. If we start with notations,
those notations are not meant to be absolute precepts. They're meant to be almost like in martial arts,
forms that can be deployed. Now, if you look closely, a lot of them seemingly contradict themselves.
Meaning, I say something like evil can practice in extreme speed, can accelerate reality. Then I'll
say evil can practice in extreme slowness, it can paralyze reality. You know, and you can think of images
that come, come to that. You can think of, of, of sort of evil that is, again, instantaneous almost,
but you can also think of like a gargoyle, which is frozen in time, sort of, and all that. So I'll say
things that I use paradox and contradiction, because I don't want to, they're not delimiting
sort of a finite map. Instead, they're saying these are like cards in a deck that can be played,
given the circumstance. They're highly contingent upon circumstance. Which typology of evil is the right
one to summon at any given moment depends on whether you're in a dead end, in an alleyway,
in a labyrinth, in, you know, on a cliff about to fall. It depends, sort of, you know, and all that.
So that's, that's the first thing that I would say. That's why there are just so many of them too,
and they could proliferate. It's just, you have to call it quits somewhere eventually. As for diagrams,
you know, this is, this is the attempted humility on my part of switching modes because of the
realization that my thoughts will change if I change the, the sort of the, the, the matrix
of how I'm, of how I'm engaging. I always took it very seriously that one thing I'm writing now,
so here's something that, for instance, I'm writing now a short piece for another book on
weather events in literature. So imagine entire, entire civilizations or entire tribes or entire
secret societies that define themselves through some climatological phenomenon that happened. An
earthquake, a flood, sandstorms in the desert, right? That's their, that their identity is predicated upon
a climatological weather, weather occurrence, right? Hurricane seasons, you know, things like that.
So similarly, I know that, okay, it's, it's, if I'm, if I listen to the elder Nietzsche,
I should realize that probably my thoughts will morph slightly when it's raining outside. You know,
that, that rain should have an, and it should have an effect. If not, I'm a terrible philosopher.
Then I'm in a vacuum. I'm in a bubble, pretending that I'm doing high stakes work, but allowing
anything to challenge or affect me whatsoever, right? Remember all this stuff, we call it affect,
affect, affect, now that comes from, they lose actually most of it, which is a stunning revolution
thought. It just means being affected, right? Just allowing yourself to be affected by things that are
occurring. So I allowed myself to be affected by saying, okay, now I'm not going to write in textual
notations, I'm going to write in diagrams. And I'm going to envision, I'm going to reset to zero
and play the game again, but this time in diagrammatic fashion. And diagrams unleash just
a different, a different type of thinking about the topic, as well as then moving into a much more
speculative side of things of inventing books that have never been written before, or to my knowledge,
at least have not been written before. And I really hope that some people steal some good
dissertation topics from that, or book topics for themselves in the future, because I worked hard
to come up with weird, weird literatures that I don't think exist until this point. And so that just,
that was sort of me plunging into sort of the third component. And that just allows you to write
differently, different tonalities, even the fact that one, some are written in shorter sentences,
when you write in diagrams, you have one word, you know, essentially for every, it's like,
I think I've eight, eight chambers, or eight compartments, I'm only allowed one word, and then
I have to let the reader fill in the blanks, you know, of, of why that word is associated in that
particular constellation. So I like that. But I'll just, I'll just say one other thing to the diagram,
you know, because I've been talking about this recently, I'm really fascinated by
a concept I rediscovered recently. So something that I had read 20 years ago, lost track of it
completely. And then and then it visited me again, I didn't, I didn't find it by my own will. There's
a great diagnosis by one of Freud's rivals, actually, Freud's ultimate rival, Emil Krepelle,
you know, great German psychiatrist, I don't adore everything he said, just in the same that Freud
doesn't always doesn't, he's a genius, but I'm not always on his side with everything. But Krepelle
says something really cool. He says, this Freudian symptomatological method is so constrictive,
because, and it's a false method at some levels, to go after symptoms, individual symptoms and say,
well, schizophrenics do this. He says, actually, if you notice, almost any symptom that you say,
identify or isolate that can happen in one type of madness, can also happen in every other type of
madness. They're much more fluid and interchangeable. You can have delusions of grandeur in manic
depression, you can have delusions of grandeur in schizophrenia, you can have delusions of grandeur
in hysteria, you can have all these kinds of things. What he says matters is the syndrome,
which is to say the particular sequence pattern configuration of symptoms, right, that that creates
sort of this elegant mapping that allows you to identify something. And so I like that idea,
because then you could actually go and redesign every one of those diagrams. And they would change
by taking a single term and placing them. And that doesn't offend me, because I'm not selling,
you know, a moral philosophy on evil. Instead, I'm just, I'm again, I'm inventing a card game.
And I would love others to come and say, what if we played with this strategy, just like chess evolves
new moves all the time, new forms of attack, new forms of defense, this should do the same,
as well as even new rule sets. It doesn't bother me if someone came and offered entirely different
rule sets to this. It's just setting almost a point of departure for that. But the other thing I just
wanted to mention quickly to that is Emil Krepel in this psychoanalyst, he says something very cool
as well. He has the idea that came back to me after 20 years was called confabulatory paraphernia.
Now, I had heard about that decades before where he said, this gets too often associated with
schizophrenia, and it's not. Confabulatory paraphernia is basically people who invent
very lavish, vivid, false memories of their life, and tell them constantly to others, like that I'm
actually the long lost descendant of a royal dynasty, or that I have a lineage with werewolves,
or that I'm actually the one who wrote George Bataille's books, you know, and things like that.
And they have sensorial memories of these things. They're absolutely convinced that they've lived these
lives, and they have the most elegant complex forms of storytelling. And what he noticed was
schizophrenia tends to suffer from what's called a deterioration of identity over time. So it becomes
worse and worse, more aggressive, more troubled, more tormented, more painful, the more that it goes
through the motions of its delusions. But this one, confabulatory paraphernia, became more ecstatic
over time. And actually, the identity just became more multifarious, more multidimensional, more
detailed, because it was always improvising like a writer, or a theatrical modality, always improvising,
which is why, by the way, Antonin Artaud should not be called schizophrenic. He should be in this
designation, because Artaud just kept adding nuances, adding stories about his life to create this gigantic
colossus figure called Artaud. But what's amazing there is that Kripal in the end calls this euphoric
dementia, which is a really cool line. And then it got me to thinking that, well, then what's the secret
of euphoria? Because dementia, we almost never describe as euphoric. We never pictured or envisioned
as a euphoric thing. We think of it as a terrible condition. So I started looking into it and realizing
something. If you take paranoia again, which evil has been associated with, because paranoia is an
ultimate form of intelligence, of looking and seeing everything and thinking about everything too much
in excess. When does paranoia go bad? There is euphoric paranoia, and there's really sort of
tortured paranoia. And what's the difference? Tortured paranoia is where I think everybody is out to get me,
and everything I see in reality confirms my suspicion, my story, right? And that's the conspiracy theorists
online, which is why they're tormented, and why they often end in violence, the way that we're seeing
today, right? But on the other side, if it remains partial, if it's not everyone is my enemy trying to kill
me, if it's there's one person. Don Quixote calls him the enchanter in the story. He has one enemy, the
enchanter, and that he only shows up in certain phenomena as cats or in mirrors. You follow? So it's only
partial slivers of reality that are corroded or corrupted or that keeps you in a euphoric game then. You have moves to
make, right? You're not in this fatalistic, deterministic, awful state of infestation,
sort of, right? The syndrome remains an arena, you know, or a game where I can beat this enemy,
I can beat the enchanter, right? I just have to avoid mirrors, or I just have to align with forces that are
against the enchanter, like stones, for instance. So this becomes in, this is where it remains euphoric,
even paranoia can be euphoric, as long as you don't let it saturate the totality of reality and
thereby become totalized, which is what we call society, unfortunately. Well, I mean, honestly,
the method of paranoia precisely in that mode is more or less what characterized like our book,
and I think like the sort of the book sort of the solo book I wrote as a sequel exactly like this. I mean,
it is paranoia as a mode of thought to try and find points of capture and escape. And I really
appreciate the way which evil is presented here as a set of techniques, because it also takes me back
to one of, you know, every occultist favorites, favorite factoid, which is the link between
grammar and grimoire. And it really does seem that there's something of a grammatical work here,
and especially in the idea of publishing it, giving general rules for application,
and also sort of make making it public, you know, there's something evil about
publication, and hell, if we know anything, the publishing industry is only getting more evil.
Don't give them the honor of such an exalted term. They're just bad, they're just bad.
Yeah, let's just be more stringent lead to shit about this. But I also want to ask a question
as well, is how this idea of evil, which is sort of being laid bare in terms of the rules of the game,
which evil becomes published, it becomes techniques, it becomes something manipulable,
becomes a technique, but also a techniques, how that might relate to your other work recently on
secret societies, where we're here, evil is being moved from the esoteric to the exoteric.
Here, you know, Weds relate to the movement to the esoteric, the enclosure of things.
Thanks for the segue there. No doubt, there's a link, you know, and actually they were written
a lot of, well, the secret societies book is underway. But a lot of things were written
simultaneously in this regard, because what I was trying to do there, and it's a similar game in
some ways. And the name of the secret societies book is The Unlost. And the reason is because I
was looking after, and I've done this for decades in my own life, it's just I never thought to actually
write about the process of doing it, is to look for and to unearth books of secret societies that
have been lost in time. So these are forbidden books, these are books that have been hidden,
misplaced, neglected, you know, either because they were too obscure in their meanings, or like you said,
too esoteric in the topic. So there's medieval notebooks on blood purification, you know,
completely superstitious stuff. But you can only find it in one library in a small village in Spain,
for instance, right? There are journals of caravan thieves from from the Arab world that nobody takes
as legitimate knowledge, who would ever want to read, you know, to even read it means that you're
captivated by by thieves, you know, who wants to read the diaries of thieves, unless you're planning
something. And so they're typically in ill taste, even though they exist and are somewhat accessible,
or their books that are famed books, books of legend that were part of libraries that have burned to the
ground in history, you know, and it's that's that's a tragic undercurrent of the history of philosophy
and literature and theology and all of all of knowledge that we have these burned libraries like the
House of Wisdom in Baghdad or Alexandria in Egypt. And it's, it's a hell of a thing to think how,
how frail the practice is, these are entire lives devoted to subject matters to inquests, you know,
tracing things only for some idiot emperor, or something like that, or some thuggish, you know,
militaristic force to decide, you know, to set fire to something. So it's a way of trying to also just,
just remember that that we're always beneath the beneath the knife of history in that regard.
But what's similar in a certain regard is that the method for a book on secret societies and lost
books is like a book on evil, you're chasing rumors, a lot of the time, you know, everything's kind of
hearsay, half lies, I love the fact that when I go to places like parts of North Africa to look for some of
these lost books, I used to do that a lot more in past years, you know, everything is exaggerated,
distorted, they're fabricated clues, you can't really trust the booksellers are testing you,
the booksellers are passing on things that have been echoed five times, you know, through street
corners and all of that. And they don't either they're intentionally misleading you, or they don't
know they're misleading you. And so a really intriguing challenge right, right away, when you're in this
ocean of deceptive signs and imposter sort of imposter suspicions is that you either choose
the route of knowledge or aesthetics, meaning when you have no absolute criterion of knowing if
something is true or not about a secret society that once existed there or might still exist there,
how do you discern between this avalanche of things being told to you which one to follow?
If you go the route of knowledge, you go an epistemological route, then you become the
ultimate detective, you almost do like forensic kind of breakdown laser sort of techniques of
trying to differentiate which is more credible, which is more authentic, based on the reputation
of the person who's telling you, based on the context, based on how close they were as an eyewitness
or something like that. Actually, a lot of things which have now become part of just the law
today. You can apply those. And that hopefully will get you closer to the inner circles of the mystery
that you're looking to go to. But I actually like the second route. And weirdly enough,
paradoxically, it often led me closer to what you might call the truth, which is just chasing your
favorite story. So you're told three different things by three different people. Just go with the
one that sounds the coolest to you. And I learned this method from, by the way, this is even,
and I'm not that far from a history department where I'm sitting right now. They would come and
burn me at the stake for saying this, but I know their dirty secret, which is that that's how
Herodotus starts the discipline of history. He says something like there are like eight stories
circulating about how Cyrus the Great became the king of Persia. I'm going to tell you my favorite
one. That's his methodology. It's just this whimsical mood choice of, I like this one the best.
So I learned this actually not from Herodotus. I learned it from Sufi mystics because Sufi mystics,
when they go back and some figure, some mystic was sanctified, it's almost always after their death.
They become this kind of saint. Everybody starts generating accounts of miracles.
And it's really cool how contagiously people enjoy being like, well, I once saw him do this,
and I once saw her do that, you know, and all that. And so the question of how do Sufis then,
how do Islamic mystics historically, what do they include and what do they throw out? They include
the best stuff. So for instance, Halaj, who was this amazing early mystic who was crucified
for claiming that he was God. And he supposedly danced in ecstasy in his chains as he was being
led to the cross to be burned on the cross. And while he was burning, he screamed out in ecstasy,
I am God, I am God. And it left this haunting resonance in people's minds in the Middle East
throughout history. There's a story about him that he was talking very calmly and serenely with a crowd
of people in a room at night. And it was there was this candlelight flickering in a lantern.
And all of a sudden, they noticed as he was speaking, that his shadow began stretching to
like overwhelming monstrous proportions on the wall behind him.
Sufis include that reminiscence, they include that account in everything written about Halaj,
just because it's awesome. You know, it's just it's just a great phenomenological
account. And it's unique. You know, it's something they hadn't heard before. So that's why they throw
it in there, whether it's more or less true. That's almost irrelevant. So in some ways, that's that's what
you have to do, especially when you're dealing with secret societies, we have to remember that the really
good ones, the ones that I consider the elite ones, they turn themselves into walking riddles,
meaning they purposefully circulated misinformation about themselves, misunderstandings about their
origins, their beliefs, their rituals. So they wanted to be concealed in some ways or misread in
other ways. And so even what's out there on the surface in the in the light of day, you can't trust
that the architects of that information weren't people trying to throw you off course.
Jason, speaking of stretching shadows, I'm sure you have been approached about the film
Nosferatu, the most recent remake, and I've actually been reading a few different things as of late.
I'm reading this collection of essays by the famous archetypal psychologist James Hillman
on melancholy and mania. And it made me think of you and your work on mania. And looking at the film
Nosferatu, I mean, melancholy is not only an an operative theme, but it is a very stark thematic
choice made by Eggers to convey the story of the the kind of yearning and transfiguration that the
character of Ellen is undergoing. And I'm curious if you've seen the film, and if you have a take
on it, and we'll just say spoiler alert at this point, if you're listening,
I'm going to I'm going to disappoint everyone here that I haven't seen it against every every desire
and instinct. My my lovely child who's my universe, my my whole universe, she, she keeps me very closely
bound to the realm of cartoons. Most most of the time. And so and so I haven't had a chance to steal a
night for myself. But it's going to be a luxury item in the next couple of weeks where I do my
escape artist move, get out of the house late at night and under the cloak of of night, be able
to watch this. I have seen some of the imagery, though, I did see the silhouette behind a curtain,
which was a really powerful sort of cinematography. And what intrigued me was the look of the actress
actress while while being sort of the shadow of the claw, I think was on her face in that scene.
That's all I that's the only thing I know of it. And I just recently talked about the fact that,
you know, a friend of mine, Eugene Thacker, who you as may know of, you know, he's a he's a friend of
mine who I don't see for years of years at a time. But he's a wonderful thinker in so many regards.
But he wrote a piece many years ago about this turn towards what he called I think he called the
transcendent horror, where he said, you know, in the 80s, when I was a kid growing up, you had the
Freddy Krueger, Jason from Friday the 13th, you had evil embodied in a particular fiend or monster.
And your job was simply to outrun it or kill it by the end of the film. Right. So it was a pure
exteriority, something totally unlike you and foreign to you that was chasing you that was
trying to harm you. And you could either, yeah, dodge it or or or annihilate it. And then you look
at films like The Witch, you look at The Lighthouse, you look at Midsommar, and they all end with this
look of rapture at the end of the surrender of the human to the evil universe. So it's not a person
anymore. It's not a circumscribed, you know, monster figure necessarily. It's that the universe is evil.
The whole universe is evil, and that they realize this finally, and they become one with the evil.
And that's why there's this look of kind of of sort of happy resignation on all their faces
at the end of the film. I didn't see that in the Nosferatu. Instead, I saw a more ancient principle,
which was just complete frozenness, like disbelief, the incomprehensible, which I like
at first glance. What bothers me, and I love that Eugene Thacker mentioned this move towards
transcendent horror as a new philosophical orientation of our generation towards horror,
which may be more interesting than the old creature sort of typology. But I do worry that
it's actually complicit with, and I don't want to sound like a critic here. I'm complicit that that
whole smile at the end is actually part of the narcissistic capitalist era of everything is about
me and everything is for me, and I'm the center of the universe again, and I can customize my, you know,
evil to my own individual, you know, consumption. And for me, it's more interesting when evil is
pure exteriority, you know, when it remains purely outside as something that is exceptionally alien
and strange. I think that's more powerful. And so I'm a little bit concerned with that move.
So whether Nosferatu then, whether you can, you know, become the creature or not, or whether the
creature is a standout and it does not represent all of being. You know, in the old ones, like the
Bela Lugosi vampire ones, the castle stands out on the horizon as a perversion or an anomaly against
the sky, against the village, against the forest. You know what I mean? It's, it's, it seems to be
almost like an alien hovercraft. It shouldn't be there. It's what's not supposed to have happened.
Right. And so, and the creature by, by extension is the same, you know, even in, even in Dr.
Frankenstein, it's an unintended consequence, right? And I love the fact, by the way, just to bring back
to, to, to earlier discussion, a lot of people always forget that Dr. Frankenstein, Mary Shelley's
masterpiece is a book about technology as well. It's a book about the invention of electricity
and her fear that this supposedly utopian invention was going to lead to catastrophic monstrosity
and, and, and destruction, which is the same debate we're having now, again, with artificial
intelligence. It's the electricity of our time, you know, in a way, but, but no, I haven't seen the
film. I promise you, if you have me back at a later round, I'll, I'll, I'll watch it.
I do though, want to jump on your, your comment about being drawn into children's animation,
because our discussion started with the lullaby and one in sequence one of this book on evil,
you talk about immemorial collapse and yet, you know, uh, the aperture and the function of sort of
being drawn in. If, if the lullaby is, is evil, I'm, I'm thinking, or if the lullaby is a technique
of evil, I'm wondering what do you make of the proliferation of strange cartoons across the internet
that are meant to, to, to render children docile, right? These, I mean, I'm assuming you've seen these
increasingly bizarre cartoons, and I'm wondering if you can maybe connect these two things.
It's a, it's a great question. I'll give a negative and a, and a positive because,
you know, I never trust, I never trust that something, you know, I, I kind of had this dualism.
It could turn bad. It could turn great. It could be an opening. It could be a, a closure, uh, that,
that looks like an opening. So for instance, our generation is
seemingly the most vulgar in terms of, if you look at just, I mean, swearing and cursing and profanity
on TV and movies, but even in the everyday, you'll see young kids swear around old people in ways that,
let's say, older, older cultural moments wouldn't have allowed, would have prohibited, right?
Now, at some levels, that seems liberating, maybe, that we're getting out of ageist hierarchies.
Okay, I'll, I'll, the anarchistic side of me will, will grant that. But at the other level,
I fear something that Artaud, who I mentioned earlier, feared. Artaud was filthy sometimes in
his writing, right? Really could curse with the best, but he was an elite professional cursor. And
they say that if he heard someone in a cafe in Paris swear in front of him, he would get up and leave.
He would storm out. Because he would be offended by the amateurism. But what he was also disturbed
by was the mediocratization of the most extreme language. So, like the F word. The F word is
supposed to conjure damnation itself. It's supposed to bring the heavens, like, collapsing overhead
on the person you say it to. And I hear kids these days just drop it like a placeholder.
Like it's like, or, you know, it doesn't qualify anything. It doesn't actually even
intensify or electrify language the way that it's supposed to. So what's the outcome of that
psychologically or existentially? People who, when they go to watch Nosferatu, write on Twitter,
OMG, that was the most awesomely amazing, crazy movie I've ever seen. Five exclamation points,
all capital letters, three emojis. That means they're hitting this steroidal juice, sort of,
because language isn't doing what language is supposed to be doing anymore. It doesn't have
the voltage or the charge. So they've got to be hyperbolic and redundant and use, use every trick
in the book. Just see, nothing should be amazingly awesomely whatever. Awesome already encompasses
amazing. I have to interject and I think there are going to be a lot of listeners who are going to
just be really upset or really going to laugh at what I'm about to say. But there's an entire brand
of like children's YouTube content. I'm about to say skibbity toilet. You don't have to know what it is.
I don't really, I don't really know what it is, but it's these extraordinarily graphic and intense
and uncanny and violent images that have, to say no meaning would be to give it too much credit.
Actually, what we're seeing is the proliferation. I think what you're describing is something like an
empty intensity, intensity that is just absolutely empty. And I'm wondering if, you know, just like
how Hildegard von Bingen, the mystic of, like the mystic of the Shavias wrote that, you know, aridity,
emptiness is precisely that space where evil can start to, it's aridity that through which evil can
start to sort of manifest. I'm wondering if, if the, the increasing intensity yet emptiness of cartoons
in our, in our age opens up sort of new techniques of evil. I hope so. But, but I would say it would
have to be through active nihilism, not passive nihilism. So active nihilism is that I can get my,
my little two-year-old daughter to play any game in the house, hide and seek, you know, tag. I can get
her to play any, any type of game, tug of war, which is an ancient, ancient Babylonian game and
all that. We play all sorts of games and she's always up for it. But I've seen teenage members
of my family who you cannot motivate to want to do anything. You could tell them that there are
miracles happening in a hallway down the, down the, and they're on their phone in that neurotic
scroll mode, right? Which is full of supposed shock value. That's what it is. It's novelty.
It's like, oh, what's this next thing? Oh, what's this next thing? But it's such a low intensity
charge, as you said, and it's there just to create not awe or pleasure, but addiction,
essentially. You know, anytime you see an addictive propensity, don't trust it that, you know, and, and
this is, you know, who teaches me that great junkie writers throughout history, you know, like, like
William Burroughs will tell you that. Burroughs will say the most boring person on earth is a junkie
for all the exoticism that we give to as, as one himself who writes the famous book, you know, called
that, you know, for all the exoticism and adventure we think that's involved. And I have looked at
literature of addicts and I'm interested in decadent writers. The absinthe taverns have written a whole
piece on opium dens and things like that. But more often than not, he said, a junkie can usually only
talk about one thing, junk. They only want to think about one thing or, or discuss one thing or discuss
stories, one thing, which is the last time they were on the substance, you know? And so it becomes
actually very one dimensional and confining. So even with shock in, so think about that, like the,
you know, the, the, the, the, the jolt of, of a high, of a drug high is kind of like a shock value.
But when it becomes so repetitive and you're chasing the dragon and it's just diminishing returns,
and now that thing in the veins is not working, you know, and every time around it's getting less and
less. And you even, here's a, the, one of the only times you will ever hear me give an homage to the
great Socrates. But Socrates said one of the fundamental confusions of human beings is not
being able to differentiate pleasure from release from pain. So every time my phone dings with a new
text message and I think it's, oh, it's a curiosity. Oh, who's that? That's not pleasure. That's release
from pain. That's an anxiety mechanism, right? That's, that's compulsive. And so I worry about
this new methodology of really transgressive, really shocking comedies even gone that way.
Have you noticed that you have standup comedians who are just foul and filthy beyond belief, who are
not just willing, but who dive headlong into the most taboo subjects, who make jokes about AIDS,
who make jokes about rape, who make jokes about, you know, all kinds of different violence, murder,
and all of that. And they're mainstream, by the way, these are extremely mainstream.
Many of them women, right? You know, know that as well. And I watch it and I see this is an
interesting twist in the history of humor and comedy. But the problem is that the reason why
they're allowed to get away with it is that there's this little wink, wink, sort of supremacy complex
of the righteous who are saying the reason I can make this racist, sexist, violent joke is because,
you know, I don't actually think that way. And the crowd uses it. And so they exonerate themselves in
this morality play. Like the fact that we laugh shows that we're above this vulgarized mode of
thinking of others, that we're not the racist. So you get both a charge of self-righteous,
sort of sickly pleasure, along with actually getting to laugh at a racist or sexist joke,
but pretend you're not laughing at it.
This actually really does open up, I think, something, even if we stumbled upon it accidentally,
something rather profound about the unfunny humor of contemporary comedy and the comedy scene,
especially in Austin with Joe Rogan and all of those people. We're told to laugh at the humor.
It's not even particularly funny, right? There's an emptiness to it. And yet the laughing signifies
that disconnect. And yet we're already supposed to be. So like, I think that, that in a certain
sense, it goes back to that, that, that low level intensity issue here, but I'll let, I'll finally let.
So then the question, when you say then, is there a space for evil, evil would have to restore,
not just disperse intensity, but restore the possibility for intensity, which is to say,
to create the stage. Remember that in, wow, you, you guys got me on this German,
German French thing today. So let's do it. Heidegger in his, in his piece called,
what are the poets for says something really sly. He says that it's about, not about God. It's about
the house of God being empty. There's no altar for God to inhabit. There's no dwelling really.
The dwelling has to come first. And so for him, poets lead you across this abyss and try to rebuild
the house of God. It's really theological in certain ways and messianic. And that's what's, what's not my
favorite element of it. But I think this is, this is the interesting issue is that there used to be
unknown spaces. There used to be undergrounds, fugitive spaces, pirate utopias, hideaways,
you know, that was the space of conspiracy before. Now we really don't have much terra incognita
in an age of surveillance, in an age of, of hyper exposure of everything onto the internet. It's not
simply that we don't have even a lot of physical spaces where you can go. And when I was a kid,
there were forests I could get lost in. Now they're all building developments in those same
forests and all of that. Just, it's not only the, the actual physical space that's deteriorated,
it's the inclination to find that physical space. Remember every, we're talking about kids,
every fairytale is basically a story of a runaway, right? They're all abandoning reality,
but there has to be an alternative space, whether it's the rabbit hole, or it's the wardrobe in Narnia,
or it's the, the labyrinth in Pan's Labyrinth, or the forest in a million fairy tales and all that.
There have to be portals. There have to be archways or gateways that allow this traversal
from this awful reality principle. And I think it's the most wonderful and accurate indictment
of the horror of adult human civilization, that every kid would rather be in a forest with predatory
witches and wolves than hang out with us talking about society and politics and all that. The
excruciating boredom, but the hypocrisy is what they hate, not our violence, because all the
creatures in their forest are violent. It's the hypocrisy of our violence, which they detest,
right? That we're these bad liars walking around pretending to be noble and kind. And that's actually
Freud's first insight too, is every cat who walks in my office is lying to me. They're telling me some
movie in which they're the star. That's why the last question he ever asks is, tell me about yourself.
What a waste of his time. He's just going to get a film reel of, oh, Dr. Freud, I think I'm a very kind
person. And I've always tried to be there for my family. And you're the bastard who was just gossiping,
trying to ruin someone's reputation three minutes ago outside in the waiting room.
He knows that. So in a, in a similar way, the question is, do we have the capacity to build
zones? You know, if you go back to Tarkovsky's, you know, great movie, Stalker, you know, and you think
about what it means to have this, it's like Kafka's castle again. Can you actually construct this,
this willingness to abandon everything like the child does in the fairy tale? And prophets do this
in the Bible too, by the way. Abraham leaves his family, his tribe, his possessions to go out into the
desert. Some go into the bellies of whales, some go up on mountains and caves. Muhammad does that in
the, in, as a prophetic figure in the Islamic tradition, goes to a cave all day long to listen
to the voice of, of infinity, you know, sacred verses. These are people who will throw away and
discard reality for some other, some other sphere, right? And the question of whether or not then
something that has imprisoned us in a kind of pseudo interiority will ever allow us to chase
some extraneous sphere. Well, that brings me to my final question, which has to do with
politics, the, the kind of political commitments that, that we have on the, on the podcast amidst
actually this, this narcissistic concern, maybe about the kinds of discussions that we have here too.
One of the dominant claims that, that repeats within the book on evil is that idleness is evil.
In fact, there's a sentence, evil is often tied to philosophies of idleness and evanescence,
the devil's workshop, laying down in clay, withering. Here on the podcast, we valorize philosophies of
idleness. So I thought that was an interesting point to talk about, especially in distinction to the kind
of mania that is present in today's world, the mania for labor, the mania for the phone, you know,
the, the constant influx of, of digital stimulation. And what makes idleness in today's world a kind of
evil versus the evils of mania? Let me say this, because I know that there, I share and harbor the same
revolutionary inclinations and proclivities as, as, as everyone else. The book on evil is a book against
genocidal war machines and empires. Because evil, if you look at historically, is always an underdog.
It's always a subversive movement. It's never the dominant, which is why I really dislike and I,
you know, I, with all due, all due respect and credit to, to the brilliant Hannah Arendt,
when she calls Nazism evil, she gives it way too much exotic credit. It is a disgusting, bureaucratic,
genocidal war machine that would have purged the entire earth if given enough time and chances.
But it's deeply neurotic. And evil is always from the vantage of, again, the loser or the exiled one.
If you look at Satan, if you look at Cain, they're the afflicted, they're the banished,
they're the unwanted, right? It's never the totalitarian dominant regime. That's not evil.
I hate to say it and I've said it all elsewhere. That's the good. That's what we call the good.
Because these are all utopian ideologies, whether it was
Stalinism or fascism or capitalism that have hundreds of millions of dead bodies to account
for. Slavery, Holocaust, gulags, right? Just killing fields on every corner of the earth.
These are all leaders who claim to be working for the good. I want to give them the respect
of their terminology then. That's what the good looks like to me. Absolute terror, right? Absolute
oppression. So for me, evil is always just, again, an escape artist's maneuver to try and unbind
oneself from that subservience, from that slavehood. For me then, it is a fundamentally revolutionary
technique. To be diabolical is to be elusive. And I'll just say this. Sometimes, I know we've been taught
since the great, great elder Marx that revolution is about struggle and about fighting. And he's a
dialectician. So he wants you in the center of the city, causing trouble, fighting head on. But I would
just remind you that there are two other forms of resistance that are equally crucial. One is doing
nothing. So that's idleness, as you talked about, right? And that's mastered by great decadent figures like
Rimbaud, who is young and gay and poor. By the way, he checks a lot of boxes of minorities and of
marginalized figures in his time. And his form of resistance is to not work, not become a productive
member of modern society, right? To stay at the fringes. So that's one form of resistance that mystics
also do a lot. They just check out of the mainstream in that regard. It's what the Beats did by becoming
hitchhikers, dropping out of college and all of that stuff. But then another thing is to leave.
You know, and this is what I did even with the United States. I got to a point with the US,
I'm back here now, but I was gone for six or seven years from the US. And the reason is because it got
to a certain threshold of obscenity for me, and of just complicity, just feeling like you had blood on
your hands just living there every day, that the most radical thing I could think to do was what
James Baldwin did, which is just leave. Not go fight, not go storm capitals or pretend I can make a
difference or change the fate of the planet. No, just turn my back on us and say, I want nothing to
do with this nonsense. I'm not part of this profane little game you're playing. And go
elsewhere for as long as you can, as long as you can survive. And that doesn't mean you're clean or,
you know, in unadulterated territory. Everywhere on this earth is stained by corruption and oppression
and dishonor. And I hate to say, it's most often people claiming to be good and ethical and noble who
are behind all of these insidious operations. You know, you can say what you want about my,
my dead, my dead master Nietzsche, for all, for all whatever faults he may have had or may have not
had, he didn't hurt anybody. And he never claimed to be a good man. He just did his thing, you know,
but he didn't hurt people. If you look at any accounts of him, he was not cruel. He was not vicious.
He was, didn't have a sadistic bone in his body. He embodied the generosity of the spirit. I try to
be the same as best I can. I try to be generous and kind and affirmative to others. And the way I do
that is by never circumscribing myself in an ideology of the good. Awesome. That's, that's fantastic.
Jason, please tell us what's next for you. I know you have another course coming up,
you have the two books coming out. Let us know where we can access these things.
Hopefully then what's coming up for me is another great conversation with all of you
some months down the line. I'll have more material on the new book on secret societies,
which is some great texts, books of poison, books of plagues, books of, you know, books of sleep. Oh,
that's one of the great things. We didn't get to talk about dream temples in ancient Egypt
or the sleep caves of Rome. So I'll throw that out there. It's just a thread for,
for us to, to chase after the next time.
Peace.
Bye.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
