You said when the tide turned against American workers, the professional managerial class
preferred to fight culture wars against the classes below while currying the favor of
capitalists it once despised.
The culture war was always a proxy economic war, but the 1960s divided the country into
the allegedly enlightened and the allegedly benighted with the professional managerial
class able to separate itself from its economic inferiors in a way that seemed morally justifiable.
Talk about that split, that moment.
I think you actually give it a year, 1972 or something, but talk about that split.
I think it really had to do with the fact that the Vietnam War was seen by college educated
liberal elites and radicals as being something that they condemned on their own and that there
were these and that the American people or the blue collar college uneducated workers were
all for that war.
In the wake of this, in the 70s, in the wake of the 70s, I think it was Barbara Ehrenreich
who actually wrote about this in The Fear of Falling.
People did studies about income levels, education levels and attitudes towards the Vietnam War.
And it turned out that the wealthy and the college educated were actually much more for the Vietnam
War because it skewed towards the Republicans and the blue collar people, people who did not have
college educations, actually had to send their sons to war.
And that in terms of population and demographics, they actually skewed more against the war
than the college educated, wealthy elites.
But in the mind of the liberal professors and the pseudo radicals who came out of 68 thinking
that they did yoga and they were cosmopolitan and the working people of America were benighted,
they took their cosmopolitanism, their anti-war position as a sign of their superiority
and that they would have to lead the American people out of the darkness.
So it was at this moment also that the rate of profit and capital goes down and the US government
decides to punish American workers with a kind of industrializing, massive industrialization of
East Asia as a bulwark against China.
And, you know, the offshoring of industrial jobs begins then.
It's in Jim English's book about prestige and the prestige economy that he writes that
in 1972, the weight of things produced in America starts to go down.
And so the immaterial economy like Hollywood, the press, finance, insurance, real estate,
the things you can't touch, the value of the economic activity of things that have no weight
goes up and like ball bearings, cars, you know, um, forks,
desks, these things that were once made blankets that were once manufactured in America,
the weight of these things actually starts to decline.
So it's actually a, um, an inflection point and decisions were made by policymakers that
were going to industrialize East Asia at the expense of the American worker.
And, you know, my family sort of benefited from it because we were, my grandmother's family was
in Taiwan.
Taiwan is a first world country now.
So in that sense, good, good on, it was great for Taiwan.
But in the end, this logic just extends into globalization in the 2000s, 2010s.
And, you know, you could say, well, I'm Chinese, right?
This kind of, um, de-industrialization benefits China.
It does benefit China, but it was, but at what cost and could it have been managed differently
so that, um, we don't have a devastated rust belt.
We don't have, um, US steel completely collapsing under the weight of global competition.
There was a concerted effort to, um, punish the American working class
because actually there was enormous, the, the, in the countercultural foment, we only,
um, hear about Chicago and, you know, the, the hippies and the yippies demonstrating against
the war, um, in, during the democratic national convention.
And we hear about Kent state.
We hear about the free speech movement.
We hear about, um, um, summer of love, but you know, in every factory in the Midwest, there were
wildcat strikes, walkouts, sit downs, what people call quiet quitting.
I mean, um, the Chevy Noah factories were notorious for, um, GM was like, um, increasing
the rate of production.
The American worker was refusing that kind of intensified tailorization.
And you know what the bosses said?
They said, you know what, you guys are too much trouble.
We can't handle it.
We're going to go somewhere else.
We're going to take this, we're going to move this factory somewhere else.
We're going to extend the logistics lines and we're going to punish you because you want too much.
And the level of the American working class, um, lives had been raised, uh, expectations were raised.
We had our 30 years of redistribution from the top down, um, since the second world war.
And then people are, you know, the people at the top were like, you guys have too much.
We're going to take it away.
And we have an intermediate class of managers and professionals who oversaw this.
I'm going to give you a really specific example of how the, um, um, credentialed elites
sell out the interest of their own class and wage workers to, um, to the, um, bosses, to the
capitalists, the UC system is a 10 campus system of public university.
And we have a board of regents who is appointed by the, um, governor.
You appointed board of regents who will, um, who are extremely wealthy people
who will donate to the university because the university is being starved by budget
cut after budget cut and the California tax revolt.
So recently we've had a lot of campus arrest, um, unrest, as you know, with faculty and students
protesting on behalf of, um, Palestine and against the genocide of their people
and the destruction of Gaza.
Um, the board of regents met yesterday.
They want people to be punished.
And they were speaking to our provost, Catherine Newman from Berkeley, who is a professor.
And they said to her three of the regions, big fat cat money guys.
Um, you know, we want to be able to move to punish faculty.
We don't like faculty governance.
It's go, it's too slow.
It is not working.
And this woman, this high level manager who probably makes like 500 to $800,000 a year,
um, twice, three times, four times, five times what, um, professors make, because in this,
we are the wage workers here, she's our manager.
And then you have the bosses or the regents.
Um, she said, yes, yes.
Um, we're going to get on it and we are going to make a committee.
Um, and she goes, we can do something by July.
And they're like, no, no, because they're all fucking CEOs and C-suite guys.
So they're like, no, it has to be made.
It has to be fabulous.
This is not working.
Faculty governance is not working.
It's the pride of the UC system.
That we have a faculty Senate instead of a union who is supposed to represent
the interests of the professors with regard to the administrators, the chancellors,
and now increasingly the donors and the regents.
And we have a woman, Catherine Newman, who is selected to be, you know,
the highest level under the chancellor, under the president, Michael Drake.
And she is rolling over.
She's basically saying, okay, okay, you're right.
You're right.
We need to move faster.
Um, July is too late.
Let's try to do something.
She's plague.
Her interests are to please the regents, not to protect academic freedom,
not to protect the faculty that she manages, not to protect the integrity of the university.
So we have seen this university be destroyed by the interests of the capitalists.
And Newsom is totally responsible because he appointed those people.
They are Philistines.
They hate the university and they hate the idea that there are people who they can't fire.
So they're basically like democratic versions of Trump.
And they are, they have a lot more hypocritical, um, attitudes about culture and about how they
love the humanities.
So I can totally vibe, understand the average American going, you know what?
I would prefer the real thing, red blood, red meat, you know, hate workers.
But, um, speak my anger guy.
Then those of you who are telling me I'm inferior, who tell me that my life, my, my, my life choices
are terrible and who are going to punish me anyway.
I'd rather be punished by the big orange baby than by the, you know, uh, Ozempic, um, Ozempic shooting,
you know, Halloween, Hollywood, um, liberal mogul.
It was like, there's a, you know, the, the fact that I would say this now,
it could be a breach of academic, um, propriety on their part.
They want to decide who they can fire.
They don't want to have, um, um, tenure or peer review or anything into, um, be intermediates or
process, due process.
All of that is too, going too slow.
It's not working.
They said this, it's not working.
And so it's very clear that they have, um, a handy, a handmaid in this woman who's going to execute
their will, who, who said she was going to execute their will, who didn't give them a
single word of pushback when they said faculty governance is not working.
Everything should be on the table.
This means they should be able to fire professors at will.
Well, that's been true at universities across the country.
They coordinated all summer, uh, and to impose all these draconian rules to create these academic
gulags.
You can't flyer.
You can't forget encampments, uh, at the few handful of professors, uh, and then the students
they're on probation up the street at Princeton.
Ruah Benjamin's teaching on probation.
Uh, so, uh, that's hardly limited to Irvine.
Um, and the UC, the UC, this is Berkeley.
This is the entire UC system, right?
They are coordinated.
They're, they're, they're talking to each other.
They're talking to each other.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Completely.
They've decided to bring down the hammer.
Sorry.
I want to talk about what the, this professional managerial class, because it's worse than of course,
virtue signaling and, uh, demonizing the ungrateful, uh, working class.
My mother's family is from Maine.
They come out of the working class, as I've seen what's happened up there.
It's awful.
Um.
And, uh.
I'm sorry.
I have good news in order from India.
Yeah.
Okay.
Good news in heaven.
Great news.
Okay.
Hopefully message out.
Okay.
Wait.
Let's go.
And then, Nick, let's go.
Day.
After Ż involve you.
Oh.
Economic region.
You may...
Call yourself.
Yeah.
What so?
Let's just quit of...
...
...
The memory.
...
...
...
One...
...
...
...
...
You kind of see this
...
..
Go.
