I'm going to describe a bioelectric interface, and I'm going to talk about how this interface allows us to communicate and thus reach new capabilities by taking advantage of the collective intelligence of cells and tissues.
And so I view living material as a kind of agential material, meaning that it has agendas, it has problem-solving capacities that already exist that we do not have to engineer, and thus we can take advantage of them.
So all of the primary data, the software, the papers, everything is all here, and then my own kind of thoughts about what it means are here if anybody's interested.
So here are the main points that I will try to transmit today.
First of all, that bodies operate fundamentally on a multi-scale competency architecture, meaning that at multiple scales there are problem-solving subunits that we can take advantage of and communicate with.
I'm going to claim that really definitive regenerative medicine is going to require learning to work together with the collective intelligence of groups of cells, not micromanaging the molecular hardware, but communicating novel anatomical goals.
I'm going to try to show specifically how endogenous electrical networks in all tissues are a very tractable new interface for using simple triggers to induce very complex downstream desirable outcomes.
I'm going to show you some tools for reading and writing these kind of pattern memories.
And I'll show you some applications in birth defects, regenerative repair, and a little bit in cancer.
But the fundamental message is that to really induce the ability of healing and restoring structure and function, we have to understand the material we're working with, and fundamentally it is an agential material.
So let's just talk about overall the idea of engineering.
So there are lots of different types of materials.
Of course, we have the most experience with passive materials, but now active matter and even computational materials are coming out.
And the thing is that you have to engineer very differently.
So when you engineer with Legos, the only thing you can count on the material to do is to keep its shape.
That's it.
Which means that it is on you to assemble everything exactly how you want it.
You are in control of every piece of it.
Well, the good news is that there are a few surprises because you are in control.
The bad news is that you are responsible for absolutely everything.
When you're dealing with an agential material, and this is a material that has built-in agendas, problem-solving, competencies, learning ability, and so on, something very different happens.
Imagine instead of trying to build a tower out of Legos, you're trying to build a tower out of dogs.
Well, this kind of strategy is not going to work because if you try to micromanage it and stack them one on top of the other, they'll simply run off.
But you can do something more interesting, which is you can train the dogs, in which case they make this tower, but it has an interesting property.
When you push it over, they will get back up and reform the tower autonomously.
So you gain something interesting.
You gain the self-repair capability, but at the price of having a very different way of engineering with this material than you engineer with that material.
This comes up a lot in biomedicine and in general in the philosophy of biology where people argue all the time, are living organisms machines?
Are they something else?
Well, in medicine, we have both perspectives because if you have an orthopedic surgeon, they do this kind of thing.
And you really want an orthopedic surgeon that believes that your body is a machine because they have hammers and screws and chisels and things.
And they will take advantage of the machine-like properties of the organism.
But when they're done with all this, they send you home to heal.
And everything that happens after that, all of the healing, the adjustments, none of those things do we have control over.
We're actually expecting the organism to do the rest.
And that's when other, including perhaps trauma-related psychotherapy and various other things that are an important part of healing.
So both of these components have their place.
You don't want a psychotherapist that thinks your body is a machine, but you definitely want somebody who's going to work at this level to understand the machine metaphor.
And there are people like Fabrizio Benedetti who work on placebo effects where the two worlds of cognitive semantics and molecular biology collide.
You know, he says words and drugs have the same mechanism of action, and it's true.
And so we really do need to understand kind of both perspectives.
So what I work on is fundamentally diverse intelligence, so different embodiments of different kinds of intelligence in the physical world.
And one of the things that we try to do is place systems along this kind of spectrum.
It's specifically a spectrum of persuadability.
That is, what kind of is a very engineering approach.
And in fact, my framework is called TAME, T-A-M-E, Technological Approach to Minds Everywhere.
And it's very much an engineering kind of take because I think that all of these intelligence and cognition claims are really protocol claims.
What you're really saying is, what tools can I use to interact with the system?
So here you're going to use the tools of physical rewiring.
You're not going to convince it of anything.
You're not going to reward or punish it.
Here, with these kinds of systems, now we're talking about the tools of control theory and cybernetics.
You can rewrite goals, and these are systems that are goal-directed.
And then we have some systems that encapsulate a lot of underlying mechanisms that you don't even need to know, really, to train the system.
They learn.
And so training with rewards and punishments, behavior shaping.
And then, of course, even more advanced, you can communicate with arguments and cogent reasons and so on.
So where something fits is all about what tools you're going to use.
But notice that that's an empirical question.
It's not a philosophical question.
So lots of times, people have background commitments, well, I think cells are down here, and I think only human brains are here, and whatever.
But the reality is, this is very much an empirical kind of experimental science.
So if you want to answer the question, where do cellular collectives fit in?
And a lot of people treat them as simple machines, and maybe down here.
The reality is, we should actually be using all of these tools to see what actually works.
And in our experience, you get a lot of surprises when you do that.
You can't just assume from the beginning.
Now, the reality is that all of us start life as a kind of a chemical machine, a little blob of chemistry and physics, an unfertilized oocyte.
And then through the amazing process of embryonic morphogenesis, we become something like this or even something like this.
So the journey from physics to mind is really slow and gradual, both evolutionarily and developmentally.
And what we need to develop is models of scaling.
In other words, how do the competencies of these kind of chemical systems result and transform into the kind of competencies of these goal-seeking systems?
What happens along the way?
How far back do these skills go?
And so on.
And all of that is described here.
Because we are fundamentally made of an agential material.
This is a single cell.
So there is no brain.
There's no nervous system.
But this thing is very competent in its own local needs in terms of metabolics.
And, you know, here it is hunting in its environment.
So this is the material that we're working with.
The thing with engineering with these agential materials is that in traditional synbio or robotics or any of that, all of this is on you to implement.
You have to make circuits to do all of these kinds of things.
In fact, you really, you know, synthetic biologists often are very frustrated with their medium because the material does not just do what you want it to do.
It does all kinds of other things.
And that makes it very, very difficult.
It's not a blank slate at all.
So traditionally, you hope the material is very, very passive and doesn't interfere with what you're trying to do.
And you do bottom-up engineering of specific circuits.
But what we are exploring is a new way of engineering with agential materials where we use human and AI discovered prompting to exploit the competencies that are already in the material.
And all of this is described here.
What are some of those properties?
Well, the first thing is that I showed you that cell, but actually you don't even have to be a cell to have learning, for example.
So we've shown that just gene regulatory networks by themselves, you don't need a nucleus or cell or, you know, a cytoskeleton.
You don't need any of that.
Just alone, a small set of molecules which up and down regulate each other is sufficient for six different kinds of learning, including Pavlovian conditioning.
And that means that what you should be able to do, and this is what we're doing right now,
we're building these automated devices to try to train cells for specific responses to drugs, for example, in a kind of Pavlovian assay where you can do drug conditioning.
You can condition one drug on another drug that didn't actually, it didn't used to do anything, so a kind of molecular placebo.
And that has lots of applications in, for example, allowing the use of drugs that you couldn't use by themselves.
Let's say they're too strong, too many side effects, whatever, but you can condition their effects on some other much more inert drug and things like that.
So by taking advantage of the competencies of the living material at the subcellular, cellular, and tissue level, we can make some interesting advances.
The material is actually incredibly plastic.
So here's a tadpole.
Here are the nostrils, the mouth, the brain, the gut, and there's the tail.
So what you'll notice here is that there are no eyes.
What we did is we prevented the primary eyes from forming, but we gave them an eye on their tail, and this eye makes an optic nerve, and the optic nerve comes out.
It synapses sometimes on the spinal cord, sometimes on the gut, sometimes nowhere.
But what's amazing is that if you actually test these animals for vision, and we built this device to test them on visual learning cues, you find out that they can see.
In fact, they can see quite well, and so this is very puzzling and unexpected.
You know, this is a very different sensory motor architecture.
The eye is not connected to the brain.
Why doesn't it take new rounds of evolution, you know, new generations of mutation and selection for this animal to adapt to this novel architecture?
Why does this work out of the box?
And partly it's because the material, the living material, has all kinds of interesting problem-solving competencies that we can talk about.
Another competency that it has is moving information across tissue.
So these are planaria.
These are flatworms.
If you cut them into pieces, every piece regenerates a perfect little worm.
Okay, so they're highly regenerative.
But one thing that's amazing is that if you train them, and they have this little centralized brain here, you train them to find food at a particular location on these bumpy discs.
It's called place conditioning.
You then cut off their head and, you know, amputate the entire head.
The tail will sit there doing nothing for about eight days.
It grows back a new brain.
And then you find out that this animal remembers the original information.
So not only is that the information resulting from training, not only is it somehow distributed throughout the body, but it's actually imprinted onto the new brain as the brain develops in order to drive behavior.
So this ability of moving information across radical reconstruction is another example of the plasticity of the material that we're dealing with.
You start to get the idea.
This is nothing like the kind of materials that we deal with when we engineer robotics or anything else.
One final example I want to show you is the caterpillar to butterfly transition.
So these caterpillars basically live in a two-dimensional world.
They crawl around, and they eat leaves, and they have a brain that's suitable for that.
So this is a kind of soft-bodied robot, so to speak.
This is a hard-bodied creature, completely different controller needed for this.
And that means that it needs a new brain.
And in fact, during this process, it dissolves the old brain, breaks up most of the connections, most of the cells die, and builds up a brand-new brain.
Now, it turns out that if you train the caterpillars, the butterflies remember the original information.
Now, it's not enough to ask how is this information stored while the brain is being taken apart.
I mean, that's an important question.
But actually, an even more puzzling thing is this.
The specific memories of the caterpillar are of no use to the butterfly whatsoever.
The butterfly doesn't like leaves.
It eats nectar.
So when the caterpillar learned to find leaves at a particular color disk, to move around and to move in a certain way that gets the leaves when prompted by a certain stimulus, that kind of thing is irrelevant to the butterfly.
The butterfly doesn't want leaves.
It doesn't move the same way.
So we can't store the actual information.
What it has to do is remap this information onto a novel architecture.
The things that the caterpillar learned are not just stored.
They're actually remapped and reinterpreted in a novel context.
So instead of leaves, nectar, and so on.
And this has many implications for human augmentation and stem cells implanted into human brains and so on.
How does information move through the body?
How is it reinterpreted in novel circumstances, right?
So you're starting to get the idea that the material is really kind of remarkable.
So the reason all of this works is because at every level of organization from molecular networks on up, we have problem-solving competencies.
So at every scale, these things are solving problems in different spaces.
And many of these spaces are very hard for us to visualize.
So we're good at visualizing intelligence in three-dimensional space.
We can see animals moving around, you know, medium-sized objects moving at medium speeds.
I mean, we can recognize that as intelligence.
But actually, living things work in a lot of other spaces.
For example, they traverse the space of gene expression, the space of physiological states, and the space of possible anatomical outcomes.
And so all of these systems traversing those spaces, it is not easy for us to visualize.
These are often high-dimensional and quite abstract spaces.
It's not easy for us to recognize problem-solving behavior in those spaces.
So I want to take one example.
I want to spend some time on really diving into one model system that we've developed to study this unconventional collective intelligence.
Okay, how do cells work together to solve specific problems?
And let's look at this.
How do they navigate morpheus space?
So here's the question.
We begin as a set of embryonic blastomeres.
Eventually, it gives rise to this amazing thing.
This is a cross-section through a human torso.
So how do the cells know to build this?
I mean, you might say, well, the genome.
But we can read genomes.
Now, we know that when you read a genome, you don't see any of this.
What you see is protein sequences.
And the genome directly specifies the hardware, the molecular hardware that every cell gets to have.
But all of this is the result of the physiology that runs on that hardware.
And this shape is not directly in the genome any more than the structure of a termite nest or the exact structure of a spider web is in the genome of these organisms.
It is the result of a construction following specific policies.
And the policies are not simply put each Lego where it goes.
So how do the cells know what to make and when to stop?
If something is missing or damaged, how do we repair it?
And as engineers, we wonder, past that, we wonder, what else is possible?
You know, these exact same cells, what else could they build if we knew how to make them do it?
So the way I see the endgame of this field is something I call the anatomical compiler.
The idea is that someday you will be able to sit in front of a system and you will be able to draw the plant, animal, organ, biobot, whatever, whatever structure that you want.
And what this thing would do is compile that anatomical description into a set of stimuli that would be given to specific cells to get them to build whatever it is that you want.
Okay, so complete control over growth and form.
If we knew what we were doing, that is what we would have and all of this would go away.
We would have no more issues with birth defects, traumatic injury, cancer, aging, degenerative disease.
If we knew how to convince cells to build specific structures, this would all go away.
Now, molecular biology and genetics have been going very well over the last decades.
Why don't we have this?
Why are we very far away from this?
I think it's because what's important here is that this is not a 3D printer.
The goal is not to micromanage the cells or the molecules or anything like that.
This is fundamentally a translation device.
What it's doing is converting your spec as the bioengineer into the goals of the cellular collective so that they are motivated to build exactly this.
So what we need is to take advantage of their capabilities to build different kinds of structures, to remap information, to move information through tissues, to reach anatomical goals despite various interventions, and then maybe we'll be able to have some of this.
So, like, one thing that really stands in our way is this idea that the genetics is some kind of a privileged level of control.
So let's just look at a simple example.
So here's an axolotl.
Baby axolotls have little forelegs.
Tadpoles do not have forelegs.
And what we do in our lab is we make something called a frogolotl.
So it's an early embryo that's a chimera between axolotl and frog.
And so now I ask a very simple question.
You have the entire axolotl genome.
It's been sequenced.
You have the entire frog genome.
We know what that looks like.
Is a frogolotl going to have legs or not?
And so the reality is that there is no current way to even begin to answer that question from the genetics that would tell you what's going to happen in this case.
So what the situation is currently is that we are very good at manipulating this level of information.
But what we actually care about is this.
We want to understand why do specific structures form?
Why do they fail to form?
Why do they overgrow?
And so on.
And so I think that we are today in biology and biomedicine where computer science was in the 40s and 50s.
Back then, in order to program, this is what you had to do.
You had to interface with the hardware directly.
You had to rewire the machine to get it to do something different.
This is where we are now.
All the exciting advances, CRISPR, genome editing, protein engineering, pathway rewiring, all of these things are at the level of the hardware.
And we're getting very good at manipulating the biological hardware.
But what we've barely begun to scratch the surface of is the software of life, the actual intelligence, and I mean that quite literally, of the material that we're dealing with.
We are engineering with our hands tied behind our back because we are neglecting the special properties of the material.
Now, what do I mean by intelligence?
I don't mean anything like human-level metacognition where you know you're intelligent and so on.
I simply mean what William James meant, which is the ability to reach the same goal by different means.
It's a goal-driven system.
It expends energy to reach certain states in some kind of problem space, and it has different degrees of competency or ingenuity in solving problems to get there.
So let's talk about this.
What kind of collective intelligence do cellular swarms actually have?
Well, the first thing you notice about development is that it's very reliable.
And so what I'm going to develop is this idea that groups of cells literally implement a collective intelligence, just like we do out of our neurons in our brains.
So we are all collective intelligences.
But living cells and tissues are a collective intelligence because they solve problems in the anatomical space.
Now, development is very reliable, but that is not why I call this intelligence.
It's not because it's reliable.
It is not because it gives rise to complexity.
Those are very easy.
Reliability and emergent complexity are cheap and easy, and that's to see in a variety of systems, and that's not what I mean by intelligence.
What I mean is William James' definition, which has to do with problem solving.
For example, if you cut an early embryo into pieces, you don't get half bodies.
You get monozygotic twins, triplets, and so on.
Each of these starting states can navigate anatomical space and get to its goal, which is the normal human target morphology, despite various perturbations.
It is not a hardwired process.
It gets really crazy with certain examples.
This is a cross-section through a kidney tubule lumen, and what you'll see is normally there's eight to ten cells in this newt.
But you can make polyploid newts that have multiple times the chromosome numbers, you know, to 4n, 6n, 8n newts, and so on.
And when you do this, you discover that, first of all, the cells get very big because they adjust to the amount of DNA, but the newt stays the same size, and that's because the cells automatically adjust the number of cells to their newt size.
In fact, you can make the cells enormous where one cell will wrap around itself and still give you the same anatomical structure.
But notice something very interesting.
This is a different molecular mechanism.
This is cell-to-cell communication and tubulogenesis.
This is cytoskeletal bending.
So what we have here is the ability to reach the same goal in anatomical space while using different molecular underlying tools to get there.
I mean, that is the definition of intelligence, using various available tools to get your goals met.
Now, think about what this means as a newt coming into the world.
What can you count on?
Well, you can't count on knowing how many copies of your genes you're going to have.
You can't count on having the right size and number of your cells.
Not only can't you really count on your environment, you can't even count on your own parts.
This is what I mean by problem solving.
You have to get to where you're going in anatomical space, assemble a correct newt, no matter what's going on with your parts.
And the material has incredible competency to do it.
Now, some animals keep this throughout their lifespan.
So like this salamander or these axolotls, you can amputate anywhere along the limb.
They will grow exactly what's needed, and then they stop.
That's the most remarkable thing about regeneration is that it knows when to stop.
So it's not just a hardwired set of processes to build the limb.
What it's really doing is a kind of homeostasis, anatomical homeostasis.
It's minimizing the error between this state and this state by filling in.
And when the error goes to below acceptable levels, then it stops.
And they regenerate their eyes and their jaws and their spinal cords and portions of the brain and heart and so on.
So it's this very generic property of being able to stay in a certain region of anatomical space and get there when you need to by different means.
Of course, mammals have this to some extent.
So humans regenerate their liver.
Human children regenerate fingertips.
And deer regenerate large amounts of bone, vasculature, innervation every year.
But they're certainly not as good as salamanders.
So how does all this work?
When you have something like this, how does the tissue know what the correct pattern is?
How does it know when to stop?
How does it know when to build?
We've already talked about the fact that DNA by itself doesn't tell you that answer.
So we've started asking this question years ago and trying to get inspiration from neuroscience.
So neuroscience, we know a little bit about something about how goal-seeking systems represent and achieve their goals.
And it has to do with this interesting electrical architecture.
The hardware looks like this.
It's a bunch of cells connected to each other with these electrical synapses, known as gap junctions.
And they have ion channels on their surface.
They create a voltage gradient.
And that voltage gradient may or may not propagate to their neighbors.
So it's an electrical network.
If you track the electrical network over time, so this is a living zebrafish brain, you see these kinds of dynamics.
So this electrophysiology, according to neuroscience, is the medium of the collective intelligence of these cells.
What makes this a fish instead of a pile of neurons and what gives it goals that no individual neuron can fathom is a kind of cognitive glue.
That cognitive glue is bioelectricity.
It's the fact that these things are connected into an electrochemical network that processes information that enables this to be more than the sum of its parts.
And what neuroscientists try to do is they try to decode it.
So they have this neural decoding project where they try to read the electrophysiology and say, well, what is the cognitive content of this collective of cells?
Well, what is it thinking about?
What does it remember?
It turns out that this kind of architecture is extremely ancient evolutionarily.
It was invented around the time of bacterial biofilms.
So every cell in your body has ion channels.
Most of them are electrically connected to their neighbors.
This is not about neurons.
It's not about brains.
It is an absolutely ancient system for processing, storing, and integrating information across space and time.
And so we asked, could it be possible that this kind of network not only became sort of evolutionarily adapted to process information about behavior and solve problems in three-dimensional space for animals that run around and do things,
but could it be the more ancient function of this is to store morphological information?
And could the bioelectrics underlie the collective intelligence of cells that have to solve anatomical problems long before they encounter behavioral problems?
So we developed some tools, and the idea was to apply the same neural decoding strategy to non-neural cells.
To ask, is neuroscience really about neurons, or is it really about how cognition emerges through electrochemical networks, or in fact other networks,
and how that gives us the ability to communicate goals to novel systems?
So here are the tools that we developed.
First of all, the use of various voltage reporter dyes and proteins to track the bioelectrical conversations that all these cells are having with each other.
So think of this as the equivalent of trying to do a brain scan and recording all the electrical states of all the neurons.
And then we do lots of computer simulations to try and reconstruct the network and understand its properties.
How do these electrical gradients spread?
How do they form?
How to control them, and so on.
I'll show you just a couple of examples.
This is a frog putting its face together.
So a time lapse of an early embryonic xenopus making its face here.
This is one frame out of that video.
And what you see here is that you can catch the pre-pattern, the scaffold, that tells all the organs where to be.
So here's where the animal's right eye is going to be, the mouth, the placodes.
This is the pattern that controls the downstream gene expression and location of all the different organs.
And we can read it out from here, the fact that this is what the future face is going to look like by reading these electrical pre-patterns.
So that's an endogenous pattern and, in fact, required for normal morphogenesis.
This is a pathological pattern.
So what we've done here is inject a human oncogene into these embryos.
Eventually, it'll make a tumor, and the tumor will start to metastasize.
But in the meantime, the first thing that happens is the cells electrically disconnect from their neighbors.
They depolarize and they disconnect.
And on a voltage scan, you can see where this is going to be.
And, in fact, we're developing this as a cancer diagnostic because you can actually see where the cells are going to disconnect.
What happens when they disconnect is that they roll back to their ancient unicellular lifestyle.
As far as they're concerned, the rest of the body is just environment.
They will go where they want.
They will reproduce as much as they want.
They become amoebas.
The thing that makes an organism or an organ out of individual cells is the bioelectrical glue, the ability to form a network that has large-scale goals, such as building specific organs and maintaining them, not the tiny little goals of individual cells.
Okay, so this is all about the kind of the monitoring and the reading of the electric code.
What about the functional experiments?
Because we need to know whether these things are actually doing anything.
Are they epiphenomena or are they actually instructive?
So, in order to manipulate the electric content of these collectives, we don't use any magnets, waves, fields, frequencies, electrodes, nothing like that.
We do what neuroscientists do, which is to hack the normal interface that the cells are using to control each other.
That means altering the ion channel properties, opening and closing and mutating them, so pharmacology, optogenetics, things like that, and the same approach to these gap junctions.
So, we can control the topology of the network, which cell communicates with which cell, and the electrical state, which cells have what voltage patterns within them.
And so, now I'm going to show you just very briefly, we could spend hours looking at all the examples, but I'm just going to show you a couple of quick examples of what happens when you do this.
What do these voltage patterns actually do?
Well, the first thing that you can do is you can try to reproduce that electric face pattern somewhere else.
So, I showed you there was a little eye spot, a little voltage spot that says build an eye here.
What happens if we put that spot somewhere else?
So, we can take ion channel RNA, encoding a particular, for example, potassium channel, inject it into cells that are going to give rise to this gut, and we're going to give them this weird voltage pattern that says build an eye.
And guess what the cells do?
They build an eye.
And those eyes have the same lens, retina, optic nerve, all the same components.
Now, notice a couple of interesting things from this.
First of all, the bioelectric pattern is instructive.
If you put the pattern somewhere, it will force the formation of a whole organ.
Number two, it is modular.
We did not tell these cells how to build an eye.
We have no idea how to build an eye.
There are so many cell types and so many different genes.
We have no clue.
What we provided was a high-level prompt or subroutine call that says build an eye here.
That's it.
The system takes care of the rest.
Very much like when you train a dog or a horse, you do not try to micromanage the synaptic structures or the firing of the muscles, the nerves in the muscles in the legs.
You are providing stimuli, high-level stimuli, and letting the system readjust in a way that is appropriate to what you're trying to get to.
So the same thing here, highly modular.
Also, if you look at the developmental biology textbook, they will tell you that only the tissue up here, the ectoderm out here, the anterior neorectoderm, is competent to make eye.
That's because they've been prompting it with the so-called master eye gene, PAC-6.
But it turns out that it's not the tissue competency that was limited.
It was our competency in knowing the right prompt.
If you prompt it with the bioelectric signal, actually, you can get eyes pretty much anywhere in the body.
So this reminds us how important it is to be humble and to think about the fact that we don't know all the competencies of our material.
The limitations, the developmental constraints, all of these things, they might be constraints on our own imagination and knowledge.
We don't know that there are actual constraints here.
So this is important to keep in mind.
And, by the way, the material self-scales, which means that if we inject only a few cells here, so the blue cells are the ones we injected, this whole lens is made of other cells that the blue cells recruited.
In other words, we tell these cells make an eye, they know there's not enough of them to make an eye, and they recruit all these other cells to get the job done.
We did not have to teach them to do that.
We didn't have to worry about it.
So the material has certain autonomous competencies that we want to take advantage of in engineering.
We've also applied this to leg regeneration.
And so frogs, unlike salamanders, do not regenerate their legs.
And so normally you amputate and nothing happens.
We developed a bioelectric cocktail that sends a signal that says build a leg, not a scar.
Immediately they turn on this MSX1 gene, this blastema gene.
They start building a leg with by 45 days, you've already got some toes and a toenail.
Well, in our most recent experiments, 24-hour stimulation, so the signal, we're sending the signal for 24 hours.
This ion channel drug cocktail is there in the wearable bioreactor for 24 hours.
You get a year and a half of leg growth from that, a year and a half.
So again, the idea is not to micromanage it.
We're not 3D printing it, no scaffolds, no talking to stem cells.
We are telling the collective on day one, go down the leg building route, not the scarring route, and then we take our hands off the wheel.
And then eventually you get a pretty respectable leg.
And so here I have to do a disclosure because David Kaplan and I, we are scientific co-founders of this company called Morphoceuticals,
which is now trying to move that from frog to mammals, and David makes these wearable bioreactors.
And then we try to figure out the payload, the ion channel modulators that will trigger leg regeneration.
And so all of this is done with the help of a quantitative predictive models.
So we need to be able to start by knowing which channels are expressed, and then a biorealistic electrophysiology model of how the cells react to each other,
and then large-scale organ and tissue regionalizations all the way through to an actual algorithm computed by this electrical network to make decisions.
How many heads, how many fingers, symmetry type, and all of that.
And this is what we try to do.
I'll show you one example of the use of this kind of approach where we found that, so here's a normal, this is a normal brain of a tadpole.
So, you know, it's got left and right hemispheres.
Here's the forebrain.
Here's the midbrain.
Here's the hindbrain.
You can make a mutation.
For example, notch is an important neurogenesis gene.
You make a mutation.
The forebrain is missing.
The midbrain and hindbrain are a big bubble.
They're all profoundly disabled animals.
They don't have any behavior.
The brain is a complete mess.
What we found is that that bioelectrical pattern, I showed you the one that controls the formation of the face.
Well, there's another one that controls the formation of the brain.
And if you force the right pattern, even though you have this mutation, you end up with perfectly normal animals.
These guys not only have a normal brain, but they have normal gene expression and they have normal IQs.
Their IQs are indistinguishable from controls, even though they're bearing this really terrible notch mutation.
And that was done by using the computational model, which suggested one particular ion channel called HCN2, that would get the brain pattern back to the right level.
Even the right pattern, I should say, as the right spatial pattern, even though the notch is mutated.
So, and then we can actually mimic this effect by using HCN2 channel openers to trigger existing HCN2 channels, or we can introduce novel HCN2 channels directly.
So, what this shows is that we can use the computational model to ask a simple question.
If we have an incorrect state, for example, a tumor state or a malformation or a scar or something else, if we know what the correct bioelectric state is, and that's a big if because this kind of physiomics has not been done yet.
So, that's something that we're doing now, is to characterize what all the correct patterns are.
Then you can ask the computational model to say, what channels could I open and close to go from the incorrect state to the correct state?
So, this is part of this cracking this bioelectric code to understand what are the prompts, the stimuli in this language that are going to motivate the system to build all these complex things we don't know how to build.
So, you can play with a very early version of this, but the biggest rate limiting step here is obtaining all the physiomic data.
You cannot infer it from genomics, proteomics, or anything like that, because these channels open and close in place.
So, just because you know the expression level of a channel does not tell you the voltage of the cell, so we have to do measurements in the live state.
So, that's the idea, is that this kind of system to help you pick electroceuticals, ion channel drugs, for moving the patterns to the correct message that you want to send.
So, now, so this is kind of the biomedical side.
Let's back off of this a little bit and talk about the broader aspects of engineering.
What if we try to go beyond the normal patterns?
So, what I've told you is that we can restore normal patterns, face, heart, gut, whatever, we can restore the normal patterns.
But, first of all, where do these patterns come from, and what can the system do besides those patterns?
Well, the traditional answer is, again, well, they come from evolution.
So, over millennia, what's happened is that the genome that gives rise to oak trees has learned to make this.
So, in other words, the acorn contains the genetic material, and what the genetic material knows how to do is make this.
And that view, focusing on the hardware and the fact that this is what normally happens, is really limiting.
This really, development is almost too reliable in that it lulls us into a false sense of its limitations.
What is the option space, actually, around this?
And Darcy Thompson, back in 1917, already understood the amazing concept of an anatomical morpheus space of possibilities.
So, what else can the system do?
Well, bioengineers are ideally suited to find out what they can do.
For example, one thing you can build out of these cells is something like this.
Now, interestingly, this was not done by a human bioengineer.
It was done by a wasp.
So, what happens is these wasps prompt, they signal the cells to build something that the cells actually are quite capable of building.
But who would have known this?
If you hadn't seen this, would anybody ever look at these?
I mean, you know, incredibly reliably, 100% of the time, this acorn builds nice, flat, green structure of the appropriate shape.
Who would have known they could actually do this if prompted correctly?
So, that space of possibilities is something that's here for us engineers to understand.
And remember, this is not made of insect cells.
This is made of the plant's own cells.
What's also interesting is that more advanced engineers induce better elaborate constructions.
So, bacteria will make galls that look like this.
They're basically a big lump.
Fungus does a little better, you know, these kind of well-defined lumps.
And the nematodes make this kind of thing.
Mites do a little better.
But insects can do something.
They can make the leaf do something like this.
So, again, it's this idea that the intelligence of the system and the intelligence of the engineer who seeks to prompt it are tightly linked.
You do not see what your material is made of if you either are incapable of it or are, you know, sort of closed off to the possibility.
There's a real correlation here between what the hacker can do and what the material proves to be capable of.
So, let's look at a couple of animal examples.
What if we take some, I'll just pause that.
What if we, this is a frog embryo.
In the cross section, we take some of these epithelial cells off the top and we dissociate them and we put them in a petri dish.
Now, a few things could happen.
They could die.
They could spread out and get away from each other.
They could form a two-dimensional model layer.
Many things could happen.
What they do instead is something very interesting.
Overnight, they clump together and they form this little thing.
I'll show you in a minute what it does.
Let's just look at the individual cells here.
So, these are the individual cells.
Look at this little thing.
Okay.
So, this is just a group of each one of these is one cell.
So, they move together.
So, this little, you know, sort of the horse looking thing, we call them xenobits.
And these are the individual cells trying to figure out what they're going to make now that they've been liberated from their normal environment.
Their normal environment has all kinds of other cells telling them what to do, specifically to be a boring two-dimensional outer covering on the embryo surface.
The light flash, by the way, is a calcium that you're seeing here.
This is calcium signaling.
There's been an event here.
These two cells have signaled to each other somehow.
So, there's this incredible diversity in these kind of shapes that they make and the way they move.
But together, once they get together, this is what they look like.
So, these are our xenobots.
Xenopus laevis is the name of the frog species.
And it's a bot because we think this is a biorebotics platform.
So, it moves on its own.
The way it moves is it has little cilia, these little hairs that spin.
They're normally used to propagate the mucus down the side of the animal's body.
But here, they're being repurposed to row against the medium.
So, they can go in circles.
They can patrol back and forth like this.
They have collective behaviors that they do.
Here's a xenobot traversing a maze of still water.
So, here, it's going to come down here.
It's going to take this corner without bumping into the opposite wall.
So, it takes the corner.
And then here, for some reason, it turns around and goes back where it comes from.
So, autonomous, spontaneous behaviors.
Again, there's no nervous system here.
What you can do is put calcium reporters in here.
And so, you see the cells are very active.
There are lots of computations going on.
Again, no neurons.
This is just epithelial cells.
But what you can do, and this is a preprint, and we have a couple things more in the pipeline.
You can start to apply various neuroscience metrics that people apply to calcium signaling in brains to ask, what does the causal architecture here look like?
What does the information processing look like?
And how similar is it to brains?
So, stay tuned.
We have some exciting data on that.
But you can apply it directly to these things that are absolutely not neural.
They self-heal.
So, if you cut them almost in half.
So, let's look at this.
We cut this thing half.
Look at that hinge there.
Imagine the force that it takes through that little hinge to, like, you know, do this sort of bicep curl up here and fold back.
So, they heal back to their normal xenobot shape.
The most amazing thing so far that we've found is something called kinematic self-replication.
So, we've made it impossible for these animals to replicate in the normal froggy fashion.
But it turns out that if you give them a bunch of loose skin cells, so here's a bunch of loose epithelial cells, what they will do is they will run around and condense these cells into little balls like this.
And the little balls, because they're working themselves with an agential material, these are not passive particles, much like us and much like evolution, we work with agential materials to make xenobots.
And they do the same.
And, therefore, these little balls mature into the next generation of xenobot.
And guess what they do?
They run around and make the next generation and the next generation.
So, this kinematic replication is something that we have never seen in any other creature on Earth.
And that raises an interesting question.
What has this genome actually learned through its time on Earth?
Well, it certainly learned to do this.
This is what we see 99.9% of the time.
They make this particular developmental sequence, and they make these tadpoles.
But much like with that oak leaf, if you think that's all it can make, then you're missing quite a lot, because the default hardware is great, but it's also capable of lots of other things.
And so, these cells up here, when you liberate them from the instructive influence of these other cells, you find out what they really are capable of doing, which is to form a xenobot, then have a developmental sequence.
This is about an 83-day-old bot.
Who knows what it's becoming?
We have no idea.
And then they have these behaviors.
So, the thing is, there's never been a xenobot before.
There's never been selection to be a good xenobot.
There's never been selection for kinematic self-replication.
Where do these things come from?
These competencies of our material.
Previously, in the first half of the talk, we were talking about specific patterns that correspond to healthy, normal organs and so on.
And those patterns, you could think, are set by evolution and so on.
And so, we're just trying to remind the tissue of what it needs to do.
But actually, now you're starting to see that, well, there are many other potential outcomes on the table.
And how do we understand this?
So, there's really two ways to think about this.
One way, which is what a lot of people say, is that this is emergent.
What they say is that, well, yes, if you have large numbers of subunits following simple rules, you're going to have certain emergent behaviors.
And that's true as far as it goes.
But what I think we don't want is to be surprised every time that happens and to say, oh, look, this is a random kind of a bag of emergent things that sometimes occurs.
What I think we ought to do is use the hypothesis that what we're actually exploring is a structured space.
So, not just random stuff that emerges in various systems, but actually the way that mathematicians think that, at least many mathematicians think that they're exploring, they're discovering, they're not inventing, they're discovering a platonic space of mathematical truths.
My feeling now is that when we engineer, what we're doing is creating vehicles, so Xenobots and so on, are vehicles for exploring the latent space of possibilities.
Each one of these things is helping us to see.
So, there's a little point in that space that corresponds to the normal embryo.
But outside of that point are all the other things that that hardware is capable of.
And what evolution is doing is producing pointers into that space.
And we can manipulate those with our synthetic bioengineering to see what else is out here.
I would rather think that this is a space that has a metric, it has a structure.
We can systematically explore it, not sort of randomly encounter emergent surprises and think that it's just random.
So, what I think is going to happen for next generation of biomedicine is that we are going to use AI and other tools to explore that space, and in particular, not to try to micromanage the system, but to explore the communication space.
The space of signals, the space of behavior-shaping cues that we can give to these highly competent multi-scale systems to get them to do what we want.
And in fact, all kinds of other wild things that we've never seen before.
And so, the thing is that reprogramming complex outcomes top-down, meaning figuring out what are the signals that are going to motivate the cells to do a particular thing, not micromanage them, but reset their set points that they're pursuing, you need smart interventions.
There needs to be a kind of impedance match between the tools that you're using and what you're hoping to see.
So, the tools themselves, you know, drugs are very simple.
They're kind of low-agency tools.
They just do the same thing.
That HCN2 channel that I told you about that fixes the brain is a little better.
It's context-sensitive.
So, it will open and close in different cells depending on what's going on.
So, it's slightly smarter than typical drugs.
But we can do way better than that.
We can use what I call agential interventions.
And what might an agential intervention look like?
So, this is one example.
If I ask you what you thought this was, you might think this is something I got out of a pond somewhere.
If I could tell you that if you were to sequence this, the genomic sequence would be Homo sapiens, 100% human.
What this is is something we call an anthrobot.
Anthrobots are derived from a patient tracheal epithelia.
We choose tracheal epithelia because it's ciliated.
So, you've got these little hairs.
Here they are.
And therefore, the thing is going to be able to swim around and you're going to be able to see what it's doing.
We have a specific protocol that forms these.
And these are adult patient cells that do not – we're not using any Yamanaka factors.
We're not – there's no weird nanomaterials.
There's no scaffolds, nothing.
All we're doing is letting these cells reboot their multicellularity in a new context.
What do they do?
Well, they form this little self-motile structure that does not correspond to any developmental stage of a human.
It has thousands of altered gene expression changes.
So, its transcriptome is completely different than the tissue that it comes from just because of its new lifestyle.
There's nothing physically different about it.
Here, this is kind of a cool capability.
So, this is all – these are all human neurons up here.
We made a big scratch wound through it, right?
So, here comes the anthrobot.
They can move on their own through these kinds of wounds.
When they accumulate, you get something called a superbot cluster like this.
And if you actually lift it up four days later, you see that what it was doing under there was knitting the two sides together.
Okay?
So, these anthrobots got in there and they, for some reason, they knitted this together.
So, two interesting things.
One is, who would have thought that your tracheal epithelial cells that sit there quietly in your airway for really long periods of time are actually capable of, in a new environment, given the opportunity,
are able to have a whole new life as a self-motile novel construct with a novel transcriptome that has these capabilities of healing neuronal wounds.
And the second thing is, this neuronal wound thing is – that's the first thing we tried.
This wasn't, you know, experiment 82 out of 1,000 things we tried.
This was the first thing.
So, my guess is that they probably do a lot of interesting things.
We just don't know about them.
And these are these weird assays.
You know, you have to really kind of go outside the box to say, okay, we're going to take adult patient cells.
We're not going to try to revert them or anything like that.
We're going to see if they want to make a new kind of organism and what is that capable of.
And so, what else, you know, really, like, the sky is the limit here in terms of assays.
What can we test on these?
So, I call these an agential intervention because these things are incredibly complex.
We have very little hope in the near future of making anything directly as any kind of a biobot or, you know, that kind of an implantable device or anything that has the complexity of these cells.
They're self-assembling.
They come from the same body.
They're patient-specific.
So, if you use them inside the body, you don't need immune suppression or anything like that.
But they already have all the priors of inflammation, health, disease states, interactions with bacteria, you know, from the airway and everything.
An incredible number of sensors and effectors and amplification is all there.
And we can use them to do these kinds of amazing things.
But before we do, we need to understand what they're actually capable of on their own.
So, to finish up here, this is kind of how I see the future of medicine.
There are two major categories.
This is what the vast majority of work has been done on.
So, the bottom-up kinds of hardware-focused things like surgery and genomic editing and explicit genetic circuits and so on.
But this is an emerging area both for bioengineering and medicine where I haven't even really talked about this, about behavior shaping, training cells and tissues for specific outcomes.
We've talked about this, the discovery of morphocuticals and specifically electroceuticals, which are a subset of this,
which trigger, use the electrical interface to reset the set points that the cells are working towards.
And all kinds of agential implants of which I think anthrobots are just the first kind of, the first example.
So, I think, and you can see all of this developed here, that basically what's going to happen is that the future of both biomedicine and bioengineering is going to look a lot less like chemistry and a lot more like a kind of somatic psychiatry.
We're going to have quantitative, rigorous computer models of the memories, the preferences, the past beliefs, and the competencies of cells and tissues in their spaces, in physiological space, in transcriptional space, in anatomical space.
And by manipulating behavior, not molecular pathways, but manipulating goal-driven behavior in these other spaces, I think that avails us of an incredibly interesting toolkit for biomedical engineering and regenerative medicine focused around the emerging field of diverse intelligence.
So, if anybody wants to dig deeper, these are some of the papers that discuss kind of conceptually the thinking that goes into this area.
And I want to thank all the amazing people who did all the work.
So, Doug Blackiston is the biologist who did all the Xenobot work, and Gizem Gomushkaya did the anthrobot stuff.
And then the eye development, Sherry Au and Weibhoff-Pai, and lots of other people.
Patrick developed all the latest bioelectric voltage imaging, originally done by Danny Adams.
Computational modeling with Alexis Paitak.
And the kind of planarian regeneration work, Fallon Durant.
And Patrick Erickson is doing the cell learning stuff.
So, I'll thank those folks, all of our amazing collaborators, support from various foundations, so our funders.
And then, again, disclosures for competing interests, because these three companies support some of our work.
So, I'll stop there.
Thank you so much.
