Ever since I made a video on Jordan Peterson and postmodernism back in April, people have
been asking me to respond to this book, Explaining Postmodernism by Stephen Hicks. This is the
main source of Peterson's critique, and he has publicly recommended this book.
I want to recommend a book first to everyone here. It's called Explaining Postmodernism.
People told me that I'd do better responding to Hicks instead of Peterson, as his account
is more in-depth and systematic. I initially wasn't going to do it because I was a bit
tired of making videos defending postmodernism, but when I started reading it, I changed my
mind. That is because this book does not just misrepresent certain postmodern philosophers,
it misrepresents certain modern philosophers too, and I think pointing out where it goes
wrong is important, considering the popularity it has had in online circles.
Because of this, I hope that you watch this video even if you have already decided that
you have nothing but contempt for postmodernism. Even if you feel indifferent about postmodernism,
a critique of this book extends beyond that.
First of all, I'm using the 2014 print of the expanded edition of this book. You can find
a link to it from the official Stephen Hicks website in the video description. I'm going
to be referencing the page numbers of this book in the corner of the video. Additionally, whenever
I reference a source or an attachment, I'm going to show a number which corresponds to
a source in the video description. So let's begin.
Explaining postmodernism has a main thesis. The failure of epistemology made postmodernism
possible, and the failure of socialism made postmodernism necessary. To show this, Hicks
puts forth an admirably long historical account of postmodernism's origins, starting all the
way back at the Enlightenment era. This is why over half of the book is not about postmodern
philosophers as such, but about the philosophical and political events leading up to its genesis.
And this is why it covers a lot of thinkers. Kant, Hegel, Rousseau, Nietzsche, and Heidegger,
just to name a few. As well as some political movements on both the left and the right.
The very first page of the first chapter lists what Hicks takes to be the main postmodernist
thinkers. This is important, and in my opinion, a useful approach. Postmodernism as a label
has been used to designate a large number of different thinkers, and Hicks listing who he
takes to be the main ones gives us a working idea of the focus of his critique. The four
leading strategists that Hicks names are Foucault, Derrida, Lyotard, and Rorty. At the very beginning,
however, there's a problem. He lists Catherine MacKinnon and Andrea Dworkin as postmodernists. Now,
I knew that they are associated with radical feminism, but I had never heard of them being
associated with postmodernism before. I thought, well, maybe they don't explicitly identify as
postmodernists, but do adopt some elements of postmodern theory. After looking into it,
I found out that even that is not the case. In fact, Andrea Dworkin's book Mercy has some implicit
criticisms of postmodernism, as she appeals to, quote, keen, neutral, and inescapable observations
and analytical objectivity. If that's not enough, Catherine MacKinnon has been an explicit critic
of postmodernism with her article that's in a pretty straightforward way titled Points Against
Postmodernism, where she makes some very common criticism of postmodern theory. Quote,
Part of the problem in coming to grips with postmodernism is that, pretending to be profound
while being merely obscure, slathering subjects with words, its self-proclaimed practitioners
fairly often don't say much of anything. On page four, Hicks says that, quote,
Dworkin and her colleague Catherine MacKinnon then call for the censorship of pornography on
postmodern grounds. The source he lists says no such thing. In fact, in the aforementioned article,
MacKinnon explicitly rejects arguments made on postmodern grounds. Instead, she distinguishes
herself from postmodern feminists on the basis of the kind of a realist epistemology that Hicks
supports, saying, Dworkin's and my proposed law that pornography be recognized as a practice of
sex discrimination is based on the realities of the experience of women violated through the making
and use of pornography. Under it, women's testimony about their abuse through pornography would be
recognized as evidence so that pornography is legally seen to do the injuries that it does
in reality. And further, quote, postmodernism vitiates human rights to the extent it erects
itself on its lack of relation to the realities of the subordinated, because it is only in social
reality that human violation takes place, can be known, and can be stopped. So, already on the first page,
while listing what he perceives to be postmodernism's main theorists, he, with no explanation, lists two
women who are critics of postmodernism. I looked into all of Hicks' sources, and none of them imply
in any way that Dworkin and MacKinnon are postmodernists. So, my only guess then, if it's not just sloppy
research on Hicks' part, is that he is willfully trying to conflate postmodernism with radical feminism.
This would also explain what happens on page 17. In describing postmodernist education, he says that
according to postmodernists, quote,
postmodern education should emphasize works not in the canon. It should focus on the achievements of
non-whites, females, and the poor. It should highlight the historical crimes of whites, males, and the rich.
And it should teach students that science's method has no better claim to yielding truth than any other method.
To support this claim, he cites a work by Chandra Talpade Mohanty. Now, already, such a sweeping claim
would need more sources than the statements of a single, quite marginal professor. But what's more
is, I looked into her lectures, and they have no connections with postmodernism. She is a postcolonial
feminist. Now, even if Hicks wanted to equate postmodernism with feminism, he could have at least
cited postmodern feminists, but he didn't. Whether willful or not, this can just be dismissed as a
mistake. But the sloppy scholarship doesn't end there. Already in the second page, Stephen Hicks
attributes this quote to Foucault. It is meaningless to speak in the name of, or against, reason, truth,
or knowledge. Well, Foucault never said that. Todd May said that while talking about Foucault,
but the quote is directly attributed to Foucault. I don't know, maybe Hicks just got confused
because they're both bald men. But that's not the only false quote. On page 131, he attributes this
quote to Hitler. Basically, National Socialism and Marxism are the same. That's a straight-up
fabricated quote. And I'll attach the full transcript of the 1941 Hitler speech that the
quote is attributed to, so you can see for yourself that it says nothing remotely similar. Now, it's not
fabricated by Stephen Hicks, so it's not necessarily the case that he did this deliberately, but again,
it's a sign of at least sloppy scholarship, it seems that Hicks did not double-check his citations
and sources, and it hangs over the book like a black cloud. Then, right after that, on page 3,
we see the first instance of a very basic misreading. Quoting Leotard on the equation of power and reason,
he says that, quote, postmodernism then becomes an activist strategy against a coalition of reason
and power. This misunderstands what Leotard, like Foucault, saying that power and knowledge are
inseparable implies. It's not that the coalition between reason and power must be fought against.
It is inevitable. It is inherent to both knowledge and power. And this is not an inherently bad thing.
In some cases, it can be bad, and in some cases, good. For a simple example, in a school classroom,
a teacher has power over the student to assign readings, homework, to tell the student what the
right answers are, and the power to fail the student if one does badly. However, it is this very power
that can transmit knowledge from teacher to student, just like the transmission of knowledge from
scientist to general public depends on certain powers one has over tools, institutions, and publication
mechanisms. To say that this implies a fight against the coalition of reason and power is completely false.
An even worse misreading appears on the very next page. Here, Hicks quotes Leotard again, where
Leotard says that, quote, Saddam Hussein is a product of Western departments of state and big companies.
This, of course, refers to the fact that during the war between Iran and Iraq, the U.S. sent billions of
dollars in economic aid to Hussein's government. And, as was reported on ABC in 92, the Reagan-slash-Bush
administrations permitted, and frequently encouraged, the flow of money, agricultural credits,
dual-use technology, chemicals, and weapons to Iraq. However, Hicks interprets this as saying that,
quote, Hussein is a victim and a spokesman for victims of American imperialism the world over.
This can't even just be a misunderstanding on Hicks' part. Leotard never even calls Hussein a victim,
or any equivalent, let alone calling him a spokesman of victims the world over. It's genuinely baffling
how Hicks even managed to come to this characterization from the quote he used, unless he tried to
misrepresent it deliberately. I'm not actively trying to find things to nitpick here. On the
first four consecutive pages of the book, we already find a misattributed quote, a misreading,
and a miscategorization. On their own, each of these things could be overlooked, but how common
they are immediately diminishes the book's trustworthiness. Let's move on despite that.
Hicks wants to define postmodernism by contrasting it with modernism, and before doing that, he wants
to define modernism as ushered in by the Enlightenment by contrasting it with medieval
premodernism. He does this in a chart. People who have studied medieval philosophy will quickly see
what's wrong with this chart. Notice the way Hicks uses value-laden words without rigid philosophical
meaning in distinguishing between movements he likes and movements he dislikes. Most people who
have studied philosophy will know that there's no metaphysical theory called supernaturalism. In
epistemology, he characterizes premodernism as based on mysticism and faith, while modernism as based
on experience and reason. Now, I also thought that medieval philosophers didn't care about reason when I
was reading Richard Dawkins in middle school, but that's a myth. In fact, Hicks seems to view the
correspondence theory of truth as genuinely pro-enlightenment. That is, the theory of truth
that posits that truth is the correspondence of our beliefs to external states in the world. Well,
that theory has some of its origins in medieval philosophers such as Aquinas, who said that, quote,
a judgment is said to be true when it conforms to external reality. But the problem I have is not just
that Hicks understates the importance of reason in medieval philosophy. Conversely, he understates
the importance of faith in enlightenment philosophy, and he does this to bring his favorite enlightenment
figures closer to his own beliefs. Three of the main enlightenment figures Hicks lists that he sees
as genuinely pro-reason are Francis Bacon, Descartes, and John Locke. So, how insignificant really is
religious belief for these philosophers? Well, Descartes explicitly states that without God,
all other knowledge is literally impossible. It is God, or at least the idea of God, that gives us
the possibility of knowing anything with certainty. Now, you could argue that this is different because
Descartes tried to prove the existence of God rationally. However, so did Aquinas. Aquinas believed
that God's existence is not self-evident to us, and therefore constructed five arguments for the
existence of God. Now, what about the role of God in Locke's philosophy? Well, the starting point of
Locke's political philosophy is that God owns us as property, and it is God that gives us our rights.
Notice that these are not just examples of Locke's and Descartes' private religious beliefs.
They are beliefs that are ingrained into and essential to their philosophies. So, I think that
this caricatured and dichotomized account of history has problems. When Hicks, on page 7, says that,
quote, modern thinkers, by which he means Bacon, Descartes, and Locke, quote, start from nature instead
of starting with some form of the supernatural, we can see that he's leaving out big parts of the
picture. He then characterizes the ethics of pre-modern philosophy as collectivism, altruism,
and modern ethics as individualism. Same problem as before. Altruism is not an ethical theory,
neither is individualism. Some medieval philosophers viewed altruism favorably, of course,
but it wasn't at the basis of their ethical theories, and modern philosophers more often than
not also viewed altruism favorably. Just as before, Hicks uses a philosophically vague term,
like individualism, to distinguish between philosophers he likes and philosophers he doesn't
like. The problem with individualism, a term that Hicks often uses in contrast with collectivism,
is that if you don't specify what kind of individualism you're talking about, it's pretty
much philosophically useless. On the one hand, you have, for example, methodological individualism,
the idea that society is best made sense of as an aggregate of individuals, with the individual
being the starting point of one's analysis. And methodological individualism goes back to Hobbes,
who was an absolute monarch. Then there is normative individualism, which states that the primary unit
of ethical significance is the individual. But this does not directly translate to liberal politics the
way that Hicks assumes it does. Although there are liberal forms of political individualism,
there are also non-liberal forms, such as individualist anarchism or other individualist
forms of libertarian socialism. By using the term individualism without qualifications, Hicks is able
to give off the impression that the philosophers who don't agree with him are against individual
freedom. The reason I'm spending all this time on Hicks' treatment of medieval philosophy is that,
although medieval philosophy is pretty far from postmodern philosophy, this treatment already
reveals some common flaws that are repeated throughout the book. This kind of exposition
for Hicks is not without reason. His general thesis in this chapter is that, as he says on page 9,
individualism and science are thus consequences of an epistemology of reason. Hicks claims that liberal
capitalism was a direct consequence of philosophers starting to value reason. This is problematic for
several reasons. Not only is individualism again undefined, but as we've already seen, medieval
philosophers valued reason too. By Hicks' own admission, ancient Greek philosophers like Aristotle
valued reason as well. But then why did that not lead to normative individualism and liberal capitalism?
After all, Aristotle, the man who initiated the study of formal logic, also justified slavery in his
political philosophy. Already in the first 10 pages of the book, one starts to see that this is not
merely an explanation of postmodernism. It's a highly ideologically charged book, and in a pretty
strong way. Hicks, by claiming that his political stance emerged as a direct consequence of people
starting to value reason, is able to make the implicit argument that people who disagree with him
politically simply don't care about reason. And this is an argument that we see elements of in
every chapter of the book. That's not the only problem either. Hicks' claim on page 10 that,
quote, with the development of free markets came a theoretical grasp of the retarding impact of
protectionism and other restrictive regulations, which he also sees as an outcome of the valuing of
reason, does not match a big chunk of historical data. From his account of premodernism and modernism,
he then goes on to a general account of postmodernism. And it's imperfect, to say the least. This is how he
characterizes deconstructive literary criticism. Quote, the task of the literary critic, accordingly,
is to deconstruct the text to reveal the author's race, sex, or class interests. And further,
literary criticism becomes a form of subjective play in which the reader pours subjective associations
into the text. Hicks doesn't provide any sources for these claims, so I don't know where he got this
from. Maybe he's referring to some deconstructive method I don't know about. But that's pretty much the
opposite of how Derrida, the father of deconstruction, of course, conceived of deconstruction. A basic
tenet of deconstruction is that you don't bring anything into the text from the outside. Instead,
you examine the internal logic of the text. You find tensions in the text using only the tools provided
by the text itself. Instead of critiquing it from the outside or from a bird's eye perspective, you examine
it from the inside. The pouring in of subjective associations is precisely what this prevents.
As Professor Jack Reynolds says in the Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy,
Deconstruction is committed to the rigorous analysis of the literal meaning of a text,
and yet also to finding within that meaning, perhaps in the neglected corners of the text,
including the footnotes, internal problems that actually point towards alternative meanings.
And Derrida himself identifies his deconstructive strategy with a, quote, desire to be faithful to
the themes and audacities of a thinking. Later, on page 190, Hicks says, quote,
Deconstruction allows you to dismiss whole literary and legal traditions as built upon sexist or racist
or otherwise exploitative assumptions. It provides a justification for setting them aside. This
completely contradicts the deep respect Derrida exhibited for the Western canon, and his entire
bibliography emerged in dialogue with Western classics. This stereotype is generally strange, because
postmodern philosophers have often drawn from books within the Western canon for insights and sources of
inspiration. Often, Hicks puts forth misrepresentations and misreadings so common and cliched that you can
watch decades-old lectures and feel like they're directly responding to Stephen Hicks. On page 199,
he says, quote, Deconstruction has the effect of leveling all meaning and value. If a text can mean
anything, then it means nothing more than anything else. No texts are then great.
There is no interpretation that can bring interpretation to an end. Good books, really great texts,
do not cut off interpretation. They lead to multiple interpretations. Great examples of this would be
the Bible, which I think it's pretty obvious. Now, the converse is the claim that people find outrageous,
but it's not made by Derrida. That means since there's no the right way, then any way is as good as any other.
Now, Derrida is not compelled to hold that view, and he doesn't. Not every way to speak and or read is as good as every
other. And let me just put it simply, no one holds that view.
We'll get back to postmodernism, but for now, let's go to chapter two, where Hicks starts his
broad historical account of the counter-enlightenment, starting with Kant. Yes, you heard me right.
The counter-enlightenment, starting with Kant. This is where his gross misrepresentations of
modern philosophy begin. Now, if you're a Kant scholar, or if you've studied Kant formally,
or if you're just a fan of Kant, I warn that the following might make you frustrated.
Stephen Hicks, flying in the face of all Kantian scholarship, declares that Kant is a counter-enlightenment
philosopher. This is very strange because most accounts of the Enlightenment see Kant as a great
contributor to Enlightenment philosophy. In What is Enlightenment, Kant wrote that the Enlightenment is
man's release from self-incurred tutelage, the overcoming of man's inability to make use of his
understanding without direction from another. So, on what basis does Hicks consider Kant to be a
counter-enlightenment philosopher? Well, he says that Kant attacked Enlightenment reason, that Kant
concluded that objectivity must be abandoned, and that our reason is limited to structuring our
subjective creations. Now, anyone who has read any book by Kant will know how absurd these accusations
are. First of all, saying that Kant rejected objectivity is really strange considering his entire
epistemological project was an attempt to ground objective knowledge in the face of Hume's skepticism.
To say that Kant is against reason makes no sense considering to what extent he utilized reason
and clarified its conditions and praised it in his words. And to say that for Kant, our reason is limited
to structuring our subjective creations is flat-out false. Because Kant very clearly stated that what
our categories of understanding structure is not subjective creations, but sensory data given to us by the
thing in itself, which is Kant's term for external things outside of relations to human subjects.
On page 41, he says that, quote,
the key point about Kant is that he prohibits knowledge of anything outside of our skulls.
Again, this is flat-out wrong. Our skulls, as well as the empirical world in which they exist,
are possible objects of experience, and therefore, for Kant, are subject to scientific, empirical,
and objective inquiry. Kant made it pretty clear that he was an empirical realist.
It seems that Hicks does not understand one of the basic points of Kant's critique,
and the way in which Kant critiqued reason. It's not that Kant criticized reason as a whole.
Far from it. He placed it on a very high pedestal. One must simply read the title of his first critique,
Critique of Pure Reason. By pure, he means reason detached from empirical observation.
For Kant, reason is able to rationally structure empirical experience, but when detached from
empirical experience, it can lead to all kinds of contradictory conclusions. The critique was
partially an attack against fuzzy, empirically insensitive philosophy. On page 108, Hicks even
says that, quote, Kant blamed mankind for having chosen to use reason when our instincts could have
served us perfectly well. Just, what? A common criticism of Kant's ethics is the opposite,
that they are too based on cold reason and detached from sentiment. It's a very, very basic and
foundational aspect of Kant's moral philosophy that morality is based on universal, practical reason.
Hicks says that the reason Kant adopted anti-reason views is because of religious motivations.
Quote, he saw the beating that religion had taken at the hands of the Enlightenment thinkers,
so he realized that we need to decide which has priority, reason or religion. Kant firmly chose religion.
Again, just mind-boggling. It would have been more accurate to say that Kant was the one doing the
beating against religion, at least the way it was conceived in theology at the time. Some of the
main targets of Kant's critiques of pure reason were rationalistic arguments for the existence of
God and the existence of the soul. Kant believed that those arguments were invalid because they were
detached from possible objects of experience. He was commonly criticized by theologians for trying to
destroy the foundations of religion. In fact, it was for this reason that he was famously termed
the all-destroyer. To reduce his extremely detailed, grand, fascinating, and influential philosophy to
anti-reason motivated by religious belief is, I don't know, a philosophical crime. If that's not enough,
Hicks, with his account of Kant, even contradicts himself. On page 26, praising Enlightenment philosophy,
he says,
the individual is an end in himself, the Enlightenment thinkers taught, not a slave or
servant of others. Well, you know which Enlightenment thinker taught that? None other than Kant. Man as an
end in himself is Kant's specific and unique formulation, and yet in the very next page,
Hicks lists Kant as a philosopher of the counter-enlightenment. Hicks's account of Kant is probably
the most mind-boggling and frustrating part of the book, and that's saying a lot. I can understand
people misunderstanding or misrepresenting postmodern philosophers. They are relatively recent and came
from a time when philosophy was becoming increasingly less prized in society, but to misread Kant this badly
is much worse. Not only is Kant one of the most influential philosophers of all time, he is also one
of the biggest contributors to liberal political theory that's so dear to Hicks, and one of the biggest
contributors to moral philosophy. Whatever your political or philosophical views, chances are that
the theorists you read or follow will to some extent have been influenced by Kant. When I read Hicks's
account of Kant, only one thing became clearer. Previously in my videos, especially on my video on
Jordan Peterson, I have seen comments making really strange claims about modern philosophy, like that
Kant was counter-enlightenment, or Hegel was not a modern philosopher, or Hume was a relativist. Initially,
I would get confused about what led them to believe this. I would just assume that maybe they misheard
someone, misunderstood someone, or just misremembered. After all, no academic philosophers or
Enlightenment historians ever reached such conclusions. Now I realize that all those claims
are coming from this one book, by one person, and it's kind of sad. He then goes on to Hegel. A noticeable
thing here is that he claims that Hegel's dialectical philosophy rejects Aristotle's principle
of non-contradiction. In case you don't know, Aristotle's law of non-contradiction is a basic
law of logic which states that something cannot be both A and not A at the same time and in the same
respect. In other words, something cannot have contradictory qualities or properties. Hicks
claims that Hegel rejects this basic logical law, and by claiming this, he's able to portray Hegel,
as a continuation of Kant, as another anti-reason, counter-enlightenment philosopher.
The only problem is that this accusation is just another cliched and generic misrepresentation.
Hegel, in fact, not only says that the law is trivially true, he says it's self-evident.
Now, some people have said that Hegel, with his dialectic thesis, antithesis,
synthesis, denies the law of non-contradiction. I can only say they've never read Hegel's logic.
Because explicitly, he doesn't deny it. He simply says it's trivial.
It's trivial because if you're dealing with a historical process, you're not dealing with
things at the same time, but at different times. So the thesis applies at one time,
and at a subsequent time, the antithesis may apply.
On page 49, after a superficial account of Hegel's dialectic, Hicks even ends the paragraph
by smugly saying, whatever that means. I guess he said that to imply that Hegelian philosophy is
meaningless, but really only imply that he is unable to understand some of its most basic tenets.
It doesn't end there. Hicks won't rest until he misrepresents every philosopher dear to Western
history, unless they are his three favorites, of course. On page 51, he says that Schierkegaard,
Schopenhauer, and Nietzsche all shared a contempt for reason. Again, no source for this claim,
of course. No matter that Schopenhauer's doctoral dissertation was on the fourfold root of the
principle of sufficient reason, in which he tried to clarify the necessary conditions of reason,
which he saw all knowledge as subject to, whether empirical, logical, geometrical, or psychological.
And Nietzsche was, of course, a brilliant philologist and scholar. Apparently, he somehow
achieved this with contempt for reason. And if you're suspecting that I'm criticizing Hicks's
account of the history of philosophy because of some ulterior political motives, you can look even
at the two reviews of this book from the right libertarian Mises Institute, which is in line with
Hicks politically. David Gordon called Hicks's account of Kant not only disputable, but altogether
mistaken, and aspects of his account of history eminently questionable. While Marcus Verhegg,
I'm sorry, I have no idea how to pronounce that, calls his historical account too caricatured,
and sacrificing, quote, too much for a simple on-message presentation. You might be wondering
at this point, if Hicks manages to misrepresent almost every philosopher he mentions, how did this
book even get published? Don't we have mechanisms to prevent this kind of stuff? Well, legitimate academic
publishers do, but this book was published by the Independent Scholargy, the same publisher that
gave you classics like Complete Guide for Horse Business Success. Most likely, then, this publisher
has no peer-review process. And even if they do, it's certainly not peer-reviewed by professional
philosophers. I can only assume that Hicks was not even able to find an academic scholarly institution
willing to publish his book. It was then reprinted by Aucham's Razor Publishing. Aucham's Razor,
that sounds more academic. Maybe that was peer-reviewed more reliably. Well, Aucham's Razor
Publishing is Stephen Hicks' own business. Okay, I'm not saying that the merits of a book depend on
who it's published by, but it does explain how this book could contain so many mistakes
that could get you a failing grade even in an undergrad philosophy course. So far, I've been
pointing out a lot of specific instances of things that Hicks gets wrong, and there's no shortage of
them that I still haven't mentioned. But I'd like to get to my first general point about a flaw that
extends throughout the whole book. What Hicks really means when he says that someone has a
contempt for reason or is anti-reason is that they either don't see reason as foundational or that
they believe that reason has limits. But there's a big, big step between believing that something has
limitations and rejecting it outright. For example, every logician will tell you that Aristotle's
logic has limitations. After all, it can't even account for the simplest proofs in Euclidean
geometry. But this is not the same as rejecting Aristotle's law of non-contradiction. It's strange
to make this equation without any explanation or attempt at justification, because a lot of
thinkers believe that reason has limitations. There are many influential thinkers who were not
postmodernists, but very effectively criticized modernity for its reductive view of social phenomena
and human life, which ends up contributing to the disintegration of our sense of meaning.
In addition to this, Hicks equates all non-realist philosophical theories with the
counter-enlightenment and anti-reason. Again, a completely unwarranted equation. By making this
equation, Hicks effectively condemns the majority of Western philosophers as being anti-reason. The history
of Western philosophy then appears to him as almost one big continuous attack on reason and objectivity.
One even wonders then why Hicks criticizes postmodernists' supposed disrespect for the
Western canon when he doesn't seem to have much love for it himself. This is also why it's actually
strange that Jordan Peterson recommended this book. First of all, two of Peterson's main influences are
Nietzsche and Jung, both thinkers who believe that reason does not exhaustively explain or make sense of
the world. Additionally, Peterson has explicitly said that he subscribes to a pragmatist theory of
knowledge, which is a non-realist theory. Because of these two things then, Stephen Hicks's standards
would definitively place Peterson in the anti-reason, anti-objectivity, counter-enlightenment
camp. And just so you get an idea of how many things Hicks rejects in this way, here's some
philosophical movements and theories that on Stephen Hicks's account then become anti-reason.
All forms of idealism, existentialism, all types of dialectics, pragmatist epistemology, most forms of
phenomenology, coherentist epistemology, most analytic philosophy after logical positivism,
meta-ethical theories like intuitionism and emotivism, critical theory, all non-realist
developments in philosophy of science, and most aesthetic theories, just to name a few. Have you
noticed what Stephen Hicks has managed to do here? Under the guise of simply explaining postmodernism,
or giving a historical account of its development, he actually smuggles in very specific opinions on
metaphysics, epistemology, history, and politics as the only ones that are pro-reason and pro-objectivity.
He has managed to do this while still having the people he implicitly terms as anti-reason
promote his book. Therefore, not only is this book politically charged, as I said earlier,
it attempts to promote a very narrow conception of what is reasonable in philosophy. And of course,
what is reasonable coincides with everything that Stephen Hicks believes. This ties into my second
general and closely related criticism of the book. In categorizing different theories within
philosophy, Hicks often does not use the kind of terms that are used in formal philosophy or by serious
scholars, terms that try to neutrally categorize different theories. Instead, his terminology is very
vague theoretically, but very specific in the positive or negative value associations it's meant to evoke.
When distinguishing between philosophical theories he supports and ones that he rejects, he uses
dichotomies like objectivism and subjectivism, rationalism and irrationalism, individualism and
collectivism, naturalism and supernaturalism. Such dichotomies are usually not used in philosophy because
they're very theoretically poor terms, but it's clear why they're being used here. The former immediately
evokes a positive association, while the latter evokes a negative one. Of course, I want to be
objectivist, not subjectivist, naturalist, not supernaturalist, rational and not irrational.
But unfortunately, philosophy is not that simple. It cannot be dichotomized into people who are pro-reason
and people who are anti-reason, unless you're doing the dichotomizing for very obvious ideological
reasons. You don't do it to give people a clearer understanding of philosophical history. I'd like to point
out that objectivism wasn't used to describe epistemological theories until Ayn Rand came along.
And it still really isn't used by professional philosophers, with very few exceptions. Because
Rand was not formally trained in philosophy, she presumably did not know how complicated the history
of philosophy really is. And so she thought that theories of knowledge could be simply dichotomized
into objectivist ones and subjectivist ones. But that's not how it works. You don't just have
philosophers who think everything is subjective arguing against philosophers who think everything
is objective. It's not that simple. It actually takes a pretty high level of arrogance to come up with
a philosophy and call it objectivism, having the term itself inherently imply that your theory is,
almost by definition, universally valid. It's like if someone developed a theory of ethics and called it
goodism. Don't you want to be a follower of my ethical theory? Goodism? Are you really going to
choose badism instead? This is also related to Hicks' common use of the word relativism to describe
philosophers he doesn't like. Another term that, without qualifications, is philosophically useless,
and a term never used by postmodern philosophers in describing themselves. In fact, Derrida says,
as for the relativism they are supposed to be worried about, well, even if this word has a rigorous
philosophical meaning, there's not a trace of it in my writing. And as the great Rick Roderick puts it
very succinctly,
philosophers call someone a relativist, by which they mean it's a person that holds that any view is as
good as any other view. My simple response to that is this. That is a straw person argument. No one in the
world believes it or ever has believed it. No one, Derrida or anyone else, believes that every view is as
good as every other view. That's only a view we discuss in freshman philosophy class in order to
quickly refute it. Then, on chapter three, he goes on to talk about Heidegger. Now, I haven't studied
Heidegger much, so I asked some people who have about what they think of Hicks's account. Now, I could
again go through all the ways in which Hicks's account is less than perfect. I mean, just to name
one, Hicks concludes that for Heidegger, the ultimate revelation is of the truth of Judeo-Christian and
Hegelian metaphysics. This is at the very least questionable, considering that Heidegger saw
metaphysics as a dead end, which he wanted to resist throughout his entire philosophical career.
But instead of going on about that, I'll just leave the notes that people gave me in the video
description if you want some more in-depth explanations of where Hicks gets Heidegger wrong.
Instead, I'll mention another general flaw that became very apparent with this chapter.
Imagine if, for example, a Marxist wrote a book called Explaining Christianity, and in it they wrote
about how all branches of Christianity are merely forms of false consciousness emerging from society's
economic mode of production. This would be an explanation of Christianity from a Marxist framework,
but it wouldn't be an explanation of the Christian framework itself, and so it wouldn't be a
satisfactory explanation for people who actually want to learn about Christian doctrine. This is
the problem with Hicks's account as well. Heidegger believed that we have strayed too far from being,
and for that reason wanted to provide us with a new framework and new terminology to approach
philosophy with. Establishing a new approach was his goal. However, Hicks, instead of letting this new
approach emerge, continuously tries to force it into his own framework, and when this fails,
he concludes that it's Heidegger's fault. This is a problem that extends all the way from Hicks's
account of Kant to his account of the postmodern philosophers. As my friend Traumazine explains,
as for who we are, Pace Hicks, Heidegger does not merely swap out the term designe for subject,
as if he's pouring old wine into new skins. Heidegger explicitly denies that designe is a subjectum.
This is why Hicks fails in this summary. We cannot enter into a good-faith exploration of Heidegger's
thought, his understanding of being and design, with concepts such as self-identity or subject
or man already in hand. If we do, we're missing the entire point. Hicks hasn't made an effort to
think being in a new key or manner. He's still thinking it on the basis that Heidegger is urging
him to abandon. And that's why, again, Hicks isn't really explaining postmodernism. Explaining it would
involve actually letting the frameworks that these philosophers developed speak for themselves. Instead,
from the very beginning of the book, Hicks is already operating from within his own framework.
Not really even an Enlightenment framework, but a framework of a certain unpopular and narrow
contemporary interpretation of the Enlightenment, namely the Randian objectivist one. Every philosopher
he looks at, he views through this narrow framework. And when the frameworks that other
philosophers use are incompatible with his, he thinks that's their fault. For a more simple and
visual explanation, Hicks is basically picking up a square-shaped piece, and trying to fit it
throw around whole. And when this doesn't work, he blames the piece. So we're far into the video,
and we haven't even reached postmodernism in Hicks' historical account. So how did he do there?
Well, criticizing his account is difficult. Not because he provides good arguments, but because his
most damning conclusions end up being basically slander with no sources. On page 90, following four
full pages of ranting with not a single source, Hicks characterizes the postmodern left like this,
that is only logic and evidence. Logic and evidence are subjective. You cannot really prove anything.
Feelings are deeper than logic, and our feelings say socialism. Okay, I'd like someone to find me a
single source of any major postmodern philosopher saying that logic and evidence are irrelevant,
that you can't prove anything, and that only feelings matter. I swear. Because I have looked
into many different kinds of postmodern theory, and never have I heard anyone say anything remotely
similar. Hell, even on the mess that is internet discourse, I've been in postmodern circles, and not
even there have I ever heard anyone say that logic and evidence don't matter. I mean, I might have missed
it, but Hicks has no sources. So this amounts to middle school level slander that even middle school
me would be embarrassed by. I believe in logic. My opponents don't. I believe in evidence. My opponents
don't. I am rational. My opponents aren't. How did people think that this is a worthwhile critique?
The Dunning-Kruger effect is accelerating here so drastically that I don't even know how much more I can take.
Same on page 184. He lists five contradictions that postmodern philosophers supposedly believe in.
I have never heard a single major postmodern philosopher argue for any of these contradictions.
For all we know, neither has Hicks. Because again, there are no sources. There's not even enough
substance here in order for something to be criticized. And it's not just postmodernism that
he slanders against. Characterizing the environmental left on pages 153 to 155, he says that they went from
believing that wealth is good to believing that wealth is bad. Characterizing this movement,
he says, quote, Capitalism, since it is so good at producing wealth, must therefore be the
environment's number one enemy. Again, just slander. Even anarcho-primitivists who go as far as rejecting
civilization itself do not say that wealth is bad. Instead, they criticize our organizational structures.
Again, there's no source here other than a smug quote from Ayn Rand. Surely that's how scholarship works,
right? On page 157, he says that, quote, Frankfurt School theorizing had suggested that Marxism was
too wedded to reason. That reason led to major social pathologies. Again, no source. So I can only
guess that he's referring to the Frankfurt School's criticism of instrumental reason, which, if that's
the case, Hicks completely misunderstands. The reason they critiqued instrumental reason was not because
it was too rational, but because it was not rational enough. It led to irrational outcomes. It was a
matter of rational means leading to irrational ends. As a quick example, you can think of how we
have McDonald's using completely rational means to make their burger production as fast, productive,
and cost-effective as possible. Then, you have people buying burgers for completely rational reasons.
They don't have enough time to make their own food, and they don't have enough money to buy
something better. However, all this instrumental rationality ends up leading to irrational outcomes.
Mass consumption of low-quality food and the massive society-wide health problems that it leads to.
To say that the Frankfurt School simply wanted to be less rational is silly. Also talking about the
Frankfurt School on page 141, he says that in the 30s, quote, large segments of the radical left had
come to agree with what national socialists and fascists had long argued, that socialism needs an
aristocracy. Socialism must be for the people, but it cannot be by the people. The people must be told what
they need and how to get it. Preposterous. Again, there are no sources. If anything,
Western Marxism since the 1930s saw an increasing number of anti-authoritarian strands. Yes, there
are anti-authoritarian forms of Marxism. Ones that are anti-state and even anti-party. There are
libertarian Marxists, autonomous Marxists, the situationists, etc. etc. Not to mention non-Marxist forms
of socialism, like different forms of anarchism. Their very existence puts a hole in Hicks's
historical account of the left. Not only that, some of the Frankfurt School theorists even
explicitly argued for a more pronounced individualism in Marxism. To say that they believed
socialism cannot be by the people contradicts everything they believed.
I mean, there seems to be an aura about it of disappointed hopes, disappointment with Marxist
theory, disappointment perhaps even with the working class itself for failing to be an effective
instrument of revolution. Was there something disappointed or disillusioned or pessimistic
at the center of your approach in those days? Well, if disappointment means as you formulated
disappointment with the working class, I would decidedly reject it. None of us has a right
to blame the working class for what it is doing or what it is not doing. So this kind of disappointment,
certainly not. Time to get to general flaw number four. Hicks doesn't really show the arguments that
the philosophers he criticizes made. Hicks himself says that, quote, postmodernism mounts powerful arguments
against all of the essential elements of modernism. Well, if there are powerful arguments, why not talk about them?
Reading Hicks, you get the impression that
postmodern arguments amounted to everything is subjective, reason doesn't matter, so only our feelings matter,
which really isn't very powerful at all, not to mention something that no one ever said.
You know, Richard Rorty didn't gain legitimacy as a philosopher by just
going right into claiming that we should kill all white males.
He kick-started his career with the book Philosophy and the Mirror of Nature,
a very rigorous book with clear argumentation that engaged with the analytic philosophy of its time.
Why not engage with its arguments? Well, Hicks doesn't really have to. Instead, he implicitly
discredits the philosophers he talks about in a twofold manner by making claims on what their motives
were and what the consequences were. For example, he criticizes Kant as being counter-enlightenment,
but doesn't really engage with Kant's arguments. Instead, he claims that Kant only believed things Hicks doesn't agree with
because he tried to justify his religious faith. Similarly,
he doesn't engage with arguments from postmodern philosophers,
but simply claims that they only held the views that they did
to justify their leftist politics. Then,
he makes claims about the consequences of their views. On page 133,
he bafflingly claims that because people in early 20th century Germany
were raised on the teachings of Kant, Hegel, Marx, and Nietzsche,
they saw National Socialism as a moral ideal. Of course, the claims he makes aren't true,
but they are useful to him because, in the eyes of many of his readers,
he has discredited these philosophers by showing both their supposed causes
and their supposed effects, all without having to engage with any of their arguments.
I'm saying all this as a preliminary intro to one of the final moments of the book, where,
in his regular tactic of trying to show how other beliefs lead to bad consequences,
he tries to show how postmodernism leads to nihilism, and even a hatred of mankind.
And he does this with possibly the worst and most laughable misreading in the entire book.
On page 195, he says,
Foucault extends his desire for effacement to the entire human species. At the end of The Order of
Things, for example, he speaks almost longingly about the coming erasure of mankind. Man is an
invention of recent date that will soon be erased, like a face drawn in sand at the edge of the sea.
Yes, I'm not making this up. Hicks thought that Foucault is some kind of anti-natalist or whatever.
To make him misreading this bad, Hicks must have not read anything else in The Order of Things.
It was enough for him to just find the single out-of-context spooky quote.
To see Hicks' failure, you only have to read the paragraph right before the one he quotes,
where Foucault says, quote,
One thing in any case is certain.
Man is neither the oldest nor the most constant problem that has been posed for human knowledge.
Taking a relatively short chronological sample within a restricted geographical area,
European culture since the 16th century, one can be certain that man is a recent invention within it.
Here, Foucault is very clearly distinguishing between humans, that is, the human species,
and man, that is, the concept man, the abstraction, the idea of man, that is at the core of humanist
thought. It's obviously not the human species that he talks about being effaced, but a certain
conception of what man is. Then, as further proof of postmodern nihilism, he quotes Derrida, where he
talks about, quote, a birth in the offing, only under the species of the non-species, in the formless,
mute, infant, and terrifying form of monstrosity. Somehow, Hicks interprets this as Derrida saying
that we, as postmodernists, must bring forth monsters, heralding the end of mankind. What
he's actually saying is that the future, as that which cannot be predicted, which is alien and unfamiliar,
and not yet conceptualized, is always, in a certain sense, monstrous. This isn't an imperative to
bring forth monsters. It's a descriptive claim about the nature of the future, the alien, the
unfamiliar. Both of these ideas, to an extent, date back to nihilism's greatest critic, Nietzsche,
his idea of the overcoming of man, and the idea of life as that which must always surpass itself.
So I have read through this entire book, a book which certain Jordan Peterson fans claimed was
a better version of Peterson's criticism, and in some ways it's worse. Peterson misrepresents
Derrida and Foucault, sure, but at least he doesn't try to misrepresent most of Western philosophical
history before them. It's full of misreadings, technical problems, misrepresentations,
misattributed quotes, intellectual confusions, historical caricatures, and straight-up slander.
Once you take all those away, there's barely anything left, and the book lacks basic academic standards.
What's amazing about this book is that, while claiming to be an explanation of postmodernism,
not only is it actually a rough, polemical attack on postmodernism, it's also an argument for an
extremely specific and narrow view of which philosophers are pro-reason and rational. The
view is so narrow that you'd think most people wouldn't agree with it. However, most people reading
this book are people who are not well versed in philosophy and do not even notice what is being
done. In my last video on The Moral Landscape by Sam Harris, I said that I had never read a
philosophical book that messy. Well, this one might have actually surpassed it. At least while Sam
Harris doesn't hide the fact that he's unfamiliar with the history of philosophy, Hicks acts like an
expert on it, only to then provide us with a series of misrepresentations. You know, if you want to
criticize postmodernism for being too polemical, ideologically motivated, and lacking academic
standards, that's fine, and I'm sure you'll find lots of targets to critique, but don't do it using
a book that's polemical, ideologically motivated, and lacking academic standards. Hicks wasn't even
able to publish the book academically, and this is why it is either not known or not taken seriously
among academics. The only reason people read it in the first place is either because they are followers
of Rand, like Hicks is, or because of certain public figures who recommended it. As Marcus Verhaegg of the
Mises Institute correctly says in his review, students with little knowledge of modern philosophy
who are likely to be swayed by Hicks's readings of key modern figures are decidedly not a proper
audience for this work. However, those are precisely the people who read this work, and this is why it's
so sad. They're taking his word for it and adopting distortions of what key modern figures argued for.
See, people who are already well versed in philosophy will either easily see the flaws in Hicks's account,
or find his account too superficial to be valuable. On the other hand, people who are beginners in
philosophy could have potentially found this book valuable because of its broad scope and accessible
language, but that possibility is destroyed because they are the very people who won't be able to easily
distinguish between what is true in Hicks's account and what is not. Now, I'd like to bring up a term that,
although not used in this book, is often brought up in comments on my videos by fans of Stephen Hicks
and Jordan Peterson. Hierarchies of competence. First off, let's just get this out of the way. No major
postmodern philosopher has ever argued against hierarchies of competence. Not only that, they
performatively supported those hierarchies with the insane amount of research that they would do to be
able to competently write works of philosophy. I'm mentioning this term because I'd like to end with a
genuine plea to fans of Stephen Hicks. If you truly believe in hierarchies of competence like you say
you do, then please uphold those hierarchies of competence in philosophy also, and even when
criticizing things you don't like. Don't take Stephen Hicks's word for it. Don't take Jordan Peterson's
word for it. Don't take my word for it either. If you're interested in philosophy, read up on actual
academic, peer-reviewed sources, actual scholars. They are not difficult to find, and almost any
academic source you will come across will more likely than not be way more reliable than explaining
postmodernism by Stephen Hicks. Finally, I'd of course like to thank my patrons. Einziggy Stardust,
Lucy Pearson, Tsone, Ascetics, Sean Oscar, Bad Dreams, Sean Brocklehurst, Ben Kalziki, Nikolai Lissak,
Eric Coronado, Tormarino, Mary of Magdala, Comfy Acreman, Den Chaplin, Ilya Pippa, Jason Bourne,
Aperture 413, Criminally Vulgar, Cattle Last, Azzy the Mazzy, Homeless Snail, Donald E. Strong Jr.,
Noah Trapolino, Cancer Pigeons, Simon Cook, Yavin Arba, Ark Stanton, Space Smile, Pistol Pete,
Steven Z, Aidan Williams, Elizabeth Ward, Joseph Patron, Bad Horn Choir, Quantum Computation,
Rooftop Korean, Industrial Robot, Kelly Rankin, John Drumm, No, Yvonne, Jinsu Ahn, Jibbering Idiot,
Cary, Juan Chavez, Tim Warmar, Numu, Andrew Burns, Michael Doherty, Dee Lang, Sina B, Isabel
Abdullali, Robert Phillips, Adam Johns, Tandys123, John Beatles, and Susie Oh. Thank you.
