Matt Kennard, a former investigative journalist for the Financial Times, in his book The Racket,
details the nefarious tools the United States employs to shape and manipulate power abroad
to serve its quest for global hegemony. His reporting done over four years in more than
a dozen countries, including Bolivia, Mexico, Haiti, Palestine, Tunisia, and Egypt shatters any
idea that the U.S. is concerned with fostering democracy or protecting human rights. In case
after case, he illustrates how U.S. military and economic power serve as the enforcer for global
corporations. In the service of exploitation, the U.S. instigates coups, uses natural disasters such
as the 2010 earthquake in Haiti, to sell off the country to foreign corporations, breaks labor
unions, removes from office those such as Jeremy Corbyn, who pose a threat to its interests. In
Haiti, in one example in the book, the U.S. establishes a publicly funded but privately run
educational system. This privatization of the educational system saw $700 million of Haiti's
tax revenue turned over to corporations while more than half of the country's school children
lost access to schooling. At sweatshops in Honduras, half of which are owned by U.S. multinational
corporations, he found that managers were administering birth control pills to female employees
each morning to ensure they can continue to work. And there were notices stipulating the hours during
which workers were allowed to use the toilet. He writes of U.S.-backed assassination attempts in
countries such as Bolivia. The consequences of U.S. intervention abroad are impoverishment for workers
and the installation of puppet governments that are enemies to national sovereignty. The reality of U.S.
imperial power, he wryly notes, is not covered in domestic media, which continues to pump out the
fictitious fictitious narratives of the U.S. as a light among nations and a beacon of human rights
and democracy. But the ugly face of American power, especially with its complicity in the genocide in
Gaza, has turned the country into a hated global pariah. Joining me to discuss his book, The Racket,
The Rogue Reporter vs. the American Empire, is Matt Kennard, who is head of investigations at the
investigative journalism website, Declassified UK, which he co-founded with author and historian Mark
Curtis. I think the power of the book is that by the time you're done, you have delineating most of
the patterns of control, most of the methods or tools the U.S. uses, and not just in the global south,
but even within the UK, and we can talk about that. But let's begin with some of the examples I alluded
to in the introduction of Bolivia. I mean, maybe we can start with Bolivia and then talk about Honduras
and Mexico, but let's start with Bolivia. Yeah, Bolivia is a very interesting case and should be much
more widely talked about amongst progressive forces around the world, because in my opinion, it might be
the most successful sustained experiment in democratic socialism in history. Evo Morales won the election
in 2005 and took power in 2006, and he was the first indigenous president of Bolivia. This is a country
which had effectively been under the control of a white-skinned elite since the Spanish came, and
the indigenous people have been brutally repressed in all sorts of ways for centuries. And he
came up in a democratic revolution and really straight away transformed the society. So within
the first 100 days had a program of nationalization of different industries, investment in education,
healthcare, all the stuff we're told that the World Bank and others are concerned with, but actually
promote policies which do the opposite. But anyway, he was a huge success. And I was quite inspired by
watching this democratic revolution from the UK at the time. And then I went to the States and
continued to follow it. And then I was actually, and then in 2008 began, well, there was straight away,
there was attempts at subversion. In fact, there's a quote in a book from an American I interviewed when
I was in Bolivia, who was an activist, but he went on this trip in Bolivia. And there happened to be some
US Embassy, USAID officials on it as well. And he's quoted in a book talking about, he overheard them
talking about how we got to get rid of Morales quite explicitly. But the US subversion started right
away. But it picked up in 2008 when the eastern provinces threatened to cede from Bolivia, which
has been one of their goals ever since that they didn't control central government, they basically went to
break up the country. In fact, that was only kind of reversed because Hugo Chavez was in Venezuela at
the time, and he threatened to invade if they overthrew democracy, or at least illegally ceded.
Anyway, I went there when I was at the Financial Times. And it was a real window into how the US
empire operates. Because essentially, all the institutions, you'll talk about the patterns that
I call it an empire of acronyms, you know, when you go to these countries, you see NED, USAID, DEA,
CIA, if you look hard enough. And what all these institutions have is huge amounts of ideologies
bolted onto them to justify them as benevolent organisations which take great things to the
developing world. So the Drug Enforcement Administration, we're told is about stopping
drug production, and cracking down on narcos. National Endowment for Democracy is about promoting
democracy. USAID is about aid and bringing wonderful benefits to poor people. And that kind of works
okay in that ideology and that propaganda works okay when things are running as they should, which
is you have some client ruler who who basically just does whatever he's told by Washington and by
corporations which want to ransack the country for resources. But obviously, that that that wasn't the
case in Morales' case. And so all the different pressure points were exposed and all those organisations
became exposed as well. So I started looking into the National Endowment for Democracy and looking into,
okay, what are their programmes in in Bolivia? And you realise actually it was nothing to do with
promoting democracy. What was it? They were funding groups which were opposed to Morales and trying to
bring him down. USAID is the same thing. And I got internal reports when I was in, I was in the
Financial Times in Washington and sent Freedom of Information Act requests and had tons of data.
And then also read every single cable when the WikiLeaks cables came out from 2005 to 2010, which is
when they were up to. And it just shows that there was a wide ranging effort to destroy this really
promising development, not just for Bolivia, not just for Latin America, but for the whole world.
Because we're constantly told, oh, socialism doesn't work. You can't run an economy based on
the needs of the people. You need foreign corporations to come in and develop resources.
That's like the strongest ideology they promote. And obviously, they promote for a reason, because it
enriches corporations and the 1%. And they say, well, if you have socialism, what you do is you get
dictators and they end up basically just exploiting their people for the regime rather than corporations.
He showed, actually, this is a movement based democratic society. And the point is that that
is what happened, that occurs naturally a lot of time and huge amounts of resources are put in by
the US to try and smash that hope when it arises. And they nearly did it under Morales. And in fact,
there was a CIA-backed coup in 2019, which involved other organisations as well, based in Washington,
the OAS. And again, not talked about enough on the left, but that was a majorly historic moment,
because he was taken out in a US-backed coup in 2019, but returned and democracy was restored the
following year. And I don't know of any other case where a CIA coup like that has been reversed that
quickly and democracy has been restored. And his party, which had won the election in 2019, won the
following elections the following year. So it really opened my eyes to the nefarious nature of the US
empire. The fact that it is the biggest enemy of human progress, I believe, around the world,
because it smashes anywhere, any leader, any movement that wants to do things differently.
And the key point is wants to use the resources of their country for the people rather than the
global market and global corporations. And yeah, and obviously, the key point of all this is that
this is the opposite of the propaganda we're fed from the moment we're born effectively in the US and
the UK as well, which is that the United States is unlike all previous empires, which did
operate on exploitative terms. But the US is different, it operates on noble principles like
freedom, democracy, development, whatever these words are. And it's pervasive, everyone, you have
to believe that to work in the mainstream media effectively. For the Financial Times, you can't
believe what I've just said about US power. So it works in a filtering mechanism. And I realised as well,
when I was at the Financial Times, I couldn't write about US subversion of Bolivia, which I was seeing,
which if you actually had a free media, you'd be free to write stuff about that. If I was,
if I was published, if I wanted to publish stories about Chinese or Russian interference in a country
I was visiting, they'd welcome it and promote it and pay me to do it. But when it was US subversion,
it was I was getting no's from all editors about specific stories. So what I've realised quite
early on, being in the Financial Times was I'm not going to stay here because I can't do the
journalism I want to do. So what I want to do is collect as much information as I can from the
coalface to try and then expose how the system works when I leave, which is what the racket is.
And effectively, what the racket does is use a lot of the information I gathered at the Financial Times.
And obviously you have access, which is amazing. Like when I went to Bolivia, I could interview the
Charged Affairs, there wasn't an ambassador because they'd been kicked out. But I interviewed,
I went to the US embassy and interviewed the Charged Affairs, I interviewed USAID.
And, and, and then, and then cross reference that with the WikiLeaks cables, because the WikiLeaks
cables are the best window we've got into how US empire really works and how US foreign policy really
works because they're talking, they think privately. And they're much more honest, obviously,
and there isn't the space for the ideologies, which I've talked about. So you can get the real
information. And what you see is that they just admit in private that all the stuff they're saying
in public is rubbish. And actually, the cables showed in the case of Bolivia, that they were actively
working with the opposition to take down Morales. So I think that Bolivia is actually the longest
chapter in the book, because I feel like it's such an important case study, because as you say,
it's also patterns. What I've described in Bolivia has happened in countless other countries.
Anytime a democratic left leader who wants to use their resources comes along, the NED are mobilized,
the USAID mobilized, DEA is mobilized. And it's very, very hard to move in that, in that ecosystem.
And that's why they want it. It's a straitjacket. And actually, Evan Morales realized that quite
early on, and he kicked out USAID, and he kicked out the DEA, which I think is a prerequisite for
actually, any leader in the global south wanting to run their country as a sovereign country,
you need to get rid of these agencies, because these agencies aren't there to help you. They're
there to enforce US power, and enforce US corporate power.
Well, they also that they work in tandem with a banking system to strangle the economy. That's
certainly what they did with Ceresa in Greece. So there are the internal organizations, you have a
line in the book that the NED just does publicly what the CIA used to do in private.
But they have the ability to essentially shut the country down. Just before we go on,
I want to talk about the WikiLeaks cables. But that pattern has been replicated. I lived in Latin. I
actually studied Spanish in Bolivia and Cochabamba, and lived in Latin America for six years. That pattern
has been repeated for decades, whether it's Allende in Chile, whether it's Arbenz in Guatemala,
anytime there was a movement, a popular movement that sought to reclaim sovereignty,
you know, control over, and of course, in Bolivia, a lot of it is tin,
the famous tin mines, that the US intervened on behalf of corporations. And I think a lot of people,
you and I do, but a lot of people don't realize how important the WikiLeaks cables were, not just for
the debacles and war crimes in Iraq, but for shining a light on US complicity. I mean, Haiti being one of
the most, you write about Haiti as well. But the WikiLeaks cables exposed that the US government was
on behalf of US corporations, which ran sweatshops in Haiti, you were also right about this in Honduras,
but was working to essentially suppress a movement to raise the minimum wage to, I mean, something
insane. What were they trying to get $2 an hour? I don't remember how much. But talk a little bit
about the importance because in independent media in the global south, the WikiLeaks cables,
which was also true in Tunisia, were huge, a huge revelation.
Yeah, I mean, I think it's the best repository for historians and journalists there's ever been
for understanding the global system, because the US power is the governing dynamic in
world affairs. If you look from what's going on in Gaza to regime change in Venezuela, Syria, wherever
you look, American power is the overriding factor. And we were given decades of them speaking privately,
what they thought was privately about how they operate. And actually, its significance is why
that it's completely ignored by the mainstream media in the US and the UK, because their role is
not to reveal truth. They say it is, and we're told it is in civics class and journalism school,
we're a check on power. But what you realise when you work on the inside, and I'm sure you saw this
at the New York Times as well, is that actually, if you start doing proper journalism, like Julian
Assange did, and really revealing truth, as we're told we should, then you get attacked by the journalists
that operate at the top of society. And one of the awakenings I had when I was at the FT was I was
there in Washington, this was under the Obama administration, when the WikiLeaks cables first
started coming out. And I remember being really enthused and excited about this. I was thinking,
this is a treasure trove for journalists. And I remember the first editorial meeting at the
FT's Washington bureau. And it was just everyone was attacking Assange and basically dismissing
the cables. And I was just thinking, wow, if that is their reaction to the revelations that might give
us some clue about how the system really works, then they don't see their role as really exposing
power, what they see their role is, and I still believe this is that they project an image of
that through covering frost stories, scandals, like small fry, and then but never ever do stories which
impact on our understanding of how the system works at a much deeper level. That's the red line for these
journalists, because effectively, and this goes, in fact, the liberal class may be even worse than the
right wing. In fact, I think they are, because they essentially believe in the system, and they
have to believe in the system to get where they are. So I think the WikiLeaks cables are hugely
significant, and they just appear all throughout the book. In fact, the book's dedicated to Chelsea
Manning, because she changed history by what she did. And it was completely heroic, you know, and again,
wasn't supported by the media in the way that she should have been, wasn't supported by the Guardian in the
way that they should have been. Julian Assange wasn't supported by the Guardian. Look at,
not to go off track too much, but this is very linked to the US empire, because this was a historic
moment in exposing the US empire, what Julian Assange and Chelsea Manning managed to do.
But the Guardian was the paper that published most of those early leaks. And then they later on became
the biggest vehicle for the information war, which was being fought against him by the CIA,
the British state and other elements. Outrageous. He was in Belmar's prison for five years, maximum
security prison, never without a conviction for anything. The Council of Europe just voted,
which is the highest human rights body in Europe, of which the UK is a signatory.
They vote, their parliamentary institution just voted that he, to declare him a political prisoner
for the five years he was in. It's quite incredible that not one UK newspaper has written a single
word about it. You would think that the highest human rights body in Europe, ruling that we held
a journalist as a political prisoner for five years in our highest security prison, would interest
journalists, and at least should be on the front page of every paper if we had a genuinely free press.
Nothing. And that's because Assange is the enemy, because he took journalism too seriously,
and he did, he exposed them. He exposed the American empire, but he also exposed journalism,
because he set the standard for actually how you really do what we're told you meant to do,
which is help our understanding of how our society works. And in the case of Haiti, it was very,
very, I used the cables throughout because as you say, I think that Haiti is maybe the emblematic
example of how this system operates, an emblematic example of how the US empire destroys countries.
Because I was sent there the year after the earthquake in 2010, which was an unbelievable
disaster. You know, 300,000 people died instantly. I remember getting there and I was just, I couldn't
believe my eyes. It was apocalypse. You know, the presidential palace had collapsed, all the government
ministries, the whole of Port-au-Prince, which was where I was, was living in tents, the whole of it.
And just incredible. And I look, I started looking into the history and at that time I was working
for the FT. So I got all the, I got the, the, the, the tour that you get as a, as a corporate
reporter for elite paper. And that is how it works. You know, you stay in the five star hotel, you get
taken around in a air conditioned four by four by the world bank to the nice projects that they're
funding. And they're telling you all these wonderful things that they're investing in and
restarting the economy and blah, blah, blah. And it's very seductive. And in fact, if you don't
come in to journalism with a, uh, a very, very defined idea of how the world works, or at least
you, you, some kind of backbone to resist that ideology and that seductive system,
no, you don't go against it. And not many people do go against it. And they were taking me to
these, uh, special economic zones, which were being opened, funded by USAID. One of them was in the
north, we flew to the north and they took me. And I remember we went to an, another special
economic zone, which had been set up previously by a company from Dominican Republic, but with aid
money. And I was taken in and, uh, interviewed the CEO and he was, they had a union. So I was talking
to him about the union and he was saying, well, we had some teething difficulties, but now we have the
best running union in the country. And I remember I looked at the WikiLeaks cables afterwards.
And firstly, I found that that SEZ had been built on peasants land that didn't want to move
and had been actually removed by, uh, uh, uh, corporate and state forces. And then I found out
that the union had been, uh, talked about by us officials because the union had taken its, uh,
role too seriously and was demanding better rights for the workers and then was disbanded and then
replaced by this, what's called a yellow union, which basically just works for the corporation.
So you saw there's these two worlds. There's the fantasy world, the hyper reality world, which is
created for you. If you're a corporate journalist and you go to Haiti and it's very easy to accept
because it, that what's your interest in not accepting it. And then there's the real world,
which is evidence-based and, uh, uh, and, and really exposes the dynamics, which govern the decision
making of the U S and, uh, sat traps in Haiti and other places. And they're completely at odds and they
never can meet. Um, and that's why there was a brief opening when WikiLeaks cable started coming
out. You know, we did have some real, uh, evidence of how the world works. This hyper reality was
smashed, but actually I've been thinking recently about that because it was an amazing moment, but
the powerful forces who create the discourse in, in the U S and the UK, they have all the resources
and they managed to, okay, even though we had amazing revelations, like the collateral murder
video and others, we showed that the U S just gunned down, uh, journalists and kids and others. Um,
it didn't dent this, what we're talking about this overarching ideology of the benevolent and benign
American power. It didn't dent it in an, in the longterm. And that's because they have all the
resources to kind of just squash the, the, the evidence that come up and that, and that, if it was
sustained, it would be, but the whole point is it's not sustained. There is this little brief blink and
then you get put Assange in prison and it all goes back to how it was before. So I think, uh, us in
alternative media, that's why I think what's going on in alternative media and, uh, and, um, the, uh, the,
the, into the power of the internet gives us the circumvent, the mainstream media is so important
and obviously does worry the powers that be because the empire operates on propaganda. That is one,
that is why they took Assange so seriously because one of their biggest priorities is
the truth about how the world works and in whose interest it's being run is, is central to them
being able to project power. If you damage that and people will understand that, uh, how the world
works and what we're involved in. And for example, in Gaza, then they really, there will be pressure
to change. And in fact, I do believe that's what makes a journalist complicit in what's going on in,
in Gaza now because we at Declassified have been doing a stream of stories about the use of the UK
base in Cyprus. This is a bit off topic, but it is related to the US, but because the US has been
flying flights from there and that's caused an absolute, uh, scene in Greece. I mean, sorry,
in Cyprus, in Greek Cyprus, there's been, um, demonstrations at the UK base is both present,
presidents on both sides of the border. I've had to talk about it. Never a word has been written
about it in the UK media, but if, if the resources of the BBC and the Guardian were used to really
expose the US empire and it's, and it's little poodles like the UK, then I think that it would
really make the system running as it does much harder and may have, they would have to change it.
Uh, they might get more sophisticated way to propagandize and, uh, but, but, but that pressure
is not there at all. And this is not a left right issue. Guardian is, which is held up as like, uh,
as, as the, the kind of like liberal left, you can get an anti-imperialist perspective. They're
signed up to the U American imperial project and all the propaganda that goes with it. So it's, it's
not about a left, right. The whole of the, the, the left center, right in the establishment all
regurgitated stuff and believe that stuff. And you have to believe that stuff to get into the media
and, and, and get a column or get, uh, become a news reporter.
Well, that's what Noam Chomsky told us several decades ago. Um, I just, on Cyprus, I think it was
Declassified UK, which you run, uh, broke the story that, uh, arms shipments were being flown from Cyprus,
uh, to Israel, uh, to fuel the war in the genocide in Gaza. That's correct.
Yes. And it's, it's actually really relevant to what we're talking about, which is US empire, because
I know the, obviously Britain is part of the American empire. We are a junior partner. We're
an adjunct to the whole system, but one of the major ways we, uh, remained relevant to the United States
after the second world war, which is the time when we're told the empire died and it, but which never
happened. It just got repackaged in, and in different ways. But one of the ways we remained
relevant was we basically opened up our bases, which we have all around the world from Falklands
to Cyprus, to Bahrain, to Nepal. We made them also US bases and Diego Garcia being a emblematic example,
that's actually called a joint base, but unofficially all the others are joint bases.
And I went to Cyprus. So a bit of background on this base as well, about, which shows how the
empire never died as the British empire never died. So Cyprus was a British colony until 1960,
when it got independence under Archbishop Makarios, who was a, the liberation leader,
the first democratically elected leader of, uh, independent Cyprus. But in that treaty that we
signed, the British signed, they retained 3% of Cyprus, which we still own. And not many people,
no one knows about this even in Britain, but, um, so it's these huge swathes of land,
which aren't just military bases. Uh, there's military bases on them, but you're talking about
3% of the islands. So they're big. And, uh, I went there and did a series of stories. One of them was
about revealed for the first time, the, the real presence of the US air force there, because the
British and Americans had said for 50 years, the Americans have a presence there, but they wouldn't
say the size and they wouldn't say the, um, the, uh, the complexion, what, what, what units were
there. But I found that 129 USM and were permanently stationed at REF at Criteria, which is the main base
there. And, but, but as I say, one of the services we provide, it's not only use, but the all UK sites
around the world. And this is very important. People know this and no one knows this. And I only know this
because I've been trying to get information, but they operate as black sites for the Americans. You
cannot get a single bit of information about us activities on UK basis, a sink from the UK side.
I've tried, they said, and they come up with a blanket statement, which is we don't comment on
allies movements on our, or activities on our own basis. And there's the, so it's more secret
effectively than our intelligence agencies and our special forces, what us do. And they've got a huge
presence within the, within Britain as well. There's 12,000 over 12,000 us, uh, troops permanently
stationed in the UK met most of them at two sites just outside London called RAF Mildenhall
and RAF Lakenheath. Lakenheath they're talking about was rumored, uh, and it seems likely that
they're redeploying nuclear weapons. The U S is to, to, to that. Plus you have the intelligence
occupation of Britain, you know, Edward Snowden's leaks showed that GCHQ viewed. Now GCHQ is the UK's
largest, um, intelligence agency. It was exposed extensively by Snowden's leaks.
And it has a site in Cornwall, which is in the west of England, um, by the beach. And it's called
GCHQ viewed and it, all the transatlantic cables go there. And, um, he, his leak showed that the NSA,
the national security agency pay for half the maintenance of GCHQ viewed. Uh, so it's effectively
a U S site. You can't get any information about how many U S personnel are there or anything because
there's just a blanket statement saying we don't comment on intelligence matters, but then you have RAF
Krauton, which is another base within the UK itself, north of, uh, in the Midlands where they,
they say that there's a thousand CIA, uh, officers based there. It's 25% of all communications,
which come from Europe back to America, go through RAF Krauton. And that's also the site where, uh, the,
the alleged CIA officer, uh, and Sekoules, uh, killed Harry Dunn, that child, uh, which was a case,
which got very big here. I don't know if it was big in the States,
but what you see when you start looking into it and this, and let me just interrupt Matt,
because she was then spirited out of Britain and, uh, all the requests to extradite her were,
uh, met with this false claim that she had diplomatic immunity.
Exactly. Yeah. And, and they first denied that she was working for the CIA because it's not official.
None of this stuff is official. They've never acknowledged that RF Krauton is a huge CIA station.
So it was all very embarrassing for them, but effectively the U the UK just takes its orders
from Washington that there's no, and that, and that, and the, the, the quid pro quo is that, um,
the U S, uh, uh, keeps us, I guess, gives us the, uh, we can have the pretense that we're, we're,
we're this still this powerful force and the British establishment really care about that just
on a personal level. There's an arrogance in the British establishment, which has been festered
and pickled over centuries of ruling the world, which, and they don't want to let go of it.
So they're willing to do anything for Washington if they can stay part of the U S empire.
But we have, so we have this huge occupation, which means that we're not a sovereign country.
And I know it's a cliche to say Britain's the 51st state, but it really is. We cannot go against
the U S and actually, uh, the preface to the book, um, is all about this. And we read that again,
this was really exposed during Jeremy Corbyn's leadership of the labor party, because that was
a historic moment in British, British history. You know, he was elected labor leader in 2015.
He was the first, well, the second non-Atlanticist labor leader ever to be, uh, elected post the
second world war. Uh, the other one being Michael foot in 1980 to 83, but he was destroyed again.
But, uh, Cor, Corbyn really showed that, uh, the, the, the power that the U S still has here. And
actually when I started looking into all the agencies that you mentioned, you know, like the
NED and stuff, I was, uh, through the whole of my career, I'd always looked at those in the global
South who were operating in weak States, uh, and basically running the show. And I, I kind of assumed
that even before I was going there, because you, in a country like Haiti, the States are weak that
even one of those institutions is more powerful than government. My hunch was, okay, well, this doesn't
operate the same way in Britain where we've got a longer history. We've got these strong institutions,
but you realize, I realized pretty quick when I started looking into what these agencies were
doing in Britain, that the same patterns, uh, were occurring. And in fact, even more resources
were going in because obviously as an Imperial center, uh, financial capital, it is at the top
priority to keep the U S to keep the UK, uh, uh, pro-Atlanticist. So Jeremy Corbyn was a massive,
massive nightmare for the U S. And in fact, it was, it became really explicit, you know, Mike Pompeo,
when he was secretary of state, who was previously director of the CIA came to the UK in the summer
of 2019. This was before the six months before the election, uh, of 2019, which, um, Jeremy Corbyn
lost to Boris Johnson, but he was recorded privately saying to a group of people, we will do our quote
level best to stop Jeremy Corbyn becoming prime minister of Britain. And he said, it's too hard to do
it once he's prime minister. So we will do it now. Like this was, and it was reported for a day
in the papers, but then it just disappeared. And you're sort of thinking this should be a huge,
huge scandal. This is a senior official, uh, coming to the UK and basically saying we won't allow it.
And there was no investigations of what he meant by that. And obviously he was referring to certain
programs they had. And, and, and I think those programs are like the NED. So the NED fund,
I did a story about the NED in the UK and their investments in the UK, uh, in media organizations
picked up massively after Corbyn became leader. And they included groups like index on censorship,
Bellingcat, um, article 19, uh, open democracy all had received money over, uh, uh, since 2015.
And it was in the millions of pounds. Plus, um, there's, I'll, I'll finish with this because
there's a very, very interesting, um, organization, which again, is the dynamics of it and the setup
of it and how it works is very, very much part of this pattern of how the US exercises power sort of
covertly. But it, it, as I mentioned, the, the only other leader of the Labour Party post 1945, who was
non-Atlanticist was Michael Foote. And he was in, he, he, he was elected leader in 1980. He lost the
election in 1983 and left, but he, the election in 1983 was, uh, he was really radical. Well,
comparatively, like if you read that manifesto from 1983, he called for the UK to withdraw from NATO,
for example, um, and really showed that he wanted to move Britain away, not to the, not towards the
Soviet Union, but away from the United States. He wanted Britain to be a kind of non-aligned country.
And he lost the election badly, but, and it was called the longest suicide note in history,
but declassified US CIA files have shown that they were massively worried about Michael Foote's
leadership and what had brought him to power, which was a real sort of anti-imperial, um, movement
within the Labour Party. And they, uh, and the US embassy at that point started this organization,
which is called the British American project. And it was quite explicitly about kind of cultivating
the progressive left end of the British political spectrum into, um, a pro American position.
And it developed massively during the eighties and it still exists today. And it was mobilized
massively during Jeremy Corbyn's leadership of Labour and many, many senior figures in that
organization were became the biggest critics of Corbyn. Uh, and, and you saw they had to come
out the shadows. They wouldn't because they, how it's presented is it's a nice membership organization
where journalists, politicians, um, uh, intelligence officials as well, by the way, UK military
as well, uh, get together and have, they have dinners and events and they have a conference every
year in the US and the UK, uh, alternate years. Uh, but what it is actually is about trying to cultivate
and bring, um, uh, uh, the left of the political spectrum away from any anti-imperialist position.
And it's been very successful. And I actually interviewed a MP or a former MPs called Emma
Dent code. She won the elect, she won her seat in Kensington for the first time for the Labour
Party in 2017 served till 2019. And she's told me that she was recruit what they tried to recruit
her to the British American project in the eighties when she was a journalist. And she said that, um,
they said, come to this conference. It's just about helping develop relations between Britain and
America and, and, uh, helping, uh, poor kids and stuff like that. And she said something smelt fishy.
And this was a senior official in CND, by the way, which was, uh, which campaigned for nuclear
disarmament, which, which were, which called for the US to, I mean, for the UK to unilaterally,
uh, decommission its nuclear weapons. But she found out subsequently, she told me this, and this is not
a fringe figure or a conspiracy theory. She's quite a prominent figure here in the US, in the UK. She
said her threat that the, the boyfriend who was no longer the boyfriend of, of this woman that tried
to recruit her told her, actually, I found out that, uh, she works for the CIA and she was working for
the CIA at the time. And that's Emma Dent code said that, and that we put that in the article,
um, obviously didn't get any pickup in the mainstream media, but you see time and time again,
that the CIA, its main focus in the UK, uh, has been to try and stop, uh, the, the anti-imperialist
left getting anywhere in the Labour party. Uh, and that really, they really had to come out of the
shadows during the Corbyn years, because that was, he, he is a genuine anti-imperialist and he has a
long history of, um, uh, opposing US wars and UK wars. And he was kind of the biggest nightmare for the
United States and they successfully did it. You know, they, they, they, like Jeremy Corbyn
in 2017 was within 2000 votes of becoming prime minister, spread across different constituencies.
If he hadn't been fighting a guerrilla war against these, uh, different elements for two years,
he would have won that election and British history would have been different. But,
but the whole point about the British political system is it's never been allowed to,
we've never been given a real choice and we're not allowed to have a real choice, partly because
we're controlled by the US in all these different ways, military, NGOs, uh, uh, intelligence, uh,
and, and, and you can't talk about it. It's an M it's a, it's an interference that literally
you can't talk about. So we get endless stories, most of them rubbish about Russian influence every
day, every day, but literally nothing about the fact that we can't move because we're controlled by the
US and that figure I mentioned about over 12,000, uh, US troops permanently stationed has never
appeared in a UK paper. So just omitted from the record. No one, so no one will know that we have
this occupation. So it's, it's, uh, it's a silent empire. And again, as we, as we mentioned that as,
as you know, this is, that's how it operates across the world. They, there's so much propaganda
put into, um, uh, uh, presenting the US power as benign and benevolent, but there's also a whole
other side of this, which is propaganda by mission where all the nefarious things that the US does
around the world are just omitted by the oligarchal media. So no one knows about it. So, so we need to
change that. Yeah. I'm the first story I ever wrote. I was in college was a company called Gulf and
Western, uh, which owned many corporations, including Paramount Pictures. And I went to
the Dominican Republic. They were assassinating labor leaders. Uh, I wrote it up, uh, and it was
set to be printed in the outlook section of the Washington Post. I was a freelancer and Paramount
Pictures told the Washington Post that they would withdraw their advertising, millions of dollars of
advertising. And the story was never printed. It was eventually printed in the Christian Science
Monitor in a reduced form, uh, only because the Christian Science Monitor at the time did not take
advertising. Um, so I mean that it, and of course you and I both come out of the mainstream media.
We understand exactly how that pressure works and, and journalists, most of the people of the FT or the
New York Times are good careerists. Uh, you don't need to write rules on the walls. They get it. Um,
they don't want to become a management headache and end up like you and me. Uh, I want to talk
about Zionism because, uh, there were two forces that brought down Corbyn. One was this neoliberal
American imperial force, but also it, uh, they, the, the way they discredited him was as an anti-Semite.
They got him to purge his own party. You also had the Blairite faction within the Labor Party that was
working against him. And part of your book is written from Palestine. So let's, let's talk about
about that, that force of Zionism and, and what you wrote about in Palestine.
Yeah. Well, I mean, uh, uh, to link it to what I was just saying, I think that
Gaza, um, the horror that we've seen over the past year has, has kind of stress tested
the propaganda system and the propaganda system has failed. You know, we have, you've had like, uh, a year of
people, uh, millions of people, and actually the general population seeing on their phones,
some of the most awful things they've ever seen in their life, just, uh, straight, uh, terrorism by
the Israelis. And yet they've seen Joe Biden, who's a Democrat, and they've been told their whole life
is the good guy against the boogeyman, Trump, uh, getting up and defending it all, uh, and
ventriloquizing Israeli propaganda, sending billions more weapons. Um, and I think that
contradiction is really having an impact on a societal wide level. I've talked to people
who are just, they're like, my worldview has completely changed over the past year, uh, because
they're not like us in the sense of that they haven't worked in it and they don't have this
kind of, uh, understanding because they're not, uh, uh, working within the system or, or at least
trying to, uh, do journalism about this stuff. And so if you've been fed that propaganda and you're
seeing this, that contradiction is, has never been as extreme because obviously US and UK imperial
crimes throughout history have been, there has been awful stuff happening, uh, uh, similar to Gaza,
you know, like what the British did after the Indian mutiny in 1857, people should look into that.
It was the savagery was out, uh, off the charts. And then obviously Vietnam, or the Mount or the
Mao Mao, exactly. And then you have the Vietnam, Laos and Cambodia, but we didn't have social media then.
Like, this is the thing that I think got why Gaza's because, uh, is changing the consciousness of
humanity because everyone is seeing it and the mainstream media, you won't see it or you won't
see the real stuff, but there's a way we can circumvent it. So I think that, uh, that, that,
that's changed the world for the better in that the cost has been way too high, obviously, because
it's, it makes you speechless often looking at what's going on. But I, but another part of it is
to go to what you talk about Zionism as well, because previously in the UK in Corbyn period,
we couldn't ever talk about Zionism, even like people around Corbyn and, uh, stuff,
we couldn't talk about the Israel lobby. Uh, we did on the fringes, but we were called cranks and
dismissed as, uh, but, uh, but it was that people were so scared to touch those two things. And
that has also changed. You know, we can talk openly about what is Zionism. It's a settler colonial
ideology, um, which, uh, which is predicated on, uh, the supremacy of Jews over the indigenous people.
Um, uh, uh, uh, uh, and, uh, it's intellectual godfather is Jabotinsky, who was a fascist,
uh, and an admirer of Mussolini and kind of his philosophy is one out. The Lukutniks
adhere to all that. And, uh, and, uh, and, and the way that the Zionist, uh, lobby in the UK,
and I think around the world as its central goal has always been to present Zionism as a progressive
force. They say they, they, they, they try and link it always with the history of, uh, uh,
persecution of Jewish people. Uh, when it's Zionism and Judaism are two totally different things,
but there's this real, real, um, uh, attempt to do that. And in fact, within the labor party,
it was, it was those organizations that really went for Corbyn, you know, because, because of his
pro Palestine position, nothing else. He's never said anything antisemitic. In fact,
they picked on, uh, uh, uh, the, the most storied anti-racist of his generation in parliament,
by far, Jeremy Corbyn. He's been a long time support of the Muslim community, the Jewish community,
every minority. He's famous for it. So it was kind of like, you know, that Swift Boats Veterans
for Truth thing with John Kerry, where Karl Rove said, we got to go for his, his strength. That's what
they did anyway. Uh, but they don't, some of those groups call themselves like Israel, uh, have Israel
in the title, like the labor friends of Israel. Um, but others like the Jewish labor movement,
say then what they said, they're nothing to do with Israel, but in fact, uh, have run effectively
as proxies for the Israeli embassy. Um, and they did, I mean, very, uh, there's a very good
journalist we've got in the UK called Asa Win Stanley, who I think you've had on the show before,
but he, he wrote a book recently and he, but he was literally the only journalist
really doing this at the time. There's more stuff coming out now, but it was, uh, but it was
completely suppressed. And in fact, I, I don't think the Corbyn administration dealt with it at
all. They didn't really realize what they were up against because I think they were quite naive.
You know, they kind of got catapulted into this position. No one thought Jeremy Corbyn was going
to win in 2015. There was not many personnel around that he could, but they basically, uh, they,
they did, they never pushed back against the, the smears, which is what they should. They said,
they kept saying, uh, we're sorry. Uh, we, we don't, any antisemitism is wrong, which everyone
agrees with obviously, but, but they never said, actually, this is a witch hunt, which has been
instigated by the Israel lobby actually, and other forces as well, who was useful to, uh, to destroy the
one bit of hope we've had in the UK for many generations, which is what they should have said.
Um, and, uh, but again, uh, I think all this has changed now because I think if, if, if we're
looking at what's going on and we're not brave enough to speak in clear-eyed terms about what
Zionism is and what the Israel lobby is, because we're scared we're going to get smeared as anti-Semites
or, um, uh, or, or bigots or whatever it is, then, uh, uh, yeah, you, you've lost your humanity
because we, it's too serious, you know, and I think that's a lot of people have had that realization
and are speaking out, um, uh, in a, in a clear-throated way and hopefully it will continue.
I mean, I don't, I don't know where it ends. I don't know what you think, but it seems to me that,
um, Zionism is dying in, in terms of the narrative. Uh, I think that it, I can talk to the UK side
because we've got actually a lot of amazing activism in the UK against Israel and, uh, um, uh, pro-Palestine
activism. All the biggest marches actually about Gaza have been in London. Um, and we have this group
called Palestine Action, which is actually making actual strides to shut down Israeli weapons factories,
Elbit factories in the UK, but there's a massive backlash from the state because of fact, and there's
polls that have come out recently. There was a poll that said 71, uh, uh, it was that their favorability
for Israel was minus 71 in the UK, and that was the lowest ever in recorded history. And so the
population is, and wants a arms embargo on Israel, they want a ceasefire, but you've got this massive
breach now between the ruling class, Labour Party, Conservatives, and pretty much the rest of them,
and the whole population. And that's not sustainable for that long. I don't believe. And what the state
is doing in response is to try to discipline the population through legal means. So they've, so they're
using these laws that have been, that were passed to prescribe Hamas and Hezbollah, which were actually
done at the behest of the Israel lobby, by the way, Hezbollah was banned in the UK in 2019. But, um, what
they, what, what this, what the terrorism act says in section 12 is that you cannot voice support for
prescribed groups. Now, Hamas and Hezbollah are prescribed, but they, they're now using that.
They're wielding that legislation against pro-Palestine activists. So Sarah Wilkinson,
who's an independent journalist, had a house raided by 13 police. Uh, this is a woman who runs a Twitter
account, just giving updates and got it. She was bundled into a van. They threw the, the earner with her
mum's ashes against the wall. She was held in a police station and interrogated. Uh, you had the
week before Richard Medhurst, another independent journalist who was detained for 23 hours in
solitary confinement in, at Heathrow airport, uh, again, under section 12 of the terrorism acts,
uh, and charged under it. Richard Barnard, I was just at court the other day in London. Um,
he's been charged under section 12, uh, of the terrorism act for a speech he gave. So they are,
they know they're losing and they know Zionism is losing because we're talking about it. People are
seeing the real, uh, uh, basis of it, which is it's a settler colonial ideology, which, which has no
place in the 21st century. We, we, we left, we should have left all that behind, but, um, the, but, but
the repression is getting worse here. Um, and we don't have the culture of free speech that you have
in the, in the U U S like whatever you think of Hamas and Hezbollah, you should, it's a massive
attack on free speech that you can't speak freely about, um, uh, resistance groups around the world.
It's like, it's kind of tantamount to say it to the U S uh, uh, outlawing, saying you support the
Vietcong during the Vietnam war. It's, it's, it's, it's a, it's an attack on free speech and it's
attack on the basics of freedom, but it's being done at the behest of the Israel lobby. And they are
clamping down massively now, but I don't think it will work because they can't put, uh, millions
of us in prison. Well, maybe they can try, but, but, but the, the awakening that has happened here
is incredible. And I see it in the United States as well, you know, like, look what happened with
the student demonstrations. I was a student at UCLA and Columbia at different points in my twenties.
And I remember I was a columnist on the UCLA student paper called the daily broom. Uh, and you
couldn't say anything about Israel back then, anything like it, you would get, editors will
tell you, don't say if you wrote anything mildly, you'd get attacked. And then you saw the UCLA,
all these students coming out, doing an encampment. Uh, it was the same at Columbia. So things are
changing and I think they know that, but what people are saying, and I think it's quite accurate,
is that democracy is being, and free speech is being eroded in the U S and the UK to defend the
fascistic genocidal regime of Benjamin Netanyahu, which is an absolutely insane
scenario. These are victories for freedom that have been won by centuries of popular
struggles. And they're all being dismantled to support this genocidal state, which is smaller
than Wales. Yeah. Well, they've come down very hard on the universities, the universities and
colleges spent all summer with, uh, security firms, many linked to Israel to, uh, impose all sorts of
new rules. You can't have encampments, you can't have, uh, tables with leaflets, et cetera, et cetera.
Um, so yes, the, the response, especially targeted at the student activists, who perhaps the only
people in the United States with a conscience, along with Jewish voices for peace and a few others,
um, they've targeted them, you know, with very draconian means. Uh, I, I want to talk a little
bit before we go about, uh, the, the transfer of manufacturing overseas. This is a, you, you raise
this issue in particular in chapter in Honduras. Um, and the role of the U S in essentially, uh, as
the, as the protector of sweatshop labor. Um, so you, after NAFTA are able to move, uh, large industries,
the auto industry, et cetera, over the border into Monterey, Mexico, uh, workers who were once making
25, $30 an hour with union union members with benefits, a pension plan, they could buy a house.
Uh, they didn't need to work 70 hours a week. They could send their kids to college that vanished,
evaporated, uh, and, uh, and our work in China, Vietnam, Bangladesh, you know, it all becomes the
sweatshop labor, but an important point in, in the enforcer of this sweatshop labor is the U S empire.
And that's something that you write about in the book. Yeah. Well, I mean, uh, there's a whole section
in the book. Uh, one of the four sections is about the empire at home and how the Imperial elite in
Washington, um, and other places, uh, there, uh, when, when they do have to defend this system,
they'll, they will say, uh, Oh, well we get lots of benefits from being engaged in the world,
you know, for the people where these resources are coming back and, and, and America's prosperous
because of it. But it's, it's, it's, it's all a lie. And you realize that when you start looking at
the sorry state of the United States, uh, uh, society, you know, like the huge levels of inequality,
the poverty, the people without, uh, health, uh, healthcare, it's outrageous when you've got the
richest country in history and, and, and you have a situation like that, but that's by design,
you know, all that wealth comes back and it's not distributed in society. In fact,
the poor subsidize the rich because the military, they, their taxes go towards the military,
which enforces the system, which then benefits the, the 1%. So it's a transfer of wealth from
the poor to the rich globally and domestically within the United States. And one of the main ways
they do that is by offshoring production, uh, because it takes jobs away from Americans,
um, and, and, and, and, and, and gives them to, uh, the poor world, but not good jobs to the poor
world. So they go there because they can, uh, undercut, uh, the wages. Um, and they can,
in fact, often these sweatshops are built in special economic zones as well. And one of the facets of
special economic zones, and one of the, um, incentives for corporations in the US is that especially
economic zones have even less regulations than the national state on what, how you can treat
labor and taxes and customs. So you send, so you, so you open these, uh, sweatshops, um, in, uh, on
the special economic zone, you pay the workers pittance and you get all the resources out without
having to pay customs or tax. So the, but the state in Mexico or Haiti or wherever it is where they're
offshoring is production doesn't benefit at all either. And that's by design, you know, so you just see
that the coffers of the state are always the ones that, that, that, that never get, um, uh, uh,
increased and it's, and it's the corporations that do the benefit and that operates domestically.
And there, I mean, there was quite a lot of, um, opposition to NAFTA within the United States
and also within Mexico, because there's a chapter on them in the book of Mexico, uh, which is a kind
of section on resistance and successful resistance. And obviously the Zapatistas, uh, rose up in night on
the new year's day in 1994 and the first day of NAFTA, because they, what they were rejecting the
neoliberal model, the sweatshop model for Mexico. And they, uh, it was a, uh, it was a unarmed, well,
nearly all unarmed, uh, uprising. They, they took control of San Cristobal de la Casa where they were
based with like, uh, guns carved out of wood just symbolically. And, but, but they, they fought a battle
and won, you know, there was 1996, the San Andres Accords, um, gave them, well not gave them, they
won, uh, 13 autonomous zones within, uh, um, Chiapas. And so the book, I went to one called
Oventic, uh, and it's, it's amazing. And again, a story not many people know, and it should, but it
shows what can happen when this system is resisted because, uh, and I, I do believe, and I think this
is also the case with the previous book I did with corporate power, like that these institutions
project power so forcefully, partly because they project this omnipotence, uh, and this idea that
they can't be forced back, but you see time and time again, that they often are paper tigers that
if there is a resistance, they don't know what to do and they can't handle it. And the Zapatistas,
as I say, the ragtag army of unarmed mostly, uh, peasants, uh, won these, uh, autonomous zones
where the military still can't go in. Um, and, uh, but just to go back to the sweatshop point,
the US empire and this sweatshop model, um, and the international development organizations,
they're all intertwined. They're all part of the same system and they're all effectively
the US empire. You know, the US empire is a system which runs for the benefit of corporate power. Um,
and, and in fact, the book is the title of it is the racket. And that comes from a speech by Smedley
Butler who signed up to, um, uh, the Marines in 1898 during the Spanish American war when he was 16.
Spanish American war, by the way, is when historians say the overseas American empire
actually began when they took on the possessions, when they won the war from Spain, like Philippines
and Guam and Puerto Rico. But anyway, he, he, uh, you'll know this story, but not a lot of people
do in the UK. I don't know if it's well known in the US, but Smedley Butler was, uh, died the most
decorated Marine in US history. He was very, very senior. Uh, he fought in Haiti, Honduras,
China during the boxer rebellion, but then later in life had this awakening about what he, his,
what he had been doing all those years, because obviously you're told in the military and you're
told in society at large, well, the military is about defending the national interests of America
or Britain or wherever it is. And when he left, he realized actually, no, I wasn't defending American
people. I wasn't defending their security. I was defending American corporate interest and
enforcing corporate rule. And that the speech he gave, which became very famous. He says, um,
uh, I wasn't in Honduras or wherever it was for national security reasons. I was there for
Brown brothers bank in New York. And then he says, I was a high class muscle man for big business.
Al Capone could operate in four districts. I operated on four continents. Uh, and he, and he said,
uh, he said war is a racket. So, and I think he's right. That's why I opened the book with that quote,
because that's what I saw at the financial times, the U S empire. There's two elements,
obviously it does want geopolitical control as well, but the primary role of the U S empire is to make
a global economy run in the interests of American corporate power. It's called an open door empire
nowadays. Cause it's not like old empires where you'd have formal garrisons of troops and formal
colonies, but effectively they are formal colonies because you can't go against American corporate
rule. And if you elect a leader who does like everyone or Alex will take you out, whether it be
through intelligence agencies, doing it through subversion, if that fails, we'll send in the
military as a last resort. And you see it, as you said, time and time again, throughout Latin America,
Africa, Asia, and we need to, as a, as the left or progressive forces or anyone interested in truth
and progress, understand that the U S is the major impediment to human progress. And like that William
Bloomberg called killing hope. I think that's a great title for a book because that's what it is,
is wherever hope arises, that maybe things can be a bit different. Maybe humans can live at peace with
each other. Maybe humans can actually benefit from the resources they're living on top of all these
things that we're told that are basic things that I think are very, very possible. They get smashed by the
US state, by the US military, by the CIA in infancy. And we need to fight back against the idea that
there's anything benevolent or anything benign about the US empire, because that is a prevalent ideology,
which is just the opposite of the truth. In fact, it's Orwellian that anyone actually believes that.
Great. That was Matt Conard on his book, uh, the racket, a rogue, uh, reporter versus
the American empire. I wrote the introduction. It's a great book. Uh, I want to thank, uh, Christian
and, uh, Sophia, Thomas, uh, Diego, and Max, who produced the show. You can find me at
chrisedges.substack.com.
