Dear friends, welcome to the first episode of my new podcast, The Aftermath.
I envision it as a podcast book, a sequel to my book Love and Math, which was published in 2013
and is now available in 19 languages. I see it like an audiobook, but released in installments,
with each episode being like a chapter in a book, so they are all connected to each other.
Of course, we will also have a visual component, and most importantly, I'm inviting all of you
to comment and to ask questions. Your feedback will be very much appreciated. It will make this
podcast so much more interactive as it unfolds in real time. So what are we going to talk about?
Well, my passion, my big passion is mathematics, so naturally it's going to be a big part of this
podcast. Also, since I was a kid, I've been fascinated with quantum physics, and in fact, a lot of my
research has been on the interface between math and quantum field theory. So that's naturally another
topic of interest. I'm also interested in philosophy, specifically the fundamental questions on the
nature of reality. Well, who isn't, right? And also in psychology, specifically, Jungian psychology,
which I have been studying for the last 10 years through the works of Carl Jung and Marie-Louise
von Franz, who was arguably his favorite student. You see, in my mind, all these subjects are deeply
connected to each other. And in fact, the main motivation for me to do this podcast is to share
my knowledge with you, and in particular, to show you how these pieces fit together from my perspective.
I will start by talking about some important aspects of mathematics, which are rarely, if ever,
discussed these days. One could say that mathematics creates a kind of a bridge between matter and mind,
and this provides some very important insights on the nature of reality, but also insights on our lives.
So, to me, this is not just some abstract stuff that we are discussing just out of curiosity. In fact,
they touch upon the most fundamental questions of our lives. Who am I? What is this all about? You know?
What is life? What is death? How do we relate to one another? These are the types of questions that I
want to talk about. And most importantly, what I will argue is that mathematics shows us that we are all
connected to each other, you see. And when I say connected to each other, I mean it at a much deeper
level than it is ordinarily understood. Because it's well known today that our bodies are connected to
each other through the environment. Duh! Because, you know, the skin is a kind of a membrane through
which the inside of the body interacts with the environment. And so through the environment, our
bodies are connected. Fine. But what I'm going to talk about is a connection at the level of our minds.
Our minds are not isolated from each other. My mind is not locked in my skull. Your mind is not locked in
your skull. We are capable of communicating with each other somehow. And mathematics gives us the clearest
evidence of this connection, you see. So it kind of becomes a portal to this hidden reality. What is
mathematics after all? So to me, it is this fast reservoir of timeless, persistent, and objective
knowledge, which is accessible to all of us. Even though, even though we don't perceive mathematical
objects through our five senses. Think about it. It's a very important point, which is usually missed.
And I'm going to explain this in more detail shortly. But roughly speaking, that's because the
objects we study in math actually don't exist in physical reality. Let me repeat this. The objects
that we study in math, if you look at them more closely, if you examine them more closely, you realize
that they do not exist in physical reality. They are not in space and time, you see. Where exactly
they reside then, if not in space-time? I don't know. It's a big question. It's a big mystery. We'll
discuss it. But the first thing to understand is that they are not in physical reality. We do not perceive
them through our five senses. And yet, we can talk about it. We can imagine them. We can conjure up these
mathematical objects in our minds. And we can talk about them. We can reason about them. And we
understand each other. We understand what we're talking about, you see. We can prove theorems about
them. We can introduce new mathematical objects, and so on. So, it's really fascinating. And I believe
that this points us directly to our unity, to our connection to each other. Moreover, the fact that
mathematics has been so successful in describing the physics of the universe, as a physicist Eugene
Wigner put it, is this unreasonable, almost unreasonable effectiveness of mathematics in natural sciences,
that, to me, points to our unity with nature at a deeper level than is ordinarily understood. And it is
this unity, this unity between us, between us and nature, that will be one of the main themes of this
podcast, the aftermath. Let's get right into it. I want to start by pointing out an important difference
between mathematics and physics. Mathematical theorems stay the same. They don't get updated. New theorems get
proved, but this does not change the validity of the theorems that were proved before. But our
physical theories get updated. For example, Isaac Newton formulated his laws of motion and his theory
of gravity. Both were used successfully for more than 200 years. But in the 20th century, both theories
were drastically updated. Now, this doesn't mean that Newton's theories were completely discarded.
They're still used today because they give us efficiently good approximate description in many
situations. But physicists realized that these theories don't give us a good description in many
other situations. Roughly speaking, at high speeds, at small scales, or when the gravitational force is
very strong. So, other physical theories were created in the 20th century, which gave us much more accurate
description in those cases. Namely, Einstein's special relativity theory, quantum mechanics,
and Einstein's general relativity theory. However, these theories still don't give us a totally,
total and complete and precise description in all cases. Quantum mechanics, for example, is incompatible
with special relativity. And so, it needed an update, which we call quantum field theory. And now we have
to reconcile quantum field theory and Einstein's general relativity theory. And we still don't know how to do it
to this day. You see, in other words, the best theories that we currently have, quantum field
theory and general relativity, are incompatible with each other. And hence, they are incomplete.
The upshot of this discussion is that physical theories are always approximate. A given theory works
well in a certain range of cases, but not in all cases. Physics is always work in progress, you could say.
Now, this may sound discouraging to some of us, but I actually think this is not a bug. It's a
feature. What it means is that our universe is so incredibly complex that we shouldn't expect any
theory to describe it completely. As Richard Feynman put it, the great Richard Feynman,
nature's imagination is so much greater than man's. It will never let us relax. It will never let us
relax. So now let's contrast that with mathematics. Consider the Pythagoras theorem, which we all study in
school. This theorem is about the right triangles. We're talking about the triangle, which has one
angle is 90 degrees. So then there are three sides. The longer one, which is opposite to the right
angle, is called the hypotenuse. And then there are two shorter sides. If we denote their length by x and y,
and the length of the hypotenuse by z, Pythagoras theorem says that x squared plus y squared equals z squared.
Now, this was discovered by Pythagoras and Pythagoreans about 2500 years ago. In fact, it was also discovered
around the same time in other cultures. So that was a theorem proved in those days. And in fact,
in Euclidean geometry, it is kind of codified in the framework of a formal system, a kind of axiomatic
system that we will talk about in more detail. Now, fast forward 2500 years. Today, Pythagoras theorem is
still valid. It still expresses the truth about the right triangles. Any right triangle with the sides
x, y, z gives rise to this relationship x squared plus y squared equals z squared.
That relation has not changed, nor do we expect it to change in the next 2500 years. So that's
difference between mathematics and physics that I was talking about. What's even more fascinating
is the fact that math and physics actually describe different things, closely connected to each other,
but different. And I know this might sound surprising. And in fact, it's very easy to miss
this feature. It's one of the most important aspects of the story. So let me explain what I mean.
And a good illustration for this difference of math and physics is provided by Euclidean geometry.
So Euclid's idea was to establish some fundamental relations between different geometric figures on the
plane. Now, what do I mean by a plane? Usually when I teach this in the classroom, so I have a,
I have a blackboard, say, and I explain to my students, I say, imagine this blackboard extended in all
directions to infinity. Okay, but I don't have a blackboard. So let me show you this on my iPad. So
here's, here's a page on my iPad. And so imagine extending it in all directions to infinity. Or likewise,
you could imagine, you know, a flat tabletop extended to infinity in all directions, or a piece of paper,
again, extended in all directions. That's what mathematicians mean by a plane. Already, the first
issue appears, what do I mean by saying extended to infinity? Because we don't have this type of infinity
available to us in the physical world around us. More on that later, but let's go back to this, to this
page. So on this page, I can draw, for example, I can draw a line, or I can draw points. I can have
intervals connecting points, I can have circles, I can have triangles, right. And so once I draw this
picture, so for example, here is a right triangle that has one of the angles 90 degrees. And let's
suppose that I arrange that once one of the sides is three centimeters, and another side is four
centimeters. And I want to find what the hypotenuse of this triangle is, right. And so here's where I
can use the Pythagoras theorem and to say that, well, you have to take the square, three squared plus four
squared. So the result is nine plus 16, which is 25, which means that the hypotenuse squared is 25.
That is to say that the hypotenuse, the length of hypotenuse is equal to five. So it's what's called
a three, four, five triangle. So it's a triangle in which each of the sides is actually a natural number,
and they satisfy the Pythagoras formula. So now one approach to doing that is to kind of draw the
picture and then to make an accurate measurement. But Euclid's idea was to deal with this kind of
once and for all, with this relation for all right triangles, and think of it as a universal relation,
and not just do it each time a right triangle appears. So how to do it? So his idea was to start
with certain core principles, which are some statements about these geometric figures that
we take for granted, except without proof. We call them axioms, or sometimes in the past,
people use the term postulates, okay? And so then the idea is that you start with a small number of
these core principles of these axioms, and then you try to derive other statements, which we call theorems,
from these axioms. And this way, you try to establish some universal relations between the
geometric figures, but by pure thought, without any experimentation, you see, without actually going
out in the field and measuring things, or drawing them on an iPad or on a piece of paper and measuring
things. So this is a brilliant idea, that you're just trying to do it by pure thought, by pure logic,
by pure reason. And in fact, what Euclid did was what we now call a formal system,
it's the first example of this approach, which has been sort of a bread and butter of modern
mathematics, that you produce new statements, new theorems, by starting with a carefully chosen
collection of axioms, statements that you take for granted. So for example, one of the axioms that
Euclid used was the following, that if you have two points on the plane, there is a unique line which
passes through them. Reasonable. And there was a few other axioms of this nature. But the question
that I want to ask is, what do we mean by lines, points, circles, and so on? Because you see, whatever
I draw on my iPad, or you would draw, say, on a piece of paper, and so on, it's not going to be the
same as what is actually considered as a bona fide object in Euclidean geometry. A point in Euclidean
geometry is not supposed to have any size. It's not supposed to have any thickness. Likewise, a line
is supposed to have zero width. It has to be infinitely thin, if you will. And it should be
completely straight. But in the real world, in the physical world around us, there are no such things.
There are no points, which have no size. There are no lines, which have no width. And perhaps
even more importantly, there are no lines, which are not wiggly. All the lines in the physical world,
they're wiggly. They may look approximately straight from a particular vantage point. But as you zoom in,
you will see the wiggliness. The world, the physical world is wiggly. But in Euclidean geometry,
we postulate the existence of these absolute, idealized, abstract objects, points, lines,
triangles, and so on. And axioms and theorems are about them. Let me repeat this. Axioms and theorems
of Euclidean geometry are really about these abstract, pure forms, abstract, idealized geometric figures.
They are not, strictly speaking, applicable to the objects that we find around us in the physical
reality. So you see, what we learn is that these mathematical geometric figures that we are talking
about in Euclidean geometry are not something that we can find, we can observe in the physical world
around us. The objects in the physical world are approximate lines, approximate points, approximate
triangles, but they're not exactly the objects of Euclidean geometry. Those are idealized, abstract,
pure geometric figures, which have no place in the physical world. But of course, what we do is a
kind of a sleight of hand that we conveniently forget the difference between the two and pretend
these are the same objects. But what does it mean, actually? It means that actually, if these are so
different, it means that these abstract geometric figures, these points with no size or lines that have
no thickness, you know, that are absolutely straight, and so on, they actually don't reside in the physical
world. So where do they reside? It's kind of clear that they reside in the mental world, they reside in
our minds. But what does this imply? The fact that we can talk about them, that you understand perfectly
well what I'm talking about. You understand what I'm talking about when I talk about these idealized
objects. And it's not like you are perceiving them with your five senses in the physical world. If
these objects were present in the physical world, then you looked at them, and I looked at them, and
they say, okay, we understand each other, because we perceive them through our five senses. But as I have
explained, that is not the case. And yet, nobody has ever told me, you know, when I teach this stuff,
Professor, I don't understand what you're talking about. What do you mean by a line without thickness?
What do you mean by a point that has no size? Everybody understands that such things exist in
our minds. We have the innate capacity to conjure them up in our minds. But then, I would argue that
our minds must be connected. How else could we talk about them together? How else can we understand each
other? How else can we reason about them without having seen them, without having perceived them
in the physical world around us, you see? What is perhaps even more shocking is that Euclidean
geometry assumes the existence of infinity. Because remember how I talked about the plane as being
a page or a blackboard extended to infinity in all directions? Every line on this abstract plane is
infinite. It doesn't have a finite length. It doesn't end anywhere, you see? But in our physical universe,
there are no such lines, there are no such planes, for the simple reason that the universe is 13.7
billion years old, give or take. And the speed of light is finite, which means that the absorbed
universe, whatever we can observe within our universe, has finite size. It simply doesn't contain
infinite lines or infinite planes, or any other objects who's of infinite extension, you see. So, that
shows you even more clearly the difference between the abstract math of Euclidean geometry and the
concrete, so to say, applied math of approximate forms, approximate lines, approximate circles and
points and triangles. There is an important feature which is missing in our physical universe,
which we have no trouble conjuring up in our minds, and that is lines of infinite length, you see.
And in fact, to continue the story of Euclidean geometry, I mentioned that Euclid came up with
these axioms and then tried to derive various theorems, such as Pythagoras' theorem, from those
axioms. I mentioned one of the axioms, which is about a line passing through two different points. So,
that axiom does not require you to kind of see the entire line in all of its infinite glory. There are four
more postulates that Euclid came up with, and all but the last one, which became known as the fifth
postulate, or perhaps now we would say fifth axiom, kind of have this finite nature. So, it's something
that you could experience just by looking at the finite piece of a plane. But the last one is about
parallel lines. The statement is the following, that if you have a line, and you have a point
outside of this line, I'm drawing this again on my iPad, then the axiom says there will be
there will be a line passing through this point, which is parallel to the original line.
parallel meaning that it never intersects it. But you see, that means that we are making a statement
about these two lines all the way to infinity in both directions. But we have no way of verifying this
in our physical world. In our physical world, I can only draw, make approximate renderings of these lines
as kind of finite segments of those lines. They will be different from the abstract lines
in several aspects. As we discussed, first of all, they will have some thickness, which contradicts
the assumption that we make in Euclidean geometry. Second of all, they will not be exactly straight,
which we assume to be the case for the abstract mathematical objects in Euclidean geometry. But
perhaps what is even more important is that we'll only have access to finite pieces of those lines.
But in Euclidean geometry, we are talking about those lines in their entirety
as the infinite, as the really genuinely infinite
geometric objects. And this fifth axiom, fifth postulate, specifically talks about what happens
throughout this line in all the way to infinity. No wonder the mathematicians
for the next 2,000 years tried to get rid of this axiom, tried to prove it from other axioms,
because I think intuitively they felt uncomfortable because it was a statement that they were being
told to take on faith, so to speak. And that statement dealt with something with a certain feature
of this Euclidean geometry, which is very hard to imagine verifying in the physical world.
So you see how interesting the natural question at this point is, where do these mathematical objects
reside? And many mathematicians believe that they reside in what's called the
Platonic reality, a kind of a realm of pure forms, which was theorized by the Greek philosopher Plato,
who in many ways actually followed in the footsteps of Pythagoras and Pythagoreans.
So many mathematicians believe that these abstract forms are real. They do not exist in the physical world,
as we have just discussed, even in the simplest possible example of Euclidean geometry. So they
reside in this sort of mental space that we all have access to somehow, right? So the great logician,
Kurt Gödel, one of the greatest mathematicians of the 20th century, has actually said that in his view,
mathematical concepts and ideas form an objective reality of their own, which we cannot create or change,
but only perceive and describe. Now, I'm not going to try to resolve this question once and for all,
and argue whether this Platonic realm really exists or not. But the question I'm asking is,
how can we possibly understand each other? When I talk about points, lines and triangles,
if our minds were separate, I can't imagine how we could possibly understand what we're talking about.
And yet, we don't have to make any effort to understand what kind of things we're talking about,
you see. And I don't believe it's just because objects of similar kind, similar kind, that approximate
them can be found in the physical world. For one thing, no finite interval actually approximates an
infinite line. And yet, when I say infinite line, I don't think you have a difficulty understanding me.
Our mind has the capacity to conjure it up. And what you conjure up in your mind,
what I conjure up in my mind appears to be the same, even though we don't perceive these objects
with our five senses. Note one more thing. If we are looking at some objects in the physical world
and perceive them with five senses, you and I will have slightly different views, slightly different
perceptions because we'll have different angles, different points of view. But with mathematical
objects, we all seem to have the same point of view. We don't have different perspectives. How
interesting, huh? So this reminds me actually of a very nice quote from Charles Darwin. I'll read it from
my book, Love and Math. It's actually in the preface, in the preface to my book. And Charles Darwin,
whose work at first did not rely on mathematics, later wrote in his autobiography,
I have deeply regretted that I did not proceed far enough, at least to understand something of the great
leading principles of mathematics. For men, thus in doubt, seem to have an extra sense.
In other words, he's saying those who understand mathematics have an extra sense.
And I would actually say, I kind of agree with it, but I would say more. I would say that all of us
have this extra sense. All of us have this ability, not just mathematicians. In other words, everybody's
a mathematician somehow, even if we don't really, we don't really notice this.
capacity that we have. And it's a great gift, I think. It's a great gift that we have to appreciate
and celebrate. It shows you the plasticity, the ability of our mind to go much further
than we could imagine by being confined just in space and time. So that means that some part of us
is beyond space and time. And I think that is an incredibly important consequence or incredibly
important conclusion from this discussion. It opens up our horizons to go from feeling as being separate
and enclosed and divided and isolated from the rest, from other people, from nature and so on. To the idea
that there is a much deeper connection between us than is ordinarily understood. And what gives us
this sense, this evidence for this deep connection is mathematics.
This is what I meant when I said that mathematics is our portal to hidden reality.
Well, you could say this example with Euclidean geometry, with points, lines, triangles and so on,
the difference between the idealized, perfect mathematical objects and the objects that we
actually find in the physical world around us is not that great. You could say that sort of to an
naked eye, a slightly wiggly line in space could actually look like a perfect straight line. So,
yes, that's correct. But here we're only talking about the most elementary objects of mathematics.
As we progress and as we delve deeper into the subject, we find much more refined, much more
sophisticated objects. There are all kinds of exotic numerical systems. For instance, the so-called
P-ADIC numbers, which you can Google that. P stands for prime and P dash ADIC, A-D-I-C. P-ADIC numbers,
they form a big part of the mathematical universe, but I don't think anyone finds them in the physical
world around us. We find real numbers, we find natural numbers, we find rational numbers and so on,
but not P-ADIC numbers. So where are they in the physical world around us? That's not clear at all.
Even with complex numbers has been a big question up until recently. What I'm talking about is numbers
like square root of negative one, which we usually denote by i. The first mathematician to write about
them was an Italian mathematician, Girolamo Cardano, and he was speaking about the mental tortures involved
in trying to understand and decipher the meaning of those numbers. These days, they are just, you know,
bread and butter of mathematics. We don't even think twice about any kind of, there's no mystery about them
anymore. And moreover, our best physical theories, the quantum mechanics, quantum field theory,
rely on complex numbers. The Hilbert space, which appears in quantum mechanics or quantum field theory,
is a complex vector space. It's the complex numbers are built sort of hardwired, are built into it.
And so, okay, so you could say, yes, complex numbers in some sense are connected to the physical world,
but they're connected in a rather non-trivial way. So this actually shows a very strange way in which
some mathematical concepts that initially appear to be purely abstract and esoteric actually then kind
of find a back door into the physical world. So maybe periodic numbers also will somehow, in later
theories, will make an appearance and we will say, okay, well periodic numbers actually are integrated
into the physical world around us. This hasn't happened yet. And I would say that it's probably
safe to assume that most of mathematics perhaps will never find its way to the physical world around
us. There's no reason to believe that it will. And even those that do, like points and lines and
triangles, there is still a subtle but important difference between them, as I explained, you see.
So therefore, we have to be careful not to identify our mental world with the physical world. It seems to
be that the case that we can actually imagine and conjure up things in our minds, which we cannot really
observe in the physical world around us. So that's the point I'm trying to make. But you see, if so,
then there is a big question about how we can actually talk about this. Because if all of those
objects actually did appear in the physical world around us, we would say, okay, yes, our minds could
well be disconnected. So here's my mind, here's your mind. But we are both observing the same thing in
physical reality. So that's why we can communicate about it. But if we agree that there are some
objects in mathematics, which we do not find in physical reality, then how can we possibly
understand what we're talking about? You see, the same ways that I imagine a straight line,
or I imagine periodic numbers, or I imagine complex numbers, or an infinite dimensional hybrid space,
so can you. You may not have thought about it as deeply as I have, but all the information is
available, and everybody can learn this, everybody can understand it. And once you do, we're all on
the same page, we can reason about it, we can discuss it, we can exchange ideas about it, we can move to the
next frontiers in our research about the substance, which is how mathematics has been developing, actually.
So that is a very essential point, that it opens the possibilities, the possibility that our minds
are actually connected to each other. Because otherwise, it looks extremely implausible that we
would actually be able to, you would be able to understand what I'm talking about, you see.
So I would say that's the biggest takeaway from this discussion, this idea of unity, this idea of
non-separation, you see. So we go from this sense of being in a sort of a conflict with each other,
in disagreement with each other, being isolated, alienated from each other, and from nature.
We go from that to this realization of how deeply connected we are. And we're not led to this by some
magical thinking, some voodoo. We are led to this by mathematics, the most objective of all
sciences, you know. So we have to pay attention to this. And in fact, if you think about it,
this has been staring at us this whole time, because we all study Euclidean geometry as kids.
But it's just that what I pointed out today are these very subtle aspects of it, which I not usually
emphasized. And you see, this is what we're going to do in this podcast. There is a lot more to discuss.
In the next episode, I'm planning to talk about non-Euclidean geometry, about how in the 19th
century, mathematicians also realized that you can replace this fifth postulate, this axiom of
parallel lines that I talked about earlier, with its negation. And this way to come up with much more
interesting realizations of geometry, which lead us to this bigger world, the world which is not flat.
Just like Earth is not flat, our space time is not flat. So this idea of non-Euclidean geometry
eventually led Bernard Riemann, the German mathematician, in the in the 1850s to his theory
of Riemann geometry, which became the cornerstone of Einstein's general relativity theory. And we
learned from Einstein, from this theory, that in fact, not only the surface of the Earth is curved, but
in fact, our space time is curved. A ray of light bends around the star, a massive star, something that
was confirmed experimentally in 1919 by Eddington, the great astronomer and his expedition. So there's
so much more to talk about. But also, by the way, formal systems. I have to explain to you the language
of mathematics. What are these axioms? How do they produce new theorems and so on? What happens when we
replace one axiom with another and so on? So this is called formal systems. I will explain to you this
language. And this will also lead us to another important aspect of mathematics, and that is
infinity. We have already talked about it a little bit, but we'll also talk about the infinity of natural
numbers, for example. And what does that mean? But let's wrap this up for today. Before I go,
I want to tell you something. I'm not by far the only scientist who has suggested this possibility that
our minds are connected. And in this respect, I want to talk about Erwin Schrödinger, the great
Austrian physicist. The Schrödinger equation is a cornerstone of quantum mechanics. He was an
absolutely brilliant man. And, you know, also famous for his cat, the Schrödinger cat. Is he dead or
alive? We don't know. I guess one day we'll find out one day. But he was very interested in these
questions. The question of nature of reality, nature of consciousness. And he wrote a book,
Mind and Matter. And in this book, he writes about what he calls the paradox of numbers. That is,
to him, the appearance of many conscious egos from whose mental experience the one world is concocted.
That's to consider that a paradox of numbers. The seeming appearance of many conscious egos.
And the solution to this paradox of numbers, according to him, was the unification of minds,
or consciousnesses. Their multiplicity is only apparent, he writes. In truth, there is only one
mind. In truth, there is only one mind. And he adds also in the book that the empirical fact that
consciousness is never experienced in the plural,
only in the singular. He says that's the empirical fact. Not only has none of us ever experienced more
than one consciousness, there is also no trace of circumstantial evidence of this ever happening
anywhere in the world. So you see, he was very much sold on the idea of a unified mind,
or the unification of our minds. And I also want to mention the interview of a mathematician,
Russian-born mathematician, Vladimir Vapnik, who is one of the luminaries in the subject of machine
learning. He's a founder of the statistical learning theory and many other important advances
in machine learning. So he was interviewed by Lex Friedman on his podcast. And here's what he said.
He said, I'm not sure that intelligence is just inside of us. It may also be outside of us. When we prove some
difficult theorems, in a couple of years, in several places, people prove the same theorem. In history of
science, this happened many times. He gives us an example, the discovery of non-Euclidean geometry, which we will
talk about next time, in the second episode of Aftermath of this podcast. And Vladimir Vapnik says there
are many examples like this, and I concur. When mathematicians develop something, he said, they are
developing something general, which affects everybody. Isn't it what we've discovered today?
So maybe, maybe, he says, our model that intelligence exists only inside of us is incorrect.
It might be that there exists some connection with the world intelligence,
the world intelligence. I really like this idea of a world intelligence. Now, interestingly enough,
Vladimir Vapnik was saying all this in response to Lex Friedman's question,
can machines think? Can machines be intelligent? So, of course, all this stuff is very much connected
to the current debate about artificial intelligence, about what these computer systems can and cannot do.
And I promise you, we will devote a lot of time to discussing this in the subsequent episodes of this
podcast. And I will also talk about Jungian psychology, which is very much relevant to all of this.
So Jung had this idea of archetypes, which in some ways are close to these platonic forms, these pure
platonic forms that we talked about earlier when we discussed the question, where do mathematical
objects reside? But Jungian idea of archetypes, I think, is more advanced than the idea of platonic forms.
I will explain in what sense. And Carl Jung was actually very much attuned to mathematics.
He believed that numbers, actually numbers, represent the simplest possible archetypes.
He called them archetypes of order. And he actually expected that by looking at mathematical objects,
such as natural numbers, as well as other mathematical objects, one could actually gain a lot of
interesting insights into psychology and into kind of the structure of our psyche,
the collective unconscious and things like that. So we'll definitely talk about all of this,
especially in connection with numbers and connection with infinity and things like that.
But that's all the time we have for this first episode.
I'm super excited about this project, as you can tell. And if you enjoyed it, if you like the content,
please hit the like button, please subscribe, please share with your friends on social media.
And most importantly, please leave comments, leave questions. I'll be happy to respond to discuss
these questions in the future episodes. Also, you can contact me on social media. I'm active on Twitter,
on Facebook, on LinkedIn, Instagram. You can see in the description, in the description of this video,
you can see my handles on various platforms. I will also put in the description, a few links that
are relevant or related to the material that we have discussed. And I'm really looking forward to
seeing you next time on this new podcast, The Aftermath. Thank you. See you later. Bye-bye.
