40-50 years ago, our paradigm was that we have to remove nature, remove the trees to plant
soil, pasture. Now we know that we need forests, so the paradigm has shifted. We need to redesign
the landscape so that we maximize the connectivity between productive areas and forested areas.
These two things are not competitive anymore. They depend upon each other.
Recently, Carlos Nobre joined me to discuss the state of the Amazon rainforest, the risk of its
collapse and flip to Savannah in the coming decades, and why that's important for the health
and stability of the entire world, as if we shouldn't have known that. Following that,
this week, I am joined by Andre Guimaraes, another expert on the Amazon, to discuss
the political and economic realities on the ground in Brazil in the fight to both preserve
the integrity of the Amazon forest and the Amazon basin, as well as the well-being of the people
who live there. Andre Guimaraes is the executive director of the Amazon Environmental Research
Institute, which is a Brazilian think tank focused on the challenges to the Amazon for reaching
zero deforestation, as well as developing sustainably. He is also the facilitator of the Coalition
on Climate, Forests, and Agriculture, a network of over 200 entities from the rural sector, academia,
and civil society focused on a long-term vision for the land use in Brazil.
As always, thank you for listening to and supporting this podcast. If you enjoyed this two-part series
on the Amazon, consider sending one or both of these episodes to someone who might be interested
in learning about this topic, as well as discuss it with some of your friends or colleagues
and how it might impact your lives and choices going forward. With that, please welcome Andre Guimaraes.
Andre, bom dia, tudo bem?
Bom dia, Nate. Tudo bem por aqui? Com você?
That's all the Portuguese I know, my friend.
That's a good start.
You know, we talked briefly a couple weeks ago, and I immediately felt a kinship with you,
and I was looking forward to this conversation. And isn't it a blessing and a boon that two people
living on different continents who've never met can use modern technology to come together
and have a conversation about the crisis of your country, the forest in your country,
the whole planet that we're facing. It's such a perilous and amazing time to be alive, don't you think?
Absolutely, Nate. I couldn't agree more.
I think this is one of the beautiful aspects of being on this planet these days. We do have problems, yes,
but we can communicate on an efficient way and try to find solutions for the problems. And I think
that's pretty much of a privilege of being walking on this planet.
A privilege and a responsibility, I increasingly think, and I think more people increasingly feel.
Absolutely.
Okay, so we're going to take a deep dive on what's going on in the Amazon forest, the relationship
to climate, the relationship to global systems, the relationship to the people of Brazil,
bioeconomic regional models of economy, and all that. But let's just start with how did you
first get started on this topic as a researcher, as a defender of the Amazon?
I am an economist by training, Nate. I graduated, actually, in the University of Brasilia,
where I'm talking to you from, back in 1991, a few months away from the big ecological moment of our
recent history, which was the Rio 92, the Eco 92, the meeting in Rio de Janeiro, which grouped together
more than 150 global leaders to talk about, you know, climate, to talk about the challenges of protecting biodiversity,
the challenges of, you know, humans embracing nature. So I think was one of the very first moments in our history that,
you know, these issues of protecting nature and in protecting nature and protecting ourselves
was debated in a large scale in such a high level debate. And again, when I graduated, again, a few months
before Rio 92, you can imagine the debates and the media and the attention that the public was given to
the subject, particularly the environment. And suddenly, for, you know, younger students or young scientists,
as myself, the Amazon appeared on the radar screen. Up until then, to be very honest with you, I'm a human
guy. I used to live in Brasilia, my parents are from São Paulo. So the Amazon for me was something very
distant, something very, you know, unknown, something very dangerous, something very, you know, from many, many
perspectives was strange to my reality. But suddenly, because of the event in Rio de Janeiro, that big green blur in the
Brazilian map appeared to me. And I had, remember, I had two job offers when I graduated. One was to,
you know, be an agronomist, to really run farms and, you know, dedicate my time to, you know, producing
soy and other products in the central Brazil, where I am, where Brasilia is. And the other job offer was
actually an idea of putting together a project with another couple of young scientists to try to
understand the dynamics of logging in the Amazon. I had no doubt, Nate, I said, thank you very much
to my job offer to become an agronomist. I took everything I had, including my wife and my dog,
put it into a little car, and drove 2000 kilometers to the north and reached Belém, where I lived for
four years and started my career. And honestly, I would do that all again, if I had the opportunity to.
I think I would do that again, if I had the opportunity, I would do that right now.
Um, so, so, uh, I just recently had Carlos Nobre, uh, on the show who I know you are a colleague with,
who said when he started and he's a little bit older than us, um, that there was only 0.5% of the
Amazon forest was deforested and now it's, uh, approximately 17%. So, so when did this major
deforestation begin and what were the main drivers at the time and the main drivers now?
I think to understand the process of, of deforestation, we have to, to go back to the,
I would say the late sixties, early seventies back then. And there were lots of oil crisis and,
you know, global economic crisis. And Brazil was a net importer of a number of goods and services,
such as oil, for example, we were a net importer of oil, but we were also a net importer of food.
So Brazil used to import poultry, used to import fruits, used to import, uh, you know, other, uh,
uh, uh, uh, food products and, and, and so on. So, uh, the, we had problems with the balance of
payments at the country. So several working groups were created at the time to sort out ways
to, to, to replace, uh, imports. So one of these groups was a group dedicated to, uh, replace, uh,
food imports. And, uh, from that group, a number of initiatives, uh, came out. One of them was the,
the, the setup of Embrapa. Embrapa is the Brazilian agency for agronomical research.
So the objectives of Embrapa back then, late sixties, early seventies was to, uh, you know,
to bring the, the Northern agriculture to tropical regions. So adapt agriculture to tropical reasons.
So we, we have seen back then lots of incentives, both to develop science and to, uh, uh, you know,
bring Brazilians to the, to the interior of the country. I'm talking about the Cerrado,
the Southern part of the Amazon, but also the Amazon. So roads were built. Infrastructure was,
was designed. Electricity was connected. Dams were built to generate electricity to cities,
cities like Belém and Manaus, which are today 2.5, 3 million people cities were, uh, have gained
traction and, and enhanced its population. So the, the idea of, of, uh, of developing the agriculture
of Brazil, which initially was to replace the imports of food was one of the main drivers of
the occupation of, of central Brazil and the Southern part of the Amazon. So it is a success
story. If you, if we cut a long story short and look at it from, from today's eyes, we'll see that
Brazil is today, you know, one of the largest producers and exporters of, of food and agricultural
commodities on the planet. So this is a tremendous success story on one way. On the other hand, on the
other way we, we, we, we have promoted this growth at the expense of half of the Cerrado biome and
nearly a 20%, as you said, 17, 18% of, of the Amazon biome. So there was an environmental cost
associated to this, this development, which, you know, strikes us today and put, uh, you know, a
responsibility on our, on our shoulders to redesign this process. We can continue the way that took us here.
We have to rethink the model. So what you just described in Brazil is a microcosm of what's
happened in the entire planet with growth and the cost of the environment, except in many other
countries, what happens in their country environmentally stays in their country, but that's not the case in
Brazil, because as we hear in the news, the Amazon forest are the lungs of the planet. Uh, maybe you could,
uh, describe how important the, the Amazon basin is to the global, uh, weather and climatic and, and
natural world. Absolutely. Um, the Amazon, uh, uh, stores the equivalent to 10 years of global carbon
emissions. So that's the, the, the, the, the weight of the Amazon in terms of, of, uh, climate change. I mean,
if we, if we, uh, had the, the Amazon burned, you know, from, you know, in a few days, we would add
a dramatic situation to the planet because, uh, uh, uh, zillions and zillions of tons of carbon would
be immediately emitted to the, to the atmosphere. So the Amazon is also responsible for maintaining,
or at least help to maintain the, the, the, the climate in our planet. But Brazil, as, as, uh,
we've talked about is, is, uh, is a net, is a enormous producer of, of, uh, food and commodities,
agricultural commodities, and so on. According to the minister of, of agriculture, Nate, we supply
food to, to 1 billion people every day. And that is directly related to the moisture that comes from
the Amazon and allows for Brazil to have such a successful, uh, agricultural production system,
among other benefits. But the main benefit, one might argue, is you're an exporter of ecosystem
services, the vast majority of which are not included in our prices or our goals, uh, of our
current system. Absolutely. Uh, one, one kilo of soy, and it requires 4,000 liters of water, nearly,
uh, uh, what, uh, 1,000 gallons of water to, to, to be produced. We, we don't spend that water,
but the water is necessary to, to be in the system so that we produce the soy. One kilo of beef
demands 15,000 liters of water available in the system to be produced. So, uh, all across the,
the life cycle of the animal. So, you know, water is absolutely necessary, but it's not just the volume
of water, but when it comes, when it stops. So the distribution of water in addition to the volume of
water is something that the tropical forests provide as a service to agriculture, as a service
to food security, as a service to the planet. So just to quote one example of how dependent we are,
and sometimes we don't realize how important it is to keep forests standing for us, for our daily lives.
So I know the last two years have had some incredible droughts. Um, and, uh, there's,
the smoke from the fires can be just visible on a, on an aerial map of, of South America has,
have you tracked, um, the standard deviation of precipitation, uh, flood and drought, like over
the last few decades, and has the amplitude, uh, increased of, of, uh, the, the variation in rainfall?
Absolutely. This is, this is one of the, one of the analysis that we keep, keep doing all the time.
Uh, the variation, if we look at the volumes that it's pretty much stable, right over the past decade.
So we don't have more water or less water falling. What we have is a, is a different distribution of
water. And that's for no other reason that we are having landslides, for example, in several cities,
including Sao Paulo, which is a big city, more than 20 million people city. They are facing challenges
in Sao Paulo, in Rio de Janeiro, in other parts of Brazil. We have had a, a severe, uh, uh, uh,
severe flooding in, in, uh, Rio Grande do Sul, which is a state down south of Brazil. It's a,
it's a tragic story because Rio Grande do Sul is responsible for about 15% of the Brazilian GDP and 80%
of the economy of that state was, uh, somehow damaged because of the, the water flottings and
so on. So all of those, those disturbances are related to, uh, uh, let's put it this way,
a different distribution of water, which sometimes gets concentrated in a few days, sometimes a few
hours. It's, uh, we've been experiencing situations in, in some parts of Brazil, and that's not different
in other parts of the world, in, in Germany, in Indonesia, in Mozambique, in several parts of the
world, we are experiencing the same thing. You know, the, the water systems, both the natural ones,
the rivers, and that the, the, the artificial ones, the sewage systems, for example, they weren't designed
for that amount of water. So we, we, at the end of the day, we, we face, uh, you know, challenges in
our infrastructural system in cities, for example, such as the sewage systems, but also in the natural
systems with floodings and, and, uh, water disturbances that we haven't been experiencing,
uh, uh, you know, three, four or five years ago. So take me through the history of how
Brazilian government, Brazilian policy surrounding deforestation has changed, uh, over previous
decades and where does it stand now? Let me roll back the movie, uh, a couple of decades, maybe three
decades. We have had a peak of deforestation in 1999, around 1999, 2000, uh, that year, 26,000 square
kilometers were deforested in the Amazon in one year. There was the peak of deforestation, which took
place in the, in the year 2000 or around the year 2000. A peak in the rate of deforestation. In the rate
of deforestation, correct. In the rate of deforestation that year, uh, two, 26,000 square kilometers.
So, uh, you know, the images of the degradation of the Amazon, the images of, of the forest fires,
similar to what we are observing today, Nate, were, were on TV screens, were on, on the national news
every day in 1999, in 2000. So the, the Brazilian population started to think, well, this, this is my,
uh, uh, in heritage, this is my asset and, and we are just letting it burn. So there was a, a
discomfort in Brazil. So the, the, the, the, a government, which was a late elected in 2002
and started it, uh, it mandate in 2003, president Lula, his first mandate, they said, we have to do
something. And the minister of environment was structured led by minister Marina Silva. And the
end result was between 2004 and 2012, 80% of the deforestation in the Amazon, the, the deforestation
in the Amazon was reduced by 80% from 26,000 square kilometers down to 4.5 thousand square kilometers.
So this is a, uh, uh, unprecedented, uh, process that took place. Tons and tons, millions of tons of carbon
emissions were avoided. Many, many, uh, biodiversity loss was avoided at the time. However, and here's
a big, however, from 4.5 and then we moved to five and then to six and then to seven and then to eight
and then to 12 and then to 15. And now we are beginning to, to drop it again because we had a,
uh, a government prior to, to the current administration, which was, uh, for which it wasn't
important to fight deforestation. They have a, they had a different vision. They had a vision of,
you know, to ex to develop the country. We need to open and clear more areas. That was the vision
of the previous administration. Is, is that because the previous administration and the officials,
uh, didn't understand the ecological systems, uh, or because they didn't care, um, or don't you know?
I think they didn't care to be very frank with you. They were just, uh, willing to promote
development and that has harmed indeed, uh, the forest and they harmed the Amazon. We are now,
even with the, for the, the, the efforts of the current administration, we are now where we were
about 12, 13 years ago in terms of the level of the rate of deforestation. So we are, we are
backwards instead of moving forward, but there's still a challenge there.
So under Lula, my understanding, uh, is that there's a promise or, uh, an intent
to stop deforestation by 2030, which is just five years from now. So you said, uh, um, in 20 years
ago, we were at 4,500 kilometers per year, um, uh, reduced. And where are we now? Like roughly?
13, around 13, 14,000 square kilometers in one year. That's a long way to go from 13,000 to zero
in, in five or six years. What is the general, irrespective of one's political affiliation in
Brazil? Um, what is the general citizen, uh, in Brazil, their attitude towards the importance of
the Amazon? Has that changed? I think, well, according to some pools that we, we, we follow
and actually IPAM, my, my institution have actually, uh, ran a pool a few years ago with this question,
how important is the Amazon for you? How, how, how is your perception of climate and the impacts of
climate in your life? So questions like this were asked and we were very surprised, Nate,
that more than 70% of Brazilians were indeed concerned about the future of the Amazon did
understand at some level, the implications of the, the Amazon's, uh, degradation and deforestation
to their daily life. So Brazilians are amongst the most, uh, you know, interested people. I wouldn't
say conscious yet, but interested people into what happens, uh, in our backyards, what happens with,
with the Amazon. It's important to say, it's relevant to say that we are, uh, highly dependent upon,
uh, you know, the Amazon to survive as a country. I mentioned agriculture, which is not irrigated
and depends upon the, the water cycles that comes from the Amazon, but you know, more than 70% of our
electricity is hydro powered plants. So plants. So we do depend upon a lot of water flows to have
electricity in our homes, uh, to cut a long story short, that's absolutely necessary. And people realize
that dependency. I hadn't thought about that. So if the pump between the Amazon and the ocean and the
rivers in the sky, if that slows down or disappears, so does a majority of your electric, uh, power.
Precisely, precisely. And we have had, I mean, right now, this is, uh, we are having shortages. The, the
water levels of the reservoirs are to the minimum level. So we had to turn on thermal power plants in order
to keep the electricity levels that we need in the country. So that has been happening over the past
few years, mainly because of droughts and the poor, uh, water distribution, uh, along the years. So we are
facing challenges and problems with electricity supply, uh, in our homes. So I'm paying 40% more in a, in my
electric bill compared to three months ago because of shortages in, in waterfalls, waterfalls, uh,
and the river headings. And consequently the reservoirs are in low levels.
So what have been some of the most effective policies in prior, uh, administrations to halting,
uh, the rate of deforestation and, and looking ahead to 2030 or beyond what, what do you think are
some of the most, uh, important ways, uh, that Brazil might halt deforestation?
One thing we've learned, uh, back in the early 2000s, Nate, when we reduced the deforestation in 80%
in the Amazon was that reducing deforestation is one thing. Keeping deforestation down is a different
thing. So you have different toolboxes to deal with one and the other challenge to reduce deforestation,
command and control, punishment, you know, law. You have to respect the law. If people respect the law,
you know, we, we, we will reduce naturally deforestation. More than 90% of the deforestation
in the Amazon is illegal. So fighting illegal loggers, fighting, uh, land grabbers, fighting
farmers that are not in, in compliance with the Brazilian forest code, for example, reduces deforestation,
right? But keeping deforestation down requires replacing an old-fashioned, unsustainable economy
for a, a sustainable and, and, you know, green economy. Let me give you an example. There are
municipalities in the Amazon, Nate, that, uh, more than 50% of their GDP is directly related to
illegal activities. I'm talking illegal gold mining, illegal logging that generate jobs in those
municipalities. And I'm not just the direct jobs involved in, in, in, uh, in, in land grabbing or in,
in, uh, chopping down trees, but the hotels at this, at, in the cities, they depend upon the gold miners
to, you know, create their, their, uh, economic result, their financial results. So at the end of the day,
you have to invest in green jobs. You have to invest in bioeconomy. You have to invest in
modern technologies so that new jobs are offered to the, to the Amazonian population so that they,
they wouldn't be going to the illegal activities anymore. So keeping deforestation down is still a
challenge.
Jim O' You need punishment, command and control, but at the same time you need reward,
which is a different incentive because obviously all that illegal activity is because they're being
compensated or rewarded by the products of their illegal activity. So if we had, if we favored
and preferred whoever they're selling it to something else, then maybe a bioeconomy or something else
might take a foothold. Yes.
Fernando Pérez, Yes. What we are living through today was planned, as I mentioned before,
in the sixties and seventies. And the mindset was let's expand the country. Brasilia, where I live,
was, was, was built out of nowhere in the middle of Brazil, back in the, in the early, late fifties,
early sixties. The idea back then was to, you know, bring Brazil to the countryside, bring Brazil
to the, to its interior. Most of Brazil still today takes place in the coastal area. Some 70%
of the Brazilian population lives up to 200 kilometers from the coast, from the Atlantic coast. So Brazil
is still the big cities, São Paulo, Rio, Salvador, Recife, Porto Alegre, et cetera. These are all coastal
cities and, and, and most of the population is there. So the idea of bringing Brazil to the country,
to Cerrado, to the Amazon, begun in the late fifties, have had a lot of incentives over the seventies.
Now the challenge, Nate, is to redirect those incentives. The approach that we do promote here
at the, at IPAM, that we do believe, and where we are trying to, to position our science,
is to indicate where did, where do we need to change the incentives? We are still incentivizing
with subsidized money out of my pocket, out of my taxpayer money. We're still subsidizing chainsaws
to chop down trees in the Amazon. This is happening today. And why is that? Because the, the credit lines
that are available and the credit system is still designed with, with an ancient, I would say,
mentality of expansion. We need to expand the frontier in order to thrive. That paradigm has to
be shifted to, you know, we need to intensify and redesign the frontier. And in order to redesign the
frontier, to stop deforestation and intensify the production, generating more jobs and less deforestation,
we need to refocus, rethink the incentives that we have designed, you know, 30, 40, 50 years ago.
So you mentioned that Brazil is probably one of the biggest exporters of environmental services
to the world. But you also are one of the largest exporters of beef to the world. How can these two
statements continue to simultaneously be, be true in the future? What are your thoughts on that?
They have to. And let me tell you why. First of all, you know, Brazil in some, some crops, let's,
let's say soybean, for example, or even corn and cotton, and at some extent in beef,
Brazil is very competitive. It's very, very efficient. It produces a lot per hectare. It's
produced a lot per unit of, of dollar. It produces a lot for, per input. So it's an, it's efficient.
Because you have a lot of sunlight and great soil and the hydrological flows of the Amazon.
Nature blasts us with those, those assets. And, and fortunately, you know, we were able to
use that on an efficient manner when it comes to production, when it comes to economic outputs,
but when it comes to nature outputs, that's not so efficient. So there is a room for improvement in
Brazil, but still Brazil is quite efficient in producing those, some of those goods. So if we
somehow continue exploring the frontier, what's going to happen is that the production will start
to fall. And actually we are observing that in some regions. So right now, what we need is more
forest. We need to restore some areas. We need to replant forest. As I said, we need to redesign the
landscape. Let me just give you one example to illustrate what I'm saying, Nate. Soy,
for example, soybeans, they are up to 20% more productive, up to 100 meters away from a forest
fragment. So the more contact that I have from my croplands with forest, with nature, vegetation,
more production I have. Because the roots of the trees are helping the soil somehow, or the,
the, the, the, they attract more rain because the forest is there. Why are they more productive?
It's a combination of factors. You have a natural enemies of insects, for example,
which lives on the trees, it lives on the forest. We leave, you have a more moisture closer to the,
to the forest. You have more healthy soil and so on. So it's a combination of factors.
Except if that's true. And if our economic system and our incentives favor higher yields,
then what would happen eventually, everything else being equal is a patchwork quilt of some forest,
some, uh, soy crop, some forest, some soy crop, because that would give the highest yield for soy,
but eventually the connectivity of the forest as a, as a trophic pump, the way you were describing
earlier would gradually disappear. Yes. Precisely, Nate, you know, again, back 40,
50 years ago, we didn't know that. I mean, our, our mindset or our paradigm was that we have to remove
nature, remove the trees to plant whatever, plant soy, pasture, whatever, right? Now we know that
we need forests. We need the cropland and the pasture land in contact with forest fragments,
in contact with natural, natural vegetation so that it can produce more. So the, the paradigm has shifted.
We need to, again, as you said, redesign the landscape so that we maximize the connectivity
between productive areas and forested areas so that we can produce more. So now we understand
that in order to be effective and efficient in producing agriculture, we need forests alongside.
These two things are not competitive anymore. They depend upon each other. Forests depend on,
you know, human beings to protect them and human beings, human activities, such as agriculture,
depend upon forests. This is, this is now clear to science.
I have a lot of questions on this. So this, this would be true even 50 years ago when it was,
the entire forest was largely intact. But now, according to Carlos Nobre and many other scientists
that I've read and interacted with, we are approaching a tipping point where if we deforest much
more, and I think there's a difference between the actual deforested like 17% and then some other
percentage, which is 20 or 25% of forests that are not fully intact. So there's some degraded, right.
But as we approach those tipping points, these efficiencies, soy near forest conversations
change because it's a dynamic system, right?
Absolutely. Absolutely. There's a trend in some areas in the Amazon, for example,
that it's, it's becoming a savanna. So in a savanna, you have one third, maybe less carbon that
you have in a, in a, in a, you know, rainforest, a mature rainforest, a climax rainforest. And if you
have less biomass, less carbon, you have less, you have less environmental services being generated.
One mature tree from the Amazon with a 30, 40 meters high, Nate, it can pump up to 1000 liters per,
in one day to the atmosphere, one big tree. The trees in the Cerrado have a very, in a savanna,
have a way limited capacity compared to a, a climax tree in the, a climax tree in the Amazon. So
the more biomass you have, the more services you have available. On the other hand, the more degraded
you have in forest, the less environmental services you have. So the challenge for the future, and this
is not for Brazil, I think that's for the planet, is to understand that we do depend upon nature to thrive.
And the more we understand how we do depend, the more we will be able to protect nature and benefit
from it. I think certainly in our circles, people are, are fully eyes wide open, uh, aware of that
now. And it's my hope that the world wakes up to that before it's too late and we just see it in
hindsight. Oh shit. Um, so, uh, I want to get back to the beef question in a second, but I, I think I
read in something you sent me or, or one of your talks that, um, a kilogram of chicken from Brazil
that is consumed in England, in London, including all of the shipping emissions and energy to ship it
from Brazil to, to London still has a lower environmental footprint than a chicken raised in,
in England. Is that true? That's true. That is true. That is true. Why is that true?
Uh, corn, which is the basic, uh, feed for, for chicken is also produced here. So the, the, the integration
of the system. So you have a cooperatives in the Southern part of Brazil, which are extremely efficient
in terms of poultry production because the, the, the inputs are nearby. Consequently, the,
the efficiency is also, uh, an issue. Okay. So then this becomes an issue of scale because if we had
the appropriate scale, then from an economic environmental, uh, emission, you know, all in,
uh, cradle to grave, uh, analysis, it would be more, it would be better environmentally for people in
England to import their chicken, uh, from Brazil. But if everyone in the world did that, then the
incentives in Brazil would be so strong that we would tip over the Amazon tipping points and it
would be an ecological disaster. Right? So there's a, there's, there's a threshold there finding,
finding the fine tuning there is one of the challenges that you are absolutely right. Right.
Let me, let me give you another example, which, uh, you know, is it's, it's a bit away from our
conversation, but for example, electric cars, right? People are, you know, everybody advocates for
electric cars today and everybody's willing to change their six, eight cylinder cars for, for electric
cars and so on and so forth. But what about the source of energy? If I drive an electric car in,
in Beijing, in China, 70 or 80% of the electricity is thermal power plants. So I'm actually burning coal to,
to fuel my car, right? If I'm, uh, uh, using an electric car in Brazil, for example, 70% of the,
of the electricity that fuels that car is, uh, you know, renewable, hydro, solar, or wind. So, uh, you know,
it is not because the car is electric that it's, uh, emitting less carbon to the atmosphere. You have to
look at the whole chain, right? So, uh, that's the, the tricky. So you have to look at the, the,
the, the, the feed for the animal, the, you know, the medicines, the equipment, the, the whole chain
to analyze whether or not it's better to import or to produce locally. Sometimes it's better to import,
sometimes locally.
So let me ask you this. Um, in my episode with Carlos, uh, we summarized that there are things that
Brazil needs to do, uh, on behalf of the Amazon and its own country for the rest of the world.
And there are things that the rest of the world needs to do for Brazil and the Amazon. Namely,
we need to reduce our emissions. Otherwise the dual, uh, threats of, um, threshold of, uh, Savannah
tipping points and two degree plus climate means that there's a positive feedback and we lose the
Amazon. The one thing that Carlos suggested that the rest of the world could do is stop eating beef
unless they know the destination. What, what is your response to that? Or how do you, uh, think about
that situation?
I think in the long run, Nate, uh, beef is going to be, you know, for a niche product, very expensive,
very difficult to produce, to transport, to, you know, to justify the existence of it. I mean,
but that's in the future. We still have billions and billions of people, uh, on this planet that
has deficits of protein, for example. So we need to address nutritional challenges that we still,
we still have in many, many countries, including Brazil. We do have a partial, a part of our population
that is still do not have access to, you know, good quality and good amounts of protein a day.
And one of the cheapest ways to produce protein is through, uh, the beef industry to the poultry
industry. I believe that in the future we will have alternatives or more efficient ways to produce
protein. Part of it will come from, you know, vegetables, but part of it will come from animals.
Eventually part of it will be synthesized in laboratories. So we will have a different reality
in the long run, but we still, again, we still have billions and billions of people that are way
below the capacity to, uh, you know, to have, uh, you know, funds or money available to buy,
you know, cutting edge technology of, of protein. So we need to provide cheap protein to a number of
people before we reach a momentum in which we can get rid of it. The small caveat, um,
beef in the way that you describe as the most efficient, uh, way, um, is true, but using the wrong
prices because we don't include a lot of the externalities in the prices. So, um, is there,
is there a difference, um, with soy or beef, uh, or any of the other main, uh, agricultural products
in Brazil between large and small scale farming operations in terms of the impact on the Amazon?
Yes. Uh, yes. There's a big, big difference. Uh, uh, the specifically in the Amazon,
you have, uh, the, the Brazilian forest code asks or, uh, it requires from farmers in the Amazon
biome to set 80% of the farm aside for conservation. So if I have a thousand hectares of land, I can only
use for cropland or, or pasture land, 200 hectares out of those 1000. That's the requirement of the,
of the forest code for medium and large farmers. So what, what happens to the other 800?
They're left alone. They are left alone. They have to be left alone for conservation purposes. It's
what the, what we call the legal reserve. So it's a, it's a legal requirement. If I'm in Cerrado,
I have to leave as to set aside 30% for conservation. If I'm in the Atlantic forest, the coastal area of
Brazil, 20%. So it varies depending on where you are in the country. The Amazon is the most rigorous
request request, which is 80%. I mean, people that would go to buy a land in the Amazon,
they know that. So they buy the land knowing that they have to set 80% aside for conservation.
That's the rule of the game, unless they change it and hope, hopefully it's not going to be changed.
That's the law. That law applies for medium and large farmers, small holders. They are in different,
under a different type of, of compliance requirements from the forest code. They oftentimes are in what
we call the rural, uh, agrarian reform settlements. They are all together. Oftentimes they are legal
reserve or the area that they have to, to protect is collective. It's not individualized each property.
So it's a collective area. So that gives you a, a different of the, of the, in terms of medium,
large size farmers with, with small holders. But most importantly than that, Nate is the fact of,
that around 30% of the deforestation in the Amazon takes place inside small holders property.
And why is that? Some 70% of the farm, small farmers in the Amazon, differently from medium,
large farmers, but small holders in the Amazon, family farmers, more than 70% have never seen an
agronomist or a technical person in their lives. The only capital they have is the natural capital.
They don't have access to financial capital. They don't have access to technological capital.
They have limited human capacity, human capital, because it's only a family. The only capital they
have available is the natural capital, is the natural fertility of the soil. So every year,
they have to clear a new half a hectare or a new hectare in order to keep the minimum level
of production in, in, in their property. So when you sum up one hectare for, multiply it by 700,000
small holders in the Amazon, you'll see that that's about 30% of the deforestation in the Amazon.
And that's a challenge indeed.
Nate Hagens
How many Brazilians are struggling now to make ends meet a living paycheck to paycheck? And how does that
Nate Hagens affect the overall trend of deforestation that you're describing? Or did you just give me that answer?
You're talking about Brazil as a whole or Amazon?
Both.
Both.
Both. According to the official data, somewhere around 30 million Brazilians are still
below or near the poverty level. So we're talking here, people that do not have three meals a day,
for example. So we, we still have, uh, tens of millions of Brazilians, uh, still having to,
you know, sell what we call sell their lunch to buy the dinner. In other words, they, they are not, uh,
fulfilled in their needs. In the Amazon, the number is, is smaller, but still a percentage of the population
there.
Again, the Brazil and the Amazon situation just in so many ways is a microcosm of our, of our global
situation. So if we head into, uh, a world of less affordability, inflation, um, more disruption,
higher droughts and floods, a higher amplitude of, of natural events, uh, the kind of the default
pathway that itself is going to put everything else being equal, which I hope it's not, that itself
is going to put a burden on the Amazon because these people, these 700,000, uh, farmers are not
going to have any recourse, but to use the capital they have, which is the one hectare and use it
however they can to get money or food to survive.
Yeah. Oftentimes to survive. We have about four million people in the Amazon today. Uh, one thing
that is important to say, Nate, we haven't mentioned yet, is that, is that, uh, most of the population
in the Amazon live in cities, uh, somewhere around 80% of the population in the Brazilian Amazon, they are
in cities, big cities like, but oftentimes in medium and small sized cities, 30,000, 50,000, 100,000
inhabitants. So it's a, it's a quite urbanized, uh, uh, territory out of the 28 million people
living in the Amazon, some 20 to 22 live in cities. So we have another, you know, five, six, seven,
eight million people living in rural areas and four million of those living in rural areas are small
farmers are living under, you know, minimum conditions of subsistence. So, and, and I see that as a problem,
the half, uh, empty glass is, well, four million people are living in poverty in the Amazon. The
half, uh, full glass is that if we provide technical assistance to those people, and this is something
that we've done, we've actually tested that hypothesis a few years ago, we've invested in, in, uh, create,
we've created here within the pump, uh, a group of technical extensionists. So we provided permanent,
good quality extension services, technical services to 3000 families in the state of Pará.
We were testing the following hypothesis. If we provide technical assistance to those farmers,
they will live better and they will reduce the deforestation, uh, that would, that would be
necessary for them to survive and thrive. The end result of this project, three years of a project,
25 million reais involved, 42 technical people involved were two numbers, 140% increase in the
income on average and 80% reduction in deforestation. They don't need to cut trees anymore because now
they have access to fertilizers, uh, some equipment that would allow them to produce near their homes
instead of chopping down trees every year. So what are some of the farming changes in the methodology,
et cetera, that you, you inform and practice during, uh, those, those, uh, extension people?
One of the things that we've looked after was, uh, cattle raising. Some 80% of the small holders in
the Amazon do have cattle. Cattle is like a savings account. This is important to understand. This is
like a savings account to small holders. When someone gets sick, they sell a couple of animals, go to the
city to get hospital treatment. Uh, when someone, you know, uh, the daughter wants to go to school
in a, in a city, they would sell the animals to allow for the, for the, the, the kid to go to
school and so on. So it's a, it's a savings account. They don't have bank accounts, but they have the
animals as, as a savings account. So it's, it's an important part of the, the economy and the economic
safety of those, those families, right? So again, 80% of small holders have cattle on an extremely
inefficient way. The average head count is half an animal per hectare, right? If you provide,
if they, they, they invest 300 kilos of nitrogen, and this is not hypothetical, this is the reality,
300 kilos of nitrogen per hectare, fences, a little bit of, of training to, to the, to the, to the farmer
and a pump to pump water from the river into a more comfortable area for the animals, you can move from
less than one animal per hectare to up to five animals per hectare. And we've done that. So again,
you, you, you don't need to chop down every year, half a hectare to expand your pasture land.
If you use minimum, this is not rocket science. We're talking here, you know, fences, nitrogen,
and, and a pump, and then you move, you know, a five fold, six fold more production of, of cattle.
This is just an example of how income production can be increased without the needs to, to open
new areas. And the same goes for, you know, food crops like manioc and, and fruit production. When they
have the, the, the, the availability of, of, uh, fertilizers, the availability of minimum technology,
you know, to, you know, how to plant the trees, what's the, the distance between one tree, one
plant and the other basic information, they can multiply it by two, three, four times the yields,
which means that they don't need to, to go into new areas anymore. They stay closer to home and more
efficiently. Let me put you on the spot here, Andre. First, before I do that, what, what are those,
uh, symbols on the wall behind you, uh, represent? I love the green and then the, the wood and then the
red. It's, it's, there's something artistic and abstract sense, but what are those?
That's very symbolic to me, uh, uh, Nate, uh, the, the wall in green is, is the palm scholar. So
this is one of our, our, our, our characteristics, our logo, our, you know, materials are all in this,
this green. So this is what we call our green, but most importantly are those equipments over here.
These are indigenous, uh, uh, equipments used for, for wars. And, uh, Chief Raoni, Chief Raoni is probably
one of the most, uh, known, uh, recognized, uh, leaders in the, in the Brazilian indigenous, uh,
groups. And, uh, he's, uh, 80, he's nearly four, 90 years old now. He's an old guy. And, uh, we have
had a relationship with the Institute, uh, that carries his name, Instituto Raoni. Since a long time,
we are partners with the Instituto Raoni and we, we have this, uh, this, uh, uh, I would say this,
this vocation of, of bringing indigenous leaders to the environmental discussions globally.
So the, the climate cops, for example, the conference of the parties of, of the climate
convention, we, we used to bring always, uh, alongside with our delegation, we invite two
or three indigenous leaders to participate in the discussions, to learn what's going on and so on.
And Chief Raoni was invited to come along with us to COP, uh, oh my gosh, COP 26 or COP 27 in Bonn,
in Germany. And at the end of the COP, because he was part of our delegation, he was participating in
our, and he was very thankful for, for IPAM. So he took this, actually, there are three of them,
one on top of the other, and he, you know, gifted us with, with those. So I, I was thrilled because this,
and, and by the way, those were, were made by him himself. So his hands were used to produce
those, uh, those, uh, uh, equipments here, which again, are used to war. Of course, I'm not willing
to hit nobody on the brain, but if necessary, I can use you to educate some of my colleagues here.
Please don't take me for, uh, for literally on this one.
Uh, I'm going to come back to the question that I was going to ask, but you brought up the
indigenous people in, in, uh, the Amazon. My understanding is there's over 350 tribes in the
Amazon. How many of those have your, as your organization, IPAM worked with and how are the
indigenous, uh, peoples and nations playing a role in efforts to preserve the Amazon forest?
Well, first of all, uh, around 30% of the Amazon is formed of indigenous territories. We're talking
about, uh, 200 and, 200 and so ethnic, different ethnic. We are talking, uh, you know, about 150,
160 different languages, uh, from different routes. I mean, different, these are totally different
languages. So there's an enormous cultural diversity, uh, in, in those areas. Again, 30% of the Amazon
uh, that those areas, Nate are, they, they, they represent less than 5% of the deforestation in the
Amazon, despite being 30% of the total territory, less than 5% of the deforestation takes place in
those areas. And this is directly related to the presence of indigenous people. You know, they are
there, they have a fire brigades. They looked after their territories. This is their land. This is where
their ancestors are, were buried. That that's their, you know, uh, uh, uh, you know, ceremonial places
are, are in those lands. So they have a profound respect to the forest. These are people we are talking
here. Some of those, uh, those, those in ethnic groups, they have thousands of years living in the
Amazon harmonically with, uh, with the forest. So, uh, they are the guardians of the forest,
the guardians of 30% of the Amazon, needless to say more.
So the, um, the survey that your organization did and 70% of Brazilians, um, cared about the
Amazon, that would be a silly survey to give to those indigenous peoples, because it would be a dumb
question. They would, they would intuitively know that their livelihoods and their future are
intimately connected with the forest. Are there any common principles or, or ways of life, uh,
that you've observed that the indigenous people in, in Brazil, uh, help them live in tune with the
Amazon, like things that they do or ways that they think. There's, there are some beautiful stories
there, Nate, because, uh, you know, the indigenous groups, you know, they, they have nature as their
clock. They have nature as a calendar. So, you know, that, that tree on, when that tree blooms,
that's the time to plant manioc. When, uh, you know, that tree over there, you know, let go of their
leaves. This is the time to fish a certain fish that will take place. And so they have these, uh,
you know, connections, which for us is absolutely difficult to understand, but
this is their daily life. We have to use Google. We need Google. Exactly. There Google is looking
at the trees, you know, looking at the rivers, looking at the animals. So the way the animals
behave, you know, tells them a story or tells them that this is the time to do something. So,
you know, the connection that these folks have with nature is, uh, metaphysical. It's, it's,
you know, it's not written on books. And, and so we, we need to learn from them. We need to learn
from them, not just to, you know, to protect the forest, but to respect the differences. I mean,
I tell a lot here at my institution that we are all for the, the, you know, the, we are defenders
of the biodiversity. What about the cultural diversity? What about the, you know, religious
diversity? I mean, we have to be coherent and I believe that, you know, the future of mankind
is a diverse future or no future at all. So we need to be open to see and respect and sometimes
learn with, you know, the different and the indigenous groups present in Brazil, they offered
us an enormous opportunity. I'm very proud to have, you know, more than 200 different cultures in my,
in my, in my country. You know, there are nearly 50 indigenous tribes that have never been contact
yet living in the middle of the Amazon. We just know that they are there because here and there we,
we, we fly over them. So we know they're there, but they never been contacted. And I have a profound
respect to the fact that we are still protecting those groups. Me too. I think there's something
in many of us that when you say a fact like that, it, it, it, uh, lights, uh, an ember of, of hope and
reverence that the superorganism hasn't reached quite that far yet. True. Um, so on this conversation,
uh, there are at least four things that need to happen. One is the global human economy needs to,
reduce emissions and eventually pull out CO2, uh, from the air in order to get back down to, uh,
a safe operating zone, uh, for the, the Anthropocene or the Holocene. Number two is, um,
Brazil needs to stop, uh, deforestation. Uh, number three, Brazil needs to eventually reforest so that we
go back from that 17%, uh, um, deforested Amazon down to 15% or 13%, or eventually maybe we, we get back
to where it was 50 years ago. And then the fourth thing is obviously as, as you've brought up is have
a bioeconomic model to support the, the people, uh, in the forest, in your country of Brazil.
So if you were benevolent dictator, uh, on these issues, leaving aside the global emission issue,
um, because that may be out of your benevolent dictator control, what, what sort of things, what sort of
pathways could you envision in Brazil, in the Amazon that would allow us in the next few decades to
completely stop deforestation, to reforest and have economic models that, that work for the people?
I would focus a lot of my attention into incentives. Uh, you know, humans react to punishment. Yes,
we do react to punishment, but we do react much better, you know, uh, through incentives. And, and,
and I think, uh, we, we have an opportunity in the Amazon, for example, to redesign incentives to, uh,
we don't even need to create new incentives. Incentives are there. We have subsidized credit
lines. We have, uh, you know, money from the public sector, you know, supporting poor families. But
what I think is that we need to rethink those incentives on a new paradigm. The new paradigm
is a paradigm of more harmony. And here, let me be philosophical here a little bit, because,
you know, we, we are oftentimes trying to, you know, balance the game. So we need to balance the game.
But balancing, uh, suppose, uh, supposedly we have two sides on a, on a, on a, on a scale. So we need to
balance two sides when it comes to harmonize. I mean, we are all equals. So I think we, the challenge
is to, you know, once again, promote more incentives, refocus the incentives. So we have a
better harmony. We have people respecting the indigenous groups because the indigenous groups
do produce something that is important to the country. They are protecting water services. They
are protecting environmental services, which we need to our economy. So the understanding those
connections in my view is fundamental for, uh, any human, uh, community to, uh, you know, behave
properly and, and, uh, you know, design a future in which we'll be more harmonic with nature and
consequently be more, uh, you know, sustainable in the long run. Right now, uh, we are not sustainable.
We need more than three, four or five, uh, planet earths, you know, to survive in the, you know,
model, the consumption model that we have today that has to change. And I think that has to change
and we have to change looking at, you know, our ancient cultures. They have a lot to teach to us.
The indigenous groups, they have a lot to teach to us.
So what, what is your, uh, what is your work, the work of your organization, IPAM? Uh, if you're wildly
successful, what are some things that you hope to implement?
We are science-based organizations. So what we, our, uh, raw material is data and our product is,
uh, you know, information. So we do believe that good quality information have the power to change.
That's what we have been doing over the past 30 years. That's what we intend to continue doing.
Uh, however, uh, it's, it's, uh, I need, it's, I have to say it is a quite an efficient, inefficient, uh, process.
Uh, translating science into policies, translating science into corporate decisions is very difficult,
oftentimes more difficult than producing science itself. So I think, uh, if I, if I had, uh, an opportunity
to do one thing, I would try to translate science on a, on a way that, you know, ordinary people on the
street of decision makers on, you know, political levels could, could use more efficiently. And this
is, this is, uh, you know, uh, I think, uh, it's, uh, it's a, it's a mistake that many, many scientists
do is, is, uh, you know, they think that their work ends on a paper. I think the work of a scientist
begins on a paper. That's when you really defend your ideas and channeling those ideas to make changes.
So I think, uh, you know, uh, my view to this organization in the future is that we approximate
the distance between science and decision-making on a individual basis, on a collective basis,
on a country basis, it doesn't matter. We need science to be closer to people's decision-making
process on a daily basis. This is my personal challenge for my life.
Jim O' Many countries are, uh, I've, I've learned recently are threatening to boycott Brazilian
products. If Brazil doesn't start to, uh, protect the rainforest, what's your opinion of that strategy
from the international community?
Jim O' I think boycotts, boycotts have to be very carefully used. Oftentimes, if you look at history
of boycotts, they serve the purpose of those that are promoting the boycott, but not necessarily they
solve the problem that the boycott wants to solve. Let me give you an example, a concrete example. Right
now, as we are speaking, Europe is, is designing and will be launching in the years to come a policy
called EUDR, European Union Deforestation Regulation. So basically, the EUDR says that, well, there's a
list of products that they import, and they are not importing from a certain date products that have
promoted deforestation. So they don't want deforestation in those products. So I'm talking here soy,
I'm talking here corn, beef, leather, coffee, cocoa, so on and so forth. Fine.
Jim O' However, the world is a little bigger than Europe. I mean, that EUDR system will certainly
solve, you know, the European problem with, with important deforestation. But my question is,
is that going to solve deforestation? I doubt, you know, Europe represents a smaller portion of
the Brazilian market, for example. So what about the balance, you know, so it will at the end of the
they create two worlds, boycotts, in my view, they create two worlds. One is the world that can attend
the boycott demands, and the other world that cannot. So the problems continue, you're not sorted out.
Okay, I'm going to put you on the spot, Andre. You talked about your mission, both your
organization and your personal on science and policy. So I want you to give an elevator pitch,
two different ones, about a minute each, give a pitch to people in the world,
on the state and the importance of the Amazon and how they should think about it and what to do,
and then do the same pitch to someone that lives in your country, in Brazil.
I would say for the globe, something very simple, Nate, you know, it's better to have an Amazon on our
planet than not have an Amazon. And you do have a role to play in making sure that your kids and your
kids' kids will see the Amazon and will benefit from the Amazon. Simple as that. This is what I
would say to the planet. To a Brazilian, something similar, you know, the Amazon is fundamental. If you
have three kids, one of your kids will be employed in the future if we keep the Amazon standing. I'm
talking about not just the farming of our economy, the farming portion of our economy, but also,
you know, the industry of, you know, equipment, the industry of input suppliers, financial services,
which are in Sao Paulo, Rio, and so on. So you want to get your kids employed in the future,
make sure that the Amazon is protected.
So we have multiple, multiple risks and thresholds, both in the world economy and the world
ecology. But let me ask you this hypothetical question. So in my opinion, we are headed towards
two degrees Celsius above pre-industrial times and probably above. I hope that something happens
either technology-wise or economic-wise that that's not the case, but I think that you and I would agree
that that's probably, uh, that's the trend. Um, we are also sitting at a state when 17%
plus, uh, of the Amazon is deforested. And although we are reducing deforestation, it's still net positive,
which means more kilometers, square kilometers are being, uh, removed every year.
In the possible scenario where the world does hit two degrees Celsius, um, but Brazil,
maybe with your help, uh, yours and your colleagues and others, takes a different path
and does start to respect, uh, um, and rebuild the Amazon. In a two degrees Celsius world,
how important is it? How critical is it that the Amazon's component in that world reverses and we go
back? Because if we were able to reverse deforestation and go from 17 to 12 to five,
so the way that the Amazon used to be, that itself removes a lot of carbon. Like you said,
the Amazon, uh, contains 10 times as much of our emissions. So if we regrow it by 20%, that's,
that's more than the emissions of a couple of years. Um, is it possible that, that this could
happen? That Brazil could really value the commons, both its own commons and the global commons,
which is the, the, the lungs and the heart of the planet and the Amazon forest. What are your
thoughts on that? It is not just possible, but absolutely necessary. Uh, let's look at some
numbers to illustrate my point here. We have about 120, 130 million hectares of, uh, land, uh, deforested in
the Amazon, right? Uh, about, uh, about one third of it, 40 million hectares is degraded, uh, highly degraded,
not just degraded, highly degraded. I'm talking here, former pasture land that is now, you know,
soils exposed. So those areas are just sitting there. They, they have very limited capacity to
naturally regenerate. So we need to intervene in those areas, 40 million hectares in the Amazon alone.
Let me put it in perspective, Nate, Brazil in the entire country of Brazil have, uh, 65,
70 million hectares of cropland. So we are talking more than half of what you have in cropland in the
entire country, more than half of what we have is degraded land in the Amazon. So we have the chance to,
if we don't do anything else in terms of technology, no, no enhancement of technology, we can multiply
by 1.5 or 1.6 hour production without chopping down a single tree, just benefiting from, you know,
the, the area that is already degraded, highly degraded in the Amazon alone. Cerrado has another
20 million hectares and so on. So we do have enough land to expand the agricultural frontier without
chopping down a single tree. So that's one, one point. But my other point is that we should not do that.
We should actually restore some forests within those 40 million for the reasons that I stated
before. We need to redesign the frontier. We need to maximize the contact between pasture and
cropland and native vegetation. But in order to do that, we need to have a, to build an economic or a
financial stream, which is not built yet. So the planting forest has to be looked at as a business,
not as a philanthropy. Right now we are restoring forests with philanthropic money. We need to
restore forests with the mainstream money. And that means that companies, countries, banks have to
benefit from, they have to profit from it. So it's on us scientists, it's on us Brazilians to show to the
financial world that there is profit, you know, in restoring forests. And in my personal view,
that profit is in two issues. One is environmental services, such as carbon sequestration and
maintenance on the ground. And the other one is agricultural crop yields improve or increase.
So, you know, there's profit there potentially, but we need to make sure that, you know, banks,
investors, companies observe, realize, and invest. That's the challenge.
So there is the possibility of the rebound effect or the backfire effect is that as incomes go up,
there's more barbecues and more demand for beef, etc. So you make income that is more environmentally
sound, but you spend it in the global economy on something that's not so environmentally friendly.
Yeah, that's a good point. A good point. We have to agree on a moratorium. You know,
we will continue to thrive, we will continue to expand production, but we're not chopping down
any more trees. We need to agree on that.
Boy, I, um, you know, I haven't talked about the Amazon yet. And now I'm, I met several people in
New York at climate week and I have become aware how critical, um, the Amazon situation is not only
for the people in South America, but for the whole world. I mean, it is, like you said, the heart of the
planet. Um, do you, I mean, you are, uh, at least since 1991, uh, an ecologist, a scientist looking at the
situation of the world, do you have any suggestions for the viewers of this program, uh, who are paying
attention to what's happening in the world, um, at this time of, um, anxiety and opportunity?
Yes. Uh, I would say that, you know, for everybody, especially for young people,
Nate, I think they, they need to think global and act local. Let me try to illustrate it. I mean,
we need to understand what happens in our planet. This is our planet. This is our home. So we need,
you know, I'm sitting in Florida and, you know, I need to understand if I was sitting in Florida,
I need to understand what goes on in Africa. If I'm sitting in Zimbabwe, I need to understand
what goes on in Brazil. The good news is that we have social media, we have internet, we have,
you know, technology, which allows us to, you know, get the information quick. We are not using
well that information. Look at the elections in some countries there, look at the politicians,
you know, benefiting from the fake news and so on. So I think there is a, an industry of fake news,
which is taking advantage of the technology, but that this is going to be over at some point.
You know, people will realize what is good and what's bad on the internet at some point in time.
And so thinking globally for me means get yourself informed what goes on in the country, make your,
make your mind, make your, you know, create your own opinion about things. This is number one.
So look at the, at the planet, but act locally. For example, Nate, I have it with my family,
an agreement that if I have two products, it doesn't matter what the price is. If I have two products
that I can buy, two similar products that I can buy in a supermarket, and one of them was produced
closer to my house, I'll choose that one. Simple choices like that. Let's look at the planet. Let's
learn globally about the global issues, but acting locally, you know, go, go visit the cities that are
close to your city, you know, do tourism next door to your city, instead of catching a plane, or in
addition to catching a plane to visit Paris. I mean, you know, these are individual decisions on a daily
basis that if you sum up them all up, we may have a better planet. What advice do you have for young
people in their late teens, early twenties, who are becoming aware of climate and the Amazon and
the economic and energy issues, et cetera?
Mm-hmm. Spend some time, you know, learning about them. Let me, let me give you my example,
Nate. Why did I choose to go to the Amazon and become, you know, a scientist and gave up my agronomic
career? You know, the salary that was offered to me was five times more in the business sector than
it was to be a scientist, but it wasn't a variable in my life. So what I would advise young people to
is, you know, don't be, you know, excited about making millions and millions of dollars, being so
competitive and so on. Competitiveness and is, is the more harmonic you where you are to the
environment that surrounds you, the more competitive you are to survive, the more competitive your kids
will be because they will have a better culture coming from you. So, you know, look at the planet.
It's a beautiful planet. Learn about the planet and help the planet to survive in the long run. You do
have a role to play. We, we have, we all have a role to play. And just to finalize that, that message,
Nate, I, a few years ago, I used to say that, well, the, the work that I do is for my grandkids. You
know, I'm working for my grandkids. I have two kids, but I'm working for my grandkids because the impact
of climate change will take, you know, 20, 30, 40 years to, to arrive. A few years back, I started
thinking that, well, not really to my grandkids, but maybe I'm working for my kids because, you know,
things are happening, you know, sooner than later. Now I'm thinking, well, maybe I'm working for myself.
And a few, few weeks ago, I realized that actually I'm working for my parents. We are, which are in
their eighties because they are breathing smoke as we speak in the capital of my country today. So their
health is being affected by the degradation of the Amazon today, not in 30 years time. So please,
young people, we need, we have a job to do. And that job is today, not tomorrow.
What do you care most about in the world, Andre?
People living in harmony, harmony, you know, being equals. I mean, I meet a millionaire. Of course,
I admire that guy. But you know, when I talk to this millionaire, I look at him or her in the eye,
same level. When I meet someone in the middle of the Amazon with no income, no money at all,
no assets at all, you know, I have to look at that person as an equal. I look, I have to look at her
or him in the eye. And we are all the same. I mean, we are born naked, and we die naked. We are all the
same, Nate. And what happens in between, you know, born and dying is what's going to make the difference.
And I think the difference is made not in, you know, building more things, not in accumulating
more goods, not in making more money, but instead, you know, in making more friends,
in learning more about the planet, in, you know, being in harmony with nature, harmony with the
others, especially if they are different from you. So we value the differences and the diversity.
If you could wave a magic wand and there was no recourse to your status or security,
what is one thing you would do to improve human and planetary futures?
I would stop poverty. I would, you know, cancel poverty from this species. We don't have any more
poor people. This is an absurd, Nate. You know, in 2024, we have to live with poverty. We have to live
with families and kids starving to death. You know, we have enough food for everybody. We have enough
food. What we don't have is money to buy food. So, you know, income distribution, making sure that,
you know, everybody has the minimum conditions to live, to thrive, to, you know, to be happy.
Right. So, uh, I would stop poverty.
Thank you. And, and thank you for your time today. If, if I were to ask you back in the future for a
repeat conversation, what is one topic, um, that you are passionate about and you know a lot about
that's relevant to our, uh, global ecological and economic futures that you would be willing to take a,
a deep dive on food, food production. We, we, we are in the, in the, the merge of, of a revolution
in food production for good. Hopefully, uh, you know, we need to feed seven, eight billion people.
This is not easy, but we have to feed that those people with a quality, with, you know, good level
of protein, good level of carbohydrates, good quality of carbohydrates, vitamins, vegetables. You
know, I, I do have a very, very diverse and, and, and, you know, uh, uh, nutrition, uh, but I would like
to, that nutrition to be available to everybody, regardless of where they are, regardless of their
religion, regardless of their gender. I, I would like to talk about food. And I think that has everything
to do with climate change that has everything to do with forest tropical and non-tropical that has
everything to do with the essence of being humans, right? We do it before we drive cars. We do it
before we learn, uh, to read books. We have to go back to our origins and, uh, make sure that we
understand who we are and who we are is beta based on what we eat. So let's talk about food, my friend, if you
want. Okay. Sounds like a plan. Thank you so much. And, uh, I've never been to Brazil, maybe one day,
but thank you for all your work. We got to fix this. Thanks for all your important work. And, uh,
I have high hopes for people in Brazil and the world waking up to protect our forests, uh, and earth
systems. An honor, Nate, and, uh, looking forward to talking more about food and other issues. My pleasure.
Really honored to be here. If you enjoyed or learned from this episode of the great simplification,
please follow us on your favorite podcast platform. You can also visit the great simplification.com
for references and show notes from today's conversation. And to connect with fellow
listeners of this podcast, check out our discord channel. This show is hosted by me,
Nate Higgins edited by no troublemakers media and produced by Misty Stinnett,
Leslie Bat-Lutz, Brady Hyen, and Lizzie Sirianni.
