We're a few years into the supposed artificial intelligence revolution,
which could and should have been about reducing mundane tasks
and freeing up everyone to do more interesting things with their time.
Instead, thanks to bloodthirsty nature of modern capitalism
and the ideological crusade being waged by the tech industry,
we're now facing a world where many people's livelihoods,
like video game developers, are under direct threat.
Really?
I mean, I like to consider myself an AI realist.
But that was a lot of words just then that I'm not too sure.
Like as somebody who just vibe coded a lot,
let's just say that I'm a bit surprised by the onset of this article.
To be completely real,
I think the fiver artist is under real, real actual direct threat.
The person that's like, hey, could you make me five potions for my game?
Now, I think human art always looks better because it's cohesive.
There's like a uniform experience to it.
There's like a bit of personality, a bit of characteristic to it.
That's kind of hard to really get out of an AI,
if not impossible to have a uniform experience throughout your entire game.
You get a much better experience.
When we had Adam Eunice come onto the stream and make the art for our game,
what he did was very, very good.
I don't think we could have gotten nearly the same result out of an AI.
We tried to do some basic prompting to get some towers out of it.
And it was like, the game just was confusing, right?
It just didn't have, it just, it just wasn't there.
And so, yeah, I think the fiver artist is most certainly in trouble.
Like right now I could probably start to, you know,
and I probably actually should just do this,
have emotes of my channel, like the little badges right here.
These little badges.
I just hand drew a P and never updated it again for a long, long time.
Now's my chance just to be like, hey, you know what?
I can make my own little things right here to kind of describe each one of those.
And that's like a thing I could do.
I know, I know.
It hasn't changed in like six years.
I've had the same, like four emotes in the last six years.
So direct threat to me just seems not like that.
This seems way too explodiated, right?
Tell you the complete truth.
I don't know what the ideological crusade is.
I don't even know.
These tumultuous times.
Ooh, I love alliterations.
By the way, that's usually a good sign.
This is like a good sign that this was actually ran through an LLM.
You'll see some alliterations.
Are, of course, being reported on everywhere.
You look, including on this very site.
But one area I've been curious about recently aren't the broader moral and legal battles,
but what the struggle looks like for the average dev who is now having to encounter AI in their workplace.
Okay?
Okay.
Very curious.
I'm very curious too.
I don't know what it's like.
I guess the problem is, is what is an average workplace?
I think I got lucky.
My first job was what I'd consider an exceptionally below average workplace.
My second job is what I would consider an exceptionally above average workplace.
And my third job that I held for 10 years, I would consider a decently above average workplace.
So I never really, I think I kind of would have dodged a lot of these problems.
Um, and so I don't think I have a lot of insight into what the average looks like for this, uh, piece.
I spoke with a number of people working in the video game industry or very close to it, including artists, game designers, and software developers.
All right.
So I guess probably want some clarification on the term game designer.
Is a game designer one who works on game mechanics or one who designs bits of like Chrome and such for a game?
Because I think that means different to different people.
Like if you're in the web world and you heard the word game designer, you probably would assume it's on the art side and not on the mechanics programming side.
Right.
I think that that's just what would happen.
And that's fair just because it did.
It is.
I asked them to tell their stories about their daily interactions and struggles with artificial intelligence in the workplace.
This is also a very biased question.
You should probably ask them, what is your daily interactions with AI in the workplace?
You should probably not like kind of anchor it to struggles because if you anchor it to struggles, you're going to get, you know, you kind of get people to say things in a certain way that they may miss stuff.
Right. Or they may say things in a way that's overemphasizing a certain aspect and underemphasizing another aspect in the workplace and what it means for the jobs they've been trained and hired to do.
Each person's name and workplace has been changed to protect their identity.
He can't even write a email without using chat.
I mean, I wouldn't even write an email.
So there's that just being real.
Bradley is a veteran artist who works at a triple A game studio.
They describe the company as having been founded relatively recently with investments coming in from traditional triple A executives who want to make money.
And they're trying to figure out what game to make for that.
This is a hard pill to swallow.
Triple A game's entire existence is to make money.
I know this is a hard pill to swallow.
Triple A games are funded as a venture into the gaming industry to try to make money.
Now, I understand that there's always exceptions.
Everyone will point to like something like Elden Ring.
But even Elden Ring, if done poorly, you know, the Souls game wouldn't exist if they weren't done well.
Triple A. Remember where we got the term triple A from.
Triple A is the investment rating.
It has nothing to do with the size of the game.
It just happens that if you do a triple A game, you're doing big investments, which by incident of the investment is the size of the game.
Right. It's not the other way around. It's not like, oh, this is a really big game.
Therefore, it's triple A. It's no, this is triple A.
Therefore, it's going to be a bigger game.
They say their project's art direction has been largely fueled by AI prompts and generated imagery, all driven by their head art director, who is himself an experienced video game artist, but who now can't even write a fucking email without using Chad Gyppity.
Yeah, you know, I mean, part of me, to be fair, like if I was just generating a game and I was like, even the game we were working on, if we didn't have Adam and just TJ and I were working on this offline, I would have generated assets until I kind of came up with an idea and then started bringing in somebody that I knew that could help me like Adam to kind of build my vision.
I'm not such like a hardcore person in the anti-AI world that I don't think you can.
I think you can just use that for a little bit and use it as exploring.
I don't think that's a huge deal.
I think it's better to always hire somebody.
I just think at least in today's day and age, barring some unforeseen future jump, it just always feels that people are better at it.
In my interview with the company, I was very clear that I do not like AI-generated content.
Yeah, generally, same here.
I think it has this soulless feel to it.
It's like the Dreadlords of Wheel of Time.
Yep, Wheel of Time reference.
Again, I'm on book 14 at this point.
In the Black Tower, Taim is obviously creating Dreadlords.
And people who knew the people that were converted into Dreadlords could see the shadow in the eyes, but you could only see it.
There's like this haunting problem behind how they look at you, but they still look just like a person.
They still look like the person you know.
But there's like this hauntingness to it that they're like, you have something evil in you.
And so it's like you can see this with AI-generated content too.
There's like, at least as of right now, you can see it a lot of the times where it's just like this is AI-generated.
You can feel it.
There's just something about it that's not quite right.
All right, Bradley says and adds that a team initially said that was fine.
The tech was only being used for pitching purposes, which I think is also fine.
I mean, this is a good example.
Again, I like it as the idea to try to iterate quickly just to see something.
And then when you see something, you make the thing, right?
But Bradley says the reality has proven vastly different and that the studio has made increasing use of AI-generated imagery in their team's art pipeline.
Again, you work at a AAA game studio.
Like, I expect this out of AAA.
I actually expect this quite a bit less out of indie.
Because indie, a lot of indie is passion projects.
A lot of AAA is how do we make the most amount of money projects.
Those are very different.
They're just different motivations.
And that's not always true.
I'm positive that's not always true.
I'm sure there's AAA games that are actually also passion projects.
And I'm also positive.
I assume that, you know, like whenever I play a lot of the Nintendo stuff, I, regardless of what you think about Nintendo and the recent pricing and all that, their games are just so great.
I've loved virtually every Mario that ever has been created.
And I'd call those AAA games.
They've been fantastic.
And they're just like, that's just something special there.
I feel like that is a passion project as well.
So, I mean, it's obviously this isn't universally true stuff I'm saying.
I have no idea how he ended up as an art director when he can't visualize what he wants in his head unless he sees some end results, Bradley says.
Rather than beginning with sketches and ideas, then iterating on those to produce more finalized image or vision, Bradley says his boss will just keep prompting an AI for images until he finds one he likes.
And then the art team will have to, will have to backwards engineer the whole thing to make it work.
Interesting.
Okay.
I guess the idea would be that he's just trying to shortcut that whole process of starting with like the basic sketches and slowly going up.
And then once he slowly goes up, then he goes from there and says, okay, he's just trying to back.
He's just trying to back all of that and get the right image right off the rip and says, okay, start there.
Yeah.
I mean, I bet you the game will probably suck.
That sounds very hard to kind of develop a lore and stuff.
He doesn't know what the important thing isn't just the end result.
It's the journey and the questions you have to answer along the way.
I think there's two things that are, I think two things can be true at the same time.
This statement can be true, meaning that for you, the artist, the game mechanic designer, the programmer, the questions you ask along the way and the things you've learned along the way are most certainly important to you.
But to the person consuming and paying money, there's only one thing that matters.
Nobody cares.
Nobody cares that you had a life altering experience with this art or it was vacuous.
Bradley says that the studio's management has become so enamored with the technology that without a reliance on AI generated imagery for presentations and pitches, they would not be at the stage they are now, which is dealing with publishers and investors.
I don't know.
I just, I guess I'm not surprised by any of this.
Like this is just what I would expect.
I feel like if you had any ability to kind of just read the winds of the day, you can complain all you want, which is what I do.
But you should completely understand that this is the destination.
I don't know.
Is anyone surprised by this?
I don't, I don't really feel surprised by this stuff.
I kind of feel like this is complaining for the sake that it just feels like it's complaining for the sake that things aren't what you ideally wanted them to be.
You know, like I've had to take many shortcuts that I would not want to take shortcuts.
I've had to develop many things that I would not want to develop, but I did it because that is what the job required.
And I didn't want to do it.
I thought it was bad.
I hated it.
I had to upgrade groovy ones.
Do you know how awful that was tracking down endpoints that were five years old for the Wii U?
Do you know what that's like to update an endpoint that 14 people use and then have to monitor it to see if it breaks?
It feels very meaningless and annoying when you work at a company at that time had 50 million subscribers and there was literally unironically like 50 people using it.
It's just like meaningless work for meaningless stuff causing huge headaches.
Like I get it.
I would argue that's worse than whatever this AI madness is.
They're finding it difficult to get funding because the game is being treated as a car salesman pitch using AI generated imagery to sell it without any actual substance or meat to back the vision up.
The whole game is resting on a prompt.
What if a game was, but with no idea if it would be fun or how to make it fun?
It's madness.
TJ and I developed this game just two weeks ago about a card playing tower defense game and we didn't know if it was going to be fun or even how to make it fun.
You know, I do think that that's a part of any game.
Any game, it's kind of hard to know if something's fun until you've really built it in and actually been able to go through it and feel it.
Because even your best intentions feel fun until you actually like do it.
Anyone who's built any sort of project trying to guess into the future knows that you have this idea for a tool or anything and then you build it.
And then when you realize when the like the rubber meets the road, you're like, oh, that actually was a bad idea.
I also think, you know, another thing that's probably really difficult, especially in a room full of probably engineers, is that we like engineers just have such a little amount of tying to identity in their code comparatively to artists, right?
There's always there's that old trope that's been around long before ChatGPT, which was like a designer going to another designer.
You stole my work.
And then another programmer going to another programmer.
You stole my work.
Yeah, I stole it too.
Right.
Or, hey, did you steal my work?
Yeah, I did.
But I also stole Bob's or whatever, whatever the thing was.
It's like, hey, I stole your work.
Yeah, I stole it too.
Yeah, whatever it was.
Anyways, it's just that like, I think programmers just have a fundamentally different viewpoint.
So I think I might have a hard time sympathizing with some of this.
But I can sympathize for the fact that if you threw together a working product and said, this is the game we want to sell.
Okay, you want to sell it?
It's almost done here.
I'll just have my programmers do some polish.
I could see that being really annoying.
Because that's kind of like what I'm hearing here.
It's like something the same where it's like, okay, I guess now I have to go.
And rewrite everything and actually make it work and actually make it a viable product.
Then I could add polish.
So now I'm being dumped with all the work and responsibility from you selling something that was exceptionally incomplete.
I think that's the argument that's being made here.
And if that's the argument, that's actually a pretty good argument.
It's like, yeah, we didn't do the proper kind of build up to this.
And so now it's really, really difficult.
I had a meeting with the CEO where he told me he noticed I wasn't using the Jippity account the company had given me.
I wasn't really aware that the company was tracking that.
Yeah, I was about to say that exact thing, which is, how did he know you didn't use it?
That sounds way crazier.
Like, that's the red flag I'm looking at.
If my boss was like, I have noticed you haven't been doing your prompts lately, I'd be like, fuck off.
What are you?
Are you monitoring me?
Monitoring me again and I quit.
Mitch has been working in software for over seven years.
Having previously been employed in the defense industry, their last job was writing developer tools for a small tech startup, creating an app.
The company was built with some initial interest in artificial intelligence.
Though Mitch says this was met with varying levels of skepticism by employees.
Good.
I mean, that sounds healthy.
I was the most opposed, Mitch says, to the point where I felt it was a detriment.
One team member who only ended up working there for a few months was very positive on it.
The CEO was skeptical but felt it could be a massive benefit if used correctly.
By the way, is this Nate?
The shopping experience Nate that is currently being sued?
And the other team members saw it as a fun toy that could occasionally be useful.
So it was pretty broad across the board.
Some at the company were uneasy with the technology early on.
And when the team initially had just a small AI plug-in through which users could chat with the app.
On the way to the airport with Coworker, we talked about the introduction of these AI-generated plug-ins, Mitch says.
Both of us felt incredibly uneasy with them, despite my Coworker finding AI to be a fun toy.
He was worried that it wasn't what he initially signed up for.
And I had hope, or I had more or less the same sentiment.
I didn't really boil over into anything at this point since the feature didn't go anywhere.
But it was still notable.
A few months later, things started to change.
Mitch says the first signs of a deepening reliance on AI came when the company's CEO was found to be rewriting parts of their app.
So that it could be easier for the AI models to understand and help with.
Oh gosh.
The real crime here that I'm just averting my eyes from has nothing to do with the fact that the AI rewrote the code base to make it easier for AIs.
It's the fact that the CEO was writing code.
Like that's the last person in the universe I want writing code.
If you have to meet with investors and then you're going to whip out a critical feature in between meetings, screw you.
Don't do it.
Oh gosh, it's real.
Then Mitch says, I had a meeting with the CEO where he told me he noticed that I wasn't using ChatGPT on, let's see, account on the company had given me.
I wasn't really aware that the company was tracking that.
Anyways, he told me that I would need to start using ChatGPT to speed up my development process.
Furthermore, he said I should start using Cloud, another AI tool, to just wholesale create new features for the app.
He walked me through setting up the accounts and had me write one with Claude while I was on the call with him.
I'm still not entirely sure why he did that, but I think it may have been him trying to convince himself that it would work.
I had to bring back up the vibe thing again with the video game.
TJ and I were actually able to make really great progress just having Cursor use Claude and vibe code out a bunch of stuff.
We are actually able to make really great initial progress.
But every two steps forward was a known, it's going to suck, but we're going to have to rewrite it.
But it allowed us to actually understand a lot of things with the, I mean, I understand why people do this.
I just think that it allows you a quick initial speed.
But what's even better is just going and reading the documentation for two days and understanding what's happening, and boom.
You just go way faster.
Like, for me, I get virtually nothing out of vibe coding, almost universally.
Now, the place that I do get something out of it, which I mentioned just yesterday, is with shaders, right?
I don't know anything about shaders.
I would just vibe code them just because the investment needed to make a good shader is just super high comparatively to draw a rectangle.
Like, draw a rectangle very small, very little investment.
Write a good shader, you would learn a lot.
And I'm not even saying that I don't want to learn shaders.
It's just that to learn them and learn them well is a, it's a non, it's a, it's a decent time commitment.
You can get into something, but then you can't, you know, I can only go so far with it.
And I'm okay with that right now.
Honestly, I'd rather pay Ace Rolla a couple thousand dollars to come over here and write me a couple shaders
than for me to learn it because his are going to be better.
I'm going to love it.
We're going to let him go for it.
It would be sweet.
Maybe we can get him for this game.
Hey, think about it for a second.
Should we try to get Ace Rolla for the game?
I think we should try to get Ace Rolla for the game.
Ace Rolla is generally the goat of shaders.
Exactly.
Maybe I should get him to come in, be a part of the Tower of Modoria, and boom.
I'm actually going to work on it.
No idea who that is.
Sure.
He's the one that did the ASCII shaders, if you remember that YouTube video we reacted for.
He did the ASCII shaders.
Love Ace Rolla.
I got to meet him in real life.
He's actually just a genuinely super cool guy.
Mitch describes an increasing reliance on AI, not just to be incredibly boring, but ultimately pointless.
It is kind of boring.
Like, I do think that you do lose a lot of stuff.
Like, I know there's that whole joke with the vibe coder that is just constantly saying things,
then sitting back, and then says a couple things, and then sits back and wait for it.
It also feels really boring.
It feels like your role becomes QA, but like the worst kind of QA.
Super, it's like, it's almost like we've returned to 2011 QA.
Like, highly manual, make something happen, and then go through every single manual step.
It's like you've just recreated 2011 super manual QA.
I am QA.
Well, with AI, you most certainly are.
Sure, it was faster, but it had a completely different development rhythm, they say.
In terms of software quality, I would say the code created by the AI was worse than code written by a human,
though not drastically so, and it was difficult to work with since most of it hadn't been written
by the people whose job it was to oversee it.
This probably is true depending on the type of software you're writing.
I'm sure there's some softwares that AI can write much closer to humans,
and there's some software that they write much further from humans.
My guess is that the more complex your project is, the worse that AI is getting.
If you're just plugging in one software to another software, it's probably really excellent.
That's why I always think, like, people that do CRUD
typically have, like, very simple CRUD apps, like marketing apps, like agency apps.
They probably have the most positive AI experience
because they're just, like, cranking out the same thing over and over again.
That's pretty straightforward programming.
It's not really problem-solving.
It's more just like, I already know what I want to do.
I already know how to do it.
I just simply have to type it out.
Let's go.
All right.
One thing to note is that the thought of using AI to generate code was so demotivating
that I think it would counteract any of the speed gains that the tool would provide,
and on top of that, would produce worse code that I didn't understand.
And that's not even mentioning the ethical concerns of the tool built on plagiarism.
It's real, though.
I do think there's a reckoning coming.
Unironically, I think there's a huge reckoning coming with a lot of companies.
There's a lot of companies.
I'm not saying they all have AI-generated code.
I'm just saying there's generated code out there.
Stolen.
Don't like it.
China stealing code.
Right?
Like, I do think that there are some serious ethical and potentially legal concerns over
the next decade.
China.
China with the stolen code.
Right?
Like, I do think there is a realness there.
China.
China.
I can't even.
Dude, I don't even have enough in my China to say it correctly.
Mitch says that over 18 months, they worked with the company.
His CEO had transformed from someone mildly positive about AI to emphasizing to workers
that AI was the future.
In particular, he was of the belief that developers who are able to use AI to accelerate their
process are going to win out in the future.
I have seen this sentiment in other places worded as AI won't replace you, but a programmer
who knows how to use AI will.
He didn't believe that 18 months ago, but he absolutely believes it now.
I typically attribute this thought process to people who are novice programmers.
I'm novice at identifying rocks.
I take a picture of a rock, shoot it to an AI, ask it to tell me about stuff.
It can give me some good identification, give me a bunch of stuff, and I go, wow.
You know, like, I'm not good at identifying rocks, but man, this AI is super good.
It's an expert.
But I also have, like, no, I'm not a good judge of what good or bad is.
And I think that that's one thing that's very difficult, is to be a judge of what is
good, requires you to be an expert.
And even then, you're still bad.
Then on top of all of that, you have the, uh, gelman.
We've talked about this a lot with AI.
The gelman, what is it called?
The gelman, something, something, something.
Anyways, look up gelman, and it's like gelman fallacy or gelman amnesia.
There you go.
Where you read a paper and you're an expert on a topic.
You read the paper and every single point that the paper talks about that you're an expert
on, you're like, wow, they're wrong here, they're wrong here, they're wrong here.
The next day, you open it up, and it's about horses, and you read about it, and you're like,
wow, there's such, this is such a great article about horses.
It's like you forget the fact that you just got done writing, reading a post, and it was
horribly wrong, in your opinion.
And then you read the next post, and you're like, it's completely correct.
You're very bad at remembering the fact that when you read something that you're not an
expert on, it appears to be great.
But when you read something that you're an expert on, it appears to be bad.
That's because it's probably all bad.
That's the reality.
It's probably all bad.
You just don't know yet.
You just keep thinking it's not that.
The AI's poor code and personal dislike of technology meant that Mitch soon simply began
ignoring their CEO's instruction to use Chad Chippity or Claude.
A few months later, the entire company went bust.
The only issue I'm facing as a professional arts director in games is that I just want
them to leave me and my art teams alone.
That I can understand.
Francis is both a consultant and artist in the video game industry, and so has worked alongside
arts teams as well as working with agency studios and publishers about their creative
process.
This means I have had some truly wild conversations about AI in a professional context that makes
me want to walk into the sea, they say.
Since AI-generated imagery first blew up a few years ago, Francis has found that discussions
with both the consulting clients and potential employers for their own art has shifted.
They believe that most employers and outsiders they speak to don't see themselves as part of
what Francis calls an AI will replace artist crowd, but are more like if we use AI, it'll
make our artist's life easier crowd who think using AI in art will protect their artists and
not displace them.
Well, not only that, but again, this is the gentleman fallacy, like perfectly.
I'm not good at generating art.
Like I cannot sit down and make great art on the computer.
So when an AI generates me a great looking potion, at least in my eye, I just feel like, oh, that's
great, which is like perfectly the example of why I'm not a good judge at it.
I know I'm not a good judge.
At least I understand these things.
What follows from these discussions is me explaining why, usually over hours rather than
minutes, that these tools have no place in a professional game development pipeline or
production and actually hinder the development of visuals, Francis says.
I also find myself explaining to them how the iteration and idea phase of a project is where
the best stuff happens, how exploring things through artistic labor is where your best ideas
come to fruition, and why we would want an AI that we don't own to do that for us with art
that isn't ours to use.
I mean, can we not say the same thing for development as well?
Don't you have to develop a product wrong the first time?
Like, isn't that part of the whole process is that once you develop the product wrong,
you then go, I know way better how to make something.
The journey does matter.
The destination is the best place, but the journey still is important.
Like you have to, you have to go through that process.
And I do think shortcutting that process can be hard for future.
It does make short-term gains though.
You do get to move much, much faster, perceived speed, but maybe not actual speed.
I am yet to have a team or a game runner push back on me once I explain how these AI arts
generators work and how they don't contribute in a helpful way to a project.
But I have a sense of dread that is only a matter of time until that changes, especially given that
I've gone the majority of my career with no mention of them to every second conversation, having it
mentioned.
Nah, it's the hotness.
Every second video on this channel right now is reading about AI because that's just like every
article is about AI right now.
It's true.
We're all talking about it.
It's a very, this is a very unusual time in place in history.
This all sounds slightly more optimistic than what other people I spoke with expressed.
But Francis also added that a close family member is neck deep in the technology side
of the AI industry.
And that while conversation with them mostly gives me the desire to purchase cigarettes for
the first time in a very long time.
It also gives me insight into how these people feel when they say they are helping my industry
by innovating to make artists' lives better.
I don't have a problem with a lot of AI maxis that are working in the space.
Like I'm fine.
The thing is, is that I'm fine with AI maxis who are trying to develop something to make
some part work.
I don't actually care about that.
The people I care about or the people that piss me off or the people that actually end
up one guy-ing me are people who literally don't know anything about the space telling
you how it's going to happen.
DHH.
37 Signals is hiring a junior programming.
We're accepting applications until Wednesday, April 23rd.
We're going to pay them $145,000.
DHH.
Good guy, DHH.
Getting a good person, training them up, making them an expert in your system, allowing
them to have autonomy, allowing them to develop great stuff and becoming an expert and ultimately
helping out their system.
And yeah, maybe it won't be as proficient as an AI, Devin, for the first three days.
That's it.
And then after that, it'll be fantastic.
All right.
This guy is so dumb.
He's hiring junior programmers at $145,000 when $200 per month in Shadjippity, AI agent
can do the job.
Blah, blah, blah, blah, blah.
All of you programmers are already cooked.
Let it go.
Blah, blah, blah, blah.
Personally, I haven't built anything, but that doesn't mean programmers are cooked or
aren't cooked.
This is the person that I think is stupid.
Like I don't mind when someone's building an AI trying to solve a problem and they think
they can solve the problem.
Honestly, that's an honorable pursuit in my personal opinion.
Even if you're creating something that I think is stupid, it is really, really awesome
to see someone attempt to solve something that's really, really hard.
I actually get really inspired by that.
So this person getting really upset about whoever their close family members that work
in something that's trying to solve something, I don't think you need to.
I think it's the other person, right?
It's the people that don't know how anything works, that have never done anything themselves,
that are telling you why you should.
Those are the people you should be like, you're stupid, shut up.
Like you literally, you are celebrating your ignorance and telling, like I use ignorance
in the proper sense.
They just have a black hole where that place is.
They have no experience.
They have nothing.
It's just a black hole.
And then they're telling you how that hole works.
You're like, no, you know nothing.
You know nothing, Jon Snow.
Francis says their understanding of AI pushers outlook is that they see the entire game making
process as a problem.
One that AI tech companies alone can solve.
When I am old, think of how much time you could be spending instead of making the actual
game.
Those who have drank the AI Kool-Aid don't understand that all this brainstorming and
iteration is making the game.
It's crucial everyday part of game development and human interaction and is not a problem to
be solved.
Yeah, I mean, that's so spot on.
You know how crazy that is to think that you'd want to fast forward that process?
I mean, the thing that you want to fast forward is the ability to make the platform to test
out mechanics.
Like if you could, if you could fast forward anything, which is again, what we did with
our vibe coding session is to get to the point of trying to make things work.
Then you get to experiment.
Then you get to kind of explore.
Then you get to do all those things.
Like that's a much better way to look at it.
It's kind of crazy to look at it from any other perspective.
My experience here is that unfortunately not singular.
Francis says, I've had many discussions with many game developers who interact with AI
engineers and savants who believe our industry pipelines need fixing by them and them alone.
The only other similar experience I can think of as a comparison is the snake oil salesman
insisting that their magic tonic will fix all my problems that don't exist, but they
insist that I have.
Francis believes that there's a common thread running through both their lines of work,
that those selling AI tools and those advocating for their use, whatever their best intentions,
they think that AI is solving a huge problem game industry workers are facing.
The only issue I am facing as a professional art director in games is that I just want them
to leave me and my art teams alone so that I can make a cool art.
There is no problem to be solved here.
I'm just surprised that the robot first let her pack up all of her belongings.
And then kicked her ass.
Like, why would you first let them pack up their stuff and then kick them out?
I mean, it doesn't even make any sense.
It really doesn't even make any sense.
Man, I'm shocked at how much there is.
This is a great, this is great though.
I think a lot of people are going to have to, I think the next five years is just going
to be this over and over and over again.
And then maybe by the time these five years are up and we make a technological leap that
actually makes sense in AI and where we can actually start solving larger problems.
If that does happen, then people will be like, see, we're right.
But if it doesn't happen, they're just like, don't worry.
It's six months away.
And then we'll just perpetually be in this thing over and over and over and over again.
And then we'll all be sad for a long, long time.
The name is HopeCore again, HopeCore people.
