Hi, welcome to Ayurubah Speaks Literally, the podcast where I share the random things
and the random thoughts that shape my personality.
Today's random thoughts, well, it is mental health.
Mental health is a topic that touches all of us in some way.
And so I'm excited to have two incredible guests with us, each bringing a unique perspective
into this very important conversation.
First, we have Vanessa Van Der Pooy, a PhD candidate in clinical psychology based in the UK.
And we have Mame Adra Eja, who is a behavior, I'm trying to make sure that I say this word
correctly, a behavioral, behavioral, a behavioral health technician in the US and a master's
student in health psychology, or I believe she's completed her master's by now, or she's
about to complete her master's in psychology.
So in this episode, we're going to talk about their journeys, compare the differences in
mental health care in the UK and the US.
And seeing as we're all Ghanians, we're also going to talk about Ghana's mental health
approach as well.
And then we'll dive into what the future holds for psychology and mental health.
For me, I'm going to have, I'm going to ask questions about technology as well, because,
well, I'm a technology law graduate.
And, and so just going to ask how technology also, um, mends itself, mends itself, combines
itself with mental health, um, treatment in our world today.
So whether you're curious about pursuing a career in this field, passionate about improving
mental health care, or simply looking for insights into how we can better support ourselves and
others, this is a conversation for you, and I hope you enjoy it.
So grab a cup of coffee, cause it's chilly over here.
If it's hot, grab a hot, a cold soda, and let's dive into the conversation.
My name is Aiyue Boa.
Well, damn.
Hello.
How are you feeling?
So glad you tuned in.
Let's get to talking.
Na, na, na, na.
Aiyue Boa speaks.
Literally.
Yeah, she's speaking literally.
About things slightly trary.
Whether happy, scary, or teary.
She'll have you feeling very merry.
She's about to count.
Na, na, na, na.
Hi guys.
Welcome to the episode.
Like I mentioned earlier in the intro, we're going to be talking about mental health, which
is a very important conversation.
And to, to help me with this conversation, are very, two very important ladies, Vanessa
and Mamiadra.
Welcome ladies.
Thank you for joining me on Aiyue Boa Speaks.
Thank you for having us.
Yeah.
Thank you.
So, okay, so before we start the conversation, just, just give us a little, you know, intro.
Who, who is Vanessa?
Who is Mamiadra?
Tell the listeners so that they can, they can learn more about you.
So I'll start with Vanessa.
Okay.
Well, my name is Vanessa.
I went to secondary school.
So high school with Irama.
I, I, I moved to the UK after high school.
And ever since I've been in the UK, I've been studying psychology.
So it's been about 10 years now of studying psychology.
So I'm currently doing my doctorate, my clinical doctorate in clinical psychology to become a
registered clinical psychologist in the UK.
I'm already a clinical associate psychologist, which is like the equivalent of physician assistant.
I'm a psychologist.
So I'm already qualified as that, but I'm upgrading now to become a proper clinical psychologist.
So it's a three-year program and I'm currently in my second year.
Well done.
Well done.
Thank you, Vanessa.
Mami.
Hi, my name is Mami.
Sometimes I go by Mami in the US only though, but I'm a Rama's cousin on my mom's side.
And I'm currently in my master's program where I'm on the health track.
So I'm finishing up on my thesis.
And then after that, I'm trying to find a job before I get into my doctorate degree.
Well done, Mami.
In case you guys didn't know, I am Ayuribua.
And I'm going to have this conversation with these two lovely ladies.
So thank you again for joining me.
So let's get into the conversation.
Um, hold on.
Let me, let me gather my questions now.
Okay.
So my first question is, like you guys said, you've mentioned that you're, you're pursuing,
um, either, either already started pursuing a career in psychology or you, you are still
in the process of it.
So the first thing is what's inspired you to pursue that career in psychology and mental
health?
Mami, let's start with you.
Okay.
Um, well, while I was in undergrad, I was originally a math major.
Well, actuarial science to be accurate with it, but I switched into psychology because
I wasn't entirely enjoying the math curriculum.
So while I started taking psychology, that's where I started learning more about it, especially
with, um, health psychology.
So from there, that's where I wanted to pursue a career where I can help others with their
health behaviours.
Okay.
Um, Vanessa?
Well, I think I decided to do psychology in, in secondary school, actually, because, um,
I remember on one of the, I think it was a university fair or something, some, there was a university
from, in the UK.
Yeah.
Um, I shared like leaflets or pamphlets about it.
Yeah.
I remember those days.
And then I saw like, because I really, I was studying visual arts.
I really, you know, I thought I'm going to be a graphic designer and that's it.
Um, but then I came across psychology and then the summary for the course was that it's
about helping people.
So I thought, oh, okay, that's what I'm going to do.
So I came to the UK and decided I was going to do psychology and, um, yeah, it's, you know,
I, I, I guess my decision to, to pursue psychology, because it's a very long journey and my decision
to still stick with it was also out of, um, lived experience of mental health disabilities,
um, my own personal experiences and wanting to, to be of value to people who have been
through things that I have also been through.
Okay.
Thank you.
Um, so now let's, let's look at it right now.
We are away from home basically, let's say, but coming from where we are, um, obviously as
years have gone by, we can, we can say that the conversation of mental health.
Has become a thing and people actually, um, you know, appreciate it a lot more than they
did, let's say, even 10 years ago when we were in high school.
So, um, what do you think is the most important thing to, um, to say when it comes to conversations
where they say, you know what, this mental health thing, um, you are just making it a big deal.
It's not too much of a big deal.
Just pray about it, you know, just forget, forget your worries.
Just do this, just do that.
You'll be okay.
You'll be fine.
What do you think is the most important thing to say when, when people say that?
Who else to go first?
I can say that.
But it's like a, okay, mommy can go.
Oh.
I feel it's just important to let them know mental health is just as important as physical
health.
That's like, you know, you see what people who go through depression, anxiety, even stress,
right?
Like we all go through that with school work.
It's important to like, you know, remind, especially maybe those who are against mental
health, that when you have it sorted or even learn ways to like, um, improve on it, it really
changes your outlook in life and also how you are able to like, you know, function as a human
being.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Um, I agree with you, um, really mental health is also health is it's, it's, you know, it's
an aspect of health.
So there's physical health, which people think is what health is and health is physical health.
There's also mental health, there's emotional health, um, there is spiritual health.
So health is very valid, uh, sorry, varied.
Um, but I guess I understand why people say, you know, um, mental health is, um, mental health
is, um, almost as if it's, it's a luxury, you know, it's like, well, at least from where
we're coming from, it's often viewed as if it's a luxury.
And I understand that because in some, in some ways it is a luxury, you know, you have to
pay for, you know, psychologists and it's not, it costs a lot of money.
You know, so part of changing people's minds is also perhaps looking at systems that have
made mental health feel like a luxury rather than just right, that people have the right
to mental health care.
Um, and I think it, that much of the advocacy has to come from, from top to bottom.
So looking at people who are in charge of systems, healthcare systems, policies, laws, whatever
it is, that is where the work has to start from.
But then there's also the individual work that we all have to do, regardless of our financial
situation, regardless of our circumstances, at the end of the day, it is your health and
it is your responsibility.
Um, so perhaps you can, what you have to do is to first of all, deconstruct the idea that
health, mental health is a luxury or that mental health is separate from health because it's
really part of health.
And, and when you can start, start to sort of understand it in that way, you can try to
find ways in the system to, to support you with your mental health.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Well said.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Um, would you say that your academic path or your professional path has helped to has
helped shape your perspective on what mental care, mental health care is, is that a big
factor?
Yeah.
Yeah.
Sorry.
I like the unison.
Yeah.
Okay.
Well, I'll go.
Um, yeah, no, I agree.
I think it's taken me years to, um, really sort of even, um, understand mental health within
the African or Ghanaian context.
Mm-hmm.
It's taking me a lot of time to understand that it's not a luxury, that it's not a rich
people's.
Problem.
Yeah.
thing.
You know, it's taken me a lot of time and certainly education has helped me tremendously
because now I don't just, I don't just situate the problem within the person.
I look at the systems around them.
Mm-hmm.
And so, you know, in the past I would have said, well, it's all on you.
If you're not taking care of your mental health, it's all on you.
Mm-hmm.
But how can it be all on them when they are in system in place to help them with funding,
to help them with medication, to help them with seeing a psychologist with, you know,
it's, it's all of these systems.
It's really about helping people to see that I understand, I understand where you're coming
from and why you think it's such a luxury or it's so difficult to get mental health care.
But let's think about what we can do with what we have.
Mm-hmm.
Because while we, we, we, we try to push people in higher systems or levels of, of authority
to change the system.
But until then, let's sort of work with what we have.
It's, it's the approach I use now.
Yeah.
Mami, what about you?
Yeah.
Yeah.
Going off Vanessa's point about like accessibility, what people see or perceive about mental health.
Um, I was able to learn about different like techniques while I was in school.
And if I didn't have that experience, I feel I would have not been able to like, you know,
have that knowledge.
And it just reminds me of people who don't like, you know, have that accessibility to, you
know, the vast knowledge on stress management techniques and other ways to, um, you know,
help with, um, mediating any kind of like depressive or negative emotions.
Like one big thing I like is, um, mindfulness or meditating.
Like that might seem as something far-fetched depending on your culture, but it really does
help just to sit down for a second.
Like, and you can even pray if you're somebody who's religious.
So yeah, just the knowledge is, um, one way to like help with that.
Okay.
Thank you both for that as well.
Um, so now my next question is, what do you think about the differences in the approach
in the study of mental health?
You, Vanessa, you're in the UK.
Mama, you're in the US.
How does the, um, approach also, how is the approach, um, important in understanding mental
health?
Do you think that there's a real difference?
Are you, do you mean sort of differences in the way the countries approach?
Yes.
Yes.
Okay.
Well, I'm not familiar with the American system, but I know that to become a clinical psychologist,
um, it's, it's a very competitive process because it's funded by the NHS.
So it's funded by our healthcare system.
So they pay for your tuition and then you're paid a salary because you, you, you do have to
work while studying.
So it's a lot of juggle.
Um, but because it's paid for, it's very, very competitive.
Um, I, I remember you said you wanted to do health psychology.
That one is not funded, unfortunately.
So it's only clinical psychology that's funded in the UK, but forensic psychology, educational
psychology, health psychology is not funded.
Um, so because of that, it's very competitive in the UK.
If you want to train as a clinical psychologist specifically, and because it's very competitive,
you have to sort of accumulate a lot of work experience.
You have to have done a masters.
So for instance, I had two masters because I, you know, that's all the work I had to do
to be able to get a space on a very competitive program.
Um, and then when you're from a minority, it's even more difficult.
Your journey is longer, you know?
So, um, because yeah, I can say a lot about that, but anyway, let me stop myself.
But, um, yeah.
So, uh, and so because of that, um, we have lots of clinical psychologists who are very competitive
in nature who are very perfect, you know, come from a very perfectionist, perfectionist approach.
Um, and, um, the thing about the way we study clinical psychology here is that we're not
restricted to one model or one, um, um, type of therapy.
So we have different types of therapy.
We have CBT, we have EMT, we have DBT, we have CART.
We have, so there are different types.
The difference between a clinical perspective.
You said so many things that I don't know if you could explain those things.
So basically what I said was like, you know, there are different therapies in that.
What I mean is depending on which therapy you go for, um, it, it would affect you.
It would affect the approach in which they treat you because every therapy has a way of understanding
mental health.
So for example, CBT things that the way to alleviate mental difficulties is to think about
or focus on the way the person thinks about the problem, how it connects to the way they
behave and then their feelings.
So it's, it's that sort of thoughts, behavior, feelings.
So that's, that's what approaches mental health.
Whereas for example, um, cognitive analytic therapy approaches mental health in terms of
looking at the way people relate with themselves and one another.
So that it's philosophy is that to alleviate mental health distress, you have to first go
into the person's childhood.
Um, how did that relationship affect the way they came to understand themselves and then
as a result of that, how they relate with other people and understand other people.
So depending on the type of therapist that you see and that, that their type of, the type
of training that you've got, which specific therapy you've trained in, it will affect the
way they view the problem that you come to them with.
And I think that's one of my issues is that a lot of therapists don't disclose which particular
therapy they've trained in.
They just say, I'm a therapist.
Without providing information about, are you a CBT therapist?
Are you a, because the, the, the, the patient or the client needs to know that this is the
type of therapy that the therapist is trained in and then decide, is this kind of thinking
about mental health?
Is this the way I want to think about my difficulties or fair, a different type of therapy?
Doesn't make sense.
So the difference between a psychotherapist and a clinical psychologist or a psychologist
is that a psychologist has training different types of therapies.
Okay.
Whereas a psychotherapist has a training in one particular type of therapy.
Okay.
That's the difference.
So most people confuse the two.
That was the difference between a therapist and a psychologist.
So a psychologist knows more about a lot of therapies.
Whereas a therapist or a psychotherapist has just focused on one type of therapy.
One thing.
Okay.
Okay.
So it's true that your, your academic details has really, you know, put you in a, a more clear
view of what mental health is.
Yeah.
Mame, Mame, were you going to say something?
Yeah.
Um, sorry.
I was listening to the question.
The question, the question, you forgot to the question.
I was, I think the question was about, um, how studying.
How studying, so you also be, how studying in the U.S.
Um, you know, the pathway in the U.S. is.
Yes.
So, um, I joined in psychology my junior year of undergrad.
Mm-hmm.
And then I just went into masters.
So I have more, like, knowledge of, like, what's required there.
They, um, expect you to finish a thesis.
And, um, with your courses, like, they want you to apply theories and models, um, towards,
like, real world, real world applications.
So you, um, so in the beginning, you start learning about different models.
Uh, one big model we learned is the health belief model, theory of plan behaviors, just
all these different, yeah, theories and models.
Um, and I haven't started my Ph.D. by, was, like, um, researching about it.
I know in the U.S. it takes five to seven years, depending on which program you choose.
Mm-hmm.
And they focus more on, like, conducting longitudinal, um, research.
So, like, um, basically research that is going to take over, um, two years or just a long period of time.
Uh, that's why I wanted to take a break before I went into Ph.D. program, because.
Yeah.
Here in the U.S., um, going off of Nessa saying that they want them to work.
I think some programs, like, want you just to dedicate your whole time to finishing, um, your, the Ph.D. degree.
So I know some students have, like, um, conflicts with that, especially with financial, um, with their finances.
Uh, and I think in the U.S. there's been more, um, resources to, like, um, towards mental health.
Um, especially in, like, I can speak on campus for, um, students.
Especially, um, with, um, like, community health clinics.
And also there's a lot of, like, um, sorry.
It's a specific name for it, but, like, basically a mental, um, health counselor services.
Like, they have different ones, um, pertaining to what students need.
So, like, there's a lot of athletes on campus.
They give them mental health, um, services.
They give people services for depression, um, anxiety.
Yeah.
It's just, like, abundance of it.
So that's just, I guess, what I can speak for the U.S. side of, um, psychology.
Okay.
Thank you.
So, um, now I want to understand these.
I want to understand emotions.
Let's, let's bring emotions out.
What exactly does, you know, the study of psychology or mental health tell you about, you know, anxiety, depression, hope, sadness, happiness, all those emotions.
What exactly does the study tell you about it?
When a person is feeling all these emotions, whether at one particular time or the same things altogether.
Um, I don't know if my question is helping you, but yeah.
I can try to answer.
You let me know if I'm going way off, but.
I wouldn't know.
So, um, in the health, in the health psychology track, they focus on the biosocial, social, I can't even say it.
Biosocial.
Biopsychosocial.
Yeah.
Biopsychosocial model.
It's like a tongue twister, but yeah.
And it focuses on, um, physical and mental health with consideration of social and psychological factors.
So I believe like, um, looking at that, it helps to understand people on a different level as to why they, or their, um, interpretation of their behaviors towards like health.
Um, so like one big thing that like we learned in school with social factors is finance, um, where people live at, like their, um, their location or their availability towards, um, certain health services.
People's knowledge.
People's knowledge.
That's also another thing to, um, to consider because some, someone might not know what an insurance, um, plan can cut, um, how it can be useful for them since they don't have like the knowledge of it.
So I like that aspect of it.
Cause you always just think it's, oh, like if you're doing something that's like not good for you, that's the reason why, like, you know, you're having a low quality of life where it's like stuff you can't control.
Like money and all that, that can influence your overall health.
So money is the root of all happiness?
Maybe no.
There's other things to like, you know, that can help your mental health that's outside of finance, but that can be a big barrier for people.
So that's yeah.
Yeah.
Okay.
And just to add to that, I think, you know, in, in America, there's a insurance system.
You know, which we don't have in the UK cause healthcare.
Oh yeah.
You guys got that good.
So for us, the biggest barrier to healthcare is long waiting list.
Like you, you're just going to be waiting for a long time.
It's free, but it's not as quick.
I had that experience today.
It's not as quick, but just to go back to your question, I noticed that you, you, you said, you know, depression, anxiety, hope, sadness, and I was thinking, were you sort of thinking that depression and anxiety were emotions?
Yes.
Yes.
I, I, I, I believe that.
Yes.
Well, no, they're not.
They're not.
No.
Yeah.
This is part, you know, I, I do a lot of work with the fake community and I love my Christians.
I love my religion, but sometimes like when I listened to them speak about, you know, depression and anxiety and they say things like, you know, as you are just deciding to be depressed and you know, God has given you sadness.
And, you know, it's, there are two very different things.
I, I really get upset when people mean sadness and then they say it's depression because the two are not the same.
Sadness and depression are not the same thing.
One is.
Don't they blend in though?
No.
No.
We have depression.
That's like a whole different thing than being sad.
Different types of depression.
So depression is a, is a medical, medical condition.
It's not a, it's not an adjective.
It's not a, a synony or another name for depression, for sadness.
Sorry.
It's a proper mental health condition that is diagnosable.
So you have to be diagnosed in order to, to say you have depression.
And you have to, you have to be experienced a constant decrease in low mood every single day for two weeks.
So it's not like I'm sad today.
I get money.
I'm happy.
No, that's not depression.
Depression is even when the good things come in your life, even when everything is available to you, even when things are going well, you just can't seem to lift yourself.
Like your, your mood is just constantly so low every single minute of the day, every single day for two weeks.
So if by week three, you're fine.
That's not depression.
If by, if by day three, you're fine.
That's not depression.
If by day seven, you're fine.
That's not depression.
It has to be constant for three weeks.
See, so you see how that differs significantly for sadness.
It's not the same thing.
And there are different types of depression, different symptoms of depression.
It's depression that can look nothing like what, like sadness.
Some people are depressed and they're just hyper.
Yeah.
They're impulsive.
There's hypersexuality, drinking, alcohol, and it's a form of depression.
But if we always say that depression is sadness, going to be missing out a lot of people whose depression doesn't look like what we think it is.
You know, it's very important that we get that right.
We, we, we understand the words we're using and we want to sort of advocate for, for, for mental health awareness.
Anxiety the same way.
It's not the same as worry.
Anxiety is so, and worry.
There are different types of anxiety.
So many times.
It's very, you have to be diagnosed with it.
You have to see just, there's a strict criteria in order to be diagnosed with anxiety.
There's social anxiety.
There's generalized anxiety disorder.
OCD is a form of anxiety.
There are different types of anxiety.
So it's not the same thing.
I'm just worried all the time or I'm having a panic attack or it's panic attack is a different disorder on its own.
You know?
So I guess what I'm trying to say is that, um, I just wanted to use that opportunity to like, make it clear that those are not.
Yeah.
Those are medical conditions.
Okay.
Yeah.
But on the topic of, of emotions, um, I really like what you said about the bio social model, because we need to understand that medical conditions are not just an issue of emotions.
Medical conditions are as a result of your biology, your psychology and your social factors interacted.
So you, you first need to have a biological predisposition.
Okay.
So that is the difference between break it down for me or break it down for me.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Teachers.
Please.
Your biological predisposition means that, for example, in your family, there's a, there's a, um, a history of like, let's say bipolar disorder.
Mm-hmm.
You know?
Mm-hmm.
So it means that you have the biological predisposition likelihood that you also get bipolar, but then having the biological predisposition doesn't necessarily mean that you automatically get it.
Mm-hmm.
It is when your psychology and your social factors are so bad, and that's what triggers the biological predisposition.
Mm-hmm.
It doesn't make sense.
Yeah.
So now, two people can go through the same thing, and one will have a mental disorder, and the other person wouldn't.
It's not because the person who gets it is weak and doesn't believe in God, and it's not because of that.
It's because perhaps there was a biological predisposition, their social situation was not helpful, their psychological situation was not helpful, and that brought about the full-blown disorder.
Mm-hmm.
You know, doesn't it?
Okay.
Yeah.
So that's where situations, sort of emotions sit.
Mm-hmm.
They sit in a biological, psychological, and social, like, interaction, if it makes sense.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Actually, Vanessa, that reminds me of when I took a psychopathology course.
Mm-hmm.
We were talking about, like, how social factors or, like, environmental factors can trigger people's, like, people's schizophrenia and bipolar disorder, like, in later years.
Yes.
And, like, you explaining it helped me to understand it more.
Oh, that's amazing.
That's just so funny.
And that's why sometimes-
Mamma, you're welcome.
Thank you.
Yes.
And that's why sometimes people can develop mental health difficulties later in life.
Mm-hmm.
And they're like, where did this come from?
Yeah.
Mm-hmm.
Because then it's just that the situation wasn't as bad enough to trigger it.
Mm-hmm.
Let's say people, I remember there was a time where there was a lot of university students dying by suicide.
Mm-hmm.
And then the story was always, oh, they had a broken heart, and so they killed themselves.
Mm-hmm.
It's most likely that there was a genetic predisposition.
Mm-hmm.
The broken heart was just the situation to trigger that-
Yeah.
That biological predisposition.
Mm-hmm.
You know?
So it was always there.
There was always a-
And that's why, you know, there's this whole, like, don't take drugs.
Because you can end up, if you have a biological predisposition-
Mm-hmm.
To trigger it.
To trigger it.
It can trigger, yes.
There are someone who doesn't have the biological predisposition who will take the drugs and
they'll be fine.
And you'll be thinking, oh, me too, I can take it.
Mm-hmm.
I can take it.
And they were fine.
But then you take it and then-
No.
Yep.
You know?
And then they'll say it's fearful.
Exactly.
Mame fearful is like house people, house witches, quote unquote.
Oh, yeah.
Uh-uh.
Okay.
So I now understand that.
Yeah.
Depression, anxiety, they are not emotions.
And the emotions, basically, they might come out or they might show themselves in our
socials.
Psychosocial.
Psychosocial.
Yeah.
Yes.
I got it.
I got it.
So let me give an example now of a time where I felt sad when my environment changed.
So moving from Ghana to the UK.
And I'm sure you have heard a lot of things that when people move here and they move here
alone, they don't have family here, it can get very lonely.
So there might be days that, oh, I've closed from lectures and I come back to my room.
And I'm sharing a house with strangers.
So I can't even go out and start chatting with them.
So I'm alone in my room.
And so there's a feeling of every time after school, I'm sad.
I'm lonely.
The weather is not even appetizing to say, oh, let me look out the window and see the
bright skies.
No, the weather is also sad.
Okay.
So will you say that or can that be one factor that if I had a biological disposition, this
kind of situation that I'm in will then trigger whatever, you know, bio thing is in mental health
is in my genetic.
Yes.
That's exactly.
Yeah.
It's kind of similar to like Vanessa's example of the students who started like, you know,
going through their personal problems and yeah.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Wow.
Yeah.
Thank God that there's no genetic.
Yeah.
That's a very good point.
Because, you know, same thing happened to me.
I moved to the UK very lonely.
Unfortunately, there was the biological predisposition because my mom was.
Oh.
And so now it's like, I'm also full blown.
Like I have lots of diagnosis and I know it's strange because I'm a psychologist and you have
like, oh, yes I do.
You know, but understanding that it's not just a, a sort of like a, you're not good enough
or you don't have willpower or you're not, you know, resilient enough.
It's a nation of so many things, biology, you know, my, my, my psychology that is, you
know, what, what resources do I have available to me to bring joy, you know, things.
And then my, my societal factors, do I have a community?
Do I stay in touch with people?
Do all these things interact, you know?
So for some people moving to the UK, because they have all of those things, they have community,
they have, you know, they, they, they, they have things that make them happy.
They won't be depressed.
Yeah.
But some people don't have that, you know, and that they might be on the edge of depression,
but what saves them is that there's, there's not that biological, you know.
Mm-hmm.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Okay.
Good to know.
Hopefully I stay in the community.
And you have a community at home too.
Yes.
It, but it does, but lots of people complain about it on social media.
They say, people always say, well, then just come back home.
But it's not, it's not as easy as that.
Okay.
Mm-hmm.
So I guess, so now, and this brings me to, um, um, another question is how do you approach
breaking down the stigma of mental health with your clients or within your community?
Who wants to go first?
Itty, bitty, bitty.
Um.
Mommy.
Sorry.
Cause right now I'm still a student.
Yeah.
Um, over, well, last semester I volunteered at, um, well, I had my internship at a community
health clinic.
Mm-hmm.
And one way, um, I was able to like, you know, um, see different ways to like focus on healthcare,
I said healthcare, sorry, mental healthcare was like, um, diversity and inclusion.
That's like a big thing, especially, um, since my campus has like, um, a big Hispanic population
there.
It's important to make sure like, um, you know, you have a link, you know, knock down that
language barrier.
Um, learn ways that health, um, relates to their, um, their ethnicity or their race.
Cause that's also important.
Like something that we're reading about in the book might maybe pertain more to a certain
type of, um, population versus like our own or, you know, other neighboring ones.
But, uh, I just think diversity is very important, especially in the US.
I feel the UK too, but in the US I can speak for, um, is like what's different.
Yeah.
It's important.
Yeah.
No, I echo everything you said, like you've just hit it.
You've hit the nail right on the head.
Like for me, my work is not separate from, um, advocacy.
It's not, don't separate the two.
You know, I'm not this, um, psychologist trained by white people.
And then I'm coming to my community and be like, well, you know, I'm coming to teach
you all the white things that no kind of psychologist I am.
I'm the type that is always questioning that is always asking.
Okay.
So how do we apply this to people from ethnic minority backgrounds, you know, really glad
that you're thinking about that mommy, because we need a lot of representation in psychology
and in mental health and, and, and the whole, we don't have lots of black psychologists in
the UK.
Um, so here in the US too.
Yeah.
It's very, very important.
Um, and I think for me, just to answer your question about, um, stigma, I, I, I like to
always come from the person's understanding.
So before I can understand, I can do any work on stigma, I need to understand why mental health
is so stigmatized to you.
Yeah.
What does it mean to, to, to have a mental health condition?
What would you lose as a result of that?
Who would it affect if you were to identify with mental health?
Until I understand the person's context, I can then project like, and say, you know,
this is what you should do.
And I don't think that's the right, you know, approach to mental health advocacy.
We always need to understand why is this such a big deal to them?
Take it from there.
So for me, a lot of the work I do, especially in the faith community is to understand what
is the fear about being a Christian with a mental health condition?
What is the fear about being, being a Muslim with a mental health condition?
What is it?
Is the fear coming from judgment from other Christians?
Is it the fear coming from your community or is it like self inflicted stigma?
I want to really understand.
And then there, I offer, you know, you don't have to, whatever they are afraid of losing,
I then offer hope that you don't have to lose that bit.
It's just adding more tools.
So let's say you're afraid that people will say that you're a weak Christian.
Well, acknowledging that you have mental health difficulties doesn't mean not weak.
Rather, it shows how much you need God.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Reframing as opposed to like, that is wrong.
Don't think that way.
No, it's more about, let's think about this differently.
Yeah.
That's how I would do it.
Okay.
Okay.
Thank you both so much.
And now let's talk about some challenges that you have faced.
Um, so mommy, for instance, you, when you were volunteering, what were some of the challenges
that you faced, um, while, um, volunteering?
Um, and Vanessa in your practice as well, what are some of the challenges you have faced?
Um, during my, um, my, oh, sorry.
I said volunteering was my internship.
Um, but yeah, during my internship, I guess challenges I faced was like communication.
I was like the, um, new person in there.
They seem to know each other well, like the other workers there.
So like, I didn't want to like, you know, overstep my boundary, but I also, sorry, it's
really windy over here if I'm breaking out, but, um, but yeah, communication was a big thing.
I had to like learn how to overcome.
Cause another thing too, is I'm, I'm 24 now and a lot of them are older there.
So like, how can I come up to me and talk to someone, you know, that's way older than
me, like as if they're, you know, my age mate, but I had to like get out of that mindset
too, that like, you know, I'm also, you know, there to help out and we're basically working
partners, but that was just, I guess that's the only challenge.
Cause I had a good experience there, but yeah.
With the, with the, with the students that you were, you were volunteering with in the
school, right?
Yeah.
It's a, um, community health education clinic.
So they give free services to students and, um, the school, the school's community.
So anyone who lives there.
Okay.
So, but there, there weren't any challenges or like the students themselves that you were
volunteering for, sorry, eh, interning for, yes.
Like in terms of clients or like people I was working with.
Yeah.
The clients, the clients.
Patience.
Um, there's different, you know, energy.
Some people are like, you know, reserved and others are just willing to tell you any
and everything.
So just learning how to like, you know, apply yourself or respond to them and apply yourself
those types of manners where it is professional, but also like, you know, you want to make
it in a, like have a good connection with them.
Cause some people are scared to like go to receive health services, even if it's free
because like, you know, the fear of doctors or not having a good patient and provider relationship.
So yeah.
Get that.
Yeah.
Similar things for me as well.
I think for me starting, um, on this journey, the biggest barrier for me was the fact that
I was from Africa, from Ghana and I didn't know the system, um, because I didn't go to
their, you know, their secondary school and I didn't really understand the education system.
Um, so a lot of it I had to do on my own.
I didn't know people that wasn't connected to other psychologists to be like, can you read
my application?
I didn't, I just didn't know people.
So everything I could do on my own.
And then you get into these spaces and then you're a black woman who like can talk a lot.
And when I talk, it's like, I get you to think, cause I'm questioning and I'm like, I don't
accept things at face value.
So then you're like, who is this black girl?
And then she has an accent.
So that's also another barrier.
Um, yeah.
So, but you know, I'm here now I'm, I'm doing the doctorate now and it's still not easy.
I think for me, the biggest obstacle is just, it's unbelievable.
But after 10 years, I've not assimilated into the culture and I'm in a very white area and
all my clients are white.
So sometimes they say certain things about British culture and I'm like, I don't get
what you're saying.
Like I do.
So for me, the challenge is I'm not from here, you know, so it's very, it's very difficult
to integrate in that way.
Um, and then again, because most of my clients are white, cause I'm in a white area.
I'm always scared when I'm starting with a new client, because I'm like, what are they
going to think when they see that their therapist is black sent and she's from Africa, you know,
African therapist going to offer me.
So I'm always sort of, I always have that at the back of my mind, but you know, like you
said, like being a therapist is like being a chameleon.
You change who you're talking to.
It's a very relational job.
Like you're in the business of talking and relating to people and studying people and
making sure that you're getting the communication right.
And sometimes in order to have a strong therapeutic relationship with the blind, you need to match
their style in that sense, become a chameleon in that you change the color of your skin
depending on your environment, depending on the client you're talking to.
So the style in which I'll talk to a client changes depending on who they are.
And so in a client, in a day, if I'm going through four or five clients, imagine I've
changed myself so many times.
Yeah.
It's a very tiring relational job.
It's very difficult.
I think a lot of people think, Oh, all we do is just talk to people, but it's not that easy.
It's not just talking to people, you know, and especially as someone with lived experience
myself.
And then sometimes you have clients who are going through the same things that you are
also going through as well.
And so, yeah, those are my challenges so far.
Yeah.
Okay.
Thank you.
So I wanted to ask, um, a technology question because I did my master's in technology law
and I've learned that technology is, you know, it's not even something that you have to learn.
Almost everyone can see that technology is, you know, weaving its way through every area
of law, law life.
So my question is, what, how do you see the use of technology or is technology being used
in the world of mental health?
Like, is there teletherapy, other mental health apps?
Um, what are some of the ways that technology can, you know, merge into mental health?
Um, I think what you said, mental health apps, that's like something anybody who has a phone
or smartphone can be able to download.
Um, I know like one big thing is like Calm in the US.
People like using that.
Calm?
Yeah.
Okay.
I think it's like a mindfulness app.
Um, I don't have that, but, uh, like those type of, um, apps help to like, you know,
it lets someone, you know, able to practice those, um, strategies like right there, wherever
they are, it might be at work, it might be home.
So like this accessibility for it and availability is like really good.
And, um, another thing I want to talk about with technology was biofeedback.
I don't know if you heard of that, um, Vanessa, like with the wiring and all of that, like,
it helps people to like keep track of their stress levels and learn how to adapt to like improving
it.
And when I learned about that in school, I feel like it's something new.
So like, you know, they're still trying to find new innovations of how to like, you know,
integrate technology with psych.
And I think that's important too, because like you said, technology has taken over the
world.
So why not find ways to like help improve, like, you know, on something that we need.
Yeah.
Okay.
We agree.
I think there's been a lot of, um, advancement in terms of making mental health care more
accessible.
Right.
I didn't even know there was something like technology law.
So yeah.
Yeah.
I didn't know that too.
But yeah, you're right.
You know, technology is everywhere.
And if we want to make mental health more accessible, we need to think of, you know, ways
to, to, to use technology to, to reach more people.
So I think if you're looking for skills, so like maybe mindfulness skills or breathing
skills, or, you know, just, um, basic level one, like anxiety management skills or things
like that.
There's lots of apps available for that, but where the mental health conditions are complex.
So like there's things like disability disorders, lots of trauma, complex trauma.
Um, I don't think we need technology for that.
I think it's, it has to be traditional in the sense that you need to see a therapist
that would be able to help you regulate and process those emotions in a, a healthy therapy
way.
Because it, with technology, you're not getting that therapist feedback, you know, it's just
you and a device.
So if it's like, I just want skills to, to just cook in, you know, just cook skills, technology
is perfect for that.
But if you want to like process your trauma and talk about your childhood, no.
But I thought that, you know, some of these apps have like, you know, therapists, you know,
in them.
So you can get access to a therapist over the apps and talk to one, like, like how we're
talking now, you could probably talk to your therapist like that over the apps, or that's
not how they work.
I know there's hotlines here for people who are like, I know it's mainly, um, suicidal,
but like, it can be for any kind of like emotion you're going through or, or, um, disorder
you're going through.
So that's like one way to do like a tele, um, appointment.
I don't know if that's a word, but like, yeah, an online appointment.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Like there are lots of appointments that we offer online.
So you can choose to have sessions online or through a telephone call.
And I guess that gives people like options and, you know, let's say somebody is disabled
and they can't come in person, offering the session online is a best way to do it.
But then you still have that feedback because you're seeing your therapist on screen.
You're seeing your facial expressions.
You're seeing, so you're having that feedback.
Um, in terms of like those platforms, I think it's, it's, it's, it's a way to connect
with therapists.
I don't think it's, it's like maybe like a, it's not like a replacement.
Yeah.
No, is it a sign to find a therapist?
I'm not sure, but yeah, there are crisis lines.
So let's say you're a suicidal and you just need to speak to somebody in a moment.
There are lots of crisis lines you can call.
Um, but in terms of if you want like therapy, like, you know, our sessions, you know, this
kind of things, I would say for the more complex side of things, maybe technology has
a lot of a way to do that in an ethical way.
Um, as of yet.
Um, but we do have like technology for the more soft skills level one.
Um, actually going off of the online, I think technology definitely helped during COVID time
to have online appointments with your doctors or therapists.
But I know other people were complaining, or I felt like, um, resulting in that people were
complaining about not having a job.
Mommy, your sound is going.
Can you hear me now?
Yeah.
Oh, okay.
Yeah.
Um, yeah.
So I think it just depends on the person.
Cause some people didn't like, you know, doing it virtually.
They liked being in person with their, um, therapy.
But it, I feel like it helped me with COVID.
Eh.
Am I breaking out again?
Oh, okay.
It keeps going up.
Okay.
Isn't the wind?
I'm sure it's the wind.
Yes.
Hmm.
It's snowing and windy here.
Like, ugh.
Oh.
So, um, so now we, so basically we're saying that AI cannot take away your job.
Mm-mm.
No.
No.
Okay.
That's good to know.
Okay.
So before we wrap up this session, which has also been very informative, I must say, is
there any other misconception?
Like now you've taught, you've taught me something about, um, the depression and the anxiety,
not being emotions.
Is there any other misconception you would like to clear up to anyone?
Something you've learned during your studies where you, you yourself were surprised.
You're like, oh.
Mm-hmm.
You know, I think what has surprised me so far is the amount of knowledge we need to have
as clinical psychologists.
Mm-hmm.
So we do research as well, but not to the level of PhD, because you know, with PhD, the
three, the whole, the whole of the three, four, five years, it's just research.
But we do research like for a year.
Um, and then we have the teaching and then we, which we have to do essays for.
Mm-hmm.
And then we have the clinical, which we have to go to placement for.
Mm-hmm.
It's a lot.
And we, we cover things like learning disabilities, neurodiversity, healthcare, stroke, fibromyalgia,
um, all sorts of disease.
And it's made me, I think what I'm learning is that psychologists can work everywhere.
Mm-hmm.
Mm-hmm.
That is not just limited to mental health.
Mm-hmm.
And because of that, we don't, psychologists don't just talk to people.
We're, we're people that have stood deep to doctorate level.
Yeah.
Well, most of the, most countries have stood deep to doctorate level.
Yeah.
And so whenever we're offering therapy, it's coming from a place of what we've learned.
Yeah.
What we've experienced.
It's not as simple as we're just talking to you and giving you advice.
Mm-hmm.
And I really want to say this because there's something in the Christian community.
And sorry that I keep bashing the Christian community.
Mm-hmm.
There's something about, I need to see a Christian therapist.
But there's no such thing as Christian therapists.
Mm-hmm.
There's a thing as a therapist who is a Christian.
Mm-hmm.
Yeah.
But a lot of learning we do isn't just tailored to Christian therapy.
It's like, I want to see a Christian doctor because they'll give me a Christian prescription,
a Christian type of medication, a Christian, it doesn't exist.
Yeah.
Mm-hmm.
What people are saying is that, well, I can't go to a psychologist who has different beliefs
because they are just going to tell me their opinion.
And I want your opinion to be a Christian, but that's not what it is.
Mm-hmm.
Mm-hmm.
Of our opinions.
Like when you come to me with a mentor, I can't tell you what to do.
What I can do is help you to give yourself the answer you need.
Mm-hmm.
So, but it's not, we are not trained to tell people, oh, I think you should know.
That's not what we do.
Okay.
So, for the Christian community, if you're thinking, well, it has to be a Christian therapist.
Mm-hmm.
There's no accreditation board for Christian therapists.
So, somebody can get up and say, I call myself a Christian therapist, but who is your registration
body?
Yeah.
Who is thinking that what you're doing is actually Christian?
There's nothing like that.
Mm-hmm.
Mm-hmm.
I want people to be very careful because you can miss out on very good therapists because
you are looking specifically for Christian therapists who will probably end up scumming
you because all they are doing is just giving you their opinion because they are the food
Christian on their title.
You know?
So, we have to be very vigilant in that way.
You know, ask questions when you want to see a fit.
Not anyone who has food therapists in their bio is a therapist.
Yeah.
Ask them what kind of therapy are you trained in?
Mm-hmm.
You know, because they may be trained in CBT.
Different types.
Yeah.
Exactly.
So, ask questions.
Do your due diligence.
Ask them.
I'm a Christian therapist.
Okay.
What makes you a Christian therapist?
What's your accreditation body?
Even as a Christian, what kind of Christian do you subscribe to?
Are you Methodist?
Are you Jehovah Witness?
Are you what?
Ask questions.
Mm-hmm.
Don't just accept things at face value because your mental health care is so important.
You might end up causing more damage if you go to the wrong person.
Hmm.
Yeah.
So, what do you want me to say?
Yeah.
Thank you.
Mommy.
I agree.
Mm-hmm.
Yeah.
It's really hard to agree on, but I want to start with, like, how psychology, there's
so many different specializations.
Oh.
Mommy.
Your sound.
Can you hear me?
Can you hear me?
Yes.
Okay.
Yes.
Yeah.
There's so many different specializations to go into psychology.
So, I feel like that's a great thing, especially if you don't know exactly what you want to do.
Oh.
Oh.
Hehehehe.
Hehehehe.
Hehehehe.
Hehehehe.
Hehehehe.
Hehehehe.
No.
Can you hear me now?
Yes.
Okay.
Okay.
He says you have to hold your laptop like this.
Hehehehe.
Hehehehe.
Hehehehe.
But yeah, I'm really happy about, um, it having different tracks.
Cause, like, I'm on a certain track right now, health.
and i believe also to like going off of what you're saying like it's important that we
oh my god this is like the worst time okay yeah but yeah it's important to just keep
people educated about mental health so that you know um throughout
normalizing
being able to like access
thank you um so i picked up on one thing that vanessa said and which is learning disabilities
and so i'll just like to take us back to um how i think that growing up i feel like a lot of our mates
or a lot of our um this is coming from ghana i feel like a lot of our mates probably had some
learning disabilities but they're probably brushed off because you know we didn't have the knowledge
or classmates will be laughing at the person thinking oh you don't know how to read or you
know you can't pronounce certain words or you are seeing numbers you know just basically we probably
didn't know and so i think that um i don't know if it has really changed now especially coming from
like the basic education if people are actually aware that this child might probably have a learning
disability so how can we help them rather than say quote unquote what boom quote unquote you know you
know uh you do mamma do you know what what boom means
go talk quotes um it means you're dumb yeah i think yeah yeah you know so that's just basically
like my my is it my question or my worry or my yeah i just i just hope that
isn't it's still not the same as it was you know when we were growing up
yeah sorry oh no i'll speak about later on because the u.s side but yeah
yeah no it's still a very big problem at least well in ghana and my mom so my mom is a she's in the
education sector she's a well she she well she she's no longer a teacher she's an assistant head
mistress but she teach she's taught for a very long time even now she still comes to me to say
oh this student has this oh and i'm i'm educating i'm sending resources i'm saying like read this do
this you know still a lot of misinformation people don't understand there's still the tendency to
spiritualize everything you know everything is a spiritual problem everything is you know um so
there's lots of education that needs to happen there's a lot of learning and unlearning there's a
lot of like um i get i guess the people who know better it's going to it get very tiring you shouldn't
stop we shouldn't yeah students that advocated sometimes it would feel like it's not rewarding
it'll feel like people aren't even listening and but the more we know the better we become so that
we can help and teach you know there's no point of learning so much if you can't help if you can't help
yeah yeah so you know those of us who are privileged to have education let's keep on teaching keep on
advocating and not get tired because we have a long way to go and if we we look to the people to say
well they need to change it it's not going to happen best yeah okay mama what are you going to say
no i agree with vanessa like just keeping people educated i think our generation is starting to do
that more especially like you know identifying different um
children who might have like behavioral problems and um i have like certain maybe like certain
they have to take into consideration that they have to be so like knowing how to like you know not
cross that boundary and like learning how to like um learn how to implement um the knowledge of how to
into their um programs and um i think that if we continue to keep doing that
it will definitely help um with improving our knowledge of mental health
you know the funny thing is i didn't break out when i mute when i muted my mic mama's sound go better
so i might be the problem i'll mute myself when you're speaking now okay so now i think i think this is
my last question is my last question actually um is any advice that you would give to students or
young professionals who are looking to enter the field of psychology let me
so i would say that it's a very long journey but it's rewarding um
um don't don't you first need to understand your why you know it has to be um more than self-serving
you know you you you have to do this job because you you genuinely want to serve other people and not
just yourself you know if you're looking for quick money this is not the job for you this this job is about
people listening to people's you know struggles and difficulties and having compassion if you're
somebody that feels like you cannot have compassion and sympathy for people you have a very short fuse
you you're not an understanding person this is not the job for you so you have to do lots of
introspection ask yourself who who am i really what are my weaknesses um am i willing to to to work on
those weaknesses so that i can pursue a career in psychology and so it really starts with you it
starts with checking whether you have the right temperament and you know characteristics for this
job and then once you you you you feel that you can and you feel that you have reasons that are
beyond self-serving then you have to commit to the journey and it's very long but have your community
um i'm going to put myself out there connect with me i'm happy to be your cheerleader along the journey
and but please you know don't be discouraged we need people like you we need more representation
you're valuable to this profession if you decide that it's the best thing for you um so that's what i'll say
yeah thank you mommy i'll muse myself
um i also agree with vanessa definitely um understand the field you're entering because
um with psych like there's so many different ways you can like you know go about like depending on your
interest and i feel it's also important to like you know form a social support group especially if
you're in school because having i can speak from my own experience experience like having a a couple
of friends around to help keep track of assignments projects even meeting new teachers like i met some
teachers that i wouldn't have ever came across if it wasn't for my friends so like just um being able to
like work on your career as well as just um gaining those experiences as a student is important and it's
also important to do your own self-research on like um jobs like for me my master's degree doesn't give
us a license after to like practice but there's other things that i learned that you know through while
i was researching that i can like um apply for after graduation so just make sure you're like um i think
when i said like look within yourself and just see how it applies for you like there's so so many things
to like go from in um the field of psychology okay thank you both so so much for your insights um again if
if you want to change one thing about mental health care or the way that it is delivered would you change
something oh i guess i'm first person um maybe just um towards the availability um for people
because um i guess it varies because in the u.s they're doing a good job in my opinion to like try
to expand it but obviously there's some more work that needs to be done towards like insurance coverage
and like i said like people knowing about it so yeah just to keep pushing it um it to others
thank you yeah i agree with you mommy um i i agree like what i would want to change is to
make mental health more accessible but even more is to have quality mental health practitioners
people who know what they are doing people who are following what they've been taught and not
deviating from it and doing their own thing and people who are committed to giving people um
good experiences not you know being non-judgmental not bringing their own beliefs and stereotypes into
the therapeutic room so i want there to be availability but i also want there to be quality therapists
quality mental health practitioners who do the job very well thank you so so much vanessa and mami for
joining me on this conversation about mental health so today we've covered um what psychology or the
different types of you know what the difference first of all i know that there's a difference between
a psychotherapist and a psychologist and i've learned about the differences between um disorders and
emotions and i've learned about you know the system the way that um it goes in the uk and the way that
it's you know being done in the us as well and and basically the conversation has been informative
insightful and interesting and i appreciate that you spent time to talk to me and my my fans
on this episode so thank you once again do you have any last words for your fans shout outs to your fans
i'm just happy to be here grateful to be here and everyone watching arama's videos yeah oh i made it
so thank you once again so this has been ayuribwa speaks literally and today i spoke with mommy and
vanessa on mental health and psychology what are some of the misconceptions that have been cleared up
today in your mind don't forget to comment what are some of the you know there is inspirations that
you've gained from this conversation don't forget to comment and what are some things that you can do
in your own community or within your friends to enlighten them about um the you know the importance of
mental health or take them away from the stigma of mental health and again remember there's there are
so many things that you can do with your mental health even as you you have your faith you also have
to take care of your mental health because your mental health is still health thank you for joining us
on this episode don't forget to follow the podcast subscribe to the youtube channel follow listen to
the podcast on all your podcast platforms share with your friends and tell them about this very
interesting conversation because it's very important so i'll see you ladies some other time if every
if anybody asks for parts i'll call you thank you for joining me thank you so say bye to everyone bye
