Thank you, Bernard, and everyone for being here.
I really am just delighted to be here with all of you and to explore uncertainment together.
Yaron and Bernard, you've both been in the lounge, but for everyone else, I'll try to
provide some context.
Thank you for introducing yourselves.
I feel a theme building, and I think the way I would personally connect to your introductions
is that I also feel uncertainty moving from the periphery to the center of my experience
over the last couple of years.
And so today I'll be giving a brief telling of that story, and then we'll go right into
the practice together and then wrap up the session with some exchange and reflection and feedback,
and just whatever's alive.
So after we do the practice, I'll ask you for feedback about what our next step should
be.
But yes, I am also experiencing, as Eva said, the real enlivenment of our times.
For those of us, I think that steward and cultivate learning groups, this is an incredible moment
that we're experiencing and participating with.
So to that end, I'll go right into it.
Maybe I'll just make a couple of quick comments in response to Bernard's prompt about the developmental
connections.
As Bernard said, we met through the DDO group founded by Brian Ungard.
He, the late Brian Ungard, who unfortunately we just lost very recently, he, many of you probably
know, worked very closely with Robert Keegan and Lisa Leahy and Kaz Gotts in the context
of the Decurian company.
And for, I think, about a decade, actually, they had a long engagement together.
So the DDO group, that learning organizational service network was an outgrowth of that work.
So yes, I have a long-standing interest in integral theory and developmental models and
cross-model comparisons in the whole world of cognitive development.
I've been, as you all know well, Otto Lasky has a very unique approach to cognition and knowing
and measuring hidden dimensions.
So I will try in my talk to make some connections to knit some of that together and also to provide
maybe moments for us to be in dialogue with about together.
I think that one of the dilemmas that I'm practicing with myself, one of the ways that this is a zone
of proximal development for me is in the role of facilitator.
And I've talked to Bernard a little bit about that.
On the one hand, I want to protect the practice because it's so young and diffuse and nebulous.
I want to resist the temptation to codify it.
And on the other hand, it's important to make some distinctions.
So that's the space that I'm playing with.
And I'll say more about that as I get into the very brief framing that I'll share with you now.
So beginning by taking our cues from the poet and psychologist, Bio Akoma Lafe, this is such
an unusual and punctuated moment as we're all so well aware.
So the Uncertainment Lounge is asking the question, if liminal times call for emergent and counter-normative
practices, what new language and praxis might we cultivate in order to bring forth the uncertainty
curious dispositions that our challenging times seem to evoke?
The poet John Keats called it negative capability, the capacity to kindle states of generative uncertainty
in knowing, being, and doing.
The Uncertainment Lounge takes the form of a twice-weekly virtual Wii space.
And our experiment began in the university context at the Parsons School of Design in New York.
It was a way to cope and to learn together in the novelty of the emerging pandemic.
Personally, I don't know how to do Uncertainment, so this remains a zone of proximal development for me.
Now, in order to foster the conditions for transformative dialogue and practice, participants at the lounge
choose to be with the unknowable and the uncontrollable in real time.
So it's a self-selected group of individuals that find uncertainty not off-putting but curiosity evoking.
Uncertainty then serves as a contextual frame to invite playful engagement with creative tension and ambiguity.
We were basically there to cultivate collective attention around the subtle, nebulous, emergent, and novel dimensions of experience.
So it's not limited to the subtle, but we are extra attuned to the subtle dimensions.
Now, in keeping with what I've just said, by design we don't use any maps or agendas.
In fact, that is the primary rule or agenda is that we don't have a destination, and we're finding that that is crucial to maintaining the vitality of the process itself.
So people are showing up randomly, some people regularly, some people sporadically, and we're there to acknowledge, witness, and stay curious about our own uncertainty.
So, therefore, we, with love, we lovingly forgo the contextual frames that tend to prime our expectations and tend to help us orient toward the familiar and toward the sense of control that knowing promises and that makes knowing so addictive and enticing.
So.
A key social agreement of the Uncertainment Lounge is granting mutual permission not to know, and I would say this relates strongly to Robert Keegan's DDO frame in the sense that the minimum viable condition of a DDO is to opt into a container where we honor
where we honor all, we honor one another exactly where we are and honor that this is a learning experience for everyone and grant that mutual permission not to know.
And I would add another condition is the willingness to recreate the rules and process in real time we we opt into a random assortment of very heterogeneous meaning making.
And we lean into the risk and we lean into the risk that's implied in configuring the rules of the and the boundaries as we go along.
And we're also playing with tracking our real time state experiences while we build a relational social field.
And we, another condition would be, another condition would be orientation toward inquiry rather than declaratives.
So some questions might include how might I participate more fully with the unknowable and uncontrollable in myself.
And under what circumstances am I contracting into a consensus view or a familiar role or a tribal explanation.
And finally, in what ways might being uncertain together help us to enact meaningful, relevant and useful responses to our unique life conditions.
And finally, in what ways might be.
The Uncertainment Lounge has attracted a small intact practice cohort.
So the experience is, as I said a moment ago, very contingent upon who shows up and what they bring in the moment to this ensemble practice.
I'm learning that the random, this randomness really makes the space in the, in the sense that we're not tracking an intact cohort boundary we're tracking the changing rules and patterns.
So there are regulars, as I said, but there's more discontinuity than you might imagine.
We mimic, we bend, we break patterns of interaction.
We notice and sometimes get underneath our biases and our habits.
We negotiate our points of sameness and difference in the gross and subtle dimensions.
And although this is not a sense-making practice per se, it's, I would call it an oblique sense-making practice in the sense that certainties and distinctions happen.
And incoherence may also happen as well as tensions and silences.
Dialogos and a certain non-linear group flow may or may not take place.
Now, what are we learning?
Well, so much, so many things.
So many things.
For one, we're learning that showing up uncertain together is simple but not easy.
It's week to week, it takes a certain willingness of disposition to put my, to put myself and to ask my colleagues and friends to join me in that vulnerable space of revealing and inquiring in real time.
We, because we, because we tend to be educated, socialized, and incentivized to be certain, it's probably no big surprise that uncertainty is actually a very challenging practice.
I'm also noticing that I arise as we are.
So my self-concept, my, the, my, the way I'm defining myself as a process is constantly evolving and the space is helping me to feel and sense and know things about that.
I, as I said a moment ago, I am constantly attempting to resist codifying the practice too much at this time in order to give it enough space to become what is useful.
Some challenges for me personally are the ways that the conditioned parts of myself reflexively orient to pre-existing constructs of what is facilitation?
What is pedagogy?
What is, uh, dialectic?
What can I know?
How can I be safe and maintain continuity of self?
And how can I let go of that continuity of self and enough to be of service to myself and others?
So my habits of certainty seeking and my role boundness to certain identities can sometimes be more, uh, can overpower my ability to practice with agility.
What ultimately or provisionally what's at stake in kindling this collective capacity and why does it matter, especially given that there are, there's such a proliferation of dialogue processes and practices.
I think creating a tight framing of a practice space, um, through the lens of uncertainty may be particularly useful for building capacity to build capacity.
And I think that is, um, the whole conversation around the UNDP goals and the, the inner developmental goals.
This is so key to think about negative capability as a medical, one of several medical capacities without which we won't be able to transcend our current human limitations.
So by confronting the paradox that the ways of knowing that got us here no longer have optimal survival advantage.
Uh, I think that's one of the, one of the ways that we have a breakthrough or seek a breakthrough also by overcoming our reluctance to think together with people.
We are different from in service of meaningful societal change.
And also by extending, as I said, as I just said, extending our capability to be aware and to respond in life positive ways to.
Can our very ways of dialogue and communication and sharing be oriented toward life and life giving.
And by cat, I would add that uncertainment seems to catalyze the latent potential of the group because it's an open invitation to be something that you do not know yourself to be.
So now with that brief, um, framing, I'd like to warmly welcome you all into the practice with.
These are typically our shared agreements and I realized that some people can't have their camera on today due to various things so don't worry.
But I just wanted to share with you the basic shared agreements of the space be present ideally with camera on speak when you are moved to speak.
And please maintain confidentiality of participant identity and it's not necessary to be confidential about the practice itself.
And then the most difficult injunction is to refrain from certainty that's the key practice, which is easier said than done.
So for the next 45 to 60 minutes will collectively practice and then when the time seems right will shift into some form of reflection and will source that here from the group together and.
So, as we begin, we will.
Take a moment here to get present and just to.
Get back in touch with our.
Feelings.
Thoughts.
Feelings.
Feelings.
Feelings.
Feelings.
And sensations.
So have a.
Have a sit back.
Rest.
Rest back into the body.
Take a moment.
Take a nice deep breath into the belly.
Feelings.
Move.
Stretch.
Vocalize.
Find your feet.
Find the stillness of your ground.
Find that part of you that knows.
Find that part of you that is secure and grounded in knowing always already knowing.
Hold on.
ふ
If that's.'s compassion to our community.
angle guests have felt fine when you'll feel good and feel good, it'll give it a moment to because you will know exactly what they need.
honor and appreciate the parts of you that have no idea what we're doing right now
and the parts of you that want to turn off your camera and run for the hills
and just smile broadly into all of your aspects all of your
diversity and complexity
take a moment just to scan
thoughts that might be tugging for attention
feelings perhaps bubbling up
or body sensations
take a moment to think about whether there's anything
uncertain
or especially uncertain
that you might want to explore
or share or put into the space for consideration
and take another deep breath and then we'll begin
begin
you
you
you
you
