Hi, I'm Chris Hedges, and we are here in Salem, Oregon, interviewing Dr. Sheldon Wolin,
who taught politics for many years at Berkeley and later Princeton. He is the author of several
seminal works on political philosophy, including Politics and Vision and Democracy Incorporated.
And we are going to be asking him today about the state of American democracy, political
participation, and what he calls inverted totalitarianism. So let's begin with this
concept of inverted totalitarianism, which has antecedents. And in your great work, Politics
and Vision, you reach back all the way to the Greeks up through the present age to talk about
the evolution of political philosophy. What do you mean by it?
Well, I mean by it that in the inverted idea, it's the idea that democracy has been, in effect,
turned upside down. It's supposed to be a government by the people and for the people and all the
rest of the sort of rhetoric we're used to. But it's become now so patently an organized form of
government dominated by groups which are only vaguely, if at all, responsible or even responsive to popular
popular needs and popular demands. But at the same time, it retains a kind of patina of democracy because we still
have elections. They're still relatively free in any conventional sense. We have a relatively free media. But what's
missing from it is a kind of crucial continuous opposition which has a coherent position and is not just saying
no, no, no, but has got an alternative and above all has got an ongoing critique of what's wrong and what needs to be remedied.
You juxtapose inverted totalitarianism to classical totalitarianism, fascism, communism, and you say that there are
very kind of distinct differences between these two types of totalitarianism. What are those differences?
Well, certainly one is in classic totalitarianism. The fundamental principle is the leadership principle and the notion
that the masses exist not as citizenry but as a means of support which can be rallied and mustered almost at will
by the dominant powers. That's the classical one. The contemporary one is one in which the rule by the people is enshrined
as the sort of popular message about what we are, but which in fact is not really true to the facts of political life in this day and age.
Well, you talk about how in classical totalitarian regimes politics trumps economics, but in inverted totalitarianism it's the reverse.
That's right, yeah, and classic totalitarianism thinking here now about the Nazis and the fascists and also even about the communists. The economy is viewed as a tool which the powers that be manipulate and utilize in accordance with what they conceive to be the political requirements,
of ruling and they will take whatever steps are needed in the economy in order to ensure the long-run sustainability of the political order. In other words, the arrows of political power flow from top to bottom.
Now, in inverted totalitarianism, the imagery is that of a populace which is enshrined as the leadership group but which in fact doesn't rule, but which is turned upside down in the sense that the people are enshrined at the top but don't rule,
and minority rule and minority rule is usually treated as something to be abhorred but is in fact what we have. The problem has to do, I think, with the historical relationship between political orders and economic orders.
And democracy, I think, from the beginning never quite managed to make the kind of case for an economic order that would sustain and help to develop democracy rather than being a kind of constant threat to the egalitarianism and popular rule that democracy stands for.
In your book Politics and Vision, you quote figures like Max Weber who talk about capitalism as in fact being a destructive force to democracy.
Well, I think Weber's critique of capitalism is even broader. I think he views it as quintessentially destructive, not only of democracy but also, of course, of the sort of feudal aristocratic system which had preceded it.
Capitalism is destructive because it has to eliminate the kind of custom, mores, political values, even institutions that present any kind of credible threat to the autonomy of the economy.
Capitalism wants an autonomous economy. They want a political order subservient to the needs of the economy. Their notion of an economy, while it's broadly based in the sense of capitalism in which there can be relatively free entrance and property is relatively widely dispersed,
it's also a capitalist. It's also a capitalism which in the last analysis is elitist as any aristocratic system ever was.
You talk in the book about how it was essentially the engine of the Cold War, juxtaposing a supposedly socialist Soviet Union, although like many writers, including Chomsky, I think you would argue that Leninism was not a socialist movement.
I think Chomsky actually calls it. I think Chomsky actually calls it a kind of counter-revolution. Adam Ulam talks about it as a counter-revolution. Chomsky is a right-wing deviation.
But nevertheless, that juxtaposition of the Cold War essentially freed corporate capitalism in the name of the struggle against communism to deform American democracy.
And just also just want to make it clear that you are very aware, especially in politics and vision, of the hesitancy on the part of our founding fathers to actually permit direct democracy.
So we're not in this moment idealizing the system that was put in place. But maybe you could talk a little bit about that.
Well, I think that's true. I think the system that was consciously and deliberately constructed by the founders who framed the Constitution, that democracy was the enemy.
And that was rooted in historical realities. Many of the colonial governments had a very strong popular element that became increasingly prominent as the colonies moved towards rebellion.
Rebellion meant not only resisting British rule, but also involved the growth of popular institutions and their hegemony in the colonies as well as in the nation as a whole.
So that the original impulses to the Constitution came in large measure from this democratizing movement.
But the framers of the Constitution understood very well that this would mean or at least would jeopardize the ruling groups that they thought were absolutely necessary
necessary to any kind of civilized order. By ruling groups, they meant not only those who were better educated, but by those who were propertied, because they regarded property as a sign of talent and of ability, so that it wasn't just wealth as such, but rather a constellation of virtues as well as wealth that entitled capitalists to rule.
And they felt that they felt that this was in the best interest of the country. And they felt that this was in the best interest of the country. And you must remember at this time, that the people, so-called, were not well-educated and in many ways were feeling their way towards defining their own role in a political system.
political system, and above all, they were preoccupied, as people always have been, with
making a living, with surviving.
Those were difficult times, as most times are, so that politics for them could only
be an occasional activity, and so that there would always be an uneasy relationship between
a democracy that was often quiescent, and a form of rule, which was constantly trying
to reduce, as far as possible, democratic influence in order to permit those who were
qualified to govern the country in the best interest of the country.
And, of course, when we talk about property, we must include slaveholders.
Indeed, indeed, although, of course, there was, in the beginning, a tension between the
northern colonies and the southern colonies.
This fear of direct democracy is kind of epitomized by Thomas Paine, who was very useful in fomenting
revolutionary consciousness, but essentially turned into a pariah once the revolution was
over and the native aristocracy sought to limit the power of participatory democracy.
Yeah, I think that's true.
I think it's too bad Paine didn't have at his disposal Lenin's phrase, permanent revolution,
because I think that's what he felt, not in the sense of violence, violence, violence,
but in the sense of a kind of conscious participatory element that was very strong, that would have to
be continuous, and that it couldn't just be episodic, so that there was always a tension
between what he thought to be democratic vitality and the sort of ordered, structured, election-related,
term-related kind of political system that the framers had in mind.
So let's look at the Cold War, because in Politics and Vision, as in Democracy Incorporated,
you talk about the framing of what Dwight MacDonald will call the psychosis of permanent war, this
constant battle against communism, as giving capital the tools by which they could destroy
those democratic institutions, traditions, and values that were in place.
How did that happen?
What was the process?
Well, I think it happened because of the way that the Cold War was framed.
That is, it was framed as not only a war between communism and capitalism, but also a war of
which the subtext was that communism was, after all, an ideology that favored ordinary people.
Now, it got perverted, there's no question about that, by Lenin and by Stalin, and into something
very, very different. But in the Cold War, I think what was lost in the struggle was the ability to see
that there was some kind of justification in historical reality for the appearance of communism,
that it wasn't just a freak, and it wasn't just a kind of mindless dictatorship, but that the plight of ordinary people
under the forms of economic organization that had become prominent, the plight of the common people
had become desperate. There was no social security, there were no wage guarantees, there was no union organization.
Just like today.
Yeah, they were powerless. And the ruling groups, the capitalist groups, were very conscious of what they had,
and what was needed to keep it going. And that's why figures like Alexander Hamilton are so important,
because they understood this. They understood it from the beginning, that what capitalism required,
in the way not only of so-called free enterprise, but remember, Hamilton believed very, very strongly
in the kind of camaraderie between capitalism and strong central government. That strong central government
was not the enemy of capitalism, but rather its tool. And that what had to be constantly kind of revitalized
was that kind of relationship, because it was always being threatened by populist democracy, which wanted to break that link,
and cause government to be returned to some kind of responsive relationship to the people.
And the Cold War. So the Cold War arises, and this becomes the kind of moment by which capital,
and especially corporate capital, can dismantle the New Deal and free itself from any kind of regulation and constraint,
to deform and destroy American democracy. Can you talk about that process? What happened during that period?
Well, I think the first thing to be said about it is the success with which the governing groups managed to create a Cold War
that was really so total in its spread that it was hard to mount a critical opposition or to take a more detached view
of our relationship to the Soviet Union and just what kind of problem it created. And it also had the effect, of course,
of skewing the way we looked at domestic discontents, domestic inequalities, and so on, because it was always easy to tar them with the brush of communism.
So that the communism was just more than a regime. It was also a kind of total depiction of what was the threat and complete opposite
to our own form of society, our own form of economy and government.
And in Politics and Vision, you talk about because of that ideological clash, therefore, any restriction of capitalism,
which was defined in opposition to communism as a kind of democratic good, if you want to use that word,
was lifted in the name of the battle against communism, that it became capitalism that was juxtaposed to communism rather than democracy.
And therefore, this empowered capital in a very pernicious way to dismantle democratic institutions in the name of the war on communism.
Oh, I think there's no question about that. The notion that you first had to, so to speak, unleash the great potential capitalism had
for improving everybody's economic lot and the kind of constraints that had been developed, not only by the New Deal,
but by progressive movements throughout the 19th century and early 20th century in the United States,
where it had been increasingly understood that while American economic institutions were a good thing, so to speak,
and needed to be nurtured and developed, they also posed a threat.
They posed a threat because they tended to result in concentrations of power,
concentrations of economic power that quickly translated themselves into political influence
because of the inevitably porous nature of democratic representation in elections and rule.
So that the difficulty has been there for a long time, been recognized for a long time,
but we go through these periods of sleepwalking where we have to relearn lessons that have been known almost since the birth of the Republic,
or at least since the birth of Jeffersonian democracy, that capitalism has its virtues,
but it has to be carefully, carefully watched, observed, and often controlled.
Thank you. Please join us for part two later on with our interview with Professor Sheldon Wolin.
Professor Wolin, we were talking about the freeing of corporate capital because of the Cold War from internal democratic restraints,
and that freeing saw corporate capital really make war against participatory democracy, democratic institutions.
Can you describe a little bit what the process was, how they began to hollow out those institutions and weaken them?
Well, I think you really have to start with the political parties themselves.
The Republicans, of course, have never had much of an appetite for popular participation.
The Democrats have had a checkered history of it, sometimes very sympathetic and other times indifferent.
But during the 60s and really even during the 50s as well, movement toward democracy began to take shape with the realization of the kind of voter restrictions,
the most elementary restrictions, the most elementary kind of restrictions on democracy, prevalent especially, of course, in the South,
and especially involving the disfranchisement of African American voters.
So that kind of development and, of course, the attempt on the part of freedom riders and others to go into the South
and try to help African Americans organize politically and to defend their rights created a kind of political context, I think,
probably which had never existed before, in which there were fundamental arguments about franchise, election, disenfranchisement, race,
and a range of related issues that simply called for a kind of debate that, as I say, had scarcely been raised for decades.
And it meant that a certain generation or a couple of generations had had a political exposure that was truly unprecedented in recent American history.
Not only the freedom riders who went down, but practically every campus in the country was affected by it,
not only because various faculty and students went to Alabama and elsewhere, but because it became a standard topic of conversation,
to learn how the movement was doing, what kind of obstacles were being met, and what we could do.
And there were marches and marches and marches, so that it was a political experience that was, I think, as I've said, unprecedented in terms of its intensity
and in terms of the huge number of citizens being involved of a younger age.
And yet, when we look back at the 1930s, what I think marked the so-called New Left was that it was not coupled with labor.
No, it wasn't. No, it wasn't. The 1930s were kind of a peculiar thing. I mean, it shouldn't be simply dismissed,
because it did have lasting influence, because it showed, to some degree at least, that it was possible to get a progressive administration,
that Roosevelt, whatever his failings and shortcomings, had shown that with sufficient popular support,
you could manage to make some kind of dent in the kind of political privileges that existed in the country
and help to benefit the economic plight of most people. And he did make serious attempts.
It, of course, ran into all kinds of problems, but that's the nature of politics.
But I don't think it can be underestimated. The extent to which the New Deal influence spread throughout the society,
I think it had an extraordinary long-run effect in terms of igniting ideas about popular participation and its possibilities.
And yet, it was really a response to the breakdown of capitalism.
It certainly was. I mean, it had its limitations. But I think there's a very real question about how far the country was prepared to go at that time.
It's important to remember that the early 30s, meaning by that from 1932, say, on, was not only a period of New Deal ferment,
it was also a period of reactionary ferment. And that one mustn't forget such things as the Liberty League, and also and above all, Father Coughlin,
Father Coughlin, who was an extraordinary figure, someone who began as a defender of the New Deal and ended up as a bitter anti-Semite,
and had to be disowned or at least throttled by his own church. It had become so extreme.
But there were a lot of things percolating in those years on both sides because I said the New Deal and the liberal resurgence also in effect caused a reaction that I think led to a kind of permanent,
I want to say permanent conservative realization that it had to develop a kind of standing set of its own institutions and foundations and fundraising activities all year round,
not just to wait for elections, but to become a kind of permanent force, conscious conservative force in American politics from the ground up.
And that started when, would you say?
I would say it started with the reaction to the New Deal, which would mean in about 1934.
And so essentially they're building anti-democratic institutions to burrow themselves into what we would consider the fundamental institutions of an open society,
universities, the press, political parties, would that be correct?
Yeah, that would be largely correct, yes.
They did realize that those institutions were porous and that they lent themselves to the influence of money and the influence of the kind of people who had big money.
And so they waged a counter campaign and the result was, I think, a sort of permanent change, especially in the Republican Party.
Because remember, the Republican Party was not a reactionary party in the early 30s.
And even as late as the 1936 election with Al Flandon, who was very much a moderate, and he only won Maine and Vermont, but still, he was significant.
And that Wendell Wilkie was a power in the party until at least 1940, had a very important liberal wing.
So it took a while for the evolution of the Republican Party to becoming the kind of staunch and continuous opponent of New Deal legislation,
with leaders who by and large were committed to rolling it back and to introducing conservative reforms in education,
in economic structure, in social security systems, and so on.
We had spoken earlier about what you term inverted totalitarianism.
When did that process begin?
Would we signal the beginning of that process with those reactionary forces in the 1930s?
Is that when it started?
I think, in the broad view, it would start back then.
I think that it didn't gain full steam until you had those parallel developments that involved such sophisticated public relations powers,
and political party organizations that were round-the-year operations,
that with a conscious ideological slant, and an appeal to donors who wanted to support that kind of slant,
so that politics, while all of those elements had been present to be sure for a long time,
they achieved a certain organizational strength and longevity that I think was unique to that period.
One has to remember that the 1930s was a very troubled political period,
because not only of the New Deal and the controversies it raised,
and not only because of the reactionary elements at home,
but Europe was clearly heading towards some uncertain future with Hitler and Mussolini,
and then the specter of Stalin,
so that it was a very, very worrisome, nervous period that had a lot to be nervous about.
Do you have a theory as to why countries like Germany, Spain,
why Europe went one way and America went another?
Well, I think, I'm sure there are lots of reasons.
One that I would emphasize is the failure of governments in that country
to be able to capture and mobilize and sustain popular support
while introducing structural, economic, and social changes
that would meet the kinds of growing needs of a large urban and industrialized population.
I think that was the failure.
You talk in, I think it's in Politics and Vision,
about how fascism arose out of Weimar,
which was essentially a weak democracy,
and yet you argue inverted totalitarianism,
certainly a species of totalitarianism,
can often be the product of a strong democracy.
It can in the sense that strong democracy can do what its name implies.
In the pursuit of popular ends,
it develops inevitably powerful institutions to promote those ends.
And very often, they lend themselves to being taken over and utilized.
For example, that popular means of communication and news information and so on
can become very easily propaganda means for corporate capitalism,
which understands that if you gain control of newspapers, radio, television,
that you're in a position to really shape the political atmosphere.
You write in Democracy Incorporated that you don't believe we have any authentic democratic institutions left.
I don't.
I don't.
That may be a bit of an overstatement.
But I think in terms of effective democratic institutions, I don't think we do.
I think there's potential.
I think there's potential in movements towards self-government,
movements towards economic independence,
and movements towards educational reform, and so on,
that have the seeds for change.
But I think that it's very difficult now, given the way the media is controlled,
and the way political parties are organized and controlled.
It's very difficult to get a foothold in politics in such a way
that you can translate it into electoral reforms, electoral victories,
and legislation, and so on.
It's a very, very complex, difficult, demanding process.
And as I've said before, democracy's great trouble is it's episodic.
Right.
And that just makes it easier for those who can hire other people
to keep a sustained pressure on government to go the other way.
You talk about how democratic institutions,
which have essentially surrendered themselves to corporate power,
have pushed politics, if we define politics as that which is concerned
with the common good and with accepting the risks, the benefits,
and the sacrifices evenly across the society,
that essentially that has pushed political life to some extent underground,
outside of the traditional political institutions.
I certainly think that there's something to be said for that,
because I think if you look strictly at our political parties
and the national political processes, you get a picture of a society
which seems to be moribund in terms of popular democracy.
But if you look at what happens locally and even in statewide situations,
there's still a lot of vitality out there and people still feel that they have a right to complain,
to agitate, to promote causes that will benefit them.
And this still remains, I think, a strong element in it.
But I do think we're facing a period in which economic uncertainty is such that,
particularly for younger people, in the sense that we don't really know anymore,
with any degree of high certainty, how to prepare young people for a constantly changing economy,
so that young people, in a certain sense, who are the sort of stuff of later political movements
and political support systems, that young people are, in a very real way, puzzled,
and, I think, confused, and sort of don't know where to go
and are being propelled in certain directions that don't really add up to their long-run benefit.
And it starts with, I think, the secondary education and it continues in college.
The plight of liberal arts education is just extraordinary today.
It's just so much on the defensive and so much on the ropes that it's hard to see what, if any,
place it will have in the future.
It's hard to see you in most politics departments at American universities today.
It was probably a lonely position even when you…
Oh, yeah, because most American, most political science departments have become,
in effect, social science departments,
and much more addicted to seeking quantitative projects that lend themselves to apparent scientific certainty,
and are less attuned, in fact, I think even, I would say, apprehensive about appearing to be supportive of popular causes.
It's just not in the grain anymore.
And the more that academic positions become precarious, as they have become,
with tenure becoming more and more a rarity…
Thirty-five percent now positions are actually tenured.
I would believe it.
I would believe it.
I mean, and that becomes the, that becomes a problem in terms of finding people willing to take a certain risk,
with the understanding that while they're taking a risk, it won't be so fatal to their life chances.
But I'm afraid it is now.
Right.
And it doesn't bode well, because it seems to me, in a left-handed sort of way,
it encourages the kind of professionalization of politics that results in the kind of political parties
and political system that we've been warned about from the year one.
And a political passivity, which you say, you talk about classical totalitarian regimes mobilize the masses.
Whereas in inverted totalitarianism, the goal is to render the masses politically passive.
And you use Hobbes to describe that.
Could you speak a little bit about that?
Well, Hobbes is interesting because he's, he writes in the so-called social contract tradition.
And that had been a tradition which grew up in the late sixteenth and seventeenth century.
The social contract position had furthered the notion that a political society and its governance
were the, should be the result of an agreement, of an agreement by the people as to what sort of government they wanted
and what sort of role they wanted to play for themselves in such a government.
So that the, and the social contract was an agreement they made with each other.
That they would create such a system and that they would support it, but they would reserve the right to oppose it,
even rebel against it if it proceeded to work contrary to the designs of the original contract.
So that, that became the sort of medium by which democratic ideas were carried through the seventeenth century
and into much of the eighteenth century, including the American colonies and the, and the, and the arguments over the American constitution as well.
And, and especially, I should add, among the, and the arguments about state constitutions and government.
And, um, that fostering of political passivity, uh, you said in, uh, or have said in your work,
is caused by what you were speaking about earlier, the economic insecurity, the precariousness of the position,
which I think you go back to Hobbes as, as citing as one of the kind of fundamental controlling elements,
uh, to shut down any real political activity.
I think I, yes, I believe that very strongly.
I think that if you go back way to the, uh, Athenian democracy,
one of the things you notice about it is that it paid citizens to participate.
In other words, they, they would be relieved from a certain amount of economic insecurity in order to,
to engage actively in politics.
Well, when we get to our times and modern times, uh, that, that kind of guarantee doesn't exist in any form whatsoever.
We barely can manage to, to have an election day that isn't, uh, where we suspend work and other obligations
to give citizens an, uh, an opportunity to vote.
They have to cram a vote into a busy normal day.
So that the, uh, the relationship between economic, uh, structures and institutions
and political institutions of democracy are just really in tension now,
in which the, uh, uh, which the requirements of the one are being undercut by the operations of the other.
And I don't see any easy solution to it because the, uh, the forces that, uh, control the economy, control to a large extent,
public opinion, um, modes of, uh, of, uh, of, uh, publication and so on,
and, uh, and make it very difficult, uh, to mount, uh, uh, counter, counter views.
Well, in fact, to engage in real participatory democracy or political activity is to put yourself in a more precarious position
vis-a-vis your work, your status, uh, within the society.
There's no question about it. And that, that's true of, I think, virtually every activity. It's now certainly frowned upon an academic, uh, uh, uh, uh,
work and it's certainly in, uh, uh, public education. It's, it's frowned on. And there's no effort made to really make it a bit easier for people to, to participate.
And the, uh, the, uh, intensity that economic survival requires today leaves most people exhausted.
There's, uh, and one, understandably, they don't, they don't have much, if any, time for, for politics.
So we're, we're in a really difficult situation where the requirements of democracy are such that they're being undermined by the realities of a kind of economy and society that we've, that we've developed.
Which you point out, Hobbes foresaw.
He did. He did indeed. And his solution was, you surrender.
Right. You surrender your political rights.
Yep.
Uh, thank you. Stay tuned for part three with our discussion with, uh, Professor Sheldon Woolen.
Uh, you talk in both of your books about superpower, which you call the true face of inverted totalitarianism.
What is superpower? How do you describe it?
Well, I think it's important to, uh, to, to, to grasp that superpower includes, as one of its two main elements, the modern economy.
And the modern economy, with its, uh, with its foundations in not only economic activity, but scientific research, is always a dynamic economy.
And always constantly seeking to expand, to get new markets, to be able to produce new goods and so on.
So that the, uh, so that superpower's dynamism becomes a kind of, uh, uh, becomes a kind of counterpart to the character of the modern economy,
which has become so dominant that it defines the political forms.
I mean, the first person to really recognize this, which we always, uh, are embarrassed to say, was Karl Marx,
who did understand that economic forms shape political forms.
That economic forms are the way people make a living.
They're the way goods and services are produced.
And they determine the nature of society.
So that any kind of government, which is responsive to society, is going to reflect that kind of structure in and itself.
Be undemocratic, be, uh, elitist in a, in a fundamental sense, and be, and have a, uh, uh, have consumers as citizens.
And Marx would also argue that, uh, it also defines ideology.
It does.
It does define ideology.
And Marx was really the first to see that ideology, ideology was a, had become a kind of,
although there are antecedents, had become a kind of, uh, preconceived package of ideas.
And, and, uh, centered around the notion of control.
That it, uh, represented something new in the world because you now had the resources to disseminate it,
to impose it, and to generally make certain that a society became, so to speak, educated
in the, in, in precisely the kind of ideas you, you, you wanted them to be educated in.
And that became all the more important when, uh, when societies entered the stage of relatively advanced capitalism,
where the emphasis was upon work, getting a job, keeping a job, holding it in insecure times.
And when you got that kind of situation, everybody wants to put their political beliefs on hold.
They don't want to have to agonize over them while they're agonizing over the search for work
or worrying about the insecurity of their, their position.
They're understandably preoccupied with survival.
And at that point, democracy becomes at best a luxury and at worst simply an afterthought.
And it's, uh, so that it's, it's future becomes very seriously compromised, I think.
And, uh, when the ruling ideology is determined by capitalism, corporate capitalism, you write,
uh, we have an upending of traditional democratic values because capitalist values are about expansion, exploitation, profit,
profit, the cult of the self.
Uh, and you stop even asking questions, uh, that can bring you into democratic or participatory democracy.
I think that's true, uh, to an extent.
But, you know, I would amend that to say that once the kind of supremacy of, of the capitalist regime becomes assured
and where it's evident to everyone that it's not got a, uh, a, uh, a real alternative in, uh, confronting it,
that I think it's genius is it sees that a certain relaxation is, is not only possible but even desirable
because it gives the impression that the regime is being supported by public debate
and supported by, by, uh, people who were, uh, arguing with other people who were, uh, justified,
I mean, who were allowed to speak their minds and so on.
And I think it's when you reach that stage that you get, as, as I think we have, that, that the, that the,
that the, that the problematic relationship between capitalism and democracy become more and more acute.
And yet we don't have anyone within the mainstream who questions either superpower or capitalism.
No, they don't.
And I think, uh, I don't think it's, it may be a question of, you know,
weakness, but I think, um, I think the problem is really, I think, more sort of quixotic.
That is, um, capitalism, unlike earlier forms of economic organization, capitalism thrives on change.
Uh, it, uh, it, uh, it presents itself as the dynamic, uh, form of society with new inventions, new discoveries, uh, new forms of wealth.
So that it doesn't appear like the old regime as sort of the, uh, an encrusted old fogey type of society.
And I think that makes a great deal of difference because in a certain sense, you almost get it roles reversed.
That is in the old regime, the dominant powers, uh, aristocracy and so on, wanted to keep the lid on.
And, uh, and the, uh, insurgent democracy, liberalizing powers, wanted to take the lid off.
But now I think you get it, uh, as I say, I think you get it kind of reversed.
That, uh, democracy now wants in its form of being sort of the public philosophy, now wants to keep the lid on.
And becomes, I think, increasingly less or more averse to examining, uh, in a, in a, uh, to self-examination.
And becomes increasingly, I would say, even intolerant of views which, uh, which, which question its own assumptions and above all, question its consequences.
Because I think that's what, where the real issues lie is not so much with the assumptions of democracy, but with the consequences and trying to figure out how we've managed to get a political system that preaches equality and an economic system which thrives on inequality and then produces inequality as a matter of course.
Well, in all totalitarian societies, there's a vast disconnect between rhetoric and reality, which of course would characterize inverted totalitarianism.
Well, I guess that's true.
I think I'd probably qualify that.
Because I'd qualify it in the sense that when you look at Nazism and fascism, uh, they were pretty upfront about a lot of things.
Leadership principle, racist principles, and they were made no secret that they wanted to dominate, dominate the world.
So that I think there was a, a certain, uh, uh, kind of aggressive openness in, in, in those regimes that I think isn't true of, uh, of our contemporary situation.
And yet in the same time in those regimes, I mean, you look at Stalin's constitution as a document.
It was a very liberal.
Sure.
Protected human rights and free speech.
And so on the one hand, at least in terms of civil liberties, uh, and we have as superpower exactly, uh, replicated in many ways this call for constant global domination.
Yeah.
Expansion that was part of what you would describe as classical totalitarianism.
You write that the notion of superpower is that it's global.
And that, that constant global expansion, uh, which is twinned with the engine of corporate capitalism, is something that you say has diminished the reality of the nation state itself.
Uh, somehow the nation state becomes insignificant in the great game of superpower, global empire, and that that has consequences both economically and politically.
Well, I think it does.
Uh, I think one has to, uh, treat the matter, uh, carefully because a lot of the vestiges of, uh, of the nation state still are obviously in existence.
But, uh, I think one of the, one of the important tendencies of our time, or I would say not tendencies, but trends, is that, uh, sovereign governments, based on so-called liberal democracy, have discovered that the only way they can survive is by giving up a large dose of their sovereignty.
By setting up European unions, various trade packs, and other sort of regional alliances that place constraints on their power, which they ordinarily would proclaim as natural to having any nation at all.
And so that the, uh, uh, uh, that kind of development, I think, is, is fraught with all kinds of implications.
Not the least of being, uh, not only whether, what kind of actors we have now in the case of nation states, but what the future of social reform is, when the vehicle of that reform has now been sort of transmuted into a system.
Where it's lost a degree of autonomy and hence its capacity to, uh, to, uh, create the reforms or promote the reforms that, that, that, that, that the, uh, that, that the, uh, that, that people and social movements had wanted the nation state to do.
And, um, part of that surrender has been the, uh, impoverishment of the working class with the flight of manufacturing.
Yeah.
And I think it's in Politics and Vision you talk about how, um, the war that is made by the inverted totalitarian system against the welfare state never, um, publicly accepts the reality that it was the system that caused the impoverishment.
Mm-hmm.
That those who are impoverished are somehow to blame for their own predicament.
Mm-hmm.
And this of course is part of the skill of the public relations industry, uh, the, the mask of corporate power, uh, which you write is really dominated by personalities, political personalities that we pick.
Um, and, and, and that has had, I think, uh, I don't know if you'd agree, a kind of, uh, a very effective, has been a very effective way by which, uh, the poor and the working class have internalized their own repression and in many ways become disempowered.
Because, uh, I think that that message is one that even at a very, uh, at a street level many people have ingested.
Mm-hmm.
Mm-hmm.
Mm-hmm.
Yeah, I think, I think you're, I think you're right, uh, about that.
The, uh, uh, uh, the problem of, uh, uh, of how to get a foothold, uh, by democratic forces in the kind of society we have is so problematic now that it's very hard to envision, uh, would take place.
And the, uh, uh, uh, the ubiquity of the, uh, of the present economic system is so, is so profound and it's accompanied by this, uh, apparent, uh, denial of its own reality.
Yeah.
That it's, uh, becomes very hard to find a defender of it who isn't really, uh, uh, doesn't want to claim in the end that, that he's really on your side.
Uh, it's, uh, um, yeah, it's a very paradoxical situation.
And, uh, I don't know.
I mean, I think we, we all have to take a deep breath and, uh, try to start from scratch again in thinking about where we are, how we got there, and what kind of immediate steps we might take in order to, to alter the course that I think we're on, which, uh, which really creates, uh, societies which, when you speak, you speak, you speak.
It is, which when you spell out what's happening, nobody really wants.
Right.
Or at least not ordinary people want.
It, uh, uh, it's, it's a very, it's a very strange situation where, and I think, you know, not least among them, is I think the factor that you suggested, which is the kind of evaporation of leisure time.
Mm-hm.
And the opportunities to use that for political education, uh, and refer as well as kind of refreshment, moral refreshment.
But the, uh, yeah, it's, uh, it's, it's, it's a, it's a really, uh, totally unprecedented situation where you've got affluence, opportunity, and so on, and you have these, uh, these kinds of, uh, frustrations, injustices, and, uh, and really very diminished life prospects.
You agree, I think, with Karl Marx that, um, unfettered, unregulated corporate capitalism is, is a revolutionary force.
Oh, indeed.
I think it's been demonstrated even beyond his wildest dreams that it, uh, yeah, you just, uh, you just have to see what, what happens when a underdeveloped part of the world, as they're called, becomes developed by capitalism.
Just transforms everything from social relations to not only economic relations, but, uh, prospects in society for various classes, and so on.
No, it's a, uh, it's a mighty, mighty force, and the, uh, the, the problem it always creates is trying to get a handle on it, uh, partly because it's so omnipresent.
It's, uh, so much a part of what we're used to that we can't recognize what we're used to as a threat, uh, and that's, that's part of the paradox.
You take issue with this, or, you know, point out that, in fact, it is a revolutionary force, and yet it is somehow, uh, as, as, as a, as a political and economic position, the domain of people as self-identified conservatives.
Yeah, it, it, it is, uh, I think they're conservative on, um, sort of one side of their face, as it were, because I think they're always willing to radically change, let's say, social legislation that's in existence for, for it to defend, uh, people, ordinary people.
Uh, I think they're very selective, uh, about what they want to, uh, preserve, and what they want to either undermine or, or completely eliminate.
That, that's, of course, the, uh, uh, uh, the kind of, uh, uh, the, the kind of way that the political system presents itself, in kind of an interesting way.
That is, you get this combination of conservative and liberal in the party system.
liberal in the party system I mean the Republicans stand for pretty much the
preservation of the status quo and the Democrats have as their historical
function the kind of mild modest low moderate reformism that's going to deal
with some of the excesses without challenging very often the the basic
system so that it kind of strikes a wonderful balance between preservation
and criticism the criticism because the preservation element is so strong
criticism becomes always constructive in the sense that it presumes the
continued operation of the present system in its main elements of both
corporate capitalism and superpower absolutely and yet you say that at this
point political debate has really devolved into what you call non-substantial
issues issues that don't really mean anything if we talk about politics as
centered around the common good political debate has become you know either so
rhetorically excessive as to be beside the point or else to be so shy of taking on
you know the basic problems but you know you again you're back in the kind of
chasing the tail problem the mechanisms ie political parties that we have that are
supposed to organize and express discontent are of course precisely the
organs that require the money that only the dominant groups possess I mean you know
long ago there were theories or proposals being a floated to set up public
financing but public financing even as it was conceived then was so minuscule that
you couldn't possibly even support a kind of lively political debate in a modest way now
politics has become such an expensive thing that it's that I think really the only way to describe it
realistically is to talk about it as a political economy or an economic kind of
political economy it's it's got those it's it was two are inextricable elements now in
in the business of the of the national or state governments too and yet I think you could argue
that even the Democratic Party under Clinton and under Obama while it continues to use the rhetoric of
that kind of feel-your-pain language which has been part of the Democratic establishment has only
furthered the agenda of superpower of corporate capitalism and of course this is the rise of the security and
surveillance state by which all of us are kept in check yeah I think that's true because the
they the reformers have simply hesitated really really hesitated to undertake any kind of
focus upon political reform haven't the reformers been bought off in essence I think it's a no-no
subject I don't think it even has to be bought bought off anymore I think that it it is such a kind of
third rail that nobody wants to touch it because I think there's there's a real inbuilt fear that if
you mess with those kind of fun so-called fundamental structures you're going to bring down the house and
and and if you and that includes messing with them even by constitutional legal means that it's a that it's a it's a it's so
fragile so delicate so this that and the other thing that inhibit all kinds of of efforts at reforming it it's a as a phrase used to go it's a machine that goes of itself so they think
thank you stay tuned for part four coming up of our interview with Professor Sheldon Woolen I wanted just to go through and I've taken notes from both of your books Politics and Vision and Democracy Incorporated of the characteristics of what you call inverted totalitarianism which you use to describe the political system that we
live under live under you said it's only in part a state-centered phenomenon what do you mean by that
well I mean by that that one of the striking characteristics of our of our age is the extent to which so-called private institutions like the media for example
uh are able to uh to work towards the same end of control pacification that uh the government is interested in
that today idea of uh of uh genuine opposition is usually viewed as subversion and so that criticism now is a category that we should really look at and examine
and to see whether it really amounts to anything more than a kind of mild rebuke at best and at worst a way of sort of uh confirming the present system by showing its open-mindedness about self-criticism
and you said that there's a kind of fusion now of and you talk a lot about the internal dynamics of corporations themselves the way they're completely hierarchical uh even the extension of the
extent to which uh people within corporate structures are made to identify with a corporation on a kind of personal level even
and i speak as a former reporter for the new york times even we would get memos about the new york times family which is of course absurd um and you talk about how that that value system or that structure of power coupled with that type of propaganda has just been transferred to the state
to the state that the state now functions in exactly the same way the same hierarchical way uh it uses the same forms of propaganda to get people at once to surrender their political rights and yet
to identify themselves through nationalism patriotism and and the lust for super power itself the uh which we see now you know across the political landscape
yeah no i think there i think that's a very uh a very strong element in fact decisive element in our in our present situation the uh there's been a kind of uh conjuncture
between the way that social and educational institutions have shaped a certain kind of mentality among students among faculty and so on and the media itself
that have uh that have uh that have that are in lockstep with the requirements of the kind of political political economic order that that we have now and that the uh the the the basic uh the basic question i think has been that we have seen the uh kind of absorption
of politics of politics and the political order into so many non-political categories of economics sociology even religion that we sort of lost
the whole uh seems to be unique character of political institutions which is that they are supposed to embody the kind of
uh the kind of the kind of substantive hopes of ordinary people in terms of the kind of present and future that they want and uh and that's what uh what democracy is supposed to be about but instead we have a we have it subordinated now to the so-called demands of economic growth the so-called demands of uh of a kind of uh economic class that's at home with the uh
uh sort of scientific technological advances that are being applied by by industry so that the uh the kind of political element of the ruling groups now is being shaped and to a large extent i think incorporated into a uh an ideology that is fundamentally unpolitical
uh that it's uh it's uh it's uh it's a combination of forces that really wants to exploit the political without seeking to either strengthen it or reform it you know in a meaningful way or to uh or to rejuvenate it it's uh it sees the political structure as opportunity and the uh more porous
the worse it is the better because they the uh the dominant groups have such instrumentalities that they're controlled now in order to do that explanation exploitation radio television newsprint what have you that it can that it that it's the best possible world for them
for them you actually cite nietzsche as saying how prescient nietzsche was i think you may have
said he was a better uh prophet than marx i think if i remember correctly in politics and vision but how nietzsche understood
the disintegration of the liberal of liberal democracy in the liberal class and also understood the rise of
fundamentalist religion in an age of secularism and how dangerous that was yeah he i think that's obviously
i think it's true of him uh and i think it was very very far seeing on his part uh he of course was not a
sympathizer with those development but he wasn't an ordinary sympathizer either with uh with the sort of
historical elites or even current elites that were either uh capitalists or nationalistic as in the case of
of germany uh nietzsche nietzsche was trying to to really retrieve a notion of the value intrinsic value of of of
political life and he found it however only to only uh comprehensible to him in terms of some kind of
dichotomy between elite and mass and that i think was uh the failing of nietzsche because he saw so much
in terms of which in terms of tendencies in our society and culture that were ruinous
to democracy and and needed to be reformed but reformed in a way that would promote democracy but
which nietzsche would inevitably try to turn into vehicles for celebrating or encouraging uh elite formations
and uh he simply could not conceive of a society that would be worthwhile in which elites were not
given the most prominent and uh and leading role he just couldn't conceive it he had the kind of 19th
century sort of hegelian notion that that the masses were ignorant they were intolerant they were
uh uh against progress and all the rest of it he simply like so many very good writers in the 19 19th
century didn't know what to do with with the quote people including marx no no they didn't they uh they
they tried to either neutralize them or try to uh co-op them but they never really tried to understand them
i think the best the best political movement i think which did try to understand them in a significant
way strangely enough was the american progressive movement which was very much rooted in american
history and american institutions but saw uh quite clearly uh the dangers that it was getting into and the
need for really significant reform that required uh democratic means not uh elitist means for their
solution and above all required america to really think carefully about its role in international relations
because he saw that uh that that was a trap that it would that is a uh an aggressive uh dominant role
in economic relations was a trap because of what it required what it required of the population
in terms of their outlook and education and culture and what it required in the way of elites who could
lead that kind of uh of those kinds of formations and uh and i think for that reason he was
uh literally a pessimist about about what what could happen and uh he had nowhere to go he had no great
trust in the people and he had come to distrust uh the elite i think in the end he took a kind of
view that what elite should do is to hunker down and preserve culture preserve it in its various
manifestations literature philosophy poetry so on but he certainly understood what happened when the
state divorced itself from religious authority oh yeah that you you would see the rise of fundamentalist
religious movements in fierce opposition to the secular state number one and number two you would
see a frantic effort on the part of the state to sacralize itself yeah yeah that's true it did try it did try
to do that it did that rather far less in the united states but it certainly did it in germany and
to some degree italy but not not fully it yeah i think i think to some extent the problem that
that nietzsche gets into i think is an overstatement of a position that assumed a kind of a kind of sustained
religious religiosity on the part of ordinary people that i simply don't think was true i don't mean to say
that they became skeptics or they became agnostics or anything of the sort but i do think there was a
slackening and a lessening of religious commitments and a kind of marginalization of ecstasy groups are
you talking about the end of monarchy uh no the the end of uh of of the of the of of really the the
the significant role of religion in the constitution of the modern modern state which would have been the
end of monarchy wouldn't it it would have been the end of monarchy except in a kind of symbolic role
yeah it would have been the end of monarchy i do think that monarchy probably
would always require some kind of sacral element certainly the remnants of it in countries for a while
like spain and greece uh indicated that but um but no it it did undermine monarchy there's no question
about it uh most modern uh tendencies have undermined it and monarchs have mostly been show pieces and
not at much else you also talk about inverted totalitarianism as not only
uh signaling the political demobilization of the citizenry but how it's never expressed conceptually
as an ideology or objectified in public policy what do you mean by that well i i mean by that that um
it it hasn't it hasn't been crystallized in just those terms that it's a that it's it's it's operational
now it's operations is really a combination of elements that have not have not whose uh interlocking
and coherence together have never been either properly appreciated or publicly debated in any sustained
way and i think that uh there's been a sort of creeping quality to it that it becomes more and more
significant as the requirements of a modern economy and a modern education system become more and more
apparent and that but it's never provoked the kind of uh crisis that has led to fundamental re-examination
it's uh there have been critics there have been complaints and so on but it's never opposition
has never really been focused in a way that presented a a serious challenge because it's never named
it never names itself no no you cannot you cannot use that name i mean it's that simple you cannot use
capitalism as a you know in a way that's appropriate you said that in inverted totalitarianism it is
furthered by power holders and citizens who often seem unaware of the deeper consequences of their actions
or inactions what i find interesting about that statement is you you say even the power holders don't
understand their actions yeah i don't think they do i think that's most uh i think that's apparent not
only in uh so-called conservative uh political uh office holders but liberal ones as well they uh
there's such and it's i think the reason for it isn't far to seek uh the demands of contemporary
uh political decision making that is actually having to decide things but in legislation or executive
action in a complex political society so an economic society such as ours in a complex political economic
society such as the world is make it make reflection very difficult they make it extremely difficult
and everybody's caught up in the in the demands of the moment and understandably so it uh it becomes
again a kind of a kind of game of of of of preservation of keeping the ship of state afloat but not really
trying uh seriously to change its direction except maybe rhetorically uh no i think i think it's a i think the uh
the demands of the world of are such now and so dangerous with the kind of weaponry and resources
available to every crank and nut in the world makes it uh makes it extremely difficult for for governments to
to let down the to relax a moment and think about social order and that welfare of the citizens
in some kind of way that's divorced from the uh security potential of the society we spoke earlier
about how because corporate forces have essentially uh taken over uh not only the systems of media but
systems of education uh they've effectively destroyed the capacity within these institutions for critical
thinking and what they've done is educate generation now probably a couple generations of systems
managers people whose expertise technical expertise revolves around keeping the system as it's constructed
viable and afloat so that when uh there's a uh in 2008 uh the financial the global financial crisis
they immediately loot the u.s treasury to infuse a staggering 17 trillion dollars worth of money back
into the system and uh what are the consequences we'd spoken earlier about how uh even the power holders
themselves don't often understand where they're headed what are the consequences of now lacking the ability to
to to critique the system or even understand it what are the consequences environmentally economically in terms of
democracy itself of of feeding and sustaining that system of corporate capitalism or inverted totalitarianism
well i think the only question would be how uh what kind of time span you're talking about i mean
i see the uh the the kind of erosion of those institutions that you mentioned as so continuous that uh that it that it won't take
i won't take terribly long before the substance of them is completely hollowed out and that's what you will get
is institutions which do no longer play the role they were intended to either role of
lawmaking in independent way or criticism or responsiveness to a to an electorate so that i think the uh the
consequences are with us already and are and of course the turnoff on the part of the voters is uh
is just one indication of it but the level of public discourse is certainly another so that i i see it as a
a a process which now is finding fewer and fewer dissident voices that that have a genuine platform and
mechanism for for reaching people i don't mean that there aren't people who disagree but i'm talking about
do they have ways of communicating discussing uh what the disagreements are about and what can be what
what can be said about the contemporary situation that needs to be addressed so that the the problem i
think right now is the problem that the uh the the instruments of uh of revitalization are just really in
very bad disrepair and i don't see any uh immediate prospect of it because
you know coming from within the system coming from within you know years ago say in the 19th century
it was no uh ordinary occurrence that a new political party would be formed and that it would make
maybe not a dominant effect but it would certainly influence as the progressive party did influence
affairs that's no more possible now than than you know the most outlandish scheme you can think of
political parties are so expensive that i needn't detail the difficulties of that would be failed be
faced by a anyone who tried to organize one i think the beautiful example we have today i just think
fraught with implications is the coke brothers purchase of the republican party they literally
bought it literally and they they had a specific amount they paid and now they've got it there hasn't
been anything like that in american history to be sure powerful economic interests have influenced political
parties especially the republicans but this kind of gross takeover and in which the
party is put in the pocket of two individuals is without precedent and that means something
serious it means that among other things you no longer have a viable opposition party and while however
much many of us may disagree with the republicans there is still a an important place for for disagreement
and now it seems to me that's all gone it's now become a personal vehicle of two people
and one god only knows what they're going to do with it but i wouldn't hold my breath if you think
constructive results are going to follow well didn't clinton just turn the democratic party into the
republican party and force the republican party to become insane yeah it's uh it's true yeah i mean it's
true that that the beginning with the clinton administration the democratic party has kind of lost its way too but
i still maybe it's a hope more than a a fact but i still have the hope that the democratic party is still
sufficiently loose and sufficiently uncoordinated that it's possible for a for dissidents to get their
voices heard now it may not last very long because in order to compete with the republicans there will be every
temptation for the democrats to emulate them and that means less internal democracy more reliance on corporate funding
wouldn't it be fair to say that after the nomination of george mcgovern the democratic party
created institutional mechanisms by which no popular candidate would ever be nominated again
oh i think that's that's true mcgovern thing was a nightmare to the party to the party officials and i'm
sure they they vowed that there would never be be anything like it again possible and of course there
never has been and it also means that you lost with that the one thing that mcgovern had done which was to
revitalize popular interest in government and so the democrats not only killed mcgovern you know they
killed the what he stood for which was more important and you saw an echo of that in 2000 when ralph nader
ran yeah and engendered the same kind of grassroots enthusiasm and just as it was the democratic
establishment that uh you know virtually during the presidential campaign the connelly democrats
conspired with the republican party to destroy in essence their own candidate uh you saw the democrat
it was the democratic party that destroyed the viability of of nadir yeah now that's true that's
true the uh the democrats uh i mean it's not it's not surprising because as we've said many times
the democrats are playing the same game as the republicans and have have a nuance and some historical
baggage that compels them to be a little more to the left but uh it seems to me that the
conditions now in which political parties have to operate conditions which involve large amounts of
money which involve huge stakes because of the of the character of the american economy now which has to
be very carefully dealt with and very cautiously and given the declining role of america in world affairs
i think that there's there's every reason to believe that the uh that the caution cautionary attitude of the
democratic party is emblematic of a of a new kind of politics where the room for maneuver and the room for
staking out significant different positions is shrinking shrinking very very much thank you very much
stay tuned for part five coming up of our interview with professor sheldon woolen i wanted to ask
about the nature of superpower and particularly the role of the military in superpower and i thought
i'd begin by asking because the military is something you have personal experience with
your own you were a pilot of a b-24 were these the flying fortresses was that
a bombardier navigator was what i was a bombardier and a navigator yeah uh and in the south pacific yes
and you flew how many combat 51 51 missions
and what was from when to when and what were you uh targeting well we uh our group started from guadal
canal when the americans took it over finally and what we were essentially was the air force to support
macarthur and macarthur's strategy was to proceed by island by island uh taking them back from the japanese
and getting closer and closer to uh japan proper and we were the support group for that which meant uh
softening up the japanese holding island holdings prior to invasion and then the other unfortunate
uh mission we had was to chase the japanese navy which proved disastrous isn't that a novel use of
aren't those like about as maneuverable as a tank in the air terrible we had we received awful losses
from that because these big lumbering aircraft particularly flying low to wow try to hit the japanese
navy and we lost countless people in it countless so and that's what so we we spent that and uh we were
going from island to island making our way eventually to the philippines itself and then i left at that
point had finished my missions and the uh air force was at that point preparing for the invasion of
japan which of course didn't uh actually take place where were you when the bombs were dropped
on hiroshima i was on a road to miami beach to visit my i had my wife and we were going to visit my mother
did you did you at the time recognize the significance of that uh i didn't i don't think
we quickly learned something about it because there were some people i was associated with who
who knew some of the the the men involved in the development of it and uh they they used to tell
me things about uh oppenheimer and the others that especially of course you became uh aware of this
when oppenheimer ran into his own trouble with the un-american activities people well and this is because
he turned on the nuclear program after right yes producing yes the weapon yeah um what from your
own experience because you write about the military and you write about superpower but your own experience
in the military what did you learn from that what did uh it wasn't theoretical for you you were in war
you were in the giant bureaucracy of the military itself well uh you must remember the cardinal fact
which is we were all so young uh i was 19 and the uh other members of our crew there was only one
who was about 23 or 20 24 so we were all extremely you know inexperienced and impressionable
uh and we were you know flying these giant giant bombers and going into combat not knowing anything
about what it meant except you know sort of formal lectures which we might have had so the experience
was always quite traumatic in a lot of ways some of it didn't register until much later but for some of
them some of the people i knew it had registered very soon and we had quite a few psychological casualties
of uh men boys who just couldn't take it anymore now just couldn't stand the strain of uh you know
getting up at five in the morning and proceeding to get into these aircraft and go go and getting
shot at for a while and and coming back to rest for another day it uh it was it was a difficult time
it was a very difficult time and i think the fact that saved us was that we were so young we didn't
know what was going on basically and i think there was a lot of of uh coming to grips with it later in the
lives of most of us that we began to appreciate and realized what we had been through and uh that didn't
help terribly much but it did allow you in some sense to get come to grips with with what it had meant
especially uh the kind of suppressed uh memories you had of bad incidents that that happened how did it
affect you uh did you walk away differently both i mean emotionally and intellectually do you think
from the war the way i became i think as i look back i think i went through a period of being and very
inward uh looking and uh the other thing to be remembered is uh the pace of things from the moment
you got out in my case i had to go back to undergraduate school to finish my degree so i was back for a
year then you jump right into graduate training and graduate education was at that point so
overwhelmed by numbers that everything was kind of compressed and and uh brief and not terribly uh much time
to digest things and then you were scouting for a job so that the uh one had the impression that uh the
pressure that had been building up in the war and the war service just kept on going and that you never
really had a chance to relax because now you were faced with tenure and the problems of tenure and the
problems of publication and teaching so that it uh it exacted a toll it there's no question about it
we never really managed to relax because we i suppose we did relax a bit when we finally got tenure but
even then it was very competitive because the password was publication and so you were constantly pressured
to write and write and write and write and uh uh and you did yeah you did but uh i think i was
fortunate enough in it to enjoy it actually enjoy the writing but for a lot of my colleagues
they would manage it but it exacted a price they it's hard to explain to people how difficult it is
to write when you uh what when it simply has to be forced in a lot of ways well let's see
the difference is you're a writer i mean you're quite a good writer which is not common among academics
yeah i'd always enjoyed writing from the time i was in grammar school to to the time i went to college
uh i enjoyed it very much but uh some of my uh some of my colleagues who loved the subject matter
and were good teachers just couldn't write right and it was tragic because they had a lot to give
and they couldn't get tenure because they hadn't passed this particular bar and you also had
uh so you were at harvard in the 1950s yeah yeah and this was when the academy was being purged
stoughton lind you may know uh driven out of yale uh you know chandler davis and a long list of
great great scholars and academics who were targeted uh from outside and within the academy and and pushed
out and this was something that coincided with the development of your own formation as an intellectual
and as a writer uh and i wondered how that experience also affected you because you held fast to a very
kind of radical critique of well it i mean i had a very peculiar experience when i got hired at berkeley
because i didn't realize when i went there that the position i was taking was one occupied
by by a man who refused to take the loyalty out and he and i didn't know that at the time
and uh so when i did learn it of course i i felt kind of guilty about the whole thing yeah he lost
he lost the job he he quit and uh it was uh at one sense you know you sort of said to yourself well
i don't have to i don't worry about the loyalty oath because i've taken it in the military many many
times so there's nothing new to me but later on you began to think about it more and realize that maybe
there was a a larger issue there than than you thought because it meant that you were accepting a
certain orthodoxy from the outset and that you weren't quite as free as notions of academic freedom
suggested you were and it was it was a kind of rude awakening for a lot of us i think
because you know we also were carrying the the wartime propaganda about we represent the forces of
freedom and and open society and all the rest of it and then to find ourselves really kind of cramped
for expression in that uh very tense kind of postcode a post-war cold war war period it was it was not a
it was not a pleasant time i i didn't enjoy those years of teaching it settled down later but didn't
settle down for much because we then had the fracas of the 60s too which was very disturbing and upsetting
to uh all the academic routines how much damage do you think those purges triggered by the mccarthy era
in the early 50s did to the academy i think it did a lot to uh uh to people almost but often in ways they
weren't quite aware of um it had a definite uh chastening and uh deadening effect on academic
inquiry and political expression and what happened was i think the worst part of it was that once that
got into the air it became normal you accepted those things really unconsciously when you say those things
what are you talking about you're talking about how far you question government policies how far you
question dominant values what you said about the economy and things of that sort and the uh uh the the
problem was that you uh you you faced the students with a with a far less uh critical attitude than you
should have had and it took a long while i think to kind of disentangle yourself from that kind of uh
kind of coverage which the the loyalty of period gave uh to to people and since academic jobs then were
scarce uh you always you know kind of swallowed whatever you had had to swallow to get a job
so you may have been a radical in graduate school or undergraduate school but you knew that you
couldn't carry carry that torch as a prospective faculty member i talked to larry ham who at princeton
organized the anti-apartheid movement this would have been in the 70s and uh he said of roughly 500
princeton faculty there were only three or four yourself included who joined those demonstrations
yeah that's true they paid a price i think the most uh humiliating episode for me was when uh some of
the undergraduates were protesting uh princeton investment in south africa and uh they wanted to
present their case to the to the alumni and the alumni had a meeting and the kids were supposed to
present it and at the last minute the kid who was leading the group got a little cold feet and he said
would you come in with me and i shouldn't i should have said no but i didn't so i went in with them and
i've never been jeered quite so roundly by the by the uh alumni sitting there waiting to be
be talked to by the students about investment in south africa some of them called me 50 year old
sophomores and that kind of thing it was it was a difficult experience but uh the the students did
well they they held their own it was one of the largest at princeton surprisingly one of the largest
student well largely because of larry yeah who's a remarkable organizer and uh very charismatic and
with deep integrity and um and still doing it in newark today um um i wondered whether that experience
says something about the university um about its cowardice um i guess let's say the faculty in
particular yeah oh i think it did i think uh all those events of the 60s on on through the 70s uh did it
it's hard to realize at the outset of the fracas particularly i'm speaking from my experience at
berkeley it's it's really hard to to recognize this the moment when the faculty suddenly realized
that they were a kind of corporate body right that that could stand up against the regions and uh take
a stand when they're when they thought there was interference with academic freedom as there tended to
be with the regions they uh they did kind of mess around with curriculum and tried to influence faculty
hiring and so on it was a very very grim chapter but the uh the effect of it was you know to make you
very very uh very very much on guard against the uh the role of the of the of the of the uh of the uh of the uh of the
graduating graduated graduated students and their uh and their influence in the university because
at princeton you had like at very few other places lots of concentrated money and the university were
dependent on that to to a large extent so that the uh the alumni had a had a kind of position that i
didn't experience anywhere else in terms of the their prominence and i think the uh informal influence
that they exercised over a lot of matters that they had no business dealing with it was a it was an
education in alumni relations the like of which i never had any place else when you came back from the
war you went to oberlin and then you went to harvard yeah many of the academics at these institutions
during the war had served uh in positions of some authority in washington had certainly integrated
themselves into the war effort and i wondered if this if you thought this was a kind of turning point
in terms of academia fusing itself the way business had with the military uh you know in a
way of the military uh you know in a military uh you know in a military uh well i think it certainly
had some influence in the sense that uh i guess one of the things that struck me at harvard in terms of
going to seminars where the professor had been active in washington during the war
was the uh i mean they were always interesting because of inside stories but they were also
really quite uncritical of anything that they either were doing or the government was doing
during this period.
In other words, there was no detachment because they were so, in a certain sense, carried
away by their own experience and their kind of self-assumption about their importance
and so on. I found some of the early years at Harvard experience with faculty to be very
unnerving in a lot of ways. Now, it isn't true of all of them. Some of them, like—I
don't know whether you knew Merrill Feinsod or not, but he was—Merrill was chairman of
the department, but he was a wonderful person. He had been in Washington during the war with
one of the agencies controlling prices and wages. He never threw his weight around or
tried to rely on Washington experience as the answer to all lectures. He was a very good
man and a very, very serious academic. Others, like Bill Elliott, as I say, were just so infatuated
with their own self-importance. I learned absolutely nothing from them in class, and I don't think
any of the other students did. They never came prepared. They always would kind of talk off
the top of their head. More often than not, it would be autobiographical. It just was a
very disheartening kind of experience. I remember when I first came to Harvard in graduate school,
there was a man who taught the history of political theory named Charles McElwain. McElwain was of the
old school. He was a very careful, very erudite scholar with very few, if any, axes to grind. I, unfortunately,
didn't come to Harvard until his very last year there, but I did manage to sit in on some of his
lectures. Well, he was succeeded by another man, Karl Friedrich, who was so infatuated with himself and
his self-importance and his role in the postwar constitutions that were written for the German
states—the provinces—that he could hardly bother teaching you the subject matter and was much more
concerned that you shared his experiences and the kind of role he had played in the postwar world. I have
never seen such a parade of academic egos in my life as that moment when so many of them were clearly
so marked by the Washington experience. Well, I'm wondering if that isn't an important rupture for
academia, going back to Julian Benda's Treason of the Intellectuals, where he writes about how, you know,
it is not the role of the intellectual to formulate policy, to adjust the system, but to stand back with
a kind of integrity and critique it. But you had that combination of the fusion of academia with
Washington carried forward in the 60s under Kennedy and others, coupled with the anti-communism.
And I wondered whether you thought that that was a kind of radical break or a destructive force within
academia when set against the pre-war? Well, yes, it certainly cast a kind of set of constraints,
many of which you didn't really recognize until later, about what you could teach, how you would
teach, and what you wouldn't teach. And its influence was really simply very great because
people, it's not so much what they said, it's what they didn't inquire into.
Well, and also it's who's led into the club.
Yeah. Oh, yes. Yes, indeed. Yes, indeed.
I mean, Chandler Davis, one of our great historians, pushed out of Yale for taking a piece,
going on a peace delegation to Hanoi during the war, blacklisted, gets a law degree. He's still
working on behalf of, at this point, prisoners and workers in Youngstown, Ohio. Please join me for
part six of my interview with Professor Sheldon Wolin.
Um, we were talking about superpower, the way it had corrupted academia, especially in the wake of
World War II. Um, the increasing integration of, uh, academics to, into the power system itself.
Um, and I wanted to talk a little bit about the nature of superpower,
um, which you describe as essentially the face of inverted totalitarianism.
Uh, you, you say that with superpower, power is always projected outwards, um, which is a fundamental
characteristic that Hannah Arendt ascribes, ascribes to fascism, uh, of totalitarian fascism. And that
the inability, um, and she juxtaposes, uh, Nazi Germany with countries like Hungary, so that the,
uh, nature of fascism in a country like Hungary is diluted because they don't have that ability
to keep pushing power outwards. We, of course, uh, in our system of inverted totalitarianism
have been constantly expanding, hundreds of bases around the world. We virtually at this point occupy
most of the Middle East, and I spent seven years in the Middle East. Um, and to come back to America
and have Americans wonder why we are detested, um, is absolutely mystifying because the facts on the
ground, the direct occupation of two countries, the proxy wars that are carried out, Somalia, Pakistan,
Yemen, and Yemen, um, have engendered ISIS and resurrected Al-Qaeda and other jihadist movements
in a way that, uh, is completely understandable and rational from their perspective. Um, so I
wondered if you could talk about what that quality of constantly projecting power outward does to
the nation and to democracy itself. I think in some respects, uh, it, it's pretty apparent what it does
in terms of institute governing institutions. That is, it, it obviously enhances their power and their,
and increases their scope, uh, and at the same time renders them, uh, less and less responsible,
even though we've kept the, uh, the outward framework of elections and, uh, criticism and all the free
press, et cetera. Uh, but the, the, the power is there and it is, uh, it is thanks to particularly to
contemporary technology, it is power that's kind of, uh, endlessly expandable. We, uh, and it's very
different from the sort of imperialism of the, of the 18th or 19th centuries where resources
always had a limit and that, uh, territorial and other expansion was severely restricted by it.
And, but now, uh, uh, expansionism is accompanied by an ability to impose cultural norms as well as
political norms on populations that did not have them. And the, uh, and that has made a tremendous
difference in the, uh, in the effect of, of the imperial reach because it means that you can, uh,
it's becoming easier to, uh, have it rationalized not only at home but also abroad. And the, uh, and,
and, and the differences I think are just very, very profound between, uh, the kind of expansionism of
the contemporary, uh, uh, a state like America and, and those in the 18th and 19th centuries.
Um, what are the consequences? You talk in Politics and Vision about, you mentioned Thucydides and, uh,
and Thucydides raising up the figure of Pericles who warned the Athenian Deimos that expansion,
uh, constant expansion would ultimately destroy Athenian democracy, uh, uh, by,
in essence, bringing back the, um, mechanisms for control, the, the harsh, violent mechanisms of
control of empire back into Athens itself. And that of course is what we have done, um, from the use of
drones to militarizing police forces to the security and surveillance state. What, what are, what are the
consequences, the physical consequences of, of superpower? Uh, you mean particularly upon the population?
Right. Upon us. Yeah. Well, I think, I think what it does is create an enormous chasm between, uh,
the sort of, uh, pictures we have of, or are given of what our system is in high school, grammar school,
even, even college, and the reality of where we are. Uh, it's, uh, it's, I, I think it's that disjunction
that seems to me, uh, so, uh, kind of perilous because it means that much of our education
is not about the world, our world that we actually live in, but about a world that we idealize
and idealize our place in it. That, uh, that makes it very difficult, I think, for Americans
to take a true measure of what their leaders are doing because it's always cast in, uh, in a kind of,
uh, uh, uh, mode that, uh, that seems so reassuring and seems so self-confirming of, of the value of
American values for the whole world. And I think that it's, uh, that that problem is such that you,
you don't really have a critical attitude, uh, in the best sense of the word. I don't mean that the
public is never disgruntled, or the public is never out of sorts. I'm talking about a, a critical
attitude which, which, uh, which really is dealing with things as they are and not with a simple
negativism, but it's trying to make sense out of, uh, out of, uh, where we are and how we've gotten
to be where we are. But it, it requires, I think, a level of political education that we simply haven't
begun to, uh, to, to explore. And I think it's become more difficult to, to, to, to kind of get it,
get it, uh, across to the public because there's no longer what Dewey and others called the public.
The public is now so fragmented and so, so almost comatose in so many ways that it's, uh, that it
becomes very difficult to reach them. And there are so many intermediaries of entertainment and
and so on that, uh, that, uh, the political message even when it's presented, which it is rarely,
as, uh, as some kind of, uh, public-spirited, uh, set of, uh, ideals, uh, just gets lost. It, uh, it,
it's, uh, it's, uh, it's a very, very perilous period, I think, because, uh, uh, I think the net effect of it
is to render the political powers more independent even while they proclaim their, their democratic basis.
And, of course, superpower creates a bureaucracy which operates in secret virtually. I mean, we,
and, and I think that is something that we have seen transferred back, um, that you're no longer
allowed to peer into the internal mechanisms of power. And the, uh, Obama administration has been
quite harsh, uh, in terms of going after those few whistleblowers, people within the systems of power
who have reached out through the press, uh, Edward Snowden would be an example, to allow the public
to see the workings of power. Um, using, misusing the Espionage Act, which was really the equivalent,
I think, of our Foreign Secrets Act, to shut down, uh, this kind of, uh, lens into how power works.
And that is, I think, the disease of superpower itself that has now been brought back, would you say?
Yeah, I, I think that's substantially correct. The, uh, the, the difficulty is, uh, is really so
enormous now in trying to educate a public to, to awareness of what, what is happening when there
are so many countervailing methods of, uh, conditioning and informing that public that are
quite, uh, quite concerned to prevent exactly that. And I think that the, the, the whole, I think it's very
much a question of whether the whole idea of a public isn't in such jeopardy that it isn't,
that it isn't really faced with a certain kind of antiquarian significance and nothing more.
Because the, uh, the public has, uh, I think, ceased to be a kind of, uh, entity that's self-conscious
about itself. I mean, when everybody may vote and we say, the public has expressed itself. And that
in one sense, in a quantitative sense, it's true. But the real question is, did they, when they
asserted themselves or voted in a certain way, were they thinking of themselves as a public,
as, as, as performing a public act, a political act of a citizen? Or were they expressing resentments
or hopes or frustrations more or less of a private character? And I think that it's, uh, that it's that
kind of a quandary we're in today. And, uh, again, it makes it, makes it very difficult to, to see where
the democracy is heading with that kind of, uh, level of public, uh, of public knowledge and, and public
political sophistication. Well, the public is encouraged through the ethos of capitalism to
express their interests. Yeah. And I think it's in Politics and Vision that you speak about how
that fragmentation of the public is by design, that people are broken down according to their
quote unquote interests, not as, uh, a citizen within a democracy, but as a particular group
that seeks to acquire certain rights, power, economic advantages. And that fragmentation,
which is, uh, assiduously cultivated opinion polls become a way to do that. Although of course,
modern public relations do it and campaigns do it, that P that, that rather than speak to a public
in a presidential campaign, you target quite consciously these public relations, uh, mechanisms
within the campaigns will target these fragments to keep them fragmented. Yeah. I think that's true.
And I think that's a, a very significant development where the, uh, I mean, the notion of a public
that, uh, uh, that, uh, that justified describing it as a public. But I think that, uh, that day has long,
long since gone because of precisely what you described, that is the fragmentation of it,
deliberate fragmentation of it, and the, uh, skill with which you can slice and dice, uh,
the public into smaller fragments that are, that can be appealed to while holding that fragment,
uh, in relative isolation from what's happening to the other fragments or to the society as a whole.
Yeah, it's, uh, you can target now in a way that, uh, that you couldn't before. Before you had a blunt
instrument called public opinion and you assumed it, yet you shaped it as you shaped some kind of
amorphous mass into a whole. But that's, uh, that's not it anymore. It's far more sophisticated,
far much more aware of lines of distinction that set one public against another and that you had to
be careful not to, uh, not to ruin your own case by, by antagonizing one public that you needed for your,
for your, for your cause. So that it's, uh, it's become a highly, highly sophisticated operation
that, uh, that has no counterpart. I don't think in, in our previous political history.
It makes Walter Littman look benign.
Yeah, it certainly does. Yeah. I mean, his, his public is still a coherent whole,
even if it's a little crazy. Um, and I think what's frightening is the way not only
the public has been fragmented, but the way that these fragments are manipulated to be turned
one against the other. So for instance, corporate capitalism strips workers of, uh, you know, benefits
and job protection, um, pensions, medical plans, and then very skillfully uses, uh, that diminished
fragment to turn against public sector workers, such as teachers, who still have those benefits.
So the question doesn't become, why doesn't everyone have those benefits? The question becomes to that
fragment, which is being manipulated by forces of propaganda and public relations, you don't have
it and therefore they shouldn't have it. They shouldn't have it. Yeah. And I think that's an example
of what you were speaking of. Yeah, I think that's, uh, I think that's accurate. The, uh, the, uh, the ability
of the, of, of the fragmentation strategy is, uh, is really quite astounding. And it's that we've got such
sophisticated means now of targeting and of fashioning messages for specific audiences and insulating
those messages from other audiences that it's, uh, it's a new chapter. It's clearly a new chapter.
And I think that it's fraught with all kinds of, uh, of dangerous possibilities for any kind of theory
of democracy, which, uh, which requires, uh, I think some kind of, uh, notion of a public
sufficiently united to, to express a will, uh, and a preference that, uh, that, that of what it needs
and what it wants. But if you're, uh, constantly being divided and, and subdivided, it's, uh, it's,
that's an illusion now that, uh, that there is a public. And the amazing thing, it seems to me,
is that the ruling groups can now operate on the assumption that they don't need the traditional
notion of something called a public in the, in the broad sense of a coherent whole, that they now have
the, the, the tools to deal with the very, very disparities and differences, uh, that they have,
have, have, have themselves helped to create. So that it's a, it's a game in which you, uh, in which
you manage to, uh, undermine the cohesiveness, which could, which publics require if they are to be
politically effective and you undermine that. And at the same time, you create these, these different,
uh, distinct, uh, groups that inevitably find themselves, uh, in tension or at odds or in
competition with other groups so that it becomes more of a melee than it does become a way of, uh,
of fashioning, uh, majorities. And this was quite conscious, the destruction of the public. Oh,
absolutely. Absolutely. I mean, again, it's that theme we've talked about, it, uh, they're capable of
doing it now. That is of, uh, of dealing with fragmented publics who aren't aware of their, of their
ties to those fragments. But our, our, everybody feels sort of part of a, of a group that has no
particular, uh, alliance with another group. And the cultivation by the dominant forces
of that sense of victimhood of your group. Yeah. And that victimhood is caused by another
fragment. Yeah. I mean, that of course characterizes the right wing. Yeah.
The reason for our economic decline and our social decline is because of undocumented workers or
because of liberals or because of homosexuals or whatever. Yeah. Yeah. No, that, uh, that's the,
that's a time honored strategy of, uh, really not only divide and conquer, subdivide and subdivide and
and conquer. Well, they were good students of Hobbes, I guess. Yeah. Yeah. Better than they know.
Uh, thank you very much. Uh, stay tuned for part seven of my interview with Professor Sheldon Wolin.
Uh, he is the author of several seminal works on political philosophy, including Politics and Vision,
uh, Democracy Incorporated, and, uh, a book on Tocqueville. Uh, and it's Tocqueville who, I think,
expresses, uh, uh, this notion of participatory democracy that you embrace. And I wondered if
you could explain what that means and set it against, um, um, manufacture, what you call,
I think, manufactured democracy. Well, Tocqueville discovered the, uh, I mean,
he didn't invent, uh, the notion, but he discovered the significance of viable local self-government.
And they, and he insisted that the, uh, that, uh, that a democracy, if it were to avoid the pitfall
of becoming a mass democracy, would have to zealously protect and nurture, uh, these smaller groupings,
whether they be municipalities, religious groupings, or economic groupings of one kind or another.
But that these were the, the major, uh, forces for offsetting the drive of modern power towards
concentration and control. So that the, uh, that was the, the basic, uh, basic, uh, struggle for him
was between these two, these two forces. And he saw in the New England town meetings and in the New
England local self-government schemes, uh, the, the answer to how you kept democracy alive. You kept it
alive locally and that the effect of keeping it alive locally was to dilute the significance
of majority rule at the national level. Tocqueville feared majority rule because he thought it meant
uniformity of belief imposed by the power of the majority. I think he, uh, in a certain sense,
may have overstated that and paid insufficient attention to the rule of, of elites. I think
that, uh, in some of his later writings, especially when they were concerned with France, uh, in the 1840s.
This is the Anxian regime. Yeah. I think he became aware that, uh, that, that, that there were,
was a problem with, with that and that, uh, uh, the, the old regime's system of, uh, corporate bodies
had to be carefully thought through because they could easily be, uh, become simply vested interests.
And the, uh, and so that they, there was a lot of unfinished business in Tocqueville. And I think
it's very important in understanding him that you recognize it.
But I think that his definition of what participatory, participatory democracy is,
is one that you embrace. Yes, it is. And I, I think that the, uh, that the, uh, common thread,
I think we both share, if I can put it that way pretentiously, the common, that we share the, the notion
that, uh, that the problem is centralized power and that centralized power has assumed because of
scientific and technological developments has assumed a quality of menace that it simply didn't have
before. Before it was simply the power of a central government in its army and in its bureaucracy to,
to sort of enforce, force its will. But the, uh, but now it's much more than that. It's the,
it's the ability to shape and direct society in, in a fashion that's much more, uh, of a lockstep
thing than was ever conceived by, by Tocqueville. And this was Lenin's genius and that as a revolutionary,
he understood that. Yes, he did. Yes, he did. And the, it's, it's as it is at the same time,
the tragedy of Marx because he both understood the Lenin point of view, but he also understood
the point of view of, of more participatory kind of institutions. And he, I think he never managed to
overcome that because he thought that revolution required mass movements, mass organization,
and that once you got there, you didn't know what to do with it after the revolution,
except sustain it in certain, uh, institutions. And that the, uh, that the problems of participation
and the kind of experience Marx wanted people to get in running government, in running economic
institutions was becoming increasingly, uh, more difficult.
And what Lenin grasped is that the goal was to seize those centers of power, destroy the Soviets,
destroy autonomous power, um, and, and as in essence, harness that system, which you talk about,
that complex system, uh, to his own ends. Yeah. And to simplify it in doing it. I mean,
not just take it over, but refashion it in a way that was harmonious with this kind of central regime
he wanted. In other words, you didn't just take over, uh, local institutions and, uh, local parties and so
on and so forth, which had their own histories and ideologies and practices, but you reshaped them,
and you reshaped them in accordance with a, with a centralized power system that, that Lenin, I think,
very unfortunately, led towards uniformity, uh, because I, I think he saw or thought he saw that
uniformity was also a key to exercising power in a way that could change a whole society, a way that you
could not do it if you kept recognizing differences, tolerating them, even encouraging them. Well,
he didn't tolerate any differences at all, starting with Bakunin. No, he didn't. He certainly, he certainly
didn't. Um, Adam Lewin in his great book on Lenin Bolsheviks said that the only people that Lenin finally
admired deeply were quite successful capitalists. Yeah, that's right. Because they had accomplished in the
capitalist world what he was seeking to accomplish. Uh-huh. In that uniformity and that complete
hierarchical, uh, you know, repressive and unforgiving system that in many ways just became a form of
state capitalism. Right. Yeah. True enough. You had published, I think it was for five years,
this journal. Oh, yes. Democracy. I see you have the great historian Arno Mayer contributed to this.
Yes, he was on the editorial. Oh, he was on the, in 1982. Um, which must have boosted your esteem and
popularity at the politics department at Princeton? Oh, yes. Oh, yes. I remember once when I was
editing that journal, I left a copy of it on the, on the table in the faculty room and hoping that,
you know, somebody would read it and comment. I never heard a word. No. And during all the time I was
there and doing democracy, I never had one colleague come up to me and either say something
positive or even negative about it. And just absolute silence. What you did, it was five years
that you did it? Yeah. And, and why, why did you see the need for this journal? Well, I saw a need for
it because I thought a couple of things. I thought political theory had to, to justify itself, not just as
an historical discipline that, uh, that dealt with the critical examination of, of idea systems,
but also that political theory had a role to play in, in helping to fashion public policies and
governmental directions and above all civic education in a way that would, that would further
what I thought to be the, the goals of a more democratic, more egalitarian, more educated society.
And, um, I assume that's because you saw within the intellectual landscape that that was not being
addressed. I didn't think it was. I mean, I had respect for the people, especially at the nation
magazine, which I thought was, was trying very hard. Uh, my problem with the nation, I thought was that it
was, I hate to appear this way, but I didn't think its intellectual level was very high. And that mattered
because its arch enemy, the new republic, whatever you may think about its politics, managed to attract
intellects of a pretty high order. And that meant that the, the liberal radical case was being, was not
being presented at its best. And that, uh, that it was, uh, that it was mostly a kind of responsive, uh,
set of, uh, reactions to what, what the government was doing or what capitalists were doing, but had no
coherent idea of what they really wanted to get to in terms of a, of a just and more equal society.
Were you seeking to do what Dwight MacDonald did with politics?
A bit. Um, I, I admired his work. I thought he was a, a real ground breaker, uh, breaker. Uh, and I
certainly, uh, uh, certainly did learn from him about trying to, to do something like this. I think he's
uh, underappreciated. Yeah. And very much underappreciated. He was a little quixotic, but,
uh, You know the great story about him and Trotsky? He, he, he was not orthodox in any of his beliefs,
but for a while he was a member of the Trotskyite party. Um, but of course he kept writing things that
Trotsky didn't approve of until a letter came from Mexico from Trotsky said that, uh, everybody has the
right to their stupid, the stupidity of their own beliefs, but comrade MacDonald over abuses the
privilege and he was expelled. Um, but he did very much what you did and he attracted the kind of
intellectual radical thinkers. I mean, everyone from Orwell to Hannah Arendt to Betelheim, uh,
who were not being published. Yeah. And I know you had written for a while for the New York Review of
Books and with the rise of that neoliberal embrace of what became corporate capitalism, uh, were essentially
dropped from, if we want to call the New York Review of Books, the mainstream. Yeah, it did. A, uh, uh,
it was too bad. I enjoyed that relationship and was, it was a longstanding relationship where I can,
was a contributor almost from the first edition of the, uh, of the, of the New York Review of Books.
The, uh, the, uh, kind of interesting about my rupture with the New York Review of Books,
it came about, although it was probably festering because I was moving more towards the left, they
were moving more towards the center. The rupture came when, uh, one of the editor's friends in the New
York Circle of Intellectuals wrote a book on education. And, uh, uh, uh, Bob Silver gave it to
me, uh, to review for the New York Review of Books. And I thought it was, uh, not a very good book,
and I thought that it was not even a liberal, uh, view of educational reform. And I said so in it. And
he refused to, to publish it. Well, what's so interesting is that the author of that book,
about a decade later, publicly disowned the book because she too regarded it as not really
sufficiently advanced her liberal in its viewpoint. But, you know, that was 10 years later. It didn't do,
do me any good. But, uh, but the relationship was good while it lasted. And I certainly owe
silver's a, a great debt in giving me a chance very early to write for a, for a large audience.
Um, when you talk about participatory democracy in an age of superpower, in an age of inverted
totalitarianism, how is that going to now express itself within that superstructure?
Well, I think it will express itself. I guess the answer I would give is that, that precisely,
it doesn't express itself. I think it's, uh, it's shaped and it's allowed only the outlets that
are conceived to be consonant with the purposes of, of those in power. So that it, uh, it, it's not,
not, not autonomous anymore in any significant sense. The, uh, I mean, we have to keep realizing
how difficult it is to get ideas into the public arena now, uh, for any, uh, significant audience.
It's, uh, it's becoming, uh, you know, more and more, uh, a matter of, of a few outlets. And if you
should, uh, for one reason or another, uh, become, uh, you know, persona non grata with any of those,
those outlets, then your goose is cooked. Uh, there's no other way to go. So that, uh, there's a
kind of, I think, hidden, uh, sort of force. I don't want to call it censorship. That's too strong.
But there's a kind of hidden force that kind of makes you think twice about how far you want to go
in pushing a particular point that is at odds with either the existing notions of the, of the, uh, uh,
powers that be, or are the existing notions of the opposition. Which is called careerism.
It is. And it's a powerful force. It is indeed. Both within the media, within academia. Yeah.
And, um, you know, coming from the New York Times culture, you learn not so much how to lie,
you learn what not to say. Yeah. What not to address, what questions not to ask. Yeah, I'm sure
that's true. I'm sure it's true. I, I used to get a taste of it at, uh, at Democracy even when I was
editing it, that, uh, there were certain taboo matters. Did you look at the Occupy movement as
a form of participatory democracy? I did to an extent. Yeah. I think it had,
I had certain healthy significance. I think it was, uh, kind of under, uh, I hate to sound this way,
but I thought it was under intellectualized in the sense that it didn't express, seemed quite unable to
express its own fundamental beliefs in a, in a kind of coherent way that could, could really, uh, grab the
country, the country's attention. I think, I think it was very strong on tactics and, uh, actions of that
kind and kind of weak in terms of its ability, as I say, to formulate its, in some kind of broad-based
way, its own system of beliefs. But it was at least a place, a physical place. Oh, no,
no question about it. It, I, I think it's been grossly, uh, underestimated in terms of its importance.
And the trouble is when the, uh, when it doesn't get recognized for its importance, it gradually loses
that importance because people forget about it and it's, it's too bad. I mean, memories are so short
these days anyway, but the, uh, uh, the way it sort of disappears and, and seems to leave no noticeable mark
is, is, is a, is a really tragic aspect of our politics today because people sacrificed,
they were thinking and they were trying to, to achieve a laudable end and, uh, they were ridiculed
and, uh, and, uh, abused and so on. It, uh, it, it, it's, and, and above all forgotten.
And the state physically eradicated their encampments.
Yeah, it did. Now it's, uh, it's a bad chapter and I hope someday somebody writes it as a cautionary tale.
Has true participatory democracy become in the age of inverted totalitarianism subversion
in the eyes of the state?
I'm not sure it's quite reached that point because I think the, uh, powers that be view it as harmless
and, uh, they're smart enough to know that if something's harmless, there's no point in sort of
making a pariah out of it. So that I think they, they, I think they're capitalizing on the sort of
short attention span that people, especially people working, have for, for politics and that,
it, uh, that it would soon go away and, uh, run its course and that if they could contain it,
they wouldn't have to really repress it, that it would gradually sort of shrivel up and, and disappear.
So that I think it's been a, I think it's been a deliberate tactic not to continuously engage,
uh, the, the democracy movement intellectually, because that's a way of perpetuating its importance.
Instead, you surround it with silence and hoping, and in the modern age with good reason,
that memories will be short. And you use cliches in the mass media to demonize it. Indeed. Indeed.
Thank you very much. Uh, stay tuned for our final segment with Professor Wolin on revolution,
um, coming up. Um, when you have a system of totalitarianism, in this case, inverted totalitarianism,
when you have effectively fragmented and destroyed the notion of the public, when you have institutions
that define themselves as democratic and yet have abandoned civic virtue and the common good.
Uh, and in fact, harnessed their authority and their power to the interests of corporations,
which is about creating a neo-feudalism, a security and surveillance state,
uh, enriching a small global oligarchic elite, uh, perpetuating the militarization of the society
and superpower itself, which defines itself through military prowess.
Is that a point at which we should begin to discuss revolution?
I think it is, but I think, uh, the proper emphasis should be on discussing it carefully. That is to say,
I mean by carefully, not, uh, timidly, but carefully in the sense that we would really have to be
breaking new ground. And I think it's because of the nature of the, of the forces we've been talking
about that constitute a, a challenge, I think, the like of which hasn't happened before. And that we've
got to, we've got to be very sure because of the interlocked character of modern society that we don't
act prematurely and don't do more damage than we, than we really, uh, than are really justifiable.
Justifiable. Justifiable. The, uh, so that I think, uh, I think revolution is one of those words
that I'm not so sure, uh, we shouldn't, uh, find a synonym that would capture its idea of significant,
even radical change, but which, uh, somehow manages, I think, to discard the physical, uh, notions of
overthrow and violence that inevitably it evokes in the modern consciousness. And I don't have a
solution to that, but I think that, uh, that, that that's required. I think the idea of revolution
simply carries too much baggage and it, it, and the result of that is you're forced to fight,
fight all sorts of rear guard actions to say what you didn't mean because of the, of the overtones and,
uh, implications that revolution seems to have to the modern, uh, to the modern ear. So, uh, I think we
do have to start striving for a new kind of vocabulary that, uh, that would help us express, uh, what we mean
by radical change without, uh, without, uh, simply look seeming to, to tie ourselves to the kind of
previous notions of, of revolution. I think we, I think the contemporary condition is I'm sure Marx
would have been the first to acknowledge is quite without precedent in terms of the concentration
of capitalist power and of the relationship between capitalism and this and the state. It's always
been there, but now we're talking about aggregates of power the like of which the world has never seen
and the like and the world that we have, uh, now come to see is, is, is in the throes of being
integrated by those powers. So it's, uh, I think we, we really have to know when we're being, uh, trapped by
our own language and need to, at crucial points, hold up that language for scrutiny and say, maybe it
needs to, to be rethought in a different direction or need to be modified in a serious way so that we're
really making contact with what the world actually is. And yet in the archaic sense of the word,
it's a, it's about a cycle. Revolution is about coming back. Yeah. In this sense, coming back to
participatory democracy that we've lost. Yeah. Um, and the popular notion of revolution, which you
correctly point out, does not bear much resemblance to the historical reality of revolutions in the sense
that most revolutions, although violence are certainly part of it, most revolutions are finally
nonviolent in the sense that you have, uh, the armed forces in the case of the Cossacks going to Petrograd,
in the case of, in the Paris Commune, where, uh, the national army refuses to turn in their arms and
creates the Commune in 1871 in Paris. Uh, even in contemporary situations, uh, such as the downfall of the
government, which is, uh, the national army, uh, the national army refuses to fight. It is, it is about
converting intellectually, morally, ethically, um, uh, those within the power structure who realize
its decay, its corruption, its repression, and no longer are willing to sacrifice for it.
Well, I'm, I guess I'm not quite certain. Uh, I'm not quite certain in the sense that, uh, I think
your formulation would rely more than I would on trying to persuade the power, the powers that be in
the structure, uh, to change course or modify their behavior and modify their beliefs. And, um, I don't
think that's possible. Uh, or if it's possible, it's not possible on a large scale. There might be
deviants and rebels who would. But I really think it's, uh, to have the form that I think would really
justify calling it revolution. I think it has to be generated and shaped outside the power structure.
And I think because what you're trying to do is, uh, to enlist and educate groups and individuals
who have not had a political education or experience of much, of much of any kind. And so that you,
your task is, uh, is compounded. It's, uh, for those who think the basic problem is just seize power,
you're still confronted by that in that formula with a population that's basically unchanged.
And that you then face the kind of cruel choices of forcing them to change so that they can support
your structure. So that the, the, the real, I think really difficult challenge is to accompany the,
the attempt to gain power with an equally strong emphasis on public education that, that makes it,
so to speak, uh, uh, a potentially responsible repository of that power.
I would totally agree that it has to be formed outside of power. Um, but I'm wondering whether
once you can create a revolutionary ideology and a force that, uh, contests power, um,
one of the secrets to revolutionary success is that that message, which is what Václav Havel would
call living in truth, the, the, the, that, that message, once it penetrates the lower levels of
power, and I'm thinking of like the police or the case, those foot soldiers that are tasked with
protecting an elite that they may very well view as venal, whether that can create,
or are in revolutionary society creates enough paralysis within the structures of power that you
can bring it down. And I covered the fall of East Germany, uh, where in, uh, the fall of, uh, 1989,
Eric Honecker, who had been in power for 19 years as the dictator, sent down an elite paratroop division
to Leipzig, uh, because at that point they had 70,000 people massing in the streets. And when that,
uh, paratroop division refused to fire on the crowd, the whole apparatus of the Stasi state crumbled,
almost, you know, at such a dizzying speed, none of us could keep track of it. And Honecker was out of
power within a week. So I'm asking whether that you're, I, I think you're right, of course, that all
of those revolutionary forces have to be formed outside of the structures of power, but whether
finally in some sense appealing, if you want to call it to the conscience of those at the low level,
though people who are like the Cossacks who come in and are told to quell the bread riots
and instead fraternize with the crowds, whether, um, that is in your eyes, you know, a, a kind of
fundamental moment by which a power elite can be removed.
I think there, uh, I think there's something very much to be said for that. Uh, and of course,
uh, one wants to avoid apocalyptic notions. But, um, I think what, what we're dealing with is the
ability of, uh, of Democrats, small d, to sustain the kind of political education in such a way that you
concentrate upon those lower echelons of power and get them to, to sit, to think differently
about their role. It's a very touchy subject because it, uh, it leads you open to accusations
of promoting disloyalty among the police say, or among the army or what have you. And in a sense,
that's true. But I think that nonetheless, without trying to, so to speak, ballsy, uh, subvert, uh,
those, uh, the, the role of those powers in, in society, it is possible to, to reach them and to
create a climate where they themselves have to come to grips with it. And, uh, and I think that's, uh,
that's a task that's arduous and it's difficult and it's even a little, uh, a little dangerous
in, in our present age. Would you, if you look at those revolutionary philosophers, we could
perhaps even include Plato, um, they always talk about the creation of an elite, what Lenin would
call a revolutionary vanguard, Machiavelli would call his republican conspirators, Calvin would call his
saints. Um, do you see that as, as a fundamental component of revolution?
To some extent I do. I, I would want to of course, uh, naturally avoid words like elite,
but I do think given the way that ordinary people become exhausted by the simple task of living,
working and trying to sustain families and neighborhoods, uh, in a way that just takes all
of their energy. I do think it calls for some kind of group or class, you could even call them,
who would undertake the kind of, uh, continuous political work of educating, criticizing, trying to
bring pressure to bear, and, and working towards a revamping of, of political institutions. And I don't
think it, uh, I think, I don't mean to imply that there should be no, that there should be a disconnect
between that group and ordinary people. I do think it requires that you recognize that such a group is
necessary. And that the second task is to make sure that there are open lines of communication, of
contact, of, uh, of meetings between leaders and, and, and the, and the people such that, uh, there's never a
sense of estrangement or alienation such that the, uh, that's that leading groups, uh, feel they're free
to pursue the good as they see it and for the good of the masses who do not.
Do you worry about Bakunin's critique of the Bolsheviks that once that power is the problem and
that once these people who may be very well intentioned, Trotsky would be an example of
pre-revolutionary Trotsky, post-revolutionary Trotsky, at least in his writings was very democratic.
Once in power, he was Lenin's iron fist. Um, and, and I wonder whether Bakunin's not right that
powers the problem in that sense and, and creating an elite is a very dangerous move or a vanguard or
whatever. I think it is. And I think that the, I think our situations are somewhat different from
what, uh, Trotsky and the others faced in the sense that, uh, there are openings in our system of
governance and of, uh, public discourse that make it that do provide an opportunity if you're willing
to work hard enough to get dissident voices out into the, to the public realm. And that, uh, so that
the, the need for forced violence and so on, it seems to me is, is so, is simply unnecessary.
That, uh, that, that, that as long as we have, you know, constitutional guarantees that mean,
still mean something and that we have free, free forms of communication that still mean something.
I think that we're obligated to, to play by those rules because they do allow us to, to disseminate the
kind of message we want, want to disseminate. And, uh, and that, uh, the need to sort of circumvent them or
so in some sense subvert them, it seems to me is self-defeating.
And yet climate change has created a, a narrowing window of opportunity if we are going to survive
as a species and unfettered, unregulated corporate capitalism, which commodifies everything from human
beings to the natural world. And this comes out of Marx will, without any kind of constraints and
it has no self-imposed limits, it will, it will, it will exploit those forces until exhaustion or collapse.
And we are now seeing the ecosystem itself teetering on collapse.
No, no, it's true. Uh, and I think, but I don't think, uh, I don't really see any other solution
than to, than to really put your, your chips where, where an enlightened public would be,
would, would take a stand. And I think, I think the problem to some extent is that
there are enlightened publics in this country, but there's no concerted general movement which can,
which can, which can profess to, to represent a large body of opinion that's opposed to these kind
of developments you just, you just described. And I think, I think it's the, it's a certain lack of
organization, not in the sense of following previous, uh, uh, prescriptions of organization,
but of trying to find methods whereby power, ordinary people and their power can be brought to bear
in ways that will deter and dissuade, uh, those who are, uh, in a position to, to, to influence these
decisions. Because time, as we all know, is running out. And, uh, and, and that if it, uh, we continue
along the same course, I'm afraid the solution, I mean, the result is not simply going to be, uh,
environmental disaster. It's also going to, I think, feed the, in an unhealthy way,
it will feed a, an outcry for really forceful government. Right. And, uh, and, uh, not in a
necessarily democratic way. And yet, if we don't respond, it is, in essence, collective suicide.
It is. It is indeed. Now, Weber has a very bleak view of, in the age of bureaucracy. Yeah. And what he,
he actually talks about the banishment of mystery. Um, and as a former theologian, that is really the
banishment of the sacred. Nothing has an intrinsic value. Everything only has a monetary value. Weber,
like Rawls, is scathing about allowing a capitalist class to even ever assume power. Um, and Weber
writes in Politics as a Vocation, which you cite in Politics and Vision, that
the very figure that he holds up as a political hero, who resembles the classical hero, is some way,
uh, and, and holds onto civic virtue, can never overcome what the Greeks would call Fortuna. And
that finally, uh, you, you live in a world where, um, you have the necessary passion, uh, of those who
would carry the common good within them, thrown up against this massive monolith, this impersonal
monolith of bureaucracy. Um, and I wonder if, uh, and, and because that is the reality, a reality that,
uh, in many ways, Weber discovered. Um, and, and, and he, like, I think if you go back to classical
writers like Augustine, uh, would argue, and you know Weber better than I, but would argue that in
some sense, or at least my reading of it is that in some sense, he's calling for those of us who
care about the common good and civic virtue to stand up in the face of a very bleak reality.
And, uh, again, Augustine would do this while saying that in the end, you can never create
the kingdom of God city of, you know, the city of man, city of God. Um, and yet it finally becomes
just a moral imperative, whether you can actually succeed or not succeed. Uh, I don't know if Weber,
if that's fair characterization of Weber is not really the question. The question is how do you retain
your own moral integrity in the face of these horrifically destructive forces? Um, and in some
ways the question is not, can we succeed? And, and I, reading Weber, I think in some ways he would say
you probably can't, but that you must resist anyway. I, I think that's a fair reading of, of him. I think
that, uh, that for Weber, the, uh, the truly, uh, important civic virtues were just, uh, exactly the ones
that would assert themselves at a time when basic, uh, uh, institutional values were at stake and human
values were at stake. And that, uh, you, you don't win or you win rarely. And if you win, it's often for
a very short time. And that the, the whole, that, that, that that's why politics is a vocation for, for
Weber. It's not an occasional, uh, undertaking that we assume every two years or every four years when
there's an election. It's a, it's a constant occupation and, and preoccupation. And the, the problem
as Weber saw it was to understand it not as a partisan kind of education, uh, in the, in the politicians
or political party sense, but as in the, the broad understanding of what political life should be
and what is required to make it, uh, sustainable. And so that he's, he's calling for a certain kind of
understanding that's, uh, that's very different from what we think about when we associate political
understanding with how do you vote or what party do you support or what cause do you support.
Weber is asking us to step back and say, what kind of political order and the values associated
with it that it promotes are we willing to, to really give a lot for including sacrifice.
And I think that it's, uh, it's that distinction between the, the temporary and the transient
and what's truly of more enduring significance that sets Weber off against the, uh, the group he hated,
the relativists. He's calling us to a life of meaning.
Yeah. Yeah.
Which you have exemplified.
Yeah.
Well, thank you very much.
My pleasure.
Professor Roland, it's been a tremendous honor. You're, uh, I've had a tremendous influence on
myself and many other, Cornell West and many, many others. And, uh, not only because of the, uh,
power of your intellect, but the power of your integrity.
Well, thank you. I've enjoyed it very much. And I thank you for the opportunity to talk.
Thanks.
Thanks.
