Hello and welcome to the Dr. Aya Safi podcast. Today I am thrilled to welcome Professor Tony Myers from Birmingham Newman University, who is a leading authority at the intersection of data analysis, artificial intelligence and education.
Tony is interested in how AI tools can level the playing field between students with abundant resources, including the support networks and those facing disadvantages. His work addresses the crucial question, how can we ensure technological advancement creates more opportunities rather than widening existing divides.
Today, Tony and I will be exploring how the using of AI can help close the educational attainment gap. Professor Tony Myers, thank you so much for joining me today.
It's my pleasure, Safi. Thank you very much for inviting me. It's great.
Thank you. Tony, I remember my days when I was at Newman University. You're a student at both undergraduate level, but also doing my master's and you supervised me
for my dissertation as well. And every time we had some sort of whatever issue we used to have, whether that's a dissertation related or any other subject related, we used to come and knock a newer door.
And especially with statistics as well. Now, the advancement of AI is increasing and becoming more prevalent. And so, so many people are using it.
I want to kind of understand how did you first became interested in the intersection of AI and the educational equity as a whole?
Well, I guess it's the experiences in classes so many times and I know lots of educators yourself probably as well notice when you go to a class and you might speak and you try and make it as clear and as simple and straightforward as possible.
Clearly, there's always things that you express that the students don't understand from various backgrounds.
They've got various vocabulary. Understanding their vocabulary can be a challenge.
So certainly from my perspective over the years, people are usually reluctant to say, I didn't understand that.
They sort of assume somehow if you, you know, if they didn't understand, it's their fault.
And I think you get, as you get a bit older, you get, do less of that.
I probably was the same when I was, you know, a, a youngster in the club, maybe I was, you know, a bit unsure about my knowledge or whatever.
And I would have been reluctant as well to say, I don't really understand that.
Or can you explain it in a different way? But I think students don't.
And I, and I thought that, and I was sort of quite interested in AI and using that thought that actually.
That's at least the basic thing we could ask students to do if they didn't, you know, where they might feel uncomfortable asking me or as lecturing them in front of the staff or in front of the class.
They maybe feel more comfortable on the phone or the, the, the, the iPad or the, you know, the, the tablets or their laptop and ask a question, the same question to AI.
So I'd, I'd make that explicit and say, look, anything you don't understand, I'm very happy to try and put it in, in, in the way that you might.
But if not, also feel free to be able to type that in and, you know, in during the lesson and, you know, see what comes back to see if you can put it in a, a, a way that might understand it.
And building on that, it was then thinking, well, well, I guess it was partly staff coming back and saying students are, this is AI.
This is, this is, I've had this back.
Yeah. Yeah.
It's completely generated by, it doesn't look like it's the students that they're, the writing doesn't sound the same.
There's a generic sense to it. It's not quite answered the question.
And I thought, well, in all honesty, this is not only just going to happen.
It's a, it's going to grow exponentially.
AI is growing exponentially.
It's getting, it's, it's difficult to detect anyway.
And to be honest, what we really need is students, not who are scared to use it, but who can use it really well because they're going to need to use it really well.
And we need to educate because we, we can't always assume either that everybody's the same.
So even though I asked students to type things in, when I, when I had a look at what people were doing and how they're interacting with, it was quite different.
So literacy levels did make a difference.
So both, you know, the way that people could ask questions, their knowledge, their background knowledge in the first place really did make a difference.
The, the quality of questions they asked and the responses they back got back from various different models, AI models, whether that be sort of chat GTP, the open AI, whether it's, uh, anthropic or whether it's, you know, Claude, or, you know, all, all of these different Gemini.
They're in a similar way.
It depends on the quality of, and a basic understanding about prompts and how you might prompt the model and how you might interrogate its responses really.
So I thought what I'm gonna have to do is teach people how to use it.
So I, we, I, we had a, at that point, we were having an ongoing debate about a guidance documentation for the university about how should we deal with AI?
And, uh, Chris, who's Chris Dines, who was in, uh, um, e-learning, who's doing a really good job, put this document together and some things he got from literature.
Um, and I sort of added some stuff to that about the education bit.
And I'm saying, I think we, we, we ought to look at some models that people have got, um, already to AI in, in assessment, but we probably want to add a layer to it to say they must use AI.
So I'm gonna say, I'm gonna do some modules where, because then they have to use it.
They have to not only definitely, they're not trying to hide it.
It's, it's, it's absolutely part of the assignment, but they're also having to show how they used it.
What I gave the, you know, so it's, they, along with the assignment, whatever that happened to be, and there's a couple of different modules.
Uh, they had to put in what the prompts were, what models they use, what did they use them for?
Um, what responses do they get back to that iterative journey of going backwards and forwards with the AI so we could collect that sort of how they're engaging with it.
So we had, we had a number of conversations with students during this time.
So somebody had, they're just on biomechanics.
So it's sports modules, biomechanic module.
I don't, I don't teach biomechanics, but he came to the more module after a bit.
He's a judo player and he came back and goes, I'm really stressed.
I didn't understand what momentum was or these, you know, biomechanical terms.
I said, okay, let's, let's have a look.
Let's into, let's put it into AI.
Let's say, use an example from your sport.
You're much more likely to align with something when it's something very personal to you that you're very familiar with.
So let's have a look at how momentum transfer works in a particular judo throw.
So he tried that in, he got back and said, oh, right.
Yeah, I understand.
And so it was able to back up forward conversation about his, he knows about judo.
I could then, you know, then it sort of escalated to sort of being more detailed in terms of the thing he had to do for his assignment about how can we use this?
How can we turn this into formula, but in a way that he, at a pace in a way that he understood.
And he was these things that I thought this, if we can get this right, if we can encourage students and teach them how to interact appropriately with various AI tools.
That's generative AI with other tools like Gamma for producing presentations and all sorts of other things, whether it's video generation or it's image generation.
Then we've got a chance to sort of where people are coming in without a network to be able to ask people.
You know, it's funny for their families all been to university.
They can go any family member and they can support them.
I know my kids coming back from school.
I know what they're doing.
I know about the educational system.
I know how to support them, but that's not the same for every kid at that school.
It's not the same for every, no, going to university or every, every student that's coming to university.
They haven't got anybody to ask.
They've got no experience of the environment.
And I just think that without wanting to, you know, and they often don't want to say that they don't want to feel uncomfortable being in that situation.
So that's where it started, I guess, for me.
I think that's a very good and detailed way to look at it, Tony.
Thank you for that.
Also, you know, when I speak to some other educators, including myself, when we are marking the assignments, students submitted to the tenant aid, we see the similarity reports.
And then now we have another tab.
We see the percentages of AI and then we click on it.
It kind of takes you to the percentages of whether that's been paraphrase or rephrase, or that's been completely generative production.
And then there is a percentage, the policy that we have in our institution.
And if it's beyond that percentage, we have to refer it to the academic misconduct team.
And then we have to meet the students, discuss with them why and so on.
And, you know, but mostly 90 out of 100% time students, they do get penalised for the usage of AI.
And one of the, when I speak to other people within the institution as well, they're saying, well, how would we know that it's their work?
But also, this will impact their critical thinking and critical analysis.
What's your take on that, Tony?
Would this AI, the whole process of AI, would, especially at a master level or level six, or a PhD level as well, would it help people to improve their critical analysis?
It can, Safi, but there's certainly been questions about, it depends how it's used, really.
And I think there's certainly some evidence where people have used it uncritically and still do.
So I think that's a problem.
So I think it's really teaching, which is why I made it mandatory for my modules, but had to use it.
There's no question about them using it because the detection tools are problematic.
They're not particularly great.
And it's, if they're, if they're actually a re, if they know the environment, they'll, they'll be able to beat any AI detector by modifying things.
You know, you can, if you, I mean, in all honesty, probably it was quicker to write the thing itself, but you can.
You can put them through AI checkers.
You can just change the odd work.
You know, you change synonyms.
You can do a number of things in complete, because I've done it to try and see how possible it is.
There's also some AI things that will humanize if you're prepared to, to, to, to humanize it.
So it's not a great thing.
So we, we decided not to use the AI detection because it's, it's, it's, it's problematic.
But then also the thing about critical skills is I think one would, what we tried to do is say, if you, if you worried about an essay being written in AI, you, you probably want to change the assessment.
If you really concerned about all you say, you have to use it.
And these is a, this is, you have to show me what you've done.
You have to show me how to put your own work in.
So what they have to do is they have to show for me, they have to show all the, all the iterations.
So for example, I'm doing this morning, teaching a module on, um, level five module where they, they design their, um, research proposal for the level six.
So they're designing it.
Right.
They're ready.
They're ready.
They'll do a pre-registration.
We talk about open science, do a pre-registration on the open science framework, which has a series of questions, but what they do.
So I said, you've got to use AI for this, but, but you've not got to use AI and go, can you, can you give me a, a proposal?
Cause that that's not critically thinking that's not teaching at all.
So it's more about using AI, not for production, but for, for learning about it.
So that, you know, rather than, even though they can, to some extent do that, it's about how they've learned.
So a prompt, so I put a prompt showing how to use a prompt, which says, you know, got gets the arrow to have a constant conversation by saying.
First of all, what's your broad area of interest in research?
They'll write that in.
Then the next question.
So the, the prompt asks them and tells the AI, if they respond to ask a more difficult question or a follow up.
If they didn't respond or didn't understand to ask a simpler question, but to get this iterative process of producing a reasonable research proposal,
they can go and talk to a member of staff about, so they start off with a broad area.
It might be, I'm interested in resilience in sport, you know, and then it might, you know, the, the next question the AI generates is what particular population you interested in?
And what, what, you know, what group of people you're interested in?
And they'll say that, and then it will be an iterative process of going, do you want to talk to people?
Do you want to try and capture this qualitatively or do you want to do measurements?
Have you looked up the types of measurements you might use, or have you looked up types of interviews you might use?
And if not, well, yeah, I can suggest some sort, you know, can you suggest some sources for doing that?
And so they can check.
So it's a constant, it's the iterative process where they come out with something that they've had a journey on and they, they capture the whole of this iteration.
But also anything they come out with, they have to show where they're fact checked.
So where, where, you know, they have to ask the AI, where's the information come from?
I need to check the, you know, to verify the things you've said.
And so they have to go to the original source and have a look.
We also use AI to help them do that.
So I don't know whether you've come across what's called Notebook LM, which is a Google, a Google tool, which is free.
Or at least you can use it largely free.
And there is a paid subscription, I think if you want to, but the free stuff's great.
So what you do is you can drop a, so say people are going to me, well, I'm, I find it really hard to read a journal article and pull out salient bits.
Okay, that's a skill that takes time.
So let's, let's pull up this Notebook LM.
Let's drop the PDF of your article, the journal article in you're looking at.
And let's produce a podcast to that because you click on podcast and it will produce a podcast.
Talking about the article, you can actually say the focus you want.
So you could say, I want to focus on this bit.
And then also during the fact that to produce this podcast, but part way, listening to the podcast, you can interject.
So you can press a button and say, and ask a question.
So it might be you ask a question.
So it's a, it's a male and female, um, two hosts who are American sounding.
Um, when you press the button, it'll go, wow.
Yeah, we've got a question.
You know, that's great.
Great question.
It'll answer the question you've asked.
So I might, you know, giving it a, I might ask a question on, uh, you know, whether sample size.
So I just did one recently with the students on what's called the football factory, which was about what, what had happened to some of the, the, the footballers of young footballers who'd left an academy.
You know, what did they do?
So today these people three years after they'd left and now they'd got on.
And so I asked it about, how have you recruited?
What was the sampling method used?
Um, just to say students that you might ask questions about the research processes they're going through.
And it just said, you know, we did a snowball sampling.
We got the, the, so it gave some detail.
So it's, it, if you haven't, if you haven't tried, it's well worth trying.
Cause it's really, really, really looking into that.
Yeah.
Because I think I've, I've, I've listened to your lecture with, with the basis.
Uh, and, and I did, I did come across notebook LM I think.
There's an instant asking a question about, I think about the, uh, the question on it's, it's sort of, I think it was on Bayesian, uh, quantile regression.
I wanted to, cause it was my paper.
So I knew the paper.
Yeah.
So it was partly checking how accurate they were explaining it really.
Um, but yeah, so that, that is one way they might go back and have a look at a source and question it to try and get an understanding of it.
Um, I think what's good about notebook LM is that if you, if you ask it something, it's that he can't justify with that source.
What's really, it will say it won't, it can't.
So if I say, I want to do, you know, can you, will this sort, does this source justify this particular claim I'm making?
If it doesn't, it will say, sorry, the source doesn't say anything about that.
We can't support that.
Right.
Which is actually quite useful really, but again, so it's that fact checking and how do you then engage with that? And what do you do if you don't quite, you know, if it's a bit too, you've got this general article, lots of statistics.
You don't understand.
Yeah, it, it helps again without, you know, somebody was there to talk it through them.
If there was endless numbers of tutors that could go and sit with them personally at their convenience, that'd be great. We still got, you know, we're still small numbers on the courses here, but still there's not enough to, to make everything absolutely personal for everybody.
You want to sit with them maybe when they're at home to be able to answer their questions immediately.
And, and so it's a way that they can do that.
So they have to verify the outputs of these outputs and check that the, you know, the AI model is giving it the right thing.
Sometimes it won't.
So they've got to have they dealt with that.
They've gone back and said, this is incorrect.
Can you give me another source or is this and check the claims that are made?
Cause that's really important because they're still, it's still, the models will still hallucinate.
They've got a lot better, but they still will hallucinate.
That means they'll produce stuff.
That's not exactly accurate.
The, the references are look pretty good.
They might even have credible authors, but they're doing a link to something else.
So the digital operation.
Right.
And how, you know, in terms of checking the fact checking, what would you advise to students in particular, or somebody who is, would be new to the AI.
How can they fact checked the information that AI has produced for them?
Well, one of the, one of the, on the prompt, you should say, I need, I need the sources and these are linked to the sources you're using to make these claims.
So it could be after it could be part of that prompt.
If you like, you've got various types of prompts, but you could say afterwards, when it said some of these, can you provide the sources and links to the sources?
So it's easy to click on, you click on the link, and so I can check how accurate the sources are.
And so you can go back and check for, you know, click on the link and say, and you can either go back and say, great, that's right.
Or that's not, but still, if it's a link to a credible source, you still need that, that level of checking by, by get either getting something to read it like notebook.
LM or reading it yourself to be able to, um, check whether.
Even though it's a credible source, is he actually saying what you, what the AI said?
It's saying general, that's also an important element of it.
And in that way, you start being critical.
So using, I also get students, there's, um, there's something called AI studio, which is like, again, a Google thing where you can move the temperature.
So I don't know whether you know about temperature, but temperatures, what, what AI models do is they basically predict the next token.
So the next, sometimes the next word, if you like, based on, so it makes a number and it's a statistical calculation essentially.
And, um, it looks at context.
It's not, you know, it's a, and there's a range of potential possibilities.
So it might be, I don't know.
So it might be, you type in, uh, a bird in the hand is worth two.
And the most probable response is in the bush, you know, in is the word.
But if you put the temperature up, so if you increase the temperature, it, it uses lower probability.
So it generates more creative responses.
So it might come up with something completely different than that.
If you had a low, you know, a zero tolerance, you know, a zero temperature, it's likely to say a bird in the hand's worth two in the bush or some common, you know, common, you know, one plus one equals two.
Whereas if you put a very high temperature, that will be different.
It will give a lower.
And so it's getting students to know that this is a statistical model.
These are not, this is not truth with a capital T.
This is based on, on learning from language.
And it's learned these, these patterns of, um, what it's called weightings.
These patterns of how one word, what context follows another.
And so it's really just predicting what the next word is.
And it does that with a range of things.
One of those things is temperature.
It's an easy way.
They can do a slide and see how a more creative, usually a more creative lists of ideas will be.
If you increase the temperature, it might be a bit more wacky, but they, they do that.
They can see that it's this, it's a process.
It's not, it's not, you know, it's not true in a sense.
We have to check.
It's still, well, it's just the same as somebody on social media saying something as well.
We want to really try and get students to check any information to say, how accurate is this?
Because just because somebody says it very convincingly doesn't mean it's true.
And the same with the AI, it can be very convincing.
Um, it's using, you know, trained on lots of human, uh, interactions, languages, and, um, et cetera.
And so you still do have to check it.
And it's about against it.
Right.
Not to.
Yeah.
I think that's, that's, that's, that's a great way of, uh, whatever information.
And I think any academics, depending on the level as well, even at college levels, you
are encouraged to make sure you check your source.
And, and, and, and if the AI is helping to do that, I think you should definitely be encouraged,
you know?
Um, and, and in your experience, Tony, um, what are, what do you think are some of the biggest
misconceptions that educators have about AI's role in addressing educational inequalities?
Um, rather than, for example, or, and what can be done to help address those misconceptions?
I think in a way that it's, I mean, one thing to recognize, I don't think it's going to
go away.
I mean, I was at the time at school when they brought calculators in and there was some people
frowning and going, oh, calculate as well, you know, nobody would be able to do any mental
arithmetic anymore.
And, but things, it wasn't the case.
People who, I mean, some people who maybe weren't good at a rental arithmetic didn't get
any better, but they could use tools in the end, they had jobs that they couldn't have
done otherwise.
You know, they were allowed to use electronic till or to be able to calculate something.
It's very similar with, with statistics.
It used to be all very hand done.
You know, I, when I started, it wasn't undone to be fair.
You could do it by hand, but there was, you know, there was the start of some, um, statistical
software, which is a little bit cruder than it is now, but now it's highly sophisticated
and it's, and, and you, and so it's the development of things.
And I think there's a transition.
There'll be a transition to, and it will have an impact.
I think it's going to have an impact just like any new technology.
This information technology could well have, in some cases, some jobs might well go and
it might change, but I think that that's, that's going to happen.
So we've, uh, an important for educators, we try to make sure we educate people to be
able to be constant learners.
I guess that because that things are going to change.
They're going to have to keep learning, adapting.
Um, somebody asked when, um, when, uh, when we, when I did the basis thing about, you know,
should we, you know, maybe we need to spend the next 18 months working out this particular
platform.
I said, well, 18 months would be too late.
It's, it's, it's now about learning on the hoop.
It's about check.
You haven't got 18 months.
It won't look the same.
It'll be different.
You know, it's given the rapid rise of some of the models recently, and there might be some
stalling, who knows, but it's been an exponential rise in, um, and it like likely given it's
driven by money in, in, you know, so, you know, it's a huge, um, a huge investment and
it's, it's, you know, people are already in business using it and we need our students
to be able to use it.
So, you know, it's sort of, to me, if, if we're only doing things that AI does as well
as humans, we need to change the assessments and change what we focus on, because in all
honesty, they're going to be doing that when we leave, it's going to be, that's going to
be the, that that's going to be, if you can't add anything to that, if you can't add something
human to that, that's going to be better than the AI, particularly if it does achieve,
whether it will or not, so debatable point, AGI, that means human general intelligence,
that sort of super, super intelligence potentially in the end.
If that's the, um, if we can only like get, you know, if it'll write an essay that we can't
tell the humans done or not, and it's, it's hitting all the boxes, then we probably need
to get, you know, to understand that, that thing in a new way, we need to get students
to do things in new ways.
So we need to have more authentic assessments that really assess what they're going to be
doing in a dynamic change in vocational underworld environment, really, you know, we've got all sorts
of things, you know, political shifts, we've got, and, you know, logical chat, we need to be
understand the whole infrastructure of information, whether that's coming from social media, from, you know,
directly from individuals' mouths, or it's coming from AI.
We need to navigate this and teach students how to navigate it.
And it's, it's not going away.
You know, it's a bit like, and I'm going to misquote this, I'm just not, not directly, but I know
Socrates, so he got going right back to ancient Greece.
He had some concerns about writing things down.
If we write things down, we'll lose something.
And the same with mobile phones, we've got a mobile phone on now.
No, I do not remember phone numbers.
So it has, you know, to potentially replace some of the things I would have kept in the mind.
But it's now means I can, would I replace it with, you know, going back and saying, you know, no,
I wouldn't because now means at the tip of my fingers, I can access things.
It's a different need now to be able to rather than be able to access it.
I need to be able to look at the quality of it.
What evidence, what quality is this evidence?
I've got abundance of evidence in the tip, in the palm of my hand.
I just need to know how do I sort through that?
How do I sort the wheat from the chaff?
How do I know what's good?
And it's that skill that students are going to need as well.
So, so I think we, we always are uncomfortable with new things, but we've got to embrace it really, because it's going to change whether we do or not.
And we really to help our students need to help them embrace the change and develop the skills, not be frightened of it, but to use it really effectively.
And I think I like that in particular Tony, because every time there is a change, we will have people who are these early adapters and they'll start, start with it.
And then we'll have these people who are in a mid kind of adaptation to see a bit of a benefit.
And then we have this delayed or late adapters.
And, and one of the thing with AI is whether you are a student or an educator, the earlier you adapt to it, the better, because it's not going backward.
As you said, you know, there's lots of money that's been invested in, lots of businesses are using it.
And I also agree with what you said in terms of giving the knowledge and the understanding and the skills to the students when they're qualified or when they graduate.
And the businesses that they go into or the kind of fields that they're going to definitely like within the sports science world, with the public health world, as it's rapidly changing.
And if they don't know how to use the AI, I think that they will be behind some of the other people who will know.
And that could be one of the hindrance to them becoming employable.
So, so yeah, definitely, you know, but beyond this technical skills, Tony, what do you think, what mindset or attitude do you believe that educators, people like us, need to develop effectively the use of AI, especially for closing the attainment gaps?
So I think one, it's about understanding the broader questions, really.
So the questions that, you know, so you might have the technical details and then they'll shift and change, you know, you'd have new platforms, a bit like with search engines, when they first came out, you had a range of different ones.
And in the end, you know, some somebody better than us like Google tend to stick around new, you're likely to get that, you know, within AI, I think there's a there's a range of different sort of various platforms, you know, various models coming out and that that's, you know, that's sort of going to carry on.
But that that's that as it might be, the broader issue is about how, what, how do we step back, what, what, what, what's our role as educators, you know, we that shifted over time, our thoughts about it, at least, you know, whether it ought to be, we read stuff out to students, you know, whether it's a Victorian age, education, where people sit in rows, and you wrote, you know, you learn things by rote memory, and you quote it out, or whether you, you know, or whether you're trying to
teach people to be thinkers, whether you're trying to teach people to be critical to, to weigh up knowledge to know what you know, to look at prop, look at things, as a question, a problem, I don't mean a problem in a negative sense, this is a problem to overcome, how do we adapt, that educators have to think about, we'll have to reassess what they're doing. And it can be uncomfortable to sometimes to say, well, some of the knowledge now that you might have, well, maybe, maybe students are going to question it now, because they can go, you know, there's a, some people initially said, this is not going to be transformative.
It's just an increment. I said, well, you might get students now where, where that, that the, it shifts, you know, from, you know, the person at the front being the all knowing, I don't necessarily think it's always been this, but there's been a perception where, you know, that the person at the front is the person who knows it, the person, the lecturer is the person who knows everything, whether clearly, they never really have, but they, you know, that that's a perception.
But really, it's about facilitating people exploring things. So we're facilitators, in a sense, we're going to say, and how to use tools, how do we, how do we get, you know, we've had, we had a lot of experience, so all the experience is not useless, it's good.
Even when an AI comes back, or we ask a question, we get very good as academics at asking questions, at challenging the, you know, the, the normal response to things to say, well, is that really the case?
Let's, let's, let's drill down on those things. And they're still very important skills. And you'll have very particular ones in your area that be, you know, whatever your area is, that'll have particular skills, that'll be challenges to both the status quo, and, you know, can we ask questions about this?
How do we confirm what's there? What, so it's really re-evaluating the role that we've got, and it will change, I think, you know, and I think students who, who, as AI gets better, and they go, well, hang on, you've said this, but is this the case?
And, you know, it seems to be there's alternative perspectives. I think that's actually quite healthy. I quite like, if a student said to me, well, you say this Bowsian analysis is good, but, well, I think this is great. Let's have a conversation.
Yeah, that's a, you know, let's, let's have a look, because certainly there's not one, one method of anything that's brilliant for everything. We have, it's all got limitations and strengths, so let's balance it with what we want to try and find out.
Let's, let's balance it with, with the, what questions we have about whatever that is, whether that's a, you know, what's the nature of reality is a physics or philosophical question down to what's the best method of encouraging people to do physical activity?
Or, you know, what's the best way to learn, you know, a biomechanical principle or a mathematical, you know, it's these, these things are, I think, in a way, we've got to think about what are we as educators and what we're trying to do?
Really, what's the basis? It might not just be vocational. I mean, I think we, if we're just teaching vocational stuff, well, things change. So we, we've got to think, we've got, we can give somebody something to go out and get a job straight away with, but the jobs might not look anything like they do now as they do in five years' time.
So we've got to teach critical thinkers who can go out and adapt and learn and, you know, and have resources to be able to, or use lots of resources to be able to solve problems because environment's going to change.
I mean, when I was at school, I was in an area which was a mining area. So there was like, there was lots of pits in the area where there were coal mining.
And the, the, the sort of message at school was job, job in the pits, a job for life, you know, down the mines. And I was a bit resilient. I didn't particularly want to go into the mines. I got, you know, I had grandparents who'd been there. I didn't really want to go in the mines, but I realised, you know, it's been something, you know, something lots of people did.
Five years later, the mines were closed. So those, you know, because jobs changed, you know, things changed, you know, it was the Thatcher era and they were closing the mines and Arthur Scargill and there was protests and whatever.
But things changed and things shut down. Similarly with the car industry locally in Birmingham, things changed, things don't stay still. So we, if we'd taught people only to be a mining engineer, the job would no longer have been there.
But if we teach people to be thinking about, you know, applying general engineering problems to things and how do you think as an engineer, what sort of key underpinning skills do we need? Not just vocational, but broader skills.
And I think that's, we've got to be mindful that the landscape's likely going to change even more than we've had in the past.
And we need to be mindful about, yes, we do want to give people something to go out with, but just a vocation is potentially problematic and limited.
Absolutely. Thank you, Tony. And Tony, you are trying to address, well, the address the attainment gap through the AI usage.
But then we have some critics who worries that AI might actually widen the educational, you know, rather than, widen the educational divides rather than narrow it.
What's your take or advice on that?
I think it certainly can. I think one has said that you've got to have literacy.
So you've got to really put a lot of effort into teaching people and you've got to make it available.
Now, there are some free platforms, but certainly, and there are some that you can get quite reasonable responses for on free platforms.
But certainly, if you pay, you tend to get better quality responses.
And that already means there's a gap.
So if you choose to pay, you can pay $200 to get a ChatGTP Pro model and that, you know, one pro.
That will give you different responses.
If you're a coder, for example, if you're working in, you know, a software engineer and whatever, some people, even though, you know, it's various levels of quality.
Some people will say they're prepared to pay that because that's important in the job.
Now, so there's going to be different quality responses, which is why I'm always concerned about saying, what did you give the model?
Because it doesn't matter whether you give a model that you've paid for or you've given a free model, that information you've provided, the questions you've asked are still good.
So whilst you might, you know, I think that's still important to do, but you have to teach.
You can see that if people haven't got the questioning skills and they haven't got the literacy skills to be able to read the response and ask another question, that is an issue.
So you can't, whilst you can help those who are motivated, who get the support to be able to do that, you can't just assume everybody's going to be just like you can't support, you know, you still need to support people to do that.
And if you don't, it will potentially work both those who don't have the financial resources and those who don't have somebody to support them to help them through.
Initially, once people get confident that they're able to, like anything else, they get comfortable using AI, whatever that happens to be in searching out different, you know, trying different options, I think that's okay.
But if you don't do that, it can certainly widen that gap, you know, just like any resource issue, whether that's financial or, you know, social support resources.
It, we have to, that's why it's really important to think to be able to teach students to do that now.
And if there's, if the university provides, some universities will provide paid for AI, then, then that's good.
But if not, it's about how do you get AI reasonably?
And that might be still a skill to say, what, what can I use to get free AI?
And there's enough, you can still get good models with free AI, as long as you know where to search.
But again, it's teaching people how you might do that.
Right.
Right.
I think I remember when I was at Neumann University studying and going back to 2014, 15, up to 16, and we used to get those kind of CDs or DVDs where we could then install SPSS into our computers.
If you were an undergraduate student, I think we had to pay 10 pounds for it.
But for the bachelor students and a PhD, it was for free.
And I remember when we got it, when I started my masters, and then I received it.
I was so happy that, you know, that 10 pounds, for example, at the time was a lot of money for a student.
So kind of to look into closing the attainment gap and financial restriction is one of the contributing factors, Tony, as you would know, the socioeconomic status to health, well-being, also physical activity, education, and so on.
I think, and you may agree with this, if the institutions could provide some sort of subscriptions to all students, I think that would really help contributing to the attainment gap, wouldn't it?
I think that's a reasonable thing to ask, to be honest, you know, I think it's good.
I think it's just been, it again, depends on how knowledgeable those who've got the financial strings on.
And I think in the end, it will be potentially students who request that as well, you know, so they might not, I don't think it'd be that long before they're going, well, what do you offer?
Do you offer, you know, you might offer a free PE kit, but do you offer an AI?
Yeah, yeah.
So something as well, because I know there's, there are certainly concerns.
So DeepSeek, for example, is a very good AI that's, so it's very good, but there's concerns about, you know, is it, you know, about sort of cyber security site concerns.
Now, you can download, there are various ways of getting around.
You can download a local model, so a model is not even connected to the internet, the things that's, but yeah, it's not, unless you've got a really powerful machine, it's not quite as good.
And so it's still being aware, again, that cyber security, being aware of whatever you're doing, you're not putting information in, personal information in.
And I would say that's the same for ChatGTP, even though you can sort of put a, you know, you can make it so it's, it doesn't record.
You know, there's certain things you can go into settings and say, well, I don't want this recording, I want to, you know, it's not going to remember the conversation, it's not going to train data, you can click certain buttons.
And it's just being aware of cyber security as well, I think.
So if you use this, plenty of free ones, just be, you know, just be aware of what you put in.
I mean, I guess anyway, don't put in your bank details and, you know, very personal details that you wouldn't want anybody else to get hold of.
It doesn't necessarily, like AI necessarily, when it's using your data to train, it doesn't necessarily retain, it might do, but it doesn't have to.
It learns from the, that those, sort of, the next word, you know, it learns the weights of things based on different inputs that you've got and different, and it's, it's, as it's doing, it's learning on data.
But you can, you know, certainly some, some things you can say you don't want that to happen, and it won't, but just be careful of putting stuff in.
So I think, so there are some free models that are as good almost as any paid model now, which, and that might well, I was pleased with DeepSeek, you know, being open AI, being open AI, because I don't mean open AI in the company.
I mean, being open so people could actually produce distills of the model, and, you know, that's, that's really useful.
There's obviously concerns from, you know, there's concerns about, I mean, I don't know whether we should be any more concerned about China than we should be about, you know, America with, you know, with massive, you know, profits put into it.
I'm not sure, you know, I don't know.
Yeah, no, not either, really, you know, you should probably think about, they're going to, they want something, nothing's for nothing, so they want probably something about your information, at least.
But it, but it's, at least it's, there is some possibility you can use free AI to generate very good information if, if you care for what you're doing.
Yeah, absolutely, you know, and I get, again, it goes back to the, the previous point, like, as long as you know what type of questions you are asking and the prompts that you're using, I think that will help you on the free usage.
But Tony, when I hold, well, when I tried to hold a conversation with some colleagues or some students regarding the use, use of AI in the workplace or, or research or, or teaching, it's never been a comfortable conversation, to be honest.
And I think that might be subject to our expertise or our understanding surrounding the use of AI and, and the people who I speak with.
And, and I'm sure you may have encountered some of the problems or challenges as well.
So any examples of any surprising benefits or challenges that you have encountered when you introduce the AI tools to students, but more, more particularly to the disadvantaged students from the disadvantaged backgrounds?
Any, any examples there?
Yeah, there's some, I mean, some, and I'm collecting data on, I mean, I'm putting a research study in, because obviously I want to collect this a little bit more detail than my personal anecdotal, but yeah, some people have said, um, you've said, I don't think I'd have been able to do, I think I'd have dropped out.
I don't think I've always struggled with writing, and this is now meant that I can put something together I'm proud of, that I've, that I've checked and did a good job to be honest, they did a really good job.
So it was a, it was a presentation, so I had to present, but they, but the, the way, you know, the way they collected information, the way they supported their arguments, that they had no experience previously doing that.
And college was different.
They'd gone to college and that was a different experience.
It wasn't quite the same, um, experience they'd had when they did a BTEC level three, they didn't quite the same skills.
And so he said, I think I'd have dropped out. I think I would have not carried on because of the felt, you know, felt embarrassed and all sorts of reasons about not being able to produce.
Now I feel at least I can produce work, particularly when it's not frowned upon about saying, we're trying to get you to use it.
We're not saying you're naughty if you use it or you do, you know, you're cheating because that's some of the feelings that people, you know, far from cheating.
We're, we're trying to use a tool just as much as it's not saying if you're doing, if you're doing, you know, using our code to do a Bayesian analysis of your cheating.
Well, no, it's a skill you've learned and it's important.
You couldn't do it.
Otherwise, generally it's that sort of, you know, how can you use it?
And in the future, we might have things that it's produced.
Well, it's already producing some medical innovations that we couldn't do.
It's able to do things much faster, learn on much more, many more examples.
And, and, and even though I'm not saying AI is without bias, it is like anything else that's learned on lots of human data.
It has biases.
You know, if I generate an image of, I often generate, you know, more PowerPoints of all AI pictures on them.
If I generate AI, I say I want a student body, it'll largely be a white student body.
I have to go, I want a diverse student body.
Right.
And then it will generate a reasonable, you know, what looks a bit more like the students I do teach rather than, you know, a series of sort of, you know, particular type of student.
So it's, but it's also about, so we, you need to recognize the fact that we do, we do need to recognize it.
But, but in some ways it's not biased in some ways, not biased for some of our things, but it's trained on data.
A bit like Zoom was biased on white faces because it was trained on lots of white faces.
So when you get lots of particular examples, then it's likely to pick up on those more, those examples as well.
So there is always, there is always inherent bias and you have to be aware of that.
You know, in images generated or text generation, you have to be wary of that.
But it's, there's other things where it doesn't have quite the same human bias in a sense, you know, because it's learning rather than, you know, if I'm a doctor, I've, I've encountered lots of these.
Maybe that's useful, but maybe it's also a problematic, you know, it's problematic with me.
I've got a very, maybe my experience has been limited.
And if I've trained, you know, I've managed to see thousands upon thousands of incidents of this particular disease, I might well have had a different opinion.
And now I can train on that sort of level of data very quickly.
And he can, you know, do all sorts of things we can't do, you know, whether that's looking at mammograms, it can rather than a doctor who might have, you know, maybe in a career looked at a few hundred.
It can look at thousands upon thousands, you know, and that and learn patterns.
It could still be verified by a doctor.
It just, you know, it can do things that a human can't do.
Absolutely.
Until you mentioned about the PowerPoint production AI and the images.
Is there any particular AI tool that one can access it or any GBT or cloud?
I think lots of tools where they train.
So there's lots of tools you can use.
So, for example, I get our students when they're producing presentation to use gamma, that that's got allows you to generate gamma allows you to generate.
A range of models of some.
If you pay for a subscription, you get slightly better.
Yeah.
But there's diffusion AI.
There's a few free packages, to be honest, that generate videos and images.
And you can and, you know, you can do a lot with those and you can make, you know, very photorealistic images that are that are actually, you know, you'd have to worry that you copyright protected that you stealing somebody's, you know, the copyright.
It's there generated and you can make it as nuanced as you want it to.
Sometimes you just have to work.
So if you say I want a clock that's pointing to midnight, I'll use to give this example.
You got a clock pointing to midnight with the both of them.
It'll do any clock that's ten past two to ten to two.
Yeah, because he's been trying more and that those images generally tend to be in because it's quite a nice visual image.
So lots of marketing material has got those sort of clocks in where it's learned, you know, so it learns just the same as you've probably got lots and lots of examples of students in, you know, American universities that are white and look in a particular way that, you know, it's better.
You sometimes have to prompt that to make sure that you're not in a biased response.
And Tony, in terms of one of the concern is the ethical consideration surrounding the AI, but also now, as you're looking into the attainment gap, what role do you see for AI in supporting students' emotional and social development and that network surrounding those elements?
Yes, I mean, there are ethical challenges. I think that it takes a huge amount of energy to produce these models.
It does. There's a huge amount of investment gone into it.
And you can say that some people are going to be left behind.
They may well be, including some countries left behind and not able to, which is why I really liked the deep sea offering, even though, you know, some people are suspicious of it being China and what the, you know, that, and you can't, you can't ask it about Tiananmen Square or any of the, you know, directly.
It won't refuse to say. It's still a positive step for me to have something open source that people can use wherever you're from.
You can, you can try and develop and use it, refine it, whatever.
And in terms of, I think the questions that have to be had, I think there's lots of things, though, in society that we probably want to question, I think as well, train the model.
So even though they train the model, they also then get humans to, to look at it and they're probably, you know, may well not be well paid.
So I think there's lots, you know, it's definitely a good conversation to have.
I'm not sure, you know, it's, it'd be a choice of should we abandon it or not because of that.
I don't know. I think if we do, we might be causing problems for ourselves or do, but, but it's certainly a conversation we should have, because there are ethical issues with how much and which with all those things about, you know, where energy use.
Yeah.
To, to, to, to do, maybe we, you know, maybe it's also using disadvantage to those in, you know, and not in such a strong financial position to help, you know, prune the rubbish out of these models, you know, to make sure they don't make so much big.
Again, it'll be chat GTP, open AI that, that outsources that sort of thing.
So there are those ethical issues that ought to be checked or to be talked through.
I think that's, that's the case in terms of the emotional support for students, I think it's not a human, but it feels like one.
And I know there's been some, they've had to sort of cut things where people have said off, they're falling in love with the chat, you know, the, the, you know, because we do respond to, you know, when somebody listens to you and somebody responds empathetically to what you're asking, then people do get drawn into that.
You know, we, we, we, you, we are, we don't, you know, we're not used to interacting with machines that do that.
We're interacting with people.
So, you know, we now very used to text messaging and having a series of, you know, whether that's WhatsApp or text messaging conversations with people.
And that's, but now also talk, I mean, they talk very, you know, the, the voice capture now sounds very human.
And so in a sense, I guess it probably wants monitoring, but, but if it can support somebody in some way, maybe that, you know, maybe there are apps that will be out there that will be fine tuned to support people positively in that way.
Um, but it's, it's, so it's an angle really, but we've not, we're not able to solve the mental health crisis.
We certainly haven't got enough people to do it.
Maybe can help done, you know, looked at properly.
Maybe it's, maybe it's a research project for somebody, um, to look.
Yeah, we can use this appropriately and, you know, sensibly to support people's mental health fine tuned in the right way.
Yeah, I think that would be good and I would love to kind of look into it as well and see.
Yeah, definitely.
And, and Tony, we know that the attainment gap, um, in, in, in HEI in particular higher education institution are very diverse findings.
Yeah.
And, and the reasons are also very different.
Um, and some of them you mentioned earlier as well.
And in particular, I was the first one to go to university from my family, given that I arrived to the UK when I was approximately 14 years of age with no English skills.
And it was, everything was very challenging to, as I was pursuing college, then university, masters, PhD.
But the support around me made it a lot easy for me and, and helpful and accessible and especially the mentorship and, and, and everything.
But so many other individuals that we speak with and also from the research, they don't really receive that support.
The one that I had from my university lecturers, but also from my family.
Now, how might AI tools help educators, uh, better understand and address the root causes of educational inequalities?
Well, it's, again, I mean, it can be a conversation with an AI.
It'll only give you potentially generic responses, but, but sometimes detailed responses.
But I think it's about, it's about trying to understand what it's, how can we do exactly what you've just said?
How can we get information to those who might most need it when we, we haven't got the time, you know, if you're, it's different.
Newman, well, you mentioned, he's a small, small institution where, you know, that, you know, you get to know people by name.
That's not the case or possible in lots of big places.
That's really, it's not feasible if you've got hundreds of students.
Um, and, and there is, you know, that it's more like, you know, a city.
Some of the, some of the campuses are really big or stretched across.
Yeah.
You're not going to do that.
So it's, how can you, how can we, whatever system it could, whether it's online system, whatever it is to, how can we teach people?
So, you know, to use this stuff to be able to help them and how do we encourage confidence in themselves to be able to use it?
And it's a question.
It's not an easy answer.
I don't think.
I think people have, I think where you stood out, Safi, is the fact that you were prepared to work really hard.
So had you got the barrier?
Absolutely.
But I remember writing, um, a reference for your PhD.
Yeah.
And one of the things I put in there because it's very true is whatever difficulties Safi's had with the English language and, you know, and, and struggling with some of the academic concepts because of that.
The one thing he's always had, which is really important to PhD is work, the work ethic is prepared to work, prepared to endure things.
And, and PhDs are still 90% perspiration and overcoming and knowing your face things and knowing your face hardships and being able to stick there and being able to work around a problem and being able to still ask and, and still, you know, and that was one thing that you had, you prepared to be proactive.
And that, I think, I will always help the people in your situation because you'll always be seeking to get support, always seeking to get the best answer, always working at something that that's fine.
I think the more, the more, the sort of, the more challenging scenarios when you got, those are a bit apathetic, those who are not really, you can't not, I don't mean, I'm not blaming them either for all sorts of their personal circumstances.
It means they're not able to do that.
They're not able to take pressure.
They give up, you know, their, their lives been so in such a way that they, they're not, and that's where, that's where the challenge is.
That's where the challenge is really, that'll be the challenge.
Because I think that they are those students who, you know, who don't, they don't feel comfortable coming across the, you know, onto the campus.
They feel, you know, they just want to bury their head in the sun.
And it's like, it's lots of people do that with, whether that's bills, whether that's, I think that's, that's the bigger challenge.
And not, and, and I think that's, I don't sure AI in its sense in itself will be, it could help those people, but it's getting that the message to those people in the first place is the challenge.
Absolutely.
Thank you, Tony.
And Tony, as, as now AI is becoming more clever and we've been discussing about it as well for the past hour, what advice would you give to some of the schools, colleges, or universities who are just beginning to explore AI as a tool for the educational equity?
In particular, how would, you know, any advice how this will then lead to the attainment gap?
Because I think attainment gap and NSS in particular as well is a, is a headache to some of the institutions that are really looking for some of the ways to kind of saying, okay, how we can improve it?
Yeah, I think, well, I mean, I think, I think there is lots of stuff online.
So there are some very useful videos that people have put on.
They're not necessarily about for education, but they will get tools.
It's worth looking at and thinking, could this help, could this help in what I'll do, whether that's, you know, there's a range of tools, whether that, you know, as well as looking at prompts.
So there's lots of people out there because they want to put out there, you know, they get, they get money from people watching the news, et cetera.
So there's, there's lots of stuff.
So searching, just a general YouTube search or a search about, you know, so there's some papers on AI in education to think, to look about and critical thinking.
Is do so, you know, treat as a serious subject as you might do for any other subject and have a look at what's out there.
The rare, you know, there's a, because it's so cutting edge, you've got even things, you know, some social medias like Reddit, where, where people discuss it, you know, often those into computers discuss various AI and that what they've found useful, what they've not found useful.
I think it's, and then, you know, trying to put on, I mean, I put on a session for researchers at Newman.
I'm now doing in a couple of weeks, putting one on for lecturer, you know, for those doing a PG cert about, you know, I think that sort of thing's quite useful where, you know, universities might do that sort of training for staff.
I think it's quite useful as well. So what tools to use, how we might use it and you might integrate it into assessment is, is a useful thing to do as well.
Thank you, Tony. And Tony, you know, in terms of the future development in AI technology, what is it in particular that you're most excited about?
And how do you think that would then potentially support the disadvantaged learners?
Well, I think it's multimodal thing helps. So multimodal means you don't have to type stuff.
Right.
You know, because that means that already you've got to have something you can write fairly well to make, you know, to craft a prompt.
I think it's exciting now that you can actually talk to, and it's already happening, it's only going to happen, it's going to be even more.
So AI studio, for example, you've got this where you can click one of the tabs and you can show it a problem.
So you can say, I want to share my screen. I've got this problem. Can you help sort it out?
And it will be an interactive conversation, how to sort it out, you know, how to, I don't know.
So you want to remove the background from a video, it'll, and this is the software I'm using.
It will talk you through step by step. You click on there on the right, if you can see that.
And if you click on there, have a look. Yeah, that's good.
It's as if you're talking to somebody about it, or you can share a problem, you know, you don't know, you've got them.
You've got you, your child with a mass problem. You're not sure of because you, you know, you've, it's been a long time.
You share a video, you know, with your camera of this mass problem.
And so, can you help this? And it's a conversational interaction that's happening now.
That's not, that's not in the future. That's only going to get much, much better, much, much easier.
And so I think it's, it's an exciting time for, for this sort of multimodal where it can be, you know, conversation.
We interact visually as well as orally as well, you know, not just in, in sort of text based conversations with AI.
What personal experiences have shaped your passion for using the AI and technology to close the attainment gap?
Well, I start my background, Safi, is I didn't, I didn't do an undergraduate degree.
So I've always, I was always interested in learning.
So I've constantly taught myself lots of things over the time.
So I did an art qualification when I left school and went to college.
I was interested in sport and whatever.
And it was like, as a 30 year old, I went into, uh, higher education with no undergraduate degree to do a master's.
Um, I was given that opportunity, but I, because I guess I'd, I'd been enthusiastic constantly about learning everything I could.
I'd read lots of academic textbooks, not just because I had to pass a module.
Cause I really wanted to learn genuinely wanting to learn and apply it.
And I've always had that sort of attitude really where I want to, I want to keep abreast.
Like I'm enthusiastic, inquisitive and I, you know, try and encourage people to be that because I think that's really, you know, to stay, you know, it's, it's important.
So I was always inquisitive about, so when they say I came out, it was very inquisitive, just the same as I've been inquisitive to learn about various things from academic textbooks in the past.
Uh, and how it might, how it might be.
And then as I used it, I thought, you know what, this is, I'm able to learn.
I, I, I used to, I do our code, uh, which I taught myself how to do statistics.
Uh, but then I thought, well, actually I can use this tool to help me learn Python, which is, you know, extend my vocab, you know, actually, if I can do this now, um, it might be that other people can do things that they can't do.
Or, and then I, and it was just interacting with it.
So, you know, this might have possibilities.
This is might really have possibilities.
There's lots of things people have tried to clone the attainment gap.
I mean, I, I think it's, it's, it's a lot to do.
Um, it has something to do with ethnicity, but it's more to do with where people are situated rather than anything to do with the melanin in the skin, for example.
It has to do with what, you know, what support system have you got, what culture have you come from to encourage this or to support it or to, you know, that, that, that's usually the thing.
What, what people have you got around you to help when you're struggling or what role models have you got to look at tends to be the defining factors.
So it's where if you've got people who are interested, I think I can really support that, you know, it can really help those, those situations where somebody feels that they haven't got that support network.
They haven't got that.
I saw when I'm using it, you know what, this could really help people.
Um, if they're prepared to engage with it, if they're comfortable with engagement, I do, I do know as well.
It's not the same.
If somebody is used to teaching the self, lots of things, it's very different than somebody who's never done it before.
You know, you, you know, so it's about saying, let's have a look at students and they actually do it and what barriers are there to there?
What can we help them with?
Because they're not the same as I am.
Do you know what I mean?
It's, they're not going to be, I've had 40 years in education, uh, used to doing lots of things.
It's not the same.
You can't expect somebody to be the same, but it's just a possibility when you support them and sit with them.
It's that possibility that excited me.
And I think Tony, I, I like to draw a bit of a personal experience.
Uh, when I was a student at Newham University, you know, you have played a, such a positive role in my academic career.
I think had you, had I not met you or, or had I not come across you, maybe I would not be in the academic, um, world today, or maybe I've not even gone to the higher education.
Um, because you will not be in the academic world today.
Not just supportive and generous with your time, but your constructive feedback was something that also helped me.
But what else, you know, as I, when I met you, Tony, and, and I, I find, I found that comfortable spot, you know, say, okay, I, now I know who to go to if I have an issue.
And I'm not sure if I ever told you this, but my students are aware of all of these things.
And, and I tell you now Tony.
Find something in that point.
Every time when I used to see you at the corridor, when you were actually entering a lecture, um, I used to actually copy the way you walk.
I, I was just looking at how you talk and, and, you know, how you talk to me and how you talked in the classroom and how you supervise me.
And, and now when I'm teaching Tony, and this is the honest truth, you know, I, I, and I tell my students, and I think almost all of my students knows you by name.
My colleagues knows you, and sometimes because they found, they find me very approachable, and they find me that same generosity, kindness, and everything.
And I say, well, the credit isn't, or shouldn't be coming to me.
It's the legacy of somebody else that I just want to continue.
And when you go and, and, you know, become an expert or something, you know, when you become in the leadership position, make sure you continue this if you find it helpful and help other people.
And, and, and I want to thank you for that, Tony.
Honestly, you have helped me in so much, immeasurably.
And everybody in my family knows this.
My, my, my friends knows this.
You are my favourite academic.
You are someone that I look up to.
Um, but I want to ask you, Tony, a question here as well.
Um, to, to end this, you know, cause you taught so many people, like so many friends that I know, you know, who's been taught by you.
And every time we get together, we talk about you.
There's never been a gathering with Peter Collins and, and if he, and, and some others that we have never talked about you, uh, Anwar in particular as well.
We always talk about you.
So you, you taught so many people who are in a good positions now.
And who was your favourite or most memorable student and why?
Well, you've got to, you've got to be a bit of one because there's a few students.
I've had that have had like challenges.
So I'm always, I've always, I guess.
If you ask me, you would want to win a competition.
I'm always there for the underdog.
You know, I always want, it's always the one who's had to work harder.
You know, that's a sport coach sport.
It's the ones who not the ones who find it easy.
It's the ones who've had to really work.
So, so you will always have a special place in that sense, Sophie, because, and, and some of the others who were not, not necessarily successful, but I thought that their, their history, their life history, whether that's, you know, coming through war and, you know, where some of you saying, yeah, well, you know, some people were shot by the side of me, or we had this, you know, that we had to tie a hand grenade to the door.
See, those people who've come and lived the normal, are able to adjust to a different country, different language.
You know, they're the sort of people who, whoever successful that is, being successful is just actually be, you know, surviving and, and coming through and having a, a positive role in, in life.
So I, I mean, to be honest, Sophie on the, on our open days, you are a picture on the open day presentation because genuinely, you know, it's about saying.
This is to say, if you prepared to work hard and it was, it's not just, it's not just easy.
It wasn't easy for you.
Was it? It was a struggle.
Um, because for all the things you've said, you know, it's not easy coming to learn a different culture, different language, different, everything, different environment, academic environments, different anyway than other.
Yes, it's, it's different.
There's expectations.
You don't know what to expect.
And, and, and the fact that you were able to navigate that, even if, you know, some of the grades you got were, you know, that were past grades and you go in.
And so it was feedback was that you took the feedback on board.
You did it.
That's not about saying it was easy.
Wasn't easy.
You worked hard.
You were doing, you know, fitness stuff outside of, you know, you were doing physical activity sort of stuff outside of that.
And the, a passion for things.
So that was always something that's always been really.
So that, that's, that's why there are several students, but you don't, you, you certainly one of the students who stand out.
For that, you know, and it's not about the ones who were, you know, there's some great students who were, you know, you know, were really good academically and, but it's, it's sort of, they would have probably been good anywhere.
Do you know what I mean?
They'd probably be good anytime.
And so personal challenge that coming through and, and, and then I was really, when you got your PhD, I was, I was over the moon really.
And now.
Yeah.
Thank you, Tony.
And I think you like, you helped me with, with the proposal at the time as well.
And, and with the reference and even doing my PhD, sometime I used to come to you and, and ask for advice and, and you, you always be generous for that.
And, and I just want to kind of let you know that I am continuing that legacy.
Obviously, I'm, I will never be close to as good as, as you, but I'm trying.
No, I'm trying.
I should say that you're very kind, but I also think you, you probably get to places I can't get, Safi.
So I think that's good.
Just like in the research, you know, it's, there's places you could reach that I could never reach.
Yeah.
And I think that's really important to, to, to the communities you can reach.
It's important to reach the people you can reach.
It's important to reach.
If you can't in generous, that's superb.
And I know you are, but I mean, thank you.
Thank you.
Excellent.
And we do it.
Communities again, you know, when it comes to analysis, when it comes to, to results, we can't do it without you, wherever we go.
You are with us, Tony, and you always be with us.
Um, I'm glad you did not mention, um, if Irfan Khawaja and Peter Collins as good as good as good as he.
They're all good students.
But that, that, that Peter was, Peter particularly was sort of, you know, he didn't have it easy, but he was, you know, he had a smoother ride, I think.
Yeah.
They'll be jealous to hear this.
He had a smoother ride.
Well, if he had different challenges, if he's had different challenges and they've come through and it's great.
He's going through, you know, I know he's had some issues recently as well, which is really sad.
Uh, yeah.
But, uh, both and all of the students really have got very fond memories of, and it's particularly the ones who've done PhDs, to be honest, because you get a bit.
Yeah.
And now they've been through.
Yeah, no, Tony, is there anything we have missed regarding AI or attainment?
Anything else that you think is important for the public to know?
We probably have.
I can't think of anything off the top.
I think you've covered a lot of ground, which is good.
Well, Tony, thank you so much for, again, for your generosity, your input, your time.
Thank you so much.
Pleasure, Safi.
It's great to speak to you again and keep doing it.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
