The title of today's talk, I'm told, seems to be a little ambiguous.
So what I ought to really start with and tell you what it's really all about.
I was jealous yesterday when I learned that the Haven Center, which is sponsoring my talk,
also sponsored Bernhard Stiegler, Bernhard Stiegler's latest book in English, which is
called States of Shock.
And I'm going to talk about Stiegler a little bit today.
I would have liked to have seen Stiegler, but I was obliged to give my own talk.
Which is unfortunate, because I've never met Bernhard Stiegler, but I have read a lot
of his stuff, actually, recently.
And some of what I'm about to say today, not all of it, is really to a certain extent influenced
by and in dialogue with Bernhard Stiegler.
We have a difficult time right now.
Hannah Arendt called our time 25 years ago, maybe a little longer.
You can't take me anywhere.
Anyway, dark times.
She said, these are dark times.
Well, there was one, several beams of light.
One of them was the changeover in the British Labour Party, when a 35-year veteran of the
parliament, a left-wing member of parliament, of laborite, won the leadership of the Labour
Party.
That was, in some ways, a beam of light, in my opinion.
Another beam of light, which turned out to be not so light, and to a certain extent I was
involved in that beam of light, was the victory of Syriza in Greece, which has turned out to
be very complex, because Greece is not a viable economy.
It's got olives, and formerly has shipbuilding, but essentially it's an economy which is entirely
dependent on bailouts from the European Eurozone.
And when they tried to build a political movement that was independent of the Eurozone, they got
clobbered.
And there's a split in Syriza, and there's a lot of complications going on.
So that was a beam of light that became somewhat darkened by the unrealistic expectation that
in a country which is really, in some respects, a dependent variable in the European economy,
could actually strike out on its own without a whole cultural transformation.
And I'm going to talk about some of those things.
The third beam of light, which is a little bit more home, was the resignation of one of
the worst secretaries of education that the United States has had, Arne Duncan.
That was a wonderful move, unfortunately marred by Barack Obama's praise for Duncan for having
brought the educational system of the United States into the 21st century.
That's what Obama said.
And what Duncan represented as a move to the 21st century was that the criteria for excellence
of the education system in the United States was now to be largely dependent on the quantification,
literally, of test scores.
Duncan had become, in fact, the cutting edge of what is probably one of the most reactionary
attempts to pretend that there's an education system in the United States.
If the digitalization of American education goes as far as it's gone, it is largely because Duncan
has been responsible, although there were tendencies before that.
Of course, that means that the next Secretary of Education is going to continue Duncan's program
because Obama, without much reflection in my opinion, will carry on this program, which even the two
unions of teachers, the National Education Association and the American Federation of Teachers,
the two principal unions, have condemned.
Because when I say even, these are people very close to the Democratic Party and to the Obama administration,
and yet the rank and file of teachers finds that this whole tendency to data-based results,
that is the quantification of results as the basis for education, is abhorrent.
And I think it's a hopeful sign. I don't actually pay, I don't actually believe there's much hope for the American Federation of Teachers,
although it's a big union and the NEA is a little bit bigger.
And they may snap out of their slumber. It may be. It's entirely possible.
I am a member of the American Federation of Teachers at the CUNY Graduate Center, and I have been an elected officer of my union.
I said this last night, 23,000 people would represent.
I was on the negotiating committee, I have had experience with the AFT, and their condemnation of the,
of the policies of the Obama administration of re-education is commendable, and yet they haven't done anything really beyond condemnation.
My subject today presupposes, and should presuppose, that there really is two large polls, or two large elements,
in the constitution of social relations.
The first element, which comes directly not only out of the Marxist tradition, but comes out of the neo-liberal, neo-classical tradition in political economy.
It is the dominance of political economy, that is to say the study of the relations of production, distribution, and consumption in a society.
And, of course, if you want an economistic example of political economy in the world today, all you have to do is look at the United States,
and that's all anybody ever talks about.
Jobs, jobs, jobs, jobs, growth, growth, growth, profits.
Of course, what we don't like to talk about very much is wages.
Isn't that interesting? No, no wages.
Well, because wages have stagnated now for 40 years.
But the second part of really what constitutes the social relations is much more obscure.
It is obscure in the popular media, it's obscure in what politicians talk about.
It's to a large extent obscure except in most people's everyday lives.
And that is what is sometimes called consciousness in the old term,
but more recently is termed subjectivity.
And subjectivity in many ways is as important as the categories of political economy for determining the constitution of a society.
That is to say, what do ordinary people, what do intellectuals among ordinary people believe,
are the significant determinants or at the very least influences upon how we live and how we act
and what it is that means our lives.
How do we perceive what is going on?
Both in politics, in foreign policy especially, and so on.
Now, the popular view, and I suggest it, I'm not going to suggest at all that the popular view is wrong.
I'm going to suggest it as very partial.
Is that one of the reasons that, or one of the great influences on the constitution of subjectivity,
of how people see the world, are the media.
The media now seems to have, in many of the commentaries, a great deal of influence on how people see things.
And what it is, not only what they see, but also what they feel is important.
And I know that the Haven Center has had, or will have, I guess has had, McChesney, Bob McChesney here.
And Bob McChesney has books and articles in which he believes the media is, in many ways,
largely responsible for the constitution of subjectivity.
He writes about subjectivity, but he doesn't write about it as subjectivity, he writes about it as the big, bad media.
I don't want to attack that.
I want to simply argue that it is only part of the story.
What is also a very large part of the story, of the constitution of subjectivity, of why and how people act and feel the way they feel, are two things.
One is the missing term in the critique of political economy.
And that missing term is that there really are two kinds of political economy.
One of them is the political economy of the production of goods and services, and the distribution of goods and services, and its consumption.
And the second part is what people like Bernard Stiegler, among others,
Jean-Francois Léotard, who is now no longer among us, and Jacques Derrida, who is no longer among us, French philosophers, refer to as the libidinal economy.
Now what do they mean by the libidinal economy?
Of course, Deleuze and Guattari, who are both gone, especially in the Anti-Oedipus and the Thousand Plateaus.
What do they mean by that, the libidinal economy?
One of the things about economic activity as is generally understood, that is the production of goods and services and so on,
that they have pointed to is that what people hope to gain from economic activity is the satisfaction of their needs.
But the needs are not merely physical needs, as we know.
They are not merely food shelter and so on, but they are also psychic needs.
People want pleasure. That's what they've talked about.
And the question becomes, how do we achieve pleasure out of our activities?
It is all true that people actually work in order to live.
Increasingly, as people like Stiegler have argued, what has happened in our society is that people are living in order to work.
Work has played such an enormous role in a time of an economic crisis in our lives, that we've lost contact with ourselves.
That the libidinal aspects, the pleasurable aspects of life, are to a large extent missing in many people's lives.
And the question becomes, why? That's number one.
The second aspect, which has to do with subjectivity, which is terribly important in the thinking of a lot of French philosophy right now,
and not only French philosophy, but I've written about this extensively, and I'd be happy to tell you what is my stuff on this subject,
is the role of technology in my new book, for example, my recent book.
I can't say it's the newest, but it's also in my new book.
In my recent book called Death and Life of American Labor, I argue that one of the reasons the labor movement is in the drink, not the only reason,
but one of the major reasons is they paid no attention to technology, and they have actually accepted the idea that technology represents progress.
I'm going to talk about that in a bit.
They have accepted technology and accepted its results without really contesting what technology is in relationship to the labor process, for sure.
So, but what Stiegler and others have begun to address, there's a gratitude to start with, actually, is what technology has meant for the conduct of life.
Technology is not simply machine tools for the purposes of production or delivery of services or for communication.
Technology has become dominant in what Lefebvre talks about as everyday life.
Everyday life is now dominated by technology.
People have learned to have a relationship to the screen much more saliently than they have relating to one another.
So that human interaction or even interaction with other life forms, forget about human alone, but other life forms has given away to what might be described as a machinic civilization that we're living in.
And some people have begun to raise the question, and it's a very complicated question, as to whether our relationship to technology is such that we have now entered into a post-human age.
That is to say, that is to say, have we become no longer specifically human, but we have ourselves become machines.
You could go back to Mary Shelley, actually, Percy Bysshe Shelley's partner, wife, and to a whole variety of novels and tracks which emanate from the 19th century.
The 18th century, even if you take Wilson Crabb and find that the problem with our relationship to industrialization has been that the machine is not simply a tool, but the machine has become dominant over our lives.
Not only our lives at work, and my work has been largely devoted to that.
In a book that I wrote with Bill LaFazio called The Jobless Future, we illustrated, and now they've discovered it, I'm so happy.
You know, now the Atlantic Monthly, 20 years after we wrote this book, says, you know, we're looking at a jobless future.
And Bill and I laughed and we said, duh.
Why they couldn't see it in advance is because, and I'm going to get to that in a minute, is because one of the things that we lack is theory.
We have no theory anymore.
People are A and anti-theoretical.
They are, in fact, anti-intellectual, and part of that is because technology has begun to replace the struggle for knowledge.
What is it about technology that Mary Shelley saw?
We have built a simulacrum of ourselves, which, however, has served to take over from us.
Who is Frankenstein?
What is, what is the tale?
Of course, obviously, it's part of a great fear.
But at the same time, it reflects a reality.
Now, let me just start a little systematically by talking about one of the first great commentaries on technology.
The fragment on technology from Marx's Grundreiser, 1857, ten years before the publication of Capital, which is 1867.
He wrote a whole first draft of the book and then discovered that he had to rewrite it, because he was going to do it in many volumes.
Because the first draft was very complex and there were many formulations he wanted to look at again.
And the manuscript was, to a large extent, lost and finally revived when the Soviets bought the Marx archive and then published it in limited editions and then it got published again.
And then finally in the 1970s, it was published by Penguin.
It was published, you know, it's a small book.
It's only got about a thousand pages.
But the fragment on technology makes one fundamental point.
In his analysis of automation, remember 1857, his analysis of automation.
It's also in Capital Volume 3, by the way, you can find it there as well.
In his analysis of automation, what Marx observes is that in the labor process of that time, especially in the textile industry,
but in the tendency, and I can go through the political economy if you want, but that's not necessary for now.
In the labor process, humans no longer have a direct relationship to the production process.
They have now been relegated to bystanders, to watchers of the production process.
When did I learn this?
I didn't learn it by reading Marx, by the way.
I learned it because I was a representative for the Oil Chemical and Atomic Workers International Union.
And I went into chemical plants and oil refineries all over this country.
I was a roving organizer for a while and, you know, I organized in those places.
And what you find, and I've represented the mobile oil workers in Brooklyn before they shut down the plant in the 60s.
What you look at is nobody producing anything.
The machine is a self-activating machine.
The refinery has an average of 200 to 300 people.
There are 25 refineries in the United States left after all the automation and technological change.
And they produce all of the oil, most of the oil anyway, that is used in the United States.
25 refineries times 250 average.
200, 250 average.
You think about how many people there are.
The union's membership in the oil industry is 25,000 and they represent almost all the oil workers in the United States.
25,000 people produce all of our oil.
And, as I said last night, one-sixth of steel workers of 1960 now produce the same amount of steel that was produced in 1960.
25.
25.
26.
26.
26.
27.
27.
27.
27.
28.
28.
norm. Technology is the machine itself has become the worker and the worker has
become an observer. Anybody in this room have been to a contemporary automobile
plant? All of the assembly is done by computer-mediated robots. All of the assembly. I worked six
months at Linden, New Jersey's General Motors plant and we had hands, you know, we put in
the windshield wipers, we put up the tires with our hands. We pushed physically the body
onto the line from the body shop. All done by machine. I've got to tell you, my father
was a chemical operator for DuPont, an observer. In Jersey, South Jersey? No, in Niagara Falls,
New York. Oh, I see. An observer. Bored him to death and killed him at 48. But he was
an observer. He was an observer, that's all. That's all he did. So this is simply from the
production process, from the point of view of other things we are talking about, from
the point of view of how we live our everyday lives, our interaction with technology has become
ubiquitous. And what that has led to, I have a student, his name is Ivan Zatz, and he wrote
his dissertation about the screen. The screen. He said, what is happening now is that we are
interacting with screens. The film was once an object of entertainment. But with the advent
of television and with the advent of various social media, as we call it, of the iPhone and
of the Internet and so on, our interaction are with smaller and smaller and smaller screens.
And our interaction between television and those smaller and smaller and smaller screens takes
up not only our working time if we work at those situations, but takes up our lives away from work.
We are essentially watching and acting on machinery. I don't have to tell you for the sake of illustration
of what the new business is in education. Online learning. What the hell do we need a teacher for?
If on one hand the teacher is teaching to test and has become essentially a technician of test giving,
and on the other hand the student is bereft of any teacher except in an indirect way and has not even
the interaction of a classroom, then what has happened is that our lives are being engulfed in the technology.
That is a perspective that has to be taken seriously. The more advanced the society it used to be,
that was the case. But now the so-called third world is involved in the same processes. So the
universalization of technological sensorium is really beginning to be fairly well known.
Stiegler makes the argument in this book, I can give you other books if you wanted,
the subtitle of this book is Stupidity and Knowledge in the 21st Century.
And what he argues in this book is that the more machinic
our lives, the more stupid we become. That is a conclusion that is very controversial. A lot of
people don't like it, but he illustrates it pretty profusely. But it's got another aspect and I want
to get to that other aspect because technology is not good enough, not enough, and he understands that.
The second problem is that if the machine begins to take up, take over many of the functions
that the intellect took up, that is the generalized intellect. You know the term generalized intellect?
That's Marx's term, by the way. If the machine takes over many of the functions of the generalized,
as well as the specific intellect, then the society becomes anti-intellectual.
And when it becomes anti-intellectual, it becomes increasingly unable to address the problems that it faces.
We live, for example, in the United States, more than any other country in the world.
We are a war society. There has not been almost a single year since the American Revolution that we
have not been engaged in some war or another. Maybe you could start with the French and Indian Wars of
1871 when George Washington began to make his reputation. We're a war society. We're not just a war economy.
That's true, too. But we're a war society. And that war society kills a lot of people, not only Americans,
but kills people all over the world. The murder, the killing has just go on and on and on and on.
And the problem that that poses for us is why is it that Americans tolerate this kind of butchery?
Why is it? One of the characteristics of our society is increasing specialization.
I happen to be a professor of a field that has become so specialized that the field has almost
no theory at all any longer. I won't mention historians because that's well beyond the pale.
But specialization means that people are being trained at the intellectual level not to really address
what somebody said to me, macroeconomic, macro-social, macro-cultural phenomena. People are being trained to
become very specific and very, very, in the Greek term, idiots. The Greek term idiots really doesn't mean,
it means specialized. So specialization is coincident with stupidity.
We become increasingly unable to address, never mind self, address the larger problems of the society as a whole.
We have theories now that say there is no whole, there's no totality. Even a complex dialectical totality,
even a contradictory totality, there's no totality. All we have is a new version of nominalism.
What is nominalism? Nominalism is a theory which argues that everything is discrete and that relations
are not necessary. Relations are usually relations of accident.
The problem, however, is this.
We are
habituated to certain practices.
We go to school
and our teachers in the university, the second part of this book is all about the university,
about university and responsibility. Our teachers tell us,
as students, don't take up theory because you'll never get a job.
Don't become a theorist because if you become a theorist, you'll be unemployed.
I am here to tell you that's a bald-faced lie. That's not even a half-truth.
At least in sociology, I can testify that I train
theorists. I have them read Freud. I have them read Stiegler. I have them read Marcuse and
Horkheimer, which I've been writing about, by the way. And they get jobs. It's a mistake. They
shouldn't get jobs, but they do get jobs. And one of the reasons they get jobs is because
the field is so bereft of ideas that they welcome people who have at least even wrong ideas that they
could be entertained with. And because they have to teach a little bit of theory because that's the
nature of the sociology has a canon. And that becomes another aspect of the stupidity of the constitution
of subjectivity. That we should go to school, that we should enter educational activity from the point
of view of getting a job. It's a very, very serious problem.
And the reason it's a serious problem is because we do not, under those circumstances,
cultivate iconoclasm. What we cultivate is conformism,
which Stiegler and Guattari and others have been pointing to.
People really don't believe that they can have any genuine effect on the larger world,
that what they can only do is what they can do in a very specific and a very narrow way.
And the question becomes, if that is the nature of our situation, what is it going to be like
when we have these terrible crises that we have to move away from, or we have to solve, we have to address?
And I refer you, just as another example, to 2007 and 2008.
I'm not going to go into the whole issue of the financialization of America.
I have a student who wrote a book on the subject, his name is Randy Martin,
and it's called The Financialization of Everyday Life. You may want to look at it, by the way.
It's a very good book. But I'm not going to go into that. But what was interesting about 2008,
2007, 2008, is that there were very few economists who had a clue as to what was going on.
They couldn't fathom it. They couldn't figure it out. And they were guided
by a very narrow group of economists who were basically conservative economists,
who said that the solution to our financial crisis was to give money to the banks, to save the banks.
And so they saved the banks.
And now we're in a period, now we're in 2008 to 2015, I'm giving them the benefit of the doubt,
we're in the seventh year, I think it's the eighth year, but that's a separate issue.
We're in the seventh or eighth year of wage stagnation, of almost no growth of any substantial,
of job creation, which is really of non-jobs, of part-time, temporary, contingent jobs,
of college-educated students who cannot find real vocation.
And I give you an example of my daughter, graduated Wesleyan in 2006.
She spent four years as a freelancer, five years as a freelancer, one year working for the Chicago
Tribune, but five years as a freelancer before she got her first job with NBC News. She's a journalist,
like her mother. NBC News didn't offer, it was a one-year job, didn't offer her a second year,
because she was on a Gates Foundation grant. Then she got another job for another year, and you know,
and now she's got another job for another year. She's now 31 years old,
and she's still a contingent worker. She gets paid well, but she doesn't have any business,
it's no such thing as job security.
We're finding that the whole field of knowledge is being reconfigured, so that there's very little
available to anybody. There are no newspapers that have any viability, except the New York Times and
the Wall Street Journal, and maybe the LA Times is going down the drain any minute now. Of course,
the Capital Times will always do this.
But they didn't have a clue.
The liberal economists, the Keynesian economists, now have gotten a voice again a little bit,
but the Keynesian economists are basically stuck in 1936, which is the year of the publication of the
General Theory of Employment, Interest and Money, by the way. Everybody should know that. They're still
back to 1936. They talk this language, this language. We need to rebuild America's infrastructure, roads and
public buildings, and that will create jobs. One of my fields, by the way, happens to be work. I study work.
Automation has not let the construction industry alone.
They've never looked at road building. There's earth moving equipment, built by Kia, for example,
and there's a few people in the laborers, but the number of people who used to be in the WPA in the 1930s
is no longer exist. Construction unions have declined by two thirds, not because they've lost the contracts,
but because automation and technological change have transformed the work. And still,
the politicians and the economists talk about infrastructure as job creating.
What I'm talking about is not to get into that political attack and all that. What I'm talking
about is the way in which our thinking has become addled, has become narrowed, has become tremendously
ignorant. He calls it stupid. I don't call it stupid. They're just ignorant. And there are always
individual exceptions. And they can be named. But it's part of the problem of subjectivity. How do we see
the world in which we live? How do we understand what the problems are? How do we become more and more and more
narrow in our outlook? Okay.
In 1941,
Herbert Marcuse, who at that time was connected to the Institute for Social Research, which is popularly
known as the Frankfurt School, in their publication wrote an essay. And the essay is called From Some Social
Implications of Modern Technology. It's an essay. And what he said
is that technology is increasingly becoming a way of life. And that that way of life is having enormous
impact on our economic situation, but more on our moral situation, on our intelligence, and
the constitution of power in society. He repeated the argument again in 1964 in a book called One Dimensional Man, which
sold 200,000 copies in hardcover. Think about it. And part of the reason that he was able to do that, aside from the fact that he was a very, you know, very good philosopher and a very smart guy,
is because he was the assistant of what some people think is the greatest philosopher of the 20th century,
Martin Heidegger,
whose own essay called The Question Concerning Technology
is, it reflects a similar kind of question about what technology means in human relations.
And yet, and both of them point to the limitations of technology. Stiegler,
and Deleuze and Guattari have, and Leotard to a certain extent, have extended that argument.
Stiegler is a Frankfurt School follower with criticism, serious criticisms,
but he always refers to the, to their work on technology.
But the, but the prevailing sensibility
is that
technology is going to solve every problem on earth.
It's going to solve health problems.
It's going to solve employment problems.
It's going to solve the problems of everyday life.
It's going to solve everything we need.
It's all going to happen with technology.
And we should all lay back and enjoy it.
And Apple is laughing all the way to the bank.
But we must realize
that much of the thinking that technology can solve all the problems is not a new,
not a new, not a new phenomenon. It's an, it's, it's an old phenomenon.
But there was, there's a second phenomenon and a third.
The second phenomenon
has to do with
the problem
of believing
that science, which is a,
we don't have any, any basic science anymore.
What we have is technoscience.
That science is really part of the big solution.
And no more
interesting part of that
belief in this, in, in scientific progress
is now taking place in the field of medical science,
medical tech, scientific technology.
My wife died of lung cancer. She never smoked.
People dying of lung cancer all the time who don't smoke.
The scientific establishment,
I'm not speaking about individuals, the scientific establishment has promulgated a view of cancer
and the solution, which essentially believes that the dominant reason that people get cancer is because of genetic predisposition.
And if we actually alter the constitution of DNA, or find a way of altering that constitution, we're going to solve the problem of cancer.
The alternative view is that cancer is a social disease.
The cancer is a societal question, problem.
The alternative to that, even, and people believe that, but they're not, that they're not getting any real play,
is, I think there were three things.
There's genetic predisposition, there's the environment, the food that we eat,
the pollution that people now realize is serious,
the plastics, the commodities that we consume,
fossil fuels, all that people are beginning to get the idea that maybe that has something to do with cancer.
The third, nobody believes. The only one who really did any extensive research on that subject
is Wilhelm Reich, in a book called The Cancer Biopathy.
And that is that there's a psychoanalytic, there's an emotional dimension to cancer.
And to all disease. Not that it's the cause, or that predisposition is the cause, or that the
environment is the cause, but it is a complex of causality.
That's a theory that has some power, if you think about it, because there are people who actually,
what Marcuse said in One Dimensional Man, and he was not a psychoanalyst, but he said, although he wrote
Eris and Civilization, which was a psychoanalytic meditation, he said that emotional questions have
somatic consequences. What that means is that we cannot ignore the relationship between disease
and emotional well-being.
We have to examine the question, and Siegler is very specific about that, of the unconscious.
As a factor, as an influence in how diseases emerge.
You won't be surprised to learn that oncology teams do not include psychoanalysts.
They don't even include environmentalists. The oncology team is always in the major places,
like Sloan Kettering and NYU, and my wife was treated at NYU, oncology center.
It's all chemotherapy, radiation, and surgery, and now they have the belief in the magic bullet.
Magic bullet thinking, by the way, very interesting, right?
We're going to take an extract of the disease, and we're going to inject it through nanotechnology,
and that's going to solve the problem of cancer.
How silly can you get? But that's the scientific establishment. We're going to have a solution to cancer
by medical means. They've never been able to cure cancer. Never. It's always a matter of
five years, and then maybe you get lucky. Even in breast cancer, you have a five-year
period when you can be free of it, and it often reappears. You know what's going on in the case of
infantile paralysis. It's coming back. People who have had infantile paralysis and allegedly got better,
came back. The point obviously, and it's coming back with younger people as well,
the point obviously I'm making is that this is a way of thinking
that literally believes that science and technology can solve all the problems.
And the science that they have is essentially science of particulars, of specific specifics.
I should stop with this conclusion. Unless and until
social science, history, as well as so-called natural science,
science begins to address the problem of subjectivity and the relationship between technology,
science, and subjectivity, the relationship between anti-intellectualism and war,
and all those kinds of large issues, that unless and until that begins to happen,
we're going to have a lot of trouble, continuing trouble. And one of the worst part of that trouble
is that people are going to say, I have cancer. I have heart disease.
I was a failure. I couldn't find a decent job. Not you, me. We live in a situation in which there
are very, there are real serious problems that are not being significantly addressed.
Some people believe, obviously, that it's a problem of the consumerism. That is to say,
consumerism has taken over the space of pleasure, of the intellect, and so on. I think that's partially true.
But we have, but we, but we're not thinking. In Heidegger's great book, being in time,
I'm not going to talk about for the moment, but in his great book,
what is called thinking? Heidegger says at the end, or all throughout the book, are we thinking yet?
Kids say, when they're in the car, when we're driving in the car, the kids say, are we there yet?
He's asking the question, are we thinking yet? And he comes to the conclusion that we are not thinking yet.
And what Stigler and others have, in French social and philosophical theory, have begun to address is
the problem of why we're not thinking, and they argue that we're not thinking because we have been taken
over by, we have become, to a large extent, de-individualized, that we've become conformist,
that we've become technologically dominated. Marcuse took the same position, that we've become
essentially one-dimensional. It's strange 50 years later to talk about one-dimensionality, but it's
really, it's worse now than it was 50 years ago, in my opinion. And so that's, that's my conclusion,
and I'm sorry I don't have any solutions, but I think they're very important to think about what
it is that we're facing, and I'll entertain questions. Thanks.
All right. So we've got a little less than a half an hour. We usually end at 530, so I'll let you call on people.
He was in a class that I addressed, by the way, in 1969. He remembers me. Yeah.
Could you speak a little louder? Yes. Thank you very much for the thought-provoking speech.
You have drawn quite a dark picture of the cultural and psychoanalytic state of the humankind.
I would like to ask if you see any counter-tendencies or cultural and psychoanalytic
contradictions that may provide some beams of light? That's a great question.
I know that what I presented was the critical side, and
I have to say that the first thing you have, that intellectually,
the best work that's being done is still critical. The best work. Some people, and Stingler is among them,
some people, intellectuals are beginning to talk about solutions. They're talking about alternatives,
not simply critiques. What there isn't yet, and I think almost anywhere, I'll give you a couple of
counter-tendencies in a minute. What there isn't yet is, at the social and the cultural level,
a large questioning of the role of technology in society,
a large questioning of the problem of the relationship between science, technology, and subjectivity,
and disease, for example, in the medical area.
The one place where there is a counter-tendency, and it is a muffled counter-tendency because it has no,
it is not a large movement, is that in the field of work,
in this country, as well as everywhere else, there is a new
attempt to restore the concept of what C. Wright Mills talked about as craftsmanship.
That is to say, to say, no, we're not going to be machinic anymore.
We're going to try to actually produce things in a much more archaic way.
That we're going to challenge the progressive view of technology by actually producing things
that are really, in many ways, handcrafted, or not entirely handcrafted, in part handcrafted.
You may find this strange, but you'll see this in food, primarily. You'll find this in not only beer,
but you'll find it also in certain other foods as well.
There's a lot of questioning, for example, in the fight on food,
food, both intellectually as well as in practice, about the use of genetically modified organisms,
GMOs. That's true of Western Europe. It's also true of this country.
There's also a new, Marian Nestle is among them, Michael Poll is among them,
a new attempt to really point out that we're eating a lot of poison in our everyday diets.
So there's some of that going on.
The industry, the Archer Daniel Midlands and the Monsantos are still insisting that GMOs
and scientists are being paid to say that GMOs are harmless.
They're being paid to say that GMOs are harmless. Just as, and you probably know this as well,
I hope you know it, that Coca-Cola gave a lot of money to obesity studies. Isn't that wonderful?
The medical establishment that went for obesity, involved in obesity said that sugar is not the only
major form of obesity. Now they discontinued their contact with Coca-Cola after three and a half million
dollars here and a five million dollars there and seven million dollars. I'm giving you three numbers
that are actual numbers that three of the of the institutes actually accepted.
So that at the level of work, at the level of health and food, there is a certain amount of
of counter tendency. What I don't see, and maybe you can help me, I don't, maybe I'm wrong,
there's not a single political force of any power, of any influence, including the left. I don't think
by the left is the left is great on this stuff. You know, they're either blind or going along.
There isn't a political force of any strength, Western Europe or here, or for that matter, in most of the,
in most of the Latin American and Asian countries, that actually says, look, we have to, at the very
minimum, this is minimum, we have to take a critical perspective, a critical look at technology.
We have to take an understanding
of the labor process, we have to take an understanding of the health field, we have to take an
understanding of child development, of all kinds of things, in order to be able to do stuff. We don't
have a political force of any strength that even questions the specialization of education in this
country, or for that matter in Western Europe. What you have to do is you have to present yourself as
alternative and to a large extent as, you know, as experimental and small here and small there,
that's fine. But you don't have any, any fight on these issues, real fight.
Capital has ruined the education system, or if you want to take the most pessimistic view,
the American education system was ruined from the very beginning.
Capital has ruined the education system, but I'm going to be optimistic, it's gotten much worse.
And one of the things we, well it has, I mean it's really, the University of Wisconsin
was, and still to some extent is, an exception to a very large rule in higher education.
It had, its historians had a genuine critical perspective on the world, it had sociologists,
it had political scientists, it had even some scientists who had some, some critical understanding.
That tendency is almost all over. It's not just the University of Wisconsin, it's MIT and, and, and,
uh, and, uh, other places like that. I mean, we're really in some, we're in deep doo-doo, according to the great philosopher George W. Bush.
When we don't have a counter tendency that I can point out as, as, as, as a significant political,
or for that matter, a significant educational force. Now, I will tell you this, however,
there are many people in this Western Europe and the United States, but particularly in Western Europe and Latin America,
at least, who want to see genuine alternative perspectives on what constitutes the good life.
At the end of my book, Death and Life of American Labor, by the way, which is selling a lot of copies,
yeah, I have to tell you that for, for, for what it is, it's, you know, it's not on the bestseller list, but it's still doing very well.
I ask the question, does the labor movement have a conception of the good life?
Because without a conception of the good life, that is to say, you know, as Mark says, the difference between
an architect and a bee is that the architect has in his head a model, you know, a, a, a, a picture.
We don't have the conception of the good life, we don't have alternatives, but now there are people
beginning to raise the question of what that means. What is the good life? How would we begin to, to change
things? There's an urbanist movement around the world about such things. There's, there's a people doing,
in, in, in, um, in, in, in Argentina, there were people, in people who occupied factories so that they can start
making goods themselves, rather than having management. That's good stuff, but it's sporadic,
and it's not yet matured.
Yes? Um, I guess two questions. One is, uh, do you see a difference between technology that is,
uh, sort of organized and controlled by capital versus technology that is not? So the, sort of,
Wikipedias, the 3D printers, the open source movement, um, and then I guess if we have this huge,
uh, subjective wall to, sort of, break through what does that mean for organizing strategies?
Um, good question. It's the same question with two parts, right?
Thank you, everyone.
Um, certainly, open source is better than the commercialization of the internet, right?
I mean, I, I won't deny that. Um, I use Mozilla instead of, um, the window, you know, the,
the Microsoft, um, um, search engine. You know, um, you know, it's one of those things,
it's like recycling. It doesn't do any good, but you do it because it makes you feel better.
Um, there's a distinction. Heidegger makes a distinction between technet and technology.
Technet is the uncovering of the unknown and that has been with, uh, with us for, for millions of
fears. We always have tech, tech, technical, uh, means of, of learning new things. So I'm not opposed
to learning new things. Certain things I think we should not learn, but that's the step. No,
I mean it seriously. I, I actually called for that in my book, Science is Power, and I got slammed.
What do you mean we shouldn't learn things? But the problem is, if, if we don't exempt certain parts
of the, uh, of the universe, including the unconscious from knowledge, then we will not be
able to effectively fight domination. That's my view. But, technology, capitalist technology,
or for that matter, socialist technology, whatever that might mean, there's no possibility under
capitalism that technology will not remain a form of domination. There's no possibility. It's getting
worser and worser and worser and worser. And the reason for that is because in the first place you
have, the, the, the, the dream of capital is to have the workerless factory.
Notwithstanding the problem of surplus value. Where, where, how do you get surplus value when you don't
have labor, you know, labor power making the product. Then you have manipulation of money,
you have fictitious capital, you have all sorts of other things. But, the second reason is because
if technology under capitalism is about the subordination of people, and about the use of
the human body as a commodity, continual, that's what the medical industry is really all about,
then it's not going to happen under capitalism. So that, therefore, my conclusion is, until we have a
significant, and I'm not going to use the word socialism, because socialism has had a day in
my opinion, until we have a conversation about how we change the system, and in what direction that
system has to be changed, then the possibility of technologies that would be, or technical means
that would be advantageous to ordinary people is not going to be possible. In other words, the new
technology will have to be connected to new society. Now, that is a possibility now, because the number of
individual critics of technology is growing. But so far, it's been very, very difficult to envision any
of any organizations, any movements of significant power, to be able and willing to take up those kinds
of critiques, and make them connected to social change. Let me make one point here, because this is
really the main point. One of the arguments that is being made by French social theory, and I would argue
that that that was also true of the Frankfurt School, is that the capacity of human beings to be able to
conceive of alternatives that are both temporarily relevant and politically possible, that capacity
has been so diminished that the best that we can get now is resistance and protest. The concept of
alternatives is almost impossible to think about any longer without 100 million objections because of the
of the history. You can't simply talk about socialism or communism in a naive way anymore. You just can't do it.
People are trying to do that, but you're trying to do that, and other people, philosopher, French philosopher.
But I don't know whether that's possible. We have to actually begin to think about alternatives that
haven't been thought about before. And the problem is that as long as we don't critique
the influences on subjectivity, that is to say, as long as we don't have a conception of how serious
is the phenomenon of specialization and all that on people's lives, unless we don't, and to combine the
two senses of political economy, the libidinal economy and the traditional economy with the psychological
and the social dimensions, then we're not going to go very far. We're not going to get there. We keep
falling back. We have economists who can't even think of any solutions any longer, and the economists are
the pinnacle of what constitutes good social science. Are you an economist? No. Oh, good.
But you know what I'm saying. Now, this is my prejudice. I don't think it's a prejudice. It's the way I think.
There was a lot wrong with the concept of the totality that comes out of Marx,
and the concept of the totality that was developed by George Lukács. It was serious problems because
it didn't take into account a number of different phenomena, one of which is the complexity of class
structure. We have a very complicated class structure. We have two dimensions of classes. We
have economic classes, and we have cultural classes, and they have never literally theorized that. I have
in a book called How Class Works, by the way. Nobody pays attention to that book. Oh, it does all right,
but nobody pays attention. We have different, you know, ideas about class. But the one thing that they did have
is that they tried to develop a concept of the totality, of the relationship between economic,
social, political, and psychological phenomena, that that relationship was intimate.
And Siegel is trying to do it now. He doesn't talk enough. He has a book called Towards a New
Political Economy. It's an interesting book. How do you integrate the libidinal economy with the
traditional economy? But it's not yet taken hold. That's the problem. It's not yet become
a property of any political and social movements. It hasn't happened. People still talk nationalism and,
you know, the old shit. I'm not talking about separate. I'm talking about nationalism. Anyway,
any further questions? Yeah. Can you stand up and speak louder? I'm sorry. Of course. I was hoping you could
talk a little bit about collective subjectivity and your thoughts on, you know, where we stand now in
terms of social movements constituting themselves and taking up robust political demands. You know,
there's a certain strain of thought that criticizes the kind of more horizontal, anarchist-inspired
resistance around the, you know, the WTO protests and these kinds of things, occupying Wall Street,
that there's a certain chauvinism that says these things aren't yet mature, these things aren't yet
consolidated around a real, you know, concept of political subjectivity. I'm wondering if
what you kind of think about that strain of thought, if there's something that we've learned since the
the critique of sort of simplistic class analysis or simplistic sort of political analysis from the 20th
century, if there's anything that can kind of be brought forward from some of these new experiments
in social movements and people organization. Okay.
A genuine social movement, as opposed to a movement around a specific set of demands that is so specific
that they could be resolved by those in power, a genuine social movement creates a situation in which the
the entire culture of that particular space, like a nation, or maybe even a part of a nation,
has to deal with. A social movement, and I'll give examples in a second, a social movement is not simply
an act of protest or resistance, it's an act of people who are saying we have a demand which is sufficiently
powerful that you have to address it. Okay, I'm going to give you three examples.
The Black Freedom Movement of the 1950s and 1960s, because of its direct action, because of its disruption,
because of its civil disobedience, because of its occupying spaces that were against the law,
forced the entire country, the United States, to address its demands. That was a social movement.
And it was an ongoing social movement, which had internally a number of different factions,
one of which was a more radical faction, which was for direct action. It had a more conservative
faction, which was the NAACP, which was only for legal resolution, but it was a social movement,
because it forced that kind of change. Second, of course, was the feminist movement. And the feminist
movement had factions. It had a radical faction. It had a liberal faction, very much like the NAACP,
which I call conservative, not because it's conservative ideologically, but it's conservative in its
strategy, and even its demands. But the feminist movement developed a line which challenged
a very important part of Catholicism, and a very important part of evangelical Protestantism,
which was specifically on the problem of abortion. But it wasn't just abortion. They were raising
the question of new relationship between men and women, and new relationship for sexuality more
generally than the relationship between men and women. So you had transgender issues, and you had,
you know, issues of gay and lesbian rights and all that, that developed through the feminist movement
and around the feminist movement, and they took sides. But generally speaking,
it was the feminist movement that has resulted in all of this, all of the changes that you've seen in
this country. And it took decades, and it took struggle. Homophobes, homophobes had to change their
views within the feminist movement. There were people in the feminist movement who said the basic issue
issue for women is changing the relations of the bedroom. And if you don't change the relations of
the bedroom, you're not changing a whole lot. It's not about legal rights. It's not about, you know,
whether Carly can become the CEO of Hewlett Packard. That's not what the feminist movement is primarily about.
But there were others like the late Betty Friedan, the later Betty Friedan, who said the real issue was,
you know, how do we gain legal rights and all that kind of stuff. So you had those splits. But the fact
is that they were genuine social movement, because they were raising some fundamental problems of the
relationships between people. Race on the one side was the black freedom movement, and sexuality on the
other side was the feminist movement. I'm going to now say what I think is a failed social movement.
Occupy, I've written about extensively. Have you read my stuff on Occupy? No? Well, I've written a lot. You
can get it. Yeah. Hold on. The failed social movement is the ecological movement. Because what happened in the
ecological movement, it got taken over by the Democratic Party. The Democratic Party runs the ecological
movement. It's not an autonomous movement anymore. It's got, you know, organizations that are more
independent than others. But essentially, it's looking for changes of the law. And it's looking to the, it
looked, especially since 2008, to the Obama administration. And before that, even to the Clinton
administration for changes, it did not have a social base. It wasn't a social movement. It was an elite
movement with some activists, more than some. But, you know, it was not, it didn't have a, it didn't,
it didn't have a sense of what the ecological crisis would mean in terms of the transformation of the
entire society. The problem with the ecological movement, it's unfair, in fact, as compared to the
feminists and the black freedom movement, is that the ecological movement cannot avoid, if it's ever going
to become an effective social movement taking on capitalism, it cannot avoid it. You cannot solve
the problem at this point, at this point, but maybe, maybe never, you cannot solve the problem of global
warming, of climate change, until you've actually solved the problem of capitalism. And that's what they
refuse to do, and therefore they've fallen back on a variety or another of liberal, piecemeal, small-scale
solutions, like recycling. You know, but, but it's an example of a failure. And, and, and the problem,
the problem is that if that movement is ever going to develop, it's going to have to rely not on the Bill
McKillen, McKibbins, who is a liberal reformer, is going to have to look to much more deeply to people
like Joel Covell, and people like Murray Bookchin, who was an anarchist, and it's going to have to
actually begin to expand its understanding of what produces the ecological crisis against which it is
trying to fight. And then it's going to have to become a revolutionary movement. And maybe it's also true
that whatever radical movement will develop will have to be, in the first place, an ecological movement.
So anyway, that's, that's the short answer. Uh, well, oh, that was my question. All right. Okay.
I guess that's it, huh? Thank you.
