the system that we have created. It has been hijacked and we're caught in this trap and we
are worthy of so much better. This is not what we're here to build and I think everybody on the
planet can come to that conclusion if they just have that scaffolding and that support and then
you'd want to empower them to you know drive the change but I think that's actually the core of
rediscovering what it means to be human and changing that story and the rest I think would
actually sort itself out. I often say that it is an unusual time to be alive and for many of us the
places we live and the problems we deal with were ones that the human brain evolutionarily was not
meant to hold. Navigating the challenges ahead of us will require a change in consciousness for many
humans which of course is much easier said than done. Joining me to discuss this topic today is
Eric Fernholm. Eric Fernholm has dedicated his career to unraveling how personal growth connects to
building a sustainable society. He's a philosopher, social entrepreneur and has an academic background
in cognitive neuroscience and happiness research. Eric's been involved in launching a variety of
initiatives to create forums for inner development including the co-founding of the 29K Foundation
which has a mission to democratize inner development by building the world's first scalable platform
making mental health and inner development tools available to millions free of charge for the users.
Eric has since helped in founding the Inner Development Goals Initiative which offers a framework to assist
individuals in navigating and developing their inner lives to catalyze outer change. In today's conversation
he and I unpacked much of the nuance and complexity that goes into creating and working with such an
ambitious project alongside the importance of offering just one way that people can approach personal growth
and mental health within the broader human predicament. I will also point out because it is often forgotten
that every episode including this one has a very long and thorough list of references and show notes
which can be found both in the description and on the site a link at thegreatsimplification.com
with that please welcome Eric Fernholm. Eric, welcome to the show my friend.
Eric Fernholm Thank you so much. Great to be here.
Eric Fernholm Great to meet you in your country last year. Was it last year? Yeah, I think so.
Eric Fernholm I have to admit I quite like Sweden. It feels like it's a merger of what's been,
what is and what could be in ways that the United States is not.
Eric Fernholm Yeah, it was great having you here. I really appreciated it. And Sweden, the Scandinavian
countries are an interesting place to be in. Troublesome in some ways as well, but interesting.
Eric Fernholm For sure. I only saw Stockholm and then I went up to visit Pella
Teal on her farm. So I can't say that I saw much of the country. So finally, we have you on the show.
Eric Fernholm And for those who are unaware of your work, it spans a lot of areas, which I described in the
intro, but you spent much of your career studying the psychology of happiness, eventually leading you
to your current contributions in developing the inner development goals, the IDGs. What are the inner
development goals and how can they inform and midwife the creation of better, more sustainable societies?
Eric Fernholm Yeah. So the inner development goals is a communicative framework, basically trying to map
out that, I mean, the context is basically that we know that, you know, more than half of the time
has passed for reaching the SDGs, the sustainable development goals from the UN. And we're getting
more and more information that things aren't progressing in the right direction. And we aren't adapting
to that information. So we're more or less kind of immune to that change, uh, that we are the ones
causing the problem that we're trying to fix. So what we kind of pose being the humans on the earth.
Eric Fernholm Yeah, exactly. Yes. And, and accepting that this is not just a information or technical
challenge, but this is an adaptive challenge where we are, you know, the way that we are solving problems
is the problem. Then what we're exploring in the IDGs is what shifts, what inner shifts in culture and
individuals are needed for us to actually achieve the SDGs, like to unlock this situation, um, and to
build the capacities, not only to process the information and to take that on, because that is an emotional,
quite heavy thing to do. Uh, you have a lot of psychological immune systems as well within the
individual that will kind of try to stay away from that or try to neglect it. Um, but then not only
to take it on, but then to, um, you know, take in the complex view of that and to care for the entire
system and act for that system in a more, um, in a better way, basically that is more generative.
Eric Fernandez So, so what are they, what are the inner development goals? And I, I, uh,
I have lots of questions.
Eric Fernandez Yeah. Um, so what we, what we did was that together with this huge network of
researchers, we, we kind of pose the question, what inner skills capacities and qualities are needed for
us to reach sustainability and have a thriving future and planet. And what we got back from that
huge amount of data, like 4,000 experts on the topic, uh, was five categories and 23 skills indexing,
really kind of like, these are the core things, uh, at least at a first iteration,
um, that can point us to kind of where we're lacking or the skills that we need to build and
enhance so that we better can act on driving sustainability. Uh, and really it opens up a
different type of conversation saying that there's this inner dimension of sustainability. It's not just
this external systems change that we need to fix out there, but there's an inner aspect of psychology
and culture that we need to change. Um, and it's all, so it's saying that the inner and the outer
are interconnected, but it's also a story of, of a more hopeful narrative of saying, you know what,
um, humans and cultures can develop. And that means that the system that we have created is not the
only system that we can create. Uh, we have created this one, but it doesn't mean that humanity is
destined for unsustainability, but that we actually can, um, develop past this and create better
systems. So it's, it's natural that someone would eventually be working on this because we have
a supply problem, uh, which is where our culture is based on, um, fossil, uh, carbon and fossil minerals.
We have a waste problem that emanates from that, but then there's a demand problem. What is it that
we want? What is it that we need? How do we relate with each other? And I've been saying, uh, for quite a
while, uh, and a lot recently that the real energy transition isn't really about switching from dirty
energy to clean energy. It's changing the relationship we have with energy, which gets to some of these
inner development goals. Like what's it all for? How do we relate with each other and with the natural
world? Um, so you're, you're looking on that on the demand side and, uh, presumably how we cope,
uh, and presumably how humans can measure our success in things other than material throughput.
Yeah. I mean, so as soon as you open up the box of, of the inner dimension, you, you really come
down to kind of like, um, the demand side, or what do we really value? What is truly important for humans?
And how do we build a sustainable system around those needs? Um, and here, I mean, research is quite
clear, um, that for one, I mean, human beings are hackable. Uh, so we are shaped by social norms,
uh, but we're also hackable from the dopaminergic system of effective forecasting and stuff like that,
but we, we can be fooled into thinking that if I get what I want, then I'll be happy. If I get X,
then I'll be happy. Then I'll feel this. Um, and, and the, and within the inner development goals,
it really kind of invokes and invites this conversation really of what is truly valuable.
What is a, uh, life well lived really. And I mean, it may be surprising to some people,
I don't think the audience of the podcast would be surprised by it, but from the, from at least in
Scandinavia, I mean, there's this individualistic, um, very, uh, kind of top down approach to happiness
that if I just get more optionality, if I just get more freedom and so money and power will give
me freedom. And if I get freedom, then I can do whatever I want and then I'll be happy because I
won't be limited. And that presupposes that, you know, uh, what you want and that aligns with what
you need. And it doesn't, unless you're very wise and have, you know, have had a great childhood where
you really are aligning, uh, what you want and what you need. But for most people, those
things don't really point in the same direction. So, um, exploring that, um, is, and then the research
on that topic, I think is fundamental where, you know, nobody wakes up in the morning, hoping to have
a meaningless day, even though we're all individuals, nobody wakes up in the morning, wanting to be
controlled by other people or wanting to feel less competent or wanting to be excluded of their social
group. We all have these basic human needs. Um, and, and if we could focus more on experiencing
a fulfillment of those needs, instead of getting X, um, I think that's a really, uh, it's a fundamental
conversation to be had in the realm of sustainability at large, of course.
So what are the, the five categories? And if, if you want to list the 23, that's fine as well.
Yeah, I'll stay with the five. Uh, so it's, it's, um, so what, what kind of, uh, from a Delphi process
of the data, so just a statistical analysis of kind of grouping that, what we found was that,
that, um, the first one was the being category basically of like, uh, understanding who I am,
what is important for me, the story of my identity. Um, like for me, that kind of pulls into where do I
think that I end, uh, and expanding that really shifts, uh, what I want, what I need, what I focus
on. Second category is thinking. Uh, so am I thinking in a, like in a simple linear way or I'm thinking
in systems and, and, um, I mean there, there's a lot of different types of research from Peter
Senge or the, that we, uh, pull in on, um, then also relating. So how do I relate? Third category
is like, how do I relate to myself, others in the world? Um, and then the second two categories is,
uh, collaborating and acting. So that's much more, um, you know, outward oriented, uh, getting things done,
moving. People are more comfortable in those categories because we have, of course, a culture
that's built on getting stuff done. And the first three, uh, being thinking and relating are
a little bit more about, you know, slowing down and, and, uh, reflecting and maybe changing these
deeper narratives that we have of who we are, what is valuable, um, what is really important.
So you said you had 4,000 experts contribute, um, or you looked at their, their research.
Is this like, when we talk about climate change and, uh, oil depletion and, and those things,
there are check marks, like we each need 2,000, 2,500 calories a day. Um, and there's a CO2 footprint
from flying a plane and things like that. But the list of things that you just said are, are, uh,
not so discrete and they might be applied in different contexts to different cultures.
So is it a checklist or is it more a directional, um, uh, aspiration? Some of some of these categories.
Yeah. So I wouldn't say it is a checklist at all. So, I mean, within each of the five categories,
we have, you know, a couple of skills that came out of the data, um, but, uh, like empathy and
compassion and stuff like that, uh, or systems thinking or courage. Um, but I would say it's much
more a, a, um, a way to start a conversation about what is really needed for us to, uh, take in care and
act on these really complex, uh, challenges, uh, like the multipolar traps or, uh, stuff like that.
It really needs you to kind of move away from a simple way of looking at the problem. Um,
and it invites a lot of more perspectives, uh, where there are interventions then that IDGs points
towards like programs or tools, evidence-based processes that we know will actually build these
capacities, um, and cooperations in a lot better way.
So are these, uh, IDGs, inner development goals, um, from the perspective of the dominant global
culture, which is the economic superorganism spurred by the global north right now, or are they also
applying to cultures that aren't the dominant cultures that are pulled into what's happening
right now and, and integrating those perspectives or how, how do you even manage such a thing?
There's 8 billion people in wildly different contexts in the world.
Yeah. And this is, this has actually been, um, one of the big things that we've been
working on and struggling with because.
You know, we started the framework of saying like, how could nobody have not invented the
inner development goals, like the inner side, the inner shifts of motivation and care and systems
thinking towards the SDGs. Uh, like, like when we registered the domain, we're a little bit sad
because we're like how, like inner development goals, uh, and then, and then you found out why.
Then we found out why. Yeah. Uh, it's a really complex task, but, but, um, I mean, doing it with the,
some of the top thinkers in the world, but in this field, really, I think that enabled the project,
um, to, to take off. Uh, but what happened was, uh, once we released the framework, it, it just exploded.
Uh, we had people all over the world reaching out saying like, we are starting an IDG hub here
or completely emergent organic. And now we have 700 plus hubs around the world,
more in, I think, Brazil than we do in Sweden. Um, uh, so per capita, uh, and it just took off.
And then as a kind of consequence of that, this, this topic kind of came up as like, is this just
representative of, of the, like a small group of, of, um, like Northern European thinkers,
or is this representative of, of the global movement? And like, this conversation is not,
is not ours to dominate or to, to, um, you know, have a veto on. So now what we're doing to kind of,
um, integrate all these perspectives of, you know, native wisdom and, and all these different
ways of thinking is, is expanding the survey again, not going for, you know, for 4,000 thinkers
or expert, but actually inviting 2 million people to respond. Um, of course that takes a lot more time.
Um, but it is, it is really something that, that kind of has happened as a bottom up process. Um, but
what we're seeing also in the dominant culture is kind of a longing for this type of conversation
because we've been looking at, we've been fighting for the, the people who have intrinsic motivation
and really care about these topics. They're not seeing the results that they want and the years
are passing and they're starting to feel it like unsustainability is now touching us. Right.
And for those people to have a completely different level of conversation has really, um, been
inspirational, uh, both on the corporate and governmental level.
So what happens at these inner development hubs? You said there's 700 of them. What, what are those about?
Yeah. So, um, so the, the barrier to entry to start a hub is really low. And I think the limit is
like you need to be three, three people who join together and, and want to work on these
topics in a systemic way. Right. Um, and, and spread, uh, those types of interventions. And we, we try to
stay very close to, to the science of what actually is, um, what drives these types of skills and capacities.
Um, but then there's, there's the possibility to start a, a center as well. And so some, some hubs like
the one in Barcelona, I think it has like hundreds of members. Um, but then a lot of them are just a few
people who really care about the topic. Uh, but we're also seeing is governments even coming on
board and saying, we're starting a, we're not starting just a hub. We want to be the representative
of, for the entire country and the nation. Uh, so in, in Costa Rica, the Costa Rican government,
um, for the second time in a row, like going, uh, they changed the, the election shifted parties,
but they're still implementing the IDGs centrally in the government into all of their institutions
and agencies, educational system, because they said, you know, we're pioneering sustainability,
but we know that we are the ones getting in our own way. So how do we even start exploring how we
can get unstuck here? Um, which is really interesting. So I know, you know, when I met you in Sweden,
we talked about human behavior quite a bit. I'm not sure I knew your role in, in this, um, org,
like what, what are you doing now? Are you running this IDGs? Uh, who else is involved? Are you doing
this from Sweden? What, what's the structure? Yeah. So, no, I'm, I'm not running it. Uh, we're a big
team. I mean, I was one of the co-founders. Um, but we're really, we've been extending the co-founding
team because really now it's, uh, I mean, a lot of top researchers have, have joined. So I think
the context of it was really the Oak Island foundation with Thomas Björkman. Um, and then
I was working a lot with 29 K foundation, which is basically Wikipedia platform for scaling evidence
based processes for inner development for free. So it's really a true Wikipedia open source project.
Um, with Nicholas Adalbert, founder of Norrsken. Uh, and in those conversations, I met a lot of
philanthropists and I had to spend, you know, maybe you get 45 minutes, maybe you get 20 minutes with
them. And I had to spend the first, you know, 80% of the meeting trying to explain why, uh, building
the capacity to even care for the system that you're part of, um, and to then build the capacity to act in
that for the greater good is something that's important. Uh, and, and that's where for me,
at least, uh, the inner development goals kind of at least frame came from.
So I, I imagine you have, um, some examples of how inner development creates outer change
in service of the larger good. Um, do you, do you have any, you could share?
Yeah, of course. So, um, so the one closest to heart is actually, uh, my co-founder,
Niklas Adalbert, who founded Klona, uh, payment service. Uh, so he's high net worth individual
who, when he was younger, he took part of this, um, training leadership training and experimental
program. And he said that I think like by day two, he completely pivoted in his identity and how he
saw himself and how he saw society. And he really made one of these developmental leaps. Um, and that
changed his way of thinking about his own ownership and where that comes from and how he, he is part of
the society and where he's not, you know, if he's successful, it's not because he's amazing. It's
actually because he was really lucky and has had all this support throughout the years. Um, and he
says explicitly that that's why he started Norge and foundation, which is now, you know, shifting the
entire norm in Stockholm and Sweden, where we are now at the point where we have 38 times the global
average of VC capital going into impact. And if you ask people at the business school,
the top business school in Stockholm, most of the students now, uh, in contrast to a couple of years
ago, uh, say that I don't want to go into just, you know, building a company, earning a lot of money
and making an exit. But I actually, the majority say I want to go into creating a better world.
Um, which is amazing. Uh, so one person's shift, uh, trickles down, has these huge cascade effects.
Uh, it's, it's, I mean, maybe you can't say that he wouldn't have done it anyways. Um, but his
narrative at least is, uh, that, that the, this support, uh, has enabled him to, to see himself
and in a system instead of separate from it. Well, you said when he was younger, like in his
thirties, or is this when he was like a teenager? No, I think this was, this was probably when he
was like 1920, something like that. Yeah. Beautiful. Beautiful. Yeah. Yeah. And he always says that
like he held this perspective, uh, even though he started Klana, which was the payment services,
but he always knew kind of that he was going to do something else with it. Right. Um, and this you see
again and again and again, and Thomas Bjorkman, co-founder of the Oak Island Foundation,
same story. He had a transformative experience when he was even younger at a youth camp, um,
that changed his entire perspective. And he accredited that to him starting the Oak Island
Foundation later on. I mean, you have Rosa Parks. She even went to a high, to the Highlander
Folk School. Um, and there's a quote from her saying, you know, I wouldn't have had the courage to
sit still on that seat on the bus if it weren't for the support and the insights I got from the
Highlander Folk School. So inner development for teenagers is really a,
a high priority in our culture right now, I would say.
Yeah. I mean, for everybody, but, uh, but yeah.
I was in California last week at a staff retreat and I met with some friends and,
uh, we sat, uh, and talked for 10 hours about a related topics, uh, on a Friday.
Um, one of the projects that I have in my bend versus break, uh, list, I call the 1500,
which is the 1500 elite humans on the world. Some of them need to have a consciousness shift.
Um, and it's almost like they, uh, had traumatic childhoods or, or whatever and go through the
world as if it were a video game, amassing digital wealth and like hungry ghosts. And so my, my question
to you is do these inner development goals apply equally, if not more to the philanthropists that
you're seeking and the elite, um, you know, billionaire class, um, do they need to, uh, take
these courses and experience this, uh, um, as much as they need to donate their dollars?
Yeah. I mean, any movement of a powerful player that would, that would support them to move towards
wisdom, wisdom that would, you know, help them thinking generationally and whole system.
So including externalities instead of external creating more externalities to increase speed,
um, would be a win, I think. Uh, and there, there's, you know, different theories of change.
It's like what we've been talking about, uh, in the Oak Island foundation for 15 years is basically,
you know, uh, if you could create a tipping point, uh, of enough people who start seeing themselves
as, you know, tethered to society, uh, who care for that, who think about its longevity,
um, they will automatically move towards, uh, creating sound systems that regenerate themselves.
And that could be the bus driver. It could be the teacher. It could be the parent. It could be the
farmer. It doesn't really matter, but eventually that narrative, uh, would be, um, self-empowering
and could hopefully tilt, uh, the system.
I wasn't being critical. I just, I really think we're out of time. Uh,
our cultural runway is, is quite short and I think we need everyone, uh, to play a role, um,
urgently in, in these issues. So I, I do think a shift in consciousness from those riding high on
the superorganism is one of the things, uh, that that's necessary. Um,
yeah, I mean, that's my, uh, my take as well. Um, like with my background in, in cognitive
neuroscience and just the understanding of how these types of changes happen, I mean,
some people go the cognitive route to understand how systems work and how their actions impact that
system. I mean, there's even, uh, psychopaths who start, who stopped manipulating people because
they understood how that affected their relationships longterm, which is really cool.
So there's, I've seen interviews with people, uh, who've actually concluded this for themselves.
Um, like people who are diagnosed, uh, and working with tries ways to cope with their own illness,
basically. Um, and I think that, that unsustainability is now becoming real. A felt sense for a lot of
people really creates the kind of conditions for a different conversation to be had. And if that
conversation is only about technical means and technical solutions, we're not really solving the
root problem, which is the type of deep disconnection that we have in our culture.
I can already predict that we're going to run out of time because I have so many questions. I
haven't even gotten to really the IDGs, but let me ask you this. So my, my coach and I need,
uh, I have several coaches because, um, I'm, I'm carrying a lot, uh, here keeps telling me,
Nate, you need to stop thinking and start feeling because I do, like you just said, I process all
this by thinking. And I did a, frankly, a while ago that we think that there's the, the cognitive mind,
uh, on top of the limbic system, on top of the reptilian system, on top of the enteric system.
But in reality, it's not a straight thing. It's a, it's a pyramid and those underlying systems
are much, much stronger than we give credit to. Uh, so I'm just wondering in, in all this work,
is it educational that people think about these five categories or is there an experiential way
that people feel, uh, the relational quality? Can you, can you tell us about that?
From neuroscience, what we know is that, you know, 0.5% of your decisions are, are cognitive,
rational, the thing, like the words in your head, do you associate with the conscious choices that
you're making? And even a lot of those are very biased. Uh, I didn't know that, but that makes sense.
It makes sense. I mean, we don't, we don't know how we use language. We don't know that we're,
you know, all the biological processes going on in our bodies right now. Um, so,
and usually when I work with leaders is, is like just getting people to acknowledge that they don't
know why they trust people. They just got a feeling for it. They, they don't know why they feel,
you know, trivial examples like, who do I feel attraction towards? Uh, like a romantic partner
that I met the first time we met, I felt something first. Then I found, uh, maybe later cognitive
reasons for that. And I put words on it, but, but who sent me the emotion? What process in me sent
that to me? And as soon as you start looking in, you start realizing that, wow, something below the
surface is actually directing me and telling me what in this conversation is interesting. Uh,
what kind of has this emotional salience to it and not, and that invites a lot more humility to
any human system of saying, you know, the agents, the, the first principal agent in the system is not
a rational mind running around controlling top down. So why would we build systems like that? And if we
want to create change, it's not about understanding the IDGs. Like you reading up on the 23 skills will do
nothing. If anything, it'll actually make you maybe less humble because you'll be like, yeah,
I'm good at, uh, these five skills. And it's, and it'll also create the story that, you know,
that you are good at leadership. You're good at sustainability, which makes you,
you know, it's a, it's an attractive hero story, but it won't make you curious and make you want to
explore where you, where you're lacking or where you need to learn, right? Uh, so, so breaking the
kind of rational, uh, myth is a fundamental piece. And that also plays into any of the developmental
processes. So this is where I see that the IDGs is, is this neon sign telling people, you know what,
the reason why you're seeing these outer symptoms that you're not being able to cope with, that we're not
adequately responding to is because, um, we're lacking the conversation about the inner and the
tools for that. So then direct them to these processes that are much more embodied, relational,
experiential, uh, where people uncover these experiences about themselves. It's not that they
read up on them. Does the 3000 or 4000 contributing experts to, uh, your IDG framework,
is there a evolutionary psychologist or evolutionary biologist informing, uh, what these five categories
and 23, um, subcategories are from an evolutionary perspective where we, uh, for, you know, 20 to 290,000
years of our modern species, we've lived in small hunter gather bands on the Pleistocene and what was
conserved in what drove us and made us satisfied and motivated us, um, rhymes in a wildly different
environment today with technology and super normal stimuli and all that. Is that, does that map to your,
your framework or is that tangential?
I mean, I would say that it maps, but not directly. Like we, the way that, that the process
was done to distill the 23 skills was not through the evolutionary lens. That was just a statistical
analysis of what the, the expert on aggregate thought was, was kind of, uh, needed, right?
Uh, but when looking into how do you build perspective taking, when do you build these
thinking capacities or relating capacities, the interventional programs that research has shown
are effective. Um, I mean, they're running on that substrate, right? So if they have an effect,
they're really developing these capacities within the individuals. So just one example is we ran
a program for leaders in six different countries, uh, with support from the Templeton Foundation.
And what we found was that the majority of them afterwards had started new initiatives for
sustainable, sustainable growth, sustainable development, um, just because they had been in
any process that really supported their, um, them taking on the seriousness of the, of the situation
and then being able to have that kind of communal support to actually drive that change forward.
So you, you mentioned communal support. Um, I've recently intuited that healing, um, and growing
largely doesn't happen at the individual level that, uh, someone heals and grows in relation.
To someone else or to nature or a group of people, or you and I have a relationship and we have a
discourse and from that I, I heal and grow. So how much of the inner development goals are at the
individual level or how much happen in relation to other humans, uh, in a context?
Yeah. Yeah. So, I mean, at face value, people usually think that, that the IDG is because it's skills
is this, um, individualistic framework, but it, but it's actually not at all. Um, most developmental
processes are relational. Um, and as you said, we develop in relationship to others, communities,
our relationship to nature, to the world. Um, and the, when looking at all the different types of
programs that really have an effect, uh, they usually have three components. Uh, one is great
evidence-based tools. Two is that you practice over time. It's not this kind of one-off firework.
I went to the jungle and I did the cool thing where I had the offsite team leadership stuff
like a week or two weeks, but it's actually, it's continual practicing in your everyday environment
because you need to be working down the stack from the rational into the embodied and the social way
of relating to each other. So you actually, you're working on changing within and with your context.
Uh, and the third component is this safe and trusting relationship where you feel that you can be at
home. And by me just putting words on and sharing with you, the kind of messy inner workings of my
emotions and thoughts and reflections. And I mean, it's not super clear why I feel the way I do, why I
react the way I do. Uh, we are not transparent for ourselves, but by putting words on it, um, we're
actually, um, making sense of the chaos that we're in and that creates agency. It creates sense-making.
So we want like a really powerful exercise that an intervention program is the Pennebaker paradigm,
basically where you write down 20 minutes a day for four days in a row, the worst things that you've
ever done, the worst things that you've, that has ever happened to you. So it's just free writing.
You don't have to think about grammar, editing. You don't read, you don't show it to anybody.
I mean, just by putting your inner world into words, um, the positive effects on mental health
for, they were insane. Like two years later, uh, they were still having positive effects
from this thing that basically took them, you know, an hour or two.
Why would that be?
So one way of thinking about it is that, so, um,
if we have this rational mind and the metaphor that I usually use is the rider and the elephant,
it's from Jonathan Heights, his metaphor of the brain, right? And the rider is not cognizant of the
elephant, but it's getting all these emotional signals. It'll tell it like, stay away from that
situation. Or in this situation, you have to take control here. And it's basically all these past
memories that the elephant is telling you what to do, how to react and sending you these emotional
signals, right? And by never working on the stuff that you've been through, the disconnections that
you've experienced, what your self-worth is, how you work with shame, what is shameful and not,
by never making sense of that, you're not relearning. You're just replaying that old memory or that old
sequence, right? But by putting words on it, what they found also in the research was so cool,
was that the amount of causal words was highly correlated with the positive effect afterwards.
So the more, so a happened because of B, uh, so just causal links, right? So I'm trying to make
sense of like sequencing what happened first, what came after what was in effect. And the more they had
those types of causal words, the higher the positive effect was. And you can see this in
other research as well, like in soldiers coming home from PTSD or having post-traumatic stress,
basically, is that people who share more about their experience, they have a lot less PTSD and
even live longer. Of course, I mean, because they're going through this process of making sense of the
world. Um, and in some sense on a bigger level, I think that that's really what we need to do right
now is to make sense of where, how did we get to a place where we are not proud of the world that
we've created? Um, and, and how do we get out of that? Right? Here's a thought. Let me replay that
back, um, based on some recent experiences. So what you're saying is by, by writing down the worst things
that happened in the last couple of years, what you're doing, uh, metaphorically is showing elephant
footprints, uh, to your cognitive brain. There's an elephant here and that, uh, opens up a portal to
dispel the ginormous cognitive dissonance that many in our culture are feeling. And I, I've recently been
in some, some groups, as I mentioned earlier, and it strikes me that a lot of people in the peak oil
and early climate change and the systems, uh, collapse, uh, framework, a lot of them. And I think
there is some evidence here and I'll, I'll have to ask my friend, Tom Murphy to find it, have, uh,
depressive realism personality, uh, and certain, um, Myers-Briggs categories. And some of the people I've
talked to had recently, like, um, philanthropists that totally shifted their worldview had a tragedy
in their family and such. So I, I wonder if you need to have some piercing of the consensus trance
of our cozy fossil carbon pulse, uh, reality to be able to emotionally process these things are, are
actually biophysical reality that is staring us. You and I are, are fluent in it, but a lot of people
it's too scary to touch. So the, the mnemonic, the tool that you just mentioned is one way of accessing
that. What do you think about that? I think that that would be, I mean, that's mainly about mental
health and processing kind of my own emotions, but it's also listening to them, uh, and giving them
the right place. Um, and, and so the research and kind of adult development theory shows that
we all go through a first phase of socializing where we're actually downloading the culture.
Uh, that's why, you know, you have the ash conformity studies where people really are shaped
by their in group and, and it's an evolutionary adaption. Like if you did not do that and you're
15 year old and you actually are completely self-directed, but you don't know the language,
you don't know the norms, you don't know how things work. It's too risky. So you download
first as a young person, right? And you can, you can see this either as an, as a life arc,
or you can see it as a domain specific thing. So first you download, how does this game work?
How does chess work? How does monopoly work? Right. And once you understood it,
and once you found your place in it, once you found your way to kind of master the game,
you're not that interested in becoming maybe just a little bit better. You have diminishing returns
on that from an emotional perspective. And what starts being evoked, unless you're traumatized,
really, because then you just want more, more, more, more, more, as you start listening inward,
you become more. So moving from the socialized mind to the self-authoring mind of kind of,
so the ladder that I was received that somebody put up against the wall, if I'm just climbing up to
the next rung and I'm not feeling more, maybe it's pointed towards the wrong wall. And then I myself
grab it and I start thinking about what values do I want to lead my life by taking back a lot of my
direction, right? My, my ability to self-direct. So first I can gain agency in the socialized mind.
I can be an, an agent of this current system, but I'm not holding the system. I'm not seeing it.
And that's the self-authoring move is I'm, instead of being inside the current pyramid,
I'm actually moving outside and thinking, yeah, this is just one of many pyramids.
So where do I want to live my authentic life? So that's the self-authoring, right?
And it doesn't really end there. Self-authoring can also be quite self-centered. It's about
being authentic. It's about being true to your emotional systems. You kind of discover the
elephant, right? But, um, you're still part of a context. And that's usually what dawns on people
when they move away from the self-authoring is seeing myself in a system where I actually have to
honor other norms and other people being authentic for different reasons than I would and to act for
that whole. So that's a self-transcending perspective. And these individuals, they can
really start moving systems because they're very few. They're like 5% of the population and they can
start seeing not just the norm, not just my will to be authentic and to lead my, you know, real life,
but then I can also start seeing myself in this context and starting to act for that.
What type of individuals are, are 5% of the population?
The self-transcending ones. So people who, um, I mean, and, and if we could increase that way of,
so, I mean, saying that people are on one stage, I, I, I kind of want to avoid that way of thinking
about it. I mean, you could, I have one of my oldest son, sometimes he's really acting for the
whole of the system, the family system, um, in a way that's extremely wise, maybe more wise than me
a lot of the time. Um, so, so it could be a state, but it can also be a stage way of thinking about it.
But like, how am I acting for, um, what other people have told me is, is good and true.
I'm acting for what I feel is good and true, or am I acting to, I mean, we could put it in
the monopoly frame, right? So I'm trying to be the best player I can and win the game,
or am I trying to be myself as a player, or am I trying to create a better game?
So we, um, at least in the us on social media, um, and just traveling around, there's so much
advertisement and, um, buzz around personal development. How, how does the inner development
that you're discussing here differ from, from personal development? Is there an overlap?
Are they quite different or what are your thoughts?
Yeah. I mean, I mean, I spent my, most of my, uh, professional life in this space
and I'm really, uh, uh, disillusioned of the kind of market version of a lot of these
self-development programs, personal development courses. First of all, they're usually based on,
uh, the development I can sell you. Um, and they're built off of this individualistic
frame. So you take a course, you buy the book, you go to the keynote, you do the thing,
and then they drop you back in the exact same context, the exact same situation. And your
conclusion of why you're not integrating and changing is because you didn't try hard enough.
And then you have a recurring customer come back. It's because you didn't take step two, right?
Um, so there's a lot of that with people who are really struggling and who really need support,
uh, who aren't getting it. So a lot of it is good. A lot of it is, are, are people deeply
caring about supporting other people's growth and development. Um, but there is this, this tricky
part of it being captured into kind of market incentives that optimize for recurring customers
instead of actually honestly helping people. Um, and in some cases, uh, the people who
design the programs or buy the programs in the corporate setting, for example, um,
um, if they are only saying like, how can I, what can I get out of this? What is the corporate win
out of this? Um, it, it, it can, the, the program will be very, very directed towards the metric and
it'll maybe increase people's capacity. Right. Um, and maybe that's a good thing. Maybe it's not,
but the deeper programs will usually help people, you know, mature the entire system so that it maybe
takes on more responsibility, uh, longer time horizons. And those are, um, I mean,
I really have, uh, an, an amazing, uh, privilege position because I have the opportunity to work
with some of those who are usually self-owned. So they don't have external fiduciary responsibility
on a quarterly basis, but they actually have. So one of the, one of the corporations that I'm
really, I'm, I was working with them in Austria last week, it's an 11th generation family, um,
business and they have, uh, uh, seven generation perspective at least into the future.
So in their boardroom where they have some of their boardrooms, they have a glass wall where they see
the employees kindergarten. So they see the kids that they will take decisions that will shape their
future. And just the amount of care that some of these organizations have. So I'll just give
another example from them. Like the people who can train the trainees in this corporation,
it's the, it's the top skill from the, from the, their factory floor. Like you get nominated.
It's the, it's the biggest privilege you can have in the entire corporation is to train the next
generation of, you know, 15, 16 year olds. And that's not, if you have a short term incentive to really,
you know, win, you wouldn't do that, but they're really building generationally here.
If they're really thinking seven generations ahead, I hope they have ecologists, uh, on staff. Um,
I mean, they would, should be hella worried about climate. Uh, I would think.
Yeah. And this is where, this is where, you know, a lot of these individuals that I work with,
they start seeing that they are part of the problem and that that's an, an emotionally heavy
thing to hold, but if they can do it within a context, uh, that can support that and within
other, with, with other people who are in similar situations, they can really start being inspired
by each other and starting to move a completely different narrative.
So I, I totally agree with that, which is why I, okay. So here's my question is the inner development
goals. Like, are they actually goals or are they more like, are they approximately goals,
but ultimately just a bridge to allow this company in Austria and the people there to talk and process
and get this conversation going to kick up the things that need to be kicked up? Um, you know what
I mean? Is it, is it one or the other or both? I mean, I w like the way that I think about it,
at least is not to say that they are goals as destinations, right? Uh, but it's rather this
attractor to have this conversation, to find the process and tools and, uh, like-minded people, uh,
that can start moving from the narrative of this inner shift that has to happen for the outer chains to
take place. Um, I mean, the meta crisis is, is, uh, really deep in the IDGs, I would say. Um, but
it is a different way of framing it, um, that'll attract, uh, more people to the narrative than,
I mean, I, I mean, I've been trying to work with some philanthropists and it took me like
three years to get them to kind of get, uh, the meta crisis narrative, uh, sending them,
you know, podcast after podcast. And they're like, it's way too complex for me. Like, I, I don't understand it.
Um, so this is a way of, of creating a, a, a different way of attracting people who sense that
there is a, there is something more we can do here. We can really build the soil that can be more
regenerative. Um, yes, maybe we are part of the problem, but we could also become agents for the
solution. That is an, an inner journey that has to take place within us and the culture.
And maybe also as system movers in the market. So, I mean, we work a lot with Ikea, for example,
I mean, there's a, they're a huge player and they, they honestly, honestly care about these topics.
They're like, Eric, don't sugarcoat anything. We want to hear all the, the, um, how, how serious
the situation really is. Uh, and we can take it cause we really care about this and we know that
we're, you know, producing a lot of furniture, but we, we honestly want to do our best in this.
And we want to see reality and face it as it is. Um, and that is for me, um, yeah, I mean,
people are great. Uh, they can be, they can be hijacked into really disastrous stories, but,
but for me, this brings a lot of hope.
If you're, um, give me, give me three answers, um, to this. Um, if you and your team and this effort
on, um, developing inner development hubs around the world and, and scaling this work,
um, not as goals, but as a, as a direction to get these conversations going, what is a, a minimal,
uh, base case and a wildly successful outcome and goal for you and, and your colleagues, uh,
with this framework.
Um, okay. So minimum case and then wildly ambitious goal. Uh, so minimum case would be,
you know, changing the narrative of sustainability to say, you know what it is, it is not a technical
challenge. It is an adaptive challenge. So if we're going to, uh, navigate the existential risk
of, of, of, uh, sustainability, but also of AI, like we need to change the narrative of how we think
about systems, how we think about a multipolar tramps, how we think about all of this, because
reality is a lot more connected than our thinking has been. Therefore we need this, this inner shift.
Okay. So that would be one just coupling unsustainability to the inner aspect of individuals,
groups, countries. Um, that would be one, uh, the wildly ambitious case, uh, and I can't speak
for the organization, but, but if you're asking me, um, that would be, um, having these 700 hubs
turn into 700,000 hubs and not that being a hub, but actually a place where this conversation
has, um, uh, turned into developmental processes that are distributed for the many people,
and where it becomes norm that you go through a process that will scaffold your development,
where you end up in a, in a place where you see yourself as part of this entire system,
you know, warts and all, uh, with this long-term perspective and where you are in service,
you're like your own conclusion. Of course, once you see that is how can I be in service of life
and not of myself. Um, so communities of practice, um, folk schools, basically all over the world,
uh, building the wisdom that is needed to tame the technology that we now have.
Shouldn't something like this, maybe not this exact thing be in every freshman college curriculum
in the world. Um, you learn about science and chemistry and philosophy, but shouldn't there be
some inner development, uh, um, part of a curriculum? Yeah. I mean, I mean, school wasn't designed for
that. Uh, I think that's why, you know, in Scandinavia, I have the history of the folk schools.
That was a parallel system because they were like, if we try to reinvent schools, we're going to get
stuck. Uh, so let's build a parallel system that is about inner development and technology like
building. And this is actually what is now popping up in a lot of places around the world. Like we
have one center here and in the center of Stockholm that we're now building at the Oak Island foundation,
which would be a type of folk school, which is, you know, combination of latest technology,
but, but mainly these type of inner developmental shifts and scaffolding and support for that. Um,
so, I mean, there, there are some things that I think are also hopeful and maybe shifting at least
the conversation at large. Um, so, I mean, we have, uh, so for example, like in two weeks,
I think, uh, roughly we have a round table at the white house where, uh, you know, their chief
sustainability officer is inviting Ikea, which is our partner at the IDGs, the IDGs, um, the world
business council for sustainable development, Otto Scharmer to talk about the inner development
goals and how we can actually have the conversation about the, the inner shifts that are needed in the
capacities to actually drive sustainability. Cause what we're doing now is not enough. It's not
working. Time is running out. Uh, so doing like increasing our speed won't compensate for heading
in the wrong direction. So, so what would a difference, how would changing direction actually
look like? And of course it will be uncomfortable, like, uh, but the feelings don't bite. So if you're,
if you just don't want to be uncomfortable and that's your reason for not, you know, taking on the
meta story and listening to Daniel Schmachtenberger and Zach Stein and Nora Bateson and all these great
thinkers, like it is an inherently very uncomfortable process. Um, I mean, I'm a student of these people
informally, like I really, uh, have been through years taking on trying to learn from them. And a lot
of the time it's this dizzying experience where I'm like, I'm losing my footing here. Like, uh, am I even
contributing to this movement? I just want to give up basically. And you can see it. Like when we do
workshops, I worked with Indy Johar and if you haven't had them, you should definitely have
them because he's scheduled for two weeks from now. Okay. Amazing. So, I mean, so we were doing
this AI inner development, uh, session at the last year's summit, and you could just see that like
people can hold the narrative for just a while and then eventually they just glaze over. And I
recognize that so well that like, okay. And I even had to pause the room and say, okay, guys,
can you guys see what happened here? Like 98% of the people are not still in the room. Like
they're physically here, but they're not here because they're so overwhelmed that they're not
in the process. And usually my conclusion when I've been in those conversations is I'm not smart
enough for this. This is over my head. This is over my pay grade. I should kind of get out of the
conversation. And I think this is one of the key things from a developmental perspective is you being
over your head, you feeling that you're losing your footing is not an indication that you're in
the wrong place. It's the indication that you're in the right place. This is the feeling of being in
transition, right? Um, and if you can talk about that and share that experience with others, you'll
actually stay in it and you'll grow throughout the years. I've found the only, well, the main coping
mechanism I have for this is that I have friends like you and, and Daniel and Nora, um, and Zach and
others that are experiencing the same thing. So I, I processed with them. So that's why I asked you
is the inner development goals and, and the hubs is the sharing and the sitting in a, in a circle
in the community. Is that a big part of it or is it more formulaic?
No, I would say that that is the part that is the driving force of it. So, I mean, um, and it's
so, it's so, uh, sad. Like I get a little bit emotional with talking about it because, so we had
this masterclass and this woman came up to me, this was Peter Senge's masterclass. A woman came up to
me and she said like, this is the first time she was 45. I think this is the first time in my life
that I feel at home. That like, no matter I, no matter who I turn to, I feel that we share
so much. Um, and that is like, it's hard, it's heartwarming. It's amazing, but it's also
so sad, uh, when, when thinking about all the young kids who have never been heard, who never felt that
they are really truly seen because, you know, the phones are there or, or that they think that
they're actually, you know, consumers of the society or that that's their value. And it's just
this, um, soul crushing narrative that, that hasn't been fought off really. We haven't defended
the values that are truly important. And I think that one part for me, at least of why I care a lot
about the inner development goals is that it evokes this question of what is truly important and what
do we want to hold sacred? Like what is the thing that is the highest value that we want to sacrifice
other things for? I mean, sacred means sacrifice, right? So what is the thing that is the most
important? Cause if, if I was a young girl or guy today, I would say that that's money and power.
That's the thing that we sacrifice all other things for. Um, but it's not.
I think if you were a young girl or guy, that would be the cultural context of that question,
but I would actually think most people wouldn't think that. Um, well, let me ask a follow-up to
that and then we can circle back to this. Uh, in one of your recent presentations, you cited, uh,
if I recall correctly, that 56% of young people today think humanity is doomed in their lifetimes
because of climate change. Uh, and climate change, as you know, is just one aspect of
the meta crisis. What, what might a tool like, uh, inner development, uh, goals offer to these young
people who are so worried about their futures and are losing hope of seeing positive change in their
lifetime? Yeah. I mean, on one level, uh, we don't know if they're right or not. Right. Um,
it's a feeling based on science, but yeah, it's, it's a feeling. Yeah. Um,
and I think that, that like, uh, no matter, like one thing that I at least, uh, lean towards, uh,
in kind of my darkest hours when actually I feel that, you know, maybe we are doomed,
maybe things aren't moving fast enough is, um, so I mean, one is like, how, how are we, uh,
effective in driving these change, these changes that need to happen so that we can protect what
is sacred. Um, and another one is, am I showing up in a way that is actually right now protecting
what is sacred or am I still reliving these old patterns from my, you know, limbic system or my
conditioning. Uh, so there's two kind of destinations, right? One is the destination
of the system and this kind of sustainable future, but there's also the destination of,
and this present moment. Um, and for me, uh, the kind of developmental move or the, the journey,
um, is about definitely both of these where, you know what, um, how about we try to protect what
is sacred right now and let's focus on what we have in front of us right now. Uh, and like the
next step approach of doing the most, the next most important thing. And that for me brings a lot
of hope, uh, and it also creates a sense of, you know, focusing on what we can manage instead of this
entire overwhelming system shift. So I know what is sacred to me is the natural world that is here
now. And that will come, uh, a generation and a thousand generations after I'm gone. But I think
in the 700 and hopefully 700,000, uh, hubs on inner development, what's sacred to the people in
Madagascar or Bolivia or Barcelona or Brazil or Stockholm might be different for those people
than for me and for you. So how, so I assume there's not, uh, one answer to what is sacred.
It's, it's dependent on the context of the people that are having the conversation.
Yeah, I mean, I, uh, definitely, but to act from your values, um, for the highest good,
uh, would be the common denominator, right?
And what does cognitive neuroscience say about that? Just that, that we are able to act for some
greater good. Um, I think Maslow's hierarchy, uh, Scott Barry Kaufman wrote some, uh, read some
letters that, um, that he had written, uh, before his death that said that the transcendence wasn't the
top of the Maslow's pyramid. It was, there was another thing, which was in service to something
greater than yourself. So what evidence is there in the literature and what have you seen when people
are able to go from self to we, to us and some, um, greater aspiration? Yeah. I mean, so I wouldn't
be pulling necessarily on neuroscience for that. Maybe there is great research on it. Um, but,
but for me, um, I mean, just, uh, just the research on adult development of, of looking at, okay, so what
does a wiser life look like? Um, and it is moving beyond self actualization, which is, you know,
self altering, like it's focusing on me and living my authentic life and, you know, doing that fully. Um,
but eventually that, that usually, uh, if you have the right support, um, that moves into how can I be
in service of something bigger than myself? Um, and that I think from an evolutionary lens is, uh,
quite obvious that we are both individuals, but we're also part of the whole. Um, so, so it, it,
it does make sense that that would be something that we would, uh, you know, be hard coded to do.
And if you backtrack and look at like, what do people, you know, um, regret on their deathbeds
or what are the happiest people on the planet have in common? It is not a life that is focused
on their own happiness. It's not like, I mean, people who focus on their own happiness are more
miserable and more depressed because it's about me and my happiness and how I'm feeling.
Does it almost feel in a, this feels like a movie, like a twilight zone or a groundhog day,
the things you're saying makes so much sense to me. And your colleague, Thomas Bjorkman was,
was on last year and it was the same thing. It's like at the 11th hour, just before the meta crisis
is going to explode. We've had this awareness. Oh my God, how myopic and, and diluted have we been
as a culture? Do you, do you get that sense? Yeah. Oh, fully. I mean, I've had that my entire
life. So, so, um, that's, that's my father was an Olympian. So he was a discus thrower. Yeah. He
was a Swedish discus thrower who moved to the States to train in Provo and Utah met my mom who was,
uh, then Mormon. Um, so I was born into a Mormon family, uh, but with the atheist Olympian father
who had the religion of success that was, that was, um, killing him. Like, uh, he, uh, he died when
he was 37. I'm 38 now. And just like him, I have three boys. Um, and, and he passed away due to a pale
overdose. And I was there in between these two worlds, right? Of like Mormonism, which, which on
one sense, it really held our family together and it, and it held, it, it scaffolded the support that
we needed both when we were in the States and when we came to Sweden. Um, and then my father being this,
you know, hot shot out in society. So everybody thought I was cool because I was his son, but at
home, you know, he fell asleep, he fell asleep in his food. Like he almost drowned in his, you know,
like oatmeal. It was insane to have the dissonance of like, how could that be success in most people's
eyes? Um, and even also like, how can Mormonism be so weird in other people's eyes? Cause I was
getting that signal as well, but that was something that was in many cases healthy for us with family
dinners and play nights and, you know, going to church. Um, but, but I also understood that like both
of these stories can't be true at the same time, like he can't be right about the, how the universe
is sorted and my mom can't be right. I mean, she's not Mormon anymore. We, we live in Sweden most of
my adult life. Um, but to, to see that we can be captured by these stories, uh, in a way that makes
us blind and makes us sacrifice so many values that we truly hold dear. Um, that's been kind of my
core assumption my entire life of like, how can we be so captured by, um, something that is so
apparently bad for us? That's, that's powerful. Uh, and I increasingly think that we have the mother
of all cognitive dissonances as our culture. We feel that something is horribly wrong. I, I, I refer
to people as the walking worried that they, they know that something isn't right, but they can't
articulate it, but to do the work and to peer behind the curtain, uh, to do a wizard of Oz, uh, analogy is,
is potentially painful and scary. And so it's my hope or it's my recognition, uh, in this conversation
with you that inner development goals or something like that, um, anything like that, even sitting in
ceremony with, with people or, um, just, uh, Oprah book club, uh, town meeting about climate change
in Topeka, Kansas or whatever, act as bridges to get that cognitive, to, to see the footprints of the
elephant and start these conversations. And I think they have to be conversations, not you clicking on the
internet, um, in your basement at 11 PM. Um, yeah, so I, I really, I do, are you hopeful that it's
going to scale? I mean, are, is, is, are things exploding for your, your org in this effort?
Yeah, they are exploding completely. Uh, and, and like, honestly, I don't care if the IDGs become super
successful or not. I just want this topic to be integrated into society and these conversations to be
had, like the RSA, they've also developed the framework for, for the inner skills, for sustainability
and the thriving future, the, you, the European union, they kind of copy pasted the IDGs and now
they have the green comp. I mean, all of those efforts are amazing. Like nobody, there's no winner
of this field, like any movement towards this direction is I think more, uh, apt in solving the
complexity of this issue.
Short of creating their own inner development hub, uh, how can people listening or watching this show
start working on inner development? Uh, are there first steps for those that are recognizing that
there's an elephant, uh, underneath their, their cognitive, uh, uh, mahout? Uh, what, do you have
any advice?
First is like, um, all of us have an immunity to change, uh, both on a cultural level and an
individual level. So for you to try to decide that you are going to develop yourself and to force
yourself into that, um, I'd say, uh, I would invite to take a relational, uh, you know, approach to that
and say, you know, we have to become a community of practice who meet up and practice and talk about
this over time. Uh, so that's first like input to the, to the process or scaffolding of it, right?
Reading a book won't do it, understanding it cognitively most likely won't. It's a really
good first step, but, but there are several kind of threads that need to be woven here,
behavioral, emotional, social, cognitive. Um, so, so do it as a, a part of a community and,
but find that tribe where people will be honest to you about, you know, your shadows,
or what they see as your next step. Is it, is there a container or a framework that if someone
said, yeah, I have these four really close friends and we'd like to explore this, is there a video
or, or some online resource that could get them started? Because of the network asking us for this,
we're actually in the process of developing, uh, stuff like this. Um, this is also why we built 29k.
So the aware platform, uh, if you download the aware app, uh, you'll find, uh, hundreds of
developmental evidence-based tools, which you practice in group, either in a physical setting
or online with live video where you see each other. And there's this kind of recurring format
where you can come back and meet the same or similar people working on that process. Uh, we've had
a hundred thousand people go through processes that we know have an evidence-based effect on their
lives that is, um, significant, um, and it's free. Uh, so, so it's, it's actually funded by mainly
Nordheim foundation. Um, so, so there are scaffolding for that, uh, if not reach out to me and if there's
a specific topic, I can point you in the right direction. Um, so, so getting into practice with
others, I think is fundamental. So building that kind of community of brothers or sisters or
siblinghood, right? Um, so that's one, uh, another one is actually, um, think about, think about the
kind of aims that you have and the goals, what you're striving for, what you're putting your money
into, what you're putting your time into. Is it this kind of like, if I reach X, everything will be
different, uh, or look for the, look for the lived value of that instead. When do you feel like,
what do you think you're going to feel when you reach X? And instead of going for the X, go for
the feeling. So try to uncover, like, when do you feel connection instead of posting on social media?
When do you, and try to impress people, which striving for, there's a longing for connection,
right? That's the need. That's a deep need. And everybody has the same need on a need level.
We're all the same, right? It's autonomy, it's relatedness or connection. It's, it's, uh,
competence and it's feeling, feeling safe. That's basically the needs that we have, right?
Psychologically. So instead of going for the goal, when do you truly feel connection? Like,
when do you feel held and seen and okay and feel when you feel loved? Like, what is that?
Because the research here is really cool. And really, it kind of shocks people. But, um, so, um,
uh, Sonja Lubomirsky wrote a book on this called Love 2.0, where she found that the amount of
milliseconds you're looking into other people's eyes, where you feel love and connection, and you're not
talking necessarily, you're just holding each other. The amount of milliseconds was a, was a
predictor of mental health, happiness, connection. I think even longevity or sickness. It was just
like the, it was insane. I mean, so she basically coined the broaden and build theory of positive
emotion. And then she double clicked on relationships because what she found was these micro moments,
micro seconds of connection were a driving force for a lot of health benefits. Um, so instead of
looking for the goal, look for the lived experience. Uh, two thoughts there were number one is I used
to live in New York city and you would travel, you would walk down the boulevard six abreast and
everyone was looking down. There was no looking even for one millisecond into someone's eyes. And that,
that itself is a little bit of a microcosm for our current culture. Um, and, and secondly, um,
how do, uh, how do people start on, on that? Like what, what's the mechanism of visualizing
the feeling and, and then how does that change their behavior in the future? If, if they, they play
that out in their minds? I mean, so this would be moving towards becoming more self-directed and
trying to understand what, what, what really makes me come alive, what really makes me feel purpose and,
you know, uh, connection, love autonomy. Like when do I actually feel that instead of going for the,
for the symptoms? So, so, so if you experience that a few times in your mind, um, then little Eric in
the future, when you're about to do something on social media in order for you to feel held and
respected and have status, you're like, ah, but that, that's not what I'm really after. So it informs
your future actions of sort. Exactly. I mean, it's like any addiction, right? You don't go for like
the, go for the reason why you're addicted to alcohol. Uh, and you try to, to, um, rewire the
approach to working with that anxiety or that longing for connection or that feeling of inadequacy.
And the thing that you are fleeing from when you go for the alcohol, right? Um, yeah.
And the, it's usually some type of, of deepening of these, uh, these needs, right? Um, and I think
this is on an individual level, you see this, but also on the aggregate level where the more
needs deprived you are, the more you're chasing for the goal. Um, and I mean, I've been working
with, um, billionaires, uh, and then philanthropists, and it's really always this huge difference in,
uh, both how, how they relate to their needs, right? Where, you know, one of them is where I'm
talking to them about, you know, sustainability. And I'm like, so what, what are your goal? What
are you kind of striving for? What is your motivation? Right? Why do you do what you do?
And they're like more, I have to have more. I was like, this is a billion, like one of the richest
people in Northern Europe. And he's like, I have to have more. And then you talk to Niklas and where
he's like, I'm just so lucky that I was born in the right country with parents and I got so much
free education, all of that. So this, these, these billions of, you know, dollars are not mine.
I, I, I just lucked out. So I kind of now have to give back. Right.
Nick, Niklas is a pretty rare individual. Uh, I would love to have him on the podcast,
but he's such an introvert that he doesn't like to speak. Uh, but, but I know this and I feel this,
I don't know that you know this about me, but 30 years ago, I, I managed money for billionaires
at Solomon brothers on wall street. They were the same way. They, they needed more because it was
the, it was the dopamine and the feeling of status was the, the proximate. Uh, I mean,
the dollars were the proximate, but it was the feelings were the ultimate and you can never get
enough. I mean, I can give you one example. That's really, uh, both scary and sad. Um, so one very
wealthy individual that I was working with, um, not super in depth, but, but a bit, he had like,
he couldn't sit, he couldn't sit on chair. He was laying down on the floor. Uh, and eventually
like we had a conversation about why he's not, you know, in the process and the group is doing
the sharings. And he's like, I, I, I, I've, um, broke, I have a hernia in my disc and my back
because all I've been practicing at the gym was my abs up until the point that I broke
my disc. Right. Um, and this, it says something about the, it's not about this individual.
It's a, it's about the human psyches that we can get so into the flow channel of getting
the metric that everything else. I mean, it's really this left hemispheric way of thinking,
right? As long as I get the symbol, as long as I get the token, everything will be fine.
And that is an evolutionary adaptive way of solving problems in some conditions. But if
that is the thing that also sets all the goals and it sets the direction, then we lose the
entire right hemisphere wisdom, right?
That abs example again, uh, for like the third or fourth time in this conversation is a microcosm
for our broader cultural, um, uh, context. Also renewable energy, like renewable energy is
the answer for climate change is like lifting weights with your right bicep and getting super
buff, but you have diabetes and the rest of your body is flaccid or whatever it's. That's why we
need systems and we need inner inner development conversations. Um, yeah. Yeah.
And I mean, and I mean, um, so honestly, like I, I had a massive burnout like a couple of years ago,
so I don't see myself as like a peak sustainability guy. I understand happiness and psychology and all
of that. Um, so running 29 K, like I'm not the CEO type, but I was, we were looking for an external
CEO for this foundation and we couldn't find one. So I took the job because otherwise it wouldn't have
happened. Um, and it was super complex. And I just, uh, we, we just had two kids and I was miserable.
And eventually I was, I was so burned out that I couldn't read, write, or, uh, count for like 16
months. And my wife pulled the entire like ship of the house. I was only on the property, like on in our
garden, 15 months, couldn't do anything. It didn't meet one single person, um, except my family. Uh,
so a couple of reflections on that is like knowing a lot about this is not going to help like, but
having a supportive community that could have, you know, both we pull each other through, uh, tough
situations, but we also scaffold ourselves so that, you know what, Hey Nate, you need to take a break
right now or, you know, supporting each other and seeing ways, seeing the things that I can't see
myself. Cause I'm so captured in like, this is so important. I need to, you know, deliver the thing.
Um, but one thing that I really like, I'm so grateful for that experience, um, is, is two things.
One is, uh, the people who are really struggling in the society, um, who are emotionally, cognitively,
just not where they need to be. This society is so violent for them. Cause when I went to the
grocery store, when I was kind of trying to slowly get back, when I saw the offer, like buy two for
the price, buy, buy three for the price of two or get this, or like a salesman called me, I couldn't
say no to anything. I was just like, I didn't have the emotional, you know, power to self direct at
all. So I was completely following everybody with whatever they wanted with me. And it, it just
became so apparent that this is a very violent society that we have built. Um, and then secondly
was, was that I, um, I started like a permaculture garden because the only thing I could process the
information, only process information I could process was, was farmers talking slowly. I couldn't
even recognize a healthy regenerative system that humans have built. If I saw it, I would probably
just brush it off and say, that's, you know, BS, or I wouldn't even recognize it. And it became so
apparent that of all the work I've done, I, I didn't really have a clue of what health looked like. I
mean, I know it in nature, right? But I don't know it in a human system. So what does a really
regenerative healthy human system look like? Uh, and that just has kept kept me up since
that was like, well, what would the kind of threads that need to be woven that would start
first of all, building the soil for that to take place? And then what would the specifics
of that look? Cause the, the kind of the dream or the hope, like you asked me earlier, like
if we're aiming really high, what would that look like? I mean, imagine coming to a place,
it could be a, um, municipality or city or whatever, where, um, all these principles,
all these ways of thinking that we've learned from Daniel and Zach and all these great thinkers
have been internalized where there are lived reality. You don't talk about it. They just live
it differently. Right. I mean, they could talk about it, but like, that would be such an
heartening, hopeful experience to enter a space where, you know, it's like, wow, something's
different here. What is that?
So let me ask you this, uh, a thought just came to mind. Cause one of the things that
I've been asked from our viewers is, can you make a two hour video series that gives an
introduction to the human predicament and oil depletion and climate and human behavior and
debt and the economic system and why it's relevant to our community so that we can start
having conversations locally, um, without you there because I can't be everywhere, but I almost
wonder if this inner development or whatever it's called, uh, about human behavior and our needs,
uh, our basic psychological, um, requirements. If something like that were to be able to be seen
and experienced with a unofficial city council that starts talking about it in a, in a city that,
that would actually act as a gateway to the larger conversation because the larger conversation is
too politically fraught, uh, to start unless you have close friends that are already well-versed
in these things. What do you think about that?
100% is like, if you bring people into, so, I mean, we've been talking about this for,
for a couple of years, but like one metaphor is thinking about it as a, as a temple, a temple
experience, but it's not a religious place, but it is a sacred place where, you know, life is the
thing that we, that is sacred and we're actually, everything we do here is in service of that.
To enter a space like that, um, I think it could be one of the most powerful interventions a person
could go through. Um, uh, so I'll just, I'll give you one example. And it's actually from this,
this organization that I met the other week where, um, when they bring in like the president of
Austria or, you know, the ministers or whatever, they don't bring them into through the, the big,
uh, entrance. They bring them in through the entrance where half of the wall is just a glass
wall where you can see into where are the, all these 15, 16 year olds are going through this
trainee program and learning English and learning all the machines and all of it. Right. Um,
because that's what they're most proud of. And the cool thing is not that they're proud of the kids
and look at what we're doing. The signal towards the kids is you are our reason for being like you
guys are going to carry this into the future. Um, and this is kind of what breaks my heart today
because like in Sweden, um, the average 13 year old is on their phone six and a half hours.
Whoa. And it's, I think it's actually more in the States
and that's outside of school and not including TV. And the signal for that is like, we gave you to
Moloch. We gave you to the market dynamics and these things are not good for you. And you know,
the content that you're looking at is not like, if you ask kids, uh, they don't want to have TikTok
and Instagram. A lot of them would say that I, I, I, I want Netflix, but I don't want these other
platforms. But since everybody else is there, I have to be right. Exactly. Right. Worst thing is
that we, as parents, we gave it to them and we did not protect them. So the signal is like,
and this is where I, I think it's so, I guess hard to talk about because the last thing we want to
tell our kids is that they are not worthy of protection. Right. Uh, and this is where I think
that the market and protecting the people who are vulnerable, uh, we, we need to, um, make some
big changes here quickly. Uh, and, and that is also moving beyond the postmodern perspective of
saying, you know what, everybody can just self-direct and go for their own happiness,
but it's actually saying, no, no, no, there are things that are more sacred and this is not
a matter of opinion. Uh, this is a fact about life that life wants more life and we're here to
protect that process. And that's actually moving beyond the postmodern is saying there should be
a directionality in society that creates more generative life. Um, and anything that is not
that is actually bad for society. And, and, uh, we just went way too far into the postmodern
perspective, um, and let the market take over our children's lives. And it's, it's so violent.
So what can someone who is listening to this episode right now, and if they're listening,
it means they're at least somewhat, if not very familiar with the meta crisis, what is something
they can do today? Uh, this week, this month to help address, um, these broader issues. You did
mention how to get started on the, the inner development goals earlier. Um, but what's your
advice to people listening to this podcast to make some changes or is it all up to leaders and
politicians and, and the post postmodern removal of marketing and, and some of the market leading
our world? Yeah. Yeah. I mean, I would say, um, get into practice with others, but not, not in
relationship to just a random, like inner development. Uh, I want to become more perspective
taking more, blah, blah, blah, like try to take on the most meaningful challenge you can.
And when you notice that you need to check out, when you notice that your capacities are
not, uh, up to the task, that's when you need development, right? So take on the most meaningful
change you can drive in your system. And because it's a stretch, it's the most meaningful, right?
Um, like 10% more than you think that you can handle that will become a developmental process,
especially if you have a supporting community where you can reflect and put words on it and
find tools for, you know, whatever it is that stopped you. Right. Uh, so, so find that edge
through caring, uh, as an agent in the world. And this is what I said to, to these, um, corporations
as well as like for Ikea is like, it's not about you guys integrating the IDGs only. It's not about
you becoming the best in the world. Like as soon as you have capacity and power, it's about becoming
the best for the world. Uh, so it's you in the market, how can you shift the entire market and
not just try to win and expand, right? So for any level of the system, how can I act for the highest
value? So one intervention that I really love is, is the, is the question that one of our professors
taught me and he, he, um, he teaches this to add to the astronauts, uh, that are potentially going to
Mars. And he says, so just one question, it's, it's basically, this is, it's, um, in this situation,
are you acting to avoid discomfort or are you acting for who you aim to be? So it's really pulling
on the highest values that you have. And the higher values are always about purpose and about me in
the context and about relationship and about giving high, like who I aim to be would not be like
self-serving, short-sighted, narcissistic, uh, that's not the answer to that question for,
for almost anybody. Um, so it really pulls you away from hedonism and short-sightedness
and it really pulls you towards these values that are higher than you. Um, and it has helped me
through many times in my life, um, like small things.
And it's not only avoiding discomfort, I would include seeking comfort, um, in there as well.
Uh, for some people anyways. Yeah, yeah, for sure. And, um, and, um, the people who I've seen do this,
um, they move from kind of overwhelm to this kind of sense of, of hope, uh, not necessarily because
there's more, you know, of a solution out there, but they're not alone and they're doing something for,
um, what they think is really important.
I want to be respectful of your time, but you made me think of another question.
It, it so happens that a lot of our listeners are, uh, autodidactic, um, looking at how all the
systems fit together, understanding that something is, is not right and wanting to connect the dots,
but they don't have, uh, a circle or a tribe or a group, um, that they could process these things with.
And I think it's really difficult to handle these as an individual person and you need
such a group. But if people listening to this don't have such a group in your lifetime of looking at
happiness research and social dynamics, do you have any recommendations for them?
Yeah. I mean, of course, it's, it's find your peers, right? Um, it's, it's really moving into these, these, uh, communities where we are, where we share these kind of basic axiomatic ideas about the world and the future. Um, and then move into practicing together and then move into building structures together.
I mean, this is what we've been doing in the, in, in Stockholm here for, for years and where we see that. So we've been running youth camps for 15 years almost, uh, where people find each other, work through the processes, reflect on who they want to be, um, et cetera. And the refeedback from their parents is really like, what did you do to my son? What did you do to my daughter? Now, now they come home and they're, uh, completely, um, contributing to the family system instead of receiving it as passive agents. Right. Um, so I think, um,
finding people who are like-minded who share that story, uh, and online, offline, offline is of course better, but online is a lot better than nothing. Uh, IDG hubs could be one of those. Um, if not, I mean, yeah, how does someone start an IDG hub?
Just go into the website and, and, uh, um, you'll find the instructions there. It's basically teaming up with a S with a small group first, and then you register, uh, and that becomes an attractor.
For more and more people who want to have a similar conversation. And then it grows from there. Um, a lot of people are meeting online, uh, and really gathering around this. Um, so, so that's one way of doing it. Um, but, but honestly, it doesn't have to be the IDG hub. Like it could be, it could be your neighborhood talking about how can we create a better, you know, uh,
to be, to be, to be, right?
What do you care most about in the world, Eric?
I read this question, uh, in the, the, the notes that you sent before and I actually started crying.
Um, I didn't know why, and I still maybe don't. Um,
but I think,
I mean, it's, of course it's love, right? Um,
I mean, my kids pop up. Um, I think about myself as a kid. Um,
and it just becomes very apparent that from that question,
some things are, are worthy of protecting. Um,
and, and, and I, I can't see anybody regretting working for that on their deathbed. Uh,
that that would be probably what they would be, what I would be most proud of, um,
was, you know, acting from care and love and compassion and also trying to figure out when do I shut off
love, care, compassion, uh,
and, and just working on that, um, healing or forgiving.
So from a place of love, care, and compassion,
if you additionally had access to a magic wand,
what is one thing you would do to change human and planetary futures for the better?
Um, it would be, um,
enabling,
like all people,
maybe especially young people to discover when they feel,
uh, the most alive,
the most meaning,
the most connection,
and to really cement that experience that they decided on,
that they found the patterns in.
Because if they did,
they would not accept the system that we have created.
They would say,
this is not human.
What we've created has been hijacked,
and we're caught in this trap,
and we are worthy of so much better.
Uh,
this is not what we're here to build.
Uh,
and I think everybody on the planet can come to that conclusion if they just have that scaffolding and that support.
And then you'd want to empower them to,
you know,
drive the change.
But I think that's actually the core of,
of rediscovering what it means to be human and changing that story.
Um,
that would be it.
And the rest,
I think,
would actually sort itself out.
Well said.
Um,
I did send you a list of,
uh,
uh,
rough questions,
and we only got to 20% of them,
uh,
because of all the tangents.
If you were to come back,
um,
and for a round two and take a deep dive on some topic relevant to the great simplification,
the meta crisis that,
that you were just personally interested in,
is there such a topic?
And what would it be?
Yeah.
I mean,
I think it would be actually like,
how can we start integrating the meta crisis into our lived experience?
And how can that process go from,
as it is right now,
maybe a little bit of overwhelm and people checking out.
And like,
this is way too heavy,
way too complex.
And I hope you guys are wrong,
but you sound really on,
on point,
but I can't process it to actually step-by-step integrating,
maybe in like a curriculum form that has this pedagogy of integration.
So it becomes a lived experience.
And how can I then move into an agentic experience?
How can I,
uh,
agentic way of relating to the meta crisis individually,
collectively?
Because if we get that right,
um,
it'll not be people just talking about the meta crisis while the house is burning.
Uh,
we'll actually get stuff moving and it doesn't have to be,
the right things.
Um,
it'll just be,
uh,
the,
the point of the projects,
the point of acting in this world,
I think,
uh,
where we are so much kind of interwoven into actually being the problem.
Uh,
the point of any projects that we think is meaningful is I think equally parts outer
system and equally parts inner system,
the learnings of us trying to create meaning and trying to,
to change the world for the better will actually,
uncover where we are,
have,
where we are kind of off center,
right?
Um,
yeah,
so that would be something.
And if we have 1% or 3% or 7% or 12% of people that have experienced that,
then those are rocks in the river to change the flow of the water,
uh,
that's coming our way.
I,
I,
I like that,
um,
line of inquiry.
Yeah.
And I mean,
and I think that,
um,
the water that is hitting us,
the unsustainable direction of society is so powerful right now.
And people are starting to feel it,
um,
that when they uncover,
discover,
uh,
something that's authentic and real,
uh,
the feeling of community is probably beyond what most people have ever felt in their lives.
Uh,
so it's an equal attractor,
like the,
the,
the kind of chaos is actually,
uh,
calling for,
uh,
um,
humans to,
to step up.
Um,
this is what Indy said as well is like the darkness is not here to scare us or to help us or to make us give up.
It's actually a call for human greatness.
My cognitive brain hears that and my limbic system and reptilian system feel it as well.
Um,
so I'm,
I'm on board with,
with that direction.
Thank you for all your work,
Eric,
and thank you for your time today and,
and to be continued for sure.
Thank you so much,
Nate,
for having me.
If you enjoyed or learned from this episode of the great simplification,
please follow us on your favorite podcast platform.
You can also visit the great simplification.com for references and show notes from today's conversation.
And to connect with fellow listeners of this podcast,
check out our discord channel.
This show is hosted by me,
Nate Higgins,
edited by no troublemakers media and produced by misty.
Stinnett,
Leslie Batlutz,
Brady Hyen,
and Lizzie Sirianni.
We've been joining us on YouTube.
We've been joining us on YouTube for a long分鐘,
we're now listening to our channel.
We're out of here.
I'm поряд Ultimately.
To be continued...
And to be continued...
We're out of here.
We're seeing those лег
