In 1857, Jules-Antoine Lissageux set up an experiment similar to this, and as a result
gave us Lissageux figures, which are an example of complex harmonic motion. So today I'm going to
look at what Lissageux figures are, particularly in light of the experiment that he did, how you
can set up your own figures in the oscilloscope, and an example of how we use Lissageux figures
in physics. So stay tuned.
Well what I have here is in essence a similar setup to what Lissageux set up himself. He had a light
source and two tuning forks and some mirrors that were attached to the tuning forks. Now when I create
my light source is a laser and that laser is fired onto a tuning fork over here, which has a small
mirror attached to it, and then that is bounced back over to this tuning fork back here, which
is then bouncing it onto the screen and you can see the spot on the screen. But what he did was he made
sure that those tuning forks were at 90 degrees to each other. That one's vertical and that one's
horizontal. So before we start, let's have a look what we see on the screen if we allow only one
tuning fork to vibrate. Let's have a look. Let's start with the vertical one.
Well we're getting a lovely vertical line. That makes sense. My tuning fork is
bending backwards and forwards like that and causing the light beam to go in that direction
and we're getting nice light path. It's an example of simple harmonic motion. Now let's have a look at
the other one. Well that makes sense. It's going horizontal again because the tuning fork is moving
backwards and forwards in this plane and as a result we're getting it moving in that direction. But what
happens if I allow both of them to ring at the same time? Let's see.
Now we're getting an interesting pattern and that's an example of a Le Juju figure. But the
Le Juju pattern we get depends on two variables. The first is the frequency or specifically the
individual frequencies. Whether the tuning forks are exactly the same frequency or they are different
frequencies. And the second thing is whether the two signals are in phase or not in phase with each
other. So what we're going to do now is we're going to look a little bit deeper in the mathematics
behind the two simple harmonic motions that are occurring in Le Juju figures. Now both signals are
examples of simple harmonic motion and being examples of simple harmonic motion is we can represent them as a
sine wave or it's a sinusoidal pattern. And here you can see my red and my green are my two signals.
In this case they're both going left to right or right to left. But what we're going to be doing is
mapping one against the other one on the x-axis and one on the y-axis. And so when we map those two
together we have two equations that will represent their relative positions in terms of x and 1. As a
result those two equations are called parametric equations. Let's play with that and see the pattern
that we get if we were to map one against the other. Now these two waves are in phase with each other.
They have the same frequency in the same amplitude. And so what I want to do is just examine a couple of
points and then show you using Desmos how they would add together in terms of the parametric equations.
So the top and the bottom let's start from the zero position. So you can see that the position here at
this three and that this negative three is exactly the same. In other words they're in the zero position.
So x is zero y is zero. So if we were to plot that we would get this position here. What about at that
position up the top here? Here we have a maximum and here we also have a maximum. So if we make both
values of a maximum equal to one let's say let's say that's that's the amplitude a one then we're going
to get a point that is here. And similarly if both are in the negative one position then both will map
in here. So you can see I start to develop a pattern here and Desmos allows me to now add those two waves
together and so we're going to get a wave that look a pattern that looks like this. We're getting
here a literature figure that is in essence simply a straight line. What if they're 180 degrees out of
phase let's examine. Again if I were to map basically the zero position we still get zero zero as our two
points. But now if I map one against the other when this top one is at a maximum of one the bottom one
is in a maximum of negative one. So what we're going to get is a value that is going to look like this.
This is going to be our position here. Similarly if I map the bottom one with a maximum one this one is
a negative one and we get a spot here. And again if we add them together we're going to get a pattern
that looks like this. A straight line again but down the top. So this tells us two signals are out of
phase even though they have exactly the same frequency. Let's do one more and then we're going
to play around with a few of them. As you can see now I have two waves but they are not 180 or zero out of
phase they are 90 degrees out of phase or 270. If we plot them now we get obviously in this case it's
a maximum for the top so a maximum of one the bottom is at zero so we're going to get a point that is here.
Similarly speaking if I do the next point which is this point right here you can see this one is a
maximum of a negative one but this one is at well it's at not at zero. So I'm going to get this point
right here and then of course I'm going to also get these points as well when one is maximum the
other one is zero one one is negative one the other one is at zero. If I did that consistently I would
find I'm going to get a pattern that is a circle. So in this case the paramedic equations of 90 degrees
out of phase gives us a circle in terms of a lissage figure. Now what I want to do now is show you
if I now allow the phase to change with respect to time because these are pictures of waves but
waves are actually moving. I can allow Desmos to change the phase with respect to time and what we
get is this pattern here. You can see we're getting a circle that is rotating either clockwise or anti
clockwise from the top though in actual effect that's not what's happening. Now what would happen if I then
change the frequency of one of them so I'm going to change it so it's now a one to two relationships
in other words the frequency down the bottom is twice as much. If I now show you the lissage figure
as respect to time they start in phase of course so we're definitely going to get a point that is in
the center in this position but it's going to be changing with respect to other positions and this is
what we're going to get and you'll see here we get this butterfly and the butterfly represents basically
two frequencies whose frequencies are in a relationship of two is to one. Now how do I show
that? Well if I now draw a line that is horizontal across my lissage figures you'll see I cross it at
four places but if I do it vertically you'll see I cross it at two places so as a result that's a
relationship of four is to two and that is the relationship of two is to one so the green one
is actually mapping in terms of the along the x direction in that case. If I now were to
play that with respect to time in other words the phase would change with respect to time
I'm going to get a pattern that looks like this that relationship of two to one with the cutting of
the lines is going to stay true here but you can see now what we're getting is a rotating
pattern and the same is to go if I have a different particular combination so for example I can change
that our relation is to two is to three so let me do that I'll change the top one to two and the bottom
one to three and I get this pattern in terms of the two to three relationship if I change let's say the
top one to three is to two in other words I just simply change the values I get the same
literature figures but it's just turned at 90 degrees and so you can see here it's the same
pattern but it's just 90 degrees to the previous one and finally let's do a little bit more complex
let's make it six to seven relationship so I'll make the bottom one six and the other one at seven
and in this case my pattern again with respect to time looks like this so the relationship of the
frequencies is a rational number a over b and that is equal to the number of lines that you cut
horizontally and vertically again one over the other so that gives you a good introduction to
the mathematics of lissageux figures now let's see how we can generate them on an oscilloscope so now
what I want to do is I want to use my oscilloscope to examine lissageux figures now what do we need for
a lissageux figure we basically need two signals with their own independent frequencies and instead
of mapping them out with respect to time as is what's happening at the moment on my oscilloscope
we want to map them out or graph them with respect to each other one on the x and one the y just like
my tuning books where I had two vibrations one vertical and one horizontal now as you can see I
have two signals here and both of them are in phase and and in this case I've got them set to 500
hertz each but I want to map them out against each other and so the way to do that with your oscilloscope
what we want to do is change that to xy and the way to do that is the first thing you do is you take
your time dial and you turn it all the way to your to xy now again with the digital oscilloscope you
have a setting in the digital oscilloscope that allows you to map not let's say your y risk with respect
to time but x versus y now you can see I've got two lines here because they're both signals here we
get dual so we're going to change my vertical mode to xy and I'm going to ensure that the source is xy
as well now just to be sure that we have two signals that are actually perpendicular to each other
you'll see if I mute one of them we get a horizontal line and of course I can position that to be nice in
the center so it's going left and right left and right and the other one if I mute that one and
turn that off and turn the other one here that's completely vertical just like my tuning fork but of
course if we map them with respect to each other we get this line if I change the phase here and let's
say I change it to a phase of 180 degrees we're going to get a line again but in this case we're going to
get a slope downwards because one's positive whereas the other one's a negative when they're both at a
maximum position now at 90 degrees based again on my animations then you'll know that they've one is at
a maximum one is at a minimum and we're going to get a circle like so and that's the same for 270.
Anywhere in between you're going to get a different ellipse so what's going to happen if we change the
phase with respect to time now I can do that and I start by putting this as zero and then what I'm
going to do is I'm just going to allow this phase to change with respect to time by just holding the
button in here and then the phase is going to gradually change from zero all the way to 360.
Let's have a watch what happens.
Now that has the appearance that it is rotating so some of you may think well if you look from the
top it's moving clockwise some of you say it's moving anti-clockwise well actually it's not really
rotating but it has that visual image of it rotating when actually in fact it's going from the vertical
line to a circle and back to a vertical line again now what if I change the frequency of one of them
now remember with lissageux figures lissageux figures will have different shapes depending on
the ratio of the frequencies so if I have a ratio of let's say one to two and in that case what I'll do
is I'll change my signal or amplifier um one here which is actually my second channel over here I'm
going to change that to one thousand and we get this figure what's going to happen to this with respect
to time again appears to rotate let's change this now to a three to two relationship but as you know
when you have two waves that I have different frequencies at different times in their path
their phase will be different with respect to time they ain't starting phase in this position
that phase has changed at any particular position so if I change that you have the semblance of
rotation like so let me do one last one and that's a three to one relationship remember 500 was one of
them let's make our a 1500 I enter I get this and again I change the phase and I'll just pause there
because if you're an Australian then you'll know that this is the symbol for the abc again it has the
semblance of rotation now what use is that my lissageux figures well what I want to do now is I want
to do some testing of something that has an unknown frequency in this case what I have here is a
tuning fork that is put into a resonating box which just in amplifiers the sounds basically it's a bit
of a resonance chamber here now I know this is rated at 256 hertz but is it actually 256 hertz
what if I were to able to take the signal of this sound and use that to compare it to 256 hertz from my
signal generator and I can do that need to put my amplifier to actually pick up the microphone and then
what I'm going to do is I'm going to turn on a speaker so in other words what you'll get is the
sound will be picked up and you'll hear it better now I can show you that it works by ignoring my
channel a here's my signal and if I place this you can see it's vibrating if I choose my timing fork
I get a sound here it's not picked up so I'm making it a little bit more sensitive there is some
um signal that is coming as a result of um some sort of interference we won't worry about that
because you still see it so if I play this you get your signal and I'll adjust it like so and
you'll clearly see it's got a certain frequency but what we're going to do is we're going to compare
that to 256 hertz from my other channel so I'm going to go back to oscillation a b and I'm going to
change that to 256 which is the value we should be getting like so and now I'm going to play it
and just in case you don't hear it I do have it here and I just you can actually hear the noise
going on here I'm going to turn that off again because I just want to concentrate on the one that we
have here okay so you hear it now but now what we want to do is compare that with the other signal
so we go again turn this to zero and we got this at x y and if you look very carefully what do you see
you see the circle so we're close right but the fact that the circle is turning means that the phase
is changing which means that the two frequencies are not identical we want that circle to stop turning
and so that means we need to adjust our frequency of our amplifier to over here and as a result try
to make it stationary let's see if I can do that
that's pretty close I got 256.3 so what does that mean it means that this system here this tuning fork and
the resonating chamber actually has a frequency of 256.3 hertz now for the ordinary classroom use that's
pretty good I don't have to necessarily throw this out let's see if I can do with another resonating
chamber and here I have a tuning fork that has a resonating type of 320 and we have 320 hertz for my
tuning fork and let's see how precise that one it was made that's pretty good and I've got 320.2 hertz so
this is 320.2 hertz as a chamber so that's one example of using lissageux figures where you're comparing an
unknown frequency to unknown frequency it's much more precise than trying to listen out for beats
let's say by having the two play simultaneously and listening for the beat frequency though that
is a method you could actually use if you want but this is a better method and in fact many acoustic
engineers use this to actually examine frequencies on different circuits and so forth well I hope that
has helped you understand lissageux figures please like share and subscribe please consider supporting me
via patreon to help me continue to produce physics content my name is paul from physics high take care and bye for now
