We're still slowly, slowly inching towards developing some sort of informational system for the droplets.
And so this is, you know, still a bit far away, let's say, but my dream has always been if we can, if we can make these animated droplets do something, then we could also try to encode them with some sort of information.
Which means in this case, it's going to be chemical information, just compositional.
So there's nothing new there.
People have been thinking about this for quite some time.
But the idea is how can we actually do it and then measure the outcome of this?
Let's say one way of thinking about is programmability.
So we've published a few papers which kind of sniff around this topic, which means like making droplets with different colors and then monitoring their behavior.
So really exploratory work where, yeah, we're just trying to set some sort of experimental platform that we can use then to push, push, push.
I'm hoping now that we're getting some traction.
It's really been quite a few years because my, I mean, my background is in genetics.
I have a PhD in genetics and I, I don't touch genetics, you know, and it's, it's, but it's inside of me, let's say.
And, and I've long abandoned DNA actually.
And not because for no other reason, except this, because I'm curious about other kinds of systems that may be much less sophisticated than what we are dealing with in biology.
So that's why I'm pursuing these super simplistic, sometimes ridiculously simple, simplistic chemical systems.
And yeah, so we're still working with those, Mike, that's the sort of more intellectually demanding kind of projects, but to pay the bills, we've been working now with finally applying some of these technologies to some sort of technical outcomes that could be, let's say, have some sort of societal, societal impact.
So we have, one of the reasons that I'm here in Pennsylvania is I'm kind of retreating a little bit from all the demands of two large European projects that I'm, I'm currently coordinating.
So, so I need a little bit of headspace because it's been really high administrative burden, as you probably have heard from these European projects.
And so we are applying now some of these artificial cell technologies to, to cancer diagnosis, early cancer diagnosis and organoid development, two different projects.
So with really, you know, sort of focused outcomes, not exploratory so much anymore, because we feel like we finally pushed the artificial cell stuff to a certain place where we can show, yes, we have programmability, we have functionality.
Okay, now what are you going to do with this kind of technology?
So that's been keeping me super busy.
Wow.
Yeah.
Super interesting.
So you've, you've got them, they can, they can live in an, in the same medium that, that living cells, like they operate in, in some kind of aqueous cell culture media, or how does, how does that work?
Yeah, that's the first step, of course, is compatibility.
So our initial, our initial foray into this was that as soon as we mix the artificial cells with the living cells, the living cells die.
Yeah, let's, let's, the extreme situation was we were working with pH of 12.
So you can imagine the incompatibilities there already.
And then there was also a chemical part where the chemical substance was actually shown to be poisonous to the cells, even at, at physiological pH.
So all of this stuff had to be worked out.
In that case, what we had to do was just protect, protect the living cells from the artificial cells by putting them in a hydrogel, which is a typical way people do this.
It's biocompatible.
And that actually made a very, very nice interface between the artificial and natural systems that allowed them to, let's say, coexist, but also to chemically communicate with each other.
Because it's, you know, it's a permeable barrier that we're using.
So, so that, yeah, that, that worked.
But now for these new projects, we are, we're sticking to physiological pH right from the get go, because otherwise we're not going to get very far.
And so, yeah, that's the first thing.
So can you, can these things form?
Are they stable in growth media?
And those are the things we are currently pursuing.
It's basically, we're in the first year of the project, first seven months of the projects.
So we're still getting set up.
But yeah, that's the idea.
The compatibility seems like it's going to work out.
There, there, there is prior art in this sense, where people are using, for example, you know, nanoparticles and antibodies and things like this, and not too far away from what we want to do, actually.
So we can use those, those systems to guide us how to, how to set up the artificial cell system to work in a productive way with the natural systems.
And we're hoping that with this, let's say, the programmability dimension, that we can do some sophisticated interactions with the living cells that might not be really useful when you're just pouring stuff into growth media, right?
So you're pouring a growth factor into growth media or those kinds of things.
So we're, we're hoping that we can make something that's more precise and specific.
Let's see.
Yes, very cool.
I have two, two thoughts about, about that for potential collaboration.
One is that if you, if you, if you do get them very compatible with living things, we have, we have anthrobots.
So it would be interesting to try to, you know, confront them, them with each other.
Right.
And what we also have is xenobots and the xenobots are far more tolerant of things like pH range and weird chemicals, much more so than mammoth.
So, you know, one thing you could imagine is I'm almost thinking of like a, like a, like a synthetic Turing test where we write, we put them in, we, we look at the, the interactions and, you know, what, what can we pick up?
And then you can, you can sort of probe, at least on the xenobots side, you can, you can probe, do they know, you know, you can look at transcriptomics, you can look at calcium signaling measurements and see, okay, well, how, you know, what happens to them when they're confronted with a synthetic kind of agent?
Yep.
Yep.
I, I wonder then on, on that, on that note, so one of the things we're trying to do with one of these European projects is, you know, we're working with, we're working with people who are doing organoids, which we are not experts in, but we're, we're, we're collaborating with these people.
So, and so, yeah, the idea would be to understand the, the information exchange between the two systems, for example, doing, you know, transcriptomics, like you're suggesting, so really getting into the, into the details.
Yeah, so what would be, what would be an interesting augmentation or improvement to your system that maybe an artificial cell could deliver?
Do you have some ideas of what, where, where could you go?
Well, one, one thing that we're very interested in is to ask the question of what do these constructs know about the world they're interacting with?
So you can, you can read that out through signatures of, of, of gene expression and transcriptomics, but also I really like, um, uh, uh, readouts of calcium and voltage because you can apply all the metrics from neuroscience, right?
Where people measure integrated information and all these, these different kinds of things to write, to see, okay, so, so what, what, what, what, you know, can we, can we like, like neural decoding?
Can we read out a signature that, that corresponds to the, the system having had a specific experience?
And what we do nowadays is we give them a memory of, uh, we, we, um, have them encounter something that they can sense and then sometime later, you know, four hours, 24 hours, whatever, say, do you still remember, right?
Is that signature still there?
How long do you remember?
And can we look at that signature and tell, what have you, what have you interacted with?
So I think what would be very cool is to have, for example, uh, different kinds of, uh, droplets on your end, right.
And see if the Xenobots can, can, uh, if we can read out something from the Xenobots that tell us which, which one that you see.
So let's say there's, I don't know, three different types of droplets or maybe active and inactive, or maybe ones that are bearing some kind of synthetic biology payload.
And ones that are not, you can have them interact with each other and then can the, because, because we're also very interested in having these, um, synthetic constructs.
Be like the front end of a sensor system.
So that, right.
So that they're like, you know, in a, in a, they're, they're like the retina for, for the brain, right.
Do some pre-processing and then they, maybe it's AI or maybe it's something else behind them, but it's the biological system that's front.
That's, that's, that's appropriately core screening, measuring, and then passing on some kind of processed information to us.
So I think that would be pretty cool to, to have, to have that system confront your, um, you know, much more synthetic system and just be what they
know about each other.
It might even work in the, I mean, you tell me, is there something we can read out from the, uh, from the droplets where we can say what they've seen, you know?
Right.
Yeah.
Uh, right now, uh, that's a bit far away in my opinion with the droplet system.
Sorry.
With the, um, let's say with a synthetic though, with a synthetic system, as you know, that people have built, for example, these, um, biological circuits that have memory.
Right.
So there's some, yeah.
So that, that has been shown that could be useful to consider as a possible way of for first sensing and then storing some information.
So that's possible.
Now with the really, really simplistic systems that I work with, that's a more of a challenge.
It doesn't mean that doesn't happen.
Um, and the kind of, let's say, I don't know, memory that I could tell you that we've at least detected is that we have, uh, if we have, uh, an animated droplet.
So it basically the, what it's doing at time T plus one depends on time T.
So there's a bit of a memory, let's say, which I think is stored in a sense in, uh, in fluid dynamics of the system.
Um, and the fluid dynamics, because we've seen droplets interacting with each other, that, that fluid dynamic information can be passed between droplets.
Um, that is something very different than what biological systems do with some limited cases.
I mean, there are some, yeah, there are some limited cases.
Like I think that there's some nice, uh, argument that the cilia on the surface of the, of, of cells actually is, is coordinate, has coordinated movement due to the, primarily due to the surface dynamics, the fluid dynamics of these things.
So it's not just, it's not, it's not gene control or something like this.
Um, um, so, so there is some, yeah, there's some biology that seems to, let's say, uh, uh, exploit these kinds of fluid dynamical principles.
I mean, I think there's, I think there's way more than we give credit for because, you know, the field of morphological computation, right?
Like, so, so I, I, I think, I think the material is doing way more of the processing than we typically think.
Um, yeah, and, and that leads into something else that I was going to mention, which is one thing that, that I would be really interested to do with, with your system is, okay.
You can bake in certain computational circuits, of course, and like the traditional symbiote approach of like designing something that does some kind of computation.
But one thing that we've been really focused on recently is, um, using this, uh, polycomputing framework that the Josh Baumgart and I have been working on where, what, what we're searching for is a perspective, a mapping from which the thing that the system is already doing is a computation.
In other words, you don't modify the system to do a computation and you ask yourself, how can I get to see what it's actually doing?
Because it might be a million different things.
And so we've, we've developed some, some incredibly minimal models, both computational and, and, uh, and, and physical that do some really interesting stuff.
That is nowhere in the algorithm or the mechanism or anything else that you've, that you've faked in.
There are, there are these, you know, not, not just emergent complexity or emergent, um, unpredictability, but actually emergent problem solving.
And I think it would be cool to try to apply some of those tools to the minimal, uh, uh, uh, droplets that you already have to say, even without putting in any, uh, any circuits, here's what these things already know how to do.
You know?
Yeah.
I believe there's, yeah, I believe there's some digging to do there like you.
Um, I agree with that.
Um, and I, so you have some tools already.
We do.
Yeah.
What are you thinking of?
Well, uh, there's a couple of things we could do.
If you have either videos or better yet, um, Centroid tracking data.
Yeah, we have that.
Right.
And, and, and, and especially in singletons, I remember you were doing some group, uh, you know, some collective stuff, which, which I thought was super interesting.
Um, we can apply, we can apply some of these methods and, and we have collaborated.
So there's a whole, there's basically a whole kind of, uh, group of, of people, uh, here that are applying different kinds.
They're all, they're all developing different metrics of, um, how to capture, how to capture and quantify collective intelligence.
So, uh, you know, kind of like, like IIT is kind of the big, you know, the big one, but, but, but other, other metrics of trying to say, you don't just have a pile of pieces here.
What you have is some sort of emergent hole that has goals, competencies, memories, whatever that the individuals don't have.
Right.
So, so what would that look like and how can we develop mathematical tools?
So there's a variety, some of the, some of them are in Europe, some of them are here in the U S there's probably half a dozen people.
And we all kind of share, share data to try to, uh, try to, uh, uh, quantify these things in, in all kinds of, all kinds of systems.
I see.
So you're basically have, yeah, uh, a bunch of different test systems, different test systems.
Um, you have, uh, living and artificial systems, I guess, and you're just trying to then apply these kinds of tools.
I see.
I see.
I mean, that's, so that's the kind of, um, lowest barrier, uh, things to try first is just to analyze data, but, but also, uh, and I'm sure you're already doing some of this experimentally.
One of the things that we've been doing is just taking systems and taking a guess, a hypothesis about what it is that the system is trying to do.
And obviously it's a very, that's a, that's a very loaded word, but, but what you then do is, is once you've made that hypothesis, you put barriers between it and whatever you think it's trying to do.
And that might physical space.
It might be an energetic, like in metabolic space.
It might be in, in the case of cells, we do it in transcriptional space or, or physiological space.
So put a barrier and then you watch what degree of ingenuity the thing has to get around your barrier.
And, and then, and then, and then we often get a lot of surprises.
The, the, the systems, you know, they, they, they often turn out to be a lot smarter than, than, than we think they will be.
And then, and then that enables you to kind of refine your hypothesis about what, what you, what, what space it's working in, what you thought it was trying to do and how smart it is to get there.
And so there's like, so we can think about, you know, um, have you done, have you done things like, uh, I remember, uh, mazes, right.
You've done, you've done mazes.
Yes.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Um, so there's a variety of other, uh, assays that, that we can think of where, where, right, where we can actually probe the degree of, uh, teleonomy in these systems.
Okay.
Okay.
This is great.
I actually have a really basic question.
That's, uh, just, it came back to me, which you were discussing when you have your xenobots, for example, and they're moving across and you're just, you know, analyzing how they're moving.
And because of your, um, architecture that you've embedded into these things, do you have an idea if they want to move, they do move, but do, do you have an idea as from your perspective, you know, top, from the top down, do they want to move these, you know, bots?
Well, here's the, yeah, that's a, that's a good question.
So, so there's two ways, there's two ways to, to think about that.
One is, um, the things that they're doing are, are only visible to us because we liberated them from the other cells in the body.
The other cells in the body are typically preventing them from doing the things that, the things that they're doing.
So in one sense, you can say that, I mean, we haven't engineered anything really.
I mean, there, there's a typos in about that's very hand to kind of construct it, but, but typically we do very little, right?
It's, you know, it's, it's what the cells want to do on their own.
And you can say that because what we've done is lifted a constraint, we've released the, right?
Typically the other cells in the embryo, uh, uh, induce these cells to have this like boring two-dimensional, um, existence being the outer surface of an embryo.
Whereas, whereas if you, if you get them away from that, this is, you know, so, so one way to say it is, this is what they wanted to do all along.
It's just under normal circumstances, the other cells can strain them from doing it.
So that's, that's, that's one way of saying it.
Another way to address this is, is, uh, we've been, we've been really working on, uh, the notion of stress as a driver of, um, behavior and multi and multicellularity.
And we have, um, stress markers that we can use and we've been studying, uh, and this, this is, this is all unpublished, but we've been studying stress markers in Xenobots.
And one thing that you can imagine is to answer your question, and, and we, we haven't done this yet, but we will, is, is you can imagine taking a Xenobot, uh, physically constraining it so that it can't move.
Yes.
Measuring the stress marker, comparing it with the cat and saying, actually preventing it from doing the certain behavior, just like with motion constriction in, in, in, you know, in rodents and so on.
When you prevent them from doing the things they want to do, their stress goes up, right?
Their, their, their agency, they can, they can detect that they're not able to control, you know, their, uh, their behavior and stress goes up.
That's nice.
So, so we could, we could do that, uh, you know, and you can imagine there's all kinds of caveats and, and, um, criticisms that, that would come from with that sort of experiment.
But, you know, uh, we can, we can, there's all kinds of controls that you need to do and things like that, but yeah, that's another, that's another, um, another aspect of it.
So I think that to the, you know, for me, uh, the, the kind of philosophical framework that we've been working with to the extent that anything wants to do anything, including us, these things want to do the things that they're doing.
Uh, it, that doesn't, that doesn't mean they have, you know, high order metacognition where they know what they want to do or anything like that.
But I think any, any reasonable model of how anything can want to do anything would have to deal with these minimal, minimal systems.
Yeah.
I like the question and I like your, I like your approach about the stress response.
That's nice.
Um, um, uh, I was thinking about, um, a study by, uh, Ikegami in Tokyo where he was growing, um, neuronal cells, cell culture on top of a CMOS platform,
which was part of a robot with, with wheels.
So robot with wheels and, uh, proximity sensors and put it into a big arena.
And then they look to see what's the movement of this robot.
What's not programmed to do anything, let's say.
And, uh, and then in their analysis, it would go around and it would like, you know, there are barriers, the walls would go near the walls.
And then it would turn and go away.
And their, their analysis of this was that the, the cells did not want to be stimulated.
But I thought that was an interesting, uh, how should I say interesting perspective.
And I mean, there are, there are criticisms one might say in all these things, that's fine, but it's interesting perspective to think that neuronal cells in this, in this particular case, the way it's set up,
it appeared that they would avoid going to the walls because they didn't want to be stimulated.
Yeah.
So that's why I was wondering about your system.
If you had some, uh, idea in what, what the system wanted.
Right.
I, yeah, I mean, this is, this is, uh, most of this is unpublished and there's still a ton of things to do yet, but, uh, I, I, I do feel like that is a, a very, uh, tractable question.
To, to address systems and, and another thing that we're working on is, um, instrumentizing them so that they have control over their environment.
So that certain, certain kinds of movement and certain kinds of calcium patterns will cause the, you know, stimuli or, or, you know, chemical, electrical, optical, whatever.
And then we can let the system speak for itself.
Right.
So now you tell me what you want.
If you know, if you're, if you're behaving in a way that gets you more light stimulation, well, then, then right.
What more can you ask for?
So, so, so these closed loop kind of, so, so like we're, we're building these kind of closed loop things.
Um, yeah, I think, you know, one of the, um, the reason I say is, is that, that we should, we, we really like, we haven't focused on really engineering them much, uh, in terms of
this in bio circuits or anything like that, because I feel like the pool of things that they already know how to do out of the box without us doing anything.
It's massive and we haven't even begun to scratch the surface.
And before I anything, I want to, uh, you know, I want to see what they can naturally do.
And I'll give you an example of a super stupid, like, um, a simple, uh, model system for this, that we developed recently, which is, um, purely computational, you know, um, uh, sorting algorithms,
right, like bubble sort, uh, you know, selection sort, that kind of thing, right?
So the algorithm itself is about six lines of code.
It's fully deterministic, completely transparent.
There's no new biology to find there.
There's no material physics.
It's just like, it's very simple.
You sort an array of numbers and there's an algorithm and it does that, right?
So we made a, we made a, uh, a version of this.
That's, um, uh, well, first of all, uh, and, and these things have been studied for many decades, right?
This is, you know, every computer science student studies these.
And we, we, we all feel like we know what they do because it's, it's, it's simple.
It's transparent.
It's deterministic.
We, you know, we feel like we know what they do.
Okay.
So first, first thing we discovered is that if you, if you plot their movement in sorting space, so sorting space is just, is just the question of how, how sorted are they?
And so initially you start off down here because it's random, but then everybody gets to this one point at the end where everything is sorted, right?
All these algorithms, if you, if you crank through them enough, they're guaranteed to sort the string of numbers.
So, so it, you know, sort of goes, goes up like that.
So, so one thing we did is we did something crazy is we put a barrier in its place.
What's a barrier.
A barrier is a number that refuses to move.
So you want to swap the five and the seven, but the five is broken.
It's, it won't move.
Now, the algorithm doesn't know this.
The algorithm, the standard algorithm does not ask, did the move succeed?
Right.
It assumes that you're reliable, that your hardware is a hundred percent reliable.
And when it says swap, it, it assumes it's swapped and you go on your merry way, right?
There's no, there's no context to checking.
There's, there's nothing.
We didn't put in anything like that.
All that happens is if you say swap and the cell is in the, and the number is broken, it doesn't swap.
That's it.
And then you go on what happens.
So what we, what we found is something remarkable.
What we found is something that, uh, in, in either animal behavior or in autonomous vehicles, you would call delayed gratification.
What that means is when it gets to a barrier that it can't, uh, get past, what it's able to do is to get further away from its goal, go around and get to where you need to go.
Now, right.
Like two magnets, uh, across a piece of wood, aren't going to do that.
Right.
The magnets too stupid to, to, because in order to go around, you have to get further and all the magnet knows how to do is through the gradient.
Right.
So it's not, that's right, but, but, but you need, you need a minute.
It's a next level of cognition to be able to say, I'm going to take a loss now in order to recoup gains later on.
Right.
I'm willing to step against my gradient.
Well, it turns out this, this, this, um, uh, these, uh, sorting algorithms can do that.
It's not in the algorithm.
There's nothing in the algorithm that says, if you run into trouble, backtrack the, no, no, nothing.
There's a completely surprising emergent feature of this.
Yep.
Amazing.
I'm surprised by that outcome.
I was shocked.
I was absolutely shocked to see this.
And then what we did was we, we created a version of it where each individual number had agency.
So it doesn't, it's, it's not that you have a top-down planner that's moving things around, but every single cell is executing the algorithm on their own.
And they just want, every cell wants the right neighbors.
So if I'm the five, I want a four to my left and a six to my right.
And then I'm happy.
That's, that's it.
And so, and then you use any of these algorithms to, and so, so, you know, it works and they sort themselves.
But what we found is that not only do they sort themselves, which is what the algorithm says they should do in between before they're done.
And then they do this other thing called clustering, which is again, nowhere in the algorithm.
It's a completely emergent thing.
So if you ask what do they want, I would say that, you know, how people often say, you know, when, when people try to define the difference between machines and living things, they say, well, machines only do what you tell them to do.
Living things do the wrong thing.
What, what looks like to me is that even these incredibly minimal things, there's the thing you make them do, which is what the algorithm says.
And sure enough, they, they eventually do sort the numbers and, but then there's the side quests that are like things they do that you never told them to do.
And they're doing that kind of on their own.
And, and, and we're not very good at guessing what those can be, but if we're creative, we can find them.
And those are the spontaneous things that, that this is what they like, like the wanting at that low level looks like, you know?
Um, so I think for all of these minimal physical systems and our minimal biological systems, we should be looking for this stuff.
We should be setting up assays to say, in addition to what we think you're going to do based on what engineering we've done, what else are you actually doing?
What are the other goals that we never baked in?
You know, that's right.
Yep.
Yeah.
I think, and you, you contacted me about, for example, definitions of life and things like this.
And, and, uh, you know, um, of course we all, we ruminate about these things.
And I think one of the interesting things that you're now talking about is that we have this in biology, it seems like it makes sense to have numbers like population sizes because of these kinds of factors that you're talking about.
It seems to me like, I was always fascinated that when you do like, um, a chemotoxic experiment with bacteria.
So you put the food on one side and then the bacteria, they, they, you know, as a population, they migrate towards the food, but there are always some that migrate the other way.
And I think this is, this is a fundamental thing about biology.
That's very, very important to understand what biology is doing, which is different, maybe different than what, um, engineered machines are doing, but maybe when we have engineered machines on mass, which is what we're getting.
Now we start to see this emergent behavior of the machines doing the opposite thing or going the other way or not following the, the trend, let's say.
Um, and so, and so that, that way, the, how should I say, uh, probabilistic, um, uh, dynamics becomes super important for the evolution of these systems.
Um, and that's what you get when you start to get larger and larger numbers, I think, yeah, yeah, yeah, I think it gets, it gets, uh, scaled up of, of, of, and, and, and really, um, the emergence goes up, you know, the, the, the migration, the funny thing about migration, have you seen, um, this was well over 10 years ago, the, the, the, uh, the Sun and Zao paper, where they, they show that in an electric field, single cells migrate towards one end.
But if you chop the cell into pieces, all the pieces migrate in the other end.
So, right.
So that's, it's pretty cool.
So, so all your components want to go this way, but when you put them together, the collective wants to go, wants to go that way.
Okay.
I'm making a little note here.
I want to check this out later.
I'll send you, I'll send you a link.
Yeah.
Uh, and, and I, you know, and I think that's, that's a kind of a profound, um, principle of collective intelligence, right?
Is that, is that the collective does things that the parts don't want to do.
That's the whole, that's the whole point.
Yeah.
That's, and that's part of the, yeah, that's part of the.
Point.
Right, right, right, right.
So, you know, I, uh, I teach this course in, um, uh, genetic engineering, basically.
So we go into all the details and I, I, I really like to go into the, into the papers that detail where things go wrong, you know, cause that's where the interesting stuff happens or the things, things go wrong for sure.
But things that go, uh, in a way that you don't expect, um, and, uh, yeah, uh, what was it?
Oh, shit.
I just, I just lost the thread of what I was going to say about that.
I don't know what happened to that thought.
It might come back to me.
Excuse me.
Yeah.
I mean, one, one thing that I always think about with these, with like traditional symbio is that.
A lot of the synthetic biologists I know are very frustrated with the medium because you design this beautiful circuit.
It's supposed to do the, and then you put it in the real cell and, uh, you know, it's the cell either fights you or it turns off some of the, right.
Some of the stuff where there's, there's, there's something going on that screws up your, your, your plan.
Right.
Right.
And what they really want is a nice blank slate.
You want something that doesn't do anything other than what you, you know, what your circuits are, are, are telling it to do.
Yeah.
Right.
Right.
And, and, you know, our approach, uh, especially on the biomedical side is to go the exact, the opposite direction and to say, I want the minimum.
I don't want to tell you much.
I want to take advantage of the things you already know how to do and try to sort of behavior shape you in that direction.
In fact, um, I have a new, a new postdoc, uh, in the group, Batusa Parsa, who's, uh, she comes from Josh Bongard's lab and, and she was, uh, kind of, uh, she was, she was the driver behind, um, the, the, the poly computing work on the vibrating particles that they had.
And she, she and I are going to do a, uh, a contest in, uh, in a life at the a life conference, and it's going to be a poly computing contest in the following way.
Uh, you, you submit, you submit a system of some sort, a minimal system, and you win if none of the other, uh, participants in the context can find other things that it's doing besides what you want it to do.
Right.
You, you, you win by, by submitting something that only does one thing.
And of course the other people are trying to say, no, actually we can see it doing this other thing.
Right.
Yes.
And, and, and I suspect that, I suspect that it's going to be really hard to, to, to come up with something that only does the thing that you think it's doing.
My, my guess is that even, even very minimal systems are doing many things if, if we're open-minded about, um, that's right.
Yep.
Yep.
I believe so.
Yep.
Yep.
And, uh, that was, um, yeah, that was a perspective that I, I lost track of before.
And I was going to say that, uh, I'm wondering as we understand better, the kinds of systems we're designing as, let's say as engineers, I don't know if you have a background in engineering.
I don't, uh, but, uh,
Computer science originally, but yeah.
Okay.
Uh, so I'm wondering if we start as we're engineering, for example, even these algorithms that you're talking about that have somehow found a way to, to back off from a goal and go around.
Right.
Um, so I'm wondering if, um, as we're making and then analyzing our, um, artificial systems more, whether they're going to really just spontaneously start behaving like what we consider to be biological systems.
Um, because right now, even I teach that there's a dichotomy between these artificial systems and natural systems, and they have these fundamentally different properties in some ways.
And so it's very difficult to engineer them.
Like you said, engineer them to properly behave like a machine.
Um, and we have good examples where they work and we have good examples where it doesn't work.
Um, but I'm wondering that, uh, maybe it's the other way around now that, uh, as we understand our machines more, that we start to see that these systems are just behaving like a biological system.
That there is a, there's going to be less of a separation between these two, two realms, um, as we understand them better with these kinds of tests that you're talking about.
Yeah. Yeah. I, I, a hundred percent. That's, that's what I've been arguing strongly lately. And, um, and a lot of people really don't like it because on the, you know, the, the, on the mechanism side, people really like this idea that there are these machines and the, you know, and then, and we can know, we know exactly what they do.
And on the organic society, they like the idea that we have these majestic living things that cannot be reduced to machines and whatever, but I, right.
I think that dichotomy is, is totally a dichotomy among our formalisms, not among the things themselves.
And I think we've decided to use these formalisms and we're very stuck on, uh, when they are and aren't applicable in ways that are not borne out by the science anymore.
Right. Right. And so I just, in fact, I just had, um, I'm, so I'm writing a piece on, on, on this, on living things and machines and whatnot.
Hmm.
I had, uh, our graphic artist, uh, draw, make a, make a, make a, uh, uh, you know, um, uh, an image that I'm going to use.
You know, um, Magritte, uh, famous painting, uh, this, uh, this thing is not a pipe and it's a picture of a pipe.
Yes, yes, yes, yes.
So, so, so, so he made me, I had him draw a picture with a, with a Turing machine that says, it's a machine to Turing.
Like this is not even, not even the Turing machine is a Turing machine, right?
Like you can, you can have this formalism of a Turing machine and it has all these limitations. Of course it does.
But the formalism has the limitations. That's not to say that the real thing is not captured by that formalism.
And I think it's really funny that in the case of living things, a lot of people are willing to say, look, the laws of chemistry do not capture everything that's going on in this incredible thing.
But suddenly when you come to, uh, engineering, they say, oh no, the algorithm fully captures what this thing is doing.
Why would you say that? Why, why would you assume, right?
That in one case, there's this, there's this stack on top of the chemistry that gives you new, new things.
But in this case, you somehow decide that your formalism is capturing everything that, that the system is doing.
Right. So I completely agree with you.
I think that, uh, there's not that much difference because specifically because these, these things that we love about living things.
I think they show up super early as your, as your work shows, right?
It really doesn't that much to start.
A lot of things show up early.
A lot.
Very early.
Yeah.
Yep.
That's right.
Yeah.
So I'm, I'm wondering then, uh, uh, how should I say, what does this mean for the, for the scientific method?
Right.
Well, the scientific method, as far as let's say, um, hypothesis driven.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Um, I mean, I, I, of course I like your approach cause I have a similar approach that we basically have these systems and we just, we try to learn from them.
We observe and we learn from them.
Um, and eventually I think it's important to, of course, turn around and come up with some hypotheses that we can then test in the laboratory.
Um, so I'm wondering what that means as far as the, the scientific method.
Yeah.
Um, the scientific method is the one I think that, uh, how should I say capitalizes a lot on these formalisms by necessity, perhaps.
Yeah.
I don't know.
What is your, what is your perspective as far as, as a scientist going forward?
What, what, what is, how is you, how do you juggle these things?
How do you feel about these things?
Yeah.
Yeah.
So, so, so here's, here's an argument that, that, uh, I find myself having with, with people a lot.
Um, I'll, I'll, I'll show them, I'm like, look, uh, here's a simple model of a gene regulatory network, for example.
Yep.
And, uh, look, it has this, it has this amazing property of Pavlovian conditioning.
Uh, where, where, where do you think that comes from?
Um, and people will say, well, it's just the fact that holds just the fact that holds it's, it's one of the, like, you know, kind of like the stuff that Stu Kaufman discovered in the nineties.
Right.
There's just these properties of networks.
It's just the fact that holds about the, the, the, the world.
Right.
And so now we have fine.
Now we have two choices.
We have what is the more common choice.
And I think it is actually a very pessimistic choice, which is these, this, there's a random grab bag of stuff that holds.
And sometimes we encounter it and then we're surprised.
We say emergence.
Fabulous.
Right.
Right.
So on that view, the scientific method has a lot of problems because we don't have a systematic way of finding these things.
It's just gonna crop up from time to time and, and look at that.
It holds.
Or what I think is, is the more, um, I can't prove that it's right, but it's the more, I think it's the more optimistic view is to do what the mathematicians do.
The mathematicians who, who have tons of stuff like this, right?
The truths of number theory and the, you know, the facts of, of geometry and the, uh, and in computer science, all the things, you know, why the NAND gate is special and all this stuff.
They, they don't think this is just a random grab bag of stuff that holds.
I think they're exploring an existing space.
So like Plato and Pythagoras said, right, there's a, there's an ordered space with a metric.
And in fact, you can see it.
I've seen, they make this thing called the map of mathematics.
And you look at the map of mathematics and you see, okay, here's, you know, here's the, you know, number theory and here's the topology and here's, and, and, and it's not arbitrary.
They, they, they are close to each other, which means that you can systematically having found one thing.
You can now systematically study the space around it and use all these things that you build and these things that we build.
We can use them as periscopes into that space, right?
That it's not just a random collection of things that we may, or, you know, occasionally find.
We can start systematically explore that these things now, right now, specifically, right.
What, what I really think is important for us when we're interfacing with biology is biologists like two kinds of, where does it come from?
Right sources, but they, they like two things. They like heredity and they like environment, right?
Those are the two big, the two big things.
When you're dealing with things like certain truths of mathematics or, or the facts around shapes or networks or any of this emergent stuff.
Is it heredity? No.
Is it environment?
Also because, because all of the features of the physical universe could have been different.
And I realize this is a controversial stance.
Not everybody that takes it, but if you were to tweak all the constants around the big bang, it would still be the case that the prime number.
Distribution is what it is and right.
And all of these things hold.
So, so there's a third thing.
It isn't just heredity and environment captured by physics.
There's a third thing, which is not captured by physics at all, but it sure informs the physics.
It constrains the physics and it gives evolution this, this incredible toolkit of free lunches, right?
Like, like this, this is another example.
I've used them.
Imagine you have an evolutionary system where the most fit thing is a triangle, a particular kind of triangle.
So you do a bunch of generations and you find the first angle and then you do a bunch of generations and you find a second angle.
Well, miraculously, now you're done.
You don't need to look for the third.
Wasn't that right?
Right?
That's not philosophy.
That's very practical.
Evolution just saved the 33% of its time because, because you get that for free.
Well, where does it come?
Didn't come from your genetics.
Didn't come from your environment.
It's, it's a, it's a magical thing you can exploit.
And I think evolution exploits the crap out of this stuff.
And so, right.
So, so what can we can imagine then?
So, so this is how I see it.
I, I see it that there is a third source, these, these patterns, and I think they can be quite complex.
And I mean, there's a whole other thing we can talk about.
Cause I think they're, I think some of them are essential and I think some of them are kinds of minds.
And then it's a sense.
They're not just like triangles and things like that.
But, but what I think evolution produces are pointers into that space.
I think what evolution is actually doing is producing physical objects that serve as, as, as, as, as, as, as, as a kind of pointer into that space that lets these patterns come, come through.
James, I, I think called the, or was it?
That wasn't James.
It was Whitehead called them ingressions.
They ingress into the physical world, right?
You, you, the, the physical thing we build is a, is a, is a, is a portal through which, uh, these, these, you know, these patterns come, come through and what we can do then.
So, so then here to this, my long-winded answer to the thing about the scientific method is that I think our scientific method is to map out the space.
That's, that's, that's right.
That makes sense.
We make these things.
So we have an embryo and the embryo shows us a very reliable pattern, but that's not the only thing that we can do.
And so the xenobot and the, and the, and the, and all of these different things and, and the things that you build are allowing us little glimpses of, of corners of that space.
And that's, and that's the scientific method is to systematically explore it, not just to sort of hang around until things emerge and that we're surprised by it.
That's right.
That's right.
That's right.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Yeah.
I see.
I see.
Yeah.
So there's still, there's still a lot of work.
There's still a lot of jobs to be for, to be filled in the scientific method.
For sure.
Like, I don't think this is a mysterious position at all, because that's what a lot of people think is that, well, as soon as you've.
Positive postulated this non-physical space, well, now you're done, you know, now you're done.
No, I don't think that's true at all.
This is the point isn't to accept it as a mystery.
The point is to use the, the physical pointers to explore it, which, which I think we can.
And I, and I think we're going to get tons of surprises.
And we can, we should be making a map.
You know, we should be, we should be making a map of this thing, like the mathematicians do.
That's right.
Yeah.
I really like this idea.
Yeah.
I see.
I see.
So it does.
It, it, it, it does seem like it's a bit of a, a, a mishmash of, uh, science, engineering and religion, actually.
There is this almost a religious component, which is an interesting one.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Well, well, yeah.
They say, you know, a lot of, a lot of scientists will, will, will claim that they're physicalists in the sense that, right.
That the laws of physics exhaust everything that there is to know about the world.
But, but, but they all use these truths of mathematics, of logic, of computation.
And they're not, those are not derivable from any of the things that physics deals with there.
Right.
There is, I mean, our perception of them is modeled modulated by our nervous system and all that.
But, but, but the, but the, but the, these patterns themselves, I mean, another thing is, um, uh, some of these crazy, uh, I don't know if you've ever seen these Halley plots that, uh, that, uh, that can be drawn from there.
It's like, it's a kind of fractal that is drawn from a, a simple formula of complex numbers.
The formula could be like, you know, Z cube plus seven.
That's it.
Right.
Like, like, like five characters or so, or so that's it.
The pattern that you get when you plot the, when you plot the pattern, you get this incredible thing.
It's very biological looking.
It's crazy.
Some detail and, and, and there's stuff going on where, where is that pattern?
You, you're not going to find it in the physical universe.
There's nothing about the facts of the physical universe tell you what that pattern is going to be.
Right.
And the, if you try to think of it as compression, like I have this incredible pattern.
I can press the, are you kidding?
Like what, what, what, what compression method do we, do we have that will, that will actually do that?
It's clearly you're getting more out than you put in there.
There, there, you know, there, there is no way, you know, there's, there's no way about it.
So we can be, you know, we can, we can, we can love physics and all of that.
But I think it's very clear that that is not the only source of information in, in our world.
I don't know.
I just don't know how you get around it.
I think, I mean, I think the mathematicians have taken this seriously for, for a long time.
And I think we have to now too, it's not good.
You know, people will say, well, I, I like Occam's razor and I like to simplify in this, this platonic space is too, you know, too, too crazy.
I'm just going to say it's emergent.
Well, what does that mean?
That just means you're committing to being surprised every time.
That means it's a mystery that like, that's the mysterious position to me is to say that we're just going to, you know, it'll, these, these things will just randomly pop up.
And I don't believe that there's a, that there's a structured space behind it.
I can't, can't disprove that, but it's, it's that, that seems to me like giving up on the, on the whole project of science, which is, you assume that there's order behind it.
Like, yeah, I can't, I can't really understand that, you know, that argument.
There are many examples of emergence in physical systems that have been very well characterized, right?
I mean, from, from, let's say, one side of the face space to the next, and we have a good understanding of why that is.
Is it true that, I'm trying to just think in real time, is it true that we have, we basically, do we always have emergence due to large numbers?
It must be the case, right?
Well, I'm not sure. No, I don't think that's true.
I don't think that's true because, well, first, and I'm not an expert in this, but, but I think that either.
I think there are quantum events that only take a couple of particles and you are like, you know, like, like hydrogen bonds and things like this.
You, you really only, I mean, I don't know if there are particles, maybe that's a whole other thing, right?
Some people are going to say there are no particles.
It's whatever is underneath them and then small numbers of what, right?
So it's kind of, but I don't think it always takes large numbers of things.
Okay. Okay.
I re yeah, I really don't. I don't.
But, but, but then again, we, you know, we don't understand these pointers very well into that space yet.
And so I do think that having a large number of things is a particularly good way to poke a hole into that space.
Right. That seems whenever you do that, something interesting comes through.
So I think that's a good way of doing it, but I don't think it's the exclusive way of doing it.
I see. So, so, so scaling is a tool that we can use in our experiment, which we do use.
Yeah.
That's because it's useful.
Okay.
But it doesn't necessarily have to go that way.
I have to think, I have to think a bit more about that actually.
Yeah.
Quantum stuff is something that eludes me.
I don't have a good grasp of quantum level stuff.
Right.
Yeah.
But it is a classic.
I mean, just from what I read, it is a classic model of, of, of, of, of emergence when, when you can have like, you know, simple hydrogen bonds and all the weird, you know, better than me, all the weird stuff about the water molecule.
And sure.
That's just like super strange.
And so it's super strange.
Yeah.
It's really interesting.
Yeah.
That's a good, that's a good example of emergence too, by the way.
I like that to bring that up for students.
Yeah.
So they can think about that.
Yeah.
Cool.
Yeah.
All right.
Cool.
Okay.
So, so why don't we, yeah, I think, I think it would be really good to apply some of our methods to the tracking data.
So why don't we chat online and about getting hold of some.
Yeah.
Either videos.
I mean, either videos or, or coordinate coordinate pairs.
Yep.
Yeah.
I have a, currently have a student over in the physics department who's doing the majority of the work for me.
And which brings me to another topic I'll say in a moment.
I'll, when I get back to Trento, I'm going to have a meeting with him to see where he is and then see what, where we want to go with this.
That would be great.
Thank you, Mike.
And the second, the thing I did want to say, sometimes I come, it's very rare, but sometimes I come across a student who's interested in the kinds of things we're talking about.
Is it possible that I would then recommend them to contact you or send them your way?
If I have a good student, that is.
All right.
Who's interested in these topics?
Would you be receptive to hearing from them?
Of course.
Of course.
Absolutely.
Yeah.
Yeah, absolutely.
I get, I get, I get emails from a lot of people.
If I'm interested by you, then that's even better.
So, so yeah, absolutely.
Yeah.
I, yeah.
I do an office hours when, you know, a zoom office hours, when people come on to talk about
stuff and yeah, I'd be happy to any, anybody that you think is good.
I'd be happy to talk to them.
Yeah.
Okay.
That's a good guy in the shoot here and he's young and I keep telling them, you can't
stay with me forever.
You got to get out.
And so, so I'm going to discuss that.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Have him contact me.
Yeah, absolutely.
Okay.
That's cool.
Mike.
Thank you.
Okay.
So yeah, I, I see we're in, yeah.
In the next few weeks, I'll get in touch with you and see, and see what we can do.
That'd be, that'd be super nice.
And thank you for, let's say being open to this kind of collaboration.
I appreciate it.
Totally.
Totally.
Yeah.
