you think you've been taught things that aren't quite right this whole thing about molecules in
a puddle or in a pond lightning strikes molecules form those molecules form into
slithering creatures and they come out of this pond that's the primordial supermodel
that's a bunch of nonsense
so my name is zach mcrae i am the chapter director for the russia christie chapter here at rice
i graduated uh back in 2020 i was over at jones i did a double major linguistics and theater and i
helped um start our chapter here and i just enjoyed it so much enjoyed the conversations
that we have that i decided to uh stay on board so welcome russia christie is
a christian ministry here that likes to tackle the big questions of life why are we here does god
exist is the bible true and so we enjoy having uh conversations having lectures bring in uh
subject matter experts like dr james tuer here
normally we talk about philosophical historical scientific arguments for belief in the christian
faith but that's not one of those talks tonight some of y'all might think that this is about
creationism evolution no there is not going to be any god talk here tonight rather we are having dr
tuer talk about the state of the research on the origin of life a biogenesis so if you aren't a christian
here we welcome you and we always welcome you to come to any of our weekly meetings we normally meet
here in this room 6 30 on tuesdays so if you're a christian welcome if you're not a christian you are
more than welcome to join us and now let's give a big round of applause for dr tuer
okay with intent there is going to be nothing about god in this i think i had my mention right
at the end i write the word god to say you did not hear me speak about god at all so when people
say that tour uses god of the gaps arguments or tour has to bring god into this or tour has to bring in
miracles into this they're wrong okay they're wrong all right now now um i am locked and loaded
and it's not because of you it's because of of uh my position on these things has brought attack
from people on the internet and attack from the scientific community that's why i am locked and
loaded so if if you think that i am being hard on people trust me i am an angel compared to the way
that they treat me okay so so because i know in this day and age you say one little thing that might
you know ruffle some feathers and you look at people like boy they should be cancelled but it's going to
happen tonight all right um so there was a there was a video put out a couple of years ago by professor
dave uh who's a guy named dave farina and that has 786 000 views as of today and it's it's he talks a
lot about uh my motivation for doing these things i was psychoanalyzed and uh um he knew things about
me that i didn't even know about myself at all and so i came out with a 13-part series it's actually 14
parts because this is a one of the parts is a and b but say a 13-part series on abiogenesis and so you
can listen to all of those parts and so you see i don't have the youtube following that he has
this has 43 000 views in the last year in two years he has 78 7886 000 so you know if you guys would just
click on it a few times bring the numbers up that'd be helpful and what i also did is so you don't have
to click on all the different parts you can just click once and now it's nine hours of content and and you
can just listen to it because i had to go through the science it's just strictly science i'm going
through the science and uh there's a lot involved there and so then he came out with a two-part series
on me again now these have got like almost nine eight hundred thousand views nine hundred thousand
views and uh and again he says i'm still clueless so we will address that not so much tonight but that
will be addressed in due time so it's because i have a day job that i can't just run in and and make
youtube videos and this is not easy because i have to actually read papers and go through the data on
the papers but we he brought in what was really good is he brought in three experts and so now i can
go after the experts because i'm not going after a youtuber who it's very hard to engage just going like
you know you put a hook in jello and it comes out but but i i'm going after chemists only two of those
people on his that he brought on knew that they were being brought on uh one of them didn't even
know uh so i i i i was going to go after the two today to show really their work on abiogenesis and
what it's really like uh but i only have time for one because because uh uh it was just it was so rich
there was so much to go through so abiogenesis is the origin of life from non-living matter
and uh to construct any convincing theory of abiogenesis we must take into account the
condition of the earth about four billion years ago these are not my definition these are textbook
dictionary definitions all right uh so so this is origin of life this has nothing to do
with evolution which is life from life all right what are the characteristics of life responsiveness to
the environment growth and change ability to reproduce you have a metabolism and breathe maintain
homeostasis being made of cells and passing traits onto offspring homeostasis is the steady
internal physical and chemical condition all right again not my definition this is what we've got to go
after all right molecules don't care about life organisms care about life chemistry on the contrary
is utterly indifferent to life without a biological entity acting on them molecules have never been
shown to move toward life never all right so a lot of people have have tried to make
molecules that that are reminiscent of the molecules uh of life for example eshin moser sutherland devaraj
pounder krishnamurti uh and and their origin of life researchers ool origin of life researchers
what they do is they purchase some chemicals generally in high purity they mix those together in water in
high concentrations really high concentrations uh uh compared to the way they might be dispersed on an early
earth or in a specific order they attain mixtures of compounds that might resemble a precursor for one
of the four classes of compounds you need for life you need four classes of compounds carbohydrates
nucleic acids amino acids and lipids you need those four classes they publish a paper making bold assertions
uh um uh even though even though that uh well before they do that you do all of their compounds are
stereo scrambled they have very little control of relative stereochemistry no control of absolute
stereochemistry and and uh so they couldn't work anyway and they'll publish a paper much like
miller and urie did in 1952 so we're 70 years into this since miller urie experiment which is a great
experiment i think it was a great experiment uh where a bunch of the amino acids formed um so then
they'll watch they'll publish these papers and then the late person will say you see scientists
understand this because the press has turned up the knobs and then they encourage a generation of science
textbook writers and then you hear about these primordial soup models which are a bunch of
nonsense we have no zero zero evidence for that um the problem with these is this that molecules
decompose molecules that compose living systems almost always show homochirality uh when you're
building molecular systems you need constant redesigns so if you hook something on uh wrongly you can't
go back once you hook a moiety on it's very hard to take it back off again
uh the synthetic reactions don't know how to stop molecules don't know what they're going toward they
don't let's move toward life today they don't know that they're just moving along and if they make an
intermediate that's kind of interesting kind of in your life it's going to change into something else
the next day under the same conditions molecules don't know where to stop time although claimed to
be the savior of abiogenesis is actually the enemy because molecules decompose you get a molecule
is it's good and then under the same conditions that it formed it goes bad all the time all the
time and molecules don't sit around saying i think i'll sit here for a billion years and wait for the
next substrate to come no they they oxidize and if you say the earth was reducing fine you had a lot of
ammonia which is more degrading than oxygen very often prebiotic systems don't have the ability to
purify things and they do relay synthesis uh this was the origin of life researchers do reagent addition
order is essential it's like making a cake you can't say well you know let's just put the icing in
into the into the flour no there's an order in which you have to go and to to build things you have
to control temperature pressure solvent light or no light ph what the gas atmosphere is over this complex
molecule building is hard the character characterization at each step is critical in biological systems
there's characterization they don't run it doesn't run spectroscopy but you have enzymes that check
things and if it's not the right thing then they'll pull it out and they'll they'll chop it up and they'll
use it to build something else mass transfer is the killer of everything if you start with a kilo of
something kilo would be a lot if you had a particular thing and how many steps could you bring that kilo
before you would have nothing left because each yield might only be one or two percent yield and
and all of a sudden you have very little material left and uh uh so so um uh the mass transfer problem
to anybody who does synthesis you run out of material you try to optimize and optimize material and uh yields
and it's still hard nature keeps no larger laboratory notebooks so say it's going along and hey this is
moving like and now it runs out of material and it took 400 million years to get there
well why doesn't it just go back and make more because it never kept a laboratory notebook
you don't keep a laboratory no it doesn't know how to go back and and do it again these are all
the big problems that that that happen here's the way synthesis is normally done you take a you
mix it with b and you get a number of compounds a b will couple together you get a b1
a b2 you get a number of different compounds say a b4 is the one you want then you will separate
out a b4 from the mixture of compounds you purify that and you'll take a b4 mix it with c then you
get a b4 c1 a b4 c2 maybe this is the compound that you want then you separate this out and bring
it on the next step right then you you you get the compound you want you separate it out and bring
on the next step this is the way synthesis is done here's the way people who work in the era
of origin of life do synthesis and remember if you think i'm being hard on them i there's no there's no
ad hominem attacks none if i hit them with an ad hominem attack it was not intended so i'm sorry
i apologize preemptively all right but but uh um i'm just saying their work is wrong their work makes
no sense it's nonsensical i'm not criticizing the individual i'm criticizing their work direct
criticism of their work uh relay synthesis here's what they do they'll take a and b they make the same
series of compounds and then they never purify this because it's in such a mess they can't purify
it how would early earth go about purification well it might crystallize it might we'll try to
crystallize it go ahead well they don't then they say ah we see ab4 in there it's a little blip on my
hplc so it's in there it might only only be a tenth of a percent but it's in there so i will go ahead
and buy ab4 i will purchase it and it'll be chiral homochiral and pure 100 in anti-americ excess or
as good as you can get i will buy it that way and then i'll go on well wait a minute that's cheating
they isolated that from a natural source and then they took it on and now he takes he or she takes
it on and they get a mixture of different compounds say this is the compound that do that they want
they will say ah it's there i see it now they will go ahead and buy this so they put upon the early
earth constraints that they would never be able to deal with the heck with early earth that's early
earth's problem not my problem as origin of life researcher not my problem that's earlier's problem you
see how unfair that is it's cheating every step nobody could get away with a synthesis like this
nobody i mean reviewers would just laugh at you but origin of life you get away with it all the time
because they cheat at every step they cheat at every step scientifically they cheat at every step
chemically they cheat at every step all right so here's here's uh you can just get this off the
internet and this is the prebiotic nuclear bases and the roots to them this is a lot of this is
showing if you look at these syntheses they are exceedingly complex very very hard and there is no
absolute stereo control so in other words not controlling chirality here in some cases there's
some relative control but not absolute control there's no absolute control uh there's little or no
control of relative stereochemistry there's little or no accounting of yield there's little accounting
of purification no accounting for mass transport they don't they don't say hey i ran out of material
then they look at their notebook and they go back and they make some more but they don't even really do
that because they're only one step back they just buy some more it's cheating all the way a prebiotic
earth would never have these luxuries so if you just look at carbohydrates or some kind sometimes
called sugars sometimes called saccharides and the polymers they're from so if we just take
glucose just d-glucose it can have an open form and four closed forms two is six member rings and
two is five member rings there are four stereogenic centers 16 possible isomers on the open form
there are five stereogenic centers so 32 possible isomers but that's times four plus the 16 from here
that's 144 possible isomers just of d-glucose you already have d-glucose
but it can open or close in and and you can have you can have all of these possible forms
so if you just have d-glucose how many ways can you hook together six d-glucoses because you want
to make starch for example you have to be able to build polysaccharides to have life how many ways can
you hook these together well if you had nucleotides say you had the a base there's only one way a a a a a a
that's it six a's hooked together that's the only way how many ways can you hook together
six glucoses it's over one trillion ways over one trillion ways to hook this together you say why
because it's got all these different tentacles it's got all of these alcohols all these different
so it can hook together through one or through the other through an open form through a close
over one trillion ways that's why nobody's ever done it nobody's ever made glucose in in in uh with
with even relative control of stereochemistry in a prebiotically relevant manner that it is purified
from its other material let alone absolute control where you have to have a homochiral material nobody's
ever done it nobody's ever polymerized glucose that's how far away we are nobody's ever done it in a
prebiotically relevant manner means that you're not taking human-made design stereo human protecting
groups deep protecting groups just what would be available on an early earth so steve benner he's
the founder of the foundation for applied molecular evolution why why would i why would i talk about
steve's work oh i can't imagine you look at those videos that came out from dave farina and you will see
him saying things about my motivations and why i say these things and i challenged him you think
that i'm only speaking behind his back i'm not i challenged him we met together we were at a
conference in israel in may and i went when susie got to the dinner the night before the conference i
went right at him and and i asked him i said did you ever watch my videos and remember this is this is 13
videos all right 13 videos of like nine or ten hours of videos did you ever watch my videos before you
commented on them because you said that i said many things in there that i never said
and he said well uh it was on but you know i was kind of doing other things oh i believe that
it was on you turned on part one it was this was long before i launched the the the click once and
watch the whole thing it's just part you you you clicked on part one and then you went and did other
things and it was just playing in the background and then when you got done with that playing in the
background you went and you went to part two you clicked on that and then you went and did other
yes i believe you steve do you believe him it's hard to believe is it is my voice like like you know
soft music in this in the background that people like to enjoy listening to this stuff he's published
this paper prebiotic chemistry that could not not have happened meaning that this is chemistry is so easy
it it it must have happened on early earth okay let's i was interested in this i wanted to see this
so he taught here's what this scheme that showed in the paper these different molecules that he can
make and you see all these these carbohydrates here the this is this precursor to to a nucleic acid and
things like this wow you think that these could happen let's look those articles up so just look up the
synthesis of the carbohydrates so in that article you you have to go back to these other articles to see
exactly how did he get this compound how did he get this compound so you go and you look up the
article so here's his paper where he talks about the synthesis of this and so he says one present
obstacles in the rna first model of the origin of life is the inability to generate reasonable
hands-off scenarios for the formation of carbohydrates under conditions where they might have survived for
reasonable times once formed so he's he understands he's a real synthetic chemist i know the person that
he worked for for his phd real synthetic chemist he knows that these molecules under the conditions
that they're made they decompose so how does the chemist make these you watch the reaction as soon as
it's optimized and starts going to boom you stop that reaction and then you fish it out because they
decompose under the very reaction conditions in which they form lots of chemical reactions are like
that but he wants a hands-off scenario so he picks on other origin of life researchers saying
they have two exacting conditions early earth would never have been that exact ours is a hands-off
scenario okay let's see how hands-off it is and then he says here we show how we can do this on a
on a borate material and it it helps the formation and it it makes them stay around longer it's a
hands-off approach it makes them stay around longer so that they don't decompose so fast
okay i want to read about that then he shows all i mean just like
people would be embarrassed to show a mixture like this in a normal synthetic paper where are you going
with this but in any case so he makes his d-ribose d-ribose has a normal half-life under the conditions
in which it forms in five how of five hours that means after five hours you only have half as much as
you had five hours before that's what that that the half-life means after eight half-lives it's gone
well he's stabilized this thing so that it lasts 45 hours which is less than two days
when we're talking early earth and prebiotic stuff we're talking millions of years
you go from five hours to 45 hours there's no difference the delta is too small
it's just not there and this is what you're proud of that you've stabilized this what is is is there
something there that as soon as it forms is good i mean that's his stability now you look at his d-ribose
that he made this is what the spectrum for d-ribose should look like this is right off the internet
you guys who are taking my organic class you're going to learn about c13 nmr by the end of this
semester you so so so you can have an open form and closed form so there's d-ribose here's what he
gets ah if you know anything about chemistry this is an utter joke that's not a proton nmr that's a c13
nmr this isn't people would be ashamed to show this ashamed every one of these little peaks this is not
noise every one of these is a different compound there's a bazillion compounds in here it's totally
useless and this guy puts it in there as he's proud of it somewhere in there is ribose now it's it's
it's racemic so you have the other mirror image there but somewhere there is ribose
okay now what now what do you do it it's in such a mixture you could never use it but what does he do
pata tada he gets ribose go on to the next step well where did you get that where did you get the
ribose he doesn't say he says references krishnamurti's paper he says krishnamurti got ribose in
his prebiotic work oh okay so i looked up krishnamurti's paper and you know what it says he bought it
he bought it from sigma aldrich it comes from a natural source and then he reacts it with this
compound so so banner refers to krishnamurti krishnamurti had taken ribose which he bought and he reacted
with this compound which all origin of life researchers say is prebiotically relevant in
other words it could form on an early earth we're sure and so i searched this thing down i searched
it and and uh so anyway so where does this reagent come from so that's also in reference 48 you go to
reference 48 and you go and then it refers you to another paper and refers you to another paper so you
work your way back and so you can look at here's krishnamurti's paper and so he talks about this
compound these compounds that you need for putting for phosphorylating these compounds and you look
up these references so here it is reference four and five in the krishnamurti paper so he referred
me to krishnamurti and krishnamurti refers me to references four and five so i go to reference and
and then he also uses another way and then if you look at the yields look at the yields here his yield of
this compound which banner is going to use is 29 yield of a three to two mixture hence it's 17 yield of
what he wants this is starting with something that he bought chirally pure from a from a from a
distributor that gets it from a natural source and he's using all this chemistry that's not really
prebiotically relevant he has magnesium chloride around so he uses magnesium chloride i want you to
remember that he injects magnesium chloride he says magnesium chloride it's going to be available
it is available 2.5 percent of the crust of the earth is magnesium magnesium chloride is available
all right so you you you get this compound now does he does he take this and somehow get it in pure
form no it's mixed in with many other things he has to buy this in pure form or make it by another
root in pure form but nonetheless where does he get where does he get this this uh this is a hands-off
remember benner said we do hands-off synthesis other people do hands-on well what benner does is he refers
to people who do the hands-on he says well i didn't do it the other guy did it not me it's him
here's the hands-off synthesis d ribose well where'd you get d rivals he bought it from sigma aldrich
d ribose was dissolved in water and this sodium ammonium phosphate was added well where'd you get that i
bought it and it was added at room temperature the ph value of the solution 9.4 was lowered to maintain it
at seven oh how convenient was that that really happened on an early earth over a 24-hour period
by addition of ion exchange resin amber light ir 120 where do you get ion exchange resin on an early
earth no way this is not a naturally occurring compound these are all human made at four hour
intervals another batch of sodium ammonium phosphate uh uh pentahydrate was added at ph7 maintained as
before for 24 hours subsequently the ph of the reaction uh mixture was lowered to 6.5 how convenient
was that and maintained for another 24 hours by addition of this ion exchange resin and then the
reaction mixture was diluted with 0.05 molar uh this this ammonium formic acid complex all of this and
then he he gets this and then he has to to characterize it so detailed so involved this doesn't happen did
you ever go out to a puddle and see it doing one of these things i asked you
this is the hands-on stuff that benner criticizes but then he cites this this is available it was done
in early earth because here's a paper on on prebiotic synthesis where they do this type of thing
and the the idea of hands-off is to have someone else do the hands-on part and then cite their product
buy it from an isolator of natural sources and press ahead that's what benner did now when you go to
track that compound which they say is really prebiotically relevant you go back to this article which
is like from 1955 had nothing to do with prebiotic synthesis using compounds that would never be
available by prebiotic synthesis you see how the science itself screams out that all of your chemistry
is nonsense when it comes to prebiotic synthesis as for ribose it was junk unusable like everyone else's
no homochirality so it's not accessible ribose and even then it's a trace in the sea of billions of
other products yet the world believes this nonsense and i'm the one speaking of miracles this is miracle
right here this is miracle all right so then benner publishes this paper which he had talked about on
that video he talked about it on the video so i go to look up the paper because he's criticizing me
and he's talking about how we've made you know this these polyribonucleic acids so i go to look up
the paper it's not there so i contact him i said you cited a paper could i see the paper i can't seem
to find it he says it's not published yet i said you talked about an article in a paper as your prime
example it's not even published yet could it could you send me a preprint so i can look at it no no no
you'll have to wait till it's published it came out 13 months after his video 13 months after his video
and he never said this in his video it has a substantial fraction of three five dinucleotide
linkage three five is what you want it has a substantial fraction what the heck does that mean
does that mean two-thirds of it or does that mean one-third who knows who knows a substantial fraction
he didn't even say the major portion is three five which is the linkage he has to have
so in a step growth polymerization and then he goes on he goes on in the video about how you
can do this with impure materials that's garbage you cannot do step growth polymerization with impure
materials there's something called carruthers equation which shuts the things down it says
it cannot happen if you don't have 99.999 pure material you don't get big polymerizations it just
doesn't happen so so uh that just can't happen so here here's what it is if you look at at at rna
you want to buy rna this is from the chemical manufacturer who isolates this from natural sources
um or or they make it on a dna synthesizing machine they say you store it at minus 80 degrees centigrade
that's minus 112 fahrenheit you have to store it at that with lots of stabilizers to keep it to keep
it really stable you'd never want it around divalent cations so this is the three five linkage this is
what you want here's the base here's the three three prime position going to the five prime position
three prime to five prime that's how it's polymerized here's a three prime to five prime but here's
now the two prime five prime you see this is three prime this is two prime here's two pro oh that is
a wrong attachment that one doesn't work for coding now into into a a polypeptide to make an enzyme to
do any synthesis that's the problem because rna rna can couple through either the two prime hydroxyl or
the three prime hydroxyl and any chemist knows exactly what i'm talking about and so you look up in
his paper and you look up at you look you click on the experimental of his paper and in the experimental
he put up a word file not even a pdf and it has a different author order than on the original paper
it's really wild but where did he get his his ribose with his uh nucleotide triphosphate on it
new england bio labs or sigma aldrich he bought it well why didn't you do use the stuff you made
because it's junk because he can't use it he buys it it's all relay synthesis it's a game
it's a game and you're all deceived all of you all of you are deceived until 7 30 then you're going
to know and he says you can do this on an impure stuff well then you read his experimental before
every experiment glass powders were treated for 20 minutes with three percent hydrogen peroxide that's
really scrubbing it off followed by 10 washes with ultra pure rnase free water well i could see why
you have to have rnase free because you you you want to you want to uh not depolymerize this thing
but 10 washes with ultra pure water this could never go on an early earth where you have normal
impurities around and why is that because what happens is that hydroxyl attacks that phosphate and
the rna decomposes and it decomposes much faster if there's
what is that magnesium around 2.5 of the surface of the earth is magnesium you want to be able to
add magnesium chloride when you want it but now when you don't want it you can exclude it how did
early earth know that all right and then you look in his experimentals and you see that it's got branching
it's got all sorts of crazy structures in here so the 2.5 could never work it has been shown by other
people that characterize and they honestly tell you we made this on clays i mean and we always get 2.5
linkages in fact he says 75 to 80 is the 2.5 linkage what's wrong with the 2.5 linkage it doesn't work
it can't code for a protein so let's just say let's be gracious and say that he he said a substantial
fraction is 3.5 linkage so we'll give him two-thirds of his material so that's a substantial fraction
66 percent of his material is 3.5 linkages that means the other one-third is 2.5 linkages that
means one out of every three linkages is the 2.5 linkage the wrong linkage well what does that mean
well that means that you could never get even a single amino acid coated for because each amino acid
has to have three nucleotides coating for it if one out of three has the wrong linkage you can't even
get a single amino acid out of this thing and you're going around hyping this thing up like it's so
amazing plus if you have any of the 2.5 linkage it acts as si rna that's called small interfering rna
it stops the chemical reaction steve benner starts with pure nucleoside triphosphate he gets these
mixtures he couldn't even coat for one so then you see what do these guys say to the press which you
guys read and it says scientists announce a breakthrough in determining life's origin on earth and maybe mars
of course look we got to have a cell we have to have a ton of infrastructure to have a cell work rna is
not a cell even if he had rna and he doesn't even have it this is so not true
So let's see what Steve Benner says. One community revisits classical questions with
complex chemical schemes that require difficult chemistry performed by skilled chemists. That's
hands-on stuff. Benner explained, their beautiful craftwork appears in name-brand journals like
Nature and Science. However, precisely because of the complexity of this chemistry, it cannot
possibly account for how life originated on earth. You used it. You used their chemistry
in your papers. You see what I mean? He took their hands-on chemistry and applied it, but
he didn't touch it. In contrast, the foundation study takes a simpler approach, and they talk
about how they've made these nucleotides 100, 200 nucleotides long in length on this basaltic
glass, which is this boron glass. It says, the same impactors that formed the glass also
transiently reduced the atmosphere with their metal, iron, nickel cores. RNA bases whose
sequences store genetic information are formed in such atmospheres. The team had previously
showed that nucleotides are formed by simple reaction between ribose phosphate and RNA bases.
Didn't we just look at that paper that you cheated all the way along? You never made ribose. You bought
the stuff, and you used hands-on chemistry from someone else's reaction that didn't even use
prebiotically relevant compounds. This may sound like a bunch of mumbo-jumbo to you, but you're getting
enough to catch my drift. The beauty of this model is its simplicity. It can be tested by high schoolers
in chemistry class, said Jan Spacek, who was not involved in the study, but who developed instruments
to detect alien genetic polymers on Mars. Mix the ingredients, wait for a few days, and detect RNA.
No, you won't. No, you won't. If you don't wash that 20 times with ultra-pure water and wash it with
you're not getting this. No way. The Carruthers equation tells us that. They say the same rocks
resolve other paradoxes in making RNA in a path that moves all the way from simple organic molecules
to the first RNA. For example, borate manages the formation of ribose, the R in RNA. It does not.
It gave a billion compounds, and that ribose would be totally unusable. You didn't even use it. How do you
expect early Earth to extract from that? Banner added, this path starts from simple carbohydrates
that could not not have formed. He loves that term. In the atmosphere above primitive Earth. Thus,
this work completes a path that creates RNA from small organic molecules that were almost certainly
present on early Earth. A single geological model moves from one to two carbon molecules to give RNA
molecules long enough to support Darwinian evolution. Is that not enough to make you vomit?
I mean, come on. How do you go from small molecules, a bunch of junk that you made,
even if you had the RNA that you made? Now you've got Darwinian evolution? So you've got life now?
And that life is now genetically passing on to offspring? Even Jack Sosteck, which himself,
he, we'll see more about Jack Sosteck. He's a Nobel Prize winner at Harvard. Here's what he says
about Banner's work. If you think I'm being hard, here's what Jack Sosteck says to Science Magazine.
He says, I find it very frustrating that the authors have made an interesting initial finding,
but then decided to go with the hype rather than the science. So if you think I'm being judgmental,
I mean, he's telling the press this. I'm just telling my community. All right. Lipids in the
cell membrane. So protocell experiments, they buy homochiral diacyl lipids and they shake it
together. They make these, these vesicles and they say, this is a protocell. It is not a protocell.
It is garbage. And, and the reason is anytime you have a cellular membrane, you have to have
different, you have to have different diacyl lipids on the outside than on the inside.
You have to have them different. And why do you have to have them different? Because you have to
have a proton gradient to form. Without a proton gradient, there's no life. Plus you have to have
to have a lot of transmembrane proteins. You have to have glycoproteins on the surface. Cell membrane
is really complex, but even just your membrane itself could never work. Nobody knows how to make the
outside different than the inside. How does, how do biological systems do it? They have enzymes
called flip-based enzymes and they'll take things and they'll flip them over and move them to the
other side. Remember, there's no enzymes there. Chiral induced spin cell activity. Is homochirality
necessary for life? And the answer is yes. Here's, here's what, what biological systems can do. They can
take two hydroxyl radicals and they can have them form hydrogen peroxide or oxygen plus two protons.
How on earth does, does, do biological systems do that? We are just learning in the last 20 years
how this is done. And it's because the electron, the electron here is spin polarized. It's either
spin up or spin down. These can travel down chiral surfaces and these are spin valves. They only allow
one of the, the electron spins to go through and not the other. And that's how you get the two
surfaces. One is anti-parallel. One is parallel. It's a spin valve. We don't know how to do synthetic
chemistry like that. We don't know how. That's how nature does it so cleanly. So what we're learning
is that, is that, um, all of biological systems have chiral, have this chiral induced spin selectivity
going on. And that's why biological system yields, you know, like in our class, you know, we make 45%
of this, 55% of this, 70% of this, and 30% is other junk. How? Why? And in biology, you're getting
99.999% yield or better. And the little bit that does, that isn't right, it has scroungers that go
around, find that and take it out because it would gum up the works. How does it do that? Through
chiral induced spin selectivity. Yes, there, there are van der Waals interactions, which is this hand in
glove we talked about for enzymes, but now you have chiral induced spin selectivity, which is the thing
that dominates. We didn't even know this 20 years ago. I didn't learn this when I was your age. I
just learned this 20 years ago. And many chemists don't even know this to this day. And, and certainly
biologists don't know this. Uh, the interactomes, if you just look at the protein, protein interactions
in a simple yeast cell, yes, yeast cell is very simple. Just protein, protein interactions. And you
were learning that non-covalent interactions have to all be aligned. Non-covalent interactions have to be
aligned here. And, and, uh, uh, the reason they have to be aligned because information travels down
these by electrostatic potentials. There are 10 to the 79 billion combinations of how these could be
ordered. The number of elemental particles is 10 to the 90. You think that's a big number?
It's a big, big number. It's a one with 79 billion zeros after it. And, and, uh, uh, that's a big,
big number. That's the number of combinations. And the yeast cell has the proper combination to get
this cell to work. And that's why when a cell divides, it puts this information on both sides
of the cell and then it divides. And those do the same thing. The information is constantly passed on.
Nobody knows how this is done. It's called the Leventhal 2.0 paradox. Origin of information.
Critical for life is the origin of information. DNA or RNA. The order in which these things are
attached. This information is primary. Matter is secondary. Matter is secondary. So if I, if I,
uh, if I have a thought in my mind, all right, and then I write it on a piece of paper. Now it's,
it, it, it was, it was stored in interconnect pathways in my brain. Now it's written down on a piece
of paper. Now I take that paper and I type it into my computer. It's going, it, it, it goes into a
flash memory. It goes actually into, into SRAM right away. And then when I hit save, it goes into,
uh, into flash memory. Now I take this and I upload it to the cloud. So it goes through an RF wave to the,
to the box on the wall, wherever that is. And, and it'll, it'll go into that box just through an RF wave.
So that information has been here. It's been on a piece of paper. It's been on SRAM. It's, it's been
on flash memory. Now it's in an RF wave. Then when it hits that box, it goes down a wire. That
information is going down a wire. It goes through a server farm into another flash memory. The matter
upon which it resides is secondary. The information is primary. The information is the key and the matter
can keep on changing. We don't even know how to make the matter, the carbohydrates, nucleic acids,
lipids, and proteins. I can do the same thing with, with Lee Cronin and his protein garbage that he had
in, in, in, in what he talked about. It's all a bunch of nonsense, but this will come out on my
YouTube channel, DR James tour. This is coming out. It's going to come out and all of this will be
exposed. All right. A synthetic cell. You say, well, we've read there are synthetic cells. You look,
you're, you're not telling the truth. People have made synthetic cells. Oh yeah. Okay. In 2010,
Craig Venter's team copied an existing bacterial genome and transplanted it into another cell. And he
call that a synthetic cell. That means that I buy, I buy a Corvette. I buy, and then what I do is I
buy another Corvette. And I take the, the, the computer control chip out of the first Corvette and
put it into the second Corvette. And I say, I made that Corvette. No, you didn't. He just took him
something out of an existing bacterial genome and transplant. 2016 Venter's team did something
similar. They removed all but 473 genes from a natural genome and transplanted it into another
cell. It didn't work very well. Couldn't reproduce. So in 2021, they added 19 genes back to get it to,
to, to work a little bit better. And they call these synthetic cells. And people say,
Tori, you're wrong. Because I just read a paper where they said, is it, you got to read the paper.
You can't just read the title. You got to read the paper. And this is what happens to a lot of people.
They say, Tori, you're wrong. You say amino acids don't polymerize in water. I read a paper.
It says peptides form in water. Yeah. With special activating agents and you've protected them. So
you no longer have amino acids. You don't have sphuterionic structures. If you just read the
title, you get completely misled because these guys are not to be trusted because they're telling
you things that are going to really mix you up. All right. A challenge, make the simplest living cell.
A Nobel prize would probably be awarded, be awarded very quickly for the first person who makes a simple
cell. Not a complex cell, a simple one, because people will always argue, well, cells were much
simpler back then. Well, how simple were they? Well, this has been computed. So, so bioengineers
have computed how simple a cell could be. The simplest cell has to have DNA replication, repair,
restriction, and modification machinery, has to have a basic transcription machinery, has to have
amino acetyl tRNA synthesis, tRNA maturation modification, ribosome proteins, ribosome function,
maturation modification, all the way down. And even with all of that, it has to be able to get all 20
amino acids exogenously because it has no ability to make it. It's too simple to make it. This is
nanotechnology. This is building systems out of nanocomposition. You have to have all of this in a
simple cell. Does anybody have any of this in the junk that they build? No, no, nowhere close. You
have to have all of this. This has been computed. So you can't play this game when cells were really
simple back then on the head was a little bit of RNA. That's a bunch of nonsense. Has to have all of
this to be a cell. Remember the requirements that we said the cell has to have. And so go ahead and
first you have to make the simplest cell. So first you have to make all the monomeric sugars, which
nobody's ever made. Then you have to make all of the amino acids in chirally pure form, which no one's
ever made. You can get some racinium, a bunch of racinium amino acids from the miliuri type
experiments and other experiments, but never in chirally pure form. You have to be able to make
the nucleotides where you have to first have ribose. Then you have to have a base on there and you have
to have a phosphate on there in a relevant manner. And this all has to be chiral. You have to control all
four of these stereogenic centers, one stereogenic center there, four stereogenic centers there.
Then you have to take glycerol and de-symmetrize it because both of these CH2OH groups are
enantiotopic. You say you can't do that? Well, then you can't make a cell. So nice guy that I am,
I'll give you that. Now just polymerize these, put them in the polymers. I'll give you this.
Just make the polymers. Just make the polymers. Go ahead, make the polymers out of these things.
Nobody knows how to do that. Nobody's ever demonstrated that either. Really, really hard. Remember this?
There's over one trillion ways you can hook just six of them. Now you got to hook like
2,000 of them. All right. How many ways you're going to get that chemistry right? All right.
Nice guy. I will give you that as well. And I'll even give you the sequence of nucleotides. So I'm
giving you the information, which is another mystery. Nobody knows where this informational code came
from. If somebody tells you that the DNA itself is the code, that's a bunch of garbage. That's like
saying this memory stick. You know, I just bought it. This memory, I have a memory stick in my pocket.
So this memory stick, this is the information. I haven't written anything on it, but that's
inherently the information. No, the information, this is the medium upon which it's stored.
The information is primary. So I'll give you the sequence. I'll even give you that. Even if you
had all the components, could you build a cell? Nobel prize awaits you. Surely, you know more than a
mindless early earth. So they can't do it. They can't do it. In other words, even if I gave you a
cell, I give you a cell that's alive and it just dies. Can you bring it back to life? Because certainly
a resurrection has got to be easier than a de novo synthesis. Everything's pretty much in place.
Nobody can do it. We don't even know how to define what we just lost when that cell died. How do we
even define life? That's how clueless we are. I said the exact same thing I'm saying to you. I said
in May with Steve Benner sitting 10 feet in front of me in the audience. You know what he said?
Nothing. And nothing is an answer in itself from a scientist. So you say, would you say this to
Assace? I already have. All right. Has the public been misled on origin of life claims? Under simulations
of early earth's atmosphere, scientists have mixed molecules together in the laboratory to produce
simple single-cell life forms like bacteria. Two-thirds of the public thinks that's true.
Who are these people? Well, the average age was 38. Half male, half female. Eighty percent of them hold
college degrees. Do you think you've been taught things? Well, the average age was 38. Half male, half female.
Half male, half female. Eighty percent of them hold college degrees. Do you think you've been taught things
that aren't quite right? This whole thing about molecules in a puddle or in a pond, lightning strikes, molecules
form. Those molecules form into slithering creatures and they come out of this pond. That's the primordial
soup model. That's a bunch of nonsense. Here's the dichotomy of the messaging from origin of life
researchers themselves. Jack Sostek, Harvard Nobel Prize winner, he said in 2014, he said we'll have life in
the lab in three to five years. He said that in 2014. How you doing, Jack? How's it going?
Harvard astronomer and origin of life initiated director, who was also there, Dimar Sesilov,
also a panelist, told the audience that years ago, origin of life was a neglected question,
mostly because people thought it was too hard. But outside the meeting room, he confirmed that they
were indeed now very close to life in the lab. Sesilov thinks it will take like five years and not three.
Okay. How's it going, Dimitar? How you doing? Six months, well, I don't know if I have it in here,
but six months after that, Jack Sostek retracted what he said. He said, well, I was being a little
overambitious. We're working on making the RNA. You don't even have the RNA yet. Even if you had the
RNA, you don't have a cell, you don't have life. He doesn't even have the RNA yet, by prebiotically
relevant route. At the University of Chicago, here's what he said in 2021 on a YouTube virtual
lecture at the University of Chicago. And basically that's because RNA, we know we had to get RNA.
And RNA is delicate. It has a phosphodiester backbone. It's subject to degradation by intramolecular
attack of the two prime hydroxyl on the phosphate, which I showed you. So you can get cleavage of the
backbone, which is catalyzed by metal ions. You have magnesium in there. You probably have a few
hours and it's toast. So we don't have millions of years. Everything has to actually happen pretty
quickly. The synthetic processes have to be faster than the degradative ones. He can't even get RNA.
And yet he went around saying he'll have life in the lab three to five years. That's why everybody's
confused. Here's Lee Cronin, another origin of life researcher. He said in this video, September 9th,
2011, he said this, what I'm going to try and do in the next 15 minutes or so, this is during a Ted
talk, is to tell you about an idea of how we're going to make matter come alive. And what I'm going
to try and do is plant some ideas about how we can transform inorganic dead matter into living matter
in inorganic biology. So at the end, Chris Anderson, the moderator says, just a quick question on
timeline. You believe you're going to be successful on this project? When? The question was when? Look at
the answer. So many people think that life took millions of years to kick in. We're proposing to
do it in just a few hours once we've set up the right chemistry. Chris Anderson says, and when do you
think that will happen? Because no answer is an answer in itself. So we pushed him on it.
Hopefully in the next two years, 2011. How's it going, Lee? This is what I'm talking about. This
is the problem. Steve Benner in 2021, he said to Dave Farina in the, in that YouTube video, I suppose
most of the, many of the big paradoxes in origin of life have been solved. Like none of them have been
solved. Uh, but to the professional in 2019 in a talk, it's all on YouTube. He said, chemistry is
actually hard to get to work. The molecules precipitate, the molecules hydrolyze, the molecules
decompose. So it's very much a constraint that you have to deal with. It's one goddamn problem after
another. I guess I did mention God. Okay. All right. So it's one goddamn problem after another. He says,
this is what he says to the expert because he's a real chemist. He knows we can't even get the molecules
made, but that's not what he tells the world. Remember, he's the guy saying, you know, we figured
this out. You know, this is good. It's life on earth, life on Mars. I mean, it's all here. Here's
41 textbooks talking about the primordial suit model, the textbooks that you guys grew up with.
In fact, in fact, uh, these are upper level college. Here's intro college, upper level college
during the primordial suit model. You're still learning it to this day. And these are only the ones
that I could identify through the help of a friend between 2001 and 2018. This is what you guys learned with.
Research is an original life community community of publicly, publicly accused me of being nefarious
and not hearing to current scientific consensus. You bet. I don't adhere to current scientific
consensus. In fact, some of the biggest discoveries have come when people didn't adhere to the, the,
the, the current scientific consensus. So because of that, I'm nefarious, which means wicked evil.
Unlike the claims of making life in two years or three to five years, or that most of the,
many of the paradoxes have been solved. What really is the current state of origin of life research?
Nobody has shown a method to make the homochiral versions of lipids, amino acids, nucleic acids,
carbohydrates in a prebiotically relevant manner. Nobody has shown the mixtures found in meteorites
or interstellar space could have been useful for synthesis. Even John Sutherland said, I don't think
meteorites make the right sort of mixtures, but we need to have more constrained chemistry to actually
make the right sort. Little bits of things can be delivered, but they're all mixed in with other
things. You can't do chemistry on vast mixtures because they gum up the works.
Nobody has shown prebiotic routes to polymerization of the amino acids, nucleotides,
or carbohydrates with required specificities that are needed. Carbohydrate polymerization
is unfathomably hard. Almost all amino acids need protection. DNA bases sometimes need protection,
and you have the two, five, three, five problem. Nobody has solved the code problem for ordering the
nucleotides. Nobody has come close to making the higher order structures. Remember all of these
things you have to have a cell? Nobody's ever come close to this. And John Sutherland had the audacity
to write in nature chemistry, all cellular subsystems could have arisen simultaneously through
common chemistry. Boy, I'd love to see that. Nobody has ever shown the lower and anti-americ excess mixtures
could facilitate the requisite high yielding biological like chemistries with minimization of heat release
thereby mitigating the need for chiral induced spin cell activity. We do all these computations in our mind,
and we dispel 10 watts in the process. This computer is just putting out so much more heat.
Why? Why don't we burn up? Why doesn't a cell burn up? Because of chiral induced spin cell activity.
You had to have had chirality from the beginning. It's not something that you could have evolved into.
Nobody can explain the requisite interactomes. Remember the 10 to the 79 billion? Nobody,
even if given all four classes of molecules in any desired order, could prepare even the simplest of cells.
Nobody has come close to synthesizing or even suggesting how to synthesize the simplest of cells
in a modern laboratory, let alone a sufficient suggestion on how to do this, how the universe
could have done it in 100 million years, because that's the time from when the earth cooled to the
time where you find life. As soon as the earth cooled, you find life. Or even 14 billion years.
You want to give it the entire time of the universe? Fine. Nobody has even a hypothetical method for doing this.
I have not talked at all about God of the gaps. So when people make that accusation,
this is just changing the argument. They want to attack me as an individual,
because they cannot address the science. Address the science. Address the science.
As a scientist, I would never say that we will never understand. I couldn't do that.
One day in the distant future, I presume we will understand life's origin. But for now,
we are nowhere close. How do I know we're nowhere close? It's because of this. It's because of the
moving goalposts. Because every year we find out the cell is more complex than it was the year before.
Not because the cell itself got more complex, but we find out about it. We didn't know about
chiral induced spin cell activity. We didn't know about interactomes and the 10 to the 79
billion. And that's just protein-protein interactions. You've got protein-DNA
interactions. You've got protein-RNA interactions. You've got DNA-RNA interactions.
All of these things going on. Nobody knew about this. So the target is, oh, I gotta do that too?
So the target's further away. That's how I know we're nowhere close. Okay. Therefore,
scientists remain clueless on life's origin and current scientific models for emergence of life are
nonsensical. Here's how you can connect with me. And I'll stop right there and open it up for questions.
And that's it. Thank you.
Yes? Why do you think there is such a divide between the current state of origin of life science and the
public in your perception of it? Yeah, I think the public has been thoroughly confused and the origin of
the confusion comes with the origin of life researchers themselves. Some argue that the
press is responsible. The press is not nearly as responsible as the origin of life researchers.
You look at the quotes of these people in their actual papers, it's crazy. And then when they get
to the press, it's an order of magnitude more crazy what they say to the press. And it's quotes. So the
press is just reporting what they say. And when you do that, you get more money. You get more money for your
research because people say, well, you're just on the verge of doing this. That would be a really
important advance. So you get more money if people think you're close. If you just say,
you know, I just spent 40 year career doing this and we're further away than when I began.
Who's going to fund that? So, you know, I don't know exactly why they say, but it's from their own
mouths, their own words are so off. And that's why the masses are so thoroughly confused. And most
scientists are confused on this. Number one, most scientists don't know the difference between origin
of life and evolution. They say, two of you are always talking about evolution and problems. I don't
talk about evolution. I talk about origin of life. These are two very distinct different things.
Secondly, secondly, that they think that this has been solved. I've asked my colleagues, they said,
you know, it comes from the foremost reaction. I started looking into this about six years ago.
Before that, I assumed people had much better models. So scientists, it's not like they're
looking at origin of life papers. Nobody cares. They're too busy doing their own things. You know
how many emails people get a day? I mean, half your day is just addressing emails. And you don't have
time to read origin of life papers. So the community thinks that these origin of life scientists know this
stuff, but they don't. Yes?
Yes. So I guess, how plausible do you think that as we maybe learn more about initial earth
conditions, that some naturalistic account of abiogenesis would be plausible? Or do you think
the more we find out, the more challenging we find out that that sort of model wouldn't even be
like probable, even if there's a probability it'd be? Right. Yeah. Can we find out that the origin of life,
the origin of the earth was different so that the system was better set up to do this?
Yes. It would have to be better set up than the most advanced laboratories in the world today.
Because we have no idea. So could it happen? Sure. Anything can happen. But it seems implausible
based on even the most advanced labs today are clues. We don't know where the origin of information
is. We don't know how to keep these molecules stable. So we don't know that. Now, if we can say
the life was planted here by some alien, and I'm okay with that. But this is origin of first life.
That just begs the question, what is the origin of first life? And that's what we have to get back
to. And people will say, well, Tour, what do you think it is? I have the foggiest idea. As a scientist,
I have no idea. People say, well, then you shouldn't criticize. That's totally wrong. What you do,
what we teach our students to do, is you look at a chemical reaction, and you formulate a hypothesis on how
this reaction may have gone. Then you look at the details. If any of those details say that your
hypothesis couldn't be, you get rid of that hypothesis, and you think of another. I am
shooting this down, because maybe one day one of you folks will come with some great advance. But
you're not going to come with a great advance if you keep being told, we've about got this thing
solved. You'll come with a great advance if you say, everybody's clueless on this, and I have a thought
on how this might happen. So that's why I'm doing it. Yes? So we have a question online. The first
part, seems like you already addressed it. Do you consider current pursuits in prebiotic
chemistry irrelevant or just overhyped? If you could change the way the origin of life field works
scientifically, how would you propose we change the way we approach the question of origin?
Right. Okay. So the question that came in from the internet is that,
do I think that the work being done is not worth being done? Or should we just keep doing it? And
what do I propose that we do? I think that the way we're doing it is so wrong, it's just got to stop,
radically stop. It's getting us nowhere. And I say we have something akin to a DARPA challenge. What
DARPA does is when they have it, the community is stuck on solving something. So they have DARPA challenge.
They don't invite in any of the old guys who've been working on this for 40 years. They want young,
fresh minds on this. And you can't do anything that's the same as what's been done and give us
some fresh proposals. That's what we need. Because what I say is all of the origin of life researchers
that are working today will die of old age before they solve this problem. And their students will die of
old age before they solve this problem. Because they know that we're nowhere close if we keep going
down the same way. So I think that there's no use in continuing the same work. We need some totally
fresh ideas that are much different than what we're doing today. Is there another question?
Yes? Yeah. Can I ask two questions? One is, could you see life having some different life structures,
like a non-carbon base, or just carbon base, but somehow operating differently? And then two,
Wait, wait. So could I see something that's non-carbon based? Sure, you could have silicon. The problem,
the great thing about carbon, it forms very, very strong bonds. And the bonds do not easily hydrolyze.
When you talk about other elements, water has a tendency to break those up. You talk about polysilanes,
you get silicon oxide, which is sand. And you get these very stable compounds that are then dead ends.
So the ways you can transform carbon is very broad compared to any other element in the periodic table.
And the strength of the bonds, carbon bonds to itself and to many other atoms very strongly,
and under certain conditions, they're modifiable. That's not the case with any other element. That's
why there's a whole branch of chemistry called organic chemistry just around the element carbon.
So it's hard to envision that, but it doesn't have to be based to carbon. I mean, there's a reason that
we eat carbon-based materials because we're made out of carbon. If we were made out of silicon,
we'd be eating sand or something like that. We'd be eating something different. Go ahead. Your next question.
Yeah. And then the other thing is, if we look at processes in the cell,
overall, how optimized are they compared to how optimized they could be? For example,
you mentioned, like, how operating too much more power efficient at doing computers in a computer.
Are there, like, cases where processes in the cell seem just, like, so much more efficient
that they're almost, like, high visual?
Okay. Are cells so efficient that they can be ideal, these processes? It is very hard to match a cell
with many things. But there are human-made things that hands down win. When you're talking about
vast computation of crunching of numbers, I mean, computers win hands down over human beings.
But as far as the operations within a cell, the making of molecules, it's really exquisite. But it
can't willy-nilly just say, hey, I want to put an alcohol there really easily. You don't have an
enzyme for that. So you have to genetically modify your DNA to start making some genetic modification
that's going to modify an enzyme that'll put a hydroxyl group there, where synthetically,
I can just go in a lab and boom, just do it. So people are a lot broader in what we can do
than a cell is. A cell is very specific to keep it alive. But what it does, it does amazingly clean
in ways that we today can't rival. But in 500 years, we may be able to rival. If you asked a man or a
woman in the 1700s, when would we have space flight? If they said, I don't know, 300 years, they'd have been
right. It's unfathomable in the year 1700 that we'd have space flight. We knew in 1700 that it was not
going to happen in three to five years. We knew it wasn't going to happen. And if anybody said it was
going to happen, you'd think back then you'd lock them up. But so we know we're nowhere close to this
thing. But cells are specific, they do a certain job. You can modify them at the genetic level,
you can go in and change the genes to change the enzymes to do some modification. But synthetic
chemistry that human beings do is a lot broader in what the changes we can make.
Yeah, yes, in the back.
So I think one of the things that feels about the primordial soup model is that you don't have to
think about it very much, because if you do think about it a lot, then it falls apart.
So how would you recommend explaining to people, or actually ourselves,
if I personally don't have a background at all in chemistry, on a simplistic way as possible?
Yeah, so how do you explain to people the origin of life in a simplistic way,
because the primordial soup model is so simplistic that it's a convenient thing to explain to people,
but it's like totally wrong. It's totally wrong. So, you know, the astronauts,
the astronauts were just super good basketball players, and they could jump really high,
and that's how they got to the moon. That's a simplistic model for children.
But it's so wrong, we would never teach that. We never teach that to children. This is so wrong.
It's not worth teaching. I think the better explanation is, we do not know how life formed.
We just do not know. There's so many problems we do not know. We know the types of compounds that
would have to be available. We know that they're going to have to have a cell and have these
properties, because life has these properties. We don't know how we arrived at it. And then I think
people would be a lot more interested in going into this field. How many people work in Origin of
Life? Not many. Because most people think it's been solved. There was another question. Yes?
Yeah, I was wondering, why makes you personally so passionate and motivated to speak up against this?
Yeah, why am I so motivated to speak up against this? It's because somebody pushed me. Because somebody
pushed me. Because what happened was, I was, okay, so I was going up for an award. And a few of my
colleagues said they would never put me up for the award, because you have to have other colleagues
to nominate you. You can't. I nominate myself for this award. You're not allowed to do that.
They said, we won't nominate you because you signed a statement back in 2001, which is now called the
descent from Darwinism statement. At the time, I didn't even know what, it came to me in an email.
It was like in 2000 or 2001. It came to me in an email. You know how fast you go through emails.
And I read this statement. It says, can you agree to this? I said, yes. I found my name on a list with 700
other scientists. And the statement goes something like this, that we find that natural selection
and random mutation are insufficient for accounting for the diversity of life. Therefore,
further research is warranted. Never said Darwinian evolution was wrong. It just says,
we find it insufficient, so further research is warranted. That statement then was used in the Dover trial,
where people were trying to bring creationism into schools. And it was held up as a statement. Look
at all these scientists. And so people think that that statement says something that it doesn't. So
my colleague said, because you signed that statement. I said, what statement are you talking
about? I didn't even know what they were talking about. So then they said, I said, did you ever read
that statement? I said, do you know what that statement says? You know what they said? Nothing.
They didn't know what it said. I said, you, you go back and read that statement. Let's make it.
They came back. They read the statement. One of the, one of the people was in, it was a Nobel
prize winner. The other was, was in the National Academy of Science. And, and they both came back.
They said, well, it was carefully crafted. I said, well, duh. I mean, you think they're going to
just fly by the seat of the pants on this statement? Where in any other place of science would you not say
that further research is warranted? That is the kiss of death for a scientist to say that we get no more
money for the research is always warranted. But because that came the touchstone and they said,
because you signed that statement, I said, well, if that's the bottom line, that's the end.
I was just minding my own business, not anymore. And so I started looking into this and I wanted to track
back Darwinian evolution to the beginning, which brought me into origin of life. And I started
looking into origin of life. And I thought, this is smoke and mirrors. This is smoke and mirrors.
And nobody knows this except me, because you have to be an organic chemist to really understand this.
Number one, number two, you have to be interested enough to go after it. And number three, you have
to be willing to take the shots. Like I heard came on Instagram when people heard that I was going to speak.
Look, they've said all that they're going to say. And that just catalyzes me. It lowers the activation energy
to get to the other side of this equilibrium. And every time people say, you know, he's nefarious
and he's going against current scientific consensus. I'm like, yes, I'm going to go even more. And I'm
going after you. Any other researcher that goes on this Dave Farina's program, I'm going right after
them. I'm going to expose their work. Whoever goes on his channel, their work will be exposed
because they went on a social medium to talk about this stuff. And I will go right after them on the
same medium. People say, why don't you just write papers about this? I have. I've written five papers
about this. People ignore them. People ignore the papers. I am trying to reach the masses. I'm not trying
to reach my peers anymore. I'm trying to reach the masses. And that's why I'm doing this. That's why
you need to subscribe to Dr. James. Yes. I think what you're talking about brings up maybe a deeper
concern about science education and how people are taught that science is done as opposed to it being
this methodology where you ask questions and do experiments. It's, oh, you accept this sort of
canon literature, canon set of trust. How do you, how do you think we can convince maybe the public
that no, like science works as this iterative process where somebody has a hypothesis, somebody
points out a problem with this, it becomes further refined as opposed to just these people are right
and these people are wrong because they're in the majority. Well, you know, you know, this is an area,
this is an area that, that touches to life itself. And, and, uh, um, so, so I don't like to psychoanalyze
people. I don't like to suggest why they say what they say, because so often I don't even know why
I say what I say, you know, and I say things and I walk out of there. I'm like, do I even really believe
that? Uh, so, so it's hard for me to psychoanalyze others, but you're absolutely right. The scientific
process is different than what young people think who haven't yet been engrossed in this thing.
So much is controlled by money, by some powerful people with money, and they can push certain
agendas. They can move funding. And if you start bumping up and you can, you can feel their pain.
So when somebody spends like Benner, the last 40 years of his life working on this thing,
and I come along and I say, you don't have ribose. It's garbage.
I can, I can see how that would hurt. And, and, and, and, and so, you know, I, I can feel their pain.
I do. I feel their pain. If somebody were to say all this time, you were talking about graphene,
you never made graphene. I'd be like, yikes. What am I going to do now? Either I can just dig my heels.
Yes, it is graphene. Or I can say, yeah, I was wrong for the last 10 years. I've been wrong.
If you like the content that's coming out on this channel, I've not monetized it in the sense of
advertising, but if you want to give and you want to help support it, you can give to a 501c3. So
it's fully tax deductible, and you can see the link below. We'd love to have your participation.
And there's several mechanisms by which you could give. Thank you.
Good night.
Good night.
Thank you.
Good night.
Good night.
Good night.
Good day.
