Thanks, first of all, to the organizers
for putting together this wonderful conference
and for the invitation.
Can you just in the back confirm
that you can hear with the microphone?
Okay.
So I see a slight misprint that was meant to be algebra
in field theory and gravity, but gauge theory will do.
So quantum mechanics textbooks usually envisage a quantum system
probed from the outside by an observer who is looking
at the system but isn't part of it.
As observers in the universe who are in a different situation,
we're part of the system that we're trying to observe.
Moreover, we can't resolve the quantum microstate of the universe,
and that's not only because of technological limitations,
but also because we cannot see beyond the cosmological horizon.
So some of standard textbook quantum mechanics doesn't quite apply.
I'm going to assume that a few ingredients
of standard textbook quantum mechanics are valid.
So first of all, I'll assume that observables form an algebra A,
meaning a vector space.
You can add or multiply observables.
You can multiply an observable by a complex number,
and they have an associative multiplication law,
like operators on Hilbert space.
I'll assume that there's a notion of Hermitian conjugation
of observables, and I assume what we measure are expectations
of observables in the state of the universe,
however that state of the universe is to be understood.
And I assume one more thing, which is that positive observables
have positive expectation values, meaning that if I denote the expectation
of an observable A with this symbol with the brackets,
then the expectation value of A dagger A is non-negative for all A.
That's actually enough to imply that our observations can be described
by a Hilbert space, although it wouldn't be necessarily a Hilbert space
that describes the whole universe.
We just formally introduce a symbol psi equals psi 1
that represents the presumed state of the universe,
and then for any observable A, we introduce a symbol psi sub A
that represents A times psi.
It represents the state of the universe after acting with A.
Then inner products are defined by saying that the inner product
of psi A with psi B, I hope most of you can see the green dot,
is the expectation value of A dagger B for any two observables A and B.
Now, because of the positivity assumption on the last slide,
this definition is consistent with all the properties
that Hilbert space inner products are supposed to have.
So we actually get a Hilbert space after we divide by null vectors
and possibly take a completion because Hilbert spaces are supposed
to be in a certain sense complete.
Now, that doesn't mean that H describes the quantum state
of the universe.
It does describe all measurements we can make,
but it was constructed with no knowledge
of what was beyond the horizon, if there is a horizon.
So it will give us no information about what's beyond the horizon.
It's not a Hilbert space for the whole universe,
but it is a Hilbert space for us.
Since we can see distant galaxies,
the action of our algebra A on H contains information
about distant galaxies,
but it doesn't contain any information about what's beyond the horizon.
Even from a complete knowledge of how the algebra A acts on the Hilbert space,
which is highly idealized compared to what we can actually learn from experiment,
we will learn nothing about what's beyond the horizon.
So there is a sense in which it might make sense to talk
about entanglement wedges of gravitating regions,
such as the region of spacetime that we on planet Earth are living in.
But some knowledge of what's beyond the horizon is needed
to predict an entanglement wedge beyond the horizon.
Well, what kind of algebra is the algebra of observables accessible to us?
To get a simple answer, we need two steps.
First, to get a simple answer, we have to assume
that what we measure are bounded operators.
A mathematical reason for this assumption
is that bounded operators can be multiplied.
So if our observables are bounded operators,
they do in fact form an algebra.
By contrast, it's problematical to multiply unbounded operators in general.
But there is a physical reason for considering bounded operators,
which is that in practice, even if we measure something
that in theory is unbounded like the electric field,
we only measure it in a certain range.
So in practice, our measurements do seem to be measuring,
for example, in that example, a bounded function
of the electric field.
So although this discussion is an idealization,
it seems that assuming what we measure are bounded operators
is reasonable physically,
as well as a tremendous simplification mathematically.
There's one more step needed to get a simple structure theorem for A,
and this is roughly, we do not try to distinguish operators
that can't be distinguished by experiments.
More precisely, consider a sequence of observables, A1, A2, and so on,
with the property that for all states sine chi,
the matrix elements of An between those states has a large n limit.
If so, then we define an operator A whose matrix elements are given by those limits,
and we say that A is the limit of that sequence,
and we consider A this limit to be part of our algebra.
Mathematically, this is called a weak limit.
Physically, the logic is that an experiment measures finitely many matrix elements
with finite precision.
So under the hypothesis I stated,
no experiment will distinguish A sub n from A if n is sufficiently large.
So for experimental purposes, A is, in fact, the large n limit of A sub n.
Finally, physically, it's well motivated, at least in a closed universe,
to assume that the center of the algebra consists only of complex scalars.
In an open universe, if the observable region goes off to spatial infinity,
there might be gauge charges that would make us modify the statement,
but I'll assume today that the center consists only of complex scalars,
as we would expect in a closed universe, for example.
Given A and B, the algebra is what's called a von Neumann algebra,
and C makes it a factor, the analog for algebras of a simple
as opposed to a semi-simple Lie group.
So such von Neumann factors have a simple, roughly speaking,
a simple three-fold classification, which is as follows.
First of all, if A has no useful simplification beyond the axioms,
then that's an algebra that's said to be of type 3.
So with the type 3 algebra, you can do quantum mechanics,
because I incorporated enough axioms so that quantum mechanical probability—interpreting
measurements in terms of expectation values of algebra elements make sense.
So a type 3 algebra gives us enough to do quantum mechanics and no more.
There actually are theorems showing that out of all von Neumann algebras,
a generic one is of type 3.
So one version of this statement is in this paper.
So that's natural.
It says that if we're given the axioms A, B, and C,
nothing useful follows beyond that.
We can do quantum mechanics and that's it.
There are two kinds of simplifying properties the algebra might have,
in which case it's said to be of type 2 or type 1.
A type 2 algebra has a trace but no irreducible representation.
A type 1 algebra has an irreducible representation.
So those are the two important special cases of algebras
that have useful properties beyond the axioms.
By a trace, we mean a complex-valued linear function on the algebra,
which I'll denote as trace A, that obeys two properties.
The trace of AB is the trace of BA, and the trace of A dagger A is nonnegative for all A.
The trace doesn't have to be defined for all elements of the algebra,
only for a sufficiently large, dense set.
For a type 2 algebra, the function trace is not a trace
in a Hilbert space representation of the algebra.
A type 2 or any von Norman algebra has Hilbert space representations,
as I explained at the beginning.
But a type 2 algebra, the trace in Hilbert space representation
of a type 2 algebra is infinite.
The function that I call the trace is a sort of renormalized version
of a Hilbert space trace with an infinite factor divided out.
An algebra of type 1 has an irreducible representation
in Hilbert space H prime.
This H prime is not necessarily the H that we constructed at the beginning
in an abstract way to incorporate observations.
We defined at the beginning Hilbert space, and we completed
to get a von Neumann algebra, and that algebra might be of type 1,
and if so, it'll have an irreducible representation H prime,
which will not be the one we constructed by the general procedure.
Then von Neumann showed that A is actually the algebra B of H prime
of all bounded operators on H prime.
And then there's a natural trace, just the Hilbert space trace
in the Hilbert space H prime.
It's not defined in all elements of the algebra.
Assuming H prime is infinite dimensional,
the trace of the identity is plus infinity.
But it's defined on a dense set of...
well, on a large subalgebra of operators said to be of trace class.
For either type 1 or type 2, once there's a trace,
we can define density matrices.
If H is any Hilbert space representation,
which could be the minimal one that we described earlier
at the beginning in an abstract way,
or maybe a bigger Hilbert space that includes degrees
of freedom beyond the horizon.
So at the beginning, I described a Hilbert space
that was sufficient for our observations,
but someone else who did somehow have access
to the whole universe maybe would have described...
used a bigger Hilbert space to describe the whole universe.
But in any case, given any Hilbert space representation,
a density matrix is an operator in the algebra
that obeys the usual condition of a density matrix,
except that now trace, what I'm calling trace,
is not a Hilbert space trace.
It's this... in the type 2 case,
it's this more abstract trace function.
It's not hard to prove for both type 1 and type 2
that such a density matrix always exists.
It's a positive operator that, roughly speaking,
is an element of A. There's some fine prints.
And it has the standard normalization condition
of a density matrix.
If psi is a unit vector,
then the trace of the density matrix is 1.
So the density matrix, just as in ordinary quantum mechanics,
will be a positive element of the algebra with trace 1.
Once we have density matrices, we can define
von Neumann entropies or Rainey entropies
and other functions considered in quantum information theory
by standard formulas.
Most of the definitions use only the axiom satisfied
by the trace function,
not the fact that it actually is a Hilbert space trace.
However, there's an important difference
between a type 2 algebra and a type 1 algebra.
For a type 1 algebra, the trace is literally the trace
in an irreducible representation.
No renormalization is required,
so the definition of the entropy is completely natural.
For a type 2 algebra, there was an infinite renormalization
in the definition of the trace.
So this corresponds to an additive renormalization
of the entropy.
To check that, let's see that if the trace is multiplied
by a scalar, then to satisfy the definition
of a density matrix, we have to rescale the density matrix
by the opposite factor, and the effect on the entropy is
to shift the entropy by an additive constant,
which is the same for all states.
So the best we can say is that entropy
in a type 2 algebra is defined up to an additive constant
that's independent of the state.
What are really well-defined are entropy differences.
This is analogous to entropy in classical mechanics.
In classical physics, entropy differences can be defined
by integrating the first law, but there's no natural zero
of entropy in classical physics and no natural way
to fix an overall additive constant.
Type 2 algebras have a further bifurcation
into two subtypes, type 2 1 and type 2 infinity.
In a type 2 1 algebra, the identity operator has finite trace,
and the trace function can be normalized
so that the trace of the identity is 1,
and more generally, the trace is finite
for every element of a type 2 1 algebra.
In a type 2 infinity algebra, the trace of the identity is infinite,
just as for a type 1 algebra with an infinite Hilbert space,
and the trace is only finite for a subalgebra
of trace class elements.
Now, what do we expect the algebra of observables
for a given observer to be, first in quantum field theory,
and then possibly with gravity?
Well, the interesting case is an observer who,
because of black hole or cosmological horizons,
cannot see the whole universe,
or even a complete Cauchy hypersurface.
If you can see the whole universe, you'll have access ultimately
to a type 1 algebra of the familiar situation
with an irreducible representation.
The interesting case is when you can't see the whole universe.
For example, here's a Penrose diagram of an observer
in Desider space.
As usual for Penrose diagrams, time runs vertically,
and I've chosen coordinates so that an observer propagating
on a geodesic lives on the left edge of the diagram.
The left edge is the world line of the observer,
and then the causally accessible region is this green wedge,
bounded by past and future horizons.
So in such a situation, one will not get a type 1 algebra,
certainly not in ordinary quantum field theory,
and not in gravity to the extent
that we actually know how to do computations.
The time-like tube theorem of quantum field theory,
which is a sort of precise version of HKLL reconstruction,
says that the algebra of observables
that the observer can measure, the algebra of operators
along the observer's world line, is the same as the algebra
of observables in the whole causal wedge shown in green.
A heuristic explanation is that the observer can shine a laser beam
at any object in the green region,
and by seeing what is reflected back, can learn about what's there.
So you can not just passively observe,
you could passively observe something down here,
but you can actively do experiments on something in the green wedge.
And so it turns out in ordinary quantum field theory
that the observables along the observer world line
are the same as the observables in the green wedge.
A classic result that goes back to Araki is that in quantum field theory,
the algebra of such a proper sub-region is of type 3.
So the observer can do quantum mechanics,
but can't describe those observations by density matrices or entropies,
which are type 2 and type 1 concepts.
The type 3 nature of the algebra has a rule in ADS-CFT
that was studied by Liu and Lundheuser a few years ago
in work that's influenced a lot of subsequent developments.
So here I've drawn schematically the Pan-Rose diagram
of an asymptotically ADS black hole.
So it's a two-sided situation.
There's a left asymptotically ADS region and a right region,
and a spatial hypersurface connects the two.
And if you live on either the left or the right,
you see past and future black hole horizons.
And for example, an observer with access to the right boundary,
the solid blue, will, the associated causal wedge is the light blue region
outside the past and future horizons.
So the blue wedge, as I just said, is the region causally accessible
to the right boundary, the dark blue,
where we imagine the observer to be making measurements.
In the approximation of treating the bulk theory
as a quantum field theory in a fixed background,
the algebra of the light blue region is of type 3.
So in an appropriate limit, that's also the case
for the algebra of observables on the right boundary.
The appropriate limit is when you completely turn off gravity
and treat the bulk theory as an ordinary quantum field theory
in a curved background.
So if the boundary dual theory is an SUN gauge theory
of some integer n, so for a definite integer n,
the thermofield double state, so the natural state
in this universe is called the thermofield double state.
For some fixed n, first of all, the thermofield double Hilbert space
is just a tensor product, HL tensor HR,
of two copies of the CFT Hilbert space.
And then for fixed n, the thermofield double state
is simply a vector in this tensor product Hilbert space.
And for fixed n, the algebra acting on either H left or H right
is a type 1 algebra with H left or H right
as the irreducible representation.
So for fixed n, the algebra accessible to the observer on the right
is just the type 1 algebra of all operators on H right.
That's a simple answer, but it has a drawback.
The drawback is that for finite n, for n a definite integer,
notions of spacetime and causal structure are not precisely defined.
So although we have precise quantum mechanics
with irreducible action on Hilbert space
when n is a finite integer, puzzles about causality and so on
in the field of a black hole or similarly in cosmology
are not expected to be sharp when n is a definite integer.
If we want to do quantum mechanics in a world
where semi-classical notions of causality are meaningful
and sharply defined, we need to take a large n limit.
And then it's no longer true that the thermofield double state
is a state in a tensor product Hilbert space.
It's a state in a, if you're above the Hawking Page transition,
the thermofield double state is a state in a new Hilbert space
that you can define the thermofield double Hilbert space.
It's a Hilbert space that describes states of the quantum fields
in a connected spacetime.
In that large n context, the causal wedge of the boundary
is this sub-region shown here,
and the algebra accessible to the boundary observer is of type 3,
as it always is for this quantum field theory case
of a sub-region of spacetime.
So even though for finite n the right boundary
would have a type 1 algebra, in the large n limit
it should be possible to define an emergent type 3 algebra.
To define this emergent algebra,
Lew and Leuthuis are considered single-trace operators,
normalized with no overall factor of n.
For finite n, they would generate the type 1 algebra
of the boundary.
In the large n limit, they have divergent expectation values.
So to get operators with a large n limit,
you have to subtract their expectation values,
say at some inverse temperature beta,
which you choose to be above the Hawking Page transition.
And then the subtracted operators do have large n limits.
And ADS-CFT duality, together with what's known
about quantum field theory, says that the algebra
that they generate is of type 3.
Since it's the same as the bulk algebra of the causal wedge,
treated as an ordinary quantum field theory at g equals 0.
So the boundary algebra defined, as I tried to summarize
in the top of this slide, is supposed to be dual to the bulk algebra
of the causal wedge at g equals 0.
Now, an important detail is that this large n limit
of single-trace operators does not contain the Hamiltonian.
Keeping track of powers of n, you'll see that it contains h over n,
but not h itself.
And the subtracted version of h over n in the large n limit becomes...
I wrote a c number, but I should have written
that it becomes central.
So in the large n limit, the generator of time translations
is not contained in the algebra.
Time translations act as an outer automorphism of the algebra.
So we'll come back to that outer automorphism in a few minutes.
But for now, we just note, following Lew and Lohyser,
that it means that in the large n limit, the operators in the time band
of the boundary are a proper sub-algebra.
In fact, the boundary interpretation of this sub-algebra
is that it's the algebra of a smaller bulk region.
So here, if I take a time band of the boundary,
which is this dark blue, this partial dark blue...
well, part of the right boundary that's been written as dark blue,
the causal wedge is this light blue sub-region,
and the algebra of the light blue sub-region
will be a type 3 sub-algebra of this...
of the algebra of the whole causal wedge.
Similarly, although I didn't make a picture,
we could make a semi-infinite time band,
bounded in the past but not in the future,
and that would again be of a type 3 algebra.
So various properties of the bulk geometry and dynamics
are reflected in properties of these emergent bulk algebras.
I'll just mention a couple of facts,
which you might hear more about later from some of the panelists,
although unfortunately their time will be short.
We've already seen the connectedness of the two sides of the thermofield double
which is reflected in the type 3 nature of an emergent boundary algebra.
There's an analog, which you might think of as quantum connectedness,
between a black hole that's been evaporating for a long time
and the radiation that's emitted.
You can also give a criterion for the existence of sharp horizons,
even in the stringy case, that means even when g squared n is not taken to infinity.
So we don't expect a sharp definition of the horizon for finite n,
but it's not so clear a priori if the horizon is a sharp notion
when general relativity is replaced by string theory.
So you can argue from this type of setup that at least in certain cases,
you can have a precise notion of horizon with finite g squared n,
that means non-zero g squared n, that means a stringy situation,
and large n limit.
And there's more, which you perhaps will also hear of in the,
from Nima in his short talk later,
on algebras associated to time bands and stringy geometry
and chaos and other things.
Now, there's a slightly different story
if we consider a slightly different large n limit
in which we include the Hamiltonian.
But before explaining that, I want to give some heuristic reasons
to think that type 2 algebras might be related to gravity.
So, well, here we should imagine semi-classical gravity,
where I imagine semi-classical gravity means any situation
in which semi-classical notions of causality make sense,
possibly incorporated to a stringy realm where you have stringy horizons,
as I just mentioned,
but not a completely quantum mechanical situation with finite n.
The basic reason you might think that type 2 algebras are relevant to gravity
is that in gravity it seems that we can define entropies
even when we cannot define quantum mechanical microstates.
So we've been grappling with that
ever since the early days of black hole thermodynamics.
A quantum theory with entropies with no microstates
is a good candidate to be described by a type 2 algebra.
So that simple reason is perhaps the most basic reason
you might think type 2 algebras are relevant to semi-classical gravity.
Somewhat more specifically, we often compute in gravity
things that we call traces even though they aren't traces
in any way we understand.
So we compute things that we call tracey to the minus beta h
by gravitational path integral.
For example, in ADS space, we take certain asymptotically ADS boundary conditions
with a circle at infinity of circumference beta,
and we say the path integral of that asymptopia
calculates tracey to the minus beta h,
but the topology is wrong for the function we're computing
to be interpreted in terms of a sum over states
in any way that we really concretely understand.
But anyway, we compute what we call tracey to the minus beta h,
even though it's not a trace of any operator in any Hilbert space.
And we compute more complicated things that we also call traces.
So even though we don't have a Hilbert space h and operators
on that Hilbert space, such that the quantities we compute
really are such traces.
So we call these functions traces because they obey the abstract properties
of traces, namely these two conditions,
which were the axioms I stated earlier for a trace.
They obey these conditions for any O and O prime for which these quantities are finite,
such as something like this.
Now typically, we believe we are computing large N asymptotics,
not limits, because these quantities usually don't have limits,
but we usually think we're computing large N asymptotics
of functions that really would be traces if N was a positive integer.
But in the large N asymptotics, these things aren't really traces.
We just call them traces.
So one might suspect that these objects could be interpreted
as elements of a type 2 algebra whose trace function is what we're computing.
Now, an elementary example where you can make this very explicit
is Jt gravity coupled to matter in space-time dimension 2.
So we compute from disk path integrals, for example,
with a disk of circumference beta in example 1,
or a disk with boundary segments of length beta 1, beta 2,
and beta 3 separated by operator insertions,
what we call operator insertions, but we aren't really inserting operators.
We're inserting ingredients in a path integral.
Anyway, we call the things we're computing traces,
even though there's no one-sided Hilbert space in which there are traces.
Well, there's no Hilbert space at all in which there are traces.
An interpretation is that objects such as e to the minus beta h and so on
are elements of a type 2 infinity algebra
in which the trace function is computed by a path integral on the disk.
Well, what's this good for apart from hanging a plaque on the wall
and saying that we've discovered a type 2 algebra?
One answer is that although Jt gravity does not have one-sided Hilbert space
describing states of a single black hole,
it does have a two-sided Hilbert space describing states
of an entangled pair of black holes.
And in this situation, you can define type 2 infinity algebras,
A right and A left, for the left and the right boundaries, respectively.
And you can show that they're each factors, they have trivial centers,
and they're each other as commutants.
That means A left consists of all operators that commutes with A right
and vice versa.
The statement that they are commutants means that even though classically
there can be a long wormhole between the two sides
with a lot of matter inside the wormhole,
so I've drawn it schematically here,
now I've drawn a long wormhole between the two sides,
a lot of massive particles in between,
and the causal wedge of the left and right boundary is very small,
and there's a lot of stuff that neither observer can see classically.
However, the fact that the two algebras are commutants
means that the tensor product is the algebra of all operators
on Hilbert space with no gaps.
There's nothing in between that's not accessible on left or right,
or at least not accessible to an operator with combined,
if you have combined access to the left and the right.
For example, the renormalized length between the two sides
is an operator in A left tensor A right,
in JT gravity with matter.
This is a sort of non-perturbative version
of entanglement wedge reconstruction.
There's a gap between the two causal wedges,
but there's no gap between, roughly speaking,
the reconstructable wedge of the left or right,
where by reconstructable wedge, I mean whatever you can learn
about by studying either A left or A right.
There's also no known classical geometric description
of these reconstructable wedges, except in the usual sort
of semi-classical limit, and it would seem
that only in the usual semi-classical limit should one hope
for such a classical description of what these wedges mean.
But algebraically, there's a sort of abstract entanglement
wedge reconstruction in the large N limit
using these type 2 algebras.
This has an interesting variance
in N equals 2 supersymmetric JT gravity.
In the long wormhole situation, in bosonic JT gravity
with any amount of matter in the bulk,
the energies E left and E right measured on the left and right
can be arbitrarily small, but they can't be strictly zero.
However, in N equals 2 JT supergravity coupled to matter,
no matter how much or what matter there is in the bulk,
there exists exactly zero energy state,
a completely supersymmetric state,
that looks like a supersymmetric ground state
to an observer on either left or right.
In other words, there can be an extremal black hole,
as seen on either side,
with any amount of matter behind the horizon.
So there's a large space of two-sided extremal black holes,
one for every SU 1 1 slash 1 primary field of the matter system.
This is just the conformal supergroup
of N equals 2 JT supergravity.
If you take the type 2 infinity algebra
that would exist in general
and project it to the ground states,
you get a type 2 1 algebra that acts on extremal black holes,
as essentially suggested here and further studied in a recent paper.
Now, in space-time dimension bigger than 2
and theories of ADS gravity with a known CFT dual,
we expect that for positive integer N,
there's a one-sided Hilbert space HN,
which at high enough energies is a black hole Hilbert space
that we don't understand it very well.
So, as I've said, we expect these things are really traces
if N is a positive integer.
The only trouble is that when N is a positive integer,
we can't make the statement that the high energy states
are black hole states very precise.
Such notions that involve causality
are tied to an asymptotic expansion near N equals infinity.
As I've told you, near N equals infinity,
we get answers we can't literally interpret as Hilbert space traces
because the Hilbert space HN does not have a large N limit.
What we do have in an asymptotic expansion near N equals infinity
is a description by a type 2 algebra.
Presumably, the reason that limit is important
is that it's the region where we can make contact
with semi-classical ideas of causality,
which are tied to conceptual questions
about black holes and quantum cosmology.
Jt gravity is different and easier,
more tractable for a couple of reasons.
One is that the analog of N is the number of C of matterfields,
and no large C limit is needed in the analysis.
And that's good, but then there's something which is bad,
that even for fixed C, there's no one-sided Hilbert space.
So for the analog of integer N, Jt gravity is still in the type 2 situation
because of the second fact.
Above two dimensions, something somewhat similar to Jt gravity,
with the bottom-up theory of gravity
potentially lacking in ultraviolet completion,
like pure Einstein gravity, or Einstein gravity with electromagnetism,
which potentially, if it lacks an ultraviolet completion,
also lacks a well-defined black hole Hilbert space.
But nevertheless, to the extent the theory makes sense,
we can compute trace E to the minus beta H by Euclidean path integrals,
and you could expect to give such results a type 2 interpretation
to the extent that the theory makes sense,
even if it isn't a truly well-defined theory
with a true black hole Hilbert space.
Another way to say the same thing is that if you have a continuous spectrum,
but a finite partition function, that's impossible in the type 1 world.
It's impossible in the world we take for granted in ordinary quantum mechanics,
where a continuous spectrum implies a divergent trace.
But it's perfectly possible to reconcile a continuous spectrum with a finite trace
if the object whose trace you're taking is an element of a type 2 algebra,
and by trace you really mean the trace of the type 2 algebra.
So whenever you're tempted to think that you have a continuous spectrum
and a finite trace, you probably have a type 2 algebra in your hands.
Now, a more explicit construction of a type 2 algebra
is available in a couple of important cases.
One is a two-sided Schwarzschild black hole,
and also an analog in quantum cosmology.
So for a two-sided black hole,
let H be the generator of time translations.
So as you recall, the time translations go forward in time on the right boundary,
but move backwards on the left boundary.
The Hamiltonian H can be written as an integral over an initial value surface S,
which I'll take to be a T equals zero, where T is Schwarzschild time.
So the initial value surface is that horizontal surface.
And we take the vector field V, the killing vector field associated to time translations,
and the stress tensor, and we integrate over S,
and we get the generator of a symmetry of the two-sided black hole.
In heuristic arguments, you often want to decompose S
as a union of S right and S left of portions on the right and left of the horizon.
And then you write H as H right minus H left,
where H right and H left are the parts of this integral
to the left or right of the horizon,
where you usually include some minus signs to compensate for the fact that H,
to make sure that H left as well as H right are moving forwards in time.
Now, in ordinary quantum field theory, this decomposition is not correct.
If you try to make it, you run into ultraviolet divergences.
Trying to make this decomposition leads to ultraviolet divergences
at the bifurcation surface,
which is the common boundary of the two regions, S left and S right.
However, in gravity, there's no problem
with the decomposition H equals H right minus H left.
In fact, this is just the ADM expression for the total conserved charge H
in terms of ADM energies, H right and H left,
measured on the right and left boundaries.
So now, given this knowledge,
let's try to define an algebra of observables accessible to an observer
who lives in the region U right to the right of the bifurcation surface.
So in ordinary quantum field theory, the algebra of observables
with the type three algebra A zero, but in the presence of gravity,
the full algebra of observables has one more generator, H right.
So A is the binomial algebra generated by A nought together with H right.
So this symbol just means the algebra generated
by these things taken together.
Well, H right is an observable for an observer in the right region
because it's just the ADM mass over here,
but the corresponding energy H left commutes
with all observables in the right region,
and the observer on the right knows nothing about which H left is.
So let's just give it an abstract name, X,
to emphasize that we're taking the viewpoint of an observer
who knows nothing about what H left means.
Now we can trivially write the formula that H is H right minus H left,
or H right minus X, in the form H right is H plus X.
So taking gravity into account,
we can describe the observable algebra in region UR
to the right of the horizon.
It's the algebra generated by A nought together with H plus X.
So we took the naive quantum field theory algebra,
and we added one more observable.
Here we've run into a classic construction of a type 2 algebra
from a type 3 algebra.
Takasaki and Kahn in those days
were not trying to do quantum gravity.
They were trying to understand type 3 algebras.
Since type 3 algebras were hard to understand,
it was useful to find a way to construct a type 2 algebra
out of a type 3 algebra, and in a certain sense,
the construction can be inverted, though I won't explain that.
So it gave information about the type 3 algebra,
which a lot of the theory of type 3 algebras was based on.
Anyway, the mathematical name is that what we get
when we add H plus X to A zero is the cross product
of the algebra A nought by the one parameter symmetry group
generated by H plus X.
This construction could be defined for any H plus X
where H generates an automorphism of the algebra,
but in this particular case of time translations
of the two-sided black hole,
H is the generator of what's called the modular automorphism group
of the thermofield double state as interpreted by Sewell,
and the initial algebra was of type 3,
so then the cross product algebra is of type 2 infinity.
That's basically the result exploited by Takasaki and Kahn
by coincidence in what was also the early period
of black hole thermodynamics.
So if A nought acts on the Hilbert space H nought
and H is an operator on H nought, then the cross product Hilbert space,
the cross product algebra acts on the Hilbert space,
which is the original Hilbert space,
tensored with L two functions of X,
which I'll just call L two of X.
So what Takasaki and then exploited also by Kahn did was to add,
well, to make the Hilbert space a little bit bigger
by including functions of one more observable,
but an uninteresting observable in the sense
that it commuted with, it commutes with everything,
and then you add H plus X where H is a symmetry generator
to the original algebra, and the theorem here is
that that produces a type 2 algebra out of a type 3 algebra.
And you could make this quite explicit.
If Psi TFD is the thermofield double state
in the original Hilbert space,
and Psi hat is the thermofield double state times E to the X over 2,
then the trace of any operator is its expectation value
in the state Psi hat.
And it's, although I won't show a proof,
it's not too long to prove
that that does have the properties of a trace.
This is a type 2 infinity algebra, not type 2 1,
since the trace of the identity, by definition,
is the expectation value of the identity in this state,
which is the norm of the state.
And I assume that the thermofield double state is a unit vector,
but the X part of the inner product is this divergent integral.
So the trace of the identity is infinite,
so this is a type 2 infinity algebra.
And physically, that's related to the fact
that you could throw in mass
and make the black hole heavier and heavier
with more and more entropy.
So indeed, since we have a trace,
we can also define an entropy,
and we can also compare this entropy
to the usual generalized entropy.
But when we do so, we have to remember
that the generalized entropy is not defined for all states.
It's defined for quantum fields in some states,
psi, in an almost definite spacetime.
It's not defined, well, I'll say what it is defined for.
To get a definite spacetime here,
we need the canonical conjugate of X,
which is a relative time shift
between left and right boundaries,
to have an almost definite value.
So the canonical conjugate of X is a parameter
in the spacetime geometry,
a time shift between the two boundaries.
It needs to have an almost definite value.
So a state in which it has an almost definite value
is a state of the form psi tensored with f of X,
where f of X is slowly varying.
We could also more generally let psi
depend slowly on X.
Those are states for which the usual
generalized entropy formula makes sense.
And you can show that the density matrix...
OK, sorry, in this paper,
we computed the density matrix approximately
and showed that for this kind of state,
the entropy defined in the type two algebra
agrees with usual generalized entropy,
often important state-dependent constant,
which from this point of view was not defined.
Subsequently, the exact density matrix
was computed for such states
without assuming f is slowly varying.
In general, it's hard to use this to compute entropy
when f of X is not slowly varying,
because it's hard to compute the logarithm
of the density matrix.
But a highly non-semi-classical limit,
where X rather than its conjugate is sharply peaked,
is tractable, as shown in this recent paper.
Now, in this construction, it was important,
although I whisked past it too much
to give a full explanation,
that the two-sided ADS Schwarzschild black hole,
or ADS flat Schwarzschild black hole has an equilibrium state,
the thermofield double state.
Well, I use it in defining the trace,
so I guess it was clear that we needed it.
In important examples such as the Kerr black hole
or Kerr-Newman black hole or an ADS, sorry,
or Desider-Schwarzschild spacetime,
there's no equilibrium state,
so the discussion as presented doesn't apply.
However, by starting instead from the Unruh state
and operators on the past horizon,
you can make a somewhat similar construction
of a type 2 infinity algebra for those other spacetimes.
And there are extensions to cosmology
that I won't have time for, I'm afraid.
How much time do I have?
What's that?
Okay, well, I'll be very quick in finishing.
So this has an analog for Desider space
that I actually think is more interesting,
but I guess I don't have time for,
because Desider space is less understood than a black hole.
So here, see, for ADS, for the black hole,
we actually could be looking at it from outside the universe.
But in Desider space, it's a closed universe,
so we have to look at it from inside.
And therefore, we really have to consider the perspective
of the observer and the observables that can be measured
along the observer's world line.
Unfortunately, I promised one of the panelists
to say at least a word or two,
but there isn't really time for it.
In ordinary quantum field theory,
we would again have a type 3 algebra for the green patch.
And since it's a closed universe,
the operator I called H would be a constraint operator.
That means that only H-invariant operators are allowed,
so naively, we should take the type 3 algebra, A0,
replace it by its H-invariant subalgebra, A0, H.
That doesn't work.
A basic result in your Gautic theory
says that only C numbers commute with H.
To get a sensible answer, we have to take seriously the fact
that the reason we're interested in the static patch P
is that there's an observer there.
We need a model of the observer.
The simplest model is that the observer has a rest mass
plus a Hamiltonian of the observer's apparatus.
We'll assume that if for them to be the mass of the observer's
rest mass, Q is bounded below by zero,
but otherwise we give Q a continuous non-degenerate spectrum.
So the Hilbert space of the observer is L2 of Q,
where Q is non-negative.
For the moment, we ignore the constraints
and use the canonical conjugate P.
I'm really going to finish as quickly as I can,
but want to make it possible for Chris to continue
as he's intending.
So the naive algebra, including the observer,
is obtained by adjoining both Q and P to A1.
But then we have to impose the constraints.
And the constraint generator now includes the H of the space-time
plus the H of the observer.
And now there is an interesting answer
for the algebra of observables along the world line,
and it can be described quite explicitly.
It's generated by conjugated versions of the ordinary operators,
A, which you can think of as operators addressed to the world line,
plus one more operator Q.
And by conjugating by e to the minus IPH,
you can show that this is, again, the cross-product algebra
as defined earlier of type 2 infinity,
but the constraint tells us that we should include
a projection operator into states where Q is non-negative,
and then the algebra we want with the projection operator
before and after turns out to be of type 2 1.
So that's a type 2 1 algebra appropriate
to an observer in the center space,
and because it is of type 2 1,
there's a maximum possible entropy.
The state of maximum entropy is the maximum mixed state
with density matrix 1.
Concretely, it's empty de Sitter space now
with the observer in equilibrium of the de Sitter temperature.
So as was guessed, this justifies what was guessed long ago
in purely theorem and dynamic grounds
with no microscopic notion of entropy,
that empty de Sitter space is a state of maximum entropy.
So thank you for your attention, and my apologies for going over.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Okay, let's take a couple of quick questions
so we can move on to the panelists quickly.
Thank you.
Eva?
Thanks for the great review.
It's everything we hoped it would be.
I want to make a comment slash question, which is, as you said,
this global de Sitter space has no time-like boundary,
and you've built in an observer that lives within that space-time.
However, it does not follow from the positive cosmological constant
that there is no time-like boundary in de Sitter.
You can consider the possibility of a time-like boundary
with positive cosmological constant.
When you do that, the Hamiltonian is not constrained to zero.
You have a notion of an energy spectrum.
And many of the features of the space become more similar
to the ADS-CFT case.
This will be explored later in the week on, I think,
Thursday morning in talks of Aninos and Toroba.
But I think it does fit into this session as well.
So, yeah, if you have any comments on that, they'd be welcome.
I only will make a brief comment, which is that if you wanted to think
of the observer as having a non-zero thickness,
I modeled the observer as a geodesic.
But if you want to think of planet Earth as the observer,
all of us here on planet Earth,
then planet Earth sweeps out a tube in space-time
and the surface of planet Earth could be your time-like boundary.
So, in the case that your time-like boundary is small compared
to the de Sitter horizon, you could think of it,
the time-like boundary itself as being the observer in my discussion.
And then you could equip the, if you have more operators,
in the model where the observer is seen as planet Earth,
of course, my model of the observer was rather crude.
Well, I agree.
There are some pretty good analogies between the two,
but I think they're mathematically distinct.
Either there's a notion of energy or there isn't.
And if you have a time-like boundary with a well-defined boundary condition,
for example, Dirichlet is actually well-defined in this case
of a small spherical boundary, then you have a notion of energy,
which is, it really is distinct from planet Earth, which has a mass.
Well, in my presentation, the energy of the observer was mc squared plus q,
which was a well-defined element in the algebra.
So, there was a notion, well-defined notion of energy for the observer.
Okay. They're closely connected.
I would love to discuss this further.
Okay. Okay.
I propose that, okay, maybe Lenny wants to ask a quick question.
I'm not sure if this is a question or a comment or a complaint,
but no real observer can last forever.
They'll eventually either evaporate into the horizon or fall into the horizon.
So, if I take a state with an observer, and I assume that that observer is described
by the same physics as everything else, it'll last a finite amount of time.
In fact, if you run it backward, it'll also fall into the horizon.
So, the only conclusion would be that an observer is a fluctuation,
a fluctuation which occurred in the thermal state, which occurs extremely rarely.
If you ask how likely it is that such a thing can happen,
it's incredibly exponentially small.
And so, it means that the amount of time that an observer is present in the Sitter space,
I'm assuming eternal the Sitter space, the amount of time is negligible, very, very tiny.
Don't we have to be able to describe all the rest of time in which there's no observer there?
And if so, how do you do that?
Well, first of all, I certainly agree with you that an eternal observer is an idealization.
I think what's really required is an observer with a lifetime long compared to the Sitter,
the cosmological time scale, which is realistic.
Okay, it depends on what your focus is.
If my focus is a really global description of the eternal time,
Yes.
then we're going to be a force to some kind of theory which describes some kind of system
Yes.
in which fluctuations can happen, observers can come and go,
and then we can ask conditional questions.
What's the probability of such and such given that there's an observer there?
Well, certainly what I have described would be described more fundamentally along the lines
that you say.
Yeah, yeah.
We've talked about this a lot in the past, but it does suggest that some kind of theory
which is independent of the existence of the observer ought to exist and be capable of describing
the fluctuations in which an observer comes and goes and spends a tiny, tiny fraction of
time existing.
Perhaps.
Okay.
I propose we move on, so let's move to the, let's thank Edward again.
