I couldn't believe what I was seeing.
I walked into the room and I said, this cannot be happening right now.
This is not the kind of thing that normally happens in this town.
Is it this camera?
I look at this one.
Why don't they just edit that part out?
Can you tell us your name?
My name is John.
And what is your connection to Crazy Legs?
Who?
The serial killer?
I don't know who that is.
You don't?
No.
Is this for TV?
Sort of.
Sorry, we must have got the wrong guy.
Yeah, I think you did.
I work at Hobby Lobby.
Whoops.
Well, could you tell us about that?
Oh, sure.
So Hobby Lobby is sort of a knick-knack store.
So they're just going to interview him anyway?
It's a good place to work because we have Sundays off.
And I'm not like religious or anything, but I just don't like working on Sundays.
No, it didn't hurt necessarily.
I just wanted to go to a dermatologist to make sure it wasn't anything serious.
But then I found out that if you bundle it with your home insurance, it's actually a
little bit cheaper.
How long is this?
You know what's funny?
I never understood the roadwork bond.
People would quote it to me.
Is this the whole episode?
Do you guys want to hear about the time I got my tonsils out?
Oh my god.
I'm done.
This is so stupid.
The year?
2005.
My throat?
Ravaged with strep.
Hey guy, does anyone else feel like everything is designed to waste your time now?
Or am I being too cynical?
Netflix documentaries are multiple episodes when they could have just been one 45-minute
movie.
Video games are too big.
YouTube videos are too long.
And please, for the love of god, stop asking me for my phone number every time I buy something
from a store.
I don't want to join your rewards program.
I just want to give you money in exchange for a hat.
Is that too much to ask?
Sorry, I'll start with the Netflix thing.
It seems like half of what I watch on Netflix is twice as long as it should be.
They always make it just interesting enough to hold your attention, but it's still pretty
clear they're trying to stretch it out as much as they can.
And I know it's not just me who feels this way, because I'll look up reviews after I
watch something and they almost all say the same thing.
Watchable, but it drags on.
Could have been tied up in one episode.
Please, Netflix, stop trying to make a series when there simply isn't the content for a series.
They made a documentary a couple years ago about the Cecil Hotel, a place that has,
I'll say it, an alarming number of deaths associated with it.
It's the site of that extremely famous elevator video of Elisa Lam right before she was found
dead.
So there is plenty of mystery to uncover here, but by episode two, they were just interviewing
YouTubers.
Not people connected with the story, just a bunch of random dudes who had googled stuff
about it before.
They keep calling them web sleuths, which I guess is the most official way of saying that
you just woke up one day and decided that you are a detective.
Well, since no one else has been able to crack this case, I guess it's up to me.
Generally, one of the big things that separates a professionally made documentary from just
any average YouTube video is the access they have to the subject matter.
Anyone can throw together a video where they summarize a Wikipedia page, but the most memorable
and revealing documentaries are ones where we hear the perspective of the people involved.
I watched one on Hulu recently called The Contestant, and not only is this an absolutely insane
story, but you get to hear it from the point of view of the guy it happened to.
You also get to hear from the villain of this story, who is such a monster, I can't believe
he agreed to be a part of this.
It's fascinating to see how proud he is of himself.
Like, yeah, I tormented this guy and ruined his life, but you gotta admit, it made for a
pretty cool show.
But this is kind of the expectation when you turn on a documentary, that you're gonna hear
the story from the people involved in the story.
So when you put on an official Netflix docu-series on a streaming service that costs money to
use, and most of it is just regular people offering their two cents on the same blurry
video everyone else has watched, it kind of feels like a huge waste of time.
It's so aggressively time-wasting that I can't help but feel like that was the goal.
Like, all right, we have everything we need to tell this story.
We have other guests who are staying at the hotel.
We have the manager of the hotel at the time.
We have the maintenance worker who discovered her body.
And in between interviewing them, we're also gonna hear from someone whose only credential
is having internet access.
I am a co-founder of the Elisa Lam discussion group on Facebook.
No, he wasn't there when it happened, but he has listened to a lot of podcasts about
this, so we should probably hear him out.
More recently, they made a docu-series about Ashley Madison, a website whose mere existence
is fascinating, let alone all the fallout from their massive data leak that exposed a bunch
of celebrities and politicians.
There is absolutely a story worth telling here, and some of it was very interesting.
But again, pointless interviews, backstory that's unnecessarily detailed, there's such
a clear amount of filler put into these documentaries.
It felt like half the runtime of the last two episodes was just trying to make us feel bad
for this YouTube vlogging couple, which, I'm sorry, was never going to happen.
In fact, I would say the best thing to come out of this was that it forced them to take
a short break from exploiting their children's medical issues for AdSense revenue because
they were too busy making 17 videos about how they were gonna be on Netflix.
Now, I would guess, like with a lot of their scripted content, the shadowy Netflix overlords
are more responsible for a lot of these decisions than the talented people who work on these.
I don't think almost every single documentary is three 60-minute episodes because that's
always how much story there is to tell.
I think that's the mandated runtime that their bosses give to them.
So even when they end up with footage that doesn't add anything to the show, they kind
of just have to leave it in anyway to pad the length.
There's a series I did a couple years ago with Kristen Bell called The Woman in the House
Across the Street from the Girl in the Window.
As you could probably guess from the title, this was a parody of, like, lifetime murder mysteries.
And it was a pretty funny show.
I enjoyed it.
But the whole time I was watching this, I just kept thinking, this should have been
a movie.
Why is this eight episodes?
Is it because they knew it would take me four days to finish instead of getting through
it all in one night, therefore extending my subscription just long enough for them
to make a little bit more money for me?
You know, now that I hear that out loud, I'm pretty sure it's that.
At this point, I just assume most of Netflix's decisions are made by an algorithm that prioritizes
keeping people subscribed as long as possible and has figured out the best way to mathematically
do that, even if it lessens the overall user experience.
I think overall, Netflix is trying to do too many things at once.
They want to make good shows, but they also want to make a lot of shows.
And they want the shows to be longer than they need to be, but not in a way that would
cost more money.
And they need to move the plot along so no one gets bored, but not too quickly.
Otherwise, the people who are looking down at their phones the entire time might get
confused.
She'd heard from so many showrunners who are given notes by the streaming channels that
they say, this isn't second screen enough.
The viewer is expected to be on their phone, kind of half doing something else while your
crime drama or whatever is playing.
And you just can't make it as complicated as you have because they're not going to
understand it because they're only going to be half concentrating on your show.
You know, when you hear stuff like that, it's actually not that surprising how often
shows like Avatar would repeat the same information they just told you a few minutes ago.
You're not supposed to pay attention when you watch Netflix.
You're just supposed to put it on in the background so you have something to listen
to while you make dinner.
But like, if you're designing your content so that it's best consumed while half paying
attention to it, why would I waste my time devoting all of my attention to it?
On the topic of things that are getting too long, what's going on with YouTube videos?
Does anyone know?
I'm old enough to remember when the 10 minute mark was something videos got stretched out
to.
Now it feels like half the videos I get recommended to me are seven hour retrospectives on like
the penguins of Madagascar.
And I'm kind of conflicted on how I feel about this.
Because on one hand, some of the best videos I've seen on this website are well past the
hour mark.
There are multiple Defunctland episodes that have better storytelling and production value
than any Netflix documentary I've seen.
When H-Bomberguy or Jenny Nicholson release a four hour video, I know it's not just because
they're trying to inflate the watch time so it gets boosted by the algorithm.
It's because they spent months working on it.
And that's just how long the video ended up being.
I'm a sucker for a comically in-depth review of a piece of media I've never thought about
for more than two seconds.
As long as a person making it is passionate about the subject and they put in the effort
to make it entertaining.
I'll watch just about anything.
But I'm worried that some people are taking the wrong lessons from the success of some
of these channels.
They see that a very long video about a niche subject has the potential to get a lot of
views.
So it's almost as if they go into their video with the goal of making it as long as possible,
even if there's not really that much to talk about.
The current YouTube meta is to turn your video into a podcast.
It's to pad the absolute shit out of the runtime because that's what the algorithm likes.
And to be clear, I don't really blame these people for doing this, especially smaller
channels who are just trying to make their videos stand out before they drown in the
bottomless ocean of content.
But it's just frustrating from the audience perspective that the system is rewarding
unedited yapping.
If I just vomit out every word that remotely pertains to the topic at hand with no thought
into brevity, no consideration of the viewer's time, it's actually more likely that YouTube
will push my video out to those people whose time I'm not valuing.
The algorithm is teaching me that I shouldn't cut things out of my video if they feel superfluous
or unnecessary or repetitive or like I'm just saying the same thing over and over again
but in slightly different ways.
They'd prefer if I stretched out every video as long as I could, but if that's all I'm
doing, what message am I sending to the audience I'm trying to cultivate?
That their time is just something for me to leverage so I can get more views?
That's a little shitty.
But the worst thing is when they start doing an ad read at the beginning of a video that,
quite frankly, I'm not even sure I'm interested in yet.
You haven't even hooked me and you're already trying to sell me a water bottle that smells
bad?
Brother, if I wanted to be advertised to, I would fly to New York City and spin around
in Times Square.
I didn't click on this video to learn about the deodorant that changed your life.
I clicked on this video to hear a grown man rant about the Fairly Oddparents for three hours.
So in that way, this is kind of my fault.
I don't know what I was expecting.
Also, no, I'm sorry.
You don't have to do this.
I literally do.
I signed a contract.
This portion of the video is sponsored by SoFi, the ultimate finance app, helping you
bank, borrow, and invest.
I have one goal in life, to be the first person in human history to have $100 all at once.
An amount long considered to be unreachable, and yet I will reach it.
And even though I'm only about 3% of the way there, I'm not giving up.
Because with SoFi's high-yield checking and savings account, I can earn up to 4.5% APY
on my savings with direct deposit, which is 10 times the national average savings rate.
High-yield savings accounts are a great way to make your money work harder for you, so
you don't have to work harder for your money.
Your typical savings account with direct deposit at your local bank earns you just 0.46% interest,
and that's not enough for me.
I have a world record to break.
But with the SoFi high-yield savings account with direct deposit, in just five weeks, the
money in my savings account is earning more than it would in an entire year in a big
bank savings account.
With SoFi checking and savings, you also get paid up to two days early, pay no account
fees, and you can cash in on up to $300 when you sign up with direct deposit.
But here's the best part.
SoFi and I are teaming up to give away $10,000.
So I guess I'll be the second person to have $100.
All you have to do to enter is sign up for a SoFi checking and savings account right now
using my link, and that's it.
Click the link in the description or scan the QR code on the screen to enter for a chance
to win.
But just make sure you're using my link because it's the only way to enter.
Thank you to SoFi for sponsoring today's video.
Now, based on everything I just described, you might be thinking, okay, so you want every
video to be as concise as possible.
You mean like Mr. Beast?
No, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no.
That's not what I'm saying.
That is on the entire other end of the spectrum.
There are videos that go on so long that large portions of them become nothing more than
background noise.
And then there's the most hyperactive, fever dream editing, nonstop cacophony of colors and
sounds meant to overstimulate the eight-year-old boys watching on their iPad, and then there's
a lot of space in between.
But I guess because of all that space, it's weird to me how many videos end up on either
extreme.
It'll either be like, I just dropped my friend in an elevator for 72 hours without any food
or water, but none of that even mattered because they ran out of air and suffocated
before they even got hungry.
Or it'll be like, but before I can talk about season two of How I Met Your Mother, we need to
go back to the beginning.
The first camera was invented in 18-
I'm just asking that we meet somewhere in the middle, that's all.
Also, to be clear, Mr. Beast and all of the channels copying him have never made their videos
that way because they value people's time.
They're just trying to keep their retention rate as high as possible.
It's just a different metric they're prioritizing.
If Jimmy cared about his audience at all, he wouldn't sign off on doing this unbelievably
deceptive bullshit, where during mid-roll ads, they put this progress bar on the bottom
that starts off really fucking fast.
It makes it seem like, oh, this will be done in a few seconds, I don't need to skip this.
And then once people have done the math in their head and decided they're just going
to see it through to the end, the progress bar mysteriously slows down, like, a lot.
And suddenly that last 20% is starting to feel like an eternity.
I thought we were almost done and now I'm not even sure we're halfway through.
This shit really pisses me off because this is a very deliberate choice.
This is not an accident.
You have to go out of your way to keyframe it like this with the intention of deceiving
your viewers.
It's such an openly manipulative thing to do to your audience and is very telling of
the way you view them.
That you're willing to lie to their face if it means a number on an analytic screen might
get a little bit bigger.
To you, they're not real people.
They're just data points that can be orchestrated in whatever direction you want them to.
And that sucks.
And if you agree with me, please sign up for my Patreon.
Right now I'm trying to buy a bunch of Teslas so I can see how many you can stack on top
of each other before they explode.
I have a lot of respect for creators that make algorithmically counterintuitive decisions
because they don't want to waste their viewers' time.
I think Internet Shaquille is hands down the best cooking channel on YouTube.
He's knowledgeable, he's funny, and he always just gets right to the point.
There's a promise of information in the title and he doesn't try to withhold it from
you just because he could theoretically put more mid-rolls in by meandering for a bit.
For a long time, Tom Scott was kind of the science version of this.
Nerdwriter is like the film version of this.
In a world where most video essays end up being somehow longer than the piece of media
they're about, Nerdwriter's still barely hitting that seven-minute mark.
It's just, here's this thing I noticed in a movie, here's some insight about it, and
that's all I got for you, brother.
But I think it's also worth noting that these channels are successful.
They're not doing the thing you're supposed to be doing, but it works for them.
And I just want to use that as a testament to making things the way you want to make them
or making the type of video you wish there was more of.
Sometimes going against the grain actually is the best way to make yourself stand out.
Like, don't just throw together a bunch of crappy videos about whatever drama is trending.
Make a retrospective about some niche hobby you had as a kid.
This shit is way more interesting.
Remember, this website is called YouTube, not do the thing that you think will become
popular to.
That would be a really stupid URL.
Now I'll admit it's not totally fair to get mad at other people for wasting my time when
really no one wastes more of it than I do.
There was a day last week where the screen time on my phone was 106 hours, and I slept
in that day.
There's so many things I want to do in my life before I'm gone, so many people I want
to spend time with, so many places I want to go, but I can't stop scrolling.
I don't want to, but it's as if it's been scientifically engineered to be the easiest thing to do.
Adam and Eve were caught on camera.
Can you guess who's holding the camera?
Keep scrolling if you choose the devil.
There's this weird feeling I get whenever I go on TikTok or Instagram reels or threads,
just kidding, where I'm simultaneously aware of what it's doing to my brain, but I do nothing
to try and intervene.
I just sit there and let it destroy me because I have to see that next video.
What if it's so funny, but I exit out of the app before I ever get a chance to watch it?
I'd cry.
No, I'd kill myself.
And it's almost as if that feeling is intentional.
They've made it so the distance between you and a chance at dopamine is just one small swipe away.
I'd almost say it's malicious, but I know that's not true,
because a billion-dollar company would never do that.
Billionaires care about your well-being.
That's how they made so much money in the first place.
Twitter, Instagram, Facebook, they would never intentionally show us things to make us upset
because studies show that people spend more time on a platform if they're seeing something
that makes them angry.
They wouldn't do that because that's not nice.
This is what most of my timeline is whenever I scroll through Twitter.
It's the most blatantly obvious engagement bait that has weaseled its way into being prioritized
because it's successfully baited engagement.
It's arguments about body counts and whether Nickelodeon shows were good or not.
And it works on me.
It has the intended effect when I see it.
I was scrolling one day, and I saw someone say, iCarly, Victorious, Zoe 101.
And at first, I had to squint for a few seconds because I wasn't sure what they meant by this.
And then I realized they were saying the first two are good, LeBron James,
and the third is sort of an imposter that doesn't belong.
And I, in my head, got defensive.
I was like, what are you talking about?
Zoe 101 was good.
It was certainly better than Victorious.
How does this have so many likes?
What's wrong with Zoe 101?
And then I exited out of Twitter and sat in silence for a few seconds as I pondered what just happened.
How I got upset that someone I don't know said a show from 20 years ago that I kind of liked
isn't as good as a different show that I barely watch.
Why is this how I'm spending my time?
In this moment, I could have been doing anything else,
and yet I chose to introduce this argument into my head?
That can't be good long term, right?
Like, we can all agree that's probably not great for my brain.
If you're like me, and you've been struggling with the endless scroll,
I do have a recommendation.
I found this by accident while I was doing a video a couple years ago about dopamine fast.
It's called Screen Zen, and it's free.
I have it set up so it only gives me a few minutes at a time
on each of the most poisonous apps that I hate but am addicted to.
So you can still pop in for a sec and get the feeling of being up to date,
but then it'll grab you by the shoulders and yank you out
before you get too sucked into the void.
You still get a little bit sucked, but not all the way.
But of course, I saved the most important issue for last.
Video games are too big now, and I'm tired of pretending like they're not.
When I was a kid, the idea of an open world game blew my mind.
Up until a certain point, everything was very linear, very insulated.
You load into an area, you do what you have to do there,
and then you move on to the next place.
But this idea that you could go anywhere, in any order,
what could be more immersive than a world that you could essentially live in?
And boy, did I want to live in any other world than the one in which I played clarinet
and got bullied by someone who also played clarinet.
You're not better than me.
We're the same.
To me, open world games felt like the culmination of every technological milestone.
It felt like the future of gaming.
And then over time, it became the standard.
It became what every game had to be.
And then all of a sudden, it seemed like the goal shifted from making the best game
to making the biggest game.
I guess because it's easier to market something based on scale
than to just come out and say,
hey, the story's really good in this one, trust me.
I started to get overwhelmed by games
because of the seemingly endless list of tasks I needed to complete.
The chores that I needed to do.
And to be clear, I'm not talking about games like Crime Scene Cleaner.
That's a great game, okay?
I don't mind chores when the game is chores.
I'll play Power Wash Simulator all day.
I played Unpacking shortly after moving into this house,
and I hadn't finished Unpacking in real life yet.
My wife was not happy about that.
What I'm specifically referring to is when games feel artificially padded with repetitive side quests.
When there's like seven different activities to do,
but you just end up doing each of them a hundred times.
And as someone who goes into games with a completionist mindset,
this is the quickest way to make me give up.
Because I'll try to collect every item and go into every corner for like 20% of the story
until one day I just stop opening the game altogether,
relieved by the massive weight now off my shoulders.
I think that's a big reason why Elden Ring had such a big impact on me and so many other people.
Yes, you're in this staggeringly large open world,
littered with places to go and things to kill,
but it's not in the form of just a bunch of exclamation points on your mini-map.
Almost everything you do in this game is motivated by,
oh, that looks cool.
I want to go over there.
It's a feeling you should have while playing an open world game.
It's that sense of wonder that has mostly been lost by all these cookie cutter task-a-thons.
Also, the more bloated a game is with content,
the more narrative dissonance there ends up being.
Which of course only matters as much as you let it,
but it's still really funny sometimes when the main questline of a game
is trying to instill this sense of urgency,
but at any given moment you can just go fuck around for 15 straight hours.
We've only got until midnight tonight to rescue my uncle,
or they're gonna execute him.
Hey, do you think there's anything cool in this cave over here?
A compromise that works great for my brain is a semi-open world,
like the two most recent God of War games.
I like when there's enough optional side exploration
that it still scratches that itch for me.
Without it ever feeling like I'm missing out on this overwhelming amount of content
by just wanting to streamline the story for a bit.
I think it's okay for a game to be modest in scope.
Just because the technology exists to procedurally generate a thousand different planets
doesn't mean we have to do that.
Sometimes I wonder if the technical limitations from previous generations
actually made games better.
I mean, it certainly made them more contained.
It made them more approachable.
I love going back and playing older games that only take a few hours to finish.
I want to be able to complete things.
I want to have a full experience in a reasonable amount of time.
I'm tired of not getting any closure from games
because they make it so tedious and long-winded to get to that point.
And that's assuming the game even works when you first buy it,
which chances are it won't.
It's become so normalized for games to be unfinished and littered with bugs on release
that it's actually surprising when a game comes out and works the way it's supposed to.
A lot of even really good games aren't worth buying for like two full years.
Cyberpunk?
Fantastic game.
In 2024.
But I bought this on release and had to slog through so many bugs,
retread so many areas because of crashes,
all before encountering an immovable obstacle.
I could not progress the story because every time I tried to initiate this cutscene,
the other character would not say the next line he was supposed to,
so they would both just sit there in silence indefinitely.
I couldn't continue the game past this point,
and I was like 10 hours into it.
I had a similar game-breaking experience with Dying Light 2,
Metro Exodus,
and I'm not even touching Starfield anytime soon.
The bigger a game is supposed to be,
the more I don't trust it to be a complete experience when it first comes out.
It usually takes years to fill out all the missing pieces,
so I'm not going to waste my time or money on what I assume will be a significantly worse experience
than if I were to just wait until it's on sale in 2027.
But in a world of titles forced out prematurely by a deadline that was never realistic,
nothing feels quite as egregious as the yearly full-priced sports game.
You spend 11 months building up a player or a team or a general manager if you're a weirdo like me,
and then as soon as the calendar flips over, you gotta start from scratch.
All right, everyone, time for the new game.
Yes, it's $100 again, but we've made so many improvements.
The number on the box is different.
And where's your credit card?
NBA 2K has one of the most aggressive microtransaction systems I've ever seen in a video game.
But they're not just dedicated to milking every single dollar out of your bank account.
They've also made it their personal mission to waste as much of your time as humanly possible.
A few years ago, they added something revolutionary.
They turned the park into the city.
Now, functionally, at its core, the city is just a menu.
Every physical location that you have to trek to could have just been text on a screen,
and it would have been way more efficient to navigate.
But that wouldn't be innovative.
Innovation is when you have to jog a mile just to have Gatorade before your next game.
Innovation is when you create something tedious so you can sell the solution to it.
Man, aren't you guys tired of having to navigate this big, stupid city we made?
Then buy a bike. It's $10, fuck you.
Imagine if every time you turned on your computer, you had to make a little guy run across town just to go to the Gmail store.
Oh shit, forgot my password. Gonna have to sprint over to City Hall.
I feel like every single element of this game is designed with the goal of wasting your time.
Whether it's getting interrupted in the main menu to show you two separate ads,
or a halftime show you cannot skip even if you press X the whole time.
Don't get me wrong, this halftime show is great.
They've got Ernie, Kenny, Shaq, my three favorite guys.
They show highlights and relevant stats.
They make jokes.
By sports game standards, this halftime show is fantastic.
But there are one million games in every basketball season,
and I don't want to watch one million halftime shows.
I'm just trying to speedrun to the playoffs so I can take a virtual trophy home to my real-life Orlando magic.
Is that too much to ask?
58 seconds, by the way.
But whatever, those are just minor inconveniences.
The really egregious wastes of time are in the My Career Mode.
Now the thing is, when you start his career, this guy fucking sucks at basketball,
which is a problem because that's the thing he's trying to do.
He's slow as hell.
He can't shoot to save his life.
He has one shirt, and it's brown.
And in order to fix these things, you need to obtain virtual currency.
Now, there's two ways you can do this.
Option one, grind.
Spend dozens of hours playing dozens of games,
scraping together pennies so you can get 1% faster, 1% stronger, 1% better at handling ball.
But it's never enough.
This process is miserable.
You're useless out there.
You don't belong in the NBA.
You would be better off in any other line of work, and this is exactly by design.
This is how the game wants you to feel.
They want you to hate this part.
Because they know the more frustrating of an experience you have,
the more likely you are to just skip to option two, spend 40 more dollars.
Come on, just do it.
You don't have time for this.
Don't you want to get to the fun part?
You'll start doing the math in your head and rationalize it as a no-brainer.
Yeah, $40 is a lot of money, but it's not nearly as much money as I could earn in the 40 hours it's saving me.
You feel like a genius.
You feel like you outsmarted the system.
And then you realize, this is the system.
I did the exact thing they wanted me to do.
And it wouldn't even be that bad if the game itself didn't already cost $70.
But now you're out over $100, maybe $150 if you pre-ordered it.
Also, the professional athlete you created doesn't play like he's never touched a basketball in his life before.
And I've got all the natural ability in the world, thanks to my genetics.
And then you get to do it all again next year.
This whole system of paying to skip a grind that has been intentionally designed to be insufferable has become way too common.
Developers are purposely holding our time hostage, knowing we'll probably spend a few bucks to get some of it back.
I feel like that's almost the entire business model of MMOs.
It's one of the reasons I stopped playing RuneScape after our lifelong on-off relationship.
I kept having to fight the urge to spend a few bucks on gold because the alternative was earning it in the game.
But then I'd have to play the game.
And I don't want to do that. I just want to play the end of the game.
How long does it take to get there?
Oh.
Well, I guess this is where I live now.
In conclusion, life is short and your time is precious.
It's your most valuable resource and you should treat it that way because unfortunately, no amount of it is guaranteed.
And I just hate seeing how much it's become commodified.
How companies have figured out ways to steal as much of it as they can from us.
You can't even pause a fucking movie anymore without having your attention demanding.
I know you're just getting up to pee, but if you could please scan this QR code, we got a lot of interesting information about Lysol wipes.
The way our attention gets pulled in every direction at all times also makes me feel like I should be multitasking always or I'll fall behind.
I always feel like I'm missing out on something.
There's so many movies I want to watch and games I want to play and there's not enough hours in the day to do it all.
So when I do give myself free time, I try to be overly efficient with it.
I can't just play a video game.
I should be catching up on podcasts.
Loading screen, perfect.
That gives me exactly nine seconds to scroll through TikTok.
I hate to be bored.
I'd hate to have to listen to the thoughts that are already in my brain.
I need to be absorbing new information constantly or I'll die.
I've been trying more and more lately to not let the feeling that there's something better I could be doing prevent me from enjoying the time that I have.
Sometimes it's nice to go for a walk without bringing my AirPods.
There's still plenty of stuff to listen to.
Birds, cars, one billion cicadas making the world's loudest sound.
I don't need to min-max content consumption.
In fact, I probably shouldn't be doing that.
I don't think prioritizing constant small hits of dopamine, hoping it all adds up to something meaningful is the secret to being happy.
The secret to being happy is gambling.
Nobody's ever had a bad time in a casino.
This is free.
So how do you make money?
The advertisers cover the cost of the TV.
This.
This is an ad.
This is always on.
Whatever you're watching, we're able to monetize using the bottom device.
Pistar, check this out.
So there's a Pizza Hut ad right there.
We literally are now on PizzaHut.com and we can order a pizza.
