well good evening everyone and welcome to this uh this event i'm very happy to have you here
i will forget to introduce myself my name is mike gomez and i'm the current chair of hispanic
studies and um this is the second installment of a new series that hispanic studies has which
re-term the hispanic studies global perspective distinguished lecture series uh and it's done in
collaboration officer the rose institute um the first one we have is this past fall we have the
consul general of brazil here and uh that was a great event and i'm equally uh very much looking
forward to this one um and we'd like to welcome dr jesus bernandez gonzalez the education counselor
of the embassy of spain in washington dc uh very excited about this talk foreign policy for the
language and culture the power of soft diplomacy which is exactly the kind of thing that the college
um the school of languages cultures world affairs and the department of hispanic studies
aims to do to give their students this perspective of that wider world that's out there how they fit
into it and how that world interacts with them um you know and how being conversed in a language and a
culture is not ancillary it's not peripheral it's intimately connected with anything you may be doing
whether that is medicine or literature or linguistics or or policy so having said those brief words uh
want to well known uh dr jesus uh fernandez gonzalez and pass the mic to max covelo
thank you mike uh good evening everyone and thank you for being here my name is max covelo i'm the
director of the morose global leadership institute it's a pleasure to sponsor another event with the
department of hispanic studies uh thank you to dr gomez for this partnership uh the mission of the
morose global leadership institute is to help our students acquire essential skills of global fluency
and prepare them for to be future global leaders uh we also seek to educate our students about
diplomacy the importance of diplomacy this lecture series serves an important as an important uh
element of our programming and this programming programming is designed to bring to campus
speakers with uh international experience uh to stimulate conversations uh about important global
challenges with our students members of the community faculty members uh and so so thank you for joining us
uh tonight and thank you for coming here remotely or again in person i know we have a group of guests
who are connecting to us remotely um dr fernandez will give his remarks uh and uh then there will be an
opportunity for questions our remote audience will be able to ask to use the chat feature and you and a
feature uh to ask questions we have a couple of microphones for our face-to-face audience and with
this i want to uh give the microphone to one of the global ambassadors uh he will introduce tonight's
speaker good evening everyone my name is samuel hall i'm a global ambassador and it is my pleasure to welcome
tonight's guest dr jesus fernandez gonzalez uh he serves as counselor for education at the embassy of spain
in u.s and canada he previously was the attache for education in new york he was the counselor for
education in the uk and ireland and as an educator he teaches spanish as a second language university of
salamanca as well as other american universities when researching he studies influence of mother
link mother tongues on the process of a second language acquisition and it is my honor to welcome
dr fernandez to the college of charleston
k
Okay can you hear me yes you can great so first of all thank you so much to Charleston
college for inviting me to come over this is a great college and a great city should have come here
before but better than ever I would like to thank Amy Arias I'd like to thank Michael Gomez
Max Ivanov and all of you here for coming some of you for the second time so you can get tired
for sure the thing that has amazed me most in this college is helped by the students
are you have such good questions and motivation is such an interest that it's really overwhelming
um we all people are usually pessimistic about the future but when we look at you
you give us all for sure okay so let's go foreign policy through language and culture the power of
some diplomacy have hundreds of slides here but I've been told that I have half an hour or so and
I have this sort of um clock over here uh warning me of the time um you can interrupt me at any time
you want to ask questions feel free to do it even if I'm if I'm speaking uh I'll run over some slides
real quick um but I'll try to do it in in in in in in in in in in in in in in in in in okay okay so let's
get to it well um you see the world over there it's sort of a patch quilt of countries shaped by geography
history wars and fate it's uh sort of a mosaic of large middle size and small countries that host
8 billion people and counting and um when you see the countries they're fascinating things about them
for example uh well some of you already know somebody told me in the class do you know where
the name espana comes from you don't okay it's the land of the rabbits apparently when the romans
slide uh let me there there's so lots of brothers there say okay let's call this the land of the rabbits
for argentina why argentina is for argentina the silver that's right that it's the silver land
or canada canada we take things for granted and never think about what white things are the way
they are what kind of a settlement you know request so um we could rank those characters according
oh I shouldn't move sorry uh we can we could rank actually according to many criteria for example
military power according to global firepower uh the uh ranking them uh this year while the
countries in dark blue are the most powerful ones for the united states followed by russia china
india south korea and so forth we can rank countries according to economic and sort of global power index
uh from scale from zero to 600 uh including globalization geopolitics transformative technology
and societal change and then again dark blue um says where the big ones and aren't uh i don't know if
you can read that but united states is number one again china number two france three is singapore
you that kingdom i don't know which famous famous 27 well not that bad to welfare the human development
index uh that means our life expectancy uh years of schooling and um you know gross domestic product
now the u.s is not number one switzerland is uh followed by norway iceland of scandinavia
hong kong australia uh i can't found the u.s uh oh there it is number 21 and spain is number 27 so not that
bad again uh well there you see now it's a dark green instead of dark blue and then we can come to a
language uh language how many languages are there well some of you already know so be quiet with the rest
it's one thousand seven thousand fifteen thousand eight hundred and forty seven two uh thousand five
hundred well to test your visual activity you have uh red dots over there now you can count the little
red dots and tell me how many countries there are well um to make a long story short it's around seven
thousand spoken languages in the world including sign languages which is quite a lot but it's less than
there used to to be so in a in an ideal world it's seven thousand languages two hundred countries
you take eight million people seven thousand languages so it's 35 languages per country one
million speakers per language but that is of course not the case the first mismatch is linguistic diversity
now it's uh dark green uh the color of the more the darker the green more languages they speak you can
see there for example india papua new guinea central africa where are regions where many languages are
spoken in this distorted map you can see it better for example uh papua new guinean they have thousands
of languages in the library now to give you a couple of examples in nigeria which is a bit larger than
texas with almost 200 million inhabitants there are 524 languages but if you go to the neighbor of the
south cameroon it's smaller than texas um 22 million inhabitants there are 275 languages over there so it's
possibly defining a person that speaks different languages is really high over there so um in
spite of what some people think multilingualism is the norm in the world it's not at all usual
we are used we are taught to think somehow that every country has a language and that is not the
case at all there there are many languages practically in every country and there are
countries where there are many many languages most people in fact are multilingual either because they
live in a multilingual context like um cameroon or nigeria or because of migration and this is in
contradiction to this idea of one nation one language that uh really throughout our days uh like here in
the u.s later uh this is the u.s we speak english here and you should speak english and not anyone
know which which is kind of uh while migration is a fact in the u.s and it's a fact for same as well
that you see over there that of course most people speak english but many people uh about 40 million
world members change of course 41 million speak standards or stand speakers and then you have
german tagalog one of the many languages of the philippines france vietnamese korean russian arabic
chinese you name it every possible language and of course we shouldn't forget the native american languages
which are on the verge of extinction many of them but our languages of this country
have such respect uh now if you have a look at the map the u.s it's really an absolute quilt of
uh of languages all over and all over like say in our sense of language and there should be many many
powers uh let's go to new york if you go to new york and go to queens in new york then you can listen
to they say and i believe it at least 500 languages from many many migrants i mean so it's a
it's really a fascinating world for us to go there and listen to languages that we've never heard
before without um uh well that gives the clue for the next question which is the most of a diversity
in the u.s new york l.a washington dc seattle and salamanca there's a city called salamanca in the
state of new york it's not salamanca in spain but i'm meaning the view the thing is small small city
well um it's new york but if you see this census of the u.s census it says it's uh almost 200 languages
that's the census because sometimes people don't say a language state speakers they say i speak english
they don't want to say which that their their mother tongue is uh but i assure you there's more than
there's more than 200 so if you walk around you see um dentists dentistas and i wish i knew how to
to pronounce korean and then in korean so you can have your people you can have three different
languages or you have you can have miniatures uh like our bowels are bigger which worked pretty well
for commercial brands uh i've read but then again you have two different view um this is an english
speaking and so please speak in english always or management serves the right to refuse service this
is american minority speaking english or now entering english always so i wonder what the animals say
about that i mean because they were hit before right second mismatch is native speakers uh if you look
at this pyramids you see that 83 languages account for almost 80 percent of the population whereas 3500
little small languages account or are spoken by just 0.2 of the world population and then you have
the mid-size one is covered by 20 percent well that means is that the big fish it's a small place and so
forth and unfortunately that brings a very high extinction rate languages are kind of extinct each and
every day if we have now seven thousand next time we meet here in a hundred years there will be probably
half of them which is really really sad uh if you look at this graph the top 25 world languages account
for half of the population so this is the way it works very big languages and then mid-size and really
small languages that are on the verge of extinction or really extinct the language with most native
speakers is of course mandarin chinese and then you have tennis second one english and then you see
there all the all the big languages japanese version thai and indian and so forth if you see that on
a map you see that english uh is quite widespread it's really a global language language spoken in
america in africa and europe as a second foreign language in asia and of course in new zealand and
australia chinese is a big language bad in a small area just china of course there are many immigrants
immigrants as well but uh you know it's mostly spoken in mainland china spanish spoken of course in
spain and latin america and then of course is white and of course in the u.s it's like the first
second language in the u.s and then you have indian or orders different names for the same language in
this but they're used in india and words then they use in pakistan they're written with different
alphabets but it's truly the same the same language it's only spoken in india and in fact most educated
indians think english as well arabic is spoken in north of africa russian in russia and in a way the
former us as our republics although as you say in this graph of the new york times uh the former us as
our republics um now say yes to that is you know to rush many of them consider which ones except for
the second and pakistan most of them uh most of them have rejected russian portuguese in portugal
brazil and the colonists the former colonists in angola and mozambique french in france and well
this is an optimistic map for the french because apparently spoken in all over canada and that is
not the case as you know rather other than quebec what we learned as a second language and that counts
because uh these are imperial languages these have been languages that have uh throughout history
conquer the world uh as spain did uh in the 16th century as you can see um the expensive empire went
from alaska down to the tierra of the fuego for argentina and to the philippines which then comes
from the king philip the second it's funny because uh that was in 1492 when along
one landed in uh arriving in america and that was the same year that uh spanish grammarian rita wrote
uh the first grammar of coromans language matica de la lengua española and he wrote this and he wrote
language and empire though together there is no empire without language and that has happened with
spanish with english with french with russian and so forth and he said and through this language for
spanish and through the grammar um your majesty can the conquerors can teach the language to this
very connection nations their body is those who are not able to speak in this case spanish so um
that's how it works big languages are small at one point and then they expand
conquer the world and um kill so to speak uh the the same goes for english this is a poem uh
written by samuel daniels in 1599 and who in time knows me there we may vent the treasure of our tongue
to walk strange shores this game of our best glory shall descend to enrich and knowing nations with our
our stores what worlds in the yet unformed accident they can refine with that access to our hours well
he didn't know at the time that anglers would become a global language but um as a prophet in that picture
well that's the english empire um in the 19th century but then counterpart is that languages are dying
the north and central america or 200 are dying south america 256 and so forth they have a picture
and it's really because your heart the picture of the last speaker maybe have uh chief uh mary sleep
jones the last speaker of ayak who died in 2008 um and when a language dies and culture dies and way of
seeing the world dies uh many words uh many stories many songs uh dying and it's like
like that but like by the divergent it's it's it's it's it's i was finding the students like like whales or
frogs or butterflies there you have uh some examples of um languages that are either the bridge of
extinction or already dead and i want to call your attention to yagan spoken in the south tip of chile
chile this is uh christina galeron the last speaker of yagan who died last year and uh i bring your
attention to this language because they have the most beautiful word mommy labina die if you don't
remember anything about this lecture no problem just remember this beautiful word that means the world
doesn't look between two or who both desire something yet are equally reluctant to insert
and i find this gift really enlightening
shall i speak to him shall i speak to her no isn't that a beautiful word well every language has
beautiful words tennis beautiful words german french all of them so there is um a ranking of languages
rank languages where english is number one and then according to different um uh linguists then you
have uh a second i mean if i think if english were the where the sun then the planets would be arabic
russian uh suahili the language of uh um like the lion king uh indian malay spanish portuguese etc and
then there would be another layer of medium-sized languages wallops from the senegal kid trust of
and bolivia or argentina armenian and so forth and then thousands of really small languages that
have to learn other languages around uh and of course the dominant languages like for example in the
anisonian even in the emotional tribes in the anisonian they have to learn portuguese they used to be
isolated but unfortunately not anymore well that's uh and you can have many many different rhymes
so pyramid according to rattle uh certain layers according to macarthur english and spanish and indian
that around that's up to the not to the to the linguist now how can we write uh different languages
which criteria would we consider in order to measure reports of new language well um the most common
ones are demographics geography economy science and technology culture internet and international organizations
uh there are many many classifications that i resort to this made by khan uh in terms of geography how
many countries languages spoken what the land area is how many tourists go to those to that those
countries uh what the gross domestic product general upper capita is exports x market share sdr composition
in terms of land area for example it uses spread all over the world whereas chinese as we saw
this is just limited to the mainland time number of native speakers number of elder speakers for example
uh i guess every kid in the world learns things for language except for
kids in australia and suds africa england ireland and the us in spain every kid has to learn
things the sad thing about is that they're learning this for many years and then they can't say can i have a
vote please um linguistic kind of list size um into european families this is really huge because it
comprises english or general standard portuguese league languages most of the languages notes on the
media internet content i mean if a spaniard were to speak in black german they would most likely speak in
english picture films top 500 universities academic journals and in diplomacy it's spoken in the
monetary fund united nations world bank and this organization nations for example there are six
official languages but the fact of the matter is that most people speak english except one an argentinian
means spaniard and then of course speaks fans uh the other languages that have a brain
that have a brain that are very limited than very little to reduce well according to xang english would
rank first and read second in third spaniard and spaniard and spaniard and spaniard and spaniard
this is the baby of course but uh that's his view and if we uh in his projection for 2050 uh
while spaniard would go up one layer uh and english would still be in the first time
and second and second and second and second and third mandarin has a problem to be a global language and
in its writing, because in Spanish, English is 20, 20, some letters you can read or write.
But in Mandarin, you need thousands of signs of character.
So kids in school take years until they master all the characters.
Just imagine if we had to do that.
Well, this is I'll skip this.
This is the scores in the different criteria that English, French, Spanish, and that's the
memory of some of the faster.
Now, let's go to some power and cultural diplomacy.
What's our cultural policy?
Well, according to Wikipedia, which is the oracle cultural diplomacy, that is the exchange
of ideas, information, art, language, and other aspects of culture and nominations and their
peoples in order to foster the mutual understanding.
So for me, that is not Wikipedia, it is myself, cultural diplomacy is the art of making people
fall in love with their languages, other cultures, other ways of living and looking at things.
So education, because I have to work some magic on you and convince you that Spain is a great
place to go and spend as a great language to learn.
I would have to make you fall in love with Spanish.
I would have to entice you to my language culture with capital letters, culture with lowercase
letter.
I'm not an expert on cultural culture, but maybe some of you could be enticed by like
chemical culture language is a gain to other people's cultures, minds, and ways of perceiving
the world.
You learn a foreign language is not just words, it's a different German saying this great word
Weltanschauung, this concept of the world is like you try new glasses and you see things in a different
way.
Like, for example, these financials are so direct when you speak, you say open up or mom, make
me a sandwich, whereas in the US would be more indirect, say you open up the door, please.
Your mom would be so kind and make me a sandwich.
So you have to not just learn the words and then culture them.
And it's a way of acculturating, integrating and being one of them.
If I speak a language, it's a way of saying I'm one of yours.
I couldn't do that with AI.
If I were speaking in Spanish right now, and my micro would translate the words into English,
it sort of creates a barrier to us.
It's different if I speak to you directly in your language than if I do it for some artifacts,
like artificial intelligence.
The thing is that we'll be discussing that before in class that the problem is that, well,
to learn a language, how did Churchill put it?
Blood, sweat and tears.
You need a lot of many years, any effort being laughed at, et cetera.
And then if you can buy sunglasses for, I don't know, $500 a month, it's a tough decision.
Nelson Mandela also very, very nicely.
He said, if you talk to a man or woman or person in a language, he understands that goes to his head.
If you talk to him in his language, her language, that goes to his heart.
And I believe that to be absolutely true.
Whenever I'm abroad and someone speaks Spanish to me, I feel welcome.
Thanks for speaking my language and being so nice to me.
That's something that, so far, I don't forget, physical intelligence.
Well, there you have artificial intelligence, but it's Ken and Brown.
Then you have study abroad.
Study abroad is a great way to learn a language and to learn about a culture,
especially here for a long time in the country.
Because sometimes people go for a couple of weeks.
They believe that they're going to be bilingual.
They have such high expectations.
And thinking that just because you're breathing, Spencer's adjunct, it is going to come from your nostrils.
They're on the star going to show up in your brain.
And unfortunately, that doesn't work that way.
It works with little in a case, but not with adults.
At any rate, it's better two weeks or four weeks than nine.
So study abroad should be mandatory for everyone.
Everyone should spend some time somewhere.
For example, and then there's something policy at the bottom of my units on my hometown like this to this lady.
And I'll just give you a brief example of this program.
The North American language cultural assistance program in Spain sponsored by the embassy of Spain.
the Spanish education by which American Irish and some of the country's students or graduates can go to Spain spend a year.
And well, that's the video.
Let's see.
Thank you.
Fancy living in Spain?
Join the language and culture assistance program of the education office at the Spanish embassy.
It offers a fantastic opportunity to spend a school year in Spain as an assistant teacher sharing your language and knowledge with Spanish students K through 12 and adults.
I got medical insurance and a monthly allowance to pay for accommodation and expenses.
And I really think that this experience will help with my career in the future.
Spain also offers you amazing travel and cultural possibilities.
I couldn't have imagined this was going to be such a life changing experience.
And I still have a sense.
I also felt like looking for students to students.
But stillvelt çıktı the language and cultural assistance program of the education office at the retrouver of Spain.
share. Now, some humans are thinking, oh, come on. This is a commercial. You've set everything up. You've selected the people. You've put up wonderful CDs and photos and everything. I mean, we know how it works, right? Well, something I've learned when you're going to talk in the U.S. is that everyone tells a story of a personal story.
That's very common in your culture. You start to talk and you say, well, this happened to me when I was a little kid, blah, blah, blah, blah, blah, blah. So I have my personal story for you. Now, I go to LA. We have an office there. And I'm checking in the hotel. Perception is my passport. Perception is this guy over there. And he says, oh, he's from Spain. Oh, okay. And I say, did you spend? Yeah, of course. I was a language assistant there. And I'm like,
say, what? You were a language assistant in. Yeah, it wasn't a little bit in Madrid. And then I'm the guy that runs the program in the U.S. and he couldn't believe it. So I recorded this video.
Hello, everybody. Yeah, my name is Matt. Hello. And I was an auxiliary in Leganese for two years. I absolutely loved it. It was
two of the best years of my life. It was a fantastic opportunity to meet new people, practice a new language, get to know a different part of the world.
So if you want an opportunity to get your Spanish down, have some, have a lot of fun.
Work with some real cool kids, meet some incredible people. Please, please become an auxiliary. Please become a language assistant. I absolutely loved it. I would go back in a second.
If I could. And you can as well.
Thanks so much. Thank you. Okay, that wasn't. I mean, I couldn't think I was going to find a language assistant in a hotel in general.
Okay. Well, some of you don't speak Spanish. There's something you do. What's his Spanish like?
It's very good. It's very good. Really good. I mean, it speaks better than me, I think.
Okay, thanks.
I have more videos, but I would love to listen to your questions.
So let's keep the videos.
Okay, then you have culture with big letters, architecture, sculpture, painting, literature, input in translations, music, movies, series, dance.
So now comes the part of subliminal propaganda here.
So you have media.
Alhambra.
Again, I'm.
Santiago de Compostela.
You know who this?
Martin Sheen.
American actress.
Camino de Santiago.
Yeah.
Yeah.
And there's a movie about the way.
It's sad at some point, but it's great movie to see.
Then you can visit.
The most other problems here.
The same things.
A lot of these in the brother.
I mean, I got this one though.
When this beautiful, so they gone by.
But I'm.
Trying to watch your brains.
Realize it.
All right.
And get me down.
The view of this.
Funny pictures.
And this is a painting.
This is not a picture.
This is by Antonio Lopez.
I think it's nice to something.
Despite all of this.
And I.
I love this.
It's just beautiful.
It goes early in the morning.
We can see it earlier.
And then.
And paints this beautiful view.
They run the.
And I think.
Of course.
Literature.
The answer.
From.
100 years of solitude.
Or.
Nowhere from.
This is a very funny novel.
Very short.
Funny novel.
About an alien.
Coming to the earth.
And all sorts of problems.
Music.
Classical music.
Or.
Flamenco music.
This is.
One of our.
Famous.
Players.
Of course.
Flamenco.
Or.
Tango.
Argentina.
This.
Step side.
Or.
Salsa.
Or.
Movies.
While.
Whatever is pretty well known.
In the.
In the US.
And then.
Argentina.
And Mexican.
Or.
In the US.
First.
Unfortunately.
That didn't.
Wait.
But anyway.
Or.
I don't know.
If you've seen.
La Casa de Papel.
If you haven't.
How did we come to you?
It's a Spanish series.
It has been.
It's a Netflix.
Show.
No.
Over the world.
And if you want to learn.
Spanish.
It's a series.
And you have culture.
In lowercase letters.
Quotes.
For celebrations.
Way of life.
Tourism.
Presents.
Panda meat.
Panda bears.
Because that's.
For the Chinese.
Do they.
Give.
Panda bears.
As a.
Sub.
Diplomacy.
Press.
Well.
You have.
The.
Toughest.
There.
Now.
Waters.
This is.
Little Spain.
Run.
By.
Post.
We are world champions.
In.
With.
Toussaint.
In.
2030.
Or.
Tenis.
Be.
Experts.
In.
In.
We have last.
Filks.
Celebration.
In the.
Is.
Spain.
Or.
This.
so much for months or tomatoes and uh war uh where people throw into each other and
apparently they have a lot of fun i can't imagine myself in this but uh many many
young people do and many americans go to to this village in the tomatina or the
or something very stylish to um it's a very typical stash
and um we like to eat together there's something that we do in spain we like to eat together and
there's a beautiful spanish world remember the dragon one which is sort of nesta and that is
after having lunch or having dinner just stay calm for a while relax talking about things
uh enjoying uh the food and the conversation um after business uh schools are very different in
space over those who want to just sign up to join the nightclub program they'll see that the
school's working a bit kind of a different way in spain inside the same everywhere but the school
organization is different so you have to accommodate to that opener cafes barney i mean that that's
something that i think kind of paid sometimes and then because people party in spain
uh up until i don't know five six a year seven a year they have breakfast there and of course for
foreigners this is a paradise this is a different day and something uh that i find very inspiring
and it's that spain and the u.s are the um countries brand number one in or again the nation
rates and i think something we should feel proud about if you compare to portugal france etc i mean
it's it's uh something somehow touching we have no problem in when we die or
or even living to the nation or whatever of course landscapes
and you can go to paraculture i don't have much in that respect i'm not an expert in kind of culture
those areas and how is this promoted well this is promoted through the embassies through cultural
education tourism and trade offices we do part of our job is to do some diplomacy cultural institutes
and exchange problems uh because of the time i'm just going to mention well this is our the embassy
in washington dc this is your your home you will feel free to come over and visit and uh these are
the countries where the where we have education office like the one we have in in washington dc this
is these are the countries with the instituto cervantes or cultural institute as centers
and skip there and i because it's just mostly spain and somehow mexico they have
university national economy mexico will now centers in some cities here in in
and uh don't stop here because otherwise you won't have time for questions so uh
um yeah i'll i'll i'll leave it there and i'm happy to answer easy questions thank you dr fernandez
gonzalez uh now our audience can ask questions online and we have a couple of microphones here
i have this microphone i can bring it to you or you can just come up to one of them thank you so much
this was fascinating and i have a quick question and then a comment one is will we have access to
your slides of course okay thank you uh and the other is i don't know if you're aware that we've had
many many students from the college of charleston participate in mount god i know okay i just wanted
to make sure that yeah i'm waiting for the day when i get to do nothing but no i wanted to congratulate
you it's a wonderful program and and so many of our students have thrived so thank you so much and i
i would like to say that it's a free program because there are companies that uh chart or similar
programs we do not count and will not charge at any center for this program so we'll be free to
register and then as i said you get an allowance it's all a lot of money but this point in anything
i enjoyed your talk a lot um thank you so you know i want to go back to the g-cub was kind of
fascinating and and you know the idea that there is no empire without language and culture confusion
and and sort of on that on that note what do you see as being the the consequences of an isolating sort
of policy on the world stage which where someone is pulling back by doing so they're not reaching out
and by not doing that they're not using their cultures can you think of like what would be
the unintended consequences if any of those things and can you think of any examples
i'm not sure if i understood that um the consequence of uh of inferior languages is the death of many
small languages and that's what happened in the u.s of course and in a lot in america as well
not to the same extent i must say because the the priest mr is the word in in central and south america
wrote grammars of those languages and preach on those languages they thought uh if we're waiting for
this to learn hispanic this is not going to work we want them to be christians we want them to be
catholics so we have to preach in uh pechoa or in naya or in nesting and then and that's something that uh
should be mentioned as well it wasn't the case of spain that imposed spanish on they wanted to but
they couldn't it was the uh people like bolivar or the leaders of the independency in america those
were the ones that decided to stand up which was going to be in the language spoken in argentina and
i don't know if answering your question yeah it was more the idea of when when you cut yourself off
when you pull back from the world which which happens and we have a nationalistic sort of
context where people push pull back from that that interaction there are consequences because
you're pulling back you're not reaching out they're not reaching out you're not diffusing and
they're not diffusing you are perhaps undermining your own power base can you give me an example
for example that's pulling back i mean english speakers uh wouldn't learn other languages is that
what you mean yeah well i i would say that without getting too political recently in the united states
there has been a pullback right as far as the posture um and it's very interesting to think somehow
you know going back to the people who understood right how this how this reaching out um and it's sort
of there's this two-way communication which you know it's about fostering mutual communication
understanding but it goes way beyond that i'm not sure i'm not sure that rico had that in mind i think
that it was more until they have to they have to learn spanish uh because they are in fact
provide people's uh in terms of um pulling back i mean that's it's a delicate balance i mean you have to
promote your language but you have to give oxygen to those languages in the virtual extension i mean it's
not that i i mean i'm proud of for learning spanish for all the world but uh i usually say uh learn
for a language if it's spanish great if it's catalan great if it's spas wonderful if it's aranese which
is both language spoken in the pyrenees in spain not for you that's good for you so it's it's um sort of uh
um delicate box thank you thank you other student i wonder i'll take this question from a student and
then i'll get to hello i'm taylor i'm a junior here and my question for you is well i would like you to
explain more about your career path and how you found yourself to fill the role of um ambassador spain
um all right um i'd like to talk about myself pretty much uh i myself am the professor of linguistics
at the university of salamanca and in salamanca we have so many foreign students that um to make
extra money i used to teach spanish foreign language there at some point i directed the department for
spanish as a foreign language university of salamanca that meant i mean around six thousand seven
thousand four students throughout the year especially in the summer which was a great experience and we
had programs with the spanish industry of education bringing american teachers to learn methodology in spain
and through that i talked about that there were positions as education at a shared counselor in
different different embassies and i said well what do i have to do to be one of them they told me
you only have to apply for it you have to prove that you speak the language and you know about
american american education system k-12 k-12 and university in college and well then have some
bit of luck so i applied for it and i was appointed uh educational shaping room um uh there's the rank
his counselors with all how to share second layer and then there are officers so i was education at
10 years which was great i spent four wonderful years in big apple and then i was transferred to
london so i had to learn another language english spoken in english language and once i have to get
get used to say mike and cheers and all that stuff and from my arms uh spent two wonderful years in
london i was even invited by friend elizabeth the second uh with three or four thousand other people
just invited me that's a wonderful years and then i went back to the university of salamanca to teach
there and uh when i thought everything was over and was about to retire they told me i wanted to come
to washington bc the council of litigation and i said yes now uh this is a very unique path for
stanis embassy and i think some of your genesis because if you were going to do the same thing in
the us i guess you would have to join the foreign service you would have to do the different exams and
interviews to join the phone service and then when you join the foreign service you're kind of a
swiss night diplomat you may be in nigeria working in development projects or maybe in spain working
for cultural programs or in peru doing i don't know politics and analysis or whatever that in our
embassy there are diplomats there you guys have joined the spanish foreign office and were cleared
ambassador and diplomats but the different ministries have different counselors agriculture
police law what else is there tourism trade etc and these are not praying diplomats to the way
there are people like me that have a career in agriculture and trade police in whatever and that's
speaking the language they know about the culture and that are appointed as counselors or other shares
and in terms of the military it's it's military personnel that uh that uh have these positions
so it's a very particular way to end up in suspensions sorry first of all thank you for a beautiful
presentation i have two facts and i find very interesting as opposed to simon bolivar who was a
little bit of an imperialist in terms of the spanish language uh the the liberator of argentina was very
different san martin had a markedly different linguistic policy and what's been investigated by an argentina
a glorious spirit so that they're moving. And one of the years is a junci for a woman to come back to the
globe for the birthday ladies they had two phones in the
oms and they put two of those hands together which i'm really very money i'll invite you when we had to
thirty people there we can take a well i think yeah you did i've also done two of our vases on the
And for the brief time that San Martin, who I'm sure, you know, grew up more in Spain and Argentina, was in Argentina, there actually was a kind of incipient trilingual policy which died the minute he was essentially dethroned.
I just want to add that point about San Martin.
Yeah, there was a time also that there were so many Italian immigrants.
There was some sort of debate as if Italian should be the language of Argentina or Spanish.
And but unfortunately, as you said, well, it's getting around Argentina recently, as opposed to Paraguay, where everyone speaks Spanish and Guarani.
It's a sort of diagnostic situation.
I mean, Spanish is the official language.
The language you speak and you're even a lecturer in Guarani is the language you speak with your family or so.
But for me, it's a bit sad that so many languages have disappeared.
You might be happy to know that in the northwest of Argentina, there is a very active resurgence of Quechum.
Not so much on mine.
And just one more thing I thought you might be interested to know.
I'm a native speaker of a language that is not spoken anymore, which is Judaism.
Oh, okay, okay.
Which everybody here calls Ladino.
Ladino.
It's Judaism.
And in Argentina and Brazil, the language has been basically swallowed well in Argentina by Spanish.
And in Brazil, frankly, also by Spanish going into Portuguese.
But in the Sephardic Jewish communities in Brazil and Argentina, there really is a feeling that that's not such a bad thing because the language would have died.
And at least by being swallowed by Spanish and it's controversial, at least the literature and the mutual and all of that has survived.
It survives in Spanish.
Yeah, well, you know, I think they're trying to, you know, I'm just trying to revitalize it somehow, but it's it's very difficult.
And some people even I think I believe they keep the case of the houses in that they have them stay.
Yeah, that's perfect.
Yeah, that's perfect.
Yeah, that's perfect.
Yeah.
It's a question over there.
Oh, okay.
Oh, okay.
Um, there's a meeting.
So, um, currently we're seeing across the world, a serious migration crisis, forced displacement, like a couple of examples, Sudan, Venezuela, and this mass movement of people, which is changing these demographics.
They talk about how is that impacting language diversity and the spread of languages and also the cultivation or loss of languages.
Uh, okay, I'll give you the example of Spain.
If you ask someone what languages are spoken in Spain, they would say something from Spanish.
Some of them say, well, Spanish, uh, Catalan, uh, Basque and Galician.
Some might even put our needs that live in small language spoken in the Koreanese.
And that's it.
That's not true.
There are languages spoken in Spain, uh, Arabic, Wallach, uh, Bulgarian, Romanian, languages from Africa, languages from Eastern.
Europe and dialects from Latin American countries.
Uh, what's happening is that, um, unfortunately, uh, and, and, and, and, and, and, and, and, and, and, and, and, and, and unfortunately what happens in Spain is the same thing that happens here in the U.S.
That after the second, third generation, uh, those, uh, languages, I mean, uh, English speakers, uh, look for language.
It's like, I have to speak English to accommodate to, to the country.
You have to speak Spanish.
And it's, for me, it's really sad because when you're a little kid, you can absorb as many languages as you have around.
There's no limit other than time.
Uh, but what happens is that, um, they lose their, their language and part of their comfort heritage.
Same thing happens in Germany with Turkish immigrants.
Second, third generation may not speak Turkish anymore.
And I understand.
And, uh, the government policy is not to develop those languages.
For example, instead, if you open up, uh, bilingual English and Spanish school, great.
Great.
Everyone's happy.
Everyone says wonderful.
My kids call their Spanish and English.
Great.
Great.
Great.
Great.
Great.
Great.
Great.
Great.
Great.
Great.
Great.
Great.
Great.
Thank you.
Oh, no, no way.
Systems is dangerous people.
You can do that.
So that is, I find that very, very, very sad.
Um, they, they should have the opportunity now.
And then, well, when the Ukrainian immigrants came, they tried to do something with, uh, with
the case from Ukraine.
I mean, that was, that was really a big effort from the Spanish government, which is fantastic,
Fantastic, but why don't you do the same thing for Moroccan kids, for Sinellus kids, for Chinese kids?
I mean, I know it's the problem, you know, but so, yeah, that's something that happened with my question and here in the US, what I see is that while some communities try to help our languages like the Japanese community, Korean community, we try to do that, we have a program for children of
citizens in New York and Washington DC, and then sometimes they ask why don't you include that in everything is that I say, I have a means, I have money, I have a support, I wish I could, I have a lot of them, but I can, but
I don't think the public education and I'm very rich in this much in that respect for money and they have problems problems in schools like lunches or fentanyl of us.
We have time for one more question.
We have time for one more question.
We have time for one more question.
We have time for one more question.
I have time for one more question.
I have time for one more question.
And my question is about migration coming from Latin America.
We actually had a student graduate a few years ago who worked with people who were coming.
speaking languages that were deemed Spanish speaking, but they were indigenous languages.
And I'm wondering if Spain or or other Latin American countries are working to help them when they came to the border, they they couldn't speak Spanish and they couldn't speak English and it was pretty disastrous for them as they and their families were split up.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Well, the sad answer is no.
I mean, that should be more responsibility of Latin American countries.
And sometimes they have this discourse of Spain, the conquerors and assassins and that stuff.
Yeah, of course, many bad things around the world that it's, I mean, as the Mexican government, the Argentinian government, we should care about their own population and foster those indigenous languages.
And I'm not sure they are so good on that.
What we do in Spain or we try to do in Spain is foster our languages there.
Catalan or with some of the person as well.
That's listening.
But in terms of indigenous languages, there are organizations that work, as I know, a friend of mine went to Colombia and worked with communities there.
And I think, I mean, the past is the vast history is history.
We did many bad things.
I know, I apologize, whatever you need.
But it's the actual problem, the current problem that we have now, we should address.
And it's this case that we should take care of.
Of course, Spain, but other than the American countries as well.
But it's, it's, yeah, it's a difficult situation.
Dr. Fernández González, thank you so much for a wonderful presentation and for your questions.
Good evening, no apologies.
Important.
Thank you so much.
Thank you.
