The reason that democracy is failing
is because we have very significant levels of inequality
that mean that there's a kind of governing class
who make a lot of the decisions,
run a lot of the corporations,
and you don't really understand many of the problems
that affect most people's lives.
And most people feel, I would say, very powerless.
I think this kind of narrow view of human beings,
the economics profession pushes,
and this narrow view of society
generates policy suggestions that are just wrong
and, quite frankly, unsuitable for the world
in which we live.
The governments have got to stop listening to economists.
And they've got to start listening to climate change people.
Do you agree with that philosophy?
It's always super to talk to someone
you don't absolutely agree with on every subject,
but who is, at the same time,
unbelievably open and kind enough to have a good debate.
So it's safe to say my chat with Grace lately
was definitely a spirited one.
And we thought it was a good time to revisit
as COP29 is currently underway in Azerbaijan.
Grace makes a compelling point that dealing with climate change
shouldn't continue to be parked at the feet of individuals,
but of institutions and businesses.
No amount of tote bags are going to save the planet.
And I was definitely cool with that.
She also discusses why the idea of stakeholder capitalism
is almost certainly bullshit and why community wealth building
and long-term investment might be credible alternative solutions.
Also very cool with that.
But we did have a bit of a ding dong about tax,
but you can skip that bit if you want.
Check it out.
Hello, and welcome to Business Without Bullshit.
I am Andy Oury, and alongside me is the fabulous Pippa Sturt.
Hi, Andy.
Lovely.
And today we are joined by Grace Blakely.
Have I pronounced that right?
You have, yes.
Grace is an economics and politics commentator,
columnist, journalist, and author.
She's a writer for the Tribune, a panelist on Talk TV,
and was previously the economics commentator
of the New Statesman.
Very good.
Well, that's not a bad list.
So how are we doing, Grace?
Welcome to the podcast.
I am all good.
Thank you so much for having me.
It's good to be here.
No problem.
So we always start with a very simple question,
which is, what's keeping you up at night, Grace?
God, what isn't keeping me up at night at the moment?
I mean, I've just come back from quite a long holiday,
so I feel like I've kind of stepped away from all of the chaos
and had a bit of a relax, but there is the-
Ready to get back into it, right?
Exactly.
I think there's just the perennial worry of,
you can't really escape it, of just what's happening,
happening to the climate.
I mean, there's news every day, I think,
from various different parts of the world,
just of very strange and unprecedented weather events
and things getting a lot warmer and all that sort of stuff.
So I think that is, in the back of my mind,
this kind of urgent thing that's always, you know,
always there, really.
And I think it is for a lot of people of my generation, actually,
and younger.
Is there anything that will make people do anything about it?
It's hard, really, because, you know,
I think a big problem with the way we talk about climate change
is it all comes down to kind of individual actions
and individual responsibilities.
And that's actually a narrative that the big fossil fuel companies
worked to push.
You know, they were BP created the idea of the carbon footprint
to say, oh, please don't regulate us.
Just make sure people, you know, buy tote bags
and don't use plastic straws and all that sort of stuff.
Whereas actually, you know,
if you really want to tackle climate change,
you've got to just change the whole structure of the economy,
how we generate electricity, how we get around,
how we produce things.
So it requires like a really big structural shift
in the way that the economy works, basically,
rather than just people trying to be nice.
So the Green New Deal.
Yeah, exactly.
What's the Green New Deal?
Well, the Green New Deal, it actually came out of the UK.
So yeah, the initial version of it came out
after the financial crisis, which was this whole idea from,
you know, a bunch of economists and politicians got together
and said, we need a stimulus package post crisis
that's going to actually solve these climate problems.
Then it went over to the US where it was picked up by the squad,
you know, Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez, et cetera.
And then kind of came back here.
But now it's been, it's been kind of squashed, I think,
in the Labour manifesto, unfortunately.
It's basically all your, all your kind of power
should be renewable green.
Like you should stop the fuck with, with coal mines
and getting oil out of the North Sea and all that stuff should be,
we should be planning to get rid of it.
Yeah. And it's also things like, you know,
retrofitting housing stock so that it's much more environmentally friendly,
you know, investing in different forms of transportation,
like, yeah, renewable energy, all that sort of stuff.
Electric cars.
Yeah. I mean, if you take the house one,
having, having looked at it recently, it's, you know,
it's, it's, it's a chicken and an egg situation.
You know, I went to an expert on it and, and I mean,
they immediately started telling me, they were just sort of,
you know, warning me how much it was going to cost as much.
Were you going to like put insulation in your house or something?
Well, basically you've got, you've got to use the heat exchange,
but then you've got to actually completely rebuild your house.
Cause it only works if you've got underfloor heating with piping,
which is, you know, major.
So, I mean, a quick examination suggested it might cost 60 to a hundred thousand pounds
to sort my house out, which was more than we were going to spend on an extension.
Yeah. I mean, this obviously would have to be something that would,
you'd be supported by the government.
And the whole idea of it as part of this stimulus package,
which is what the Green New Deal is supposed to be about,
is that, you know, this is classic Keynesian economics,
is that you are investing in infrastructure that's going to last for a long time
and support, you know, sustainability as well as growth.
And you're creating jobs now in the context in which they're needed.
It's a little bit more challenging to just now,
given that we've got these high levels of inflation.
The whole idea was to do it immediately after at first the financial crisis,
then the pandemic, when the economy needed a bit of a boost.
Arguably it still does now, but you have got these inflationary pressures,
some of which, by the way, do come from the problems associated with climate change.
It's becoming increasingly difficult for us to feed ourselves
in the environment in which we've created.
And that's why a big part of why food prices have gone up so much, actually.
So, yeah, it is a bit of a chicken and egg problem in the sense
we need to spend money in order to fix some of these problems.
Otherwise, everything's going to get more expensive.
Is it part of an issue that we've got a government
where a lot of the government is both insulated from the problems
that a lot of the rest of us have to deal with and also has vested interests.
Why is the government insulated from up on?
Because you've got people like Rishi Sunak
who really wouldn't notice if it's my salary, right?
You know, it's like this is a man who we discovered last year
and never used a credit card.
I mean, what I'm trying to say is we've got a lot of people in government
who live very different lives to the rest of us.
You know, you've got Nadim Zahari with his stables and his heating his horses.
And, you know, you've got lots of lots of them
seem to have very different rarefied lives to us.
And you wonder how much they understand
what the rest of us are living with.
Even if they didn't, you know, you've still got the problem of kind of
political donations and the influence that some of these big companies
who have a vested interest in these issues not getting solved
have over the Conservative Party.
And I'm thinking particularly of landlords and property developers
and also some fossil fuel companies who, you know, have often quite clearly
and I've had conversations actually with MPs about how some of these interests
have actually stood in the way of things like solving the housing crisis.
I mean, I'm just on a basic level.
I'm like, we're talking about borrowing more money than I could even calculate
so we can retrofit everyone's houses.
I don't I don't think that's easy for any government to go and do regardless.
Just because I have a big house, which, by the way, would cost me a fortune to heat,
you know, because it's relative, you know, you've got a big fucking house.
The bill is pretty fucking big right now.
So I don't know if that's connected to the fact that it might be my frustration
is actually the same thing, is that the short termism that we live in,
whatever government we put in, no one is and I can't get my head around.
We've discussed I cannot get my head around why someone doesn't come forward and say,
this is what I'm going to do.
This is my 20 year plan to get Britain.
And it's going to get worse, by the way.
It's almost, you know, Thatcher got lucky with Falklands and I know you hate her, but it's like,
you know, at least it's like that you get the two terms and you've got to get lucky.
Well, I mean, Thatcher was the last person to really fundamentally transform our economy.
I think she did it in a really bad way.
But, you know, it was a big shift, as you say.
And that is really the scale of the change that we need again right now.
But nobody talks like that.
Nobody comes out and says, right, here's my 20 year plan.
You're going to have to vote me in three times and it's going to get really shit for 10 years.
A bit like, you know, what it only happens like when South Korea goes through a war or
Germany goes through a war and they're starting from nothing.
Do they get to rebuild properly?
We, you know, the problem with Britain winning the second world war, inverted commas and all
these things, we quickly got to the second world war.
No, but we, you know, the problem with being the victor is we didn't really ever rebuild
anything.
Well, actually, I would kind of disagree with that because I was going to say the last time
that we borrowed a substantial amount of money, like huge, huge sums of money, much the public
debt to GDP ratio is much larger than it was, you know, even after the financial crisis was
World War Two.
And what do we do after that?
We didn't implement austerity.
We had, you know, the creation of the NHS.
We had a massive program of social house building.
That was funded by the American Marshall Plan.
I mean, well, a little bit, but like ultimately over the long run, we've had this huge stock
of debt.
Austerity was enormous after the second world war for decades.
We had this huge stock of debt and we invested a huge amount in social, the house building,
in the NHS and the creation of public services, in education, in infrastructure.
And because the economy was growing, partly because of that investment, we were able to recoup
it over the long run.
But surely this all comes down to, right, you're saying, why can't we look at things on a longer
scale?
And, you know, everybody always says, does nobody think of the children thing, you know,
but it comes down to the fact that human beings, right, are just a little bit too selfish, really.
Like, we all think of, oh, my God, it's going to be terrible for my, you know, I don't have kids,
but be terrible for my nieces.
It'll be terrible for the next generation.
But I'm okay.
So I don't know.
I mean, I feel like we're encouraged to think of ourselves and human beings and our society
more broadly as selfish.
But actually, you know, that kind of thinking almost creates the problem itself.
Because if you think, oh, everyone's selfish, I've just got to look after myself, you're less
likely to kind of get involved in political campaigning or say, join a movement that's kind
of pushing for change.
Because you're like, oh, screw it.
None of this matters.
And also, I'm just little old me.
Exactly.
What can I do?
I can't make a difference.
Blah, blah, blah.
No, exactly.
I think if we actually change the narrative there and thought, we broadly all want the
same things, you know, we want to be able to live happy, healthy, fulfilled lives where
we're not working all the time, where we can afford the basics, where our children are going
to be better off than we are.
And, you know, there are ways that we can work together to make that happen.
Are you an economist at heart?
Is that what you train as?
I don't think of myself as an economist at heart.
I think of myself as in the vein of kind of lots of socialists, as a critic of the whole
idea of economics and of political economy.
And obviously, to do that, you have to be versed in a lot of the mainstream theory and stuff.
But when I look at the way that most economists describe their profession, the way that they think
about and talk about the economy, I see it as really alien.
Because, and the biggest thing for me is that we have this idea of economics is completely
divorced from politics, right?
So you can construct a very nice model that's very, you know, mathematically elegant and you can
predict people's behavior and you can say, right, and these assumptions mean that the corporate tax
rate needs to be X percent, without ever really considering the wider political variables that
are going to feed into that.
So, you know, people say, right, we need to have lower corporate tax rates because otherwise
all the corporations will leave.
And no one actually thinks about the political climate that, you know, determines whether
or not that is the case, right?
Like what other laws and regulations do we have surrounding corporation tax to determine
whether or not that's true?
So I see myself as kind of political economist, really looking at the interaction between those
two things.
How does economics affect politics?
How does politics affect economics?
Which I think gives you much more holistic view.
Yeah, I think it's a nice way of putting it.
Do you ever heard of someone, Steve Keen?
Yeah, I know Steve.
He's a great guy, yeah.
Yeah, because he came on and he just said the governments have got to stop listening to
economists and they've got to start listening to climate change people.
Do you agree with that philosophy?
I definitely agree that the government needs to stop listening to economists.
You know, yeah, I know a lot of economists and there are lots of great economists who,
you know, I agree with who are progressive
and like argue for policies that I broadly agree with.
But even then, I think this kind of narrow view of human beings that the economics profession
pushes and this narrow view of society, which is that everything can be broken down into micro
little transactions.
Yeah, we have needs.
Exactly.
And, you know, you can, it's all about maximizing people's utilities subject to their
logic constraint.
It's all, it's just silly and it doesn't capture the complexity of our lives.
Obviously it's not supposed to, but it also generates like policy suggestions.
And they say it's neutral, no policy suggestions come out of it, but they know that it does,
that are just wrong and quite frankly, unsuitable for the world in which we live.
So if we're trying to summarize, I mean, can you summarize your sort of the point that you're
trying to make in terms of how governments should change their approach?
What is it that they should do differently?
We should think more long-term, but I'd love that, but no one's doing it because they're
voted in every four years.
And I mean, other than I always joked whether we could have a sort of, what is it when they
all press the buzzer and the chairs turn around?
It's like, you almost need, yeah, the voice.
I don't think I've seen that.
Oh, I just wanted a government where you basically, you get in and until you get 80%
of people hitting the buzzer, you're in.
You know what?
That is not far from what I think actually, because I think for me, like the biggest challenge that
we face, even before all of these economic problems, is actually democracy isn't really
working, support for democracy is quite low.
And actually it's, you know, democracy in a lot of parts of the world is retreating.
This is after we were told, you know, end of the fall of the Berlin Wall, democracy and
capitalism are here.
We've won.
Exactly.
It's the end of history.
You know, totally.
And now it seems like the legitimacy of our political economic system is on decline.
And people are blaming the democratic element of it without really seeing the economic side
of it.
And for me, the reason that democracy is failing is because we have these very significant levels
of inequality that mean that there's a kind of governing class, largely speaking, who make
a lot of the decisions, run a lot of the corporations.
And you don't really understand, as you were saying, many of the problems that affect most
people's lives.
And most people feel, I would say, very powerless.
I think that's what Brexit was about.
Is that what Trump's about?
I think that's what Trumpism is about.
I think people see that they are being governed without really feeling like they have a say
in how that governing process is taking place.
And it's not good enough just to say, vote in different politicians every four years.
Firstly, because you don't have a say over who you're voting for.
But secondly, because there are all sorts of sources of decision making in government
that completely insulated from democratic accountability.
Look at the decision to raise interest rates today.
You know, the Bank of England is, in inverted commas, an independent organisation
whose sole remit is to target inflation.
But actually, that's a very political decision that the Bank of England has just taken to
raise interest rates.
It affects the distribution of income.
And it's not a democratic decision.
Democracy, to me, you know, there's some problems.
Like there was a problem because of international travel and the way the world's internationally
works now that we're no longer dealing with the national system.
So a billionaire can live anywhere.
It doesn't need to pay tax.
And then you're like, oh, all of the money is in these thousand people.
They have 70% of the money and they're the people who don't pay any tax.
So there's just some, as a tax person, there's some basic problems now of the fluidity of movement
of people.
But I think we, you know, again, we talk ourselves into a bit of a corner on this issue because
this has been the narrative for a really long time.
And this was a narrative that a lot of people on the right really worked to push.
Which, what was the narrative?
That you can't tax the rich, you can't tax corporations because they'll just leave.
And actually, we do have, you know, especially as an economy as large as we are, and also,
you know, potentially working with other wealthy economies as we were supposed to do through
the OECD, through the very nerdy base erosion and profit shifting, that sort of thing that
never really came to anything.
But no, we do have some power to be able to raise tax rates and also clamp down on tax avoidance
and evasion and to, you know, at least monitor, if not regulate the flows of capital, like
across our borders.
We just choose not to.
You know, we choose not to invest in tackling tax avoidance and evasion.
I want to solve some of these problems because here is the thing.
A lot of anger is created, I think, towards wealth.
So you're someone in the UK and you earn a million pounds a year and you've built a
business and you employ 10, people fucking hate you.
And yet you're putting half a million quid into the system.
You probably privately educate your kids.
You probably use private health care.
Why are they the problem?
Now, for me, why they're the problem is everyone's angry with the billionaires.
Everyone's angry with the people.
Now, if you are living, I've got, you know, I've got to be clear on this.
If someone is resident, they live in this country, they go on holidays, but this is their home.
And there's lots of very wealthy people who choose to do that because they love this country
and that's where they want to be or that's where their family is.
You pay a lot of tax internationally.
You're at number 15 in the world of how much tax you pay.
It's only Japan and places that pay crazy.
Well, I mean, it really depends because we know that we lose huge amounts of money from
tax avoidance.
So obviously, if you look at it in terms of the statistics and you would say if someone
were to earn this much money and they were to pay all their tax, they would pay a high
rate of tax.
But we know that we lose tons of money.
It's quite hard.
If you are a full blown UK citizen, tax avoidance is quite hard.
I have to say you could, you can be a fraudster.
If that's what we're talking about, you can be a crook.
I mean, it seems to happen.
I don't think it is.
It's quite easy to-
We've recently had one member of the cabinet have to resign because of it.
I mean-
You'd have to tell me exactly what they did.
I don't know what he did.
He was international.
That was international.
If you're talking about-
If you've got international, if you are a foreigner, much more complicated-
It's easy to set up a shell company in the Cayman Islands or whatever.
No, it's not.
No, it's bollocks.
There's actually-
It's laws against that.
Movement of assets abroad.
It's really difficult to do.
But you can create trusts and then-
You can't anymore.
You could take the only-
To obscure beneficial ownership and all that sort of stuff.
No, you can't.
The only trust you can do is every seven years, you can put 325,000 pounds into a trust for
your kids.
And that trust, you know, that's it these days.
It is really hard in this country to avoid tax.
Whether the rate is high enough, but 50% seems to be about the point internationally that
people start saying, fuck this for a game of soldiers.
So there seems to be a sort of limit.
And once you start going above that, people think, well, I won't, it will demotivate me.
I don't mind losing half.
But if you have international-
Okay.
So if you are a foreigner and you've entered the UK, if you've got, if you are able to move
and live between different countries, completely different kettle of fish.
But if I'm sitting somewhere opposite someone, it doesn't matter if they got a hundred million,
if they live all of their life in here, they're fucked.
They're going to pay full tax.
I am very annoyed that I don't have the statistics off the top of my head right now.
I should have looked up before.
I think the last time I checked, it was something like 27 billion a year lost in
avoidance and evasion.
But don't quote me on that.
I think that was from Richard Murphy, who's written a very good book about tax avoidance.
But you know, avoidance is not illegal.
Well, exactly.
That's the point I was making about-
No, but avoidance is just arranging your affairs in a right way.
And there aren't that many ways around it.
I sit in front of people every day who are like, what can I do?
There must be something.
And I'm like, not much.
I mean, you could do this and that might lower that.
But we should be arranging the tax system in such a way that it's quite
difficult to do that.
Because, you know, we're losing that amount of money.
I'm sorry, we have.
It's now a league.
It's now basically, even though-
That sounds like quite a lot of money.
It's basically made, avoidance was legal and it was about arranging your-
Yeah, it sounds, but avoidance is you might become a partner soon.
Yeah.
A full partner.
And therefore, someone could argue that you're going to get a lower tax rate because
you can offset more of your expenses or something.
You know, avoidance is, there are a whole set of rules.
They are incredibly complicated.
There are a million pages of tax law.
We have probably the most complicated and some of the most aggressive tax law in the world.
It's incredibly well thought out.
And actually, we could probably simplify it quite a lot and bring in-
We can't come in a world where we say avoidance is illegal.
Evasion is illegal.
Well, I mean, we know that, but we can rearrange the tax system such that avoidance
doesn't happen as much or doesn't happen in such an inefficient way.
Yeah.
I mean, I struggle.
If you're a full UK person, there are so few ways you can hide.
I mean, there are really few ways.
Dividend.
So you could pay 38.1% rather than 45% if you arrange your stuff through a company,
but it has all these other impacts that mean your tax goes up.
So I, you know, I just, the reason I stand up for this argument is because I think there
was a narrative around avoidance that these people are all bad people.
But avoidance is literally getting tax advice, which you should get.
And that's a very big industry.
Like, you know, as you know, because it's worth it.
Yeah.
But even how you're putting that is cynical.
You're putting it in a way of, oh, it's wrong to get tax advice.
Fucking go.
I'm not saying it's wrong to get tax advice.
No, but after you're saying it, it's got this taste of like, oh, it's wrong.
I'm not saying I would never, I find it so boring when people speak about big political
issues in terms of like individual responsibility, because ultimately, you know, we know that people
will make the system work for them.
The question is, how do we design the system?
So that in trying to make the system work for them, we actually make it work for more people.
Yeah, it's never going to work for everyone.
But we need a system that works for more of the population as a whole.
You know, and this may be a difference.
You're right between, let's say, a middle class person with, you know, a million pound
home and a good job and a billionaire.
And I think we often forget, as you say, the difference between a millionaire and a billionaire.
A great stat that I like to tell people is, it would take you 12 days to count the numbers
to a million.
To count the numbers to a billion would take you 32 years.
Wow.
That's the difference of the scale between a million and a billion.
That's a good metric.
And, you know, there are a lot of people with astonishing amounts of money, money that should
be taxed, who are, you know, avoiding tax in Panama and the Cayman Islands.
A lot of actually, a lot of places that are British overseas territories or crown dependencies
or whatever.
Oh yeah, we're definitely, we definitely have a pass to play, but you've got to understand
those rules.
Those all, every time you see that it's because there was an ability to do it historically.
I mean, look, you definitely, it's definitely too complicated tax.
I mean, on enforcement, I, you know, the revenue are just like on it.
I mean, they're writing letters to people left, right, and center.
They use psychologists, they, they bully, they, I mean, it's crazy what the sum of the
It is interesting because I know what you mean, like in the sense that it's quite easy to go
after someone who, I don't know, has a, like got a small business and maybe is arranging their
You could have a lot of money here.
It's, it's hard to go after you.
If you don't have people who, who we actually want to go after, it is, it seems like they're
either less aggressive or they just don't know, or maybe these guys are so lawyered up that it
just becomes so difficult for to even engage with HMRC.
Well, but, but, but we're back to your point that democracy is a bit fucked right now and people
like China are laughing at us and rightly so because they've got a hundred, 200 year plan
and they're off on it. And I mean, at least the Japanese have a longer term plan.
I think they seem to run their society in a much sort of longer term.
And, but you know, ultimately we're sitting here with our like three year plan,
wondering why we don't even have a three year plan.
I mean, well, we've got a year plan at the moment, the current electoral cycle,
then we've got a two year plan.
Was yours, was your proposal go back to the 16th century and the divine right of kings?
Well, you know, it's back to the thing that the benevolent dictator might be,
you know, it's like I was reading about Chairman Mao.
I've never really read it because, but I got, no, no, I'm not advocating him.
I mean, the guy killed millions and millions of people,
but it's fascinating reading the legacy.
I was reading Stalin the other day and you know, that's what I like about him.
Wait, wait, wait, wait, let me make my point.
Because it's come from the Rested History podcast,
because they started talking about the culture of an amazing podcast.
Yeah.
Anyway, so I read the Wikipedia and I'm like, I can't get my head around this guy.
And you go to the legacy of Chairman Mao and it's incredibly divided,
but he was amazing for women.
He, he raised the light, he did all these incredible things for their society,
but he did all these awful things.
But have you heard their podcast on the Cultural Revolution?
That's the one, that's the one I just listened to.
Yeah.
It's scary.
But no, I mean, you're right.
Like when you have this form of basically centralized planning that they had in the USSR,
in China to an extent and other places, there were a lot of achievements around,
you know, housing and women's rights.
Well, I'd say currently China is advancing in an impressive rate.
Yeah, exactly.
But there were also big drawbacks.
A lot of people had to die to make it work.
And also it's kind of unfeasible really, I think, to suggest moving back to that level
of centralization and bureaucratization in the kind of complex modern society that we live in today.
Like, I really think that the ideas that we have around democracy, which is that it's slow,
nothing gets done, it gets taken over by vested interests.
I think that they're wrong and they're outdated, because there are ways that you can organize
a society to make it more democratic that don't all just hinge on electoral politics.
It's things like, you know, worker engagement in the organizations in which they work for.
It's things like, you know, community engagement.
There's a lot of really interesting stuff going on at the moment, like just local council level.
Explain that a bit more.
What do you think would help?
What I think, one thing that I really think everyone should look into at the moment is
something called the Preston model.
And this is based on the idea of community wealth building.
And this would have actually been a really interesting way to respond to some of these
questions around, you know, places that have been in a vertical and was left behind.
The idea is that there are anchor institutions in an area like the council, the NHS, universities,
that they can't move.
They have a certain procurement budget.
And the way that they spend that budget can either make or break that community.
They can outsource everything to capita and all the money gets sucked out and goes to
shareholders in London.
Or they can say, we're going to procure these services from a cooperative or from a local
business and, you know, use that collective power and that spatial planning, basically,
that these organizations have to try and boost the community.
They did this in Preston.
It was an amazing success.
The Labour Council there, who's run by Matthew Brown, he's written a book about it, has just,
you know, come on heaps and bounds from this very deprived area to actually really,
you know, maintaining a lot of value in the community.
They're thinking about doing things like, again, setting up their own cooperatives, setting up local
development banks, that sort of thing.
And they're engaging people in that process the whole way through.
And as a result, they've done really well in elections.
They've got really high approval ratings.
Like this is something, you know, really simple.
It sounds good.
And I mean, I wonder who the leaders were in Preston.
They clearly weren't the Slough Council.
But, you know, you know, that's the thing.
Local makes sense, again, as long as you've got good people running the business.
What do you think is bullshit in business or in your industry and why?
So I think in general, my answer to this question, this might be controversial.
There's this whole idea of kind of like stakeholder capitalism, right?
Which is that shareholder capitalism is very short term, which is true.
You know, we had the shareholder value revolution and it all becomes about maximizing
shareholder value over the very short term.
And profits distributed are a good measure of the value that's created by a company.
So we need to move to this idea of stakeholder capitalism, which is basically where the shareholders
of a business get to act in the interests of all of the stakeholders that are affected
by that business.
And the idea is that this is supposed to be kind of voluntary.
So the stakeholders, the shareholders are supposed to say, well, we have a broad interest in society
working.
So we're going to sacrifice some of our short term profits in order to make, you know,
the world better over the long term.
For no, for no.
Exactly.
And the most, you know, the maddest version of this is I've heard is that the big asset management
companies, so like BlackRock, for example, which owns stakes in all of the biggest companies,
will start suddenly realizing that because they own stakes in all of the economy,
that it's in their interests that climate change doesn't get too bad and the economic growth is
good and that there isn't too much inequality.
So they're going to start pressuring, you know, these companies to, you know,
be better on the climate or pay their employees more or whatever.
This is something that people have actively theorized and suggested will happen.
And of course, that is not what's happened.
You know, Larry Fink is the head of BlackRock says, oh, we're going to do lots of stuff on
climate breakdown.
But then whenever a vote comes up on these issues, if it impacts short term profitability,
they're not going to do that.
And, you know, they have a fiduciary responsibility to their people who are invested in that company.
So this is not going to work on that basis.
It's not going to work because the incentives don't align.
I like the idea of companies being more responsible.
I just don't think it's going to happen from this voluntary shift that suddenly everyone realizes,
oh, actually, we don't care about profits that much.
So I think that's a bit of bullshit that people like to peddle.
It's a really curious one.
I think you have to sort of separate big, big, big, big business.
I mean, we've joked before, but, you know, there's always this line about, oh, you know,
everyone does it for the shareholders.
Most companies I know couldn't give two fucks about their shareholders.
They don't even, you know, they're like, you know, whatever, you know,
They are shareholders.
Do they have a duty to make profits?
Like, look, I'm trying to make money here.
I want my salary to continue.
You know, I'm hoping to get a dividend one day, but the stakeholder thing is coming.
But it's this hugely complicated mechanism that needs accountants and auditors and everyone.
And regulation, I would argue.
It's coming.
The audit regulation is coming.
But yeah, it would take a while.
I do think people are thinking more like stakeholders.
And again, you think of every company I deal with in London.
It's like, you know, it's rare that I meet, I meet one now who doesn't give a crap if they
can give a crap.
Yeah.
But I mean, this is the thing, isn't it?
It's struggling, which a lot of them are, and giving a crap is difficult.
Just as much as for an individual as a business.
I think this is really interesting, actually, because kind of this whole idea of stakeholder
capitalism tends to come alongside greater market concentration.
If you are a big market dominating monopoly or oligopoly, you can afford to be like,
oh, well, you know, we'll give a bit here.
We'll, you know, do something nice there.
We'll invest in this particular scheme or whatever.
Whereas if you're in a very competitive industry where, you know, costs are tight and margins
are tight, then it's going to be much more difficult for you.
So actually, it's not necessarily a good thing that we have this, at least really now quite
high in some sectors levels of market concentration that give some firms the flexibility to be able
to say, I'm going to do X or Y or Z.
It's part of our problem is what you really want them to do with these big, you know,
like the companies you don't have the money, like all the energy companies going,
well, this is rather good, you know?
And so we get annoyed about that.
So you're like, well, taxable.
Well, the problem is, is people don't really respect that taxation is being used that well,
you know?
So companies would say, well, we'll invest the money, we'll do better.
But they haven't.
You would love to say to them, give them the ethical problem of saying,
we're going to put a 20% charitable tax on you and it's going to go to these charities.
Because much harder for them to sit as shareholders and say, well, I just think it's outrageous,
you know?
But then you get into what are the charities doing?
Well, let me just give it to the NHS.
Well, I like your, well, maybe, but I like your community idea that maybe a company could
have a responsibility to its community and say, okay, you're super rich.
You've got offices in these three counties, each you're going to have to now make a donation to
that county of 20% of your profits.
And they can't get upset about it.
And then all these great things happen in their community.
But with that mechanism, those sorts of mechanisms, they are very socialist, I guess.
They're very light coming in.
No, but I'm, I'm into that shit.
I think a lot of people would be into that shit.
It's how, it's how you do it.
And then it's got to be proportional fair.
And that's the problem because then you get down to the mathematics.
But you, it would seem, you could just say, you know, yeah, if you've made mega profits
and all you do is really get oil out the ground, then it's, you know, it's, it's a, it's a rentier industry.
Well, not fuck you, not fuck you.
Well done you.
And we're going to give some of it to charity.
Okay.
You know, that's what we're going to do, you know, and, and don't get upset about it, please.
You know.
Okay.
So Grace, this is, this is the five second rule.
Okay.
Where we're going to, we're going to chop it to three seconds, given we.
We're going to ask you a list of questions to get to know you a little better.
And you've got three seconds, five seconds.
Okay.
To answer each question.
Okay.
Deque the music.
What was your first job?
Waitress in a pub.
I was paid £4.25 an hour.
What was your worst job?
I worked at the Build-A-Bear workshop.
And I had to dress up in as a bear and go outside and greet the kids.
You kind of need a mirror to enjoy that all day.
Yeah.
Otherwise you're in a sweaty bear seat.
It was really hot.
Yeah.
If you could look how funny you were.
My brother was the killer whale at Windsor Safari Pub.
And he used to squeeze the children really tight with his flippers because he was so hot and angry.
Oh my gosh.
Favourite subject at school?
History.
Special skill?
Oh God.
I don't know.
Guitar singing.
Like that.
I do do that.
Yeah.
I suppose.
That's the thing.
What did you want to be when you grew up?
Initially a pop star.
Then a politician.
I have changed entirely.
I am.
I am.
They're basically the same thing.
That's fantastic.
It's fantastic.
What did your parents want you to be when you grew up?
Just happy.
I think.
Everyone says this.
I know.
But my parents really meant it.
They were like.
My mum was always like.
My mother.
Because she was the first person in her family goes to university.
Went to Cambridge.
And her dad really wanted her to be the first female prime minister.
And she was like.
I lived with the weight of that my whole life.
I just want you to be happy.
I have no expectations for you.
So.
What was your go-to karaoke song?
Oh God.
What is.
Oh.
Oh.
Oasis.
Champagne Supernova.
Oh.
Yeah.
Okay.
Which one was the course of that one?
That's.
That's.
Um.
Um.
Champagne.
You were fine.
Yeah.
Exactly.
I thought beneath her.
Something around there.
Oh.
Look at that.
He's got a nice little singing voice.
Fuck off.
Office Dogs.
Where is he?
Where is he?
He's down there.
I don't work in an office.
But I mean.
It sounds like.
That would be a nice thing to have in an office.
I always hated working in an office.
I mean.
It was not really for me.
I was a bit too much of a free spirit.
But.
If you're going to be in an office.
Have something to lighten the mood.
Definitely.
Sometimes they're good.
Sometimes they're a pain in the ass.
I can imagine.
Yeah.
Sorry.
He's just down here.
Being very good as usual.
As sometimes.
Have you ever been fired?
Surprisingly.
No.
I really feel like.
I've been expelled from school.
Several times.
Really?
You were expelled?
You were expelled.
Yeah.
Quite a lot.
I identify with when you were talking about how British people are rebellious.
I personally think that for the reason that I'm rebellious.
That's why I'm left wing.
But that's a story for another day.
No, no.
We need to know about expulsion.
I've only been suspended.
What's your vice?
Oh, God.
Probably surfing.
That's so cool.
That's very cool.
That's very cool.
You go down to Cornwall then.
Total Cornwall.
Yeah.
Well, I've been doing this now for a long time on my holidays.
And it's expensive and time consuming.
And just a whole life consuming.
I hear we have good surf in the UK, though.
Actually, it's cold, but we have good surf.
Yeah, yeah.
No, definitely.
It just depends when it comes in.
And you have to watch out for the sewage.
Oh, my God.
Yeah.
That whole thing's been a nightmare to watch.
Yeah.
Don't go out at night if you're in an Indian hotel.
That's all I'm going to say.
The happy one.
I mean, everyone says it, but I just have to bring up my...
Which is thanks to my dad.
His point is that happiness is a transient emotion.
Yeah, I agree.
And so his was like, don't you want to progress?
He says, at times, you're going to feel sad.
At times, you're going to feel happy.
Sometimes you're frustrated, sexy, whatever the fuck.
But you want to progress.
So surely, you know, everyone, everyone, almost everyone says,
my parents wanted to be too happy.
And I wonder if that's really true,
or whether they just wanted you to build a good life, you know?
Well, maybe it's, I want you to be content.
Because you can be content.
Content's a better word, better word.
I think it might be a generational thing, to be honest.
Because like my parents' generation,
which would have been like on the cusp of Gen X and...
What would it have been?
The cusp of boomers and Gen X would have been raised by...
What, 1965, something?
Yeah, 59, they were both born in.
Yeah.
So I think they absorbed all this stuff from their parents,
which were like, you have to be successful.
You have to, you know, as I said,
my granddad was this communist who was still like,
you as my daughter, you've gone to Cambridge,
you're going to be the first, you know, female prime minister.
And it made them really unhappy because they were constantly pushing,
you know, through the 80s, through this time
where it was all about individualism and entrepreneurship to be successful.
The 80s were hell.
Yeah. And then they realised,
oh, actually, you know, I have all this stuff and I'm not happy.
And I think they then said to us,
don't just make your whole life about, you know, achieving and success
and all that sort of stuff.
Like think about what you actually want to do.
So when I said, right, I'm taking this bit of a break from my career
to go travelling for eight months at the age of 29.
My mum was like, great.
I'm so supportive.
I've come back and I'm like,
I'm going to have to stay with you for a while because I spent all of my money.
She's like, I don't care. I'm so proud of you.
It's great that you've done that.
You know, you don't want to be stuck in 10 years' time
in a job that you don't like, whatever.
I think that's kind of what it means, really.
It's about chasing what makes you, what makes you content
rather than just success.
I wish my dad said that.
I tried to move home for three months when I was doing my house up.
And he was like, I don't, I don't really want you here.
I mean, I love you terribly.
I was so shocked.
I was like, what?
All right.
Yeah.
But you know, I might end up saying that to my son one day.
And then expulsion.
What did you get expelled from?
I was expelled twice.
I was asked to leave one school.
This was an all girls school.
I went to in years seven and eight.
And that was because I had seven and eight is like 12, 13.
Yeah.
I climbed on the roof and started smoking.
Um, so that was what I got suspended for.
Yeah.
Just cigarettes at that time.
And then they were like, you're disruptive.
So I later find out I have ADHD.
So I was very disruptive all the time, but I was quite smart.
So I'd finish all my work and then distract everyone else.
Eventually they were like,
you have to leave because you're a nightmare.
Went to then boarding school for three years.
I got suspended three times.
So I actually only got expelled twice.
If you count that suspended three times at that school
for various different infractions.
Then they said, you've got to leave,
but you can sit your GCSEs.
And I was like, right.
Well, this is a great excuse to have a big blowout party,
brought in loads of booze, like messed everything up.
And then they were like, right.
Okay.
You're out properly now.
Did still get to sit my GCSEs.
I just wasn't allowed back on the school premises.
And then I went to sixth form college for two years
and I was only suspended once.
So I eventually got my...
None of these things you're doing are particularly crazy.
No, they're not.
This was all private school.
Yeah, boarding school.
I went to boarding school.
Did you board board?
No, I didn't do like...
You might say which one it was.
It was Lord Wandsworth.
So this was like, not in London.
It was, you know, way out in the countryside.
All right, let's go, let's go back to the start.
Yeah.
Let's, let's, let's wind the clock back.
Right.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Very good.
I have to say wind the clock back.
I was going to, not going to use it,
but you get upset when I don't say it.
No, no, it's fine.
You know what?
And people have that...
Anyway, how did you end up doing what you're doing?
So...
I'm not even sure what you are doing.
Yeah.
I probably tell you what I do.
Yeah.
So I am, I'm an author.
That's my main source of income.
And what I spend most of my time doing is writing books.
So I've written two books already.
I've got a new book coming out next year,
which I've kind of just finished writing.
It's being edited and copy edited and all that sort of stuff.
So I do that.
I write books about capitalism, basically.
I also do a lot of kind of media appearances.
So, you know, I'll go on Question Time and Politics Live
and all that sort of stuff.
And top podcasts.
Yeah.
And top podcasts, of course, talk about the day's affairs
and that sort of more like directly political stuff.
And yeah, so I'm kind of, you know,
mixed between writing and media.
Your last book was How the Pandemic Will Change Capitalism.
Yeah, that was just a short one I wrote during the pandemic.
What are you working on right now?
So this one is called,
we actually came up with the title really late
because there were big disagreements on what the title should be.
Anyway, it's called Me and My Publisher
because they've bought the book.
So they basically get to tell me what it's going to be called.
I was like, I want it to be this.
And they were like, no, that's boring.
No one's going to pick it up.
We want it sexy and whatever.
So it's going to be called Vulture Capitalism,
which is, you know...
And it's going to have a naked woman on the cover.
Yeah, it might do.
It's attacking already.
That would be incredibly anti-feminist.
It should be a naked man on the cover.
If somebody's going to pick it up.
Yeah, yeah, true.
Anyway, we've really lost the plot,
but we have some top tips of printing ideas there for your book.
Great, thank you.
We're going down the route of how did you end up...
Oh, how did I end up doing what I was doing?
So I started, did my degree at Oxford,
did politics, philosophy and economics,
along with all of the kind of worst people in our political system.
Exactly.
And then I started working for a think tank.
I was an intern at a think tank for a bit,
and that was actually doing stuff around local economics and local politics.
Then I went to work for KPMG, actually, for less than a year,
doing consulting for their government and healthcare practice,
which I was not particularly good at.
I'm not...
Again, you know, ADHD, not very good in big organisations.
I'm more...
Big picture, it's too detailed.
Exactly, exactly.
I'm on the same page.
Yeah, yeah, yeah.
So didn't do that for very long.
I then went to work for IPR, which was a think tank.
I really enjoyed working there, actually.
I stayed there for three years, I think, doing lots of reports.
And that's where I started doing media.
It's where I started doing interviews and like doing more journalistic writing.
Eventually got the offer to write a book, took some time off,
wrote the book, the book did well, started doing lots more media.
Right, right.
And, you know, things just took off.
Are you dyslexic as an ADHD commonly?
I'm actually not, no.
Although the attention to detail thing is like when I write,
I like do skip out words and whatever.
Luckily, I have copy editors now who helped me with that.
But yeah, so, you know, things just basically took off.
And it was during the kind of, you know,
2017 to 2019 period where socialism was suddenly fun again.
So lots of people wanted my opinion.
Suddenly fun again.
Yeah.
Have you got a long-term goal?
A long-term goal.
I mean, look, my long-term goal, I like to think about what I do really,
as trying to change the way that people think about capitalism
and trying to change the way that people think about the economy.
So for me, the goal is get the ideas that I'm trying to push out in as many hands as possible.
And at the moment that looks like writing books, but it also looks like longer term,
you know, potentially taking that onto different forms of media,
like trying to get young people particularly engaged with some of these ideas.
And yeah, you know, just kind of expanding my reach really.
What's the most misunderstood thing about what you do?
I think people underestimate how hard it is to write a book
and overestimate how hard it is to go on TV.
We all think we could write a book if we just had enough.
It's very challenging to write a good book.
What's the hardest thing about writing a book?
Keeping everything together in your head.
Wow.
So it's, you know, you can write an article.
You need a whiteboard, I guess.
Yeah, exactly.
You can write an article, then everyone thinks, oh, if I can write an article,
I can write 10 articles where I can write a book.
But actually having like the argument and the structure
and being able to keep those ideas together in your head,
coming back to them all the time in every section,
every paragraph to making sure you're really driving home that key point.
It's hard.
I always found like writing a dissertation,
I kind of thought, I've got this great argument and it's going to be really good.
And it falls to pieces.
And then it sort of falls to it.
Exactly.
It falls to pieces and there's nothing really there when you get right into it.
And when you push yourself, it's so true.
Actually, there's only a few times I've heard authors who,
I think it's Agatha Christie was one of the people who could do it,
that she didn't know what the end of the story was.
And she'd sit down and she'd write.
And three days later, she'd, or a week later, she'd finish a book.
That's why her books are shit.
Are they shit?
I've never read one.
But I mean, you know.
I mean, characterisation is not really non-existent in them.
Yeah, yeah.
And also they're just stories, aren't they?
Yeah, it's different.
And I sit down to tell my kid a story at night and sometimes I get really into it.
And then, as you say, I forget where I am and all the details.
Now I just have to finish it.
And then the farmer just said, oh, I can't be doing this anymore.
I don't think they're asleep by then anyway.
What are you most excited about?
What am I most excited about?
For your career?
God, I suppose I'm pretty excited about my next book coming out.
Yeah.
I mean, like the process of writing a book is a nightmare.
Having it come out is really fun.
Because for about a year, you're doing events everywhere.
You know, I've got book deals in dozens of countries.
You're the test of the town.
Yeah.
So you're going all around the world.
You're meeting loads of people, talking about ideas, doing interviews.
You're just talking about this thing that you've created.
After a while, it gets a bit boring.
But initially, it's really fun.
That's better than music.
I find by the time you release an album, then you hate all the songs.
You're just so bored with it.
And then people are like, oh, I really like that album.
You're like, yeah, whatever.
And I guess if you were a big artist, you might then tour and talk about your album.
But in a way, you don't talk about your album that much.
You just go play music sort of thing.
I quite like the idea.
No, I don't.
So by the end of a book, you're not sick of it.
You're glad it's over.
And you're quite happy to chat about it.
You may be.
I think I would say it's about a year after the book's actually come out.
You're sick of it by then.
Maybe six months, depending on how much you like it.
I'm not sick of this book yet.
And I've nearly finished it.
Maybe I will be by the time it comes out.
But no, I'm still really excited about it, actually.
What's your biggest fuck up?
So probably actually, and this comes down to the big picture versus detail thing.
In my first book, I had a couple of little, you know, like factual errors and like stuff
that was wrong and that wasn't double checked.
And because I was, you know, this, I didn't have a lot of resources behind the book, but
I was growing on social media.
So a lot of people were looking really hard at what I was doing.
This is how to save the world from finalization.
Yeah, yeah.
They like took me apart online for, you know, like some-
On page 63.
They literally, literally that.
I have noticed that you've missed, you know.
Yeah.
So that was quite annoying.
Luckily, you know, they all came out very quickly and we managed to do a reprint within
a few months that had all the errors corrected.
So it wasn't too much of a big deal, but it was like, you know, awkward and embarrassing.
It's horrible to be wrong, isn't it?
Yeah, but you know what?
It's a good lesson because you're always going to be wrong about something.
It's always hard though, when it's your own, like your own creation.
Yeah.
I thought you, I guess it was the start of your career.
So you don't get to just hand it to someone to do the really, really boring.
No, yeah.
I was like 24, 23 when I started writing that.
You've checked all of this, yeah?
Yeah, yeah, yeah.
No, exactly.
Yeah.
I'm surprised there wasn't more wrong with it, to be honest.
What's your passion outside of work?
Again, the same as my vice, surfing.
Surfing, weed.
She's secretly saying- It's such a cool thing to be passionate about.
I'm really bad at it.
Like, let's just, let's just, you know, get that clip.
I think everyone is on there, isn't that like the deal?
It's really hard.
But I love it.
It's great.
Whenever anybody says surfing to me, I immediately think of-
Sharks, that's what I think of.
No, I think of that film with Point Break.
Point Break.
I love that film.
It's so fun.
It's quite inspiring, I feel for you.
That's what I think about.
But my problem is, because I watched Joy, I can't do the paddling with my legs dangling with
my head above the water.
I don't care what country I'm in, even England, my legs are going to disappear.
Something's going to come for you.
There's going to be a little tug from the net.
Oh, see, I have to get out of the water so I could never surf.
And also, you're a huge attraction.
You know, if you're in the right part of the world, great whites love those seal looking things.
California, Australia, South Africa, you're in a bit of danger.
Oh my God.
I haven't surfed in any of those places, but.
There's a guy who studies sharks.
He gets a surfboard and he puts a hole in it and he puts a camera in the thing looking downwards
and he reels it out on a massive fishing line.
And this is in South Africa.
And these little guys study.
So you get this footage of great whites hitting this thing.
Wow.
So it's dark.
It's like a really good camera, but it's dark.
And then you just see this thing.
Oh my gosh.
You see this thing and it comes so fast.
Yeah.
And the mouth and you're like.
Because they think it's a seal.
Oh my God.
I am never swimming in that water.
You know, ever.
Anyway.
That's scary.
Yeah.
Oh, God.
Prime evil.
Well, it's my go.
Uh, what's the worst advice you've ever been given?
What's the worst advice I've ever been?
Oh God.
Yeah.
So when I was at school, everyone used to say, oh, you're really good at arguing.
So you should become a lawyer.
I would have been a terrible lawyer because again, the attention to detail thing.
And actually a lot of lawyers don't, you know, I don't actually argue.
Yeah.
I don't do a lot of arguing.
Yeah, exactly.
You're, especially now when you're doing solicitoring and barristering and it's, you know.
And you know, what I do, because I'm a corporate lawyer.
So even when I'm like, if I'm selling or buying a company for somebody, everybody wants to get
to the same place.
They all want slightly different things because they want to buy it for as cheaply as possible.
And these people want to sell it for as much as possible.
So you're mediating.
You're not like.
But you're all actually trying to do the same thing.
Yeah.
So it's not really, there's nothing really to argue about.
Yeah.
I mean, so that was not a very good piece of advice for me.
What's the best piece of advice you've ever been given?
The best piece of advice I've ever been given.
I think the one that I come back to most when I'm trying to make a decision is just,
my mum always used to say to me, just trust your gut.
And I think that's like, just the most important thing.
You know, in any decision making process, because you can write lists and analyze any problem for
God knows how long.
But if you're actually in touch with what you want, and you really kind of, you know,
can ground yourself in that like intuition, I think that's the most important thing.
Difficult because like, I personally, my gut is very much attached to my sense of fear.
Yeah.
I know what you mean.
You have to be able to like disaggregate those.
That's almost an anxiety you're saying.
No, but I'm just saying, you know, sometimes somebody will ask me to do something.
And my gut will say, Oh, no, don't do that.
You'll look like an idiot.
And that is not really my gut.
What advice would you give your younger self?
What advice would I give my younger self?
I think, get a hobby.
I would have liked it if I'd started doing the surfing earlier, because to be honest,
You did music, that was your hobby.
But I wasn't, I worked so hard.
I was just obsessed from about the age of 22 to, I think like 28.
I was just like, I need to, I didn't listen to my parents advice when they were like,
just be happy.
I was like, no, I need to succeed.
I need to prove myself.
I need to prove everyone wrong.
I'm going to listen to all the things that everyone's saying about me.
And I'm going to take them to heart.
And I'm going to, you know, I'll show these people what an expelled person can do.
Exactly.
And it's good because I achieved a lot, but I've gotten to this point in my life now.
And I'm like, I just, I didn't focus on my relationships.
I didn't focus on myself.
I didn't have anything else going on.
It was just work, work, work, work, work, right, right, right.
Go on the media, put myself in such stressful situations all the time.
I feel like I was constantly on edge for a lot of that time.
And it wasn't good for me.
And it just made me like, you know, a shell of a person really.
When I think about when it was the worst.
It feels like you're having a midlife crisis.
I am 100% having a midlife crisis.
I am 100% having a midlife crisis.
And I could imagine, this is the chat.
I can almost imagine it out on the waves, on the surface, aren't you?
And the lads saying, you know, I just, I just, I just work too much.
And they were like, yeah, man.
Yeah, man.
You were right.
I've had a midlife crisis.
People work too much.
It's like the only California in Britain I always think is Cornwall.
Because when you do get down to Cornwall, it has that vibe.
Yeah.
And chill out, man.
Just like enjoy for a bit.
Recommendations on what to read, what to watch, what to listen to.
I mean, obviously, my own books.
Absolutely.
You can get them on, in all good bookstores, there's an audio book,
which I read myself, hilariously.
The next one's coming out next year, obviously.
Are you doing it in a hilarious manner?
Or are you just saying?
No, just like, it's funny to listen to myself, read it.
That must have been so much fun to do.
It was bizarre.
It's actually so difficult to just sit there and read something.
It isn't got ADHD.
Yeah.
You just trip over your words all the time and you go too fast.
You go to, oh, it's just a nightmare.
But anyway, it's there.
It's available.
But no.
Okay.
So other stuff, my, a friend of mine, we're talking about,
we've talked about climate change.
Michaela Loach has just released this great book called
It's Not That Radical about climate breakdown.
And she's this amazing activist who has done loads of work on,
you know, campaigning and all this sort of stuff in the UK.
And she's, she's got this book out, which I think everyone should read.
And it's really, you know, simple and easy to connect with.
Podcast.
Podcast.
Oh yeah.
Everyone should check out.
If you want a kind of easy to listen to summary of, you know,
socialist stuff going on in the UK, Novara media is great.
They do a lot of kind of podcasts and audio and visual content and stuff.
And they get loads of interesting guests on and whatever.
So that's kind of like socialism what I want.
Obviously also I write for Tribune magazine.
And so Tribune in the UK definitely check us out.
This is like Tribune was like an old magazine that was for the socialists back in,
you know, the 1930s and kind of, you know, stopped really being released for a while.
And it was then bought up again recently.
And we kind of relaunched it and grew it.
And it's now, you know, got this kind of community around it and is about news from the labor movement,
news from the left opinion, like all this sort of stuff.
So definitely worth checking that out.
And if you want to subscribing.
Yeah.
I find the bipartisan thing just, I think it's almost,
we talk about the structural problems of democracy or economics, but I don't think we talk about,
you know, this basic problem that, of having red or blue or left or right or anything, you know,
the reason I'm.
The fact that labor is red.
Well, I mean, I want to be in the middle because, you know, I think we all need to be a bit like,
if you start any conversation from the point of view is I hate rich, I'm just going to be crass,
but I hate rich people, or I hate poor people, or I think this, or I think that, you know,
we'll never solve this world because we need to be humans.
We need to basically, we, you know, climate change, I hope brings us eventually all together.
Because I think eventually it will.
People will die and die and die until we all sit down at the fucking table and say,
right, let's sort this shit out.
You know, I know red or red, left or right shit.
You know, I don't think either side would describe themselves in that way.
No, but I just think, I just think, don't take a side.
The best way you get to the middle is by having people articulate opinions on the
opposite end of the spectrum.
It's hitting each other for a six on either side.
Otherwise, you get this kind of faux centrism, right, which is what, you know,
people like Keir Starmer say they're going to do.
It's like, oh, I'm just going to go and design this policy based on what a couple of people
in the focus group told me.
No, but can't we just take one question at a time and stop worrying about whether it's
left or right and try and come up with the right answer, and you would end up with something
that isn't necessarily...
By the way, do you know where the whole idea of left and right comes from?
Yes.
Oh, yeah, that's a...
Go on, tell us.
Uh, well, I think it's from the, um, well, not really parliament, but the assembly in...
Oh, hang on, I guess I said yes.
I do, yeah, this is right, it's the French Revolution.
Yeah, the French Revolution.
And the various different factions in the French Revolution...
Revolution?
Yes.
Yeah.
...stood on different sides of the chamber.
The chamber, yeah.
Oh, and this is the...
So it's all the French.
It's all the thought of the French, again.
So you've got 30 seconds to pitch, anything you'd like?
Follow me on Twitter, at Grace Blakely.
Blakely has two E's.
Follow me on Instagram, same thing.
And yeah, look out for news about my book, Vulture Capitalism, which is coming out next year.
So there you have it.
That was this week's episode of Business Without Bullshit.
Thank you, everyone.
Thank you, Dee.
Thank you, Romeo, Pippa.
God, wonderful guest Grace.
Then it's ciao.
