Welcome everybody to what I regard as a very important event, especially as a lot of people,
my brother and scientific friends included, don't seem to know what transhumanism means or what it
is. And so there's quite a lot of public education to do. So I'm just going to give a short introduction.
Some of you, I think, will have been in Science of Consciousness in Barcelona. I know Harold was
there and the Festival of Consciousness which followed on from it, which was really quite
an event and sort of wall to wall if you were up for that. So I just want to say something
about the Galileo Commission, Galileo Report. The Commission was set up around 2018,
or just slightly before, and that's the date when Harold published the first Galileo Commission
Report. And our metaphor, as you will be aware, is that we need to look through the telescope at
evidence and issues, otherwise we won't have the full picture and we won't therefore have an accurate
view of reality. And so the the Galileo telescope is very much the metaphor that we're using. And if
you haven't read the original Galileo Report, there are a number of different versions of it. There's
the full report, there is a summary report, then there's a so-called layman's report, and a summary of
the argument in 14 languages. So you can have a look at that if you're unfamiliar. We do have a summary of
the argument in this report as well. And so this one is a supplement to the Galileo Commission Report,
but in fact it's not really a supplement. It's like a full report on its own, because it's just about
the same length, if not slightly longer than the original Galileo Report. And I think that's an
indication of its importance. And where I see the connection between the two, and obviously Harold
is the author of both of them, is this really the dominance of the mechanistic paradigm, the mechanistic
metaphor within science and to a lesser extent within philosophy and psychology. And what we're
talking about here is a further extension of the mechanistic metaphor. And we're finding this with a
lot of what's going on with AI as well. And we have a very distinguished panel with us this afternoon.
Harold Wallach is speaking from Basel. And then we have Ian McGilchrist from Sky. And he tells us that
he's had to pull a blind, amazingly, because there's so much light coming into his from the sun. And then we
have Anne Baring from Hampshire. And then finally we have Greg Braden, who's speaking from his studio in New
Mexico. And here is his new book, which I reviewed and I had a conversation with Greg about this. If you
haven't seen the last issue, then it's in there. And those of you who haven't signed up for either the
Galileo Commission mailing list or the Scientific and Medical Network mailing list, do think of doing so,
what's going on in the future because we have a very rich series of events. And I think the fundamental
question that we're dealing with here is what is a human being? And I discussed this in my own
introduction. I think there are two very broad answers to this. One is that we are a spiritual
being having a human experience. In other words, there is a transcendent spiritual component to the human
being. And the other is that we're a biological machines, algorithms, data points, hackable animals.
In other words, we need to be upgraded, enhanced, and in a form that enables us to be manipulated and
controlled and kept in order by the authorities. And so that's the rather dystopian view, which you'll
already find as a technocratic system is prevalent in China. So if you want to know where the elite
people like in the WEF World Economic Forum want to take us, it's in that direction. And we think this
is, or I think this is fundamentally flawed as a view of the human being. And Harold will say a lot more
about this. And so we really have two different corresponding trajectories, evolutionary trajectories.
One is towards a spiritual renaissance, a renewal of culture. And the other is towards a sort of
technocratic control system and a form of authoritarianism, digital totalitarianism. And this
is just marching on at the moment. There is a very strong impulse towards this, sponsored by
some very powerful people. And I think that one of the things we're dealing with here more
generally is the rise of authoritarianism. And authoritarianism is also applied to knowledge and
information. And this is achieved through what Manuel Castells, in his communication power, called
narrative control. That you make sure that everybody, the general public, is reading only one view,
and anything else has to be censored and taken care of, inverted commerce. And I just want to
reassert that science itself proceeds by questioning, but not by consensus, by imposing a sort of
scientific authority, but by questioning. And I also want to say that the contents of the report
are to the views of Harold Wallach. And if there's something you find very controversial, well, it's
his views, and doesn't necessarily reflect those of the network. And on that note, I will pass over to
Harold, who's going to speak for about 40 minutes, then we're going to have 10 minutes of comment and
input from our panelists. And then we'll open up for questions. So I hope we'll have plenty of time for that.
Thank you very much, David, for the introduction. And good afternoon to all who are present here.
I'm going to give a presentation, which I'm just currently, I'm going into it. As David said,
I have written the first Galileo report, which is dealing with
transhumanism. And I have been tasked to do another report on transhumanism,
which will be available in a written form, first in English, and later on, I guess we will also
publish a German one. I'm not going to go through the report point by point, but I'm picking out a few
very important issues. So let me start off with showing you that report where I will be mainly
focusing on medical transhumanism. There are many aspects of transhumanism, but my main competence
lies in medicine and medical interventions. And so I'm focusing on that.
But I'm also presenting data on the diffusion of transhumanist ideas in society, because I've done a
representative survey in German and in Germany with a nine item scale, which I have developed.
And that is the first point I'm going to start off with. Now, transhumanism is the idea that we humans,
as the pinnacle of evolution, evolution can now steer the direction of the evolution directly.
And as David said, it comes from the idea that we are just algorithms. And because nature has
blundered, as many transhumanists believe, we have to correct her where she got it wrong, using gene
therapeutic methods, using technical gadgets like brain computer interfaces or other implants,
which is clearly steering towards an internet of body and things. I'm not going into that in that
presentation, but I've written about it. And with a final goal of defying death. Out
comes should be a superhuman or transhuman cyborg, a cybernetic organism, which combines human and
technical aspects. I start with my data. How widespread are these beliefs? Is transhumanism
irrelevant, maybe? And just the idea of a few crazy guys? Well, we'll see. So this is the transhumanism
scale, which I'm going to present first to you. It is measuring transhumanist beliefs. I've derived the
items from the literature. And I've given it to 1051 people from a German online panel, which is
approaching representativity, as you can see here in those data. The scale is reasonably reliable,
I think. And we have just submitted it for publication. And these are the items. So nine items.
It's just right that the limitations of the human body are expanded by technical
inventions such as interfaces to computers. It is just right that the limitations of the human
body are expanded by genetic technology. I'm convinced that in the near future, medical science
together with digitization will move death into the far distance. If there were a direct brain
computer interface of our brain, I would have inserted it in order to have direct access to the internet.
The mRNA COVID vaccinations have demonstrated that it is possible to insert foreign genes into the
body to the benefit of humanities. We will merge in the near future with computers and artificial
intelligence into a cyborg and superhuman. Digitization will help us to transcend our boundaries.
God is dead. We are God ourselves. The progress of science will bring us mainly blessings.
Now, reading through those items, you may yourself give an estimate how many people would
ascend to those. I'll show you the data. I'll show you the items one by one. And I have highlighted
the accent category plus one and the other ones you can see. So minus one means I do not agree. Zero means
I don't know. And one means I agree. So the first item, limitations of the human body expanded through
technical inventions, 41% agree. Expanded by genetic technology, 33% agree.
Digitization and medical progress will move death into the far distance, 32% agree.
Digitization and medical progress, 32% agree. Brain computer interfaces. If there were a brain computer
interface, 24% would have it inserted. So nearly a quarter of the population finds that a very good idea.
The mRNA COVID vaccines have been showed that gene technology can be used positively, 37%.
We will unite ourselves to become cyborgs, 22% say yes.
Digitization will help us to transcend our boundaries. That is clear for 47%. God is dead. We are God ourselves
and we are God. We are God. We are God. We are God. We are God. We are God. We are God.
And this is the final one. The progress of science will be mainly beneficial, 35%.
So what you see here is that about 20% to 47% of the population is actually answering
this scale or the different items positively. And this, I remind you,
is a quasi-representative German sample. It's not really representative because for that you would need
an interview sample. And that's very expensive and beyond my budget, but it is approaching
representativity. So we can see that the transhumanist mindset has actually penetrated widely into the
popular culture. And therefore, I think a critical discourse is in place. So I'm going to show in that
report what transhumanism is. And I will also hint to where it might lead us to. And we all should
engage in a critical discourse. Do we really want this? So here comes a short primer for those who
don't know what transhumanism is. Here I have listed many sources of transhumanism and they may not be all,
but one important source is up here, the evolutionary theory. Genetics and eugenics, the idea that humans
have to be genetically improved. Then the philosophical background is given by Nietzsche and his idea of
Übermensch. Many transhumanists refer to him, although philosophical critics like Michael Hauskeller
actually show that transhumanists haven't even understood Nietzsche. There is another important
source, medicine, anti-aging and genetic engineering. And there is also some semi-benign bridge there,
which is biohacking, improving humans by introducing supplements and stuff like that. For instance, Ray
Kurzweil, one of the important inspirations of transhumanism, confesses himself to taking about 60
or so pills each day to improve his medical wellbeing. Now, the red ones, computer science,
militarization, robotics, cybernetic organisms, cyborgs, is another important source together with
nanotechnology and scientific progress in general. Actually, the psychological idea comes from Maslow.
I'm not going into that, but I'm mentioning it in my report. The idea of improving, developing the
fully functioning person and transhumanism is going beyond that. Now, the precondition of all that,
I think, is Lyotard, who announced the postmodern condition in 1979, saying that we are at the end of
the big salvation narratives of Christianity and the Abrahamic religions. And that has opened up the
relativism of postmodernism. Because if there is no truth, and if there is no serious and strong
foundation, there is also a vacuum of belief systems. And in that vacuum, new ideas, new religions will be
streaming in. And transhumanism is just one such a new religion. Now, the important point is, we all have
a need for a religion or a Weltanschauung. We cannot not have a religion. It's impossible to not have a
religion or a Weltanschauung. This man here is Robin Collingwood, who wrote a very important book, 1940.
He's an Oxford philosopher, and the book is called Essay on Metaphysics. And there he really convincingly
showed that we always have to make presuppositions, which he calls absolute presuppositions. I've dealt with
that in my first Galileo report, that's why I'm not saying much here, but maybe so much. These absolute
presuppositions, they come from the cultural background, they are rarely conscious, and they
are very seldomly discussed. So they infuse our culture and our thinking, and give us the background
Weltanschauung of what we are doing. And transhumanism is just such a thing. But it's more than a Weltanschauung,
it's a kind of religion, which I'm going to show you in a few more minutes.
It is a religion, as transhumanists themselves say. This is a quote from Aubrey de Grey,
who you can see here on the right side. He is one of transhumanism's front man for abolishing aging,
and he writes, science is the industrialized world's new religion. And I think he speaks for most of the
people in that movement. This is clearly a scientistic belief system, the belief in the
pervasive explanatory power of the natural sciences. And that means whatever is important can be addressed
by means of natural science, and whatever cannot be so addressed is not important. And whatever problem
we cannot solve yet will be solvable by the future progress of science in the future. Now the point is,
this is religious hope straight and clear. Only it's not hope that comes through belief in any god or
transcendent entity. It's hope in the progress of science. I've written out here for you the old medieval
definition of hope. I made a misprint here. This is just expectatio. It means hope is a certain
expectation of future glory. That's what you see all the time in transhumanist discourse,
expectation of future glory. We can't do it now, but we will be able to do it in the future.
Here come two slides where I juxtapose transhumanism and religion in the form of Christianity because
it's the religion I know best. So we both have in both areas, we have the idea that humans are in need
of improvement. In the case of Christianity, it's salvation and deliverance because man is not perfect.
And this salvation comes from faith, faith in Christ, faith in God. And in the in the transhumanist
situation, salvation comes from the belief in the power of science. Christianity finds
that this salvation has its expression by a spiritual perfection through prayer, contemplation, ethical
ways of living in action. While for transhumanists, the methods of science like gene editing, gene therapy,
nanotechnology and so forth will achieve that. Now in transhumanism, we are God now, as you saw in my
survey, 20% believe that. And in religion, God, God is the Lord of history that comes from Jewish religion.
In Christianity, deliverance, deliverance comes from leading one's life along those ethical codes,
improving through the help of divine grace. Transhumanists don't need that because they have
medical technical inventions that will solve the problems. In both cases, there is fulfillment in
the future. But in Christianity, it is within the transcendent realm. And in transhumanism,
it is the future on earth. And you can follow that up. And there you can see that in Christianity,
there is a transcendent essence in humans, as David said at the beginning, a soul, a spiritual essence,
while in transhumanism, mind and consciousness are just biologic biological algorithmic processes
that can be and should be modeled and replaced by computer technology, because that is much more
powerful in a few years than our brain. That's what transhumanists believe. Now in Christianity,
we have an idealistic or dualistic ontology, meaning mind, consciousness has its separate role.
Whereas in transhumanism, mind is just derived from material interaction of neurons. In Christianity,
death is the final fulfillment, while in transhumanism, it is the ultimate tragedy.
So man should improve himself in both lines, but in one way through ethical guidelines,
internally and in transhumanism by technology externally. Now, an important point is values and ethics.
In transhumanism, people believe that these values and morals, they are either genetically fixed,
they come from our evolution, such as altruism or so, or they are derived from social conventions.
And therefore, they can be changed to our liking. In any religion, values are always anchored in a
transcendent transcendental realm. It's a little bit like the internal fabric of the world.
Mathematics is the internal fabric of matter. Therefore, physics is so powerful.
We have nothing in comparison within the inner realm of experience. But my guess, my hunch is that ethics
or values are actually in a similar way, the fabric of the world, but from within one, one might say.
The big question is now how trustworthy is such a religion?
What would be our reason for embracing it? And should it receive public support in form of funding?
Let me be clear. Everybody should be free to embrace his or her own religion.
It can even be the religion of the spaghetti monster. That's a private issue.
But as soon as people say, well, this is scientifically proven and public must fund it and we need funding
from public money, things are changing. And as soon as a religion starts to proselytize and go out and
say everybody must believe that, it is changing. And this is exactly the point where we are. And that is
why we need the discussion. So we should ask ourselves, is science actually a good foundation
for a religion? I don't think it is, because science is iconoclastic, means it always destroys
pictures that have been handed over to us from the past, even of its own certainties. The man here,
you can see is Thomas Kuhn, who is very famous for having developed the idea of paradigms actually
coming from Collingwood. And there he showed that science moves in disparate chunks, as it were.
New paradigms replace old ones. And scientific progress happens when old certainties and beliefs
are wiped out or modified by novel findings.
They are sometimes in support of what we already know, and sometimes they are not.
Sometimes they are really destructive. I show you two examples.
There is one idea that has been consensus for many years in the beginning of the 19th century,
and that is the myth of the scientific basis for the idea of the superiority of the white race.
And eugenics, meaning the idea of improving the genetic
performance of humans through selection. That came from America and was mainstream scientific consensus.
Everybody said that is science. Science shows us that, blah, blah, blah.
And it was a basis for all kinds of eugenic proposals already in America. And Hitler actually approved
the American eugenic movement and made it the basis for his own proposals and atrocities.
And today we don't call it scientific consensus. We call it racism.
There's another example. For many years, people thought cholesterol is very bad for you. It makes
you sick. It gives you heart, heart, myocardial infarction and heart disease. That was actually seeded.
That campaign was actually seeded by the sugar industry, as a couple of historians have shown
a couple of years ago. And this is a very interesting read for you, if you don't believe me.
And in 2020 came out the definitive meta-analysis by a French team,
who showed with 5 million of human observation years that egg consumption does actually not confer
any risk of cardiovascular disease on people. You see here all the studies. This is the meta-analysis
output. And at the end, at the very bottom, you see the common estimator is a risk ratio or relative
risk of 0.98. So there is no point whatsoever that eggs or cholesterol in that case coming from eggs is
bad for you. We believe that for more than 20 years. The first time cover comes from 1986.
I believe. And the second one comes from 1999.
The lesson is science can be very disruptive of previous certainties, and it is not a basis for
security. It's not a tower that is built into the steady heights of salvation, but more like a
patchwork of insight. And only of those insights where we are putting our torchlight on, our searchlight.
And we may not be seeing everything. We are just seeing this. We are seeing that.
And it is being continuously updated, corrected, supporting, sometimes supporting previous ideas,
sometimes contradicting them. And therefore, science cannot, by default and definition,
serve as a certain basis for current or future faith. It can serve for some very useful purposes,
but it's not good as a religion. So a scientific religion is actually self-contradictory,
but only helped by people who do not understand the nature of science.
So my claim would be all these people who say science can be a religion, blah, blah, blah.
They have not understood what science actually is.
So I will go into some examples of medical transhumanism, and I'm leaving out quite a few other ones,
which are dealt with in the report itself. Now, this is Aubrey de Grey, I've already mentioned him,
who is a computer scientist turned anti-aging researcher. The human enhancement movement
believes in the improvement of the human being through gene technology, AI, computer technology,
pharmacology, and the goal certainly is immortality and abolishing death. That is what Aubrey de Grey
has been going on about with what he calls strategies for engineering negligible senescence. So to make humans
live longer and longer and longer until death can be postponed, through regrowing of organs,
understanding aging and changing it. What I've observed is that there is a very general bias in
transhumanist discourse, namely believing in the benefits of medical or scientific achievements
and neglecting potential dangers or side effects. And I'm showing you a few examples now. The most
prominent example is Prozac antidepressants. Antidepressants have been developed in
the group where Prozac belongs to our selective serotonin reuptake inhibitor. They were developed
on the idea that depression is just a brain problem where serotonin is missing. So we fill in
serotonin by stopping reuptake of serotonin into the neurons and off goes depression. This theory is
flawed. We know that and we have known that for a long time. And it has just been debunked by Joanna
Moncrief and her group two years ago in a very, very extensive umbrella review where she looked at all
the basic paradigms that try to show that serotonin is the basis of depression. It is not, right? But by a huge
myth-making advertising like this one in America, mainly, but also in other countries, there has been
installed a myth. So people believe that and that myth is very powerful. So if you give antidepressants
to people who are depressed, they improve based on that myth. So they have very high effect sizes,
pre to post, but it's based on a very large placebo effect. If you compare against placebo,
the effect sizes are extremely small, just a third of a standard deviation, far away from
the half standard deviation that NICE, the British regulator, actually demands for antidepressants.
And they have very severe side effects, among which are actually suicide, which is supposed to prevent.
And it has been long known by the industry that antidepressants for youth and children
increase suicide risk. And it was hidden from the public for about 20 years. Now we know it,
and it's on the inserts of the medications, but it is not very known in public perception.
You lose sexual interest, you get obese, and most of all, you get addicted. This has also been
a challenge by the industry, but there is certain proof now. And I've referenced that in my report.
So here is a little question for you. The three most important reasons for premature mortality in the
West are myocardial infarction, cancer, and what is the third? A little quiz. It is medical interventions,
mostly death. That comes from Peter Goethe's book, Deadly Medicine.
And I've shown you here a little cartoon by the German cartoonist Glück.
The second example is the COVID-19 vaccination campaign. I would call it a transhumanist field
experiment in trying out gene therapeutic prevention on a very large scale, among others. There's
certainly other aspects as well, but I want to highlight this one here. Because these modified
RNA and vector RNA vaccinations, they operate with gene technology that force human cells to express
foreign genes, spike protein of the virus. And this is how it works. It goes into the cell,
it goes into the ribosome, and the ribosome is forced to express the amino acids that in the end
form the spike protein, which is expressed. Sounds like a clever idea, but it's actually gene
gene therapy. And had you asked five years ago, people in the public, would you like gene therapy?
They would have cried out because in Germany, they were lining up in front of shops and saying,
we don't want any gene technology in our tomatoes and in our corn. Now they have it in themselves.
I call it a transhumanist field experiment because gene therapy is actually the precondition for the
transhumanist agenda. And here it was tried out. Whether it was tried out by intention or just by
way of the paradigm, the ideology spreading around is irrelevant. I think this is what happened.
The benefits are largely overstated. I'm just quoting here one example, a study by the group of Peter Doshi,
who has looked at the Canadian regulatory data and found that the likelihood to have a serious
adverse event from the vaccination is higher than the risk of being hospitalized with severe COVID-19.
We looked at the mathematical models of Watson and his group that claim that there have been millions,
millions of lives saved. And these models are simply flawed. We published that, but we were not able to
publish it in any of those good journals, but a year later only. But nevertheless, these models, they are simply flawed.
Just a while ago, a very large bibliography has been published on Senedo, the preprint server of
the CERN in Geneva. It lists all the papers, and I've just listed them here, that report vaccination
side effects. There are quite a lot, as you can see here. And these are all peer-reviewed studies.
What I find interesting is this here. 80 studies document the toxicity of the nanoparticles
that are the container of the spike vaccines, because they are highly inflammatory. They were not
allowed for human use, and they are now being used for that. 140 studies show that the imprinting of
that original Wuhan strain leads to an immunological shift that actually creates more problems than it
solves. And some studies also show that there was a mutation pressure on the virus that has been
introduced by the vaccination campaign, and quite a few other ones. So let's focus on gene therapy.
This is, in the view of transhumanists, a necessary requirement for upgrading humans. That is
how it's sometimes called genetically, either by somatic gene therapy, meaning flooding all the cells of
the body with the new genes, or stem cells, which is a little bit more elegant, or the germline editing
after in vitro fertilization. So a true transhumanist actually would have children only by artificial means,
because only then can you actually edit the germline so that all other cells will have the same genetic
imprint. And the ideas of genetic upgrading in transhumanistic authors is actually very, very
simplistic. I'm not a specialist in genetics, I'm a generalist, understanding a little bit about biology.
But even me with my very, very limited understanding can see that the knowledge that these authors
actually show is predicated on a pre 1990s textbook knowledge, where only those genes matter, and only
these building blocks. So if you can read the book of life, the story goes, you can also change it. Now,
it's not quite as easy as that, because the reality is much more complex. Only one to two percent of the
DNA code, depending on which author you are reading, codes actually for proteins. The rest, we do not really
know what it's doing. And then there is the big question of the epigenome, which is everything that is kind of
in enveloping or
growing around the genome, which is unraveled in its complexity only now.
It's so changing genes will never be sufficient.
Then, in addition, every cell, not only our human body, every cell has an immune system of its own,
and it will try to expel or silence foreign genes. That is why, for instance, genetically modified tomatoes
have to be modified every now and then, because you can't regrow them into being the same thing,
because the genes are simply switched off. This is an old picture, as you can see, 2010 of the epigenome.
And it gives you a little bit of an idea what is happening there. This is the chromosome, where we have
inside nucleosomes, which are kind of put together like this. And if you unravel it, you can see
that these nucleosomes, where the DNA is threaded through, as it were, has kind of little antennas
or something, something like protein filaments that can be where you can attach methyl groups or
acetyl groups. And depending on what is being attached, methylation will switch the gene off,
acetylation will switch it on. And it's not only a switch on and switch off process, it's also a gradual
process. And then you have those micro RNAs that are only gradually being understood, and they seem
to be also controlling expression of genes. And then you can actually imagine that these genes are
more adjacent or closer together, and so they talk to each other and control each other. All this is
nicely summed up in these books here, which I've consulted, and I'm sure I've missed a lot of
the other ideas of epigenetics. But only this little bit shows you that changing genes will never ever
be what it is thought to be to make better humans or better expression of genes.
This epigenome controls and modifies gene expression temporarily. If we eat some food for a while,
maybe a couple of months, if we go vegetarian for half a year, or if we go vegan for a year,
it may change expression of genes for a lifetime or even for several generations. People don't even know.
And depending on interactions with the environment, like behavior, nutrition, toxicological
factors in the environment, genes will be switched on, switched off, will become active or will be
repressed. And this is a highly dynamic interplay, which is only gradually being understood in its
general architecture. So it expresses and self-regulates our organism. And our organism is a self-regulated
system that you cannot just simply meddle with, like with a car's engine where you replace a carburetor
or you replace another entity, because every replacement, every change will have a very complex
reaction that you cannot predict. So we are not machines, but we are highly active, self-controlled,
and self-regulated systems. And such systems, they always respond to every intervention with a highly
complex self-initiated regulatory activity, meaning as soon as you try to change something, the system
will change it back or will react in a complex way. Finally, I would like to spend a few words on the
project of a project of abolishing death. That has been analyzed by Harari in his book Hormodeus, and I think
correctly. And here is an example. So this is cryonics by Alcor, which is a foundation operative since 53
years. They say you can preserve life by cryopreservation. So the body is being frozen, or the liquids are being
exchanged, and that will cause the dying process. And if you die of a disease today that may be curable in 50 years,
then you might be put back to life again, and your disease can be cured. Mind you, nobody ever has been
revived out of that cryogenic state, but people hope that will happen, which is the religious category of
hope. This is something I looked at a couple of years ago. Today, there are probably 200 people more,
1480 members. And here you see the board of Alcor. Martin Rothblatt, for instance, is a trans,
a transsexual activist of the transsexual movement. I'm not going into that in my presentation,
but I've written about it in the report. And she's also a potent founder of the whole transhumanist and
the transsexual movement. So they say it's surprisingly cheap.
Imagine you subscribe today at age 60, you'd be paying $1200 per year,
and at age 80, you'd have paid about $24,000 a year, quite cheap for being able to maybe
gain eternal life at some point. But the question is, how reasonable is that project? The question
is not, is it possible? But perhaps it's even possible in the future, who knows? But is it
reasonable? Is it honest and consistent? And can one rationally argue for it? And I would say no.
Well, Disney was actually one who has himself cryo-preserved, I believe. Reason number one is
the concept is really neo-colonialist and not sustainable. It's very expensive. I've did a
little calculation for you. So if you'd be preserving 1 billion of people, you'd have to spend more than
the military budget of the US and Russia per year. And this is a typically colonialist project because
only rich people can actually afford that. And it will, by necessity, mean that everybody else will
either have to be stopped procreating, or there would have to be a depopulation program. It emphasizes
the present at the expense of future generations. Now, if you imagine that there is a population growth
and the current generation becomes immortal, and new generations also want to participate,
you'd have a very, very steep population growth curve. So you can only stop that by prohibiting
procreation, or you depopulate.
The concept is also self-contradictory. Because if old generations live at the expense of younger
generations, they prevent innovation, because innovation normally comes from the younger.
I also have some clever ideas sometimes, being 68, but the ideas I'm presenting are actually ideas
which I had many years ago. Innovation is dependent on old ideas perishing and new ideas arising. Americans
say sometimes science progresses funeral by funeral, kind of, using Planck's dictum. Nick Maxwell, the
British philosopher who died a couple of months ago, said in one of the last video
course I was part of, he said, it's good that I die. 85% of my ideas are nonsense, and it's good that
these die, so that new ideas can come up.
Death and finality allow for values. That is very paradoxical, but it's true. If we do not die,
we do not have to decide. And if we don't decide, nothing will be valuable to us.
Because we are forced to decide partners, places to live, friends to spend time with, things we are
doing, they have become valuable to us. So death is not the final ill to be defeated, it's the final
helper actually. This picture of Erasmus of Rotterdam, which hangs here in our Barthel
picture collection, was painted by Hans Holbein. And it is precisely valuable because there are only
two copies. And this picture is actually about this size, which you can see, and it was painted
extremely meticulously with a fine, fine Martin brush. And that is what makes this picture so incredibly
valuable. Because it's finite, because there is only two copies of that.
There is only one thing in biology that is eternal, and that is cancer cells.
Philosophical criticism is gradually picking up. Here you see three of them. Roland Benedict and my
colleague who started many years ago criticizing transhumanism, but mostly in German.
Susan Levine, who has just written a very interesting book, and Michael Hauskeller, who teaches in
Liverpool, I believe, a very interesting book, where he actually shows that transhumanism is a
postmodern mythology.
In our tradition, we have the counterposition that David mentioned. There is a human core.
You can call it consciousness, you can call it soul, you can call it a spark of the soul, or mind, or
Geist in German. That guarantees human dignity and which is beyond material control. It's an expression
of our spiritual nature, and some say body is the temple of God. So the basic construction of the human
body is actually good and should not be meddled with. Some people have tried to define it like
Fukuyama on the basis of our genetic makeup. I'm not sure that works if we go back down the road of
materialism to define the specificity of human values. So I think we need actually a spiritual
idea if we want to uphold human dignity. So I'm at the end of my presentation here so we can discuss a
little bit. I showed you that transhumanism is a scientific worldview that is actually already quite
common in the population. It would be interesting to see how it is in Britain, how it is in certain
segments of the society, like the scientists with religious people, etc. But I don't have the data.
It is a materialistic technocratic movement with religious emphasis. If you read those texts,
you are reminded of proselytizing religious teachers. It is an implicit ideology that operates very
surreptitiously. So it's not outspoken and therefore it's never discussed. But many people who are in
powerful positions, I would think, or economically powerful, they hold such beliefs. And hardly anybody
seems to be aware. And therefore, we should encourage discourse. We should discuss whether we want that.
And if we don't want that, we should do something about it. I have found it a little
cooperative, publishing cooperative, where the German language version of my report will be published and
you can write me an email if you want to have the presentation or any of those papers I mention
in my report. And that would be the end of my talk, David. I'm grateful for your attention. And
now we can go into discussion. Harold, thank you very much indeed. That's a very concise
overview of the report. And I was going to mention that you will be able to download,
those of you who are listening, you will be able to download the report from the last mailing that went
out this morning and then it will be up on the Galileo Commission site. And then we're making
arrangements for it to be made available in hard copy and through Lulu. But that would take a month or
so to get that cranked up. But we'll let you know when it's available in hard copy, because I know a lot of
you, including me, much prefer to read paper rather than screens. So I'm going to hand over to Ian now and for
some observations, then Anne and then Greg, and then we'll open up.
Yes, well, thank you, David. And thank you very much, Harold. I think you know that I have high
regard for the work you've put into this, and I'm very grateful for it. I'm just going to make a few
rather general, more philosophical points. Because I have a perhaps a slightly more impassioned view. You may do a very
good job of holding back your, your passion. And probably I should too. But I do think that it is probably one of the most,
it's one of the most important issues, if not the most important issue that we now face.
Why would anyone want to be a machine? And surely what we want to do is to be more fully human. Are we
really fulfilling human potential? I feel that when I look back over the ages, I see us fulfilling less
of our potential than our ancestors. We can't just become something else. A hippo can't become a
butterfly. What does it mean to be a human? And that's what we need to be asking ourselves. What is
it that we are doing here? What are we? What is this world that we find ourselves in? And there are
a number of points here that are very hard to measure and therefore get left out of all the left
hemispheric calculations, but are of almost unlimited significance. One is the meaning of life. And we know
that the sense of a meaning in life is profoundly important for the value, the sense of fulfillment
that a human being has. I have my own views about why we can't find that anymore. And partly it's
because science has told us that it hasn't found any purpose or meaning or values in the universe. But
that's all very well. But it starts out from the perfectly unimpeachable premises that it's not going
to look for anything like that. It's going to leave those out of the accounts. And that's fine for
certain purposes. But what it's not entitled to do at the end of the day is say we didn't find any.
Unfortunately, the humanities have jumped on the bandwagon. And in the last 50 years have
relentlessly attacked the idea of truth. And that I think leaves us absolutely without any bearings.
And I understand why young people today should feel they're confused. They don't know what to think or
what to do or why they should carry on with living at all. There's a very high suicide rate amongst young
people now much higher than before. And you didn't mention that Harold in your presentation, but it is
a very striking cause of death in the young that wasn't as pronounced in the past.
And fulfillment is something we partly feel through adversity. Adversity is not purely negative.
Indeed, negation, if I can put it that way, is not purely negative in the modern sense. In fact, by denying,
by resisting, by negating, by defining, we actually cause things to come into being. This is something
that's very well known in the East, but not so well known in our very single-minded, very simplistically
organized, mechanistically orientated world view. The nature of suffering and death are intrinsic to
the meaning of life. Interestingly, I often talk about the things that we know we have great evidence
for that make life seem or give it or fulfill it in its meaningfulness. And Viktor Frankl, who, after all,
through the experience of himself and seeing his family destroyed in the concentration camps, had
a good deal to digest on this topic, thought that one of the three most important
things that gave meaning to life was suffering. And I often say, you know, a computer, an AI system,
cannot suffer, and it cannot know that it's going to die. And I welcome very much, Harold,
your comments on how the knowledge that we're going to die make our choices urgent and give meaning to how
we dispose our time if we thought that there wasn't many another reason for doing so.
When I mentioned science and its baleful effect, I'm not saying that science itself is at fault, of course.
I very much admire the achievements of science and I've been, I hope, able to contribute to that myself.
But it's not science that's at fault, it's scientism, a very foolish belief, which is not borne out by any
evidence that science should have no limits and can answer all our questions. Indeed, one of the ways
of thinking of science is that approach to life which is never fully right and is perpetually mistaken.
That sounds rather negative, but the fact is that science should always be correcting itself and
the history of science is one of progress, in which things it used to believe it no longer does believe.
Science is a servant, it's not our master, and it can't dictate the values whereby we lead our lives.
Of course, alleviation of suffering is always brought forward as a reason for
ever greater involvement of technology in human wellbeing and I'm a doctor.
I believe in alleviation, but there is an enormous difference between even the most mechanical
interventions in the human body, such as a new heart valve,
and the idea of putting in some chip that will alter our conscious mentation or the sort of
elements that you were talking about, Harold, that will alter gene expression. I mean, this is
a step change of gigantic proportions with unseen consequences. Anyone who is honest doesn't know where
this might lead. And so it's not a matter of science, it's a matter of foolish ignorance and blind optimism,
which are not signs of high intelligence or insight, and an overwhelming desire to vindicate
our belief that we should be immortal and are divine through technology. Technology is quite separate from science.
The changes that it will bring about are also irreversible changes. And once, as it were,
we are perhaps all infected with nanoparticles which change the way we operate, this cannot be simply
reversed. And if somebody has a chip implanted in them, we don't know what it would do to them to
take that chip out again, particularly in a world in which everything depended on having that ability
to interface using some strange alien part of one's body that would be part of a totalitarian system.
It's just one of the many things that could be done to cruelly destroy somebody in a society where
everything, unfortunately, and to the destruction of the great values of truth and beauty and goodness
and love depended on a vast mechanical interface. And even if its power for good were enormous, and
I take a lot of convincing that this were likely taking everything into account, its power for harm is
unlimited and of the most terrible kind. The most unimaginably horrible things are immediately
made possible once you have totalitarian control, compared with which what the Nazis were able to
bring to bear. It seems like something very primitive.
Destroying is always easier than creating something good, and its capacity to be used to destroy will
be inevitably exploited. Indeed, I think that this whole movement is profoundly evil. I think it's based
on a rejection of nature, a rejection of truth, a rejection of beauty, a rejection of human dignity.
And I think that under no circumstances should we be publicly funding this research. In fact,
we should be doing everything in our power to inhibit it.
Another thing about it is that it wants to make us capable of doing more things, but surely the problem
is that we're doing all kinds of things that we shouldn't be doing. And we now have power to do more
of them. We have more power, but not wisdom. And having extreme power without wisdom is a recipe for every
kind of evil and every kind of suffering.
Wisdom would inevitably involve stopping doing many of the things we already can and do, as again, Eastern
philosophers would not be surprised to hear. Destroying the network of human social and emotional
connections, which the advances of this thinking would inevitably do, and are indeed already doing,
have the most devastating effects on who we are. Because we are spiritual beings, we are social
beings, we are emotionally alive, we are not just computing. And it would remove, apart from anything
else, the urge to do anything. Why would we do it if it could be carried out by a machine or a machine in
us would carry it out. The urge to excel, the urge to help others would be expunged, because it wouldn't
really be us doing any of it, it would simply be a mechanism that was greater than us outside of us
and was working through us. This alienates us from nature and increases the hubris whereby we're tempted
to think of ourselves as God. It also assumes, by the way, an already obscenely heavy use of resources
just to create current AI that can only increase. It assumes it will always work, which is a
phenomenally stupid assumption. I mean, how could one ever assume that? At the moment, the technology we have,
95% of the time doesn't actually work. One finds one's time taken up by trying to get around the
difficulties created by situations that used to be managed by humans now being managed by machines.
It doesn't save time, and it's very often deeply wrong. And that's affecting the way in which we live
on a daily level. There may be very sophisticated technologies that can work relatively reliably and
maybe that promisory thing that in the future they'll be more reliable. But the more advanced
they get, the more mistakes they're capable of making, and the more profound those mistakes will be.
So in conclusion, I thought of a myth I hadn't thought of, which is that of a mechanism that longs to be a
person. Pinocchio. And I thought of my seeing the Disney film of Pinocchio, which I think is very good
as a child. And I remember his visit to Toyland, in which he was seduced to go to this place where
nobody worked anymore, and everybody was just playing with toys. Now, I won't weigh heavily on it, I will
leave it as a self-explanatory image of where we are now. We're seduced by the little glittering toys,
by the image that we will need to do nothing, we will live forever. What a miserable, pathetic way of
thinking of what a human being is. And it did warn us, it did after all, its first great creation was a web.
easy.
And it is a
yep, here.
àn calidad
Lösung
Especially, yes.
Ian phenomenal.
And impassioned.
I love it.
Thank you so much.
And, through this just a peace a
quote from Albert Schweitzer, which which I love, is our task is to become more finely and deeply human.
performance
Absolutely.
you certain it isn't just to enjoy ourselves which well goethe said he'd only had four weeks
of pure happiness in his whole life in his life yes or even three i think yes yes okay well let's
let's go on to ann and then we'll move on to greg so ann uh you need to unmute
yeah i was saying that first of all i'd like to thank harold very much for making
transhumanism so clear because i hadn't really fully understood it before although i put a
chapter on it in my book so thank you harold and thank you also ian for your wonderful
um diatribe really i think i would call it and for saying that transhumanism is evil because i
absolutely agree with you it goes against everything that great civilizations have taught
and that have been understood by the greatest philosophers the greatest thinkers the greatest
artists and creators it simply is in bed just terrible and i think i was thinking i'd written
something out but then afterwards i thought well where is this thing arisen from why is the psyche
giving rise to it speaking as a union and i think it's come out of human despair out of the disillusionment
with religious teachings that have not given humanity the answers to four great questions
those questions are who are we where do we come from what is our purpose on this planet
and where do we go when we die now the gnostics knew the answers to those four questions but the
modern world does not know the answers and transhumanism certainly doesn't know them and i don't
think the religions really have gone into what it is that humans want to know which would give life
more meaning and deeper meaning to to everything really and if if life has no meaning the compensation
to that is a desire for power and this is what i think transhumanism has fallen into because it's a
huge ego inflation in union language it's an inflation of the ego compensating for this sense of despair
and disillusionment which has been going on for about 200 years i should think or even 300 since the
the um scientific revolution of the 17th century so you we have to ask the psychic if if transhumanism
was my patient i would say what is it that's giving you this deep sense of the need for power
over everything and then i would listen to whatever the patient said so there is an orphic
saying i can't help putting this in from 2500 years ago which goes i am a child of earth and starry
heaven but my race is of heaven alone now the orphics knew that 2500 years ago why don't we know
why have we forgotten that we belong to two dimensions the earthly one and the transcendent
one if you like but the transcendent one isn't necessarily far away it is integrated into the
dimension that we're living in but that's another question altogether and the essenes which is there's
a chapter in my book on them the scenes knew that we are children of the light they called themselves
children of the light the light of the divine ground and they knew that jesus was a great teacher
not a son of god but a great teacher showing them the way back to the light and we're lacking teachers
now although we've had plenty in the past and we've got ian today thank goodness and uh
uh ian take a bow there because you're very important what you're saying so we have no
knowledge we haven't got the essene knowledge we haven't got the um orphic knowledge and there's so
much knowledge in the past that if the um transhumanists were really well educated they would know more
about it but they're not well educated because they focus only on this one thing which would give
them control and power first of all over nature which they want to improve and secondly over the
human body which they again want to improve and that again is inflated hugely inflated because the
immune system is the most miraculous thing we have and our dna again is the most miraculous thing
we've had for 200 000 years as greg has shown so beautifully in his book pure human
um we are tampering with something that is sacred and we've lost all sense of the sacred and that is
because i think we've got disillusioned with religion going through this phase we're living now through
the time of the death of god which is marked by social unrest confusion conflict and fear and this
is how a union analyst defined this interlude the breakdown of a central myth is like the shattering of
of a vessel containing a precious essence meaning is lost and in its place primitive and atavistic
contents are reactivated differentiated values disappear and are replaced by the elemental motivations
of power and pleasure or else the individual is exposed to emptiness and despair so the outworn image
of the sacred has been dying so that a new image of the sacred and a new story can emerge into
human consciousness and this is something that the um transhumanists are completely ignorant of
and this is taking place as we move into a new astrological age alchemy gives us a wonderful image
of killing the old king and the old king personifies an outworn image of spirit and an outworn paradigm of
reality one that is cut off from metaphysical reality cut off from relationship with invisible transcendent
world and that's what the position that we're in now we the above has been disconnected from the below
and we're living in the below without any awareness that there is an above
it's ridiculous really when you come to think of it both my recent books have addressed the reasons
why we have become so indoctrinated by scientific materialism that we now see ourselves as masters of the
planet no longer serving any authority beyond our power to control nature and our bodies both of which
are treated as mechanisms that can be manipulated and altered according to our will this is hubris
that is off the scale i say that again it's hubris that's off the scale and we need to be aware of that
a little over over two and a half thousand years and referring now to the book i've just published
in hebrew culture nature became separated from spirit because the goddess who represented divine
wisdom and the holy spirit as well as nature was deleted from the godhead and from this point on nature
began to lose her sacredness there were no longer temples to the goddess no longer priestesses serving a
goddess woman's voice was silenced and the older religions were replaced by the three patriarchal
religions with their emphasis on war and conquest christianity inherited its image of god from hebrew
culture together with his creation myth during the christian era nature matter and the body was split
off from spirit the body was not regarded as the sacred temple of the soul with saint augustine the sexual
act became the transmitter of original sin a happy idea of his that was not really challenged because it
became part of church law christianity projected divinity onto one man naming him as the only son of god
whose sacrificial death offered us salvation it did not really recognized and did not dwell on the fact
that we carry a spark of divinity that dwells within each of us with the fading of christianity this long
historical process has led ultimately to the beliefs of scientific materialism and this maintains that
we're the chance product of a lifeless mechanistic universe that is without consciousness intelligence
meaning or purpose and that were the only conscious beings in this lifeless universe which seems an incredible
conclusion to draw with the arrival of descartes and scientific materialism the body like the universe
came to be regarded as a mechanism something that could be manipulated by the discoveries of science and
medicine richard tarnass professor of philosophy at the california institute for integral studies
asks the looming question of our time what is the ultimate impact of cosmological disenchantment on a
civilization what does it do to the human self year after year century after century to experience
existence as a conscious purpose of being in an unconscious purposeless universe what is the price of a
collective belief in absolute cosmic indifference and what are the consequences of this unprecedented
cosmological context for the human experiment indeed for the entire planet
i think that's one of the most crucial questions that can be asked
so i've said here that from reunion perspective transmute transhumanism is a huge inflation of the ego
that has identified itself with god and claimed his power to itself believing that it can overcome
death through technology as part of this inflation nemesis would come as professor wallach has pointed out
with the increase of the population which would need to be controlled and culled
transhumanists do not seem to have any awareness that death is not the end of our life that we have
an immortal soul or immortal consciousness that previous cultures have known and described and i would put
the gnostics there again and the essenes we're just so incredibly ignorant of these traditions that could
heal us wake us up and bring us to our true humanity as chris beige said in his lsd and the mind of the universe he said we're moving towards the future human in our own evolutionary path we don't need help from the transhumanists
i've just hit i'll just end with this that three of the greatest traditions spiritual traditions of
the world have spoken about our innate divinity hinduism about the atman or divine core of our being
buddhism buddhism about our underlying buddha nature and jesus in the gospel of thomas about the kingdom of
heaven that is within us and all around us although we cannot see it all three have said that our
undeveloped consciousness prevents us from knowing and experiencing the truth of who we are our indwelling
divinity is expressed and enabled to grow through the exercise of love compassion and service of life
and you can see that in the lives of people who've been recognized as great saints
including mother theresa for example killing others contravenes the law of life developing weapons of
mass destruction also contravenes the law of life because they envisage and condone the destruction of
life they imagine what they're going to do to the bodies of other people and how millions will be killed with
one bomb this is insanity and it hasn't been recognized as such so i think that's all i need to
say really i probably say more than i need i've had a few extra notes somewhere around thank you very
much i think that's enough then for bringing that jungian perspective um and i love the idea of of uh
giving a sort of session to transhumanism um as a jungian analyst and this is a nice thought
experiment and here's anne's new book which i'll be reviewing in the next issue divine wisdom and
the holy spirit forgotten feminine face of god and this voice of the feminine and the voice of the
sacred is incredibly important so thank you for expressing that and on that note we'll go over to greg
and i love it when you talk that way thank you for making my uh my job easier today and i just want to
say thank you to uh to harold and ian as well and david for putting us all together i had notes and after
listening to each of you uh those notes would be redundant so what i'm i'm just going to say that
i am very passionate about this topic i have been since i became aware of the transhuman movement
during the cold war in the 1980s a lot of people believe this is something new i was working with
artificial intelligence and working as a computer systems designer during the cold war years and we
saw the the beginnings the foundation of everything we're talking about right now and it was easy to see
where where that was headed so i'm going to come at this from from two different parallel perspectives
one this isn't a conversation about what's going to happen five years or ten years from now we're in it
we're in it right now the transhuman movement is deeply entrenched into our society right now and
there's a concerted effort to replace our humanness with machines with ai computer chips in the brain
chemicals in the blood rfid chips under the skin nanosensors and the respiratory and the circulatory
systems that you know goes on and on that movement is is afoot right now and the best minds of our time
now are telling us that unless we change the trajectory of that movement that very probably we are the last
generation of what will be called pure humans that this world will ever know because within this single
generation by the year 2030 to 2032 for example when you speak to someone in the grocery store
you know in the market the workplace you will be speaking to some degree of a hybrid
between biological human and machine some obviously to to a lesser degree some to a greater degree
so we are in this movement right now and the effort is being masked by really slick
and sexy marketing that is avoiding the language that we're using today the word transhuman is rarely
used and we are being given benefits dangled like little shiny carrots in front of us without being
told the downside of what it means to give our humanness away to machines and technology so so that is one
way that i'm going to talk about this the other one is the science the best science of the modern world
is showing us that in many respects our own natural biology not only meets but we exceed the
capabilities of the very technology we're being asked to put into our bodies and it's a very very
different way of thinking and i'm going to be the first to acknowledge that when when i was working
behind the scenes in in the cold war it was a very civilized kind of war in some respects governments
were at war but scientists were still cooperating scientists were still exchanging information or
research and the russians were some of the first that began to look at the human body
not as soft gooey sticky mushy biological stuff but they began to look at the human body from the
perspective of i.t information technology man that was a very very different way the first time
a soviet researcher sent a schematic drawing of a human cell as a gated circuit as an engineer my
background i'm a computer scientist of a degree geologist geophysicist with strong background math
physics computer science and i was looking at a schematic diagram of 50 trillion cells in my body
and it didn't stop there so the science is telling us that we are literally a soft technology we're not
the primitive hard technology of a silicon chip we're more than that we are neurons and cell membranes and
ion potentials moving across cell walls and the beauty of who we are our humanness is that we're
the only form of life that we know of that can self-regulate our own biology at will on demand when
we choose through what we call epigenetics primary epigenetic triggers or seven primary epigenetic
triggers thought feeling emotion belief breath focus movement and nutrition of course there are others
that are variations of that but the idea is that through choices that we make consciously we can
change the way that our body performs and the technology that we're building outside of our body
literally mimics what we already do in ourselves we're photon emitters photon receivers every cell's
got about 0.07 volts of of electrical potential do the math 50 trillion times 0.07 is about three
3.5 trillion volts of electrical potential not realized but it's potential and when we do realize
that what's it mean we apply that to our healing or we imply that to our intuition we imply that to our
longevity enzymes that that live in in every cell of the body and that goes on and on it's really
interesting to me i'm going to share a couple of experiments the uh the journal the idea of us being
information technology is not common knowledge because the discoveries are often relegated to
obscure technical journals which i love to read at bedtime i have a stack on my bed stand for light
bedtime reading and i know a lot of people don't for example uh the journal of soft computing
is now identifying human dna as a three-dimensional fractal antenna that's a very different way to think
about dna fractal means that we're well an antenna picks up signals and transmits signals fractal means we pick up and
receive those signals across a broad spectrum of information and the question is what are we tuning into and what are are we receiving the journal of uh complementary and alternative medicine
stated very clearly and i'm i'm going to do this just from memory that there's compelling evidence
that the human heart the neural network in the human heart is linked to a field of information that is
not bound by the laws of physics that there's a part of us a natural part of us that is linked to information
to energy in a way that's not bound by the laws of space and time at least as we know those laws today
and those kinds of things begin they give us the reason to begin thinking about ourselves very differently
so let me share an experiment that scientists are struggling with dealing interpreting the outcome
right now this was done by the salk institute in the year 2022 and what they did was they took some
human neurons separate from a body they put them into a petri dish and they connected those neurons
to a chip that they a computer chip so they could load the neurons into a computer that was loaded with
the video game that came out in november of 1972 i remember i remember when it came out the game is called
pong p-o-n-g and some of our younger viewers may not remember this game or have never seen it
a very primitive video game it looks like table tennis or badminton the point is that when they
loaded these neurons the neurons began playing the game of pong and the longer they played the more
they learned and the better they got and so now the scientists are asking where are the instructions
to play the game of pong are they somehow loaded into these neurons and what the studies are showing
is that the neurons are an antenna a biological antenna that are tuned to a field of information and that
information apparently is where pong lives in our in our field many words we can give to that field of
information but this supports and what ann was saying all are almost universally our ancestors our ancient
indigenous traditions they all say to us there's a part of us that's not bound in the physical body
that we are the product of many iterations of genetic attempts to hold an energetic essence in a
physical body whether we call that the soul uh whatever it is that we want to call that there's a part
of us that's not in the body the transhuman movement is ignorant of this they are operating out of fear
the fear of death and the ignorance that believes that this is all there is so those scientists they're
dissecting the neurons looking for the pong instructions trying to figure out where where they
are and this is just one one experiment one one example so our young people today the next generation
are very vulnerable to what we're talking about here they're being indoctrinated as we were this
began right in the mid-20th century right after the second world war we began indoctrinating young
people to believe that we are a flawed form of life and that because we're flawed we need something
outside of us to be the best version of ourselves and to compete in the world that something is
technology now we're seeing that in mass we're seeing young people worship ai worship the computer
chip but here's what they're not being told they're not being told of the downside of what happens when
we give our humanness away so let me just give one more example here there was a time we were all
taught that we are born into this world with a finite number of brain cells and as you go through
life choices of lifestyle can destroy those brain cells we all heard that you know when we were in
college every beer you drink you're going to lose brain cells now we know that this isn't true we know
that the hippocampus is producing new cells until the last breath we take on this planet but there is a
catch and the catch is this unless our new cells coming from the hippocampus unless they're engaged
in a meaningful way within about seven to ten days the body believes that those cells are not needed
because they're not being used this is the key because they're not being used and those cells will
atrophy and die that principle applies the entire human body it applies to the immune system it applies
the reproductive system when we begin replacing our natural biology with technology our body believes
that those natural abilities are no longer necessary because they're being replicated artificially and
because we adapt this is what we do our bodies morph and adapt to functioning without the abilities that
we used to have and this is already happening it's already being documented young people using virtual ai
goggles uh you know three hours a day weeks on end they're showing cognitive decline cog their parts
of their brain the visual cortex is getting bigger because they're they're viewing but their ability to
imagine to create to innovate their social innovation skills their actual brain size is decreasing and this
this is just one example when we give our humanness away to technology it's not like you can turn a little
dial and say oh we don't like that let's go back to the way we used to be we are on the precipice of
losing our humanness giving away our species and once it's gone we'll never get it back this is how you
lose a species and there are reasons why in another conversation we can talk about the intent and how
vulnerable we become when we give our humanness away it's all part of the equation but for what we're talking
for what we're talking about right now i think it's important that there is an awareness in our
communities and i also want to clarify because some people when they hear these conversations they say
well does that mean i shouldn't get a titanium hip you know or or an artificial heart the answer is no
this this is not about one-off applications that extend our lives uh when we need to do that this is
about in mass the proposals the policies already being written united nations is on board with some
of these policies of implementing policies uh through medical interventions through diet uh and and additives
and foods and things like that they are on board with this uh to change the fundamental nature of our
humaneness now and used a word that is the core of my new book and that word is divinity in our
ancient texts people tend to link divinity with religion the contemporary definition does not do that
the contemporary definition of divinity is our our ability to transcend perceived limitations to become
more than the limits that may not even be real perceived limitations that is our humanness that's us being
the best version of ourselves so examples of divinity expressions of divinity our imagination creativity
innovation empathy sympathy compassion love the ability to heal forgiveness these are all fundamental
expressions of our divinity that we stand to lose if we surrender our humanness to the technology that's
being dangled in front of us in exchange for efficiency and speed so i'm going to stop there
with one question and the question i think we're all asking is very simple do we love ourselves enough
as individuals do we love ourselves enough is the human species to accept the deep truth of what it means
to be human and the responsibility that comes with the power of our fully realized humanness and we're
not going to have to wait long to see how we answer this question because it's going to be answered one
way or another in a single generation so i'm going to stop there david then we can open it up maybe to
to some other questions greg fantastic um what what an extraordinary set of contributions from our panel
following on what harold had to share with us let's highlight everyone um bruce all the the panelists
and i just want to just to ask harold whether he has any observations he'd like to make brief observations
you'd like to make uh in response to um the other panelists and then we'll then we'll open up
no not really i'm very grateful to everybody i think uh ian has put in the the flavor and the and the
passion which i didn't put into it because that's not my job and greg has mentioned the the really
dire straits we are in and that it has been in long preparation and i think and and's assessment of
this being pure evil i can support as a as a person i would support it as a scientist i think we it's
difficult to use that word but i think she's correct but she is a therapist she can do that i'm a
scientist i'm a little bit more careful okay thank you very much harold so we'll we'll go on to some
questions and then and if you if your question is for a particular person in the panel then do say that
otherwise we'll we'll invite anybody to respond to whatever comes up it's sue um is the first one
uh okay can am i unmuted here you are i just want to say first of all a huge thank you to all
the speakers i think this is probably one of the most important topics that we're faced with one of
the most important threats um so there is a question coming but first i just wanted to um
highlight this book alt reich um because he goes into um a discussion and this fits into what greg
was saying that actually after the second world war many of the nazis were taken up as we know into
the united states but not only there also in this country and they actually brought with them their
own their philosophy which went kind of underground and i think it's really important to understand
the origins that actually in a way this never went away eugenics is an absolute part of the of this
desire for control as anne rightly points out it's an ego inflation it's a narcissistic attitude
um and it wants to control people and it lacks empathy and it lacks love and it comes from a place
where actually these these things happened in during the second world war in in the concentration camps
and so on so i think we should be in no doubt that it's not just something that's kind of come up
with technology it was around and technology is facilitating these attitudes to actually happen
and i guess the question is the most obvious one what are we going to do about it what can we do
how can we somehow you know help young people not to be caught up in it how can we challenge
politically any any thoughts on that would be welcome thank you yes thank you well i open it up
whoever would like to speak greg sue i think you've just hit the nail on the head we do live events
all over the world and the young people that come to our events no one is telling our young
people how how rare and precious their lives are how delicate yet powerful their their bodies are
and what it means to be human their their capabilities they're being told just the opposite
and for that reason they don't give a second thought to what they're putting into their bodies
uh what they do to their bodies and they're looking and welcoming the technology to save them
so i think it's our responsibility to inform and that's what we're doing right here to let people
know that this movement exists uh but also the flip side it it's scary if you can't do anything about
it when we begin to understand the true extent of our human capacities and our human potentials
and how easy it is to unlock those potentials the more we understand that i think the less urgency
we people in general will feel to bring technology into their bodies because they'll discover they are
the technology we are the technology can i just add something to that i think i would absolutely underline
that and i think information is key because people do not really see what is going on and i think
language and putting it out and making it clear and opening up a discourse that is a very important
element on an honor on a very generic level i think what we need is a spiritual practice if people are
anchored within their own cells they are not as prone to to these um to these ideas and to these um
movements so i think promoting that would also be a very helpful thing yes i think that's very important
uh okay i think we can pass on thank you sue we'll pass on to andrew thank you very much um i would
like to direct this mostly to ian but greg like you i did my career 42 years in the computer industry
where i was a chief technology officer of a company um so uh this question really has to do um with the
work of rudolph steiner and i noticed somebody in the chat brought him up through another author named
re torreson um but um you mentioned in um power without wisdom and i want to add to that power without
love and i think that's sort of where ann was trying to take us as well um that
um the the situation in which we are in today i think is if i were to look at what christianity was
supposed to be sorry it didn't get there we destroyed it back in 325 um and and then in 869
as well we further destroyed the idea of the human being as body soul and spirit but in john 21
there's this wonderful inter interplay between um peter and christ and and at the end of this discussion
and peter expects when christ says follow me that the lead beloved disciple john should be doing this
work he points to him and says what about him and christ says what is it that i have him wait until i
come again you have your mission follow me and for me that meant something called agape love that is a a
form of love i think we have not even much of a notion as to what it is we try to translate it to
spiritual love or something but i think we don't know it and i think this whole movement not just
transhumanism but ai is leading to 90 percent of the possible workforce will be without work in the
near future you mentioned the year 2030 day uh greg and i think that that is coming um where 90 of
people will not have jobs how do we out of a kind of new agape love out of a brotherhood
so the that's one of the questions which i was hoping ian could try to answer but greg it looks
like you might want to answer that too how do we have a society where the economic which i live in
america isn't the dominant how do we have because i think we'll kill it whether it's transhumanism
kill life kill humanity whether it's transhumanism or the economics
well thanks very much andrew so ian and then greg yeah well i mean this is where um
i haven't wanted to bring this up but but i think the understanding of the
hemisphere differences in humans is enormously important because it is possible for these
two hemispheres to produce and they do produce very usefully different experiential versions of the
world but with quite different purposes and quite different values and i can't possibly
unfold all this now but i've done it so many times on the internet and in my books that i'm sure people
will will not need me to do so but the point there is as you say that the left hemisphere has one value
which is power and it is about power and control and that discourse as anne was pointing out has become
more and more important since about the late 17th century the so-called scientific revolution made
more so by the enlightenment and more so still by modernism and post-modernism with a wonderful
period known as romanticism which tried to look the other way but the the right hemisphere
and does understand love it is it is our right frontal cortex that enables us to understand what another
person is suffering to sympathize with them to be compassionate to them and to love them
and everything that i've said can be most economically expressed by looking at the differences between
these two hemispheric visions of the world one is that the left hemisphere is driven solely by power
and control it doesn't understand implicit meaning it doesn't understand compassion it has a machiavellian
way of viewing um other other people and and life in general and it's it's it's thinking is abstract
disembodied in fact it's the left hemisphere when people this is all based on a whole range of kinds of
study but on its own the left hemisphere presents things that it itself has not made and it it prefers things
that it can make and give to itself to anything that has come from nature now it seems to me that what
we need in this world is not more power and control more self-control no doubt but more compassion
more humility and more awe now again i can't unfold all that but those three things are very heavily right
hemisphere dependent the left hemisphere doesn't understand them it is naturally hubristic to an
extent that if you haven't read my work i i can't really bring it to you now but it is extraordinarily
hubristic it's in denial of the truth when it doesn't fit its own preferred way of looking at things
it is incapable of um compassion in the sense that it is needed and or is missing it it doesn't it sort of
gets rather irritated by expressions of wonder or or because it says we soon we'll all know all the answers
but anybody who thinks that has got a very very limited mentality uh it's rather like the famous
stunning kruger effect that the less you know the more you think you know and that is the world of
the left hemisphere it's the world in which we now live so when you say what what do we do about this
i think there are various things but they don't consist in one kind of thing only i would say that getting
together um a a group of leading scientists in the same way that einstein and others got together to
to talk about the dangers of the atomic bomb i think we are in that situation where we need
a very strong lead from public scientists on this we need government to revise very heavily any kind of
sense that it is subsidizing this process we should have the knowledge that harold is putting forward
more widely disseminated and that is one of the whole purposes of the galileo commission but at the
end of the day unless we change ourselves unless we change our hearts unless we change the way we look at
the world and you know it's all it's all of no use i i feel that very strongly we can make technical
changes but unless we stop following this vision which is a very very very simple um
mechanistic model of what a human being should be that leaves out everything that makes life worth
living for it unless we get attack that get rid of it and promote the vision of us as essentially
spiritual beings we will be lost and also we deserve to be lost goodness wow thank you
greg follow that well thank you thank you ian and everything that ian has just mentioned all of the
the virtues and the qualities of our humanness that we cherish are only possible because of our biology
there's a direct link between humanist dna and our divinity our biology and that's why i wanted to
share those experiments if our dna is a fractal antenna if our neurons are antenna and those the antenna
that tune us to the parts of ourselves that we cherish to our human interpretations of love and forgiveness
and compassion and memories is a compelling body of evidence suggests that memories don't live in our
brains and memories don't live in our bodies so if we replace our natural biology with synthetics we lose
access to all of the things that ian is describing and we lose access to what arguably is the essence of
our humanness i'm a scientist i i don't care anymore uh really what anybody thinks about what i'm saying
because we've we've lost so much uh credibility in these conversations this is one of those places
where we need to cross the traditional boundaries that have separated and compartmentalize the sciences
so that we have a systems view of our our world and our relationship to the world this is where the
concept of evil evil there's a lot of baggage that comes with that word and i acknowledge that but
the goal of evil according to those gnostic texts is to deny us our divinity to deny us our humanness
so now we have a benchmark anything that we're asked to accept into our bodies or into our lives that
prevents us from healing our own bodies from loving from forgiving from empathy for our brothers and
sisters imagination creativity anything that's doing that for us uh we can say is that good for us is
that an expression of evil and that gives us a place to begin to know where where we can have these
conversations so i'll stop there david that i think yeah thank you very much yeah it's important to cross
those traditional boundaries and not get locked into to one box of genetics or you know biology because
we'll never see the answers if we do that yeah and i do like ian your your suggestion of a sort of
panel uh or it's a forum um in which these these issues can be properly discussed i'm just taking a time
check here um officially we've got about 10 minutes to go but are you all okay for an extra extra time of 15 minutes
um you know i'm panelists i don't just need to we can go on to a quarter past that is that okay have
you got another meeting yeah okay but we might still try to to keep everything absolutely yeah no so
i and what i'm going to say we're we're going to take the five people who have their hands up already and
then that i'm afraid anybody who thinks they can put their hand up after ray edgar um sorry you it's too late
so let's go to darren and as you say let's keep things moving potentially this conversation could
go on for days and days and days exactly yeah and it should but not on this occasion no thank you harold
and uh thank you everybody on the panel it's been absolutely fascinating and what was a very simple
question for me is now being tainted by all of your input that's just colored all of my thoughts now
um i'm interested in the human animal the the evolutional biology of this human animal so when
we're talking transhuman we're talking about this augmentation of this current iteration you know like
greg said we're a self-regulating soft technology and everything appears to be in transhumanism this
augmentation of our current iteration which in itself has evolved over however long since we've
moved out of the the the primordial primordial soup you know and i think about antonio damacio in his
book feeling and knowing that explains how we're or talks about how we're feeling animals that think
not thinking animals that feel so we are this current iteration that is made of its parts
and biology aside if we think of ourselves as the biopsychosocial or biopsychosocial spiritual
model you know you factor all of this into this current iteration and so at a really realistic
level i want to know people's thoughts on what is the bringing together of these two technologies this
ancient technology that we are the latest iteration of alongside this current augmented technology and
we can already see you know we've seen that this is coming in through stealth already anyway with you
know the kids on or us on phones or the kids on vr and things like this and we can see the detrimental
effect that all of this is having already so i'd like to know from maybe ian and greg's you know
kind of more uh psychological and and and biological kind of viewpoints what is the realistic impact of
trying to update the latest iteration of this ancient technology that is the human
thing thank you who you'd like i i'd just like to say that i'm uncomfortable um that ann hasn't
been given a chance to to contribute um i thought what she had to say was was profound and important
and uh i'm worried that the the two blokes here are doing that blokish thing and and doing too much
talking and i'd like to hear more from and but the questions may not be one and i don't think i can
answer that question i'm afraid i'll gladly hand it over to you or to or to great i'm not sure i fully
understood it frankly so i mean i don't like it when people talk about this technology meaning
our biology biology is not best thought of as a technology at all or as information in fact
these are very reduced ways of thinking about what material existence is and an important theme
that has been brought up has been the relationship between our mental lives and our physical lives and
i think it's intimate i think that matter is not just mere lumpen matter that amazingly has no meaning
no order chaotically bumps into itself a million times and then suddenly up comes bark st matthew passion
where did that come out of all that meaningless dust colliding for billions of years i have the clue
so i think matter is already something that has spirit in it and i in fact i believe that matter and
and consciousness are phases of the same underlying entity and by phases i don't mean temporal phases i
mean phrases as in water that can be ice it can be the water that's invisible or it can be water that
flows in a river but i think matter and consciousness don't look like one another but in fact matter is
something that we experience in our consciousness which can't be denied uh the consciousness can't be
denied um but it is there and it is part of reality so the two need to go together but i don't want to
take up any more time because as i say i didn't really understand the question okay darren i think
we'll have to leave it there leave it there if you don't mind because we've still got four people in the
queue um so james i think you're next well i'll make this quick and i'll be very direct um thank you
all very much for doing this this made my year uh i'm one of the original uh mk ultra whistleblowers
i was on the freedom of thought foundation in 1990 i knew this whole thing was going to come pat
pass a long time ago um i'm the chief advisor for the bci committee for the u.s and the international
committee for information technology standards and um uh i have literally been going crazy in the last
month uh dealing with people in the united states regarding this issue it is the number one issue
and frankly i wish ann that thing that speech you just gave i wish you gave it to congress
department of defense darpa cia nsa all those guys because this conversation is exactly what needs to be
told all over the place in multiple countries and multiple languages it's it is way past what people
know about i was asked if i would be part of this committee specifically and and do things that
uh signed security agreements i decided not to because of what was happening so my question because
i know there's other people here and i'm supposed to be on a bci committee meeting in seven minutes um
my question is are you guys going to do this again is it possible to stay in touch with all of you
and i need to um uh those two things and also to let you know that there's lawsuits being filed their
first neurocognitive uh filings are happening in the united states and local government and with the ucc
and there's going to be lawsuits filed that i know against palantir and a couple other companies
because of this tech that they're doing because the thing is what's happening here is exactly what should
be happening all over the place so i'm down for all of this on a continuous basis so that's why i just
wanted to ask is what are you guys going to do next and how can i help that's it thanks very much james
we'll we'll certainly uh be in touch and the reason we commissioned this report and we're having this
event is exactly you know to raise the issues and make people aware of the you know very deep and far
reaching implications of where we are and also the urgency of the situation which i think yes yes
yes no highlights both of this uh ann you'd like to say i just wanted to say to james that i know
quite a lot what's been going on in america because i'm three-quarters american i follow it
there is somebody called dr david martin who knows all about this and all about palantir
so i think that you have people in america if you all keep in touch with them with him particular
he would be a wonderful force because he has that terrific energy and he's well informed better
informed than anybody else i've ever heard really so that's just a comment yes thank thanks harold
i just want to say thank you james for coming out with that and i'm happy to speak in the lions then
if anybody cares for it so we will be we will be doing that all over the place and right find me
greg finally uh and just to say that um one of the plans following this up is is for harold to do a
podcast series um and i and everybody on this panel will obviously be invited to to participate but this
is still in the planning as as space at the moment but we really want to get the word out and just get
made people aware so they can you know come to their own view richard all right um i'm uh
i i i sort of grew up as a rational scientist and was a rational scientist for many many years 38
but i had when i was a child i had a connection with god so i'm a bit different from a lot of
people because i know god exists i've communicated directly with him so that's just the background and
gives you the reason for why my my sort of view is slightly different so what what i what i realized
is that i mean i looked at a lot of um occult documents i looked into the occults and read all
the sorts of documents that were in lots of secret societies and all this sort of thing
um and i read the book by arthur c clark called childhood's end and what what you find is
satanism what what transhumanism is actually the doctrine of satanism turned into a different way
and satanism has been promoted through our culture via science fiction people like arthur c clark who are
in science fiction authors and and many other people and and so they they promoted these concepts
and put them into the collective psyche via hollywood and things like that so it's been pushed into our
brains this is why such a high proportion of people believe in it because it's been already they've
already been primed with the concepts um so yeah charles was in 2001 space odyssey was was one of the
big turning points because that was when the idea of the sort of star child came up and star child is
this transhuman entity right and what's the question yeah well you have a question sorry right so the
question are interesting okay so the question is what is your view on the effect of science fiction
and then cultism on this problem on this topic i would very much agree with you that it is something
that has inspired uh popular culture and that a lot of that is coming out of of a perverted kind of
religion and the only way how you can oppose that is by offering a proper kind of religion or a
good spirituality yes anyone else want to say there's there's there's the emerging philosophy
that regarding reality that consciousness informs itself through its creations which suggests that the
books and the music and the art uh is us asking ourselves to remember something and that applies to
some hollywood movies so yes to what you're saying in terms of the normalization of evil that definitely
is happening but the consciousness is is fighting back with that with movies like the matrix for example
the matrix was about a world that we can't see that influences a world that we can see and we exist in
both of those worlds that was the fundamental theme it was one of the highest grossing box office hits
and it was a low budget movie but it spoke to us avatar it does the same thing reminding us of our
relationship to nature and the movies with young people like the avengers and wonder woman all speaking
to dormant or latent abilities within us of course you know the hollywood eyes it but the the themes
is us what are we asking ourselves to remember about ourselves and i think that's a very important
question that we all can participate in when we see what what we're being uh fed through these media
thanks very much well the harry potter is another huge theme isn't it
can i just make me one point i don't think that it's i don't think it's completely crazy to think
that there are consciousnesses that are not our consciousnesses but are disembodied
uh every tradition in the world that i know of has such creatures that can be well disposed or ill
disposed towards us and can inhabit uh structures that allow them to ingress in such a way that they
can help manipulate the world so as to destroy um what from a christian point of view was the the great
prize of god's creation so i think there are forces that wish the downfall of humanity and i think they
are having a field day right now and i agree that what we need is a proper rooting rootedness in a
a sound religion not a lot of playing with black magic and other things which we don't understand
and may indeed be harmful yes thank you thank you very much richard uh paul
thank you thank you for the light that you all bring i'm grateful to this and i look forward for more of
it to come the question i had is in the larger context and this is to the full panel but i know
ann might have something to say about this what might the role of trans migration of souls play in
this conversation in in the sense of pythagoras and periclides of cyros how how does this the trans
migration and especially it seems like this is really a deeper conversation on psyche and soul in
humanity and i think that touches the divinity that greg's talking about so that's that's kind
of the and ian i mean you all are are my heroine heroic heroines heroines and heroics so thank you
for all of this it's it's very heartfelt thank you transmigration of soul well i think that's very
important point that you've brought up and i think that a great deal was known by pythagoras and indeed by
palmenides and the great pre-socratics that we've completely forgotten but they went into caves to
incubate to get the answers that they were asking the questions that they were answering and then they
brought back the answers to their communities and and gave them out that way but reincarnation has been
so much a teaching in in the hindu tradition and um and also in taoism to some extent so i don't know
why that isn't better known and to me i i know other lives that i've had and it seems perfectly
normal that i'm doing this life now finishing off a job that i may not have that i've started in
another one and it all makes perfect sense and i can then understand my role now because i can look
back on perhaps what i did or didn't do in the past so it gives us a much wider perspective to know that
you've had many lives yes thank you anne and i think what the other the other sort of related
point is is cultural because we know that cultures have risen and disappeared and and there's a there's
a uh a resonance certainly with the the the myth of atlantis and the destruction of atlantis i don't
know whether greg liked comment on on that because we're at this kind of precipice point in my view at the
moment and and i i also accept that that you know that things are cyclical and so something has to
break down for something else to emerge yeah well i think you know in the interest of time i'll just
i'll just be brief we this is no ordinary time in history and that's why we're having this
conversation we're living a rare convergence of cycles from cosmological to geological to tectonic to
spiritual cycles that are all converging right now and we probably couldn't have had this conversation
50 years ago because those cycles were not playing the same role and that's that is precisely why it's
it's so important that we make the choice now and and to what ian was saying and and as well i think
we can we can try to regulate technology but that technology is only only being applied
based upon the way we have been led to think of ourselves so as we develop a rock solid understanding
of who we are what our capacities are what our capabilities are and that covers a lot of ground
i think the technology becomes less of a threat because we we don't feel the need to bring it into
our bodies we can use it in our lives to serve us but not become enslaved by the technology so i think
if we can light a candle and there perhaps turn off the electrical switch all this stuff is being run
on electromagnetics but thank you yeah thank you harold you wanted to make an observation i just wanted
to say i'm a big fan of leibniz he's one of my philosophy philosophical heroes and leibniz used to say
souls don't migrate they go to sleep and they wake up so what we may be facing maybe a group of souls
that need to be educated well we certainly need to wake up that's for sure yeah ray you're the final
question thank you um and thank you everybody it's been a fascinating couple of hours um i'm not going
to talk about trans migration of souls but um what's what's hit me quite hard is is the the population in
the room the way we've talked about younger generations and and what they're planning on
doing themselves and not and john asked sorry andrew asked earlier what can we do
um now ian talked about more compassion more humanity um the way we look at the world and i think
greg talked about things are systemic i don't think there's any surprise i don't genuinely i'm
not sure how many people in this room understand the world these younger generations are living in
i mean for 15 years now no real rise in income nobody who's a young person now can seriously
consider buying a house or have the sort of future that we considered as a given
capitalism is falling apart around them they've had to grow up with social media i laugh when i see
people using two thumbs on the bus because i say ah they think differently me because i can't even
imagine doing that yet it's very simple to them and i i i make a joke of that but but but quite honestly
um there's almost like a maslow's hierarchy thing going on here because we're talking about people who
haven't had the space the opportunity and are so stressed out that they literally listen to anything
and so what i'm asking the people in this room is what can we do to get those people into this
conversation and actually break down that divide so that people who are in their late 50s and 60s
begin to understand what these people are trying to live with and when i see these people i have two
children in their 20s and that's exactly what i am experiencing with them thank you so much ray i
i i think part part of part of what we could do actually is we could actually have an intergenerational
dialogue on on these matters we we've got can i just hang on a second here um bruce our our host is
part of the new paradigm navigators um and they've got a conference coming up um we next not this
weekend but next weekend and so i think this i think just getting these these different views and
perspectives would be very valuable uh ian well i i just feel that um i want to um reassure ray that
certainly for me he's completely misunderstood anything i said i am not here to blame young
people for the difficult situation there and i thought i described the very difficult world picture
that we had bequeathed to them and i i think two other important things that wherever i go what
heartens me is the number of people who come up after i talk who are young and say what you're saying
seems to speak to me very powerfully what can we do and i think there is no lack of hope there i think
the lack of hope is for the people who are driving this stuff are not young people there are people in their
50s and 60s or or possibly younger but with a lot of money and and and this is just not what what
i am certainly saying at all and the final thing i'd like to say is the word we don't understand
nowadays the relationship between opposites the worse it gets in a sense the better it gets the more
we are forced to face a crisis we've been far too comfortable for far too long so we haven't really
faced anything we've drifted in sort of a luxurious kind of disengagement from these questions but now
as things get really steeply bad i mean then i think that we will see the changes that um need to
be called force because people are very resilient humanity is unpredictable and i think we have great
resources thank you ian i don't think you're blaming anybody and i and i certainly don't uh don't don't
feel that at all it was just a question of i think in general um people who are in their 50s 60s 70s
are out of touch they don't really realize the world that uh the younger people who we refer to
are actually living in and how could they how could they ready to exemplify that i i was just in a live
event with young people recently and i had a 14 year old boy who came with his mom and he said mr
braden and i said please call me greg and he said greg everything i'm hearing in this room makes perfect
sense in this room he said when i go to school none of my friends think this way and that's it right
there it's about sharing the information i think in a meaningful way uh and and there's a powerful
difference between fighting against what we don't want and moving toward what we know is possible
and i think this is an opportunity to move toward the development of our humanness to really embrace
these potentials that are being shown uh buckminster fuller said it beautifully you know you're not going
to change the world by fighting against what you don't like find a a new way that's better in the old
way becomes obsolete there's a handful of people and they are older they're in their 60s to 80s whose
ideas are driving the technology and in the applications we're talking about in things like
what we call the fourth industrial revolution just and they are unelected officials we didn't ask them
to determine what world we live in we all have the opportunity for non-compliance and non-compliance
to simply means the sanctity of the human body and where where we choose to draw our personal lines
and that's once i think once the information is clear the choice has become obvious and it's about
simply informing of of who we are what our potentials are thank you so much thank you ray um let's have
some concluding observations from for everyone anyone who'd like to make uh could i just say one
thing one thing yeah sorry to interrupt but one of the most important things to avoid is digital ids
which are being promoted now because that will be the open door to enslaving all of us so we can spread
that among the young do not sign up for these digital ids that's one comment that i'd like to make
and any any other reflection you'd like to add i would i would like to add a reflection which which
i think we haven't mentioned um previously i think what is really needed is a good continuous education
from preschool to school to university where these ideas are critically reflected on and where maybe also
a kind of um competency in accessing our inner resources is part of the curriculum
yes very very good point thank you anyone else like to make any final observations before we sign off
well i i i think prompted by a comment that i just saw in the in the chat um saying yes yes it's very
important we'd be able to be moving forward in capital letters i don't think anybody has said we
shouldn't be moving forward and and i i i just want to reflect on the possible problem of being
positive all the time there was a terrific piece in today's times by james marriott i don't know if
people have read it but if haven't do read it on the power of pessimism and that actually thinking
i mean keeping hope i always call myself a hopeful pessimist but keeping hope is very very important
but seeing that things are going badly wrong it is is not not a mistake and it it it's more likely
to give rise to action and the complacent feeling that all is fine if we just move forward in a certain
way so i just think that all needs a bit of nuance there's been nothing negative about saying certain
things are wrong and we should resist them it is the other side of certain things are good and we
should go for them and i think today we've discussed both of those a lot yes and mara van de luft um has
written a book called hopeful pessimism she's actually yeah i can i reviewed it i i oh right he's a lecturer
at saint andrews university in the philosophy department so not so okay and she's exactly have
have i i i will send you i'll send you the details i'm sorry since we can't take any further questions
or comments um just anyone else like to say anything any final word i just i just want to thank you
david for pulling this panel together i want to thank all the panelists uh i have followed you from afar
and it's an honor to be here with you anir and uh thank everyone for sharing a part of your day with
us today uh i i think really this all comes down we've got so many nuances but it all comes down to
us do we love ourselves enough to preserve our humanness i believe we are worth preserving i believe
our humanness is worth preserving and this is the generation we have to make that choice
so well i think that's a wonderful note to end on greg um thank you all so much um for for your
inspiration thank you everybody for coming uh do make sure that you're getting our news uh signing
up for the galilee commission as a friend or or a uh professional affiliate uh or to get the network
digest uh tomorrow night i'm going to be talking about uh transcendence as it happens with with susan
plunkett who's a has a jungian analyst three forms of transcendence and then on thursday we're going
to be talking about the xeno text um from christian bock and that's on the the book briefing um so uh do
keep in touch with us um thank you so much for for coming along thank you bruce for your technical
support and we'll definitely want to pursue these questions with a with a younger panel i think you
know we we we all need to hear what young people have to say and think maybe an intergenerational
dialogue is the way to go so thanks so much and have a good rest
