I'm Tim Ventura, and we're joined today by Brigadier General Jeffrey Weiss, currently
serving in the Department of the Air Force as Regional Affairs Director in International
Affairs for the Air and Space Forces. Brigadier General Weiss has civilian experience as a
systems engineer and has military experience, including wartime operational U.S. Air Force
and Joint Headquarters staff and command leadership positions in Homeland Air Defense,
air and missile defense, theater air battle management, command and control, nuclear
deterrence, and information influence operations. He's commanded at the wing, group, and squadron
levels, holds four master's degrees in military and aeronautical study areas, including an MS in
National Security Strategy from the National War College. His articles have appeared in Air and
Space Power Journal and Joint Force Quarterly, and his book, The New Art of War, The
Origins Theory and Future of Conflict is something that we will be discussing today. So I want to
start out with the disclaimer. The views expressed by Brigadier General Weiss in this interview are
his personal opinions only and do not represent the views or policies of the United States government
or military. So Jeffrey, welcome back, sir. Jeffrey Weiss
Tim, thank you. I appreciate the opportunity to be back with you. Thanks for having me on your podcast,
and in particular to discuss this important topic today. Oh, absolutely. And you know,
I want to thank you for your remarkable career of service. And I think with the topics that we're
discussing, especially what's going on in international affairs right now, people need to keep in mind
everything that yourself and so many other members of our military services, as well as the US government,
are doing to help keep us safe. So thank you so much for that. Thank you. You're welcome. My pleasure.
So today we're talking about the war in Ukraine and hopefully taking some lessons from your book,
The New Art of War. I'm going to put links in the YouTube show notes for that. I have read this a few
times now. I think it is absolutely remarkable book. But I know you have been following the headlines
as closely as I think we all have. And I wanted to start out by asking for your thoughts and opinions
on the recent escalation of hostilities that we're seeing in Ukraine right now.
Sure. Sure. Thank them. So regarding the escalation, I mean, escalation can mean different
things to different people. But I think what we see is we see this uptick in an activity, right,
maybe an intensity, et cetera, with respect to in particular, the war with between Russia and Ukraine.
And so regarding that conflict, I think we're at an important inflection point right now in the war.
I think there's a sense on both sides as we approach three years of this war of weariness,
a tremendous resource expenditure in terms of people, absolutely horrific casualty numbers related to
this war. And frankly, and unfortunately, without much significance in terms of moving toward a
decision for either side. You'll recall potentially the Korean War, for example, where very little was
accomplished after the first year or so of that war, as both sides were essentially fighting to
establish gains on the battlefield that could be later leveraged at the bargaining table to gain a
favorable negotiating position. So though there are no really serious negotiations happening currently,
you kind of get that sense with Russia, Ukraine that each side's attempting to gain that advantage.
And that is appearing to us as escalation at this point. So whether in the case of Ukraine,
as we're looking at war strikes into Russia, and if you look at Russia in terms of the introduction of
foreign troops and new weapons to the conflict, what the rhetoric is getting more extreme,
as well as I think the saber rattling, Ukraine's former military commander in chief, Valery Zaluznyi
recently said that the direct involvement of Russia's autocratic allies in its war on Ukraine
means that World War Three has started. And last week, Vladimir Putin was quoted as saying,
the war is going global. So I wanted to ask if they're correct, is this World War Three?
That's a great question. Certainly from Ukraine's perspective, they want the world behind them,
right? And against Russia and against Putin's enablers, which we've seen in the form of China,
we've seen in the form of North Korea, Iran, Belarus, and so forth. And in my book, I echo
what most great theorists have said in emphasizing the importance of alliances. So for a weaker state
like Ukraine, particularly one without a nuclear deterrent, they have to form alliances to remain
viable when confronted by a strong conventional or a nuclear armed opponent. Even Russia, I would say
once mighty Russia, is turning to strange bedfellows to keep its gambit in Ukraine alive, and hence the
support from outliers like Iran and North Korea. So we see this posturing around the world. But the
question is, is this World War Three? Well, of course, that designation conjures all sorts of
images of nuclear Armageddon and globe-spanning battles. However, I'd like to make two points,
first of all, when we consider this question. First of all, this is the largest conflict in Europe since
World War Two. And when you look at the number of countries involved, there are more countries
involved in terms of support, in some cases direct. If you look at North Korea, et cetera,
others indirect. There are more countries involved here, over 50, than were in all of World War One,
for example, actively engaged. We are also seeing significant global and economic political effects
from this war, and we see it occurring in all domains. We see it on land, on the surface and
under the water, in the air and cyberspace and space. So it truly is a global war in that aspect.
And the second point I want to make is that we can make no mistake that a miscalculation here
or error on the part of either side could cause this conflict to escalate and widen. So I think this
is a world war in the sense that it's global in scale. There's so many countries involved. There's
so much effect around the world. However, is it World War Three? I think it's certainly possible,
should more great powers become involved directly in this war, if the US and NATO, if China gets drawn in,
et cetera, that we could characterize this as a World War Three.
Okay. Well, and thank you for helping clarify that. And I think in some ways that's reassuring,
because I think what you're indicating is it hasn't completely spiraled out of control.
You know, sometimes there is so much drama in the news headlines, right? And the ICBM story was one
where, you know, at first they said, Oh, Russia launched an ICBM. And I noticed that they walked
that back a fair amount to IRBM and they started kind of couching some of those initial reports.
So now when I read the quote by Putin last week, I immediately thought of your book,
The New Art of War. Again, I'm going to put links in the YouTube show notes for that.
You have filled that with timeless quotes, lessons, and strategy from the world's leading
military and political leaders. For me, this has been a must read recommendation because it provides a
foundational framework for military and geopolitical theory. And I wanted to ask if any specific
examples come to mind from your studies and from the book that are relevant to today's situation.
Well, absolutely. There's a lot that's relevant in there. I've published a number of short articles
on LinkedIn, et cetera, looking at the Russia-Ukraine war and Afghanistan withdrawal and others.
So there's all sorts of things we can pull out of the book, quotes and concepts. And we'll talk about
some of these today. Certainly getting back to your original note about launching ICBMs. This is
very concerning, of course, because any time a major nuclear power launches an ICBM, in particular,
if they haven't announced it ahead of time, that's of great concern because this is some kind of
preemptive strike, et cetera. So that's certainly concerning and definitely escalatory. One of the
things I do talk about in my book is the power and the purpose of rhetoric and messaging. And Putin and
Russia do this very well. Putin wants to keep the West at arm's length. So he rattles his nuclear
saber and speaks of global wars. One quote I think that's very apropos comes from Erasmus of Rotterdam,
who's a 16th century Dutch priest and philosopher who warned us that, quote,
war breeds war. From a small war, a greater is born. From one, two. The plague of war breaking out in
one place affects neighbors as well. So we have to be very wary of this war exceeding its current
bounds and drawing in the major powers, as I mentioned a moment ago, in terms of like this
escalating to truly a World War III. Another concept from my book that I want to direct your viewers to
study is the war viscosity algorithm located in chapter 4 on page 274. Because this algorithm
illustrates how both sides are making decisions in this conflict. They're navigating this algorithm,
making decisions regarding the conduct and the form that this war is taking. So they're
constantly assessing their will to fight, their capacity to fight, and the context in which they
find themselves. And capacity and context are changing daily, and they're having impact on will.
What will that impact be? Will it be enough to change, to drive a change to the form of the war,
or perhaps it could drive an end to this conflict if there's significant political change? For example,
the US election or something were to happen to Zelensky or Putin. That's when we would see this
conflict move either toward a military decision on the battlefield or potentially a settlement.
Ah, okay. Well, only a few days after Putin said the war is going global, Simon Tisdall wrote in
The Guardian that Russia has been engaged in a shadow war against the West for some time using sabotage,
arson, deniable cyber attacks, and both passive and aggressive forms of covert, hybrid, and cognitive
warfare. And he indicated that this has been going on for several years now. So when I read that,
it did kind of give me pause. And these are all forms of warfare that you discussed in your book,
right? Right. So there's a lot of terminology thrown out there, a hybrid and cognitive shadow.
That's one of the things I talk a lot about a lot in my book is that is that somebody coins another
adjective and another form of war. All of these are characterized in the book, and they're simplified.
So we don't have to sort through and say, well, now we're to the 27th different form of war,
for example. So what are we talking about when we hear terms like hybrid and shadow? I think in common
parlance today, some people call this gray zone conflict. This is something that Russia's expert
in. They actually have a word for it. It's called mascarovka, which literally means little masquerade,
and in a sense, deception. Strategically in my book, I describe these sorts of activities that we're
talking about here as activities short in warfare, but are short of actual combat. And these are actions,
they fall within what I call the third essential act of strategy, which is the implementation portion
of strategy. So think of ways and means to accomplish ends. But in this case, they're employed to achieve
wartime political aims where combat is not one of the ways and means. So we think of this deception,
the use of misinformation, all these other sorts of tactics. China uses a similar paradigm, what they
call assassin's mace. In the book, I talk about four zones of what is called the peace war dialectic,
where you have true peace, competition, conflict, and war. So here we're talking about activities that
are on the borderline between competition and conflict, where they're engaged, where there's not
combat engaged. Now where they're part of the actual war in Ukraine, they're absolutely part of that war.
Furthermore, in my book, I talk about in viscous forms of war. So you'll understand the property of
viscosity in which all forms of war can be characterized as either viscous or in viscous based on
what I call the DART criteria, directness, acceleration, restriction, concentration, and cohesion. So
you think of viscous being these regular Army, Air Force, Navy, et cetera, units in conflict with each other,
where they're very direct, they're very concentrated, et cetera, and very restricted. But acts of sabotage,
non-attributable cyber attacks, misinformation, those sorts of things, we would characterize as being
in viscous, which is much less direct, much more agile, not concentrated, not restricted. So in this case,
we're seeing exactly what we would expect in the sense of a country like Russia, who's normally
considered strong, but potentially facing Ukraine and a United West in the United States, trying to
hold the U.S. at risk without initiating direct conflict.
Well, let me go back to alliances for a moment. Ukraine's former military commander,
Valerius Luzny, again, said that Ukraine is no longer facing only Russia. And this was part of his
commentary about World War III, or at least his belief in that area. He'd said that the Kremlin
has been using mercenaries from Nepal, India, North Korea. And I've read that recently Yemen is involved
in an effort to avoid full-scale Russian troop mobilization. And I think that we're all aware
of Iranian drones, which are being widely used in Russian airstrikes. So Western nations are already
united through NATO. So I'm wondering if we are starting to see Russia build a firm alliance with
opposing nations. Yeah, to my point earlier about alliances being so important. And without question,
this is occurring. Both sides are feeling the pressure to remain in the fight and to establish
an upper hand position from which to dictate the terms of any potential future armistice. I think the
elephant in the room here really, Tim, is that there appears to be no realistic strategy or what
what people today are calling a theory of victory for Ukraine to defeat nuclear-armed Russia decisively.
So the best Ukraine can hope for is to last long enough that Russia gives out of its own weariness,
or there's a political upheaval of some kind. For Russia and Putin, there's a belief that they can
they can still win by wearing down Ukraine and also wearing down the West's support for Ukraine.
If you'll recall in my book, you win wars by defeating the other side's will to fight
and destroying capacity is one way to do this. But it's also important to attack the psychological
pillars that undergird the will. And among these are things like morale, leadership, experience,
and motivation, those sorts of things. So each side in the war certainly attempted to remain in the
fight long enough to collapse the other side's will to fight. And that entails bringing in mercenaries,
other countries, additional capacity, in some cases, prisoners, more advanced weapons and so forth,
to maintain that pressure to get to the point where that will just collapses. And of course,
we haven't gotten there yet. Now, one of the big unknowns here seems to be China. Back in October,
the Council on Foreign Relations wrote that Russia and China are strengthening their alliance with a
notable focus on Ukraine. But China seems to be supporting Russia while promoting itself as a
peace broker. So it seems like they are trying to take at least a somewhat neutral stance in this,
which could be a very good thing, I suppose. If Russia gets into a direct conflict with NATO,
would you anticipate China deciding to take a side in this? Or do you see them trying to remain neutral?
I think neutrality is probably a little too strong to call what China's doing. They certainly want to
enhance their stature in the world. They're doing more in terms of trying to make themselves
respectable in the traditional world order, while at the same time trying to revise it with them at
the top of the food chain. So I think the most important thing to think about with China is they're
going to do what's in their best interest, no matter what. And I definitely do not believe it is in their
best interest, nor do I think they see it in their best interest to be drawn into a conflict in Europe
against NATO. They have enough concerns in their own backyard. I would also say that despite the
sense that they have cozied up to some degree with Russia, these are very strange bedfellows with a
long history of cultural and political animosity. And I don't think that's going to change anytime
soon. And I don't think that China necessarily thinks it's an existential problem for them if Russia is
weakened and if Russia is embroiled with NATO. So I do not think that should NATO become involved in the
Russia-Ukraine war that China will directly participate, nor do I think that China wants
this necessarily to occur because of the global economic ramifications, which could certainly
undermine their stability within China. However, I would say that China is poised to exploit the
situation to the greatest extent possible. And if there were direct confrontation between NATO and
Russia, they would certainly want to exploit that to regional advantage, and particularly they may
want to make a move against Taiwan. And this truly would be an explosive situation that could lead
to what anyone could justifiably call a World War III. That said, I don't think that the direct
confrontation between NATO, Russia and or China is likely, again, due to the power of nuclear deterrence
between all three, but we can't rule it out. Again, mistakes can happen, but I would say nuclear
deterrence is still deterring the great powers from confronting each other directly.
Well, let me turn to this topic of nuclear weapons and nuclear deterrence. Last week,
Russia launched a new hypersonic ballistic missile into Ukraine. Now, it was armed with conventional
explosives, but it is reportedly capable of delivering three to six nuclear warheads simultaneously as part of
MIRV to independent targets. Putin also changed Russia's nuclear doctrine to say that, quote unquote,
any attack by a non-nuclear power supported by a nuclear power would be considered a joint attack.
And I believe he also wrote that any attack by one member of a military bloc would be considered
an attack by the entire alliance. So for me, that was very, very concerning. I wanted to ask,
in your opinion, how close are we to nuclear war right now?
Well, Putin wants to rein in any possibility that the West may take advantage of the situation
with some members of NATO and or allies becoming more provocative. And we're certainly towing a very,
very thin line there when we're talking about some of the advanced weapons being used.
I think Putin's statements may appear and they justifiably appear provocative. But I think when
you look through the lens of theory and history, it makes absolutely perfect sense. And it's something
that Russia has been doing from the beginning of the war. A preponderance of their conventional
military powers tied up in Ukraine, that doesn't leave them much capacity for conventional deterrence.
So that leaves only nuclear deterrence. So this is why Russia is rattling the nuclear saber.
And this is essentially their ace in the hole to protect themselves while they're tied up in Ukraine.
Putin does not want NATO or the U.S. to think that Russia's weakness is an invitation to exploitation.
And I think that Putin wants to halt the gradual escalation, what he sees of high-end Western
weaponry into Ukraine, in particular, these weapons that could potentially target strategic sites
deeper within Russia. So at the same time, I think Russia doesn't want to, for the reasons I specified
earlier, be drawn into a direct conflict with NATO. So they're towing, they're playing a delicate game
here with escalatory rhetoric that's designed to deter, while at the same time, making sure that a
conflict between NATO doesn't occur. So I would say the rhetoric makes it appear that we're closer to
nuclear war. But in reality, I think nothing substantive has changed, provided two conditions
exist. I'll throw them in. Number one, provided NATO does not directly get involved in the war against Russia
with troops and equipment. In other words, actively participating with NATO or U.S. forces against
Russia. That will change that equation. And also, the other side of that, and I think this speaks to
Putin's comments specifically, if Ukraine employs weapons that can directly threaten either Russia's
strategic forces and or create an existential dilemma for Moscow, then I could see that also
changing the equation. So we have to pay close attention, in particular to that second one,
because Putin's certainly kind of speaking his way into a box. And if he finds it where he can't
maintain his credibility without acting, that would be something that could be dangerous. And so in that
sense, we could be closer to a potential nuclear confrontation.
Yeah, well, thank you again for clarifying and providing the context. I think that's incredibly
helpful and in many ways reassuring. So I wanted to go back and look at history a bit. The immediate
comparison that came to mind for me was the Cuban Missile Crisis. Reuters reported that Russia has
started making nuclear resistant mobile bomb shelters. I have read that the city of Leningrad is
converting sellers into bomb shelters. And Germany is planning to convert public buildings into bomb shelters
as well. Now, you know, again, at first, when you read those headlines at face value, it's like,
okay, the end is nigh, this is really, really bad. But then when I paused and thought about it, I thought,
you know, this reminds me so much of the fear that existed in that existential anxiety during the Cuban
Missile Crisis. Can we draw any comparisons between today's saber rattling and what happened back then?
We certainly can. I don't want to make it appear as though there isn't the potential for grave danger
with this. Again, go back to Erasmus of Rotterdam's quote, there is a potential for widening and
escalation and mistakes to occur. Now, that being said, when we're looking at the Cuban Missile Crisis,
I don't think we're anywhere near approaching the level of nuclear brinksmanship that we saw there
because Russia is not attempting to position nuclear weapons, for example, you know, on the U.S.'s doorstep
in the Western Hemisphere. That would certainly be a lot more provocative. However, we've got to,
we can't just look at this from the U.S.'s standpoint. We have to look at it from Europe's
standpoint as well. And nuclear weapons are very much on Europeans' doorstep there. So neither Russia nor
Europe nor anyone else wants to open the Pandora's box of a nuclear exchange. But the building of the
bomb shelters, I think, signals very clearly on both sides that they want to be seen as serious,
that they are ready to do this in the event that the other side steps across the line. And that's
very important to deterrence. It's something that, again, you know, we can get scared at this sort of
thing. But we need to understand the way deterrence works. There are two essential components. One is
you have to have the capability. Clearly, both sides have the capability to go nuclear and to escalate.
But more than that, it requires the opponent to be convinced that you have the will to respond. And
that's based on credibility. So what you're seeing with these movements is that both sides are enhancing
the credibility regarding their will to respond should this be escalated. So it's a matter of
deterrence posturing. It can be frightening. But that's what deterrence is about, right? To frighten
the other side from taking action that might otherwise be detrimental to both of them.
Well, so one of the things that you mentioned a moment ago was not seeing a clear path to victory,
I guess, in Ukraine. I wanted to ask about political off-ramps in terms of continued escalation.
Do you foresee any ways, you know, I have read about something called a golden path to retreat or
something along those lines. I'm misquoting that. But the idea being that, you know, you give your
adversary, regardless of who that is, you know, a way to preserve their honor and exit the battlefield
without having to escalate things. Do you think that there is a way that we could reach that with
Russia? That is the trillion-dollar question, Tim. And it's one that, undoubtedly, the new Trump
administration will be grappling with immediately. Theory and history tells us that de-escalation,
in essence, exiting the war viscosity algorithm requires one of two things, either a decision forced
militarily or the mutual agreement between opposing sides to cease hostilities. So I think a decision
forced militarily, for the reasons I highlighted earlier, is unlikely at this point. It's certainly
in the near term and certainly not as imposed by Ukraine on Russia. So then the question becomes,
on what grounds? So how can we get to this golden path or this political off-ramp? And I think there
could be a brokered humanitarian pause or something of that nature, an agreement to de-escalate,
to mitigate human suffering, for example. But a longer-term solution, I think, will be required
to really solve this problem. And it's fair to say that Russia will not want to cede any of the
territory in Ukraine that it's taken. And so, essentially, unless Ukraine could be convinced
to allow Russia to keep its territory, we're at an impasse, which essentially explains why we've been
in this war as long as we have. So even if Ukraine could be convinced, let's say they were, say, by
President-elect Trump coming in to negotiate and to allow Russia to hold its gains, Russia would still
not give up its designs on Ukraine and would probably not accept any deal that wouldn't also guarantee
that Ukraine would not join any alliances and not accept any significant troops, even in a peacekeeping
role on Ukrainian soil. And I think Putin would say, were any of these things to happen, he would
immediately resume hostilities. So I think it's a very thorny issue. And this is why we're still at this
three years hence with almost no, again, almost no significant changes in the last couple of years.
And it's going to be very interesting to keep an eye on it in the coming months.
Absolutely. Jeffrey, let me thank you so much for your time today. Again, thank you for your tremendous
career of service. And thank you for helping elucidate this issue and just share the context
with us about, you know, why this is happening, where it's going, and some of the factors that are
involved with this. I want to remind everybody to look in the YouTube show notes once again for the
link to buy The New Art of War. That is an absolutely remarkable book. You have put so much into it,
and it is an absolutely amazing read. Let me close by asking, what do you see happening
in the near future in the Ukraine conflict? And then what are your goals for the coming 2025 year?
Thanks so much, Tim. I really had the opportunity to be on your path,
on your podcast again. And I'll be looking along with you very intently at what's going to happen
here in the near term. I think, first of all, I think you're going to see some overtures by the
current incoming U.S. administration to try to find an avenue to a political off-ramp of some kind.
Certainly, President-elect Trump has said that's one of his main goals, and Putin has said he's
willing to work with Trump, et cetera. But there's the Europeans to consider, there's the Ukrainian
to consider, et cetera. And a lot of blood has been spilled. So you're not going to
just wipe that away and sign some peace treaty without both sides, as you said, feeling like
they're getting something out of this. So that's what's going to happen. I think you're going to see
some attempt. But again, for the reason that I mentioned in the wild card of European sensibilities,
et cetera, I think it's going to be very difficult to find common ground in the near term. And so I
think unlikely that this is going to come to an end anytime soon. Regarding myself, I'm definitely going
to be working to help our allies and partners gain the capability and the confidence that they need to
stand together with us and our other allies that have similar views on values and democracy and peace
and security and human rights and those sorts of things. So from my position in the department with
international affairs, we'll continue to push that in the air and space domains. And hopefully we will
be successful in deterring Russia or China or any other actors out there, Iran, et cetera,
from attempting to take advantage of any situation or us or our allies around the world. So that's what
I'm looking forward to doing. And I'll certainly be getting after that in 2025.
Thank you again so much for your time today, sir.
Thank you, Tim. Appreciate it.
