Hey everyone, Nathan here, Absurd Being.
Alright, Henri Bergson, duration is what we're into today.
Before I do actually, I did say at the beginning, I think two videos ago, this series, I'm not
going to kind of work my way through any one book in particular.
I'm certainly not doing like a chapter by chapter breakdown, but there is, I am just
basically following Bergson's thought through time and free will, and then we're going to
look through matter of memory, and then finally we'll go through creative evolution.
So I'm really following Bergson's timeline anyway, but it's not a kind of, I mean, if
you're thinking of reading along or if you're trying to kind of anchor these videos in something,
I am really following those books.
Although, very much unlike Heidegger and Sartre and Co., I'm not doing a kind of chapter by
chapter breakdown.
I'm more focused on the bigger ideas, I think.
Anyway, that's just kind of a side note.
So we're still, we're looking through time and free will, and we're going to be looking
at duration today, and we'll start with space.
So space, we're just going to flesh this idea out at the beginning here, because it's going
to be something we will contrast to duration.
So there are two kinds of space that Bergson is interested in.
The first he calls the perception of extensity, and this is basically an original lived spatiality,
which is experienced as being full of qualitative differences.
Bergson calls that heterogeneous.
An important word for Bergson, it comes up again and again, and it comes up in distinction,
in contrast to homogeneous.
So those words are good to kind of become familiar with.
So this kind of, this sense of space is something that we live.
It's not something that we abstract.
It's not something that we conceptualize.
It's, it's, it's, it's, it's our lived way of being in a space, being in a space with other
things, being anchoring ourselves, orienting ourselves in our environment.
So, it's a lived spatiality, and it has these qualitative differences, and you can think about
this, perhaps an easy way to think about it is, is the difference between right and left.
If you have, if one hand is dominant, so I'm right-handed, the right hand feels different
to me from the left.
Things on my right side feel different from the left.
It's not just, the two, the two aren't equal.
The two aren't, um, uh, kind of, I, I can't do what I can do with my right with my left
as equal, equally as well.
Uh, if I, if I go to throw a ball, it feels natural.
If I do it with my right, the left side, it's, it's kind of strange.
So, and that, that, that carries over into, um, the way that I, I kind of subtly perceive
my orientation in the world, relate, in relation to other things.
The right side just feels a little bit different from the left.
I don't know my right as being different from my left through kind of thinking about it.
It, it's a natural lived difference.
And that's just a small example of, of this, these qualitative differences that, um, a lived
spatiality has, the heterogeneity of, of a lived spatiality.
Obviously, Milo Ponti picks up on this and talks about this as well in Phenomenology of
Perception.
He talked, he talked about this in a number of different senses.
One was, uh, with, uh, with tribes people, kind of, because primitive tribes, tribes people
who, um, when they think about the, the location of their clan encampment, it's, it's associated
with this feeling of, um, a kind of a peaceful feeling.
It's not just another point on the map.
It has an affective quality to it.
Um, and you could say, say the same thing about many religious believers today, right?
The, the church has a different feel where the church is.
It's not just another building.
It has some special kind of feeling associated with it, an affective quality.
Mecca is a great example, right?
It's so important that, um, Muslims have to orient themselves in the world in relation
to it, or they have to direct themselves to it, to, uh, to, to go through that, the prayer
and the, uh, sorry, the, the ritual, the prayer ritual that they, um, that they do.
So again, location, it's not just, not just the compass point.
It's, uh, there's a feeling associated with it.
Um, and so that's apparent in, in many different ways in everyday life.
The example that Bergson gives, which is a good one is animals are navigating through, um,
however they do it, whether it's magnetic light, um, magnetic fields or whatever it is.
The directions aren't the same for them.
That one direction has kind of a privilege over others, depending on what they, what they're doing.
So if they're trying to get back home, um, many animals are able to navigate, follow a straight line,
basically back to, back to their, their home.
Um, um, um, and however it is that they're able to do that, that line back to their home is obviously,
it has a different feeling from other directions.
Um, and so that's, that's, that's this lived spatiality.
The other kind of space, um, Bergson calls a conception of space.
And so this is space, which we, we're conceiving as, we're conceiving of it as a homogeneous medium,
which makes abstract objectifying thought possible because, because it gives us a background
on which to juxtapose things to each other.
We talked about this a little bit in the last video with, uh, psychic states.
They're intensive, they're intensities, but we tend to spatialize them.
And it makes, it means that we, we end up thinking these psychic states are measurable,
that they're quantitative, uh, when in fact they're qualitative and, um, intensities rather
than this, this kind of, um, something that can be analyzed and measured and, and quantified.
Um, so, okay, conception of space, it's an abstract, homogeneous background.
So every point in this abstract manifold that we, we are, we're imagining when we think
of space in this way is the same.
Um, no point is privileged, no point is special.
Every, every point is just another point with a, with a coordinate, which, with a set of
coordinates, which directs us to that, which, which, um, individuates that point amongst
the others, but there's nothing special.
There's not nothing else special about it.
It's just, just like the same as every other point on, on, on the, on the plane, whatever
it is that we're thinking of.
Um, so that this kind of space, it's an abstract way of thinking about something.
It's not a real space.
This, this conception of space doesn't exist anywhere.
It's, it's an abstract tool that we, that we, um, invoke whenever we want to objectify,
whenever we want to analyze something.
Um, so it's, it's, it's, it's no longer within the world.
It's not a part of the lived world.
It's, I've written, it's not contaminated with our qualitative feelings.
Um, it's this kind of pristine idealized model.
Um, and this kind of space is only available for, um, highly intelligent animals or, or animals
capable of higher kind of cognitive functioning.
Um, and so it's connected with the intellect and that's a nice, um, contrast with what we
said before space has perception of the extensity.
All animals have this, you don't need any special kind of cognitive abilities.
It's, it's present for all animals.
This one, however, this abstract conception of space is only available for, um, animals
with, with a, with a higher degree of intellect.
So with that in mind, let's turn to duration.
Okay.
Duration.
So, um, first of all, perhaps, perhaps why the word duration?
Why, why did Bergson shy away from the word time?
Um, the reason is basically because, well, actually, let me just, let me just get into it and then
I think it'll be clear.
So when we think of time, we usually think of time as this, as a dimension, right?
Another dimension like space.
So it's a static background, homogeneous medium in which events unfold.
It's like a container through which we're moving.
When we think of space in the same way, this kind of background, which, which plays, um,
no active role in, in what we do.
Um, it's just this, you know, each point is the same, is the same as any other point.
No points are privileged.
No moments are privileged.
That, I mean, it's a fundamental idea in science, right?
That's what it is to be objective.
Um, but if we, when we think of time like this, we think of it as this, this, a kind of background
medium in which things happen, then it actually means that all of those individual moments in
time coexist, right?
We're, we're, we're kind of, it's like a timeline, right?
You've got the past here, the present here, and the future there, all of those moments we
can see before us at once.
So all of those moments coexist, which means there's no actual duration.
Nothing is actually enduring through time.
And if that's the case, then there's no time because that's fundamentally what time is.
It's that enduring, that sense of persisting through, um, that sense of persisting, the
sense of living.
If you get rid of that, if we replace it with this abstract idea of, um, time as, as a timeline
or time as, as a dimension similar to space, then we can, we can easily throw up every moment
on this, on this, this ruler and, uh, all moments coexist.
We're no longer engaged.
We're looking from the outside as a spectator.
And if we have that situation, there's no sense in which time is happening.
Time is not flowing at all.
And if time's not flowing, it's not time, it's space.
And so that's, that's the way that we normally think of, of time as the static background,
um, which, which we can project in front of us, the past, the present and the future.
And if, if we have that idea, what we've done is spatialized time.
And it's the same as, um, we talked about just before space, perception of extensity,
uh, and the conception of space where you've got duration, which is lived.
It's, uh, along with that perception of extensity, it's qualitative, it's engaged.
It's, it's something that, that is, is, um, experienced, right?
As opposed to over here, the conception of space and the conception of time, the scientific,
um, and the, the, the normal, the typical understanding that we have of time is just
another dimension.
It's, it's, it's something that is, it's, it's an abstract idealized conception.
It's not what we fundamentally live.
And if it's not what we fundamentally live,
it can't be metaphysically true, right?
So we're living in reality.
If our description of reality doesn't match what we're living,
then we've got a problem, but that's what we have.
We kind of have that situation.
Now we've got this pristine idealized scientific account, which again, there's not criticizing
science at all, but it's not describing fundamental reality.
It can't be because it's excluding.
That's a reality that no one lives.
No one can live in that reality.
It's an idealized conception.
It's an abstract, um, model, but it's not what we actually live.
And so these ideas, you get space and time, they don't map on to what we actually experience.
And, and there's that, that divide and it's kind of, um, I think it's come to the fore with consciousness
because there's just no way to bridge that gap.
And so we're talking about pie in the sky notions like emergence, which doesn't mean anything,
doesn't explain anything for, um, integrated information, which again, I can't see it going
anywhere because it, it, it's just ignoring the fundamental divide that's there that we're trying to,
to, to bridge something which is fundamentally lived, fundamentally experienced with,
with a static, um, abstract model.
And, uh, I don't think it's going to work that there has to be a complete reevaluation of,
of the, the situation.
Anyway, I've drifted.
So time without this sense of duration, time without the sense of persisting or enduring
is actually space, which brings us to duration, duration itself.
And let me give you a quote.
Pure duration is the form which the succession of our conscious states assumes when our ego lets itself
live, when it refrains from separating its present states from its former states.
Okay.
So there are a couple of important things in that quote.
Um, it's interesting, actually, Bergson's not, he doesn't, he's not describing,
he's not defining duration.
He's talking about duration.
He's talking about our conscious states, actually, our psychic states.
And, and the, the way that our psychic states succeed one another.
There's that, there's a, um, there's a flow with our psychic states.
That is a kind of duration.
That's a, that's the form of duration that our psychic states go through.
So succession is key.
Succession is important in duration.
There has to be this, um, progression.
There has to be a, a flow, a flux, a change from one state to another.
If, if you don't have that pretty much, obviously, right, you don't have duration.
You don't have time.
You've got space masquerading as time.
Um, so succession's important.
There has to be a succession.
We, we saw this in the end of the last video as well with the bell, the ringing of the bell.
Each bell, each, um, each peal sounds one after the other.
So there's succession there.
Um, and that's a form of duration, uh, and not just succession though.
You have the succession, but where we don't
lock ourselves into the present and separate the present from other states.
So duration is the succession, but it's also this kind of a wider, broader, um, into it.
No, that's not, that's not, that's not a good word.
A broader, um, sense of an, an awareness of prior states and perhaps future states to come.
So it's not locked into this present moment.
Again, typically how we think of time, right?
We think of time we're locked into this present.
We're always in the present.
It's never the past or the future.
Past is just the memory.
The future is just the expectation.
The only thing that's real is the present.
But that, that, that's an, that's an idealized conception of time, right?
No one lives that no one lives locked in the present moment.
We're always, uh, our present is always informed by the past.
It's always our past moments always carry through.
They bleed into the present.
If they didn't, we wouldn't be able to live.
We wouldn't be able to function.
And, and these, the, as they bleed into the present,
we are, we are, we are, the way I described it before is I'm leaning into the future at the same time.
So I'm not locked into this, this single moment.
I'm a, I'm a broader temporal, um, existence, let's say.
So we refrain from just separating ourselves in this, locking ourselves into this present,
separating ourselves from other, other moments, other states.
Um, and that's, and that goes against kind of the, the, the normal everyday sense of time,
but also things like Buddhism, which is, which focuses on the present.
There are elements of Buddhism.
I think, in fact, a lot of Buddhism is very complimentary to science and very overlaps
with science and in a number of places, which, which is why it has a lot of, um, respect,
I think in the West.
But, but again, here, the Buddhist idea, the present is the, is the only,
is the only thing real. You only ever live in the present. That's just not true.
We don't live in the present. We're not locked into the present where, um,
we are a broader temporal, we, we have a broader temporal existence than that. But having said that,
we're not explicitly positing each of these states, right? So there's only one state present before
us at once. That's what it means. That's what a succession is. If you, if you don't have,
if you have more than one state before you at one time, it's not a succession anymore,
then it's space. You've just thrown everything up against the wall and you can see it all clearly
laid out before you, but there's no enduring there, right? So enduring, there's a succession,
there's only ever one state before you, but, um, there's, there's an, an awareness of these other
states that have gone before and these other states that are coming. Um, but it's kind of,
well, to, to go with Milo Ponte and Sartre, it's non-thetic. It's not explicit. We're not explicitly
juxtaposing these states. We're not putting them up one, one by one, you know, in front of us. We're
not laying them out, which would be to spatialize time, which would be to lose what we're trying to
look at, which is duration, which is time. Rather, they, instead of juxtaposing them like that,
we have this kind of awareness, this, um, non-thetic awareness of them, other states.
Uh, and the way that Bergson describes this, he doesn't use the word non-thetic that that's,
I don't know where that came from. I first heard it in Sartre. I'm not sure he coined it though,
but both Sartre and Milo Ponte use it. Um, but he talks about, Bergson talks about the past and the
present coming together into an organic whole in which the past is gathered up without being explicitly
posited. So we've got this organic whole, which means that we're not looking at individual moments,
individual states or individual elements in the succession, but they all, they're all kind of,
they're all there in the present moment. So I, when I'm listening now, I'm only hearing
the single peel of the bell, the single ring of the bell, but that ring, it contains all of the
rings that came before it. They've all kind of, they're all interconnected in this organic whole.
Um, and that is how I'm going to,
well, that's how Bergson's going to describe it in this next quote I have, which is, which is more,
which is a better, I think, definition of duration itself. So anyway, it's, uh, he says,
duration is a succession without distinction, a mutual penetration and interconnection and
organization of elements. Each one of which represents the whole and cannot be distinguished
or isolated from it, except by abstract thought. And that is exactly what I was just getting at.
The succession, but a succession without distinction. There's only ever one moment present, but
that moment is, it's interpenetrated. It's interconnected with all of the other moments.
We, we, we see the whole thing together. We get this organ, this picture of an organic whole
and we can't break it apart without going into abstract territory without, um, without losing what
it is that we're focusing on here, whether that we're interested in duration, the psychic states,
the, um, how they're, how they appear for us. As soon as we, we, um, we break them down by, you know,
state by state, then we, we're juxtaposing them, we're, we're abstracting them, we're spatializing them.
Uh, and that's, again, something that I remember, I remember saying those, almost those exact words
in, um, in the videos on the Loponte somewhere. As soon as we abstract, as soon as we break
something apart, we've lost what it is we're looking for. We start looking at a, um, reflective
representation of the thing, an idea of the thing rather than the thing itself.
Uh, so anyway, what I wanted to focus on or emphasize in that quote, duration's not just
succession, but it's that mutual penetration of, um, elements of states.
And just an interesting kind of side note is, um, I, I, I feel that, that, that, um,
description, that, uh, that process, the succession, which is, um, the succession of states, which in,
which, uh, are interconnected the way that Bergson's talking about, I think that is what
consciousness is. It's what, it's what, um, kind of makes consciousness conscious, if you like.
And, uh, I'm working on a series of articles at the moment, which I'm trying to kind of disentangle
the, uh, the mess that, that is consciousness at the moment. And, uh, and I'm doing it through,
through Bergson, through this idea of duration. And, um, yeah, I think it's really interesting.
He's, uh, I, I think this, this is very, um, it's just, everything just comes together so nicely in
Bergson in a way that, um, I haven't seen before. Um, you, you get this from a phenomenological
perspective in Heidegger and Milo-Ponty, um, and Sartre, although maybe a little bit less with
Sartre actually, but, um, but here he's, he's, this is pure metaphysics now. So he's really looking at
describing what reality is, not just our phenomenological, not just reality from our
phenomenological perspective, but, but, uh, reality itself. So, uh, so yeah, it's just, it's all good.
This is, this is great stuff. Um, okay, let me keep going. So psychic states originally endure,
or they succeed one another into penetrating each other in this way that, that makes an organic whole.
But when we think about them, we necessarily, we necessarily conceive of them as coexisting
simultaneously in a certain order. And when this happens, we have spatialized duration.
So what's important in there is that we necessarily conceive of them in this way. Um, and
this makes kind of duration a little bit tricky to, um, to, to, to touch, if you like to, to grab,
because, um, when we, when we use the only tool we have for thinking, which is our minds,
we automatically go spatial. We automatically, um, think in terms of space. That's just the way
our brains work or our minds work. Um,
and so it's the only way we can think about things is through this spatial, um, approach,
this analytic abstract approach. If we didn't do that, we wouldn't be able to think where we'd be,
we'd be like the animals just, um, we'd be navigating through space in that, you know,
perception of extensity through space as a, as a perception of extensity, but, but we wouldn't have
the capacity for, uh, in, for abstract thought. We wouldn't be able to think about what it is that
we're doing. Uh, and that's, that's, that's our gift, but it's also our curse because when we do that,
when we're thinking about something like duration, to think about it in the first place, to intellectualize
about it, to abstract, that in itself negates duration, that, that act negates duration.
So the act of thinking about it, um, dissipates the thing we're trying to think about.
Uh, which makes it kind of a tricky thing to, to, to get your head around. Um, and you kind of have
to approach it obliquely. You have to look at it kind of from the corner of your eye, because if you
look at it directly, it disappears. Um, if you try and think about it kind of the way that we normally
think about it and there's no other way to think that's, that's the trick here. There's no other way.
There's no special way of thinking is the way there's only one way of thinking. And that's a
spatial way. That's a, that's a logical way. Um, it's, it's kind of like, and I really think there's,
uh, this is the, the Tao Tao Tao Taoism, the Tao that the, what is it? The Tao that can be spoken
of is not the real Tao, something like that. But, uh, that, that, that applies so well here.
Duration that you can speak about that you can think about is not the real duration.
That duration is something that can only be lived. It can only, it only works in, in a life,
in a lived, uh, situation. Abstracting it out from that situation immediately loses what is essential,
what's intrinsic to duration. Um, and I just want to go through another example that Bergson
gives here. He talks about a pendulum swinging backwards and forwards and, um,
imagining keeping that in your mind. He says, I shall perceive one in the other, each permeating
the other and organizing themselves like the nut, the notes of a tune. So as to form what we
shall call a continuous or qualitative multiplicity with no resemblance to number. I shall thus get the
image of pure duration, but I shall have entirely got rid of the idea of a homogeneous medium or a
measurable quantity. Okay, cool. So pendulum swinging backwards and forwards. When I think of it, when I
perceive it, when I live it, each of those swings permeates every other swing. It's a, I, there is no, um,
um, isolated single swing. Each swing is part of, of a greater whole, like the notes of a tune. And
that, that's probably the best example. It's funny you didn't use that example. Husserl used it and
really, really hammered it out. I think nicely with the melody. A melody doesn't make any sense unless
you've got a broader focus, unless, you know, if you're locked into the present note, then the,
what about then there, there is no melody there, right? There's no melody in the individual notes.
Melody comes from the notes flowing each note and being interconnected with the note
that came before it. And that, um, and that is, is coming after it. And we're kind of, the melody leads
us somewhere, even as it came from somewhere. And we're aware of that. That's what it is. That's what
duration is. That, that's what it is to be, to live your time, not just to abstract it out there,
not just to spatialize it. And that, uh, Bergson calls, I almost called him Melo Ponti. I did that
in the last video too. That, uh, Bergson calls a qualitative multiplicity. So it's a multiplicity
because you've got, you've got a succession, right? The pendulum swinging 10 times, 15 times, but
it's qualitative in the sense that we are, we've, we're aware of it. We've, we've got this broader
sense of, of the present swing in a, in a, in a broader, in a, in a greater whole. Um, and that's,
that's what duration is. Same idea as the bell ringing. Um, so yeah, important,
pure duration cannot be measured because it's not a quantity exactly the same as we saw with
intensities, intensities of psychic states. They can't be measured because they are purely qualitative.
We think they can be measured. We think we can count them and, and, and, um, treat them like number,
uh, like, uh, objective, quantitative data, but that's only because we've spatialized them already.
As soon as once we've spatialized them, yeah, we can, we can go ahead and measure and count and
do all of those wonderful things with it, put them into equations. But as, as, as the experiences that
they actually are, they're qualitative. They're not, they're not, um, quantitative. So I like that, that
that term qualitative multiplicity. It's the multiplicity we, we talked about at the end of
last, the last video. It's the second kind. Um, we didn't, I, I didn't use the word qualitative
multiplicity. I think I just called it the multiplicity of psychic states, but that, that's what it is.
Interesting, um, point, which we're not going to drill into here, but we will, we will come back to
is, well, so we've got this idea of duration, succession of psychic states that all interpenetrate
each other, but how do they melt into each other like this? How is that affected? That's a good
question. And Bergson answers it by saying memory with, with the word, with the, um, capacity memory.
So memory is, I think of memory as the, the engine of duration, the driver. It's what, it's what allows
um, those states, those separate states to interpenetrate like this, to, to, um, connect together
into a whole. And we're going to, we're going to spend a little bit of time on memory a little bit
later, but, uh, but that's coming anyway. So just, just be aware of that. Um, I'll give you a couple
of, a couple more definitions, I think, just to, just cause they're nice. Um, Bergson talks about
these quite nicely. Duration, he talks about it as a synthesis of the past and the present
with a view to the future. Again, that idea, there's a connection, there's a, um, past and the present.
These states are, are blended together in somewhere into a whole and with a view to the future. Um, and
that's, it's, it's there in Bergson, but it's very much understated. He, he doesn't pay much attention to
the future, which is interesting because Heidegger is the exact opposite, right? For Heidegger,
the future is, is the, the, the main, um, ecstasy. The other ones, past and the present,
they're, they're, they're important, obviously. They all, they're, they're all intertwined, but
for Heidegger, it's, it's the future that's the key. For Bergson, very much, it's the past. And we'll see this
when we talk about memory a little bit more as well. Um, but, but it's just an interesting,
interesting thing to think about. One last definition, um, and this is from creative evolution.
Duration is the continuous progress of the past, which gnaws into the future and which swells as it
advances. Just a nice description, right? I mean, these people, all of these philosophers,
they have these, the philosophers that we've been reading, they all have this real knack with words,
and that's a nice description. Continuous progress of the past, gnawing into the future,
swelling as it advances. Beautiful. One consequence of this, and this is going to lead us into the last
section of this video, is that it means change is constant. Duration is the continuous progress of the
past. So one thing that is, is underlying this is the idea of change, becoming and creation. Um,
and Bergson talks more about this in, um, creative evolution, but what I want to say about this is
quite small and, and it ties in nicely with duration. So, um, we'll look at that now.
Right. Basically change creation and becoming essentially, these are all three facets of the
same thing, three kind of, um, and, and that thing is, is duration. So it's underlying, um,
duration's underlying these three notions. Um, and that's the way I've described them here.
There's kind of consequences of Bergson's, um, idea of duration. So let's have a look at some things.
There are a few things I wanted to say here. The first is that change, um, obviously occurs in between
psychic states. So we're kind of restricting our discussion here of duration to psychic states
for now. Um, so change occurs obviously in between each psychic state. So the succession
of psychic states, there's a change in between them, but change also is taking place in each state
itself. So whatever it is that's succeeding, whatever, whatever, um, elements are succeeding each other.
Uh, in addition to the change in between each element, there's also a change in, within each element, uh,
every state is itself constantly changing because just to exist is to change. Um, and that means,
and that that's again, just the consequence of the fact that every state is enduring fundamentally
enduring. So not only are the change, is there change in between states, but the states themselves
are constant, constantly changing. They are constant change. Um, and that, I mean, I've already said it,
it's, it's a key element, but, um, this idea of continuity in Bergson becoming, there is no, um,
um, nothing is static in Bergson. Everything, reality, psychic states, even, even, um, the natural world
is, is, is, is in a continual flux. There is no, there is no stasis in Bergson. Let me give you a
quick quote, duration means invention, the creation of new forms, the continual elaboration of the
absolutely new. And that's from creative evolution. Um, and it's, it's a nice quote for the section
because it lets, it leads me into four points that I want to make, four points that I want to make.
First, all change is creation of something new. Um, and that's, that follows from the fact that
every moment, every current, every present includes the whole of the past behind it. So that that's this
idea of, um, all moments interpenetrating each other into an organic whole, right? It means that every,
every moment is brand new simply because it's, it's this moment plus everything that came before it.
And, uh, and, uh, and it's a continual pushing into, um, the new. So even if this moment has happened
before, right, everything is identical, but because this moment, it's not the first time because it's
happened before in the past, it's no, it's not the same. Just that is enough to make it, to make
this moment different from the last moment or from this state of affairs different from
the prior time that the same state of affairs occurred because this state of affairs includes
that prior identical state of affairs. So when, whenever you, you factor in the past into the,
into the present in the way that Berkson does here, every, every change is creation of is the creation
of something new. It leads into something new. Uh, and this means that change is fundamentally
unpredictable. To predict something involves projecting what has, what has already been seen
or, um, inferring something based on what has already been seen. But if each moment is new,
if each moment is brand new, a genuinely new creation in the way that we're suggesting here,
prediction is impossible. Um, and that, that again, it's, it's a more central element in creative
evolution. And we'll talk about it later in, in relation to that book, but, but for now that,
that's something to just kind of bear in mind, all changes, the creation of something new,
that means that, that whatever occurs, all change is fundamentally unpredictable. Um,
and we think though about things like abstracted physical systems. So things that, um, systems that we
take out of the whole and, and isolate by themselves, those kinds of systems don't endure, they don't
undergo duration, if you like. So those abstracted systems, then there, there is, since there's no
duration going on there, they, um, it's possible for them to enter the same state twice. So if the same
state occurs, it's not, it's not different from a prior state, we can treat it as identical. And in
fact, it is identical because there's no duration because it's been abstracted out from the whole.
So there's only duration. If you have that, that prior buildup of the past with you, if we take
something out, stick it there, um, on its own isolated, then it doesn't endure, then, um, we can predict
future states. There's nothing unpredictable about that because there's no duration going on.
And the example that, that, um, Bergson gives is, uh, the system cup, kettle, and water.
So you've got those three things. Those are elements that we've broken, we've pulled out from the whole,
from the, from the natural world, um, into the static artificial system, this static artificial grouping.
And now there's no duration. There's no, there's no past essentially. Um,
um, if the water in the kettle boiled at a hundred degrees Celsius yesterday, then I can reasonably
expect that we'll do so today. And that's fully predictable. We can, we can predict that with,
with, without any problems as opposed to something like a psychic state, which is always part of,
of a human, an individual, a whole, an organic totality. Those can never be predicted. And this
is going to be a, um, a core part of his argument for freedom, which we'll look at, um, a little bit
later. The last thing I wanted to say that, that follows on from that quote, duration means invention,
the creation of new forms, the continual elaboration of the absolutely new, is that it also means
changes are irreversible. So you can never, um, undo something, go back to a prior state.
If you go, if you try and go back to a prior state, everything, even though everything is identical
to some earlier state, again, just the fact that this state has happened before makes this state
different. So whatever change takes place because it's, um, and this is really saying the same thing
as, as what I said in the second point, um, in the first point, actually, all change is creation of
something new. So you, you can never undo a change, go back to a prior state. And the way I've expressed
this is that every moment is always experienced for the first time. So there's never any creation is
absolutely new change is what better change is absolute creation, the creation of the absolutely
new. Um, and that's changed creation and becoming just, just a little bit. Um, like I said, we'll talk
more about it in, in the context of creative evolution, but for now, let's head to a summary.
Okay. So we talked about space. First, we had the perception of extensity, and this is that heterogeneous,
um, lived space that we, that we occupy, that we orient ourselves in, as opposed to the conception of space,
which was an abstract, um, homogeneous background, which, which lets us juxtapose things,
which gives us a static, unmoving fixed kind of, um, space in which to, uh, analyze and which to measure
and which to count and which to, to do all of those things that the intellect likes to do.
Then we looked at duration itself. Um, I talked about duration as being
succession and mutual penetration. So those are really the two key ideas of, uh, duration.
We looked at duration as a continuous progress of the past, which gnaws into the future. That was
another definition. And finally, some consequences of duration in the form of change or creation or
becoming. Um, and some of the points that I made here, every state is constantly changing. So the state
itself is constantly undergoing change. And this is talking about psychic states here. Uh, change is
genuine creation. So it's the creation of, of the absolutely new change is unpredictable. Therefore we can
never, um, and again, um, within psychic states or within any, any state that is, that is enduring, um,
the change that, that happens is unpredictable fundamentally. Uh, and finally change is irreversible.
Every moment is always experienced for the first time. And that is the first video on duration. We'll, um,
we'll continue this theme in the next video, but, um, yeah, I really like this concept duration. It's a
really nice and it's just so novel. It's just so, um, there are, there are bits and pieces of it in other
places, but, um, I don't, I mean, I'm not sure maybe prior to Berkson, there was someone who had something
very similar, but, um, certainly from the philosophers that I've read, this is, this is so
unique and because it's just kind of, he's been pushed aside books and duration is just kind of
languished there. No, one's, no, one's done anything with it for, for a hundred years. So
we're the first to get into it. Maybe. Anyway, that's duration. Thanks for listening. I'll catch you in the next video.
you
