what if it's not that there are physical beings that are looking for patterns they're trying to
find? What if we look at it from the perspective of the pattern? Because my view of this platonic
space is, or whatever space it is, that it has the things that we're used to, boring facts about
triangles and prime numbers and things like that, but it also has very much higher agency kind of
patterns. Kinds of minds, I think, are actually specific patterns in that space. I think that
these patterns are trying in the way that a gas in a balloon is trying to get out into the physical
space, but the only way they can do that is through what Don Hoffman would call interfaces or what I
call pointers. So we build something that could be a physical triangle or it could be a xenobot or it
could be a human embryo. And when we build these things, exactly as you just said, you get more out
than you put in because you're not actually creating any of these behavioral and anatomical
features, you are facilitating their appearance out of an ordered space.
Welcome back to the transmission, my friends. What if there were whole systems in the body,
whole realms of biology and science that we are just beginning to understand? Not only that,
but that have direct, massive philosophical implications about the nature of reality and
about consciousness. Well, for as far as we've come, that really does seem to be the case.
And if you're going to try to make sense of revelations of that gravity, you're going to
need a pretty deep philosophical well to draw from. And that is where Dr. Matt Siegel comes in
more on both Matt and Mike in just a second. I must say of all the brilliant folks who have been
in the mind meld on this show, there are some that stand out. There are some that occupy the more
advanced end of the spectrum. And I would absolutely put this conversation in that
category, but I would also put it amongst the most rewarding. Not that this episode is going to be
absolutely overflowing with technicals and jargon or anything like that, but I do recommend some
contextualization. I do recommend not going in completely dry. So given that my introductions to
the work of both Mike and Matt are going to be a bit girthier than usual. And if you're one of those
people who is just pathological about wanting to get straight to the conversation, you, you do you,
bud. Dr. Michael Levin is a developmental and synthetic biologist at Tufts University,
where he is the Vannevar Bush Distinguished Professor. His truly groundbreaking research on
bioelectricity, morphogenesis, and cognition is reshaping our understanding of how living
systems self-organize and regenerate. His work explores how cells and tissues communicate through
bioelectric signals, guiding the formation of complex structures without relying solely on genetic
instructions. His work suggests that biological development is not purely mechanistic, that it's
following invisible organization principles, patterns akin to platonic forms, timeless archetypal
templates that shape the material world. So he's really challenging reductionist mechanistic
views, and he's opening the door to a kind of biological Platonism. Helping us make sense of all of
this is Dr. Matt Siegel. He's a philosopher at the California Institute of Integral Studies. He's got a
wide breadth of expertise and interests, but he often looks through the lens of the philosopher Alfred
North Whitehead, whose work really harmonizes with Mike's in an interesting way, because Whitehead
rejected the static mechanistic view of classical science, instead proposing that reality is composed of
dynamic processes where mind and matter are inextricably intertwined. So together, Mike and Matt's work
really challenges the mechanistic view of reality that is still dominant today, and suggests that life
and mind are really active participants at all levels of reality. And with that, my friends, all the
links that you will need for both Mike and Matt are in the description. I would deeply appreciate it if
you tickled the algorithm with a like, a sub, a comment, a share. Do subscribe to Third Eye Drops
wherever you listen to podcasts. We've got hundreds more mind melds that are not here on YouTube with
truly brilliant beings. And I, and hundreds of others, would love to see you over at patreon.com forward slash
third eye drops. We have a patron only discord, we do zoom hangs a book club, you can get rewards like
stickers, pins, shirts, and more would love to chat you there. But presently, let's do so with Mike
leaving and Matt Siegel. So I was first turned on to your work, Mike by Don Hoffman. And, you know,
at first I was like, I'm not sure how their work necessarily overlaps. But the more I dug into your work,
the more it started to make sense. But one of the things just from, you know, a high level is there,
I feel like there are very few thinkers, very few scientists who are really pushing the boundaries
of all of our conceptual and scientific maps. And I think you and Don are both definitely doing that.
But one of the ways that in particular that you're doing it, and it is of particular interest to me,
is you are bumping up against these sort of hidden structures that seem to dictate the way that
life forms the way that biological organisms organize themselves. And you openly equate those things to
like platonic forms. And as viewers know, I am, I'm very, let's say, sympathetic to Platonism. If not,
I might just call myself a full blown Platonist at this point in my life. But how did you come to that
conclusion, or at least really confront the idea that that has to be considered and that our existing
maps, particularly the sort of, you know, the popular one of mechanistic reductionism just falls
short there? Yeah, well, I guess the first thing to say is that when you say I talk about it openly,
so now I do. But this is, you know, this is something that I couldn't have said years ago,
right? And so this is something that's been on my mind as part of a kind of a career trajectory map,
whatever, whatever you want to call it, that I've had in my head for many, many years. And I think now we're
to the point where it becomes productive to talk about it. You know, I didn't, it wasn't, I wasn't not
talking about it, because it was taboo, it's still taboo. But the difference to me is, I like to bring
these things up when there's something we can do about it, when they have a productive, positive impact that
they can have. And I think now is finally the time when we can do that. To talk about just what I mean
by this, and the reductionism thing is kind of, I think, a little bit a separate topic. But I put a
URL on the chat, and you can just take a look at the image that's there, just that first image on
that page, if you guys want to see it. And then you can put it in the show later, but just so we know
what we're talking about. Just let me know when you can when you can see that thing. Yeah, I've got it up.
Okay, so, so this is this is the sort of thing that I've been interested in, since I was quite young and
doing, you know, experiments on the computer with trying to pull out interesting patterns out of very
minimal, minimal constructs. That what you're looking at is called a Halley plot. And it's a particular kind of
fractal that you get by doing a very, very simple algorithm. It's basically a root finding method on the
different points in the in the two dimensional complex plane. And the interesting thing is that
that rich pattern, and it also doesn't hurt that it looks quite biologically, you know, very organic,
and so on. That that that kind of pattern comes from a very simple seed. It's a formula like
Z squared plus seven, like, that's it, you know, less than 10 characters of a formula will give you
something with that incredible richness. So now, you know, as we, like, it's, it's well known that
biology makes use of lots of interesting things, you know, properties of prime numbers and all kinds
of I mean, we could name all kinds of other interesting aspects of mathematics that have
this property. But for this for this pattern in particular, you might you might think biologists like
two things as an as an asset test for where information comes from. First of all, if you propose that
information comes from its its DNA, or it's, you know, it's protein, or some some other some other
thing, you need to be able to say two things, you need to be able to say, first of all, that by
modifying that thing, it's right, it becomes in the physical world, it becomes a locus of
interventions. So if it's DNA, then fine, show me that you can rewrite the DNA, and then the phenotype
follows and there should that now we can say that that's where the information came from. So so first of
all, you need to identify a physical locus of interaction where you can actually modify the thing,
right. And the other thing is that you need is some sort of a history. So you need to be able
to say why it's this pattern rather than some other pattern. And for biologists, usually that's a
history of selection or some some other kind of evolutionary path. So so the thing about patterns,
and there are kind of simple patterns like the, you know, the facts of number theory and the
distribution of primes and things like that. But then they but then there are more complex patterns
that we can talk about even more complex ones, but something like this, neither neither of those
things, the the two the two tests that I just suggested, it can be can be said of this in the
physical world, right? There is nothing you can modify in the physical universe that's going to
change that pattern. It comes from that simple seed that little that little and I'm going to I'm going
to call it a pointer into into the platonic space, that little that little seed that prompt that
pointer, whatever you want to call it, gives you this this this incredibly rich pattern. And it doesn't
have an origin in the physical world, because to my knowledge, there's nothing you can do in the
physical world that would change it, nor nor is there a history of any kind of selection or anything
else that will explain why it's this, this is the mapping from the from the seed to the pattern rather
than something else. So I think that it's pretty clear that evolution and biology in general make use
of these kind of free lunches, basically, you know, the properties of of numbers and of various
computational truths of, you know, truth tables of functions that can be instantiated by proteins and
things like that. Yeah, all of these are things that evolution exploits, but they don't actually
originate in the physical world, per se. So this is what I'm very interested in. And now now we're to
the point where we can actually study these things, in particular, to have a systematic
characterization of how these pointers map into whatever patterns they they bring into the
physical world. And this is this is using using the tools of synthetic biology, and in particular,
the synthetic bioengineering, where, for example, we can make beings like like xenobots, like
anthrobots, and all these other things that have behaviors, patterns of of anatomy and physiology and so
on, that have never been shaped by selection, because they've never existed in that
configuration, right. And so now we have to start to ask, so where do they if you you know, if you can't blame
it on eons of selection, where do their patterns come from? So so so so that's it. Now, you know,
now we're to the point where we can we can actually not just sort of philosophically consider these
things, but actually do some work and say, Okay, what does that give us? Can we start to characterize
that space of patterns? Can we start to understand the mapping between the the the pointers that we
create, be they embryos, hybrids, xenobots, computers, whatever, whatever else it is? What is the
mapping between them and the patterns that they give us access to?
Yeah, yeah. So in terms of trying to even begin to understand what those things could be pointing to? And, you
know, you started to mention what those pointers are, you know, things like xenobots, anthrobots, whatever you're
using in your experiments. But but Matt, you, you and one of the the dialogues I've seen between you and Mike
previously, have have said this, that his work is kind of like a pointer, or no, I think you said
it's like a periscope into this hidden realm, or this this realm of forms or something like that.
And you as someone who is mostly a scholar, I don't know if you're mostly a scholar of Whitehead, but
you're you're deeply read in Whitehead, and you reference him often. I guess to start, what really
piques your interest about Mike's work? And how is it a like a periscope into this, this hidden realm
of forms that not only Whitehead would talk about, but of course, Plato before him would talk about?
Yeah. Well, I've always been very interested in trying to understand the human mind
and the natural world out of which the human mind has evolved or emerged in a way that allows us to
feel like that's not a miracle that minds could come out of nature. And so the fact that there are
human scientists who can study the natural world and discover these laws and these patterns, to me says
something not only about the human mind, but about nature. And, you know, I think one of the first
examples I heard Mike offer of sort of the approach he's taking to his work is he's trying to understand
how we start as this little packet of physics and chemistry, you know, fertilized egg and develop into
use the example of Descartes usually, right? And so here's this philosopher in the 16th, 17th century who
develops this dualism, who himself started as a fertilized egg in his mother's womb. And so somehow
contemporary biology, especially as Mike has developed it, developmental biology forces us to overcome
that dualism. And so we as human beings, we can explore possible forms in our imagination. Where does
that capacity come come from? And what I find so exciting about Mike's work is the way he's
rethinking the process of evolution, not just as this sort of search through genetic microstates
via random mutation that then would get selected for, and instead seeing evolution as a process
that is selecting for better and better agency. And that agency is always a function of collectives.
It's like a swarm intelligence. And rather than evolution having to wait to accidentally find the
right genetic mutation that then leads to this phenotype or anatomical form, there seems to be
some degree of agency, which is this capacity, just like we in our imaginations can search possible forms.
Cells and cellular collectives are searching possible forms and making decisions
that are not merely mechanical, I would say. Now I know another thing that Mike's doing that's really
actually shaking things up is trying to bring the organicist tradition and the mechanistic tradition
together in a way by creating one continuum where maybe there are simple machines on the far end and
then Descartes on the other end, or maybe some other forms of super intelligence that we don't even
imagine yet. And I think that that's an interesting challenge. A lot just depends on how we define the
difference between a machine and an organism. But I think what talking about platonic morpha space does
in the context of developmental biology is it allows us to take seriously what was forbidden since around
Descartes' time in science, namely talking about formal causality and final causality, which is to say
purpose, agency, and the exploration of form in a way that's not simply about the accumulation of parts,
but that there's a kind of wholeness that's operative that isn't dominating over the parts, but something
emerges in these cellular collectives say that allows them to communicate globally at least at the level
of the whole organism or at least the whole tissue so as to achieve an anatomical form without any
individual cell knowing or even being able to perceive that form. And so formal causality is this
ability to manifest a kind of patterns of wholeness and final causality is this agency that's operative.
And those forms of causality were ruled out of biology and physics for most of the history of modern
science. And I think, Mike, your work is allowing us to experimentally and empirically show how these
sorts of ideas are necessary to explain what we're witnessing in the lab, right? And to help us explain what
goes on in the evolutionary process all around us and within us, right? And so breaking down this
barrier between mind and matter and recognizing matter as agential material, you know, I love these
phrases that Mike's throwing out. It really does help us understand how human minds are possible in how
science is possible, uh, in a natural world now that we can understand as purposeful as, um, uh, as guided
by form and not just guided by a kind of, you know, what we would call efficient causes where there's just
like a push from behind. Yeah. Right. Uh, there is, there's more going on in the natural world that
allows us as human beings to feel more at home here. Right. And so Mike's work, I think has been, uh,
a source of ongoing inspiration for me as a philosopher, uh, trying to think beyond dualism.
Yeah. Yeah. It really forces questions about teleology, about obviously form, like we're
talking about, like if it's not a push from behind and we're, uh, I guess for a lot of people
resurrecting this idea of like a teleological bend or something in reality that is, uh, driving,
or at least, um, massaging circumstances, or I don't know, I don't know how we want to think about
it, but I guess I'll just pose that as the next question is what do you think the more most
sophisticated or plausible way to think about it is? Um, obviously I know for you, Matt, you, you like
Whitehead's interpretation. Um, and it sounds to me like the two of you are probably on the same page
as far as that goes, but, but yeah, I'll, I'll leave it at that. I'll leave it open-ended.
So like, how, how do you think about whatever it is that is not just pushing from behind, but what is
pulling towards some kind of teleological end? Because, you know, obviously that immediately
brings into questions, you know, questions about God, questions about, uh, some kind of, uh,
uh, you know, um, design things like that. Right. But that's a no go for, for many scientists,
obviously. Yeah, no, I think Mike and I both agree if I, if I'm not mistaken, that, um, we want to
bring form and finality or purpose back into biology without, uh, resorting to any kind of design,
uh, paradigm, like what William Paley, you know, who Darwin studied with, um, had this idea of,
you know, like living organisms are akin to finding, um, a watch on a beach and you, you see how
apparently designed it seems. And so you reason backwards to a designer who would exist prior to and
outside of this process of, um, uh, natural process and impose form from the outside and
impose purpose from the outside. And I think, um, we want to avoid that avenue to, uh, formal and final
causality. The thing about Darwin is, you know, he's understanding form primarily as a function of
descent. So why do organisms have the anatomy? They do the, the, um, phenotypes they do well,
they've inherited that from ancestors and the, the forms are sort of, uh, uh, from a Darwinian strict
Darwinian point of view, just, um, a result of what happened to be, uh, to maximize survival for
that lineage over the course of time. And so form is explained in terms of descent.
And obviously there is some degree to which, um, we inherit forms from past, uh, ancestors,
but that doesn't really explain the origin of form. And you begin to get a sense of the role
that agency can play in biology from Darwin's account of, of not just natural selection, which
is this descent account, but, um, sexual selection, then all of a sudden the agency of organisms becomes
more important. Um, and I think, you know, in, in thinking of the role of evolution as, uh, the
selection of, um, agency or agential materials that already have all these competencies, um,
seemingly independent of, or at least not in a way reducible to, to the genetic, um, equipment that
they have, um, it's, it's granting, um, another account to the emergence. It's giving us another
way of accounting for the emergence of form, which would have to do with the decisions made by,
by cells and by cellular collectives to actualize the possibilities that are latent
in this platonic morphospace.
Mm-hmm .
And, and so when we try to understand mind in this naturalistic way and its role in evolution,
I think what, um, and this is a kind of whiteheading approach here, mind is this capacity to search
adjacent possibilities in this morphospace. And where is the mind? Well, it's not just in one cell.
Uh, mind seems to be something that, um, is realized in these, uh,
uh, swarms of, um, of agents and the decisions that are made are always collective decisions.
Uh, it's a kind of democratic process, you could almost say. Um, and whenever, uh, those
cellular democracies fall out of coherence, you get things like cancer, you get mutations and whatnot.
Um, but it seems like a lot of the time, um, coherent decisions can be made to actualize
forms that, um, prove useful in the environments that those cellular collectives are in. And I
think this is a mind like, or why not, why just pretend like we're using an analogy here. This is a
mental type of process. It's a cognitive type of process that's operative. Um, that is again,
not just like what human minds are doing. It is what human minds are doing. Um, the human mind
being a collective of, um, neurons, but I think also what's so important about Mike's work and it's
not that, you know, Mike discovered this, but is really emphasizing the fact that all cells,
um, are capable of holding this, um, voltage and communicating through bioelectric fields.
And in some sense, what neurons do is just a further specialization of what every cell
can do. Um, right. And so mind is everywhere. Uh, anyway, so I don't know if that's an explanation,
but that's how I think of it. It's adding to Darwin's account of form as just a matter of descent,
that actually form is also something that these agents, cellular, uh, collective agency can, um,
why does it would be ingress? Like there's a searching function and you can decide what would
be the most, uh, helpful form to ingress next, given the conditions that we're in.
Yeah. Yeah. It, it certainly opens up a lot when you start to, you know, bring in ideas like panpsychism,
you're, you're removing this problem of, you know, uh, blind sorts of groping
that lead to unbelievably, uh, complex, harmonized, successful organisms, you know,
like that, that's a huge hurdle to climb. And then you, you bring something in like,
no, there, there's agency from the top all the way down. That certainly does explain a lot,
but it still leaves the question of where does the higher form itself come from and how does the
interaction between the higher form and then the, the things that are operating from the bottom up
to follow the form, like how, I mean, I guess this is probably a question more from Mike is
how does that interaction take place? And, and it still sort of leaves the question of like,
where is the form coming from? And you could probably give specific examples of this in your work,
Mike, how you see, you know, the, the form and then the things growing into the form.
What I'd like to do is, um, uh, say a couple of things about some themes that, uh, that Matt just
picked up, uh, and then, and then, you know, and then, and then we can get to, to, to what you just
asked. So, so one thing I want to say is that, uh, with this, this, this issue of, uh, explaining
things in biology and it's, it's definitely important to explain things, but the, the thing
about just explaining is that some, something, uh, happens or someone prepares an interesting
experimental system, and then you try to give an explanation for it. This is an important piece
of it, but, but it's not the only piece it's a limited, it's limited because when you do that,
it's, uh, always possible to look at whatever this is, go, go down at the lowest possible level.
So people love chemistry and they sort of pick up chemistry as the, as the, and then not real
reductionism because nobody wants to talk about quantum foam, but, but, but, but, you know, they
say chemistry and they say, okay, so, so yeah, uh, enough, nothing to see here. It's just a chemistry
doing what chemistry does. It's just, you know, the low level rules of chemistry. And, and what
they're saying is yes, it's consistent with the laws of chemistry, but the, what, what I like about,
uh, ideas is not just their ability to explain what's already happened, but to point into the
future and to help you discover the next great thing, right? So this, this to me is really
critical because these ideas that we're kicking around here, uh, it's not the, the, the question
to me isn't, are they the only thing that can explain things that exist in biology? Because no,
the, the, the reductionist will rightly point out that, well, if I were to track all the
particles, I would tell you what's going to happen. That isn't it. It's, it's, it's not
about explaining backwards, the interesting things that somebody has already found. The
question is, does this worldview help you find the next insight, the next great thing?
And just as a, as a very simple example, you can think about, uh, something like the
game of life, you know, the cellular automaton. So you can be a reduction, right? You could,
you can be a reductionist about the game of life and you can say, look, there are no gliders.
There are no beehives. There's nothing except the rules that turn each, each little pixel on
or off. That's it. And you're not exactly wrong, right? From the physics of the world, that's true.
And if you follow that, you can in fact roll the thing forward and see what's going to happen from
every given step. What you're not going to do, if you don't believe in these higher levels of
organization and you don't believe in gliders and things like that, if you're locked into that
micro scale, what you're not going to do is design a Turing machine, for example, or a computer
in the life world that uses gliders as a way to pass information. It is not facilitative of future
discoveries. It's not that you're exactly wrong looking backwards. When somebody else makes the,
makes the interesting machine, you could say, oh, I see how this works. It's following these,
these three rules of the game of life. True enough. But why didn't you make the, the interesting
machine, right? Because it doesn't facilitate that. So that's just the first thing I want to say that,
that, that, I mean, it's not just about inventing, explaining things that already exist. It's about
having theories that actually help you find the next interesting thing. And it becomes really
important because sometimes, uh, you know, when, when we show off some of these things that we've
discovered and I want to be clear, it's not just me, right? I have a lab full of amazing people that,
that, that, that work on this stuff. So, so we show, we show these things and, and, and somebody says,
oh, uh, well, uh, yeah, that's cool. But the, you know, you should stop talking about all this
philosophical stuff. I didn't, you don't need it. You don't need any of this, uh, any of these ideas.
Just, just, just, just do the experiments. And that of course doesn't work because the reason we were
able to do this, these experiments and somebody else didn't do them, you know, decades earlier
is precisely because of these ideas. So that's the first thing I want these ideas to, to be generative
of new, of new discoveries. Um, the other thing I want to pick up just for a second is, uh, is this
notion of, uh, of, of, of agency and, and intelligence and evolution and things like this.
The problem I think that's been around for the longest time is that both we, we, we have sort of two,
two, two major views on it. And, and both of them, uh, really have bought into what, what I think is
a fundamental problem, which is they've bought into, there's only two positions on the intelligence
scale. You can be completely, completely blind and random and dumb, like, like, like, like rocks,
or you can be smart, like humans and angels and then, and various other things that people talked
about. That's it. And so then you can have this big debate, either evolution is completely blind or
it's got this master plan. That's like this, you know, this human or, or, or God level master plan.
And the, the, the thing is that we now understand, and I think this is really important that, uh,
uh, with the work on, on cybernetics and diverse intelligence and many other things that no,
there's actually a very smooth gradation, uh, of, of different kinds of problem solving capacities,
different kinds of intelligence. And you, and, and a given process doesn't need to be completely dumb,
nor does it need to be as smart as a, as a, as a human or level or above with forward, the capacity
or forward planning and all these things. There are, there are many spots in between.
And so I think what actually is happening with evolution is that because the material itself,
and then we've done a lot of simulations on this, and then I've written some,
some very specific things on this, um, because, because the material itself is agential,
meaning that you're not dealing with passive matter, you're dealing with material that has agendas,
learning competencies, uh, simple goal directedness in terms of, uh, you know, homeostatic and
homeodynamic loops because the material is, is, is, is, has a, has a degree of intelligence.
The whole, the process as a whole also works completely differently than evolution would
work over a passive material. And it's not because there's a, uh, the, the, I mean, I don't think
there's any, any good evidence for some sort of, you know, very large scale, but forward planning,
top down control over it. It's not bad, but, but neither is it completely dumb. And, and that's,
and it's okay to, to have an intermediate position because we know now that there are many different
ways of, of being intelligent. And some of them are, are, uh, you know, are, are, are all,
are, are low on the spectrum, some are high, but I think, I think evolution works very differently
because of the material and fundamentally, and there's a whole long story we could get into,
but because biological material is fundamentally unreliable. Okay. Unlike, so, so modern computing,
you have the separation of layers where if you're programming in a high level language,
you don't need to worry about the copper. You don't need to think that, oh man, the silicone
is going to, is going to melt down. You, you, you don't, you, you assume all the levels underneath
are, are, are working perfectly and then you can sort of ignore them. Biology from the beginning
doesn't work like that because you never know exactly how many copies of anything you're going
to have. You know, you're going to get mutated over time. You know, the environment's going to
change, you know, things degrade. It's really working with an unreliable medium. And because from the
very beginning it had to develop life, maybe primitive life didn't do that. But nowadays,
certainly the only life forms we see, it doesn't make, I don't think it makes solutions, fixed
solutions to, to various problems. I think it makes problem solving agents at all scales,
molecular networks, cells, tissues, organs, all of these things are solving problems. They are not
fixed solutions selected for a fixed environment. I mean, some, some organisms are more so than others,
but, but, but all of them are fundamentally problem solving agents. And this is what allows
the system. Yes. You know, frog eggs make frogs and dog eggs make, make puppies and so on, but that's
the default. That's what happens under default scenarios. One of the things that I, I, I love to
point out these examples in various reviews and things, there are many, many examples, including the
things that we've done with standard human cells, making anthrobots and standard frog cells, making
anthrobots, where under slightly different conditions, the same cells will find a new
solution that has never been under selection. That I, I don't know what Darwin would have said
about, uh, you know, anthrobots in their, in their, uh, capacities, which have never been selected in
that, you know, there's, there is no human stage of development that looks like that. There are no
anthrobots in our history, as far as we know. So, uh, so, so all of those things, uh, happen, you know, these,
these, the, is because under novel circumstances, the living material is very good at finding ways
to solve problems in different circumstances. We're using different, using their genetically
produced affordances, their molecular mechanisms in different ways. I mean, that's, that's basically
the definition of intelligence. This is why when we make a tadpole with an eye on its tail, instead
of in its head, and that eye connects to the gut, the spinal cord or nowhere, those animals can still see.
And, and that works out of the box, no new rounds of selection and mutation and the needed out of
the box. It works. Right. And I have, you know, dozens and, and, and more examples of this kind of
stuff. And it works because the system never assumed that the eyes were going to be in a specific
location in the first place. It looks to us like it did because most of the time it's, it's the same
starting position and everything's the same. But, but once you start right, once you start perturbing it,
you immediately find out that it actually, it didn't make that assumption. It was ready to roll on all
kinds of different ways of, of, of, of being a tadpole. And so what we have here then I think
is that the genome and the information in the genome is not taken literally by the process of
embryonic or regenerative morphogenesis. It's is, is some parts of it provide, you know,
structural proteins and things that are there are affordances that can be used. But overall,
I see it, I see it more as more of a prompt, right? I see it more of a, as a, as information,
uh, that has to be interpreted, interpreted creatively in the current moment. Right. And
so the allegiance is not to the past meaning of information or how your ancestors dealt with it
or anything like that, because you know, you're, you're different because you've been mutated.
The environment is different. Everything is different. Your job is to interpret that information
as best as you can to do something useful with it. And, uh, and so, so that's what I think
is going on there is that it's, it's not a, it's not a direct, uh, hardwired, uh, instructive
information that tells you what to do. It's, uh, it's they're, they're, they're like your memories.
They have to be interpreted on the fly. And just the, the very last thing is about bioelectricity.
So, so yeah, bioelectricity is awesome. Uh, but bioelectricity is not actually required for
any of the things I'm talking about. Bioelectricity is a super convenient example of it. And we know
because the brain exploits it and they actually, the rest of the body does too. Uh, it works as a
really good cognitive glue, meaning that it binds, uh, individual cells into networks that can have
a larger cognitive, like, you know, bigger, bigger goal. They can pursue bigger goals,
you know, making limbs and organs instead of little tiny cell level goals. Um, so, so yeah,
it's a, it's a great cognitive glue, but there are many other mechanisms of cognitive glue,
like stress sharing and, and, and many other things. And so it is not as if everything that I'm
seeing here is somehow pinned on the data on bioelectricity. Bioelectricity is just a very
convenient way to show how these ideas can become, uh, experimentally tested and then actually useful
therapeutics. And so that's what we've been doing, but, but it's not, it's not in and of itself.
Magic is what, what it, what is, what, what does provide the magic is, uh, cognitive glue mechanisms
that allow parts to align themselves in a way that pull down bigger, more sophisticated, more interesting
patterns in, uh, from, from, from the, from the, whether you call it platonic space or something else,
but from the, from, from the latent space of possibilities, uh, that the individual parts
couldn't have pulled down alone, that that's, that's it. And, and, and bioelectricity is great
at that, but so are, so are other things. I, I want to get more into the, uh, more into the
platonic morpho space, but for the sake of the audience who, you know, this is every day for you.
So xenobots, anthrobots, all this stuff, bioelectricity, this is every day, but for a lot of the audience,
it isn't. So let's just linger on what they are, how, how you use them. And you've already alluded
to, to some of the things that you've been able to do, like, you know, like move eyeballs from
where they belong to the tail and it still works. Um, yes, let's just start there.
Um, okay. Well, so, so then just, I guess a couple of brief definitions. So, so, so, uh,
think about the conventional story of intelligence. So, so here we are, you and I, what makes us not just
a pile of neurons. And because if you look inside, it is what we were basically a big pile of neurons
and other cells, but what makes us more than that is this kind of cognitive glue. It's the ability of
these cells to, uh, share information in networks, uh, that can store much larger kinds of memories that
the individual cells can alone. And they can own. So, so the collective can own goals, memories,
preferences, and various other things that cannot belong to any of the parts. Like if you have a rat
and you train the rat to press the lever and get a delicious reward, no individual cell in that rat
has both experiences. The cell at the bottom, at the, at the, at the bottom of the feet, it touches
the lever. The cells in the gut receive the reward. Well, who owns the associative memory that the one
is linked to the other? Not, no, no individual cell has it. The rat has it. And the reason the rat has it
is because it's got this amazing neural, uh, system that binds those, aligns and binds those components
towards goals, memories and preferences and so on that the individual parts don't have. So, so, so
in the brain, we know that this is largely an electrophysiological network that, that has that
job. And so you might ask, well, where did that come from? Where did these amazing tricks of the
brain come from, including, uh, you know, top mental time travel. So, so remembering and forecasting
things that aren't happening right now. Right. And integrating information across your whole body and,
and, and, and across time, where did that happen? Well, it turns out that the, both the mechanisms
and the policies by which that happens are extremely ancient. So, uh, sometime around the, the, the start
of bacterial biofilms, this was already happening, uh, bacterial biofilms already, um, uh, are using
electrical networks to, to form a kind of, uh, early multicellularity to do this. And what's, and then
from there we get into real multicellularity and embryonic development because in, in morphogenesis,
uh, just, just, just, just imagine, visualize an early embryo. Let's say, let's say it's an amoele,
like a human or a bird. It's a flat sheet of, of cells, maybe 50,000 cells. We look at that and we
say, there's one embryo. What are we counting when we say it's one embryo? What is there one? I mean,
you're looking at 50,000 cells and then each one of those, inside each one of those is all kinds of
other stuff. So what, what are you counting when you say one embryo? What you're really counting
is, is, is, is a kind of alignment. It's alignment in the sense that all of those cells are working
together towards one particular region of anatomical morphous space. And anatomical
morphosities is just a space of all possible configurations, you know, with giraffes and
snakes and trees and everything else. It's just a space of possible anatomical, uh, ways to, to,
to be shaped. And so all of those cells are, uh, working together to reach one specific
region of that space and become whatever it is that they're supposed to become. They, in, in effect,
it's a, it's a, it's a very cognitive kind of alignment because what they, basically they've
all bought into the same story of where to go in, in anatomical space. And what allows them,
what allows them to do that is a communication network that's partially electrical, partially
chemical, partially biomechanical. And, and it allows them to form a network that, that has a map
of that space and some set point in that space where basically the closer they, they get to that space,
the lower their overall stress becomes. And so they, you know, they're, they're, they're moving to that
location. So, so that's what bioelectricity is. Bioelectricity is, uh, it's, you know, it's,
it's not about applied fields or any of that. It's the important thing about bioelectricity is that
it allows subunits to form a large network that can have, that can have a goal-directed activity
towards states that are way too big for any individual. Right? So when you have a salamander,
you know, if, if it loses an arm, both cells will work really quickly. They'll rebuild the limb and then
they stop, they stop because they've reached the goal. And so the collective knows what a salamander
limb is supposed to look like. And it stops when it gets there. The individual cells have no idea
what a, what a finger is or how many fingers you're supposed to have, but they're, but they're held
together, uh, um, in terms of, so, so now this gets back to the theme you were talking about before,
about, um, the teleology of it. Yeah, absolutely. Right. Absolutely. They're, they're held together
by a representation of what it is that they're building. And so now this is key.
One of the things that, that, uh, we we've been working on and for, for, for years now,
and this is something that was, it was originally proposed, uh, many years ago by, by a guy named,
uh, Harold Burr back in the thirties is this idea that the shape of embryos and of regenerating limbs
and everything else, isn't just an emergent, uh, outcome of a, of a, of a, of a open loop process
where these simple rules get activated and eventually something complex happens. I mean,
that certainly does happen. There is, you know, this, this emergence of complexity certainly
does occur, but what he was saying is that actually, uh, and, and people before that,
but, but, but he was particularly thinking about this in bioelectrical terms, that basically the
tissue, uh, is, is, is operating towards specifically towards an encoded final, uh, uh, set point that
it's trying to reach. Okay. What's important about that is that it makes a very specific, um,
prediction like your thermostat, you know, to say that your thermostat, uh, stores a particular goal
that it is trying to reach. So it has, it has a goal. There's only one way to test it, which is,
well, let's rewrite the goal and see what happens. Okay. So in order to make a claim like this,
that the thing is teleological, you have to be able to find, uh, find the encoding of the set
point. You have to decode it. You have to be able to change it and show that by changing that
set point. Now, now the system is, is chasing a different goal, right? That's, I mean, that's,
that's, that's how you can, that's how you can find teleology. You don't, you don't find it by, um,
assuming it to the UP. Of course you can't all, you also can't banish it by assuming it doesn't exist.
You have to do experiments. And so we have shown exactly as were predicted that in many of these
cases, there is literally a bioelectric pattern memory that precedes and, uh, and, and, and drives
the behavior of the cells towards a specific outcome for individual cells. It's from, from
their perspective, it's just a bunch of voltage gradients and they do what cells do is they
behave in a specific ways, according to, um, uh, specific gradients because, because they're
they, at that level, they don't be, they don't have access to the whole plan of what's going on.
But the cellular collective to the collective, that pattern is a memory exactly the same way as it's
a memory to, uh, to, to brainy organisms when they're going to go and get, you know, whatever their goal
is of, of, uh, wherever they're going. So, so, so to the collective, it is a, it is a memory and
they're, um, uh, they're pursuing goal-directed behavior towards that memory. And that means
rearranging their parts to, to get us, to get the error down as, as, as well as issue. So, so, so
that's, that's the magic of bioelectricity is simply that it is an amazingly good way to, uh,
bind the pieces together towards a collective that can store larger, larger patterns. And in my
framework, this, this, the, the size of the goals you can maintain is known as the cognitive light
cone. The cognitive light cone demarcates what, what are in space and time, what are the biggest
goals that you can entertain? And what, what life loves to do is to scale up that cognitive
light cone and bioelectricity is one method for taking a bunch of parts and making sure
that the collective has a larger, uh, cognitive light cone that projects into, for example, anatomical
space instead of the physiological and the metabolic space that individual cells try to operate
in. Uh, Xenobots and Anthrobots. Do you want to riff on those too?
Yeah. Right, right. Okay. Um, basically the, well, I'll just talk about the, the, the Anthrobots.
It's the, it's kind of the, the more recent thing is, um, if you, uh, so, so sometimes I give a,
and, and I'll, I'll, I'll provide a video that you can put up on the thing. Sometimes I give a talk
where I show, I started by showing a video and this little, this little thing with an interesting
shape and it's, and it's sort of running around and doing various things. Uh, it's, it's a tiny,
tiny little thing. It's, uh, you know, probably a couple of hundred microns in, um, in, in diameter,
but it moves on its own and it's swimming around and it has some interesting behaviors and properties.
And I say, I say to the audience, what, what do people think this is? And the standard thing you
might say is, well, this looks like something you got off the bottom of a pond somewhere.
It looks like a primitive organism. And I say, okay, well, based on what you're seeing,
could you guess what the genome looks like? And you might guess that it has a genome, uh,
similar to other very primitive organisms. Well, if you were to sequence it,
you would find that it's actually homo sapiens, 100% unedited normal human genome,
because what we, what we've done, uh, and this, this, this particular work is, uh, uh, was done by
a PhD student for my group. Um, uh, what I wanted to do was try to try to try to unlock some of these
unconventional behaviors from standard cells, uh, no genetic editing, no, no weird nato materials,
just the same old cells. Let's, let's see if they're willing to reboot their multicellularity and do
something, something. So what we did was we took cells from, uh, from adult human patients,
no embryos, uh, adult human patients donating their tracheal epithelia during a biopsy samples
and things like that. Uh, with these cells, you, you take them out now. Now there's something
interesting. The patient may or may not still be alive at this point. If not, these cells are having
an interesting kind of second chance at life. Uh, but they, but, but they don't know. And so what they're,
what, what you do with them is you put them in a, in a particular environment and, uh, within,
within a short time, they self-assemble into this round little thing that turns itself inside out.
The outside now has these little hairs on it that are, they're called cilia and these little,
little things that can spin look like paramecia have and so on. And, uh, and they use those,
those, uh, little hairs to, to row against the water and they start to swim and they swim around.
And they have, they have some discrete types of behaviors, uh, that you could build an
ethogram of which behaviors follow which other behaviors like you would with an animal.
And one of the cool things they do is if you, if you plate a dish of, uh, human neurons,
and you take a scalpel, you put a big scratch through that dish, right? So it's a wound in a,
in a neural tissue. You, you put the anthrobots into the dish. They sort of run around. They, if,
if they find that, that scratch, they settle in the scratch, they work together. We call it a super
bot cluster because there might be like 10 of them that kind of clump together. They sit there
and about four days later, you lift them up and you see that what they were doing while they were
sitting there is taking the two sides of the neural, um, the neural wound and healing them
together. Did those neurons have different genomes or is it the same genome as the anthrobots?
Uh, they're the same species of genome, meaning it's human. They're all, everybody's human,
but the neurons typically don't come from the same patient. So the neurons come from IPS. I mean,
they could, we could, we could do it from the same patient. It doesn't need to be for them.
It, it absolutely, it absolutely does not need to be. No, we've, we've, the, when we did it,
it was a completely heterologous human. So, yeah. So, so now, so now what you see,
what they were doing is, and, and the important thing to point out about this is that this was not,
you know, test 102 of, of a thousand things we try. This was the first, this was the first
damn thing we tried. Okay. And this is what we found. And just imagine, you know, what, what else can
they do that we're not even, you know, and then of course, this is what we're studying.
We're studying all, we're studying various things, their ability to learn and, and, uh, you know,
preferences and whatnot, but, but, but here, like who would have thought that your standard
cells that sit there quietly in your airway for, for, for decades, um, when, when given a chance to
reboot their multicellularity would actually make a self multi-level organism that doesn't look like
any stage of human development, that's going to run around and do things like repair neural wounds.
You know, looking at it now, somebody could say, well, yeah, I suppose, you know, it's got cilia
and I suppose the cilia will row against the water and maybe they're putting out some, right.
There will be some chemical story that's consistent with what's going on. But the reason you would do
an experiment like this is precisely if you thought that actually these things are not, the human genome
doesn't just make humans. It, right. It's a, it, it, it, it's, it's a set of suggestions that can
actually be interpreted in a number of other ways. And, and the work that preceded this was, uh, was,
was work on Xenobots where, uh, Doug Blackiston and our collaborators, uh, at the Bongard lab at UVM,
we, we took some, some early, uh, some early cells that were going to become epidermis, you know,
some skin from, from frog embryos. And we saw the same thing that when you liberate it from the other
cells of the embryo, which normally basically bully them into being this boring, like two-dimensional
outer cover, keeping the bacteria out and things like that. When you, when you get rid of all that,
you find out what the cells really want to do by default. And, and if you do so, so without that,
that behavioral control of the other cells, what they do is again, they assemble into this,
this little self-multiolus around thing. And that has a bunch of behaviors, including kinematic
replication. So that means when you give it loose, sprinkled cells in the environment,
they go around and they, uh, collect those cells into little balls, which then mature into the next
generation of Xenobots. So, so it's a way of making copies, right? It's kind of like von Neumann's
dream of making a machine that, that makes copies of itself from materials that are fine in the
environment. So again, to our knowledge, there's never been kinematic replication in any lineage.
It's not something that any other animal does. We've made it impossible for these animals to
replicate, uh, in the normal, uh, froggy lifestyle is so there's a different way that they could do it
in it. And it's not, you know, it's not full on replication. For example, it doesn't have strong
heredity. So, so offspring don't look more like their parents than they do like random Xenobots.
So it's just kind of, uh, it's, it's a kind of replication. It's not like a full reproductive
evolutionary cycle, but, but it's a, it's a simple form of it. And again, this is something that,
um, was, was completely not obvious if, you know, if you had a frog genome
and you've been watching frogs for some number of years, uh, and you think that frogs are a solution
to eons of a froggy environment, you wouldn't really say that, that you, you could actually
get Xenobots in kinematic replication. That's, that's it's, you know, and, and there we get back
to the first, my first point about, um, about discovery. You, you, you, you make a lot of new
discoveries with the idea that, no, it's actually a, uh, a problem solving process that takes the genome,
you know, seriously, but not literally so to speak. Yeah. Now we're getting into some juicy
stuff. We're getting into, uh, you know, self, self-assembly. Uh, we're getting into the fact
that just by removing cells from their native environment, they figure out how to become this
new thing. And they, for some reason have a bend toward wanting to rush to a wound healing role.
I got to kick the ball to Matt. What, where does all that bring you? What all, all of seeing that
these aren't just theoretical ideas, but these are, I mean, I don't, I don't want to put ideas
in your head, but to me, this definitely seems to speak directly to some of what Whitehead talks about.
Hmm. Yeah. Um, well, I think, you know, a lot of what Mike's talking about here is, um,
you know, stuff I, I read in a paper that he sent me, uh, just last night on, um, what he's calling
self, self improvising memory, uh, and thinking of memory, whether we're talking about, you know,
genetic memories or, um, anatomical memories, or, you know, our own human memories are, we're always
recreating them in the present. And so rather than thinking of them, you know, as these static,
uh, traces or something, um, you know, Mike was using this term mnemonic improvisation,
uh, memories are more like these, uh, dynamic processes that are being recreated again and
again in the present as they are relevant to the present. Um, and so genes, it seems like are more
like, um, yeah, mnemonics that cells can use in an improvisory way. Um, and you know, the metaphor of
genes as a language has been used for a long time. Um, and I think that still works, but we have to
really follow that analogy through like language at the level of human beings. We don't think of
letters or words or sentences as like being in the driver's seat. Um, there needs to be an interpreter of
that language. And so in some sense, the genes are, um, the cells way of, uh, you know, having a mnemonic
to help it remember, um, certain, uh, tricks that have worked in the past, you know, certain proteins
that prove useful for different problems, but that genome is, you know, it maintains, it's not about
maintaining fidelity. It's about maintaining salience, which means, um, very often the,
to the extent that the genome remains, uh, a faithful copy, it's because the cell is doing a
lot of work to repair it. Right. And similarly, you know, the environment is cueing the cell to draw on
aspects of its genome that weren't active before. And so it's very much putting the cell in the driver's
seat, uh, rather than the genome as though the genome is some kind of blueprint or, um, some kind
of program. Um, and I think this, this tells us also something about, um, how to think about form
and biology rather than there's been a kind of Platonism operative in the, in molecular biology,
I would say whenever there's talk of the genes coding for a phenotype, there's a kind of covert,
um, Platonism going on there. Like there's the ideal form in the genome, and then there's this
attempt of the phenotype to kind of, uh, you know, manifest that in, uh, in physical space.
But the kind of Platonism that, um, Mike seems to be pointing to is not so much about what's stored
in the genome, but about what's stored in this, you could call it a space of possibility. Um, I almost
think it's better to refer to it as a topos, like it's, it's a topology, um, in the sense that it's,
it's when we use the term space, we make it seem like it's like out there waiting for us to discover
it. And I would want to avoid that. Um, and instead think of a, a kind of, um, a continuum of possibility,
let's say that, um, organisms are, are searching. And the question that I would want to ask,
and this is where Whitehead would come in is, is that, you know, we want to understand not just
what organisms have done in the past, which we can offer explanations of what's gone on in the past.
And, you know, Mike saying, well, what about not just, you know, what have organisms done in the past,
what can organisms do in the future, which is part of what this, these anthrobotic experiments,
uh, are searching for. But the question from a Whiteheadian point of view is, is that
continuum of possibility or that platonic morpho spaces, Mike refers to it in any way, like tilted
or, or graded such that, um, there is some kind of, um, uh,
uh, and ordering of that space, right. That it's not like design stamped from above by some kind of
a creator God, but rather, uh, uh, uh, a way in which the possibilities are made relevant to one
another. Uh, so as to realize higher and higher values, let's say, as that space is, or that continuum
of possibility is explored by organisms. Right. And so it's, it's a question of whether there might not be
it's not a push from behind, it's not a creator reaching in to design from beyond, but there's a
kind of lure from up ahead towards those forms, which would be, uh, most valuable for realization
in the present. This also just to throw this in there kind of reminds me, um, of the platonic idea
of necessity to, you know, how, like when, like in the myth of her toward the end of Plato's Republic,
there's this whole, I won't get into that whole story, but there's this, there's this whole story
essentially about how, uh, somebody goes through, through this, um, near death experience and they
see the whole architecture of, um, the afterlife and reincarnation and all of this stuff. But what
it points to is there's this sort of, uh, three pronged
nature to reality. That is something from above that is like inherited through
whatever, in the case of this myth, it's inherited about from above through like spiritual means, but
let's just say it's inherited from something else. Then there's the organism itself, which has some level
of agency, but then there's this third factor of necessity. And they talk about this like factor of
necessity as this, I guess, just reality that exists without, without like, as almost like an archetype,
like necessity itself exists as an archetype, just like the idea of self and other exist as sort of
inescapable, um, archetypes, at least in a platonic sense. But that, that you bringing up this idea of
tilting that it just seems like this is the way things need to be for whatever reason that reminded
me of that sort of archetypal idea of necessity that's played with. Yeah. Yeah. I mean, like
fractals are beautiful to us, right? And so there, there, there seems to be something, um, some kind
of aesthetic ordering to the space of possibility that is acting as a lure for evolution. And so we can
think of, you know, explanations of form in the biological world, just in terms of descent and
inheritance, but clearly, you know, life is doing more than repeating the past. It's creatively adapting
in the present to novel circumstances. And so we can also think about, um, desire for new forms, not just
descent of old forms. And what is the function of desire and how is it able to search this space,
this platonic morphospace or this continuum of possibility in a way that leads it to, um,
very quickly discover valuable adjacent possibilities, right? It doesn't have to go through many
generations of mutations to like find that. Like these, these anthrobots are able to find
ways of becoming motile. Like there's nothing in their genes other than it may be deep ancestral
memories of how, Oh, now we're one cell again. Okay. I know. I remember how to do this. Um,
you know, and so there's a way in which, you know, they used to say ontogeny recapitulates phylogeny,
which is to say, as you go through the morphogenetic stages of development to get to a human being,
you're passing through these, uh, ancient forms of, um, you know, prior ancestors of, you know,
of the fish and the, the, the amphibian and the kind of reptile forms where in an earlier stage
of development, you can't really tell organisms apart, whether they're birds or reptiles or human
beings, like we seem to go through the same stages. And so these, um, these are, these are, these pathways
through morphospace are, um, you don't want to just think of it as the adult form that there's a whole,
um, sequence of forms that we have to pass through that you're, you're talking about necessity. It's
like to get to the human form, you have to pass through these earlier stages first, because that's
the trajectory through the morphospace to get to the actualized form that's valuable to you.
Right. And so when we talk about the tilting or the ordering of the possibilities in this continuum
or this morphospace, that's a source of, um, it's not design, but it's a source of order that I do think
needs some explanation. Um, it's, it's, it's not, um, as though evolution is proceeding through just
random sampling. There is that going on, but there also seems to be these pathways that are more
desirable than other pathways. And once those are achieved, evolution tends to continue to exploit
them. Um, and it could be that we just get locked down a path, but why was the path chosen to begin
with? Like the vertebrate path, you know, the, the, this body plant that has been exploited by various
types of organisms that has proven so valuable. Um, I think one ex, one experiment that we haven't been
able to do yet, uh, uh, would involve finding life on another planet and seeing, okay, does it go down
similar pathways? Would we also find something like vertebrates, uh, as a, you know, very successful,
uh, form of organism on other planets, or is it going to look completely different? As soon as we have
another example of life, I think we'll get a much better sense immediately of the extent to which there might be
some grading or tilting or some order or organization to the way that these possible forms relate to each
other. Right. Yeah. A couple of things. Um, first of all, on the alien life, I mean, absolutely. But, um,
we should note that in the meantime, we have the next best thing, which is synthetic morpho engineering.
So we can take the anthrobots and put in some nerve cells and ask what does a central nervous system
architecture look like in a creature that's never existed before? Right. So, so the cells have
evolutionary continuity, but the, the, the overall large scale shape does not. So it's nowhere on the
tree of life with us. So, you know, not quite alien, but close in the sense that it is just,
it is just simply not a continuity of past selection forces. It's a completely different configuration.
Uh, so that's, that's one thing. Um, another thing I want to talk about is, is this, uh, and,
and so I'm going to say a bunch of stuff that is kind of how I'm thinking about it. Now I have no
clue whether this is really what, you know, what Plato was thinking or what Whitehead was thinking.
I have no idea. So this is just, you know, what, what I'm thinking now and you can, you can,
you can tell me if this matches anything else. Um, uh, the, the, the first thing is that I, I,
do think that it's important to think about it as a, an existing space that is out there in an
important sense and has structure. Maybe it's tilted, maybe it's not, but I do want to say that it's,
or that it's ordered and it has structure. Um, because otherwise what happens is, and this is
how, this is how most, most people I think, uh, tackle this problem. Um, they, they don't,
they don't want to think about a non-physical space existing. They want to be minimal, uh,
and you know, minimalist and so on. And when they run across interesting features, whether they be
mathematics or, um, map, uh, uh, surprising properties of networks or something else, they say,
wow, well that's, that's a fact that holds, you know, they say that is a fact that holds
in our universe. And the problem there is, I mean, so the benefit is, is okay, well,
it's a kind of a minimalist thing. So you've avoided having a space of forms, fine. But,
but what you've given up then is the following. You, you now are committed to a random grab bag of
facts that hold that you will come across from time to time and you will be surprised. Then you will
write them down and you'll like, you'll call it emergence, right? Which sounds like we've understood
something, but really it's just, it's a catalog of facts that hold. And I think that's a very
mysterious defeatist position. I, I don't think we should, uh, go into it thinking that there's
just going to be a random bunch of emergent surprises for us. And when they show up, we
catalog them and sort of marvel at how cool it is. And that's the end of that, uh, until,
until the next one shows up. I think consistent with the rest of the scientific enterprise,
we ought to say that, okay, these are, these are emergent facts and much like what the
mathematicians do when they build a map of mathematics. These things come from an ordered
space and we can now have a principle systematic investigation of that space by, uh, building
various pointers into that space, seeing what we get and trying to map it out like we map out every
other space. So I, I, I think it's important for methodological reasons. I mean, I can't prove that
this is true, but, but, but neither can we prove that the world is understandable at all, but we sort of
assume that to get on with, with our science, I think we, we have to assume that, that it's not
just a random collection of emergent surprises that hold, but actually an ordered space that we can
wander through by, by the art, by the, by the artifacts that we make and by the thinking that,
that we do. Uh, so that's, that's one thing. And another thing I want to suggest, yeah, please.
Um, although I can't hear you, I think you might be muted.
Yeah, you must be muted.
I just to clarify the two positions that you're demarcating there. Um, there's this one position
that all that nature is, is a series of emergent facts. And then there's this other position that,
well, there are also eternal forms or these, these patterns that are there in this, um, space of
adjacent possibilities that can be, uh, that can become facts, but they don't, they don't already
exist as facts. They exist now just as possibilities. And the evolutionary process,
which is an accumulation of facts is also, uh, as it were, uh, carving its way into this platonic space
of possibilities. And those possibilities have definite relationships to one another,
mathematical, logical, and otherwise that can be exploited, um, such that, you know, you pull one
little piece of the possibility into the actual world and you get the whole rest of that relationship.
Like you use the example of the triangle. Once you have the two sides, the third side's there for free.
There are a lot of forms like that. Um, that when they get actualized, there's a kind of leap that
occurs, um, that doesn't require, uh, uh, random searching to piece it together. Right. And so
either the one position would be nature is just an evolution is just the accumulation of emergent facts.
And then what you seem to be suggesting is yes, that's occurring, but there's also
a relationship between what's actually, what's been actualized and what remains possible.
Right. So there's actualized facts and eternal forms and the relationship among all those forms
that can inform, uh, the process of actualization. And now what's interesting is I've heard people
refer to this more platonic position as Mysterian, but you're saying actually it's this position that
it's only emergent facts that's Mysterian because it can't make sense of this order for free and the
adjacent possible that continues to show up in evolution. So we're both calling each other,
both sides are calling the other Mysterian because there's clearly something, um, surprising,
uh, going on here. And it just seems, I just wanted to note that, just that difference because
it's a very exciting moment in science as we, I think, break into a new paradigm in the largest sense
of a return to again, formal and final causality as being considered something naturalistic, but
we're also trying to work out the details here. Right. Yeah. Yeah, no, exactly. Right. And I think,
I think the reason people call these, these ideas Mysterian is because they make the assumption
that they're, they're, they're very committed to physicalism and they make the assumption that once
you've posited a non-physical world, you're down to mysteries and we'll never know. And, and that's,
that's a completely unwarranted assumption. Um, it's, you know, the, the, I mean, I'm sure the
mathematicians would be shocked to find out that they, they actually have, have, have no job to do
now because they're the, the thing that's the things that they discover are, are not a part of the
pantheon of physics. And so, uh, and, and the same, the same for us. I mean, I, I, I know it's not a Mysterian position
of people doing actual experiments, you know, spending money and buying, uh, you know, chemicals
and, and, and doing things that are directly testing some of these ideas. So to me, the Mysterian position
is not whether you're a physicalist or not. That's just a, uh, a very constraining assumption that we
don't need to make. The Mysterian position is, do you know what your next experiment is? And if you don't
know what your next experiment is, and if you don't know how the various facts that hold, uh, are actually
connected to each other and you're just sort of hanging around until you find the next surprising
one, that's the Mysterian position. The question is, the, the, the, the question is, how are you
going to find the next one? And I, and I, you know, and, and in many of these cases, we, we know how
we're going to find the next one because we're actually trying to work out the mapping between
the pointers that we make and the, you know, and the, and the things that they point to.
Oh, but yeah, yes, I think I agree. It's, it's, it's, it's a, it's a flip of, of, uh, how people
have been thinking about it. Um, I think there's one other, there's one other interesting, uh, pivot
that, that we should make, which is that, you know, you mentioned this idea of life forms looking for
these patterns and, and so on. And it's something that, um, I've been working on a log recently about
this, this distinction between who, who's the, who's the machine and who's the data. Okay. Who's the
agent and what are the patterns? And, and I want to flip it slightly. Let's, let's think of it this
way. What if, what if it's not that there are, uh, physical beings that are, that are looking for
patterns they're trying to find? What if, what if we look at it from the perspective of the pattern?
And the reason I'm saying that is because my, my view of this platonic space is, or what, whatever
space it is, that it has the things that we're used to boring facts about triangles and prime numbers
and things like that. These are low agencies kinds of patterns, but it also has very
very much higher agency kind of patterns, which I get, which, which, for example, kinds of minds,
I think are actually specific patterns in that space. And then I can even name some things that
are in between because you might wonder what, what, what could possibly be between those two
things that I can, I can name some, some things if you want to, if you want to talk about that.
But, but basically the idea is that some of these patterns are what we would consider, uh,
very low agency things, the way people think about rocks and things like this,
but others are, are active or even a cognitive. And, and thus it makes sense to ask from the
perspective of these patterns, what does the world look like? And so you can sort of imagine,
and, and, and, and this is, this is, this, this part is beyond specific experiments at this point.
This is just how, how I try to visualize it. I think that in that space, which is ordered, which,
uh, it has various gradients in it, as you, as you suggested, I think it's under positive pressure.
I think that these patterns are trying in the way, the way that a gas in a balloon is trying to get
out into the physical space. But the only way they can do that is through what Don Hoffman would call
interfaces or what I call pointers. So we build something that could be a physical triangle,
or it could be a xenobot, or it could be a human embryo, or it could be a large language model,
or it could be whatever it's going to be. And when we build these things, exactly as you just said,
you get more out than you put it. You, you, you get, you get more than what you just did because,
because you're not actually creating any, any of these behavioral and, and, and anatomical features.
You are facilitating their appearance out, out of a, an ordered space in which, uh, you know,
for all practical purposes, they're, they're, they're in, uh, they're, they're under positive pressure.
That's, that's, that's how I kind of visualize this. And I think, you know, I, I think, I think
we really need to, um, you know, we, we've been, we've been tied up with this, uh, uh, kind of
Turing model where you have a physical machine and the machine is the agent and it processes passive
data. And so we, we've now been doing work on self-sorting, um, arrays of data and, and, and
physiological patterns that, uh, modify themselves and cause disease and so on and thoughts, right.
But the, the, the, um, the, the symmetry between thoughts and thinkers as, uh, as, uh, you know,
as, as William James had suggested that, that it's not so obvious who's what's the thought and
what's the thinker. And, and this idea that, uh, that we, we, of course are also, are also patterns
of a kind, right. We're, we're, we're sort of temporary, a metabolic pattern that's held together
for some amount of time. And, uh, and all of these patterns in different media, thoughts in
cognitive media, patterns in ecological media, like us, uh, the, you know, hurricanes and all
these kinds of persistent, uh, temporarily persistent dynamical objects, um, patterns can
be agents and they can have their own first person perspective, I think. And so, and so I want to try
to recast some of this, not as physical life searching for the space of patterns, but being
able to look at it in a, in a, you know, in a kind of a, a, a symmetrical way. And I, and I,
yeah, and, and we could talk about the array. I mean, so, so, so we have minimal models of some
of this stuff with these self-sorting, um, arrays and, and things like that, which gets into another
discussion that, that Matt and I, um, were having earlier about, um, we, can we, can we put machines
on the same spectrum as, as some of these things that we, we could, we could talk about that, but,
you know, one, one way, um, I sometimes warm people up to, to some of these ideas because
people think, no, it's obvious. I, I'm a, I'm a tangible physical thing and I may have patterns
of thought, but, but those are not, those are not tangible, uh, you know, uh, and this is, this is,
this is how you might warm up to this. Imagine I have a beautiful illustration of this made by, uh,
Jeremy Gay, our graphic artist. Imagine that, uh, out of the core of the earth, out of the center of
the earth come these, these creatures that live down there. They're unbelievably dense, you know,
from the core. So, so they're unbelievably dense. They come up, they have a gamma ray vision because
that's what you have to have down there to be able to see anything. So they come up. What,
what, what do they actually see? So they're walking around. Well, the surface is kind of covered in
this like very thin, um, sort of plasma. They don't see any of the things that look like physical
objects to us. They're so dense. All of this is like rarefied plasma to them. And, um, one of them,
uh, one of them is a scientist. And so he's watching this plasma. He's got some equipment,
he's watching the plasma and he sees these, and he says to the others, say, you know,
I'm watching this, this like rarefied gas that's around our planet. It's got kind of patterns in
it. And if you watch carefully, these patterns sort of look like they're doing something. I mean,
they move around, they sort of come together, they come apart. They they're doing something.
They're almost like a gential, these patterns. And the others say, well, that's crazy. We're real
physical objects, you know, patterns in, in a gas can't be agents. And he says, well, they kind of,
they kind of look like they're doing something and they seem to have goals. They're sort of,
they're sort of the, they have some ingenuity about, you know, getting certain things accomplished.
Well, how long do these patterns last? Well, about a hundred years. That's nuts. Nothing interesting
can happen that fast. So, uh, right. So, so you can see what's going on here, right? It's, it's, it's,
it's a lot in the eye of the beholder to, to, to, to one kind of observer, we are rapidly dissipating
patterns and it might be very hard to imagine that we have any kind of, uh, uh, in our perspective
or any, any kind of cognitive chops to us at all. Uh, and I think, I think this is what's happening
with a lot of the patterns we see patterns and physiological events in living bodies,
patterns in all kinds of other, um, non-living media that, um, uh, my gut feeling is that we are
very, very, we have a lot of mind blindness. We have, we're very poorly tuned to recognize,
uh, cognitive patterns and things other than medium sized objects moving at medium speed through
three-dimensional space, anything else we don't really see. And so I think we really need to build
tools and conceptual frameworks to extend our, you know, sort of native evolutionary firmware
that is very like tunnel vision on this stuff and think about, uh, different kinds of patterns as,
as, as the, as the agents. And so you can flip a lot of this, a lot of these computational metaphors,
as far as letting the data drive and looking at the machine, be it a, a, uh, you know, a computer
or a living body that is actually the scratch pad of physiological patterns that then,
you know, kind of like a slight, like, like stigmergy and ants, you know, but they, they sort
of leave marks and they modify their environment for themselves. You can imagine physiological
patterns doing this in the body. The body's this is the tape of the Turing machine. The body can be
the scratch pad and it's the patterns of the, the physiological patterns of information, uh,
that are actually, you know, for example, like the bioelectric, uh, preview, uh, pattern, uh,
memory that I talked about before. So the, the, the rest of the body is just scratch
pad and for these, for these kinds of things. So I think, I think both, I'm not, I'm not trying
to replace the, the standard view, but I think, I think both are, are, are valuable. I think we need
to, we need to start, um, really trying to figure out what things look like from the perspective of
patterns in unconventional media. And then, and then maybe we can, we can tell a, a, a story about
evolution from, from that perspective and see where they get, where that gets us. This is all very much
work in progress. I'm not making any claims about any of this being, being useful yet, but this is, uh,
this is the kind of stuff we're, we're thinking about now. This is, this is super juicy. And I
want to say that, uh, it, so one, I think for sure that this comports almost completely with,
with Plato's view of reality. I, I think it also to some degree is why, you know, people like Roger
Penrose consider themselves, um, mathematical Platonists be, you know, he says, I think in
shadows of the mind, like, um, something to the effect of the platonic realm of forms is a
logical inevitability or something like that. Um, and he has this, you know, this, his whole triune
model of reality of the sort of the, uh, I think it's like the observer, the observed and the
platonic realm of forms, but, but also be going beyond like mathematical and rational
inevitabilities from my very high level understanding. It seems like this is where
physics is headed to with things like the, you know, the discovery of these like deep structures,
like the amplituhedron that, that, um, Hoffman always talks about, you know, this, this ironically
something that almost looks like a platonic solid that, um, perfectly somehow captures all of the
possibilities and like scattering events of, of particle collisions that normally would have taken
like, you know, hundreds and hundreds of pages of, of number crunching by a supercomputer.
They somehow discovered this polytope that predicts the scattering events. Um, so it, it does seem like
there is some, not other dimension, but hidden dimension endemic within reality that is, that is
exercising these like, like behaving like attractors or, uh, I don't know. I don't know. But this, this,
this spawns a question for you, Matt, which is, I know there's some nuance between
how Whitehead thought of forms and how Plato thought of forms. And you were just saying it before
that Whitehead thought of them more as like potentials, but, but what does that really mean?
Does it just mean that they don't exist in the physical realm, but, but have infinite potentials
of how they can exert their force and manifest in the physical realm? Or does it mean they really
don't have any kind of on toast? Like they don't exist in, in any way because I can't, I can't quite
wrap my mind around how it would be the latter. Hmm. Yeah. So the two main categories of Whitehead's
metaphysics are actual occasions or actual occasions of experience, um, and eternal objects, which are
his version of the platonic forms. Yeah. And to have anything real and existent, you need both of
these. And so actual occasions are, um, what are concrete for Whitehead and the eternal objects or
the platonic forms are how that concreteness is characterized. Right. And so you're always dealing
in reality with, um, um, a synthesis of fact and form. The question is though, um,
what is the nature of that relationship and which is primary and for Plato, it's clearly the forms
that have preeminent actuality. And what we experience in the physical world from Plato's
point of view would be a pale imitation. Yeah. Whitehead's inverting that picture and saying
our actual experience of the physical world, you could say though, his conception of the physical
world is quite different from, uh, the materials conception of it. Um, what's, what's real, what has
value is, is our experience. But that experience is itself characterized in terms of, uh, these formal
possibilities. And some forms we're inheriting from past experience because there is this dimension of
cosmic evolution from Whitehead's point of view that is about the accumulation of facts.
But, um, we don't just exist in the past. We always exist in the present. Actual occasions of
experience are always compressing in the present, inheriting that accumulation of past facts, but also
open to this future, which is characterized by these formal possibilities. Right. And I love what you
were saying, Mike, about this morpho space being under pressure, being under positive pressure,
because Whitehead would say that, as he refers to it, the realm of eternal objects,
this realm of possibilities is yearning for actualization.
In and of itself, it's deficient in actualization, but it's yearning to come into contact with
these actual occasions of experience that are compressing, is Whitehead's term, in the present.
Right. And so there's this pressure that's, um, trying to meet the year. So there's this yearning
of the eternal, uh, as Blake would say, you know, um, eternity is in love with the productions of time,
you know, as a poetic way of rendering this. And so Whitehead is trying to find the right balance,
right. Between these actual occasions and these eternal objects. And, uh, you know, he, he resorts to
theological language here, but it's important, I think, to, to keep in mind that when he references
the primordial nature of God, say he's not speaking in a religious, um, register there. He's,
he's really speaking as a metaphysician and God is a, a concept that has a function in his scheme,
which is precisely to give an ordering to those route, to that realm of eternal objects,
to order that realm, to give it a sense of, um, there are higher values and lower values,
like more valuable forms to be realized and less valuable forms to be realized, or more relevant
forms for what's occurring in the present and less relevant forms for what's occurring in the present.
And he just thought as a metaphysician, there needs to be some sort of a
eternal sorting function that would allow for there to be some sense of relevance for us as actual
occasions in the present, some sense of relevant possibility. Because if, if there were no sorting
function or no divine function in his terms, his concern was there would be no way of accounting for
the way in which we have a, as actual occasions in the present, we have some sense of the relevance of
the ordering of these possibilities, right? If, if there were no way of establishing that relevance,
we would just be faced with infinite possibility moment by moment. And it wouldn't be, those
possibilities wouldn't be ordered among themselves. And so he resorts, he resorts to this divine
function or this God concept to account for that. Maybe we don't need to do that. He's, he was doing his
best to remain, um, in his metaphysics and his cosmology consistent with all the special sciences, with
quantum relativity theories, with evolutionary biology, physiology. He, he wanted to be as
naturalistic as possible, but as a metaphysician, he still thought to make sense of this relationship
between actual facts and possible forms, there needs to be some sorting function, some valuer of the realm
of possibility, which he called God, right? And so maybe we need another name for that, or maybe there's
another way, another way to explain this, um, procurement of relevance from the space of
possibility, but that's the direction Whitehead went. And I think, um, one of the doors that this
opens for us is to, like Mike was saying, consider, uh, other seemingly agential patterns in nature as not
just mind-like, but actually as minds. And so plasma dynamics is a great example. And as soon as you
open the door to that and you look out at the universe and you see galaxies and you see stars
and you see these other giant plasma clouds with these filaments, they're, I mean, I, I know, Mike,
you said it's not just that bioelectricity is the beyond end all, but there's something interesting
about electricity. Um, that's operative at all scales in nature that maybe functioning as a kind
of communication medium for these kinds of minds that we, um, wouldn't have expected to see in the
old paradigm. I love your term mind blindness that we suffer from mind blindness. I think that's true.
And these ways of thinking open the door to a totally new conception of the cosmos and how it
organizes itself. Just interject for one second. I'm surprised it didn't go with logos there. I feel
like, I feel like everything you were talking about in terms of that sorting function or the sort of,
I guess, like innate way that systems seem to organize themselves. It seems like logos.
That's actually a good word for that. Yeah. Does he talk about logos?
He doesn't so much, you know, um, he talks about arrows, this other Greek term for desire.
Yeah. Um, and divine arrows and the way that that does, um, that's one way of thinking about
what organizes this realm of possibilities to make it relevant, um, uh, to actual occasions of
experience, but yeah, he doesn't use the term logos, but that would be a perfect way to connect it with,
um, Neoplatonic and stoic understandings of the principle of intelligibility operative in the cosmos.
When he talks about arrows, does he talk about, it's sort of like
the end of the symposium where Socrates is talking about arrows as this sort of like intermediary,
um, binding. Exactly. Of course. Interesting. Exactly. So most of, so most of the platonic,
the, so there's three big platonic ideas, the true, the good, and the beautiful and truth and goodness
for Plato are beyond our sensory experience. They're beyond the physical. Um, but beauty is this
interesting bridge idea because it, it is manifest in our sensory experience and it, because we have
this erotic response to beauty, we desire the beautiful. It's a bridge between our physical
experience and the ideal or intelligible world for Plato, which comes through in the dialogue symposium.
So arrows, yeah, it plays this mediating role, um, to guide us to the ideal world for Plato. And it's,
although Whitehead's inverting Plato in so many ways, beauty still plays a very important role. And
Whitehead would say that the, um, the teleology of the universe is the production of beauty. That's
what everything is aiming at. And beauty for him is, um, ever more intense, um, forms of contrast.
So more, more internal diversity held in harmony, right? And so if you see the evolutionary process,
it's a process of complexification on some level. Um, Whitehead would say it's this desire for beauty
and the intensification of beauty that's driving that process. Hmm. It's hard not to think about
bioelectricity, actually, when you think about arrows in some ways, you know, like bioelectricity
could almost be like the arrows of biology or something. I don't know. Yeah. Yeah. I mean,
I just, you know, I, I, I just want to be clear about two things. One is that, yes, I mean, it's,
it's pretty clear that on earth, at least, uh, evolution loves bioelectricity as this cognitive
blue that is, that is helping all this happen. Maybe that's universal. Maybe elsewhere, there
are other completely alien architectures that use something else. Um, you know, I, I, I don't know.
Right. So, so, so the, the, the other thing I want to say is, is this, I mean, I I've, I've talked
about this, this idea of, of, um, uh, mind blindness and potentially finding minds everywhere. Um, I, I want
to temper that by saying that what I don't think you can do is assume, I mean, so people love to look out and
say, oh, the whole, you know, the, the, the galaxy, the whole galaxy is this giant radium being
maybe, maybe. And I think we should totally be open to that, but I think those are claims that
need experimental evidence. So we now have, and I mean, the interesting thing is that we now have
a number of, uh, tools at our disposal. Some come from behavioral science, some from, from causal
information theory and things like this that actually allow us to say something rigorous about specific
systems. And we need to be using those tools so that we are neither on the side of, uh, total
teleophobia and eliminativism where you see my nowhere versus, uh, some kind of an unquestioning,
um, uh, animism where you think that, you know, there's an advanced spirit under every rock.
We, we, you don't know and you need to do experiments and we now can, and we've been doing
some very interesting and other people have as well. Um, uh, in terms of showing, uh, protocols,
how you can look for these things in, in unconventional media. And we've looked for
them in gene regulatory networks and, uh, uh, certain algorithms and, uh, cells and tissues.
And, you know, and you can do it by training, trying to train things, trying to communicate
with things, uh, interventional experiments. The thing is what, what makes it really hard
to talk about, um, minds on a, you know, planetary scale or whatever is that you, to really do this
properly, you have to do interventional experiments. You cannot simply observe that when you,
when you observe something, um, sort of non-invasively, it might look complex and you
might be able to tell stories about, in fact, there was this, I forget who it was, but there
was this guy a few decades ago who made these videos of, um, uh, squares and triangles and
circles moving around in the plane. And he would show it to human volunteers and they would say,
oh, it's very obvious. The circle's in love with the triangle and the square's trying to break
them up. And they would tell all these stories, right? And from purely observational data,
you really can't assess the cognitive level or the cognitive type of anything you have to do.
You have to make specific hypotheses about what the goals are, what the, what competencies they
have, and then you have to do experiments. So that, that makes it very hard, um, to do that with, uh,
things on the cosmic scale, just for practicality reasons. But lots of other things that we wouldn't
think of as a fodder for, uh, these, these, these kinds of ideas are very testable and, and we're showing
how you can test them. I mean, sometimes people say to me, well, you know, with these, with these
kind of, uh, panpsychist ideas, you, you know, you might as well say the weather is, uh, is, uh,
is, has a mind. Well, you can't just say it, but I don't know. Have you, have you tried training
weather systems with stimuli? I don't know. That's an empirical question. You can't assume that we,
we found, we found some pretty crazy things, uh, by, by doing the experiments with things that
nobody had thought of to, to test this way before. So I don't think you can assume in either
direction. I think you have to do perturbational experiments, which are, which are really hard
for big scales, you know, on that note, have you, I'm sure both of you have at least come across
some of these, um, notions from people like Sabine Hassenfeld or the physicist that the,
that there actually is now at least some actual data to suggest that universal, you know, super
clusters that connect galaxies together look almost indistinguishable from brain networks.
And there's been, I don't remember what org, like what, um, who conducted the study, but I remember
she, uh, published an article on like time magazine a while ago talking about this idea. I want to say
maybe, I think it was like Google and some university were doing some kind of, I could be wrong, but
anyway, there is some data at least to show anecd, more than anecdotally that there, that massive
galactic clusters look almost indistinguishably similar from, from brains. Have you, have you spent
much time kicking the tires on that? I mean, I've seen it and no one loves wild ideas more than me.
Okay. So, so I'm completely open to the idea, but I really don't think you can derive anything from,
from just structural assessments. So if it looks exactly like the human brain, that doesn't actually
tell you, uh, what kind of cognition it has, if it, you know, if it has significant cognition,
whatever, I, I really feel strongly that in order for this to remain, uh, a scientific field and to
drive real progress, uh, we need to, we need to, um, have specific criteria for what we're willing to
accept as evidence. And I think purely observational structural data are just not sufficient to conclude
much of anything. It's, you know, it's, it's, it's, it's cool. It's tantalizing, but I, I wouldn't, I
wouldn't conclude anything on the, on the basis of that kind of evidence.
It seems to me it's that, that as a speculative philosopher, I could say, um, he's not worried
about having to establish anything scientifically. I was going to say the same thing. I have even less
responsibility. I could just say, well, Plato says the universe is an animal in the Timaeus. So
seems to comport with that idea. Let's go. Well, yeah, a kind of organism, an animal,
um, that doesn't have an environment and doesn't need to eat and doesn't have limbs because it's not
got anywhere to go. Like, you know, so it's a loose analogy with an animal that he's making to the
cosmos. Do you know what the, what, what I, this is one of the times I hate not knowing Greek.
Like, do you know what word they actually used for, for animal there? Is it just the standard word for
animal or is it like something that they loosely translated as animal? That's something I've been
curious about. Uh, Zuo probably is in there or, uh, I mean, we don't by any means need to look this up
now, but yeah, I'm not sure exactly what word when he refers to the cosmic animal. Um, if he's
yeah, using anima there, like, or suke like soul, um, or if it's, uh, uh, uh, you know, the prefix zoo,
zoo that we use for zoology and stuff. I'm not sure. I have to look and look up that. Um, but you know,
what I would say about the galactic super clusters, it, it just seems like the universe has this fractal,
like, uh, self similar way of organizing itself at all scales. Um, and you know, there's some ways in
which something I've said, um, before is that human, we have to inflated an idea of human minds
and human agency. We need to deflate that a little bit, um, and see that, um, cognition is something
that very much could be applied to, uh, weather systems. Um, and what we think of as our own sort
of autonomous will to, you know, make free decisions. Like I do think human beings have some
degree of freedom, but we need to understand that as on a spectrum, um, with all of these other kinds
of, uh, agency and nature, which are, you know, the thing about creativity is like, and, and
degrees of freedom is that, um, we don't want to imagine freedom. Like, uh, we exist outside of the
network of causes and conditions that precedes us. And we can just, um, see the future and predict
among the options and say, ah, I will do this. Like that's not how creativity works. When an artist is
in the throes of, of, you know, sculpting or painting or composing, like they, they're creating
and discovering at the same time. It's this weird interplay, uh, between planning and surprise,
you know, that's what improvisation is all about. And so I think our human agency is way more like that.
And it's obvious how the rest of the natural world is engaging in, um, yeah, it's dipping into these,
this space of possibility, uh, but doing so in a way that's, um, not like having a, um, a preplanned
design in advance of, uh, uh, uh, making the creative decision, but in some way being, um,
forced to improvise. Right. And so if we, if we, we have to change our, our, our paradigm of human
agency, uh, to understand it more like that in order to begin to see other minds, uh, operative,
other cognitive systems, operative in nature. Um, but yeah, I, I, I think again, this is a
speculative philosopher that, um, that the universe is, whether we think of something as large or small
and Plato got into this also, it's kind of arbitrary. Like we think, oh, wow, galaxies are so
big. And these super clusters are so big. Like, uh, what if the universe is infinitely nested in,
like there's no bottom level, there's no, there's no top level. And so instead of thinking just in
terms of size, we, we need to think in terms of organizational structure and we see the same
patterns repeating at all scales. Right. And so if we, if we really want to inhabit an infinite universe,
um, I think we have to think of infinity beyond just big and small, because it's, that's not what
the infinite is really about here. Um, and obviously, you know, this, this is very speculative
and we can't do experiments on a galaxy or even a star or even the whole planet. Um, but you know,
as Mike, as Mike's always saying, uh, the philosophy that's informing our scientific, um, investigation
is going to shape the sorts of questions we think are worth asking. Right. And so a different kind of
cosmological, uh, backdrop, a different set of, um, philosophical assumptions, a different imaginative
background, such as the idea that the universe is a living organism of some kind does filter into the
sorts of scientific questions that get asked in particular laboratories about this or that, um,
natural process, you know, and so it's not irrelevant what we think of the universe at the largest scale,
even if we're being totally speculative about it, because if we just assume it's, it's a, we exist
inside some kind of gas chamber and everything in going on inside that gas chamber is just like
mechanical collisions or something, which is all sorts of questions we're not going to even ask
when we try to understand life or thermodynamics or so on. But if we, if we, if we situate ourselves
inside of this, um, um, potentially infinitely nested series of intelligent organisms, you know,
all of a sudden, um, the sorts of explanations that can be sought in biology and the sorts of experiments
we would do in biology really open up and we stop being so mind blind. Yeah. Yeah. That speaks to the
importance, I think, of having like these cross disciplinary conversations too. Like it allows
you to expand the horizon of what you can ask, what you can think about asking, what you can,
what, what lenses you can put upon the work you've already done or want to do. Um,
but I feel like we should, I feel like I should ask some practical questions because we've been on the,
like the big question tip, which I obviously love and I just naturally gravitate there. But what,
I guess one of the things I haven't even tried to address with you yet, Mike is what do you hope
practical takeaways from the work that you're doing will be in the next five, 10 years? Like,
where do you see this going? Um, what do you think has already been proven that you're just trying to
sort of put finishing touches on? Yeah. Um, yeah. Uh, okay. Uh, and then, and then I want to,
I'll, I'll, well, let me talk about that a bit. Then I want to, I want to come back to some,
uh, something that Matt said. So, so look for the future and, and this, this relates to, uh,
things that, that we've been talking about. I mean, obviously there's the, the, the obvious thing
that I've said everywhere else a million times is that what, what I think is the key we've already
shown as the case is that by releasing some of these assumptions such that, such that, uh, for
example, uh, mentalistic teleological and behavioral terms are only applicable to, to
brainy animals in 3d space. If, if we, if we release that assumption, we get to use this amazing
toolkit that we have on other, uh, types of media, for example, cells in the body navigating other
spaces. And, and, and that's what you discovered novel biomedical, uh, interventions that you would
have never otherwise find. And so, so the obvious thing is, I think is that hopefully in the next,
uh, you know, however many years we were able to drive a lot of this stuff through to the clinic
such that everybody can see, okay, I'm having this procedure because we are now convincing,
communicating with, collaborating with, and managing the prior, um, beliefs of my cells,
not because we're micromanaging their molecular networks. Right. So I, so I would, that, that's the
sort of thing that, that we're working on literally taking these kinds of concepts from control theory,
from cybernetics, from behavioral science, from, uh, computational neuroscience and saying, yes,
cancer really is a dissociative identity disorder of the morphological, um, intelligence. And the
reason that we have this bioelectric therapeutics is because of that idea. And now we've rejoined
and we've reintegrated them just like people try to reintegrate in this, in the psychological
arena. I'm just giving you an example like that kind of thing. So, so, so the, the, the, the,
the direct thing I think is the, is the biomedicine. Beyond that, however, I think, I think also very
important is, uh, this issue of, uh, this issue of ethics. And so I want to, I want to just talk
about that for a second. Um, two, two, two things. First of all, um, you know, Matt, Matt was just
saying, uh, well, how we need to, we need to kind of deflate our, our, our, uh, um, human centric view.
What I think is really important is that people understand that by releasing this mind blindness,
and by understanding that, that, that cognition is a spectrum and that there's all sorts of
unconventional minds all around us, it does not actually make us less than this is a fundamental
problem. People, people have this very, um, scarcity kind of zero sum mentality such that
if other things are smart, I I'm not as smart. It somehow devalues the human condition. If we say
that other things also have certain kinds of intelligence, people are very worried about this.
This, this is, um, uh, incredibly, uh, uh, contentious. And I get, I, you know, I get a lot of, uh, uh,
angry, uh, um, uh, you know, emails and things like that from organizers who say, look, you know,
by talking about these simple minimal systems and machine quote unquote machines and algorithms and
all this other stuff, you are basically saying that we are, uh, we, we are like them. We are,
you know, I mean, mechanical, whatever. And this is, this really degrades the, the human condition.
And I'm just trying to point out that this is not a zero sum game. You can, you can still be an
awesome, you know, a gentle emergent high level intelligence. If other things that you didn't know
about also have a little bit of that magic, it's fine. We are, we are not degraded or diminished
by the fact that there's more life and more mind around us, not less. I, I, I think that's really
important. Um, because, because people get really freaked out about this, that this is somehow gonna,
uh, gonna slide everything towards the, you know, the, the, the nihilistic sort of mechanism.
And, and my hope, my, my claim is precisely the opposite. No, no, it's a, it's a beautiful spectrum.
And many things are at different places on the spectrum than you thought. Nobody has to slide
in one direction on that spectrum. That's why we need to get it right. Not just make assumptions.
And, and, and, and related to that is, uh, this, this issue of, um, speculation. So, so yes, obviously
as, as speculative philosophers, it's awesome to have, you know, big ideas and, and, and think about
all these different things. But for, for me, one of the challenges that, that I have and other people
have is that some of these ideas end up impacting, uh, how people think about, um, the ethics of
relationships with other systems. So what I want to be clear with people about is that if I am saying
here is a system that is goal directed, it has memory, it has a valence, it has whatever in a
degree, I'm not saying it's human level, but it has a degree it's on the spectrum. It has that.
What I don't mean is the poetic, uh, is, is the sense of the poetic sense that, wow, like, you know,
the whole universe could be a giant, maybe, but it's important to, to say that in certain cases,
we actually have evidence that this is really the case and that you can't relegate it to the
speculative, um, realm because it has, because it has a ethics implications for unconventional,
unfamiliar beings that can suffer. Right. So, so, so I, that's, that's why I try to always, um,
draw that fine line that when I, when I say that something is on the spectrum, I mean, it,
we have evidence and that has implications for how you behave towards it and how you relate to it.
So, which, which is different than, than, you know, other things that, you know, maybe,
maybe not like who knows. So, so I'm, you know, it's, it's absolutely good to have all the,
all the speculative ideas, but I think for, we, we are, we are going to enter into a very,
um, diverse. If you, if you think you've heard about diversity up until now, this, this, it's not,
it's nothing. We, we are going to the next decades. We are all going to be living, living in a, in a
extremely diverse, um, environment with cyborgs and hybrids and, and, and, you know, AIs and chimeras
embodied robotics, non-embodied, uh, you know, it's, it's, it's, it's going to be completely wild.
Um, non-embodied, what do you mean?
Well, things that, things that, uh, don't look embodied to us. That's a whole other thing. We
can, we can talk about what embodiment means. This is, this, it's not, I don't, I don't think
it's what everybody thinks it means, but, but anyway. Yeah. You're not going to freak me out.
Trust me. No, no, no, that's, that's, that's fine. I just, I just wanted to finish, finish this one,
one thought is that the variety of other beings that we're going to be living with is going to be
incredible. Some, some of them already exist. Many of them are going to exist as people change their,
their bodies. And, and, and what we really want to avoid is something that humans are very good at,
which is drawing in-group, out-group, uh, separations with all of the ethical ramifications
that follow when they say, yeah, you're a little bit of a different shade. I don't think you feel
pain as much as, uh, you know, I'm like, that's an actual real thing, right? As far as analgesic
delivery and, uh, the, um, availability in the hospital settings and so on. So what people are very
good at is saying, I, I'm a real biological being. That's a machine. Okay. And you know, uh, that's
easy when you're talking about your toaster, that isn't the situation here. What is going to happen
is you're going to have humans and somebody is going to, I, I even had Jeremy make me, make me a
diagram of this just to kind of poke fun at this whole perspective. It's, it's a, it's a guy sitting
there in the park reading a newspaper and you can sort of see like he's got half of his brain,
a standard human brain, half of his brain is, is, is engineered digital. And there's a guy behind him.
And one of these old, uh, like 1800s, uh, outfits with a giant pair of calipers, and he's measuring
the guy's head to figure out if it's more than 51%, you know, machine or not, because he wants to
know if he's going to, if he's going to treat him like a human being. So, uh, this is, this is,
this is coming. And, and this, this machine versus life, um, uh, distinction is, it is,
is pernicious. It's going to, it's going to lead to severe ethical lapses when people don't
realize that what we're talking about is, is a spectrum that has implications of, of, uh,
of compassion and ethics and, and, and kindness to, to, to beings that are not precisely like
us. Humans are not great at that anyway. This is going to stretch our, our, our, um, you know,
uh, theory of mind detectors like, uh, like nothing else has before. So, so that's, that's what,
that's why I think it's important. I think, I think, uh, getting this, getting this right
and is, uh, is, is going to have fundamental implications for, um, for ethics and, um, yeah.
All right. And, and then, and then the very last thing I just wanted to point out, you
know, back, back, back to this, back to this idea of, uh, of, of living in a, in a universe,
that's a giant pattern. I think, I think it is really interesting to ask what, how would
you know if you were part of a much larger system that was in fact, right. Uh, uh, uh,
that, that had a mind. And I, I visualize when, when I think about that, I visualize two,
two neurons inside a brain and they're having this conversation. And one of, one of the neurons
is like a hard nosed kind of materialist. And the other one's a little bit of a mystic.
And the one neuron says, Hey, look, it's all biochemistry. The universe doesn't care about
us. Nothing, you know, it's purely mechanical. Nobody cares about us. And the other one says,
I don't know, you know, I've been watching these, these patterns of electrical activity
in the world around us. And I almost feel like it has a mind of its own. I almost feel like we get
rewarded and punished for certain things. And there's this, you know, these waves get back
propagated through, through the tissue. And, and I almost feel like there's something going on.
And the other one says, ah, you're crazy. It's just, it's just chemistry. And so, you know,
that in that scenario, of course, the mystic is right. They are embedded in a medium that is
having, uh, what, what we all recognize as, uh, as, as, as, as, as real mental, you know,
mental phenomena. And so, and so how would you know, right? If you were part of that, how would
you know? Um, I, I, I don't know. I suspect that there's some kind of girdle result around the fact
that you could never be sure of it. Right. But I bet, I bet, and then this is maybe for a next
discussion, cause I'd love to know what, what you guys think about this. I bet you could gain
evidence of it. And I think that evidence would look like synchronicity. I think that what it
would look like are large scale patterns that make sense that are meaningful to, to, to you as an
observer that do not have a straightforward mechanical story associated with us. Something,
something, something like that, something like that kind of, you know, synchronicity thing. So,
you know, so is it possible that, that the universe is, uh, is a big mind? Sure. It's
possible, but I think for many reasons, we need to really sort of be, um, specific in what we mean
by that claim and the tools that we're going to use to really gain evidence because, because all of
it has, has implications for us. Yeah. Thanks for bringing that up because I heard you bring up
synchronicity in that context and another podcast, and I really wanted to get to this though. I don't
think we're going to have time to, to do so thoroughly, but yeah, I mean, I think I wanted
to actually bring this up before when you were talking in the context of what if the pattern
itself had, you know, the, like the realm of forms essentially has this positive pressure on it.
And there, there's some kind of desire arrows on the parts of the pattern to instantiate itself
in physical reality. Um, it, that really reminds me of this ancient idea that was pervasive around
the time of the Platonists of correspondence of there being this sort of like the, this, this hidden
language that you could learn that allowed you to, I mean, do everything on up to like manipulate
reality through, through rituals and stuff like that. And as, as far away as that is from,
from what you're doing, I think when you couple some of the things, a couple of the things that
we're talking about today, you know, this notion of synchronicity and this notion that there could
be this realm of forms that is exerting, uh, or that is attracting or whatever, whichever direction
you want to talk about it in that does look like synchronicity because you have like a literal,
you have a non-causal relationship constructed of meaning where there's like at least a tertiary
agent that we can't readily have access to. Like we just have the subject object relationship
of, I am a person, I experienced this thing out there that has meaning and it implies that
the meaning itself is coming from this, this unseen place. And that unseen place is most likely
that same place where, where the pattern comes from and where the sort of innate, uh, meaning
of that pattern or the, or the meaning that we associate with that pattern at least comes
from. Um, I did a whole video on this, like probably a year ago at this point, kind of,
uh, using, um, Penrose's three, you know, triune model of reality as an explanation of how this
could work. But anyway, I'm sure you have thoughts on this too, Matt. So before we run out of time
here, I'd love to hear you riff on it. Yeah. Well, just on the ethics piece that,
uh, you know, I'm glad Mike brought up, um, to def, to deflate a little bit, our understanding
of human agency and intelligence is not at all to, uh, sideline any ethical implications,
but in fact, to, to magnify the ethical implications of all of this, because the point is intelligence
and agency, and similarly, the ability to suffer or experience joy are not the private property
of human beings. Um, a lot of more materialist minded people will say, oh, this kind of panpsychism
is just wishful thinking. Um, wouldn't it be nice if mind was everywhere, but actually this
puts a lot of responsibility on us. Um, it's not wishful thinking. It's actually kind of terrifying
to think that, um, there are suffering minds everywhere that, that we didn't even know existed.
And now we have to, if we're going to be ethical, uh, attend to that reality. Um, you know, and so
this sort of a panpsychist cosmology is, um, you could almost say it would be easier for us if it
weren't the case, uh, that there were, you know, minds everywhere. Um, and so, you know, I think
human organisms have to be, we have to understand ourselves as examples of something that's far
more pervasive on, not only on the earth, but, but cosmically. Um, and what this does is it allows
us to move out of this mechanistic paradigm, the old kind of mechanism where we thought we weren't
dealing with agential material, but just dead stuff where it was all about, um, forcing that
dead stuff to do whatever we wanted it to do. Um, and it seemed like knowing how the components
work in a reductionistic way allowed us to reverse, reverse engineer things and simple systems. We
could operate that way just by imposing our designs and forcing them to behave as we want the paradigm
of, you know, tame, right. Or technological approaches to mind everywhere is instead of
saying we have to interact with these other beings, these other minds through persuasion,
uh, not by trying to micromanage at the, you know, molecular scale or something or the genetic scale,
but actually engaging as agents in a, in a process of collaboration, right? So we're, we're moving from
a paradigm of, uh, mechanical force and the imposition of design from, um, outside the system to a paradigm of
persuasion, uh, and collaboration, uh, and like knowledge as a, um, way of building alliances across
species, like biological knowledge and, you know, um, figuring out what's possible, what, what, um,
morphospaces can we ingress, um, that would enhance the quality of life as a collaborative effort
that we engage in with other life forms. Um, and so it really does matter. We, we need how we
understand which other types of beings can suffer. Um, because I, I agree, Mike, we're, there are going
to be all sorts of, uh, the cyborg type, um, beings all across this spectrum, um, that will be populating
our social spaces very soon. They already are in some ways. And I think some of them probably at
least that currently exist don't suffer because there's nothing, there's nobody home, so to speak,
but it very easily could be the case quite soon that there are beings that are half machine and
half organism that do suffer. Um, and so we do need ways of thinking about that, that is the ways that
they're empirically grounded, um, so that we can avoid making real ethical, um, mistakes. The last
thing I want to say is in regards to synchronicity and like, how would we know that we're inside this
nested series of larger minds or organisms or something? And, you know, it reminds me of, um,
something Plato says in the dialogue Timaeus, which is all about cosmogony and astronomy and stuff,
but also in one of his later dialogues, the laws, um, in the laws, he says that the stars are our
teachers. What does he mean by that? Well, if you go back to the Timaeus, he describes how, um, the
ratios, which we can observe between the difference, different movements of the fixed constellations and
the wandering planets taught us math. We, we, and we taught us how to keep track of time. Um, and so
there's a way in which, um, for Plato, the, the logos, if you want, or the intelligibility of the
cosmos is, is the evidence that he would point to, to say we exist inside of this living, uh, organism,
right? It's because we literally learned how to count until time and do math and geometry by watching
the sky. Right. Um, and so this isn't something we made up cause we're so smart from Plato's point
of view. It's something that we, because we attentively observed the world out there gained
the capacity to be intelligent beings and agents. Right. And so very much so for Plato, we are embedded
in a mind and that mind taught us how to be minds, you know? And I think that, that type of, um,
cosmology is not ancient history anymore. It's not some, uh, superstition that now we know better.
I think in so many ways, um, modern science in the first few hundred years of its existence,
uh, did presuppose this, like Descartes, Newton, Galileo, like they all thought that, um, that
God is a mathematician and the reason the universe is intelligible is because of that, uh, that there's
this deep mathematical order in it. And it's not that we need to refer to a creator God to make sense
of science, but on some level we should be way more surprised as scientists that the universe is
intelligible to us at all. Yeah. Right. That raises certain questions that I don't think any
kind of reductive materialism has an answer for. Oh, my friends that I, that's a beautiful note to
end on. It's you, you pulled us out of the, the, the goth, uh, the, the goth clouds that were forming
from the, uh, everything around us might be a suffering mind. That's a much, a much better note to
end it on. So, but I, I sincerely feel like we just got started. So this has been fantastic. Um,
let's wrap this one up, but thank you guys both so much. I, I genuinely can't wait to put this out.
