I want to talk about, before we get into TOR, I definitely want to, because you write
a lot about TOR, and I want to get into the fact that these tech billionaires now are
essentially running rampant within the Trump administration, but just talk a little bit
about what you call the censorship arms race.
This is the early 2000s, because I thought that was a really important point.
Well, look, yeah, because while on the one hand, the internet was being sold to American
but also global consumers as this technology of utopianism and democracy, America saw the
internet as a tool of American foreign policy and American power abroad.
Because America developed this technology, and as it was sort of going outside of America
and globalizing and being picked up in Europe, in Russia after the collapse of the Soviet Union,
and in China as well, America, the State Department and the CIA saw the internet as a, as like,
as like a crowbar or something, you know, that could, essentially, if you could, you could
beam propaganda, you could use the internet to reach foreign populations in a way that
you couldn't before.
And so there, with China specifically, there began to be a conflict very, very, very, very
early on in the 2000s about who gets to control your domestic internet space.
And so China very quickly understood that the internet is a threat, that the internet is
a tool of American power.
And that if it didn't control its domestic internet space, it left itself open to foreign influence
from America, and to a kind of a destabilization, various destabilization programs into propaganda
and things like that.
And so the China began to essentially control what gets past its national firewall, right,
right, and to begin to erect this kind of defense against American, American, unfiltered American
internet content.
That was primarily a lot of these programs that are targeting Chinese, the Chinese population
were funded by the CIA or spinoffs from the CIA, like Radio Free Asia and things like that.
And so what that launched was America could not accept that, right, it could not accept
that another country would say, look, we want to control what happens within our borders.
All right, we don't think that allowing CIA propaganda to just sort of, you know, to target
our population is good for us or is good for China.
So we're going to have a kind of a censorship regime against, you know, the outside.
And so America could not abide that, to America, that was essentially like someone closing its
markets to American corporations, right?
China would not allow Google or other American companies to operate freely in China.
And so the U.S. began funding these kind of anti-censorship technologies.
In the first iteration, the organization that was making these anti-censorship technologies,
essentially tools that you could use to, that people in China could use, download to kind
of go around the firewall, right?
Initially, the main organization that was involved in that was Falun Gong, which is this pretty
crazy right-wing cult that's backed by the CIA that puts on all these sort of Chinese anti-communist
ballets that you see posters for all over cities in America.
And this cult was creating these programs, but very quickly it moved to a different organization.
And that organization was the TOR project that became kind of the major anti-censorship tool
that America was promoting in China, but also in other countries like in Iran and then later
in Russia.
Okay.
Explain what TOR is.
It became the lodestar for WikiLeaks and for, I don't know, do you call them crypto anarchists?
You know, these people who felt that they could evade surveillance through the dark web.
I was, I told you before the show, on TOR when I was communicating after the Snowden documents,
which were housed in Berlin, there was communication between myself and them, but they always insisted
on doing it through TOR, explain what TOR is, explain what the dark web is, but as you also
explain in the book, unless you are completely severed from Gmail and everything else, TOR,
which I think you make a very convincing case, was always a fiction in terms of what it actually
was, but you also can't, TOR becomes useless unless you're, you completely sever yourself
from all other normal internet activity.
But just explain all that for people who don't understand what it is and how it works.
I'll say, I'll talk about what first, what TOR sort of says it's going to do, and then
I'll talk about the history because I think it's very surprising about where the origins
of TOR, actually who created it and why it was created.
So what TOR promises to do, you download, now it's like a special browser, it's essentially
a kind of a different custom version of the Chrome browser, right?
And that Chrome browser has a special program in it that what it does is it kind of does
the, what do you call it, like the three card Monty, you know, it's where you, you know,
con men on the street will try to like, play with you and you got to find where the little
ball is underneath one of these cards.
And so that's what TOR claims it can do with your internet traffic.
It obscures, sort of, it shuffles it around, right?
Because all right, well, if you just to, the internet is fully transparent in the sense
that when I go to, let's say, newyorktimes.com, right, I type into my browser, newyorktimes.com,
that tells my internet service provider, hey, please request information from newyorktimes.com,
the servers that have that information.
So my internet provider knows where I'm going, what site I'm going to, what I'm requesting,
right?
And so whoever's ever watching my internet service provider, let's say it's the NSA or
the CIA or the FBI or all three of them know that, hey, this guy is requesting information
from newyorktimes.com, all right, or wikileaks.org, right?
And so it's transparent to anyone who's watching and to the company that provides the internet
service.
On the other end, right, my request is also transparent to the other internet service provider who is
providing this information, right, that hosts New York Times servers or WikiLeaks servers,
right?
So New York Times knows, hey, there's a person from this IP address.
They're requesting this particular web page, send it to them, right?
So my internet activity is transparent to anyone who has access to data on the internet that the
internet service provider has access to.
And so what Tor claims it can do, and it does do it, does do it, is to obscure kind of the
origin and the destination of your internet requests, right?
So you request everything through Tor, so you request it through Tor, and then Tor does this
kind of shuffle with your traffic that no one really knows who you are, and so it sort of obfuscates
your identity.
But you talked about how it became a big tool for drug dealers.
Yeah, and then there's another thing, Tor actually began to, you could host websites
in like the Tor cloud, essentially, which was the dark web.
So you don't actually ever leave Tor, it never, so Tor is its own internal network,
essentially, and you never leave it, right?
So if you request, let's say, NewYorkTimes.com, it has to leave this Tor cloud, because it has to
go to the public web, internet, right?
But your identity, your entry point, and your exit point are essentially broken up,
they're no longer connected, that's what Tor does.
Or you could stay inside that, and host a website inside that, and that was the dark web.
And it became, you know, very useful for a pretty famous, yeah, the Silk Road,
which is this big drug marketplace.
The guy was caught, you know, eventually, even though he used all these technologies.
And he actually, Trump just pardoned him and released him from prison.
He was serving two concurrent life sentences in prison.
Anyway, so that's what it claims to do.
And it does do it on a technical, you know, textbook case.
Yes, it does do it.
The problem is that when, if you are using,
look, and if you're using Tor to hide some kind of petty crime, let's say,
or you're, you know, hiding from the local police or something like that.
Yes, it works.
But if you're using this technology to hide from the FBI or the NSA, it starts to fall apart.
And that was, and it was targeted that it could do that,
that it could provide protection from the most powerful intelligence agencies on the planet.
That's sort of it stated, you know, Tor itself, you know, did that,
and the people who promoted Tor and backed it, claimed that it could do that.
The problem breaks because if you are someone like the NSA,
you are observing vast amounts, you're basically observing the entire internet in real time.
And the problem with Tor is that you could actually time things.
So if you're using Tor, it could time things like it could,
the amount of time it takes to jump through Tor is actually predictable.
So you could say, oh, this guy's entering here, now here, and then someone's coming out the other end,
you know, a few milliseconds later. Well, we can correlate those together.
So that was one way you could track people.
Another way you could track people is that every computer and every browser has its own
unique signature, which can also be tracked.
And then there's, you know, just bugs in the code that are not known to people that the NSA has
discovered and that has kept to itself, essentially allowing it to, you know, unmask people that way.
There are all sorts of different ways to circumvent this.
But there's even a darker level to it, which I think is makes it a lot more interesting.
Tor itself, while it billed itself as this independent agency
that was run by these anarcho kind of crypto guys who hated the government,
who had long hair, who seemed to be against the NSA, who are, you know,
helping WikiLeaks and all this stuff.
We're talking about Jacob Applebaum.
Jacob Applebaum and Roger Dingledine, who was also the head of Tor project back then.
I don't think he's the head of it anymore.
These guys were on the payroll of the US government, you know, and specifically
nonprofits that were linked to the State Department and CIA spinoffs like the Broadcasting Board of
Governors. It's called a different name now. It's called the US Agency for Global Media.
I mean, they use these, they pick these names, man, that like you can't remember them.
They're just gray generic names and they keep changing them.
But the Broadcasting Board of Governors back then was the umbrella agency that ran
and America's government propaganda news divisions, everything from Radio Free Europe to Radio Free
Asia and all these different language programs that were targeting the Middle East, that were
targeting South America, that were targeting China, Vietnam, Korea, Russia, Iran, blah, blah, blah, blah.
So just the entire American propaganda division that was sort of the agency that was overseeing it
was also funding this supposedly an anarcho, you know, sort of crypto spunky outfit that was going
to protect you from the NSA. And also it had direct contracts with the Pentagon. And the reason why
the Pentagon was funding it, so all these different agencies that are funding Tor have different
reasons why they were funding it. The reasons that the Pentagon was funding it was because it was,
I think it was being used by the US military actively. And the origins of the Tor project
were actually in the US Navy, in the US Naval Laboratory. The US Navy is actually historically
linked with surveillance and espionage. Because historically, I don't want to get into the details,
but historically, the US Navy was actually the driver of surveillance technologies and encryption
technologies and interception technologies, basically to intercept signals intelligence that was coming
from ships out in the ocean, right, and hiding its own signals intelligence from other countries.
And so the US Naval Laboratory developed the Tor project or the technology that underpinned the Tor project
to hide spies as they use the internet. So the problem with the internet is that it doesn't matter if
if I'm using the internet, right, or if a CIA agent is using the internet or an FBI agent is using the
internet, we're all transparent to the ISPs that provide the service. So if I'm a, let's say,
a CIA agent, and I want to, you know, infiltrate an animal rights forum or something like that,
right? Or I'm an FBI agent, and I want to infiltrate an animal rights forum,
I don't want the administrator of the forum to see that the IP, my IP address, you know,
the IP address of the user that I created on that forum to be linked with Langley or to be
linked with an FBI office somewhere, right? I want to be able to hide that. So for an FBI agent to kind
of use the internet, but to hide themselves in plain sight, they have to use Tor or they have to use
something like Tor. And so it was developed specifically to hide spies online, American
spies online. That was the purpose of the Tor project. And the problem with this kind of technology
is that you can also see that if someone uses Tor, because if you actually start tracing the IP
information, you see that this user popped out of a Tor node or Tor cloud. And so in order for
this American spies to use Tor, they have to open Tor to as wide an audience as possible,
to a wide as not an audience, but a wide as wide a user base as possible. So everyone from criminals
to drug dealers to drug users to, you know, let's say, political activists like Julian Assange,
to soccer moms who are just paranoid about the government, you know, watching them or whatever,
like you want everyone to use it. And that way, the spies can hide them in the crowd. It's like,
it's like in the old Cold War movies or something, you know, you do the handoff
in a crowded train station or whatever, you know, you go to a crowded square to do the handoff where
things can't be traced as easily. And so Tor was created to hide spies. And then it was essentially
handed off to this strange nonprofit that was essentially run by these nobodies, you know,
that people who were involved with helping kind of code peripherally this technology,
but there were nobodies. And suddenly it became this, it rebranded itself from a tool to hide spies
into a tool that will help hide you from spies. So it did almost like a 180, right? It's a very
interesting story. I don't know where else we can go from that or if this is enough, because I don't
want to get too much into the details. Well, just quickly, because I want to talk
about what's happening right now in the Trump administration. But you argue in the book that
Tor just ultimately doesn't work. I mean, it can work. I'd say it can, yes. It depends. It works on
very low level cases. Yes. If you're hiding from just local cops or something like that, you know,
like petty crime. Yeah.
