The New York Times published a lead column on January 18, 2025, titled Are We Sleepwalking
Into Autocracy? The columnist's answer is yes, unless, and I quote,
defenders of democracy have to stay united, focusing on ensuring that checks and balances
remain intact, and that crucial democratic watchdog institutions elude capture.
What is absent from the Times article is the complicity of the media, and especially the New York
Times, in shutting down coverage of the fight by unions, grassroots movements, whistleblowers,
and civic organizations, often led by the consumer advocate and former presidential candidate
Ralph Nader, to placate their advertisers. This decision, made by newspapers such as the New
York Times four decades ago, essentially erased these popular initiatives from public consciousness.
This erasure, done to placate wealthy corporations and oligarchs and boost revenue, bolstered the
power of corporations and the government to dominate and shape public discourse, and in
the process saw them become ever more secretive and ever more autocratic.
As Ralph Nader notes, the regular reporting about what activists were doing in the 1960s and
1970s made possible the consumer, environmental, labor, and freedom of information laws. Similar
efforts now cannot gather momentum with media visibility, invisibility. Legislative hearings,
prosecutions, and regulatory actions cannot get jump-started just by the people insistent on a just
and democratic society. How often do you see op-eds from civic labor advocates, Ralph asks? How often do
you read reviews of their books? How often do you see profiles of them? How often have the groundbreaking
studies by public citizen, common cause, center for science and the public interest, veterans for peace,
union of concerned scientists, etc., received coverage? This erasure stands in stark contrast to the coverage
given over to those on the far right and corporations. Figures like Donald Trump, Marjorie Taylor Greene,
and Elon Musk get plenty of press. The media landscape is siloed. Media outlets, both the legacy media and
the digital media, cater to well-defined demographics. But the power of the legacy media, should it decide to
use its power, is to help set the agenda through its reporting. Most digital sites feed off of the reporting
of the establishment media spinning it left or right, and what it does not cover often does not get covered.
Legions of reporters, 500 full-time reporters cover the Congress, hundreds more sit at the feet of the
titans of commerce and Wall Street, spit back to the public official communiques, and fawning interviews
with the powerful, the famous, and the rich. Unless they are deployed outside the halls of Congress and the
centers of power, what is left of our democracy, and not much of it is left, will wither and die.
Joining me to discuss our march towards tyranny, the complicity of institutions such as the media
and the liberal class, including the Democratic Party, and what we must do to wrest back power
is Ralph Nader, who has been fighting corporate power longer, more effectively, and with more integrity
than any other American. Ralph, let's go back to where we were, because where we are now is a reaction to
what you, or at the epicenter of it, built. We can begin with your groundbreaking book,
Unsafe at Any Speed, which should be taught in every journalism school. It is a
masterful piece of investigative reporting. But let's go back to what we had, and then how they
organized to take it away. Ralph Nader, Jr.: Yeah, thank you, Chris. It's very well documented,
the whole history of it. When I wrote the book, Unsafe at Any Speed, a reporter for Science Magazine
picked it up, and then the New York Times picked it up off of Science Magazine, and it made page one.
And so that was a good start.
Steve McLaughlin, Jr.: Ralph, I just want to interrupt for people who don't know. This were
cars made by GM that were not safe. Ralph Nader, Jr.: Yeah, well, it was a critique of unsafely
designed cars, cars without seat belts, airbags, rollover bars, collapsing steering column, padded dash
panels, all the things we take for granted now. And I led with a chapter on the Corvair, which is
uniquely unstable and cornering maneuvers. At any rate, up until then, the press would never cover
criticisms of cars by model or by manufacturer. They would refer to the Corvair until we broke the
taboo as a middle-sized rear-engine car, and they wouldn't mention the name.
Steve McLaughlin, Jr.: All right. So we broke the taboo, and I began contacting members of Congress,
because the next step after the book were congressional hearings in the tried-and-true tradition
of Civics 101. So I lived in a boarding house, and I would call from an outside phone to members of
Congress. And they would invariably say when they answered the phone, who are you with? Well, in
those days, the only answer you could give was, I'm with a trade association or a corporation or union.
There were virtually no citizen groups operating at that time. So I would go down to Capitol Hill,
and I would find the staff that was responsive. And there were, for example, Senator Ribicoff's staff,
Senator Magnusson's staff. And then we would start having hearings. And before the hearings,
I would call the Washington Post, New York Times, AP, UPI, Baltimore Sun, and the Wall Street Journal,
and the Detroit papers, because it was on automobiles. And not long thereafter, I had a whole
covey of reporters who wanted to cover what I was doing up there, wanted to cover the hearings.
They didn't just do a feature, hoping for a Pulitzer, and then leave the subject entirely the way they
do now. They did what was called regular reporting, beat reporting. And because I would get in those
papers, it'd be a recall, it'd be widely publicized, members of Congress began more and more to open
their doors to me and to have hearings in the Senate and in the House. And the press feels more
comfortable reporting hearings on corporate misbehavior or corporate crime than if citizens had some sort of
rally even then. So to make a long story short, in a matter of a few months after the publication of
unsafety speed, November 1965, by September, the Congress had passed the first bill ever to regulate
the most powerful industry in the country at the time, for safety standards, pollution control,
and fuel efficiency, three objectives. And they sent it to Lyndon Johnson, who had a signing ceremony,
and he invited me there and gave me one of the pens, which I can't find now, by the way.
So I was off to the races. So I figured, well, I don't want to be a Lone Ranger here. There's
too many corporate lobbyists. They started beefing up their lobbying in Washington, including the auto industry.
Let me just stop you, because, Ralph, let's not bypass the fact that GM mounted a pretty
intense and dirty campaign against you.
Yes, they hired a private detective with several former FBI people. That's what happened to a lot
of FBI agents when they retired to go to work for these large corporations to follow me around the
country, try to get dirt on me, to discredit my testimony before Congress. And the Detroit paper,
Bob Irvin, first wrote the article, fingering GM is behind this. And then all the other press jumped on.
And that's when Senator Rivakov had his widely publicized hearings. And then it shifted over to
Senator Magnuson, who reported the bill out to the Senate floor. So that helped, of course.
But then I started going after other industries, the pipeline safety issue, the insurance industry,
and others. And for a while, it worked like a charm. We recruited law school students who just graduated or
over the summer. And the Washington Post publicized one of their reports, exposing the weak Federal
Trade Commission. And the Congress had hearings. There was hearings at the House. And we had five young
law students testify. And the Post called them Nader's Raiders. So that was a very useful moniker
report for more media. And we did one report after another on the U.S. Department of Agriculture,
the Food and Drug Administration, the Interstate Commerce Commission, the FAA. And each one got
coverage. Now, when you get coverage in the Times or Post or AP, you get coverage on TV and radio,
because the original content comes from the newspapers. And then, you know, NBC, ABC. So I got
on Meet the Press, for example. I got on a lot of radio. I got on the evening news. And then we started
getting Nader's Raiders, major media, to broaden the base. And it worked like a charm. The members of
Congress couldn't shrug us off because they didn't want to be criticized by columnists like Drew Pearson
in the Washington Post or the regular news reporters on Capitol Hill. There would be hearings. There'd be
legislation. And we got not just the auto safety law. We got the consumer product safety law. We got the
Flambo Fabrics Protection Law. We got, in the environmental area, the fundamental air and water
pollution control acts. Started the Environmental Protection Agency, the Occupational Safety and Health
Administration, OSHA, and the Freedom of Information Act, on and on. And then something happened.
Let me stop you there, Ralph. Ralph, let me just stop you there to make two points. One,
what you did was create organizations, Common Cause, all these organizations which you then spun off.
They became kind of autonomous consumer agencies, environmental agencies. So you created a counterweight
to corporate power, number one. And number two, I think we have to delineate the relationship you had
with the press then and now. Because these reporters, there was an alliance between your work
and those reporters. Is that correct? Yeah. But we weren't asking for favors, Chris.
We said to them, hold us to the standard of newsworthiness. That's all we ask of you. And so
they did. And we were very newsworthy. So much so that Ben Bradley, the celebrated editor of the Washington
Post, charged out of his office into the newsroom one day, holding up the Washington Post that covered
one of our reports. And he said, why aren't you guys digging in like Nader is? What's going on here?
So that launched even more investigative reports that had nothing to do with us. And then the
television began picking up and saying, you know, this is good for ratings. Let's have an
news. And that spread around the country. Yeah. I started the Center for Auto Safety, Public Citizen,
the Pension Rights Center, the public interest research groups around the country, and many other
groups. Because again, I didn't want to be a Lone Ranger. We had to have much more resources,
many more people to counter the hordes of corporate lobbyists and their PACs. So this went on until
the probably 1974, 75. Let me just stop you because 1971 is a pivotal year. That's when you get the kind of
corporate blueprint for the blowback, the Powell memo. Right. And you're the only person named to be
targeted in that memo. So corporations feel heat from grassroots, civic, popular movements, unions,
and they react. But let's just briefly raise the 71 Powell memo because they kind of followed it to the
letter, what corporations proposed doing and then the effects of that.
Well, Lewis Powell was a corporate attorney in Richmond. He represented utilities and other
companies. And he was asked by the U.S. Chamber of Commerce for advice on what to do with the rousing
activity on campuses, the students, anti-war, the civil rights, women's rights movement, criticism of big
banks and other corporations, the eruption of resistance to pollution, and at that time, the early Earth Day
mobilization. And he wrote a memorandum. I'm sorry, Ralph. I don't want to… You started Earth Day. That was your idea,
right? Yeah. I believe. Is that correct? Yeah.
And he wrote a memorandum, about 33 pages. I just read it recently. And he basically said,
hey, we've got to wake up. We're the business community. These people, they're not just radicals.
They're regular people that are very turned off. And they want to regulate us. They want to tax us.
They want to sue us. And we've got to beef up our lobbying. We've got to have a good presence on
campus. We've got to do much more media. And they listened. And they did beef up. But the pivotal
change was not that. The pivotal change was Abe Rosenthal, the new managing editor of the New York
Times. And he was what we would call now a neoconservative. And he was a foreign reporter
for the New York Times in Poland and elsewhere. And then they made a managing editor. And he did not
like us. He was opening suburban additions to the New York Times. He wanted more ads. He thought we were
bad for business. And he basically started to shut us down. The first thing he did is he told the
Washington Bureau that if we come out with a critical report of a corporation and the corporation does not
respond, they are not to report on our findings, on our revelations. Well, that doesn't take long for
corporations to find that out. And so they didn't respond. So the Washington Bureau would send the
article up to New York for publication, and it wouldn't get in. He then didn't like Arab Americans,
particularly. He was a staunch supporter of the Israeli government can do no wrong in those days. And there
was not a little bigotry here involved, as people told me at the time. And so he wanted, basically,
to shut us down. And the coverage began to decline in the Times. Well, if the coverage declined in the
time— Ralph, let me stop you there. First of all, most people don't know or may not know you're of
Lebanese descent. But secondly, we also—that was a moment when the New York Times had severe financial
distress. It was not bringing in the ad revenue. And what Abe Rosenthal did was create all the
sections that we now see today—style, you know, business, all this stuff—which were just magnets for
advertisers, high-end advertisers. And so Abe used to, you know, walk around and say, you know,
I save the New York Times. Well, many of us would argue he destroyed the journalistic integrity of the
New York Times. But he did so by catering to these advertisers. And part of that catering was,
one, to create these special sections that have nothing to do with journalism at all.
Many of it was, in fact, paid content. And secondly, it was to erase the kinds of reports that you were
doing and both the kinds of investigative reports that these big advertisers didn't want.
Yes. And at the same time, the companies hired a firm called Wilmer, Cutler, and Pickering.
And Lloyd Cutler would go and have meetings with editors of the New York Times and Post and saying,
what are you guys doing giving this guy so much print? Don't you know he's bad for business? And
the inference was that they were going to lose advertising if they didn't shut us out.
And so once the Times started scaling down, then the Washington Post took note because they were
of the same mindset. And both of them were about to go public and sell stock on the stock exchange,
which gave them even more vulnerability to suppression. And then that dried up more and more of the
evening news. We used to get on the network news. It's almost impossible to get on a network evening
news now. And the same with radio. At the same time, there emerged public radio and public broadcasting,
and they were scared from the get-go that the companies would go after their funding on Capitol Hill
and crimp their style. And so they covered us very little as well. And who took notice? Obviously,
members of Congress. And it broke the cycle of Civics 101. You put the truth and the facts out,
the public gets informed because the press covers it. The legislators or regulators see the press covering it.
They begin to rise to their responsibilities. They have hearings. They take action. People's lives are
saved. Health is advanced. Their economic well-being is protected. And then the cycle starts again
against the whole set of new injustices. But all these forces I've just mentioned started shutting
us down. We were saved for a short period by the Jimmy Carter administration. He appointed very good
people to the regulatory agencies, the auto safety agency, the job safety agency, the EPA, and so on.
But that was just a four-year reprieve, and they were still counterattacking. More lobbyists,
more political action committees, more indignant calls to reporters and editors and publishers to shut us
down. And so that was their golden age, the mass media, what we call now the corporate media. And it's
completely changed now. And I say to reporters or editors or publishers that I can manage to reach,
it's not easy. What are you ashamed of your golden age for? Look what you did for the country,
just exercising your duty and professional responsibilities for newsworthiness. And now you
don't do it. Ralph, there was another factor too, and that is the infusion of corporate money into the
Democratic Party, because you could not have held these hearings or passed this legislation,
which many of which you wrote, unless you had a viable liberal wing of the Democratic Party willing to
take on corporate power. And that was eviscerated in particular during the Clinton administration,
led by a California congressman named Tony Coelho.
Yeah, Tony Coelho was in charge of fundraising for the House Democrats. And around 1978-79,
when Carter was president, he managed to get the party to accept the following proposition.
Why are we letting the Republicans raise all that money from the business community? We can raise money
from the business community. And they started going to these dinners in Washington,
PAC dinners they were called, and making the pitch for money. And that was the beginning of the end,
because it coalesced with the defeat of Jimmy Carter by Ronald Reagan. And once Reagan took over,
well, he gave wishlist lists to companies. So you go to the oil and gas company, the banks,
the insurance companies, and so on, and say, what do you want us to do for you in terms of
getting rid of regulations, tax cuts, appoint nominating conservative judges to the federal bench,
and so on. It was all downhill. You could see the correlation between the campaign money pouring into the
Democratic Party coffers, and the decline in regulatory action and congressional hearings when
they controlled the House or the Senate.
And I know when you first ran for president, I think it was you, I remember you telling me that
it was done essentially because Congress had become completely captive, that all of those Congress
people, Fulbright and others that you were once able to work with had been essentially pushed out of the
Democratic Party, that it had been seized. The entire party and the Congress had been seized by
corporate power. Is that correct?
Yeah, that's right. Especially in 1980, the landslide against Jimmy Carter by Ronald Reagan,
a grade B actor who had spent some years as governor of California. We lost Senator Magnuson,
we lost Senator Church, we lost Senator Nelson. These were the champions, and others were about to be
defeated. We had strong progressive Democratic senators from North and South Dakota. Jim Abarest,
for example. We had Senator George McGovern. We had two progressive senators, and now they're all
Republicans. There was hardly a shred of the Democratic Party in four mountain states and the
two prairie states. So now having abandoned them, they start with a handicap of 12 senators that don't
even compete to challenge in the U.S. Senate. It's pretty hard to control the Senate when you start with
12 down from the get-go. So yeah, what you said was the trend, and it just got worse and worse. Instead
of getting a stronger Democratic Party, a stronger progressive movement, it got weaker. The sign of a
decaying democracy is that when the forces of plutocracy, oligarchy, multinational corporations
increase their power in all sectors of our society, the resistance gets weaker. Now in a healthy democracy,
the resistance would get stronger. There'd be more marches, demonstrations, litigation, candidates
running for office, and of course more lobbying groups by new citizen organizations. We saw just the
opposite. And the price we're paying right now, the end product of all this is Donald J. Trump. Der Fuhrer,
the voters in this country seeing just two alternatives, the Republican Party and Democratic Party, on November 5th
narrowly elected a lawless dictator who is now at large in our White House, dismantling what's left of
the Democratic accountability, the role of Congress, and dictating anything he wants to do. In fact, in July
2019, he said, with Article 2, I can do whatever I want as president. And he's proving it, both in his first
term and even on a more greater rampage in the last few days starting his second term.
But all of this was the rot preceded, of course, Trump, even from the first administration,
the destruction of civil liberties, including our right to privacy with wholesale surveillance,
the destruction of due process. And you have been very critical of the liberal class, the Democratic
Party, for either being active or complicit. I remember you once saying, where are the heads of all
the law schools? Well, why aren't they speaking out? And even before Trump ran, when you were running,
I remember you telling me once, you know, it's just all a dictator would have to do is flick a switch.
It's already there. It's already been arranged. Yeah. If you just look at the countervailing forces
that hold up a society's civilized norms, due process of law, and democratic traditions, they're all
either AWOL or collapsing. For example, there are over a million lawyers. They're called part of the legal
profession. Where have they been? The bar associations don't speak out. The American Bar
Association, the biggest bar associates in the world, they don't take a stand. They're the first
responders. They're supposed to be our sedinals. They're AWOL. The organized church used to sustain
the norms. They collapsed. Gambling is everywhere now, right down at fingertips for a teenager in his
room. He's in her bedroom. He can gamble. That's collapsed on many fronts. They were
in the forefront of the civil rights movement, the peace movement. Where are they now? In fact,
the evangelical groups in the South are just opposite. They're for war. They're for destruction
of Palestinian rights. They love Donald J. Trump. It's just the opposite. The labor unions have never
been weaker. There's a few surges in partial organizations, Starbucks and Amazon and others,
of course. But the number of unionized workers still going down, down, down. It's the lowest in
80, 90 years. I think only about 10 percent of all workers now, public and private, together are
organized. They're headed by often very cautious leaders who, every time we propose to them to join
with consumer environmental forces, pass it by the Democratic Party apparatus that turns it down. So
they're like a tail of the Democratic Party. The civic groups, they're totally outnumbered. They can't keep
up with all the opposition just in terms of people. A number of lobbyists on Capitol Hill, litigators,
they're struggling for funds. So you can see the media, of course, who just finished talking,
they have cut the ground under the citizen movement and the citizen community. And that's basically
why the Democrats lost election after election, including the one last November, because the civic
groups are groups that know how to talk to people at the grassroots. They don't differentiate between
conservative workers and liberal workers for health and safety or conservative patients and liberal
patients for health and safety or consumers. They don't do that. They talk to all people and they know
the language. They know the strategies and the tactics. They were completely blocked by the Democratic
Party from any input. Why? Because, few people know this, the Democratic Party not only is wallowing in
corporate PAC money, they have contracted out their campaigns to corporate conflicted political and media
consultants who raised the money, developed the strategy, generated taboos, and block us from input
into the Democratic Party at the national, state, and local level. And that blockage kept the Democratic Party
from taking the most obvious positions that could have won easily the House, Senate, and the presidency
last year. For example, they could have made a big deal out of a frozen federal minimum wage of $7.25.
That's 25 million workers would get a raise to $15 an hour. And they didn't do it. Kamala Harris just made
a throwaway line. They didn't listen to Bernie Sanders, for example. They could have increased
benefits of Social Security, which have been frozen for 50 years. Instead, they said, we'll protect Social
Security as it is now. About 65 million people would have gotten higher Social Security benefits.
They could have defeated the Republicans on the child tax credit extension. 61 million kids
from conservative liberal families were getting an average of $300 a month. It cut poverty almost in
half among children in the United States. And they didn't do that. Instead, Kamala Harris sent her
brother-in-law to Wall Street to talk to Goldman Sachs and corporate law firms to advise her on her
economic and tax policy. And her most memorable phrase is, opportunity economy. Well, that really
spells specifics to put food on people's table. So basically, the Democratic Party owes America
a huge apology in maybe 10 installments of how they sabotaged the only party that could have saved the
Republic from the fascism and the corporatism and the militarism of the GOP. Instead, the Democratic Party
became part of the problem. They also were militaristic. They were corporatistic and
they weren't all that great in terms of opening the channels of government to civic input. And so
they had an autocratic dimension as well. I just want to, before we go on,
talk about the conspiracy or the collusion between the two parties to shut down third parties. I mean,
you were a victim of that. Yes. Well, you know, it's what I call the two-party duopoly,
which has been picked up as a phrase. And if you don't have a competitive democracy, you don't have
a democracy. And if they shut off third-party efforts by huge ballot access barriers, by avalanche of
frivolous lawsuits, diverting resources and time from these little parties, you're not going to get
what you got in the 19th century, where you had the Liberty Party created in 1840 against slavery,
you had the Women's Suffrage Party, you had the Labor Progressive Farmer parties. They all pushed
the two parties into taking up these positions after some years or decades, even though they never
won a national election. It was much easier in the 19th, early 20th century to get on the ballot.
But when the Communist Party started running candidates in the US, the ballot barriers by state
law after state law became horrendous. In fact, in one state of California, there's more signatures
required to get on the ballot to run for president than in 10 Western European countries. In Canada,
it's very easy to get on the ballot. So what happened was that they violated the law of nature. Imagine
if seeds were not allowed to sprout in nature. What would be left of our biosphere. What would be left
of our biota. And that's what they've done. And as a result, the corporatists found that they could
make the two parties come to become more and more alike. And to have one party justify doing bad things by
saying, don't you know how bad the Republicans are? What are you criticizing us? The Republicans are worse.
So they define each other by who's the worst instead of who's the best. And we're paying the price now
in wars of empire, in the domination of corporate supremacists over everything. They're raising our
children with that iPhone five, seven hours a day, undermining parental authority, separating these
children from family, community, nature, harming their health with junk food and sedentary
living with very little kids playing outside anymore. And there isn't anything that corporate
commercialism now has not invaded. They've commercialized the churches. They've commercialized
they've commercialized the academic world. They've commercialized almost everything outside the
marketplace they see as a profit center. So they want to corporatize the post office. They want to take over
public drinking water departments and corporatize them. They want to corporatize the public school
system one way or the other. They want to corporatize the public lands or take the public lands.
And they've never been more aggressive, never been more successful. And the civic community,
which used to be relied on to resist, can't get any media. And we have tried last year, we made a major
effort to turn Labor Day into a real workers day with events all over the country. We got the unions
behind us, the AFL behind us. They're ready to roll out in July. It would have been a tremendous
phenomenon. It would have energized people to go to vote in November. And it was based around a compact for
American labor, protecting their pensions, living wage, health insurance, right to organize, and so on.
And just as we were going to get underway, Liz Shuler and others passed the proposal by the Democratic
National Committee. And they shut it down saying you couldn't control what was going to be said or
done at these local media events and gatherings. And Mark Dimonstein, the head of the Postal Workers Union,
who was very excited about this idea and persuaded the AFL Council on 16th Street, next to the White House,
to pick it up. He said, that's what the unions do all the time. Anything that deals with political,
they just write blank checks to the Democratic PACs, no strings attached, they don't demand anything,
and any proposal by an outsider is passed by the Democratic National Committee. Well, that alone
elected Trump and the Congress. Just that shutdown of the civic community alone, and I include the
labor unions as part of that, would have made the difference. You know, Trump was elected by a margin of
235,000 votes just in Pennsylvania, Michigan, and Wisconsin combined. In other words, if there was
a 240,000 vote switch, he would have been defeated. So that's just one example. And in 2022, we mobilized
24 national citizen groups for a Zoom conference of six hours for candidates running for office at the
national and state level. And they all delivered 10, 15-minute concise presentations. You know, they
know what they're talking about, strategies, tactics, policies, language, rebuttals, slogans,
and ways to get out the vote. And it was almost entirely ignored. Nancy Pelosi couldn't be bothered to
tell her legions in the Democratic Party to show up on the Zoom conference in July 2022. Anybody who wants
to see what we did, it's on winningamerica.net, winningamerica.net. And again, that would have
broadened the progressive participation and majority in Congress, and would have set the stage to defeat
Trump in 2024. So basically, when you shut out the civic community, Chris, you shut down democracy.
And I place the responsibility not just on the Democratic Party, but first and foremost on the
mass media. And it was impossible to get any coverage of the July conference.
Chris Bounds. These are major groups represented. Didn't get any ink whatsoever. Couldn't get anybody
other than Dana Milbank. He wrote a column for the Washington Post to cover our nine-month effort
to inject the civic community into the dialogue and into the discussion of the 2022 elections. And the same
thing happened. We couldn't get a single column on this effort on Labor Day. Not a single column in any of
the mainstream press. And by the way, Chris, the independent press is not such a hot shot either.
The magazines like In These Times, Washington Monthly, Progressive Magazine, The Nation,
The Nation. They don't cover civic community activities. They just pontificate. They do have some
good articles. And they have their columnists, many of whom are getting very tired and repetitive.
They don't cover what Public Citizen, Common Cause, Pension Rights Center, Center for Science, Public
Interest, Union of Concerns, Scientists, Veterans for Peace, especially, gets completely blacked out,
regardless of their demonstrations and non-blind civil disobedience all over the country against the
military machine, the empire, the weaponization of the genocide in Gaza. They haven't had a single
article. They put out all kinds of great material. People can go to veteransforpeace.org and see for
yourself. These are veterans who've known wars. And they can't even get any coverage. And you can't
get any coverage of the lack of coverage. You can't get the journalism publications to do any coverage
of the censorship. So this is the ultimate censorship, the shutdown of the First Amendment. When the press,
the press, which is given a cachet in the First Amendment, there's no other industry mentioned by
name in the Constitution, are abusing their privileges for a mess of potage. They're abusing them for
the profits they want to make from advertising, which of course begins to replace journalists and editors
who want to do the right thing with journalists and editors who got their finger to the wind and are
worried about the money before reporting the truth in an equitable fashion. And it even gets worse. The
Times created Trump. They kept giving him more and more publicity. They created J.D. Vance. Whoever
heard of J.D. Vance? They kept writing about his book. They kept writing about his Senate race more than
the opponent, Tim Ryan, in the U.S. Senate race in Ohio. The same with all these other people. 11 pages
and three editions to Tucker Carlson. They gave Tucker Carlson more ink and didn't lay a glove on him,
by the way. All he did was publicize who he was. He loved it. He held up the papers to promote it.
And they gave him more space than any figure in the history of the New York Times. And whoever heard of
Marjorie Greene, Marjorie Taylor Greene from an obscure district in Georgia, until the Times started
reporting her every ugly utterance and put her on the cover of the New York Times magazine.
Before we close, I want to end by talking about what we have to do. I just want you to talk about the
crackdown on college campuses, including your alma maters of Princeton and Harvard Law School.
I find it quite disturbing. Universities should be, you know, sacrosanct in terms of free speech. And
having covered despotic governments all over the world, once they shut down that university space,
it's quite, quite ominous. Yes. It was made even worse by the October 7th and thereafter, where
the attack on October 7th was a homicide suicide mission. They lost 1,600 Hamas fighters, more than
the alleged number of Israelis who were killed, 350 of whom were soldiers, by the way. And that was a
raid into Israel that can't compare with the raids into Palestine for 60 years, slaughtering from the
air all kinds of civilians and civilian infrastructures again and again and again against the defenseless
population, as Gideon Levy, the columnist in Haaretz, wrote about again and again, among other columnists in
that newspaper in Israel. And then the eruption of protests on college campuses, I would never have
guessed the level of suppression, suspending students, discharging students, shutting down events,
suspending potential grants, blocking professors from moving from one university to another, including
one of the nation's leading experts on genocide, Mr. Professor Siegel from Stockton University,
at a post at University of Minnesota, which was turned down because he was outspoken about the genocide
in Gaza. The law schools are following suit. The law firms, some of them have announced they will not
hire or they will reject job offers of law school graduates who were involved in pro-Palestinian
rights activities at law school opposed to genocide. I mean, who would ever have dreamed something like
that? Even critics of universities never dreamed the level of cowardliness, the level of receptiveness to a
few large donors who were pro-Israeli government-can-do-no-wrong enthusiasts. And it cowed Harvard
University, Princeton, and others decisively, just proving our point that at academic institutions, money
talks more than truth, more than freedom of speech. And the answer to it is just better organizing on campus
with smarter strategies. I wouldn't have spent all that time on disinvestment. There are other ways
that can affect universities much more deeply that have to be considered. And these students need
a few full-time people helping them at these large universities because these students got to deal with
classes and grades. So there needs to be more resources around and brave faculty have to be defended. They have
to have pro bono lawyers. And with the right tactics and strategies, you can tip the balance in favor of freedom
of speech and developing the civic refinements for justice as part of the educational process itself.
Well, I know you've, you've, I want to move on to what we have to do, but I know you've talked about
mobilizing alumni as kind of a key aspect of pushing back against the suppression of free speech and
the suspension of students and the kind of blacklisting of those who speak out on the campus. But let's just
close by what do we do now? We are on the cusp of an American fascism. There's just no way around it.
You know, reading these executive orders, everything from education to revoking student visas for foreign
students who have participated in protests against the genocide. I mean, this is a long list.
What do we do now to save what's left of our open society?
Well, there's a lot that has to be done in order to create the brooks that feed the streams, that feed
the tributaries, that feed the Mississippi River, to take a metaphor to its limit. For example,
there's nothing stopping students from organizing their own full-time groups with full-time staff.
They can assess themselves 15, 20 bucks a student and do what the public interest research groups
have done on domestic issues all over the country with full-time staff. We have to expand on our
language. We should never use words like white collar crime. It's corporate crime. We should use
words like corporatism, not private sector. We've got to organize, as you say, the progressive alumni.
There's always significant percentages of progressive alumni of these schools, but they don't know each
other, and that has to be connected. We've got to beef up the student press, which is very heavily on
trivia and boards. But in a broader sense, outside of the universities, what do we have to do?
In a broader sense, all it comes down to are two things. Trump will self-destruct because he knows
no boundaries. So his greatest enemy is Trump, and you will see the unraveling of Trump in the succeeding
weeks. I would not be surprised that if he continues his bull in the china shop, illegal,
wild, flailing, affecting tens of millions of people in terms of their dire necessities of life
in favor of his corporate supremacists, that he will be impeached and convicted in the U.S. Senate.
His own party will turn against him because when they see the polls, which are already dropping since
January 20th, by the way, when they see the polls and they realize it's either them or Trump,
they will always take their own political survival, just as a few senators did during the Nixon Watergate
scandal when they got into a limousine and went to the White House and basically said to Nixon,
your time is up. You've lost your base in Congress. So the second is we've got to focus on the Congress.
That is the leading fulcrum for turning around the U.S. government foreign, domestic,
and affecting state and local. That's what the founders believed when they gave the most powerful
authorities by far, not to the executive branch or the judicial branch, but to Congress. The exclusive
power to declare war, to exercise the taxing power, the spending power, the nomination confirmation power,
and the investigative oversight authority. And so we're down to 535 men and women.
Probably 20% of them are already on the side of truth and justice and peace. And we've got to
organize back home. My best guess is 1% of the people organized in congressional districts. That's
2.5 million in progressive districts who represent public opinion, who know what they're talking about,
who are willing to put in, say, 500 hours a year of volunteer time, about the time people put in on a
hobby, and who will raise enough money for an office with two full-time staff in each congressional
district, can defeat the corporate supremacist, and take control of Congress, and turn the country
around. That is quite a bit of organizing, but most people would not believe that 1% can do it. We did
it in the 60s and early 70s with far less than 1% to regulate these companies. Remember, when it comes down
to the brass tacks, the members of Congress want your vote far more than they want money from commercial
interests. They want money from commercial interests in order to defeat their opponent, put ads on TV.
Why? Because they want to get votes. But if the votes are conditioned and focused, and if members of
Congress are regularly summoned to town meetings back home where the citizenry sets the agenda and asks the
questions, and the senators and representatives respond and listen and go back to their instructions,
the country can be changed. We should always remember that when it comes down to where people live,
work, and raise their children, there are not the kind of polarizations that the rulers try to
inculcate on the public. Divide and rule goes back over 2,000 years as a tactic. Most of the necessities
of life are supported by an overwhelming number of Americans, regardless of the labels they put on
themselves, conservative, liberal, or whatever. Living wage is one. Universal health insurance is two.
Crackdown on corporate crooks is three. A fair tax system is four. De-bloating the military budget and
coming back home to repair and modernize infrastructure and public services in every community. Creating a lot
of jobs is five. Empowering people so they can take back their sovereign power and condition it before they
give their instructions back to their senators or their state legislators or their city council person.
So it's not an impossible task. It has precedents in American history and it's surprising when people
realize what a tiny percentage of active, engaged citizens representing public opinion, knowing what
they're talking about, and making direct contact with town meetings with their representatives. No flags,
no intermediaries. We have all kinds of books that show how this can be done, how it has been done.
One of them is called Breaking Through Power, It's Easier Than We Think that I wrote, and another one is called
Unstoppable, The Emerging Left-Right Alliance to Dismantle the Corporate State. It's good to know history and
the successes from history so we don't get discouraged and demoralized as we see so much of that today in the U.S.
Great. Thank you so much, Ralph. I want to thank Sophia, Diego, Thomas, and Max who produced the show.
You can find me at chrisedges.substack.com. And I might add, keeping it up to date, I have a weekly column since 1971.
You can get free electronically at nadir.org. Just go to it, sign up, and you'll be kept up to date on what we're doing and thinking.
Up to date on how we will be.
Long
