Welcome to Current Affairs. My name is Nathan Robinson. I am the editor-in-chief of Current
Affairs Magazine. Today, Grace Blakely returns to the program. Her bio on her new book,
Vulture Capitalism, Corporate Crimes, Backdoor Bailouts, and the Death of Freedom,
describes her, I think accurately, as one of the fiercest anti-capitalist advocates of her
generation. I like fierce. Not just smart, but fierce. I would really like for you to introduce
me wherever I go. I'm a hype man. Just whatever you just said. I want that recorded. I want that
played before I go anywhere. Just to like hype me up, get me in the mood. This is what I do. I'm the
hype man for the guests, you know, because I got to convince people that you want to listen to the
guests. So I want to- Well, it worked. I'm hyped. I'm so hyped. I describe you to people, Grace Blakely,
as scary smart. And because you know everything about the global economy, you've read everything.
This new book, Vulture Capitalism, contains mountains of research. It explains the way the
entire global economy works. And it also provides a compelling alternate vision of how the entire
economy could be structured. That's what you'll get when you pick up Vulture Capitalism by
Grace Blakely. Grace Blakely, welcome to Current Affairs.
Thank you so much for having me. What an intro. What a description of the book. I'm so glad that you
enjoyed it. Yeah, it's phenomenal. I really do mean that. And so here's, okay, there's so much in the
book, though. So I was trying to think, what can I start with that is simple, that is at the core of
this? And I think one thing that is at the core of it, that is quite simple, is that we have this
popular conception that is everywhere. That is, there's something called the state,
and there's something called the market. And capitalism is when the market makes decisions
and people's, people choose what to buy in the market. And that's what determined what happens
in the economy. And the state is this other thing. And socialism is when the state does planning. The
state, there's a central plan. The state owns everything. They do the planning.
And this conception, this bipolar conception, this binary state, market, capitalism, central planning
is very, very common. And I think one of the core things you're trying to do is blow this apart.
Yeah, just completely blow it up. It's just wrong. And I think, you know, the reason that I started
thinking that this was something that I needed to write was, it was during, it was at the beginning of
the pandemic, actually, when in 2019, there had been the recent loss of the general election by
the Labour Party, the conservative one again. And I was doing a bunch of interviews in the pandemic
on TV, and all the kind of newsreaders and the interviewers were saying, but, you know,
Jeremy Corbyn lost the election, but ultimately, you got what you wanted, because we have the state
spending loads of money, and that's socialism, right? So, you know, we didn't even need Jeremy
Gordon to win the election, because you've got socialism, it's being delivered by this
conservative party. And I just found it so staggering every time I was confronted with
this argument. It led me to realise that the vast majority of people, even like educated
people who were like asking you these questions, just don't know the difference between capitalism
and socialism, and have this flawed understanding of what capitalism actually is. And it comes from,
I go into this in the book, it comes from this divide that we've had in our politics,
between like social democracy and neoliberalism, between like Hayek, who was the darling of the
neoliberals, and Keynes.
That's Friedrich Vaughn.
Yes, Friedrich Vaughn, Hayek, yeah, and J.M. Keynes, who were the kind of, you know,
two heroes or villains, depending on which side you're on, of our economic and political debate
for most of the 20th century, really. So you had Keynes saying, we need a state to tame the
irrationalities of the market, we need government intervention, you know, we need the public sector
to invest. And even if, you know, in the middle of a crisis, there's nothing to invest in,
we should just pay people to dig holes, just to give them jobs to create incomes and kind
of boost, you know, economic growth. And then there's Hayek, who comes in and says,
this kind of planning by the states is the source of all tyranny, it creates inefficiencies,
it undermines the functioning of the market, and we need less states, we need kind of, you know,
a different kind of state, really, one that does less stuff, basically.
And there's that kind of argument that won in the 1980s, right? So you saw neoliberals like
Thatcher and Reagan, Pinochet and Chile, come to power everywhere. And they set about, basically,
you know, we're told that they shrink the state, but they don't shrink the state.
Yes, even leftists say this.
Yeah, yeah, exactly. We get caught out here because, you know, we've also signed up to this
kind of dichotomy. So we often, you know, say things like they deregulated and they, you know,
reduce public spending, and all that sort of stuff. And while some cases, it's true,
it's very misleading, because the type of regulation that we have, there wasn't less
regulation after the neoliberal shift, there was actually often more, because it required a huge
amount of regulation to create markets where no markets existed before, like, for example,
in healthcare in areas of the public sector. And at the same time, you know, we didn't see a fall
in public spending. We haven't seen that over the last kind of several decades.
But we've seen massive increases in subsidies for the rich tax cuts, the benefit for the rich,
we've seen bank bailouts, we've seen, you know, pandemic bailouts that have channeled billions
of dollars of public funds into the hands of private corporations. So what's happened isn't
that the state has become smaller, and there's more space for the markets, that means more socialism
and less capitalism. What's actually shifted from the social democratic era, the post-war era to
the neoliberal era, from like the, you know, 40s, 50s, 60s to the 80s, 90s, noughties, and up to today,
is the nature of state policy and whose interests it serves. There's been a shift in the balance of
class power, such that the state is now used by capital, by the wealthy, by elites to serve their
own interests.
Okay, I want to break this down, because as I say, I really do feel like this idea that there
is this spectrum between how much the government produces the economy and how much the market
makes economic decisions, that that idea is so, so, so, so ingrained. And as you pointed out,
you brought up the economists Hayek and Keynes in the 20th century, where, you know, Hayek is writing
this book, The Road to Serfdom, where he says, you know, with the welfare programs and healthcare
and all that, soon you'll have Nazism in Britain or whatever it is. You know, it's kind of, it's
incredible that this argument was taken so seriously, because it's insane.
But then, but then you have, as you say, on the opposite pole, you have, you have Keynes,
this idea that, in fact, the economy is going to be a disaster unless there are, unless there
are decisions made in government about how to allocate resources. Okay. You say, that's not
the way to think of, that's not the spectrum of possible ideas. Break us out a little bit of the
spectrum. Give us, I don't know, is there a third person? Is there a third economist that we can bring
in here that might have some other ideas? There's Karl Marx. Now, I look at a lot of what, you know,
I come from a Marxist perspective, basically. And so what that means, when you're thinking about how
to analyze capitalism or to really like analyze a society in general, is that you start, you don't
end, but you start by looking at the way that that society produces things. So, you know, feudalism,
that was a system of aristocrats and peasants and land was a very important asset that was used
to produce, you know, basic agricultural commodities. And the way that their political
system worked was that there were lords who owned the land and peasants who worked the land. And so
the whole nature of that social system was organized around land and how that was, how that
was governed. And the political system kind of flowed from that. Moving into capitalism, this is a system
oriented around the production of commodities and, you know, the production of commodities within
corporations in which there is a divide between the people who own everything we need to produce
commodities and those who are forced to sell their labor power for a living. So, you know, you have
this insight from the very beginning, capitalism is a class-based system where there's a clear social
division of labor between the people who own all the stuff and the people who have to work for a living.
So the thing that really, the kind of most of that shapes how capitalist societies work is the balance
of class power in that society. It's not the balance between the market and the corporate and the state,
sorry. Those things, you know, are kind of important in determining, you know, how certain actors can make
their voices known. So for example, you know, during the post-war period when there was a larger state,
it was easier for the labor movement to organize within the state to make certain demands that
were ultimately realized. But that power that they held within the state didn't come because
the state was bigger. It came because they were organized enough to have built up these powerful
institutions that were capable of organizing both within the state and within corporations as well.
So the whole of society, you had, you know, higher wages and more public services and all those
different sorts of things. Basically that society was structured in such a way that it operated more
in the interests of workers than the society that we have today. Now, the neoliberal assault
wasn't about shrinking the state. And again, you know, this was a powerful narrative and it seized on the
kind of liberatory narratives that had been put forward around 1968, around personal freedom and autonomy.
You know, the idea that there was this crushing repressive state apparatus that was like keeping
everyone under its control, which of course was, you know, in a way kind of true. The neoliberal seized
upon that and said, we are going to shrink the state and create space for personal freedom within the
market. And there'll be lots of small producers all creating all the things that you need. There'll be
entrepreneurship. You'll be able to kind of, you know, work on these amazing ideas and bring those
ideas to market and you'll be able to invest however you want in stock markets, et cetera.
So it was all really oriented around the idea of personal freedom. Now that was very deceptive
and very powerful because what we ended up with was not an economy that kind of prioritized personal
freedom. It was an economy dominated not by small individual producers and small investors that were
operating in the market, but these massive corporate behemoths, these massive financial institutions
that have insane amounts of power and that are also increasingly operating within the state in the
same way that organized labor once did to get their demands met. And again, that comes down to not
necessarily the size of the state or the size of the market or whatever. It's about the balance of
class power. And there are lots of reasons that we can go into as to why that shifted so much, but it was
partly because of this, you know, outright battle that was being fought on a both kind of ideological and
material level that the neoliberals ultimately won, that ultimately, you know, capital basically got
its way. And there's some examples of this that I lay out in the book that I think might be helpful
in just explaining what this means. So like readers might, or listeners might remember the Boeing
max disasters. Yeah. You talk a lot about Boeing.
Yeah. So that, you know, obviously happened a couple of years ago. It's now in the news again,
because there's more engineering failure. Right. Just come back in time for the publication of the book.
I know it was very convenient. And yeah, basically, you know, readers can,
you can read the story of Boeing in the book, so I won't go into it in too much detail, but suffice to
say the corporate culture became, you know, just unbelievably financialized the whole, like,
the whole purpose of corporation shifted from kind of, you know, producing planes to just maximizing
value for shareholders. You could produce planes or money.
Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Literally. So, you know, there was like this whole new
cast of managers that was created to kind of cut costs and extract value from the firm.
Unions were attacked. Even engineers actually were attacked. The whole idea was just like,
you know, make these planes as cheaply and as quickly as possible. And it emerged later that
after the disasters that Boeing had actually seen, imagine that Boeing had known that there
are these massive flaws in this airplane that led it to potentially like nosedive out of the sky,
and they did nothing about it. The FAA did nothing about it because they had effectively
become captured by the very institutions they were supposed to be regulating. And the state,
of course, which is supposed to be this counterweight to what's going on in the market,
actually aided and abetted Boeing. They were channeling billions of dollars worth of corporate
welfare into the company at the same time. So, you know, this idea that we have like states and markets
fighting each other for influence is just completely utterly false. Most of the time,
public and private interests are working not just alongside each other, but through each other.
Like private corporations work through the state. The state often works through private corporations.
So we just need to like take this idea of this big separation between state and market and just
throw it onto the dustbin of history. Yeah. Well, as you mentioned,
even socialists kind of fall into this. There was this famous, you know, economic debate that the
socialist calculation debate is often called about whether you could have a functional, as I understand it,
whether the economy could function without prices and markets as if that's a debate over
socialism. And whereas that's kind of a separate debate, the debate over whether
central planning can work without prices and markets is often seen as a kind of debate about
socialism because socialism was associated with central planning and a lack of markets and prices.
But as you point out in the book, under the system that we call capitalism,
there is tons of central planning without markets and prices in these giant entities called corporations.
Yeah. So corporate, like this is kind of where I start the book really. It's by saying, okay, so,
so Hayek says an economy is far too complex to be centrally planned. There's all of this stuff that,
you know, there's so many variables, so many kind of feedback loops, so many different actors
interacting with one another, it would be impossible for one institution to take control
of this whole thing and tell everyone what to do. But you say, right, fair enough, because, you know,
from history, that seems to be the case. But if we look at the way that capitalism actually works,
that is how it works. It's a small number of very powerful people basically making decisions on behalf
of everyone else. So, you know, we can talk about the corporation in that. I look at how corporations plan,
how financial institutions plan, how states plan, and how empires plan. Now, the state side of things
is kind of more accepted. It's more accepted that states can plan. I actually look at how state power
functions and show that it tends to basically favor the interests of capital. But even within the corporation,
you have this immense amount of power concentrated in decision makers at the top of the corporation,
precisely because these corporations do not really operate in a market. So within the corporation,
we know the way decisions are made is based on authority, you know, managers, senior managers,
they decide how the firm is going to operate. And then everyone else simply has to follow.
You got to do what you're told if you're at the bottom.
Exactly. But the idea is supposed to be that those decisions are dictated by the market. So, you know,
the market says produce X amount of Y commodity and managers consult that and then they make a decision
and maybe they get it a bit wrong. So they adjust it and that's all reflected in profits.
But that feedback mechanism doesn't work at all when you have consolidated corporate power,
which we do, you know, across the whole economy, particularly in the US, but also went to an increasing
extent in Europe where, you know, a lot of particularly the most significant kind of productive sectors
are just characterized by these massive international monopolies that do have some competition in the
sense that there's, you know, a few other firms, but generally those firms collude with one another.
They don't really compete over price. And more than that, they have the power to kind of operate
within and through state institutions to make sure that they get their way regardless. So, you know,
you don't see Schumpeter, who was another theorist of capitalism, had this idea of creative
destruction. And this was what kept the kind of entrepreneurial spirit alive is that if you didn't
compete and come up with amazing new ideas, then you would die. But that isn't the case anymore.
You know, these firms survive no matter what, even Boeing, right? It's gone through all of these
incredibly horrendous disasters. It's basically killed tons of people and it still exists. And it's
probably never going to not exist because the American state won't allow it to collapse.
Well, yes. So help us understand a little more detail what that means for a company not to be
subject to market discipline. Is it that, you know, Boeing can fuck up a million times and
there's no change in what the market does because what is there going to be another plane
manufacturer is just going to spring up in the United States?
It's kind of, it's a lot of different factors. So firstly, you know, the argument that Marx made
as to why what he called centralization would increase over time under capitalism is that
production just becomes a lot more complex. So you need a lot more stuff to start a business
and something like aerospace, like you need an immense amount of capital to be able to buy.
It's so complicated. It's so complex. You need a lot of capital. You need a huge amount of expertise.
You need a lot of connections and, you know, contracts basically with other large corporations.
So basically it's kind of impossible to really like start an aerospace company on the scale of
something like Boeing from the ground up. You know, you have two or three established firms
in that sector. I mean, we've got Airbus and Boeing and they just exist. They have all the capital.
They have all the knowledge. They have all the expertise that the barriers to entry are just huge.
And that's just a function of the nature of capitalist development. But a second and arguably more
important factor and something that's overlooked by a lot of kind of pure economists is that you
inevitably when you get these big corporate behemoths, they have very close links with states
and particularly with the state in which they're headquartered. So, you know, Boeing has really,
really deep links with the American state, with the Department of Defense, with various different
administrations and like it, you know, can lobby for tax cuts. It has a huge influence over state
governments, you know, let alone the federal governments, because often it's a massive employer.
So it's able to just, you know, influence. We've seen it was able to influence regulation,
lobby and kind of extract value out of the American state at all levels. And it's actually the same
with Airbus in the EU. You know, there's been all sorts of kind of scandals surrounding Airbus
and throughout the aerospace industry, lots of issues around kind of corruption and fraud and those
sorts of things, precisely because these relationships, relationships between senior executives and
members of a particular state or international institutions or whatever are so important to
ensuring the survival of this firm, which is something that investors pay attention to.
So when there's a scandal, nobody seriously thinks that Boeing's going to collapse because the American
state isn't going to allow it to collapse. So the capital doesn't flee. The money just keeps flooding in.
And we've seen that Boeing's share price, you know, wasn't until recently, like wasn't dramatically
affected by the events that took place several years ago with the max disasters. And, you know,
we saw like it got tons of support from the state during over the course of the pandemic.
So, yeah, you know, it's just that markets don't operate the way that they are theorized to operate,
according to your average mainstream economist. And basically this comes down to the fact that
we, our worldview kind of is based on this idea that there's big, this big separation between
politics and economics. So there's like economics, which is numbers and companies and finance,
whatever. And then there's politics, which is like messy arguments and like, you know, not numbers. And
these two worlds are kind of incompatible, but actually they are part of one system, which is
capitalism. And, you know, the relationships between allegedly separate institutions within
a capitalist economy have massive implications for the way that system works.
You're listening to the current affairs podcast from current affairs magazine in New Orleans,
Louisiana. Current affairs is a registered 501c3 nonprofit organization, and we depend entirely on
reader subscriptions and donations. You'll notice we have no ads, no mattresses, no recruiters,
no sports betting. If you can help us in our mission to build independent progressive media,
please visit current affairs.org slash donate to make a donation or current affairs.org slash subscribe
to subscribe to our beautiful print magazine. Thank you so much for supporting our work. Now back to the
program. Now I want to put to you, what do you say when you meet someone who describes themselves as a
free market libertarian, you lay out what you've just laid out for me and they reply to you and say,
well, what you're describing, that's not capitalism. That's crony capitalism. This is a, this is a libertarian
buzzword term. And they say, of course, I don't believe that the state should be doing special favors for
corporations. I believe that we should have a free market. The things you're describing,
they're very bad, but they're not real, pure capitalism. Those people have no theory of the
state. They have no working or functional or even comprehensible theory of power, really. Because, you
know, the state isn't just the thing that exists out there that, you know, you get into government,
you pick it up and you do things with it. It is a very complex set of institutions that exists,
you know, outside of just what we would usually refer to as kind of the institutions of government.
So governments can change, but the wider state apparatus in a lot of ways remains the same.
And the way that those institutions function reflects the balance of power in society as a whole. Now,
that sounds complicated, but it's actually very simple. You know, the companies and individuals,
often institutions that are able to wield power within state institutions or over particular
politicians are the ones that are able to get their way. They have those policies that they
want to see enacted enacted. And, you know, it kind of goes back to what I was talking to before, like
back in the post-war period, there was a more equal balance of power in both the US and the UK and most
of the developed world between corporations and workers. Workers had their institutions that would lobby
within the state for their interests. And private corporations had their institutions that would
lobby within the state for their interests. What happened after the 1980s was that the workers
basically were crushed. And so the scales began to tilt just extremely unevenly in favor of capital,
basically. And so what you see, you know, in the book, I use the example of the fossil fuel companies,
right? You get a president like Biden who is elected and a big part of his platform is saying,
I'm going to cut emissions. I'm going to really do something about climate breakdown. And even
assuming that he was even vaguely sincere about wanting to do something about that,
which I know is debatable, like what ultimately ends up happening is that he puts through a number,
you know, some legislation that is designed to curb climate breakdown at the same time as different
parts of the state continue to, you know, say expand offshore drilling or provide massive subsidies to
fossil fuel companies. And you see what looks like on the surface, these really contradictory
set of policies, like the American state on the one hand is saying, we're going to help decarbonize.
On the other hand, it's giving loads of money to fossil fuel companies. And you're like, you know,
what's going on? But actually, when you understand the state, not as a kind of coherent entity that
does things as an individual, but as this complex set of different institutions, all of which are
influenced by social relations, by lobbyists, by, you know, corporations, it becomes more
comprehensible because many of these powerful institutions are able to get their way often
through the back door. So it's a fantasy, this idea that you could still have the giant
powerful corporations, but somehow with no influence over state policy.
Are they imagining when they think of the state? I think they are imagining this idea of like
a nice institution that's very simple, that just, you know, everyone in the institution does exactly
as they're told by the people at the top. And it's like, no organization works that way. All
organizations are complicated. They rely on these kind of like, you know, difficult institutional
hierarchies and, you know, weird ways of getting things done. Anyone who's worked in an organization
knows that. So the idea that the state is just this neutral tool that you can just kind of pick
up and get to do stuff is just absurd. Now, let me put one more kind of counter argument to you,
or something someone might say in response to you, where they might say, well, yes, there are giant,
entrenched corporations. For example, in the United States, we have the major car companies,
we have Ford and GM. But look, in recent years, the market has worked its magic because an upstart
competitor, Tesla, under Elon Musk, disrupted the industry. And the car industry was precisely the
sort of industry that nobody would have thought that could be done in because of those very barriers
to entry you describe as extremely, extremely costly and difficult to open a new car factory.
But it was done, which shows that the power of creative destruction under capitalism is not
dead yet as you say it is, Grace Blakely. How do you reply to that?
Well, it's an interesting question. And I think it requires us to look at the development of
the auto sector in the US over a slightly longer period of time. Because, you know, the auto manufacturers
are just, again, these massive corporations that are also, you know, they have a significant
amount of market power. And that is something that, you know, Ford was kind of one of the
original monopolies, really. And like I look in the book at the example of the Ford Motor Company,
how the Ford family really tried to just like dominate and control their workers and succeeded in
doing that from the very inception of the company. Obviously, that begins to change as you start
seeing much more competition from abroad. And so the only way that most of the auto manufacturers,
particularly Ford, actually managed to survive is through getting most of their profits, not from
selling cars, but from basically becoming little mini banks. So the Ford Motor Credit Company became
substantially more profitable than the actual car manufacturing side of Ford in the run-up to the
financial crisis. Of course, that required it to take on loads of debt. Of course, that eventually
meant that it became kind of financially unstable. And of course, that meant that it went to the
government for a bailout through the back door. So Ford survived, got a bailout. It's not often
included in the companies that are listed as having received bailouts, but it got money through this
loan scheme provided by a different government department, not through Tartt. Then obviously,
the other car manufacturers did get tons of money through Tartt. The entire US automobile sector is
saved through a massive bailout from the state. It's not particularly healthy, it's not particularly
competitive, but it continues to exist despite market forces saying that it likely shouldn't exist.
Then of course, you do get this upstart company that is allegedly going to revolutionize the
production of cars in the US and does to an extent begin to compete with those entrenched giants. But
again, with support from the state, all of these companies rely on support that has been put in
place by the state, whether that's tax incentives, R&D incentives, all these different sorts of things.
And ultimately, we have a market, an auto market in the US that does look pretty irrational and has
looked pretty irrational for a while now, but basically limps off because of the massive support
that is continued to be provided by the US state. Now, I'm not saying that is necessarily the worst
thing in the world, because there are obviously lots of workers in those sectors. If they didn't have jobs,
would just kind of be out on the streets because there's no functioning kind of plan to transition
the US economy away from sectors like auto manufacturing. But it is also just demonstrates
the mythology of this idea that capitalism is a free market system. The US is the center of global
capitalism. And there are huge swathes of that economy that are basically entirely dependent,
or like significantly dependent upon both market power, so corporate power over the market,
and also the relationship between corporations and the state.
Yeah, it strikes me that one major takeaway of your book is that simple fables about the economy
just overlook how incredibly complicated the world is. And that you can't, you know, if you start to
conceive of it in lemonade stand terms, you're not really going to understand how the world works.
Just to conclude here, in terms of where we can start in our better conception of how the world works,
it does strike me that one of the things that you draw our attention to over and over is instead of
thinking, I mean, we should think a lot about the questions of planning and prices and markets and
institutions and how they work. But one thing we should really zero in on if we want to understand
what kind of economy we live in is that question of power. Who has it? Who doesn't? And if you want a
socialist system, don't look at what the size of the state is. Begin with the question, who is in
control of what? Where are our decisions made? And how are they made? So tell us a little bit more about
how we can begin with an analysis of power to illuminate a lot of things about the world.
Yeah, exactly. And I mean, you know, you said it was complicated and it is complicated,
but in some ways it is kind of simple. It's like who gets to make the rules? Who gets to determine
who gets what? And at the moment that is basically just corporate executives, politicians that are in
the pockets of corporate executives, unelected technocrats at, you know, high levels of the state.
And that kind of system of like capitalist oligarchy, which is basically what we have,
you know, we have this fusion of public and private power, a small number of very influential
people at the top who get to decide how the whole system runs. And the opposite to that isn't a bigger
state because then you just get a kind of different constellation of interests that are basically
making decisions that serve to reinforce the status quo and continue to give power and wealth to
those at the top or indeed, you know, more market because again, you get the same sort of thing.
The question is how do we create a real democracy? How do we make sure that the decisions that are
being made about people's lives aren't being taken by corporate executives or technocrats or politicians,
but are actually to the extent it's possible being taken by them. And so that really requires a thorough
democratization of the economy. It requires a thorough democratization of society. So yes, it means things
like having collective ownership of the most important resources in our society. So, you know,
workers should own the firms that they work in. People say, oh, that's impossible. It wouldn't work.
Well, I highlight in the book a lot of times throughout history where it has worked and where
workers have actually come together and shown that they have the expertise to be able to govern the
firms in which they work and actually often do so better than the managers that came before them
in the sense of running the firm more efficiently and more effectively. So, you know, that requires,
as I said, a kind of shift in ownership, but it also requires a real transformation in how we think
about decision making. So like, you know, if you take politics, for example, the idea that we're just
going to, you know, change the way that the political system works by voting for a different set of
politicians, all of whom are basically still in the pockets of like big businesses and financial institutions,
and who are going to go into a state that is already substantially weighted in favor of the
interests of one class, it's just kind of crazy to think we could just change everything just by voting.
So what is really required is to think about how we organize in our workplaces, in our communities,
on the streets, to try and create a kind of counter power from below that is capable of resisting the
power that is exercised over people, whether that's in the state, whether it's in, you know, corporations,
wherever, and to start to build some alternatives. And the alternatives, I think, are the most exciting
part of this. Because I think the big challenge that the left faces isn't that people don't think
the system doesn't work. Everyone knows the system doesn't work, right? Like the challenge is that
people can't imagine a different world. And I think the reason they can't imagine a different world
is because we're so focused on individualism. It's always like, what can I do? How can I change the
world? And it's like, you alone cannot go up against all these forces that are immensely powerful,
but you as part of a collective can start to shift things. And in the book, there are all these
examples that I look at, like literally just communities who have come together and said,
we're going to do things differently, and created like massive change in their local area.
Yeah, you go from London, to India, to Australia, to Chile, and you look at and you explain various
experiments, and how they have worked. And so I think that is one of the best parts of the book is
part three, where, you know, because it's possible to read this and think, well, okay, so I am up against
massive institutions that I can't possibly fight, you show that that is not in fact true. And that's
inspiring. And I think that people will come away from the book feeling a sense of determination.
I hope so, if they manage to make it to the end.
Yeah, I do encourage everyone who picks it up to stay through part three, if you feel yourself
losing out. Yeah, or just skip to part three. You can start with part three if you want.
Nothing stops you from reading part three before you read parts one and two. Exactly.
So pick up vulture capitalism, corporate crimes, back door bailouts, and the death of freedom.
Grace Blakely, thank you so much for returning on Current Affairs.
Thank you so much for having me, Nathan.
The Current Affairs podcast is a product of Current Affairs magazine. If you are not subscribed to
Current Affairs magazine, visit currentaffairs.org slash subscribe today and get our glorious print
edition. The Current Affairs podcast is released regularly every week on patreon.com slash current
affairs. Thanks for listening.
I'll see you next time.
I'll see you next time.
