Tisky Sour. Given the chaos that is British politics, we've spent a lot of previous shows,
a lot of recent shows, talking about parliamentary manoeuvres, resignations and PR stunts. We won't
be talking about any of that today. That's because we've got Grace Blakely in the studio,
whose first book, Stolen How to Save the World from Financialisation, has just been released.
That gives us the opportunity to take a step back and look at the big economic forces shaping the
world, not just the latest madcap plans scribbled by Dominic Cummings. It also means we get to
talk about what our movement is actually fighting for. Do we want a form of social democracy
or something which moves beyond capitalism altogether, what Grace calls democratic socialism?
Grace Blakely, thank you for joining me this evening.
Thank you so much for having me.
And congratulations on the book.
Thank you. It's very weird to be back here. A year and a half ago, I was sitting here doing
the stuff with you. You guys gave me my first break.
Yeah, and now you're on GMB this morning on Politics Live in the afternoon. I wanted to
know, I haven't, I didn't wake up in time, obviously, but how did...
Well, I've been awake since 5am, guys. So if I'm a bit like bad, just like, yeah.
I know you're very articulate even at the worst.
You're very kind.
How did it go down with Piers Morgan? Was he persuaded?
Well, what was weird is that they kind of like, Piers was quite insistent that we did
actually talk about the book because we've like, I've done lots of stuff with him and
he quite likes going head to head. I don't really know why. He just quite likes having
arguments with me. So he was actually like, the fact that he even brought it up was quite
big. Like a lot of the other stuff, they picked the book up and were like, we're going to talk
about this now during the paper review, which was like amazing for me. But I mean, obviously,
he completely disagreed with everything I had to say, but he did so in a kind of, you
know, classic Piers-y way. And then Susanna did her thing of like, defending me and being
like, you know, it was great.
Did she seem to get it?
But what she said was interesting, which is, you know what, over the last couple of
weeks, I've realized that one of the most, the kind of most significant ways in which
people understand and experience the kind of political economic crisis we're going through
at the moment is through a sense that they don't have any voice or any power that like
they see the world collapsing around them. There's chaos engulfing, you know, our political
institutions, our environment, the narratives that they've used to understand things historically
have broken down, the systems that they live within are breaking down. And they kind of
feel like, I want to do something about this. But because of the kind of way that our society
develops, because of the kind of individualization of our economic relationships, our political
relationships, they feel completely disempowered to do anything about it. So long segue. But what
she was saying was like, you know, we have this social contract, and people pay their taxes,
they obey the rules. And in return, they expect to be able to hold their politicians to account.
And it just doesn't seem like that's happening anymore. And I was like, yeah, that's right.
Because ultimately, you know, I've had very strong opinions recently about this defend democracy
line. Because I don't think we live in what could really be understood as a real democracy,
because of the way that capital, you know, controls and directs the decisions that are undertaken
by our, you know, most kind of biggest and most significant political and economic institutions.
And I think people get that because they know that they've been demanding change for a very
long time, mainly to do with the fact that, you know, we've had wage stagnation, rising
regional disparity, kind of, you know, an intensification of the kind of work that people
are expected to do. And their demands haven't been respected. And I kind of think that that's
what she was getting at when she was talking about this. And I think it's what a lot of people
get at when they talk about how frustrated they are with our politics.
I suppose that question of what is real democracy will get onto a bit later with social democracy
versus democratic socialism.
Can't wait.
First, I want to go through...
I've done that with Andrew Neil as well.
Oh, did you?
Yeah. Do you not remember that clip? When he was like, what's the difference between social
democracy and democratic socialism?
Oh, no, I should have looked that up for a vision.
And I said it's about ownership.
Anyway, let's go through, you know, the key ideas of the book. So it's called, well,
Stolen How to Save the World from Financialization. So it seems apt to start with definitions.
What is financialization?
So the best known definition of financialization is the increasing role of financial motives,
financial markets, financial institutions, and financial actors in the operation of the
domestic and international economies. Gerald Epstein, brackets, 2005.
I've been doing...
You prepared for this tutorial.
No, no, no, no. That's just been like literally wired into my brain. I mean, basically, like I use
that quote and I say what it means is bigger banks and other financial institutions playing a bigger
role in the economy. And those two terms need unpacking as well.
So banks are institutions that take deposits and then lend out money and are guaranteed by the
state. You have other institutions that are also engaged in financial activities.
So, you know, one of the big ones I talk about in the book is kind of institutional investors and
asset managers, people who control, who, well, yeah, direct people's savings.
So whether it's them, you know, the money you're putting into your pension fund, corporate profits
that they're putting away, even like a sovereign wealth fund, there are these big pools of capital
based on people's savings or savings of other economic actors that are controlled by asset
managers. And they kind of, you know, determine where that capital goes. They act as kind of...
And their job is to get the highest returns for savers or for people who've saved their money in their
pension plan or whatever.
Yeah. And they kind of take a commission on that. And you have all different kinds of funds like
that, you know, from pension funds all the way through to mutual funds and hedge funds. You've
got, you know, different kinds of actors that do different types of investment, like private
equity, venture capital. You have the whole shadow banking system. So all of these different
economic actors do different things with money and investment, essentially. And then you have
the effects, different parts of the economy. And so the way I analyze this in the book is that I take
all the elements of Keynes' aggregate demand equation. So for Keynes, aggregate demand is
consumption spending by individuals, plus investment spending by businesses, plus government spending
by households, and then net exports.
And that's his way of breaking down all aspects of the economy, right? So he's categorizing all the
ways that money is spent. It's spent by consumers, spent by the government, spent to invest in
companies or whatever, and spent abroad.
Yeah. So that's the amount that's spent in the economy, the amount of demand that's created
today. There's a different kind of way of looking at the amount the economy could produce if we were
all spending as much as we could, as efficiently as we could over the long term. But that idea of
kind of what everyone's spending comprising the entirety of effectively GDP now is, yeah,
is a Keynesian idea. And so I look at the ways in which financialization has affected each of those
different things. So firstly, I look at the financialization of consumption spending by
individuals. So I call that the financialization of the household, i.e. of kind of individual
spending. Then I look at the financialization of corporations, and then financialization of the
state. And finally, financial globalization, which looks at how that's changed the international
economy.
Let's go through some of those, though. So what does the financialization of the household
mean or look like?
So before going into that, I'm just going to quickly situate this historically, because
one of the things I think I've realized while writing the book is I set out to write the book,
and I was like, it's going to have this really clean, neat structure. I'm going to go like
household, state, government, businesses, whatever, and then the crisis, and then what
we can do about it. And I very quickly realized that, which I think is why, I mean, Marx doesn't
always write like this, but I think it's sometimes why Marx writes the way he does, is that you
cannot understand anything that's going on at any one point in a capitalist society without
analyzing how it's emerged historically. And so then I ended up having this big extra
chapter, which started really big, and I managed to shrink down about how this model emerged.
And I look at basically how, from the kind of inauguration of the post-war consensus model,
so from the post-war period onwards, when you get the Bretton Woods system, which has, you
know, leads to constraints on capital mobility, lots of financial regulation, the state playing
a much bigger role in the economy, much more powerful unions, all these sorts of things
that, you know, result from various changes in technological and structural forces. And
how, you know, almost as soon as that happens, it starts to be eroded by the interests of
finance that almost kind of strain against this model. You know, there are limits imposed
on effectively wealth accumulation by the few. And because, you know, you continue to live
in a capitalist society that those contradictions and tensions continue to kind of exist. And you get
basically those interests pushing back against this model slowly and eroding it. So you get,
you know, the emergence of the euro dollar markets, big multinational corporations emerging,
the financial system being changed because of American imperialism. Eventually, you get the collapse
of the Bretton Woods system in the 1970s, which leads to the emergence of this kind of decade-long
period of crisis, which I think is really analogous to the situation we're facing today. If you look at
the economic kind of situation that there was in the early 70s, you had the barber boom,
a big boom that ended in a big bust, high levels of unemployment, a kind of sense that the economy
wasn't working for a lot of people, which was followed by a long period of political turmoil,
as people were kind of like, well, the social democratic order isn't really working anymore,
that tripartite model of corporations, states and businesses and unions are trying to work together
to determine how the economy works, started to break down as finance undermined the model as
competition from, you know, internationally started to basically make those distributive tensions more
significant. And so that model started to strain. And when it started to strain, it created this long
period of crisis. And you had, you know, a couple of years where there were like, two elections, you had
loads of governments, you had loads of elections, you had
We're in the late 70s now, right?
Well, from the early 70s, through 1970s, yeah, yeah, yeah. Series of kind of constitutional economic crises. And I think that's a similar
kind of moment that we face today. It's obviously not the same. But in terms of the idea that the old models broken down, the new one has yet
to emerge, and these morbid symptoms kind of characterize our, our existences, I think that's quite an apt comparison. And then of
course, towards the end of that period, you get the emergence of a new model. And I look in the book at the various different
reasons that what I call finance led growth, which is kind of, I suppose, the model of accumulation that underpins
neoliberalism as an ideology and as a set of institutional structures. And, yeah, I mean, that's obviously inaugurated
in the UK with the election of Thatcher in 1979, after the winter of discontent, after a really, you know, acute crisis of that
model. And she comes in, she removes restrictions on capital mobility, she removes exchange control, so allows banks to
create as much money as they could ever want. She removes restrictions on the London Stock Exchange, creates the
Big Bang, does right to buy a whole set of kind of really quite transformational, transformational changes that
impact the structure of the economy that impact the, I suppose, the balance of power between workers and owners, both at the
national level, at the level of the firm, at the level of the community, etc. And that leads to a whole host of
changes. And first, I start with, I start with the corporation. So look at how the Big Bang and the removal of
restrictions on capital mobility allow those big investors I talked about at the beginning, the kind of big asset
managers, institutional investors, to suddenly gain a huge amount of control over corporate culture. And because, as you
said, these guys have this pressure to maximise returns, when they're buying up corporations, when
they're buying up equities or bonds of corporations, there's a kind of an insistence on shareholder value
maximisation on respecting, you know, credit relationships. And you get the emergence of this really quite
ruthless and extractive corporate culture that you start to see emerge in the 1980s with kind of the
activist investor that's like, if you don't increase your dividends payout, even if it means stopping investing in
production, even if it means not paying your workers, then, you know, you're screwed. Or the corporate raiders,
there's a kind of a little, I paint a little picture in there of one of the corporate raiders that emerged in the
1980s that Thatcher was really close to. And basically, their role was to load up on cheap debt, take a load of cheap debt
out, use it to buy up corporate equities, strip out the assets from that corporation, and then sell them off,
you know, making huge margins. And yeah, that model was eventually, you know, the 1980s was kind of the
fit that started this whole thing. But it eventually just became a norm of corporate governance. And so
today, we have this essential assumption, that it's the job of businesses to maximise value for
shareholders, which essentially means it's the job of businesses to maximise value for the finance sector.
That, and often, you know, they're doing so through other relationships with the finance sector,
whether it's via lending and credit.
What does it, I'm a bit, so the fact that now you've got shareholders who have like a lot of power
vis-a-vis instead of, so who was in, who had power over these firms beforehand?
That is a good question. So prior to that, the interesting thing that happens during this period is
that you get more of a separation between ownership and management.
Okay. So prior to that, you know, you had a combination of a small number of individual
shareholders, some of whom would have just been, you know, middle class savers, but many of whom
would have been basically the owners and the managers of the company, the people who'd started
the company, they had an ownership control, they also managed things.
So you've got the idea of a family business that might have grown large.
Yeah, exactly. Yeah. And you still have some quite close relationships between, you know,
whether they're familial relationships or kind of collegiate relationships or whatever.
And so they've got an interest in the long term benefit of the firm because, you know,
they have an investment in the fate of the firm beyond the next financial quarter or whatever.
That is what they would have said. And that's kind of the argument as to why corporate culture
worked a little bit better then. What the kind of, basically what financial interests said at the time
through the kind of mouths of the like Mont Pelerin society and the various right wing economists
that they hired was that the, the separation of ownership and control created a principal
agent problem. So created a problem of like a clash of interests between the people who owned
the corporation and the people who ran it. The managers, the people who ran the corporation
had an incentive to kind of build out empires and, you know, increase their power so they had more
influence, you know, so that they had more stuff to play with. Whereas the owners wanted
lean corporations that were able to maximize returns. And so the idea was eventually a series
of articles in this kind of literature around shareholder value that say managers are the
agents of shareholders. Shareholders need to treat managers in a way that will encourage them to act in
the interest of shareholders, which is when you start getting management being paid in, you know,
getting share options and all these sorts of things, they become part owners, kind of a co option of
that, of those managers who, you know, at one point may have been working literally in a rate,
a wage relationship into these different ownership structures. And so that really changes the way the
firm works. So in the golden age, you still did have a separation between owners and managers,
but it was more informal. And these Mont Pelerin guys are the sort of founders, the founders of the
ideology of neoliberalism thought you need a more formal process connecting the people who own it.
So the shareholders and the managers, which is incentivizing them and writing targets, etc.
Yeah, exactly. You also had like less of a significant separation between those two things,
because you know, you may have had like, yeah, you still have had family owned corporations,
you still have had, you know, individual collectively owned corporations. And so, yeah,
that kind of separation issue was less of a big thing. And you also had I mean, even when,
you know, today, the ownership of shares is something that may be mediated by like, 10 different
organizations in, you know, like countries all around the world. Whereas back then, you would
have had, you know, if you owned a share in a company, you may have just bought that share from,
you know, the company itself or from a bank or on the stock exchange, it would be a fairly kind of
close relationship. Whereas, you know, today, you put your money in a pension through a defined benefit
pension scheme, that goes to a pension fund, the pension fund then sends that capital off to an asset
manager, the asset manager then says, Well, I'm going to decide what I'm going to invest in,
I might put some money in a shell company in Bermuda, and then via that invest in this, you know,
set of equities there, or that set of bonds there. So it's a much more, yeah, mediated relationship that
means that, you know, what's been interesting is that at the beginning of this model, there was this
idea that maybe the like, maybe pension fund capitalism would mean that workers became owners.
And this would be like, a way in which we could kind of, like shut down the divide between
owners and workers. But actually,
That's the property owning democracy, right? So if you have a shareholder, a shareholder model,
then the middle class in society can buy some shares in BT, they can buy some shares in Marks and
Spencers, maybe some shares in the business they they work in. And then ultimately, they're all going to,
or not, they're all going to, but there'll be a big section of the middle class who are quite
invested in the growths in the growth that accrues to capitalist businesses.
Yeah, and that is exactly what happens. And you know, whether through shares or through property,
and that was obviously always the intention of like, you know, financialized political economy.
But the, like the initial, like some socialists initially made that argument, because they were
like workers are going to have control over these corporations, because they're going to own the
shares. But of course, they didn't anticipate that actually, like through the process of a set,
like through basically, what we have, which is monopoly capitalism, but monopoly capitalism
coordinated by a couple of people, like, you know, the the board and the managers of Blackrock,
the biggest asset management firm in the world that effectively acts as a planner for the entire
global economy. Because Blackrock is so big, it has so many people's savings, it directs so much
investment, that it has a huge role, the people who manage those funds have a huge role in determining
where investment goes, when and how. That's obviously not a socialist ideal, even though
they are investing workers money, they're doing so based on very much, not just their personal
interests, but the interests of their class, and of, you know, maintaining the stability of the
system and all that sort of stuff.
How does all this on a very simple way, how does this make the firm behave differently?
So I suppose, what's the problem with it? What's the problem with the way that a firm that's sort of
governed by shareholders, or a disparate group of shareholders, as opposed to a firm who's,
who's governed or owned by a small group of individuals who have a personal relationship
to the firm? What's the difference?
So imagine you are like on the board of some company, say like, you're on the board of Singer.
I don't want to commit any libel here. So we'll have to be very careful. Let's make up a company.
That's not libel. Oh, potentially. Yeah, go on, make up a company.
Okay, Henry, I'm not looking at anything particular. So the company, Henry, you're on the board of the
company. Yeah, thank you.
You have a 20% share, it was given to you in inheritance, your sister has a 20% share,
you've got a bunch of other shareholders that, you know, occasionally come to meetings,
maybe they're like a couple of old grandmas, maybe there's, you know, one or two investment
funds. But basically, you know, you're like, pretty happy with the way the company works,
you have a growth plan, maybe you kind of have a vision of where that's going, you have relationships
with probably the state at that point, because there's much closer corporatist relationship
between businesses in the state. You're much more tightly regulated, of course, which is another
side of the story. You have strong relationships with your unions, etc. And so your vision about
what the role of the company is, is very different to you are on the board of a company, and you have
your investors are Blackrock, are maybe I don't know, you've got people short selling your shares,
you've got some pension funds that are invested in you, you've got all these different competing
economic actors, with very different views about what I mean, not with very different views about
what they you should be doing with the corporation, they all think that you should be maximising the
returns to them. But with very different ideas about how that should be done. And all saying the
same thing, we want higher share prices. How do you do that, right? Either you can be very clever and
have perfect information about the future of the economy. And you can think, I know exactly what's
going to happen 10 years from now, I'm going to make the smartest investment in production,
and I'm going to develop the best new technology, and everything's going to be great. That's a very
risky strategy, because you don't know what's going to happen 10 years from now, you have literally no
idea what technological trends there are going to be what's going to happen. It's like, you know,
in the rest of the economy, it's much easier for you to use the now very cheap money they're able to
access to buy back your own shares, boosting the share price, merge and acquire merge with and
acquire other smaller corporations that might be doing that technological development themselves,
and just dish out money to shareholders, because when shareholders getting more money,
the share price goes up, everyone's happy, except for the fact that to do that, you are curtailing
long term investment in production in innovation and technology, and you are paying workers less.
And so obviously, as a result of this, I mean, this model just becomes completely and utterly
dominant. It's now not even questioned, it's barely even referred to, because it is just so
obvious that it is the duty of companies to maximize their share price. And as a result,
you just get like falling weights of rage growth, we have we've had obviously a decade of wage
stagnation since the financial crisis. But wage growth has been slowing since the 1980s, lower levels
of investment in fixed capital, so investment in you know, creating stuff, higher levels of investment
in financial markets, much higher levels of debt, not just because firms are taking out more debt,
but because they're not using the debt to invest in anything real, they're often using the debt to
pay out dividends or, you know, whatever else. So you get this like, really extractive, highly
financialized, and really unstable corporate model, the kind of like, like, paradigmatic example of
this is Carillion, right, which is a company that literally exists through a series of like a
financial fiat. It doesn't make anything.
So Carillion is a firm which contracts, or tenders contracts from the state to do things like run
canteens, or what does Carillion do, or build hospitals?
Or like PFI as well. So like building, you know, bridges, roads, railways, etc.
I suppose that moves us on to the financialization of the state.
Yes, it does. Yeah, so obviously, the way that all of this happens in terms of
the deregulatory, the deregulatory agenda, and the boom that takes place in the city,
it's all overseen by the state, of course, and this is very much Thatcher's aim. In the book,
I look into the close relationships that Thatcher has with some of the kind of corporate raiders
and the shareholders that emerged in the 1980s. And the way she does that is, you know, obviously,
legislative change. But also, she, she goes to war with the country's unions. And, you know,
aside from all the economicsy stuff in here, and there is, you know, a fair amount of it,
I think I try and make it vaguely interesting. But like the most important message in the book is
that why did we get this model? We didn't get this model because a bunch of people decided that,
you know, it was suddenly a really good idea that we should try and maximize shareholder value.
We got this model because power relations change. On the one hand, like, you know,
finance capital gained more power as a result of, you know, all the stuff I was talking about,
about the erosion of the post-war consensus. And on the other hand, Thatcher used the power
of the state to wage class war. She waged class war from above, and she decimated the country's
union movement. There's a brilliant quote in there from this documentary called,
I think it is called Still the Enemy Within. And it interviews a load of miners,
looks back on the miners' strike. And there's a quote in there that says,
what was, this is why Thatcher had to come from us. What was getting in the way with the
privatizations, what was getting in the way of the logic of neoliberalism, of, you know,
like cutting spending, etc. What was getting in the way was us. And this was exactly what Thatcher
was trying to do. She was trying to decimate the power relations that underpinned the post-war
consensus in order to build something new to create space for finance capital to kind of
take more control over the economy. And like, she supervised that process, the state supervised that
process, the state was obviously very involved, whether through the police force or, you know,
the benefit system was used to like, starve miners out, etc. Obviously, deregulation, deregulation of
the banking system, right to buy, all these legislative changes. And then you get the kind of consolidation
of that model with new labor, which as well as continuing the deregulatory agenda with finance,
this kind of light touch approach to regulation, actually kind of perfect this private financing
model of allowing investors to undertake spending on the state's behalf. And this is really interesting
because, of course, new labor knows that after the massive increase in inequality in the 1980s,
you need to increase the size of the state if you're going to stabilize the model. But how do you do that?
If you just do state spending, then or you kind of do it through nationalized industries, or you
do it in relatively well union, you use relatively well unionized sectors, then you are expanding the
power of working people relative to finance capital that underpins the undermines the political economy
that makes the whole thing work. So what do you do? You operate a regime of privatized Keynesianism.
So rather than Keynesianism, state spending to boost demand, you have private individuals,
private investors undertake that spending on the state's behalf. And when it comes to the
financialization of the state, you get, you know, PFI is the like pinnacle of the logic of this,
which is we will pay private investors more money than it would cost us to borrow ourselves
to build things and to raise the capital themselves to build these things.
Um, just because we want them to be able to make money, and we don't want to spend money ourselves.
And we've seen, you know, what's happened with the PFI programmes, they've often been like 40%
more expensive than if government borrowing was used on its own.
So how the PFI works, just to make it super clear, is it's, it's, the state says we want to build a hospital,
building a hospital costs, I don't know, 200 million quid, no idea how much it costs to build a hospital.
The state says, one, we don't think the state are very good at building stuff because we think they're
inefficient. And two, we don't actually want to pay this 200 million quid right now because it will
be on our balance books. So what we're going to do is we're going to tender this, we're going to ask
whether any companies or whether any financial consortiums want to build the hospital for 200
million quid, and then we'll pay them 5 million quid guaranteed every year for 20 years, something
like that. Obviously, I've plucked the numbers out. It might not add up. And you'll say, ultimately,
they pay more in this guaranteed rent than it cost to build the hospital in the first place.
Yeah, exactly. It would be like, you know, if I had all the money in the wild to go and build
like a bridge, I couldn't be bothered. I was just like, whatever, I don't want to do that. But I got
you to go and build that bridge on your own, but said, I will pay you double the amount it would cost
me to do by like on my own, if you go and do it, and I can pay you back over a long period of time.
Kind of like actually buying a car on credit, isn't it? Yeah, kind of. Yeah. Except you're also
it would be like buying the car on credit, but also getting the person who's selling you the car
to build the car and paying them double of what it would cost them if you just built the car yourself.
Um, households.
Yeah. So this is probably the most interesting, um, interesting part of this in terms of the politics,
because what you were talking about, that property owning democracy is so,
so central to the logic of financialization, because you've got obviously this problem of
like stalling wage growth, um, because of the financialization of the corporation.
So corporations aren't paying workers as much anymore. They're paying management a lot more.
They're returning a lot more to shareholders. Um, and obviously that's creating a huge amount of
inequality. Now, the problem with any model like this, I mean, this is essentially the conditions that
emerged before the wall street crash in the early period of laissez faire at the beginning of the
century. The problem with that model is that when you get more and more money being sucked
out of the real economy and up to the top, it creates instability, not just because there's
less demand down here, you know, people aren't buying stuff. So businesses have no reason to invest,
but because businesses have no reason to invest, where's all this money at the top going into these
people need somewhere to put their savings. And if they can't lend it to businesses to build stuff,
they will lend it to businesses to buy property or to buy up shares or to invest in financial markets,
or they'll, you know, channel it into Bitcoin or tulips or whatever else, whatever next big fad
that they can, they can discover. Um, so yeah, rising inequality, especially wealth inequality creates
instability. Um, so the genius of financialization is papering over these inherent
instabilities that result from inequality through the creation of unprecedented amounts of credit
and primarily mortgage lending. And the genius about creating credit for mortgage lending is that
you get that dynamic of lots of people putting their money in one thing, which pushes up the price
of that thing, which leads to that self reinforcing cycle. But rather than having it just on the part of
a smaller league, which is ultimately not going to last very long, long, you have like 50 60% of the
electorate engaged in this model. And obviously, the way that you do that is by expanding asset ownership
for the middle classes in the global north, based on the massive, like a massive creation of money
through credit, that is built on the extraction of savings from the global south. Um, and this is
like a little bit complicated, because yeah, I mean, yeah, it's sounding quite complicated.
Yeah, basically, you have middle class people in the global north who have political power,
they need to be bought off, how do you buy them off without actually giving them the kind of power that
would allow them to kind of subvert the system, you do it through the creation of debt, and creating debt
leads to, you know, giving people access to debt is not the same as increasing their wages,
it creates a very individualized sense of one's prosperity that is based on, you know, the level
of debt versus your ownership of your assets, you're less likely to kind of engage in collective
bargaining, because you want to kind of boost your wages, you're more likely to think, right,
how can I kind of manage my finances that I'm, I'm getting better off. Um, and the way that like
the the way in which all of that money is is created, is firstly, because the banking system
is deregulated. And to understand that, you really have to understand that banks are able to create
money, which is actually not that complicated to understand. It's just quite a big cognitive leap. I'm
sure most people who are watching this do get that, that like, you know, the role of a bank is
not I put 10 pounds in the bank, the bank lends nine pounds to you. It's the bank exists, it has
the power to create money, because the state gives it the power to create money. So the bank lends 10
pounds to you. And it's then like, oh, okay, the state needs me to keep one pound in the in the bank,
because I lent you 10 pounds. So I'm going to come to me and say, can I borrow a pound? And that's how
banking works. So you know, banking is literally the creation of money backed up by the state. So when banks
start lending tons and tons of money, they're creating loads and loads of money. And when all
that money is going into the same thing, so in this case, it was mainly mortgage lending, there was a
massive increase in mortgage lending, and total household debt and the majority of this was
mortgage lending was 40% of household disposable incomes in 1979. It reached about 140% in 2007.
That's like insane. That's a huge increase over a very short period of time. And so the banks were
like, right, we're creating tons of money, you've got tons of money, you're going to use it to buy a
house. The housing stock remains broadly the same. Loads of people out here now have loads and loads of
money. They're all bidding against each other to buy the same number of houses. Obviously, when that
happens, house prices rise, you now own a house, you had took out a very large mortgage to buy it. But
ultimately, you get to a point where you can pay off. Great. As everyone else is now buying their house,
the value of your house is rising. Yeah. And even if you don't pay off, right,
because you can if you have a mortgage, if you owe your bank 120,000 pounds, but your house is now
worth half a million pounds, then that debt starts to look manageable. Exactly. So you then think,
right, well, I'm super wealthy, I have, you know, equity in my home worth half a million pounds,
I'm going to release that and borrow even more money. So you borrow more money, and then maybe you buy
another house, maybe you become a buy-to-let landlord, maybe you just use it to, you know, go on holiday,
maybe you use it to buy a new TV. And this, you know, model of what is effectively, it's called
debt-fueled asset price inflation. It's basically money is created, it goes into the purchase of the
asset, the price of the asset rises, and that makes you feel wealthier. So you feel like you're
able to buy more of that asset, and it creates this self-reinforcing cycle. That's what underpinned
the financial crisis. It was more acute in the US, but it also happened in the UK. And the most
interesting thing about this is the way it affects politics. Because as I was saying a second ago,
you know, that relationship between a household and a bank, or a household and a, you know, a pension fund,
is very different to the relationship between some, like, you know, a household and an employer.
Yeah. You come together collectively. You can't collectively bargain with your bank. Exactly. Yes.
Yes. Yeah. In fact, you're terrified of your bank because if you don't pay them back, they'll
repossess your home and it will be a very shameful, awful experience. And there's no possibility of
organizing with other people who have mortgages. Yeah. Because you don't know each other. Yeah.
And at the same time, you can buy big TVs and you feel like you're getting richer because the value of
your house is going up. So why would you want to challenge the system? And that is what underlies this
weird, this very, very historically weird period of financial stability. And what seems like
basically classness-ness that we have between 1989 really and 2007. It's just the creation of
tons of money. Now, obviously that system was always going to blow up and it did in 2008. But
I mean, the way in which that, looking into, looking into how that model emerged and how it was
sustainable for so long and how so many people fundamentally believed that class was dead,
that things would only get better. And that the only thing that we had to do was kind of expand this
model to the rest of the economy. It's quite staggering because it like, historically, had that
been true, we really would have chanced upon the perfect economic model. It's not that surprising that
everyone was like, history's over, capitalism has won, socialism's dead. It's just that the bubble that we
created was bigger and lasted longer than anything else in history.
That's interesting. Yeah, because even the post-war consensus, even though we call it the consensus,
there was constant conflict. And we knew there was conflict because the whole point was that
you had quite powerful trade unions who were bargaining with employers, mediated by the state.
We call it the consensus basically because the Tory party and the Conservative party were both
proposing the same, I suppose, corporatist system. But in the neoliberal period, after you'd destroyed
Labour, there was no overt conflict, which you could see, because everyone had now become
a property owner who was somewhat invested in the system. There wasn't, I mean, obviously,
there were historically low strikes after the early 80s. Yeah, yeah, yeah, exactly.
Let's go on, I suppose we'll go on to how this all, you know, entered crisis in a moment. So,
first of all, I just want to sort of like, put it into a very, like, the simplest possible
history it can be. Right. Right. So I'll do the little spiel. It's like the simplest possible
history it can be. Okay. Okay. So in the 1970s, you had the crisis of social democracy. Yep.
As a result, people started kind of looking around for a new economic model that would work. And the
people with the most power were the ones that were able to make sure that their economic model won.
The people with the most power at the time were obviously the people who own the stuff.
They want to create a system in which wealth rises to the top. So they do. But how do they
stabilize it? Obviously, you've got, you know, the creation of a corporate model that sees
money sucked up from workers and investment up to shareholders. You have a financialized
state that is less bothered about rising inequality of regulating the finance sector that doesn't take
a view on nationalizations, all these sorts of things. So how do you make that model stable?
How do you allow the 1% to continue to benefit from, you know, extraction without creating the
conditions that have been associated with a model like that for a lot of history?
Basically, you create debt. And you create debt on an unprecedented scale. You create debt by
deregulating the banking system. You create debt by sucking wealth out of other parts of the planet,
create, you know, new and like more expansive forms of credit through financial innovation.
And for a while, the system seems very stable because everyone's getting richer. The value
of all the assets are rising. Inflation is low. Growth is high. Everyone's broadly feeling
literally like things can only get better. But instability that's sorry. Stability naturally leads
to instability in capitalist systems like this, particularly in financial financialized
capitalist systems like this. Because the assumption that things can only get better
leads people to take more risks, which means the debt gets bigger, the asset prices get higher,
and eventually you get to a big bubble situation. And, you know, you can think of basically what
happened in 2008 with housing as, you know, in one way or another with a huge amount of complexity and,
you know, global interest added in. What happened to Bitcoin or what happened to tulips? You know,
it's a big bubble. And this is what stabilizes the system for a while. But obviously, eventually,
the bubble has to burst. And when the bubble bursts, the fundamental structural weaknesses,
the like deep seated inequalities and inefficiencies that that model has given rise to become very obvious.
You suddenly see that, oh, we have corporations that aren't investing, that are very unproductive,
that aren't paying their workers. We have a state that is basically captured by a tiny corporate
elite and isn't doing its job properly. We have households that are completely disempowered and
unable to bargain for wages that don't really have any social security and that can rely completely on
kind of an individual sense of debt and assets. And as a result, our economy has like a really low
level of just demand. Businesses aren't investing. The government isn't spending. People aren't
spending. Where is growth coming from? And it's not. I mean, this is the problem we've had since
the financial crisis. We are now living in really that kind of, you know, we're living with the
inherent contradictions of a model that sees growth being sucked up to the top without the balm of
constantly rising asset prices. I also realized I was supposed to do that as an elevator pitch and it
was quite long, but I hope it was relatively simplified. It was relatively simplified.
I mean, it's very difficult to make this kind of thing simple, isn't it? I mean, it's ultimately
economic history is, is, is complex and especially the financial markets are complex. But I mean,
but like in the book, I like, I do try, you know, I use stories. I like, yeah, explain these things.
So don't be put off. No, you're, no, you're, you're doing, I'm, I'm riveted. I'm gripped by this
history of neoliberalism. Yes. I mean, I think we're not actually going to delve that deep into
the crash. I mean, ultimately there was lots of credit created, but banks were able to lend more.
That meant that consumers and households were able to borrow more, buy more stuff.
And that sort of papered over the cracks of, of neoliberalism and sort of hid the way, hid the
extent to which it allowed companies to become unproductive and I suppose suppress the wages of
the working class. We're going to go on to the alternatives in one moment. First of all,
you're watching Navarro media. This is Tisky sour. This is only possible because of your kind
support. If you are already a subscriber, thank you very much. You are what makes this possible.
If not, please go to support.novaromedia.com and donate the equivalent of one hour's wage
a month. As ever, like this video, it means it appears in more people's news feeds. Subscribe
to the Navarro media YouTube channel. Keep your comments coming. We'll go to questions at the end.
If you can, please, uh, make some comments on Twitter with the hashtag Tisky sour.
Uh, when it comes to question time, I'll, I'll read out some of those because we want this
and we want the word to go out about this show beyond, beyond our YouTube community.
Although we value you dearly. Um, I can't remember if there's any shout outs I have to do.
Share it on Facebook, share it on Twitter, shine, sign up to the Cortado,
which is ask Sarkar's brilliant newsletter, which goes out every Thursday. You can sign up to that on
our website. Let's talk about alternatives, right? So you think that the financialization of the
household, the firm, the state has ultimately made a society which is more unfair, less productive
than it needs to be. What's your solution? So it's not just that it's more unfair and less productive.
It's that it's fundamentally unstable. Okay. So in many ways. Because it relies on debt,
which eventually can't be paid off. Yeah. Because if you're, if you're just constantly
papering over the cracks by lending money, um, without increasing wages, these, these households
are never going to be able to pay it back, which is why we had the housing crisis.
Yeah. And, you know, ultimately for we absent the debt, fuel asset price invasion,
you have all the inherent contradictions of capitalist growth that basically marks identified from
overproduction to the tendency of the rate of profit to fall. Like all of these things haven't gone
away. Um, they've not gone away throughout the entirety of capitalist history, but capitalists have been
extremely good at figuring out new ways of making them less relevant or, you know, fixing them for
decades on end. And that's really what's characterized how we've lurched from one growth regime to the
next. And what I argue is that, you know, we're in again, this period of crisis, like a 1970s period,
like a kind of, um, you know, post 1930s period, post the great depression. Um, and what happens next
is, is not really determined by us coming up with clever ideas. I mean, it's partly determined
by us coming up with clever ideas, but only because the ideas shape the extent to which
we feel like we have the power. Ultimately, you know, I have a Marxist view of history. It is that
what happens is driven by essential antagonisms between different classes of people. And, um,
the kind of battles between owners and workers, between people who live off work and people who
live off wealth are what drive history forward. It's not, you know, clever people debating in
the house of commons saying, you know, we should do this. No, we should do that.
So really like the, like the way I see our job, like the job of socialists, like the kind of
like reason I wrote the book is to give us a sense of the importance of this historical moment.
And even more importantly, a sense of our own power in shaping how it turns out.
Now, looking at how it turns out, obviously, not obviously, I argue that we can't just
continue to try and fix and paper over the cracks in a capitalist system that is ultimately broken.
And whether it's broken because of rising inequality, whether it's broken because of the climate crisis,
whether it's broken because it's run out of space into which it can expand, whether it's broken
because of, um, you know, the changing ways in which technology is used in, uh, in industry,
there's a whole load of reasons to suggest that the trajectory of capitalist development,
especially in the global north is not going to be what it has been for the last couple of hundred
years. So what do we do with that dying model either? And this is really where I think the kind of
political issues that we're seeing today, what happens next will be determined by the possibilities
that we think exist within the current moment. So why do we have a very pessimistic view of human
nature and we think, okay, fine. Capitalism is broken. What can we do? Well, I'm not really that
confident that we're able to come together and build something new. So let's just put the walls up,
stop everything from changing and like consolidate the gains that we have now.
That's basically the strategy of the far right. It's stop people coming in. It's, uh, kind of just
protect the economy as it exists today. Um, protect the interests of the people that currently have
buy-in within the system and stop things changing, stop things from getting worse because obviously
everyone knows things getting worse. The other option is, and I fundamentally believe that the
difference between those two outlooks has less to do with, you know, particular ideological
commitments to, you know, socialism versus capitalism or different forms of ownership
structures and actually just like whether or not you're optimistic about human nature. Do we then say,
right, we're at this really kind of critical historical juncture. Do human beings have the
capacity to come together, talk about ideas, understand where they are at the moment and build power
to change things. And I think that we do. And the way like, but you know, obviously doing that
requires, um, building up a sense of all the stuff I've just been talking about and not just stuff
I've just been talking about, but like a sense of where working people exist in like the long
trajectory of, of history and kind of facilitating the, basically the rise of class consciousness,
the emergence of a sense of identity amongst everyone who works on a wage.
We kind of jumped though from how to get to the next place to what the next place is going to look
like. Do you know what I mean? Yeah.
So I want to focus on sort of like what you, I mean, I suppose the question I want to ask as well
is there's, there's a tension I think in your book, which often, which is often present in leftist
accounts of neoliberalism, where what the, the substance of the book is doing is critiquing
neoliberalism, creaking a bit critiquing a particular form of capitalism. And the conclusion is abolish
capitalism, you know, and you see a lot. So Naomi Klein did that book capitalism versus the climate,
and the whole book is critiquing neoliberal, neoliberal capitalism. And at the end says to save
the climate, we have to abolish capitalism. So there's, there's a kind of potentially a mismatch there.
Why is the response to the failures of neoliberal or financialized capitalism to abolish
capitalism, as opposed to just finding a different form of capitalism?
Well, that's kind of, that's kind of what I was trying to say, which is that the choice is not,
do we have some sort of like committee that exists in parliament and say we're abolishing
capitalism and putting in place socialism? It's how the, how do the antagonisms between different
classes develop in order to lead us to the next model that we will inevitably have?
So like, there's some, there's, there's a combination of, of structure and agency in
there. There's a combination of like, what's going on? What are the problems? So obviously
I've laid out all the problems in full, you know, we know that basically you can't continue as we are.
And the really an acceleration of the model that we have now, you know, the creation of more debt,
rising inequality will make things worse. So we know that what happens next, because something
different is going to happen, have to happen next, um, will be determined by
who has the power, right? So it's not like, I guess the point I want to get across is,
it's not as simple as saying, let's abolish capitalism. The point I want to get across is
how do we build the power and the consciousness of working people, of the people who live from a
wage rather than people who own the stuff in order so that to allow them to build what comes next?
Yeah. You know, because, you know, the crisis of the 1970s, it wasn't like, I don't think it was
like people getting together in Mont Pelerin being like, we need to build a model of financialized
capitalism where this, this, and this happens. It was them coming together and saying, we have these
interests. We need to force those interests. We need to basically organize in order to force those
interests onto a government, which will impose those interests on society and make sure that we are
there at every moment, acting within parliament, outside parliament, within financial markets,
within corporations, to make sure that our interests are promoted. In the same way, the
recommendations I have in here aren't recommendations to abolish capitalism. They're recommendations to
increase the power of working people relative to the power of finance capital, relative to the power
of capital together. And to, I suppose, like expand our collective understanding of ourselves as a class,
um, so that we can collectively, democratically determine what kind of economy we want to live in.
That's the next step. The next step is not, how do we get rid of private ownership? The next step is,
how do we realize that we have the power to build a system in which there is no private ownership?
So I was expecting us to disagree a bit more. So that sounds like classical social democracy,
right? So it's to say, well, yeah, I guess, right? Yeah. But, but I feel like in your book,
you did have more of a, we need to move beyond social, because, because classical social democracy
is the idea you're going to have, you're going to have the profit motive, you're going to have some
private markets, you're going to have a bit of private ownership of the, of, of the means of
production. You're also going to have some state ownership of the means of production and some
democratic ownership of the means, means of production, but you're still going to have the profit
motive and you're still going to have competition, which sort of generates certain innovations, even
if in conjunction with, with the state. That what separates it from like third way social
democracies, you recognize that the only way you're going to get something that looks remotely
just and equitable is with a very powerful working class, which is something that new labor kind of
ignored. I felt like you kind of feel that that's inherently contradictory and that ultimately what
you're going to have to do is not just euphemise the rentier, which is sort of would be my response
to rentier capitalism or to neoliberal capitalism or to financialized capitalism, but to also euphemise
the, the productive capitalist. So the person who owns a business, which is somewhat productive
and is, you know, ostensibly innovating and, and is driven by the profit motive and competition.
You don't, you, you think we're aiming for something without that, right?
Again, I just don't, I don't want to use the aiming language. I want to use the inherent forces that
develop capitalism. But what were you arguing for, you know, if you've got a...
I'm not arguing for anything. I'm arguing for a directionality. Okay.
I'm arguing for, um, okay. No, I want to answer your question first, because this is going to
sound silly if I don't properly answer your question first. So do we go through, do we just
get to social democracy with an empowered working class that ultimately makes things better for
everyone else? Or do we move to something beyond that? And the answer to that question is,
can we ever exist in a stable form of social democracy? No.
Right? No, exactly. We tried that. Can we ever exist in a stable form of any society? That's my
issue. Well, no, exactly. But I mean, what we do know is that we have tried to create basically
a form of state capitalism, along with, you know, where you had mass ownership of...
I don't think social democracy was state capitalism.
Well, whatever we had in the 19, in the, you know, the post-war period, whether you want
to call it state capitalism or whether you want to call it social democracy, I would argue that
it had elements of the two, right? Or corporatist capitalism or whatever.
Yeah, you can call it corporatist capitalism. That model had its own contradictions. And those
contradictions emerged from the inherent tensions that exist between people who own the stuff and
people who work for a living for a while. Again, those tensions were then papered over by imperialism
and globalization. You know, it was much easier to think that we could have a system where states,
workers, corporations could work together to distribute the rewards that society generated
fairly amongst themselves. But when things got tough, as they inevitably always do in capitalism,
the tensions exploded. And suddenly, all these people pursuing their own interests led to the
collapse of the system. I think that that's an inherent feature of social democracy. I don't just
think it's an inherent feature of social democracy because it happened. I think it's an inherent
feature of social democracy because it was theorised before it happened by Kalecki and others who
basically said there are political reasons why social democracy cannot work.
So Kalecki said that if you have full employment, then it won't be acceptable to business because
they won't be able to discipline labour anymore. And so they're going to counter attack and try and
make some unemployed people, which describes quite well what happened in the 1970s and 1980s. So you had
lots of strikes in the 1970s when there were workers who wanted a bigger share of the pie.
Capital businesses weren't willing to accept that they wanted higher profits. And so they had to,
I mean, basically destroy the labour movement and massively increase unemployment.
Yeah. Which created issues that ultimately, you know, screwed them over as well, which is what's
interesting about a contradiction. That's what's interesting about capitalism. You get to a point where
capitalists pursuing their own interests undermine the interests of capital. And that is what creates
space for socialism. And that's why I suppose I wouldn't say, I wouldn't say the purpose of this
book is to aim for some sort of socialist democratic utopia. The purpose of this book is to set out,
you know, the like historical trajectory that I think, you know, the historical juncture, sorry,
that I think we're in now, and make a series of recommendations based on what I observe to be
happening in the economy and politics and society at the moment, that will shape the path that we take
next. And I basically, we think we have a choice between two paths, really, or three paths, right?
One is an intensification of the model we currently have. The other is the kind of closed down,
protectionist, far right, Trumpian model. And the other is a kind of emancipatory model,
right? That moves us, yes, through some sort of social democracy, right? The 2017 manifesto,
yeah, social democracy, but with not the aim, but I suppose almost like the, almost like in,
like a, I don't want to say teleology, but like it has an inherent force within it,
that kind of model where you are empowering working people and the gains that you are providing
them with enhanced class consciousness, enhance people's capacity to organize, reduce the power
of the people who own the stuff, increase people's demands for equity, increase their self-consciousness,
ultimately leads us to a situation in which we are going to have to ask that question again,
right? We are going to get to that point again where we do have to say, do we want market socialism?
Do we want state socialism? Do we want social democracy? Do we want democratic socialism? Do
we want, you know, all these different things? And that's almost a question for another day. Like,
I have my views on what that should be. I think it should be democratic socialism. And I think
the institutions that we build in the interim, to the extent that we have the capacity to build those
from the ground up should be aiming towards that goal. But ultimately the aim for me is just to build
power, build power against the people who currently have it. And as you build power amongst working
people, against the people that currently have it, it's just natural that the system emerges.
I did this thing recently. Did you see this? There was this like Marxist values, left values survey.
Yeah, we were talking about that just before we went live.
And I, okay, the one thing that I will get, that I will admit to is that I got really strong
on scientific versus utopian, which is- I like that the one thing you'll admit to,
or all the others you're kind of ashamed of. Yeah, the other ones are just like the same
as everyone else's, right? You know, like we're all basically the same. I got very high on
decentralised as well, actually, rather than centralised. But no, like, is that, yeah,
I have a very strong belief in, I came out as orthodox Marxism, right? And I think this is updated,
but ultimately I do think that there is something about the nature of capitalist systems,
the intriguing, fascinating, and incredibly complex nature of capitalist systems that,
you know, create these historical trajectories, these historical waves that we're able to analyse
and that Marx analysed so acutely. And that it matters less what we can imagine about the future.
I mean, of course it matters what we can imagine about the future, because what we can imagine about
the future shapes the extent to which we feel powerful. But what really matters is the extent to
which we feel able to, like, go into battle and demand those things.
But it's also what you're demanding, right? Yeah.
I mean, because I feel like the chapter on sort of like what you want is very ambitious.
You know, you're talking about socialising finance, you're talking about, I mean, ultimately...
But only because those are all things that, like, it's easy to do, right? I mean, it's not,
you know, easy to do in the sense of winning the war. It's easy to do technologically,
like in terms of legislation, in terms of, you know, building institutions. Like we, you know,
I think the reason that maybe, I mean, the reason it's ambitious is not because I want all these
things to happen. But the reason that it's also ambitious is because, you know, we're not
particularly optimistic about some of the things that we can achieve often. And I think partly that's
because we believe, we look at the edifice of capitalism, we look at the facade of capitalism,
and we think, wow, these people are really bloody powerful. But I mean, yeah, they are really
powerful. You know, they do control most of the things that we need to survive, and they will use
their power ruthlessly. But they aren't invulnerable. There are deep weaknesses in the system as it exists,
and the weaknesses in the system as it exists, give us the power to organise against it. That's
really why I focus on finance. It's because the contradictions of financialisation
create opportunities for working class organisation and the Global North,
where for several decades, we've been hearing from a lot of Marxist scholars that
the working class in the Global North is basically gone, right? That's not going to be the revolutionary
subject anymore. We're going to have to either just rely on the Global South or rely on different
kinds of social movements here. I think, no, I think we need to look at the productive forces,
technological development, social development, politics, etc, how those all relate to capitalism,
and think, how is, how are, what are their weaknesses, firstly, because we're probably
underestimating how weak they are. And, and how do we exploit those?
Where do you see your politics reflected in the current state of play? And I know,
obviously, we've got sort of like Corbyn and Sanders, and you can pick out sort of certain
policies, which you particularly speak to what your solutions are. But I also kind of wanted to talk
about how your vision differs from, I suppose, centre left economists. So you've got, yeah,
you've got lots of people now, Olivier Blanchard, who was the chief economist at the IMF, I was
listening to a podcast with him the other day. And he was saying, maybe we need to introduce capital
controls, you know, so, so, so you've got a big move within, I suppose, the technocratic soft left,
away from the kinds of financialised capitalism that you write about in the book. But I assume that you
see your solutions as somewhat different to that of Olivier Blanchard. Or it'd be interesting if
you don't, I don't know. I mean, I do. But also, I think,
so obviously, you know, I have different aims than Blanchard and stating that we need capital
controls. Liberals think that they're stabilising the system. There's, you know, the Jeff Mann book,
the great book about Keynes, it's like, you know, ultimately, he is views himself as the saviour of
civilisation and humanity. And by saving capitalism, he's saving the world. We obviously think we're
building an entirely new system. And, you know, maybe we're wrong, maybe the Liberals are right,
maybe by engaging in these things, we are just stabilising the system. That's been the problematic
of, like, you know, leftist reform for generations. But I would argue that the reason that they're
suddenly saying all these things is because they're seeing the same things that we're seeing.
They're seeing the deep problems that have been created by this model. And they're thinking,
right, how do we paper over the cracks? And in papering over the cracks, they are, they're papering
over the cracks in a particular way, they want to think of themselves as progressive,
not making things worse, but making things a little bit better, making things better for
future generations. And in doing so, they are kind of almost unconsciously, for the first bit of this
journey, they are unconsciously on the same wavelength on a lot of these economic issues that many on the
left are. That's why often we're able to build this coalition that we have been able to build of
socialists and Liberals. Liberals want to make the system a little bit better, a little bit less
exploitative. Socialists want to transform the system altogether. But for a while,
they go along the same page, you know, they both want a welfare state, they both want
higher taxes, they both maybe want a little bit of nationalization.
And that's good for a while, but there will come to a point, as I said, where we have to start making
the fundamental choices about what will come next. And basically, I think that because of those things,
because those things increase the power of working people relative to capital,
then there will come a point where either there is a retrenchment or there is an advancement.
And the 1970s was an example of that. And if we do get the kind of basically social democratic
reforms that, you know, most people are arguing for at the moment, then there will come a point
at which we'll have to be more ambitious. I suppose the recommendations in here are about
what happens when we start to become more ambitious. How do we move from, you know,
know, good social democracy through to something that looks a lot more like democratic socialism?
And it's not like a, you know, click of the risk, not like you come in and press a button that says
socialism. It's, I think I've come up with ways of basically steadily constraining the power of
private finance and boosting the power of working people.
That's what Keynes wanted to do though, really, isn't it? Not necessarily the power of working
people. He wanted to constrain the power of finance.
He wanted to constrain the power of finance relative to industrial capital,
right? There was never any analysis there of, you know, it was kind of an analysis of class,
but there wasn't, I mean, there was an analysis of class, but there wasn't a sense that,
and this is what I meant when I talked about, you know, the fundamental division being
whether or not you're optimistic about the capacity of human beings to create their own
systems, their own futures, their own lives. Keynes was, he did not like working class people.
Like there are, so he said something, this.
Was he a bit of a eugenicist?
This book is very good on Keynes. It's very interesting. He, he was, you know, a member of
the elite and he didn't trust working people to make their own decisions. He was like,
I know what I'm talking about. I want to stabilize the system. Initially, he was like,
guys, Tories, liberals, why aren't you listening to me? I'm trying to help you,
right? That was the aim of this whole thing. Because, you know, if you are an enlightened
capitalist, you think, wow, if I actually think 10 years into the future, if I continue to erode the
wages of my workers, it's that story about the Ford factory, when the unionist goes around and says,
I know the Ford Ford takes a unionist around the factory and there's loads of new machines in
there. And Ford says to the unionist, who are you going to pick, get to pay your, your union subs?
And the unionist turns to the Ford and says, who are you going to get to buy your cars? Like,
you know, there are sections of capital that, and that is ultimately why Ford,
you know, implemented the kind of regime that he did where he increased wages and, you know,
know, gave various, um, gave into various demands from, from the unions and the working classes.
But that is a very different thing to ultimately saying, we believe that working people are the
best people to make decisions about how society works. I think that's the fundamental division.
I'm going to go to questions in a moment. First of all, I've got a question for you. And when I go to
the questions, you're going to have to, uh, not be phased by the fact that sometimes I'm sort of
squinting at my screen while you're answering the question. Why would I be phased by that?
Well, sometimes people are like, what's he doing? It seems kind of weird the way he's sort of just
leaning into his laptop while I'm talking in his direction. No, I'm 100% used to that. That's fine.
I've done this show a lot. Oh yeah, fabulous. Of course you have. Um, my question, what have you
learned from past socialist experiments? So past experiments of, of, of a movement which seeks to move beyond
social democracy? Um, or, or, or, or I suppose societal projects which were to the left of
social democracy because not every socialist experiment had the trajectory of going via
social democracy to their end point. Um, I guess, I don't know, I guess if I wanted to be trite about
it, I would say that we consistently underestimate our own power and overestimate the power of the enemy.
Um, I think that there is a powerful kind of mirage about how capitalism works that makes it seem
invulnerable until it breaks. Um, and we obviously saw that before 2008, but I think that has taken
place, you know, with most socialist projects. Having said that, that might just be how the
status quo always seems because that should came up against similar levels of resistance
within her party, within, you know, various sections of the elite when she tried to basically,
you know, move to a completely different system herself. Um, so I guess I think the way in which
that, I think the reason that that comes about is that we rely too much on our own
cleverness and our sense of understanding of what's going on and our ability to,
you know, play groups off against each other and, um, deliver socialism on a plate
and aren't sufficiently optimistic about the capacity of people to organize for themselves.
I think the Labour Party is in many ways guilty of doing this at the moment,
of trying to be a bit too clever by half on a lot of issues that they think matter to the elite,
rather than actually thinking our job is to empower the working classes,
because the elites ultimately screwed over some time period, no matter what happens.
The question is whether or not we're able to build something new before it all goes to shit.
I like this question. It's, I don't know how, because I've got no idea how you're going to
answer it. Daniel Eden, what if socialism is, what if socialism is impossible? What then?
It's kind of an existential one there, isn't it?
I suppose, do you ever worry that socialism potentially is, or do you ever worry that it's
just not going to work? And I suppose in terms of learning from past socialist experiments,
you could, it's not just failures in the West to move beyond social democracy,
but when you have had a system where sort of the financing of the economies is democratically
run or run by the state and, you know, at times seemed somewhat incredibly productive and at times
seemed somewhat stagnant. Well, I think, how do you avoid the stagnant part? Like,
so firstly, you know, the system that we have today is pretty stagnant. I don't think there's any
question that we have to move beyond what we have today. So the question is, what do you want to
replace the current form of capitalism with? And then you have a much kind of smaller set of options?
And then
I think that part of the reason that we are often pretty pessimistic about socialism is that,
again, we like going back to Marx, the technological conditions that exist within each age are very
different from one time to the next. It would have been possible to imagine the Roman Empire during
the Assyrians. Like, it would have been impossible to imagine feudalism during the Dark Ages. Well,
no, the Dark Ages were feudalism during, I don't know, the Roman Empire, whatever. It would have been
impossible to imagine capitalism during feudalism. Like, the technological conditions that change
power relations, that change the sense of possibility and the reality of possibility,
differ from one time to the next. And I do think that we are living in a historical moment where
the technological conditions, the social conditions, and the imperative, the environmental imperative in
particular, behind socialism means that not only is it more conceivable, whether you're talking about
problems around planning and allocation, but it's also just inevitable. Or, you know, we all burn to death.
Meh.
T-W-T-W-O, to Tom, to Tom. Could the next financial crisis be the catalyst for change and empower the left?
I suppose another way of putting that is, do we need one more financial crisis before people get it?
No. Financial crises never empower the left. Crises never empower the left.
But maybe this one did 10 years on, right?
Well, yeah, exactly. Crises make the left weaker. Like, 2008 did not make the left stronger. It took
a long time for people to realise, okay, crises turn people into fear mode. I think it was de Tocqueville
that talked about this, about how revolutions come when you've had a long period of stagnation and
people look into their future and see decline. After a crisis or in the midst of a crisis,
people look into their futures and think, oh,
shit, everything's gone badly. We need to retrench and wait for things to get better.
Yeah.
Um, it's during periods of stagnation that people start thinking we need to change the status quo.
And that's where we are now. You know, millennials are the first generation since 1881. They're
going to be worse off than their parents. They've got just like a deep rational incentive to change how
things work.
This is an interesting, interesting question from Sam Ra. Opinion of McDonald's idea of a
right to buy in the private housing sector.
Oh, yeah. Okay. So this is the one way if you're a private tenant, you can, yeah. I think we should
have, um, instead of private tenants, right to buy the right of the state to buy housing back off
private landlords at a reduced price. Because you don't want to promote property ownership.
I'm not really that bothered about home ownership, but the ownership of a consumer good,
either way. The issue is that today housing is not just a consumer good. It's also an investment
good. And obviously it was central to the financial crisis. It's central to, you know,
the divisions between workers and owners in British political economy today. And we are not going to
resolve, you know, if you look at housing tenure through the last 100 years, before the first
world war, you had basically like 80 or 90% private renters, and then a tiny number of owners.
Um, and you had slums, you had, you know, a massive housing crisis, and that all changed during the
rent strikes. During the post-war period, you had 30-40% social housing, 10-ish, maybe less percent
private renters, and the rest, owners. That's probably the most stable model, that's the most
stable and decommodified and de-financialized model of housing that we've had ever. Then,
since the 1980s, we've basically moved back towards the pre-war model of like,
like, high levels of renting, like, yes, high levels, but eroding levels of ownership,
and basically no social housing provision. And if we want to get back to a system where housing is
decommodified, where it is a consumer good, where it is a human right rather than investment good,
then the state needs to provide a floor of social housing that is provided to everyone. And the best
way to do that is to remunicipalize for the state to buy up housing that is sold by private landlords,
particularly easy to do during a crisis when everyone wants to sell.
Um, in terms of people buying their homes, yeah, I'm like, fine. But if we have, what is better,
having lots of people individually owning things, this is like the kind of difference I see between UBI
and UBS as well. What is better having a load of individual people owning things and having an
individual source of income or having effectively the same levels of like utility of happiness,
but provided through a collectivized system where you don't have to pay for anything.
You get all the goods that are associated with the ownership of that thing without the individualized
relationship with that thing. And with the market, I would say the latter.
Yeah. I mean, my, I think if, as long as it's not a speculative asset,
there's nothing wrong with people owning their homes. Yeah.
So, so the idea is the problem isn't so much home ownership. The problem is
homes being treated as a speculative asset and an investment. Good.
Mm. Um, right. Paul Godrick Kelly asks, what do you think of the degrowth debate?
I've been asked so much about this and there was this good,
I have on my phone opened this piece that Open Democracy did the other day about the degrowth
delusion, which I'm interested to read. Um, I've done exactly the same.
Have you? Yeah. Like opened it and waiting to read it.
I've saved it. I haven't quite read it yet.
That's literally my entire life. Um, I mean, clearly like, okay, the one thing we all agree
on is that GDP growth is not a thing. It's obviously not something that we should be using.
Basically, a lot of people agree that GDP growth isn't the best way to measure how the economy works.
And subjectively, objectively, um, according to the economics profession, it's just not,
it just doesn't work. What we then move to is another question entirely. Sometimes the degrowth
question can be framed as we're already too well off. People shouldn't expect to get any better off.
We should just basically deal with the fact that we have this relationship with nature and,
you know, we have to kind of constrain our demands. Um, and I get the thrust of that argument,
but I don't think it is politically tenable or historically viable. You know, technological
change throughout the whole of human history has completely transformed man's relationship
with the environment from like mouthless onwards. So I don't think it's fair to say that like we can
only ever expect to be able to have the levels of productivity and the ability to use our
natural resources in the way that we currently do forever. And I also don't think it's fair to say
that like human beings should just expect to broadly stay at the level of wealth that they have now,
even if that, you know, involves a redistribution to make that slightly fairer on the more extreme
end of the spectrum on the degrowth debate. There isn't even really the kind of redistributive
element of that. It's just like things need to stop. And I kind of almost equate that with some of the
arguments that we see around protectionism and from the right that like, things just need to
stay exactly as they are. Otherwise, things are only going to get worse. Where I do sympathize with it
is that we need a better way of measuring happiness and prosperity. Because just incomes in a very narrow
sense, and particularly under capitalism, where incomes effectively equate to your ability to
purchase, you know, not just the things that you need, but random stuff is not necessarily a good
measure of like, what people need. And yeah, it would make sense to have a measure of, if not growth,
then prosperity, that would include people's sense of, you know, it includes like environmental
objectives, it would include stress and health outcomes, it would include whether you're not
your basic needs that met, it would include your disposable incomes, like all these sorts of things,
whether or not we should then aim for growth on those indicators, whether or not we should be aiming
for people to become happier. And that's sort of a controversial subject.
What's your I'm just this isn't, I'm not gonna, this is not a question on YouTube, but what's your
position on China? So I suppose it's a difficult question to say, what's your position on China? But I mean,
so your book, I suppose, is talking about how financial globalisation in the last 40 years have
been quite a negative story in terms of the results of a capitalist global economy. But also in, I suppose,
over the last two decades, you've had the greatest, I mean, the most people have been lifted out of
poverty in the shortest period of time ever. And that was thanks to, I mean, I suppose, a sort of
state capitalist system is what you can probably call China.
Yeah, like the, if not entirely insulated, that didn't insulated itself that managed its relationship
with that process of financial globalisation. If you compare, say, those states that were forced
to submit to the logic of the free market and to financial globalisation through the structural
adjustment programmes in the 1970s. So a lot of sub Saharan African countries, some Latin American
countries, basically forced to open up their economies to international capital, not able to
have high levels of state spending, high levels of state investment of the kind that most big
economies had as they grew, and obviously not able to have any controls on capital mobility or any of
that stuff. They haven't mostly fared particularly well. China has fared well. I mean, yes, it's moved
towards a more market-based economy, but it is not by any stretch of the imagination a primarily
free market economy. It is a state capitalist society. And China has been able to sustain the
levels of growth and the levels of poverty alleviation it has had by insulating domestic capital from
international financial markets, partly through capital controls, exchange controls and credit
controls, partly through a state banking system, partly through massive state ownership in the rest of the
economy, and partly through a very rigid and authoritarian system of control over the people
that exist within that state. That's not a triumph of capitalism. And I find it really weird that most
people think that it is, because basically because China moved from a Maoist society to a state,
a state capitalist society, that therefore means that free market capitalism and financial globalisation is
the best way to alleviate poverty. It's kind of a non sequitur. Well, it allowed the profit motive to,
I mean, what happened in the late 1980s, 1989, is that you had reforms that introduced the profit motive
into, I mean, you presumably had it a little bit before, but sort of celebrated the profit motive in
the Chinese economy. And it did, you know, have some quite impressive results.
Yeah, of course, it allowed China to undertake, not on the same level, but the same sort of
development that you had in the UK and the US during the early period of capitalist development
there. It basically insulated China from the forces of imperialism. It allowed China to have its own
domestic progression through a particular stage of capitalist development, and we're seeing the results
of that now. And obviously, when you have societies that still have, basically, feudal or subsistence forms of
economic relationships, and you move them on to capitalism, then you're going to see growth in those societies,
right? I mean, that's just, I mean, it could be described as teleological, but it is the kind of Marxist view of history,
that these things progressed through different stages. So that's just a phase, right?
But yeah, I mean, the thing about China is that the reason that we haven't seen the Chinese model
take place in the rest of the world is because that teleological model doesn't apply in an imperialist
global system. Ghana, Zambia can't be expected to, can no longer, given the conditions that in the global
economy in which they exist, expect to have the same historical trajectory and capitalist development that
the UK did in the 1800s, because a lot of the investment that takes place within those countries
is foreign. And so the returns from growth in those countries accrue to foreign investors. And, you know,
this is just Lenin's argument about imperialism, right? What China was able to do is insulate itself
from the forces of imperialism and therefore have a similar sort of capitalist development model as was
pursued in the US and the UK and other parts of Europe. Let's, I'm going to have this as the last
question. I like it. What do you see? So you've got your, your sort of democratic socialist solution
to the crisis, or there's a sort of Trumpian one, or there's sort of just trying to continue with the
status quo. I suppose this question is, what is the, if you were a capitalist with foresight,
you know, so you want to save the system? What do you do? And I'm, I've,
Oh, that's a really good question. I want to ask who, I want to find who asked it. Okay,
this was from Colin Bostock and he wrote, in seeing what you see, what is the capitalist
solution to this financialization crisis? That is a really good question.
Or do you not want to give away the secret, I suppose? I don't want to give away the secret to my
mates. No, I mean, I think like the problem with trying to imagine this situation is not that you
can't imagine clever capitalists that are able to come up with sustainable models that will allow
them to, you know, continue to make profits in the future and save the environment. I think that's
basically what a lot of left liberals want, right? That's what a large part of our coalition wants.
It's a form of capitalism that's less extractive, less exploitative, which doesn't involve any rupture
or kind of fundamental break with the past. But the issue there is that trying to coordinate
capital to pursue that aim is effectively impossible. Because the interests of this is,
you know, again, a Marxist argument, the interests of individual capitals, individual businesses,
are such that the attempts to kind of coordinate to create a less extractive, more sustainable model
of capitalism will mean that the people that lead that end up being the ones that are pushed out of
the market that, you know, die. Unless you change the incentive structures, right? Unless you change the
regulations and you sort of, I mean, this would be about correcting market failures.
So, yes, but again, doing so, I mean, yes, at the national level, right? So you're still going to
have the forces of capitalist competition that are ultimately the most important ones, which are
internationalist capitalist competition, especially for, you know, ultimately, you can think of like,
we've come to a point of monopoly capitalism, where it might be easier for a couple of different
big corporations within the national economy to say, we're going to change how this model works.
And, you know, that is effectively the situation that we're in today, a small number of people
have a huge amount of control over the kind of choices that we make as to how our economy works.
But that then leads to changes in the relative standing of particular economies in particular states.
And I think this is what we're starting to see now with the divergence between
the US, Europe, and other parts of the world. Like, the state today in, you know, monopoly capitalist
society is really a kind of, you know, it acts alongside monopoly capitals that exist within it to
further the interests of those capitalists. And the competition and the protectionism that we're
seeing emerge again, kind of like what we saw in the 1930s, is I think, the result of each of these
different sets of monopoly capitals trying to compete with each other. So even if you have like,
nice capitalists in the UK being like, we need a nice, progressive, better economic model and nice
ones in the US saying, you know, we need to solve climate change or in Europe saying, you know,
we need to work with the EU to do all these nice things. Like, A, they're probably using horrifically
exploitative supply chains. They're probably using business structures that allow them to avoid tax.
And ultimately, when it comes down to it, if it's a choice between environmental sustainability and
outcompeting, you know, a monopoly in a different part of the world, then they're going to choose
the latter. So it's basically a collective action problem amongst capitalism. Like,
the things that are needed to sustain capitalism as a system are not in the interest of any one
section of capital, whether that's a national section of capital, industrial section of capital,
and particularly in the interest of any one business. And that's just Marx, like that's just
Marx's argument. This is a debate that could go on all night. But I know that you woke up at 5am this
morning. I am very tired. Thank you so much for coming and having this conversation after such a
long day. Thanks for just listening to me talk. It's always a pleasure, Grace. And congratulations
on the book. Definitely get Grace's first book. It won't be the last. I hope not. You've got to put
the camera on the book. Oh, wait, is the camera not on the book? No, we'll switch at one point.
Okay. Yes, it is a great read. Very readable. I learned a lot. It makes a very strong argument
for democratic socialism and for why we are in the mess we are currently in. And yeah,
we'll be continuing all of these debates over the next months and years because this is a long-term
project. I think as has become a long-term relationship. Exactly through this conversation.
I will see you next. Again, I'm not exactly sure. The politics at the moment is so chaotic
that we're sort of making it up as we go along. Definitely by next Tuesday, but presumably also
before then. If you want to watch these shows more often, our viewership is going up, which is
wonderful. We're consistently over 1,000 every show now. When there's a big political moment,
it gets close to 2,000. We want to get over that on the live shows. If you want us to be more
often to keep expanding, to keep making more different types of content, you know what to do.
You need to give us money. So please go to support.novaramedia.com. If you're already a
subscriber, thank you very much. If not, please donate the equivalent of one hour's wage a month.
Your one-off donations are also very welcome because we want to move studios soon and we would love to
move studio before a general election, which is obviously going to be pretty goddamn soon. And that is
going to be a very exciting time where I hope you'll agree that Novara Media's presence in
the media landscape will be important. I just needed that affirmation there before we went.
Very, very important.
Okay. I'll see you soon. Good night.
good night.
