Humans live with our nose absolutely pressed up to toxicity.
We eat fruit and vegetables in particular covered in toxic pesticides
designed to kill insects, plants, and fungus.
Everything around us, carpets, etc., and the dental floss we use,
everything is dripping in toxins.
The plastic we wrap our food in leaches toxins into our food.
So we have a special problem, and it's showing up in our fertility.
Today, I am pleased to introduce for a second conversation
on the Great Simplification, Jeremy Grantham.
Jeremy is perhaps best known for co-founding the investment
and asset management company GMO in 1977
and for his widely read GMO quarterly newsletter,
which has been ahead of its time for a long time
on issues like climate change, resource depletion,
phosphorus limits, and many other topics related to the biophysical systems
that underpin human economies.
Jeremy is also known as an active philanthropist
championing issues and causes related to the environment
and for livable human futures.
In this episode, we dive into the topic of toxicity and population,
specifically how endocrine disrupting chemicals impact human fertility
and what that could mean for the human population in the future.
The findings Jeremy presents in today's episode come from his research that he funds,
but also a new white paper he has out on toxicity and its threat to capitalism.
What he said in this conversation was largely new to me.
Many of us in the environmental field have been concerned about a growing population,
and Jeremy is laying out a pretty good argument for a declining population in the not-too-distant future,
due partially to lifestyle changes, and increasingly due to drops in sperm count, testosterone,
and the inability of humans and non-humans to actually get pregnant and have offspring.
I plan on having a roundtable on this topic.
Shauna Swan and I are doing an in-person podcast next month to discuss this research.
This is an important topic, really important, and I will address it further in the future.
But for now, please welcome Jeremy Grantham.
Jeremy Grantham, welcome back to the show.
Hi.
I met with you briefly in New York, and I'm going to put you on the spot and embarrass you.
You gave many talks during Climate Week on many issues, and Jane Goodall came up to you
and gave you a hug and thanked you for all your important work on behalf of the environment.
I thought your response was precious.
You just kind of blushed.
Seems appropriate.
But for people that know you, you have been a longtime champion on behalf of the systemic environmental ecological systems things going on in the world.
And one thing, per our conversation, which you mentioned in our original podcast, is toxicity, the impact of endocrine-disrupting chemicals and chemical pollution on our society now and into the future,
specifically on human fertility, sperm count, and the like.
So you have, in the years since you've been on the podcast, been continuing to work on this topic, toxic chemicals that mess with the hormone system of animals, including the human animal.
Can you describe a broad overview of your recent findings in these studies and what you're currently focused on?
I've spent a big chunk of my life looking at neglected long-term problems, including the stock market.
And I decided long ago that humans do that pretty well.
We neglect pretty well every important long-term issue.
We simply don't do long-term.
I think a lot of people on your podcast make the point that pretty well every living creature has developed over millions of years to survive, to grab now, to be as ruthless as you have to be.
And they have not developed to worry about five or six generations into the future.
I'm sure it was a tough process learning to put some aside for the winter.
And eventually we did that.
But I think that's about it.
Everything from the stock market onwards, i.e. the trivial topics, we worry about now and not too much about the future.
And that was certainly true of climate change, which I started proselytizing on 25 years ago.
It was very hard to get people to take it seriously.
There was plenty of eye-rolling.
And only in the last two or three years did it begin to get serious traction.
And compared to that, toxicity is remarkable.
It is more dangerous, traveling faster, and utterly unrecognized by almost anybody.
Even the people who can't miss the baby bust will write otherwise splendid books, The Empty Planet, or that economist from LSE, Good How, or something like this, on the economic effects of the population change.
Which all of them forget to mention or don't know about toxicity.
There was an important article three weeks ago in the New York Times about the problem with women not having children.
And toxicity did not feature in the article or the comments.
Quite remarkable.
Foreign Affairs had a serious article, finally.
But no one realizes the role that toxicity is already playing and will get to play, possibly to ruin its effect in the next few decades.
And yet, when we're at a conference with scientists working on this, everyone is apoplectic about the risk.
And they're like, this is so clear.
The signal to noise is unequivocal.
We have declining sperm count, probably declining testosterone levels, impacts on our behaviors, maybe links to autism, obesity, and all the other things.
So is it an information deficit between the scientists and the general public?
I mean, this is why I wanted you back on the show, because I agree with you, there's lots of constraints on the human enterprise right now.
Climate change being a big one, energy depletion, politics, geopolitics, but plastics isn't there.
Why is it?
And then let's get into the details of what's going on.
We have a remarkable ability not to dwell on unpleasant topics.
And this one, apparently, takes the ticket because everybody avoids it.
But it's had a lot of publicity.
There is simply no legitimate excuse for having reached Election Day 2024 without realizing that this is an important issue.
It is clearly existential.
And not existential in 200 years, existential pretty soon.
The leading, the cutting edge is South Korea.
I would say that South Korea has moved so fast in the direction of fewer children that it has passed the point of no return.
I don't think there is even odds that it will survive as a viable, economic, stable society.
Let me ask you a question based on my work, which you probably understand this stat as well as anyone.
A barrel of oil has around 1,700 kilowatt hours worth of work potential.
And you and I working are 0.6.
So in addition to the 5 billion human workers on the planet, the machines that power the world, powered by fossil hydrocarbons, are around 400-some billion worker equivalents.
So if there's that much of an energy subsidy, work subsidy from machines powered by fossil fuels, so what if population goes down 10 or 20 percent?
The machines can make up for that shortfall.
What are your thoughts on that?
My thoughts are a bit like AI and intelligent cyborgs wandering around.
They don't consume.
They don't go into the supermarket.
They don't buy product.
And without product, capitalism, as currently configured, disintegrates.
And that's it.
It's a pretty simple story.
So you can have lots of production, no consumption.
And you have to retool everything.
So it's not the worker part.
It's not the work that we're worried about.
It's the consumption and the demand.
Well, I suspect that the work that we're going to be short of is looking after old folk.
That ratio is moving by the year.
It's moving so fast.
There's never been anything like it, particularly in China, Japan, South Korea, but China being the important one.
The rate at which South Korea is having babies, at today's rate, if it didn't get any worse,
it would mean you'd have eight grandparents for every grandchild.
Just think of the burden that that represents.
One grandchild attempting to help and look after eight grandparents.
And they will all be old.
You know, they'll all need help and there'll be no labor there to do it.
So how is that even possible?
Because I have four, well, I used to have four grandparents.
Oh, you mean one person would have four grandparents and then there would be another four grandparents
that didn't have any grandchildren.
If you like, that's right.
On average, they have a half each.
Got it.
Got it.
Wow.
Do you know what that number is like in the United States right now, roughly?
No, I don't.
China, it's one for four, which is already impossible.
Society will disintegrate pretty darn fast if you keep going at that rate.
The other thing too, South Korea, it's not only came into this year with the lowest fertility
rate in the world, but it declined at 6.1% this year.
I mean, it's just ridiculous.
6.1% will halve your baby production in 12 years.
In 24 years, it will quarter it.
It is already half of what it was.
So in 24 years, at this rate, it will be a quarter of a half or an eighth of what they
used to have.
And with an eighth of the babies, you cannot have anything approaching the society that
you had.
You simply go out of business and not slowly.
If it's not 24 years, then it's 36 years.
You cannot decline at these rates.
So how much, and I don't think there's a way to actually prove this, but what does your
research and scholarship on this suggest?
How much of that is our volition and desire to either do the act of having babies or consciously
try to have a baby?
And how much of it is these endocrine-disrupting chemicals, disrupting our hormone system, and
reducing our sperm count in men in South Korea and in the world?
So let's assume for a second, there was no toxicity.
There were no endocrine disruptors.
There was just modern capitalism with all its incentives.
It's been so successful at selling its image of high consumption, high success to women now,
as well as men, that they want to have the same life that the guys have.
And if they get married, they can't do that.
Their career suffers.
They don't get paid as much.
They have to do more work at home.
It is simply not a level playing field.
And in a chauvinistic society like South Korea and Japan, you can really sympathize why they
wouldn't want to do it.
And they don't just a word on Japan, Japan started counting babies in 1888.
It has fewer babies today than it did in 1888.
And it has fewer babies per year.
Today, we have fewer babies per year, fewer babies per year than the year they started keeping
records, even though the population of Japan has tripled.
Okay, part two, 50 years ago, they had 2 million babies.
10 years ago, they had a million babies.
Last year, they had 700,000 babies.
This year, they declined at 5%, less than South Korea, at 5%, which doubles or halves every 14 years.
So in 28 years, they will have a quarter of 700,000 or 170,000, 170,000 babies in 24 years,
down from 2 million 50 years ago.
That's how fast it's going on.
People don't seem to worry because they're happy to lump in increasing armies of 60 to 90
year old Japanese and South Koreans, which so mellows the data that it hides the real trouble
for about 20 years.
This is something that really snuck up on, or is sneaking up on, the environmental narrative.
I mean, Paul Ehrlich in 1969 wrote The Population Bomb.
This wasn't on his radar.
And it sounds like what you're describing is 50 years on, this is more like a population
implosion in the other direction due to, at least in part, maybe largely from endocrine
disrupting chemicals and some of the cultural, uh, you know, reasons you mentioned.
I'm sorry.
It's a complicated issue and full of paradoxes, but basically looking back, toxicity is a rounding
error.
It's overwhelmingly choice.
Buying into the capitalist image, wanting equality, higher education, et cetera, et cetera.
It's a pain having children.
It's inconvenient.
Now, in the long run, it's a great pleasure, but in the short run, it's a real pain in the
bottom.
But what if we, um, do have a great depression or, uh, by my lingo, a great simplification
where the capitalist pulse, uh, based on the hydrocarbon inputs wanes and declines, wouldn't
this dynamic reverse then?
And we would want to have more children because it's the economic equivalent of, of child mortality
is we, we want to springboard in the other direction.
Um, I mean, it is conceivable and I hope quite possible that we will change the culture in the
long run.
If in the short to intermediate term, we get poor, um, we will have fewer children.
It is clear that income plays the crushingly largest role, uh, today and looking backwards,
uh, in the choice.
The things that you really need when you have children, you know, housing and health and
education have all gone up way above the average rate of inflation.
The fact that televisions are a bargain does not really help you when you're, when you're
having children, it's just brutally expensive.
Also, the culture has shifted to make it worse than the modern, certainly modern middle-class
and, and, and rich, uh, have incredibly high standards for looking after their children.
They nurture them at every turn.
They don't leave them too much on their own.
They feed them exciting activities, sporting and intellectual.
And they fret about whether they are going to be amongst the most competitive, desirable,
highly educated, et cetera, as specimens on the planet.
It it's a very stressful full-time activity.
And we see it around us every day if we look for it.
So you have not only much more expensive, but much more time consuming, much more stressful,
much more competitive process.
The few children you have, you want to be all at the top of the class at Harvard, basically.
So let me ask you this, Jeremy, uh, in the same way that if you, um, observed the, uh,
median and mean income in the United States, you might get very different answers.
Uh, I think median is, is 50,000 and mean is, is 70,000 or something like that.
When you look at population and total fertility rates in the world, um, I think half of the
world population lives in countries that the total fertility rate is under 2.1 or the replacement
rate.
But the global north is most of that population.
Whereas Africa, um, uh, has a much higher, uh, total fertility rates.
So is the story that you're saying a global one, or is it, is it confined mostly to the, uh,
rich industrialized countries?
The cutting edge is the rich industrialized countries plus China, but everybody is moving
in the same direction.
And in fact, technically Africa is losing babies faster than anywhere else.
It's just from a much higher base, but in the last 45 years, they have dropped 2.1
babies per woman.
If they do that in the next 45 years, and my guess is they will, and it may be 35 or 40,
they will be at 2.1.
So all we have really is a 30 year window say, where there is a.
reasonably generous, uh, excess of babies in Africa.
The population of babies in the world is dropping 1.2 million a year over the last 10 years.
We peaked at 142 million babies a year.
We're down to 130 and that minus 1.2 a year contains within it plus 400,000 in Africa.
So the rest of the world, which includes a few poor countries.
over 2.1, the rest of the world is, is falling at 1.6 million a year, obviously from 130 million,
you can't keep that up too long, but even Africa in 30 years will be no material help, uh, to the global
baby situation.
But for 30 years, they are an interesting potential.
Now the irony, one of many ironies here is that in 20 years, you will easily notice, even if you're
not trying to look, that there will be competition for immigrants.
Immigrants, I am.
Immigrants.
Yes.
People, a lot of countries will be so desperate that they will be competing for immigrants.
Immigrants.
On that note, um, your staff was kind enough to send me a draft of a paper you're writing
on this topic.
And I, I pulled out a quote, uh, if I could read it to you and then maybe you could unpack
it.
Uh, it is worth noting here that in 20 years or less, many other countries will be competing
for immigrants, which is what you just said.
In the countries with the most inverted population pyramid, soon to be three or four grandparents
per worker, as countries hit a fertility rate of one, smarter youngsters will emigrate to
less bad countries in a self-reinforcing process that will surely cause some governments to try
and forbid immigration.
What an irony this is in the face of today's growing political resistance to immigration.
So this is, this is quite a statement, Jeremy.
Can you unpack that a little more?
First of all, let me say, I don't think there's any material chance that that is going to be
wrong.
It's moving so fast.
Let us take Japan.
They are beginning to increase their rate of immigrants in the countryside, which as you
know, is getting to be denuded by the year.
There are nevertheless, lots of old family businesses, you know, the 17th generation, the 12th generation
of the greatest paper makers in the world, or the greatest, greatest sake makers in the world.
They have a simple choice everywhere.
They will close down and dishonor their 12 ancestors, or they will bring in four or five Filipinos
or Indonesians.
The 37 people left in the village may hate that, but they're not the ones with the jobs.
The guys with the businesses who owe a debt to their ancestors, they're the ones making
the decision and they are making it increasingly to bring in immigrants.
It is in the last resort, better than closing shop.
And it's happening very, very fast, the same in, in South Korea and other places.
But what you just described, if you're right, could be a microcosm for many things in our
world in the next couple of decades.
Yes.
And let me just say in passing, because I'm a nerd, I can't resist these things, Japan is
very interesting in that even though it's shedding people for years now, aggregate population,
the population of Tokyo, the biggest city in the world is still rising as is Osaka.
So when the country folk go into Tokyo, their productivity rises.
So Japan is a very interesting case where the productivity is hung in remarkably well.
They don't get enough credit despite a chronic lack of babies and a chronic decline in the
population.
And just for the record, their population of 20 year olds entering the workforce is half
of what it was at the peak.
If America was down 15%, we would be freaking out.
They have managed to half their entry force into their workforce and, and they still maintain
a reasonably stable, effective, reasonably productive society.
It's quite amazing.
And they have reasonably healthy older people there, which is kind of not the case in our
country as much.
And they're beginning to work a bit longer, which is going to be essential everywhere.
Yeah.
And we simply, the bottom line is it's not about lock boxes and social security set aside.
Everything you give to pensioners comes out of this year's GDP pie.
There's nothing, you can't move income across time.
You can't take nursing skill and move it two years into the future or take it from the past.
It's what you have this year.
And the pie is simply going to be divided more for the nonproductive old and less for
the productive young.
And that's all you have to say about it.
Nothing can change that.
And that's going to, on top of all the other risks we face, that's going to happen to some
degree globally is your prediction.
It absolutely is my prediction.
We have no experience with population bust with the possible exception of the Black Death.
We have no economic experience with managing downwards.
And now everywhere it's beginning to seep into economies.
Everyone is learning how to deal or trying to learn how to deal with declining growth rates.
America is currently very pleased with its productivity.
What it's really saying is they're doing less badly than the Europeans.
By our own standards, our productivity is way down.
It has steadily declined.
No, it has irregularly, but the trend has been pretty obviously downwards for 50 years.
When I arrived in the 60s, productivity here was 3%.
Workforce increase was one and a half, GDP was four and a half, whoopee, practically Japanese.
Now the population increase in the next 20 years will be essentially nothing from internal
purposes and unknowable few basis points from immigration.
And productivity has wended its way down from three to about one and a half.
So we will be aspiring to about one and a half percent growth, not the old three or so that
the OECD and the boys all predicted as recently as 20 years ago.
You're predicting this not due to oil depletion or leaving the stability of the Holocene on
a route to a two degrees Celsius world or lack of mineral availability or international
trade agreements.
We're just predicting this based on fertility decline and population decline in our economies.
Yes.
And of course, if you add pressure from resources beginning to hit boundaries of availability,
it makes it worse if you add climate change damage.
By the way, last year was really the first year where global climate damage amounted to
something that mattered to global GDP.
In developing countries, it is arguably over half a percent moving towards 1% of GDP.
And on a global basis, not far short of a half a percent hit last year.
And it is not on average getting less.
So this is not an easy environment to solve the problems that we're talking about.
I have so many questions.
So just on the leaving the magnitude of productivity and GDP aside, does this potentially create a
brain drain of talented young people in countries that are struggling with population and have,
like you said, a disproportionately high older population that they move to the less bad countries?
And then this creates a spiral effect?
If you have a country like Japan with an incredibly high, strong social contract, my guess is it will
help a lot.
They will feel that it's dishonorable to emigrate because their country is in trouble.
If you have an ordinary country with a squeeze, Hungary, Italy, Spain, China, when you're looking at a,
particularly 20 years from now, you're looking at a horrific burden of looking after your, your three
or four grandparents single-handedly.
Why wouldn't an attractive, well-educated, recently minted engineer, et cetera, why wouldn't they go
to the more promising countries that are less bad?
Humans are pretty interested in their own wellbeing.
I think it's an irresistible urge to move, and I think they would, and they will.
And as they do, it's self-reinforcing.
The less bad countries become better, the worse countries become worse, until Hungary will,
as Ukraine does today, will forbid young people, in Ukraine's case, young men, from leaving.
How can they not?
Unless you want to stand by and watch your local culture, economy, society disintegrate,
how can you not try and protect Europe?
And the other thing is, they've spent a lot of money educating their doctors and engineers.
Are they not owed, in a sense, at least repayment for that?
Coming from you, this is quite profound, because you're not a Chicken Little sort of person.
But I don't hear this at the environmental conferences that I go to, or the energy resource
convenings, what impact does this have on GDP then?
By the way, I recommend The Lancet.
They have been ahead of the curve on everything.
Interaction of climate change, on medical problems, toxicity and medical problems,
and all the interactions and consequences.
And they, once again, are the least bad, the most advanced commentary on these topics.
What about the environmental movement, of which you and I are card-carrying members?
This flies in the face of some of the narratives that we need to have reduced population,
to have reduced pressure on ecosystems, yes?
I mean, isn't this a good news for the environment?
I kind of preface all these conversations by saying, this is a super complicated issue,
full of paradoxes, and so on.
But I don't think we have any material chance of reaching a sustainable living happily ever after
stage without ending up with two to three billion people.
So we've got to get there.
What are the chances, if we backed up to 1960, where the average mother was having four children,
average woman was having four children?
What are the chances of us deciding, whoops, we're growing too fast.
Club of Rome is correct.
We have to downsize the population.
What is the chance that democracies would do that?
The answer is nil, of course.
They would freak out.
They would take to the streets instantly.
But the inverse is not nil.
The inverse is we have a declining fertility crisis upon us.
Go out and have babies to help your country.
That is not a nil response, right?
I'm not sure what that means, Nate.
Well, if there was a public, like there is in Sweden, I think they give stipends to go on
vacations to have sex because they realize that there's a fertility decline.
I showed those ads as a joke in my class to make fun of it, but I wonder if that's coming.
Do it for your country.
Of course it's coming.
And you could make a list for your class of 200 different tricks that the Hungry's and South
Korea's and Sweden's have already played.
And one can say with a pretty clear conscience, if ever a bag of 200 tricks had failed, this is it.
Really?
They have been unbelievably unsuccessful.
Oh, I didn't know that.
So South Korea has been aware of this and trying to combat it with marketing and communication and tricks.
South Korea will be spending this year probably about as much of their GDP as any country on the
planet to stimulate baby production.
Sweden has tried notably.
And occasionally you get a five-year, 10-year pickup, and then it starts to drop again.
France has been very successful, but still it's decently below 2.1.
And for the last five years has been falling again.
A few countries have had a modest success for a modest number of years, but in general,
they have failed badly and surprisingly.
Okay.
So, um, what we've been talking about is the momentum of the total fertility on the planet
that has been happening and you've been evidencing this and describing it.
Um, but what about now, let's set this aside for the moment and we'll come back to it.
What about on top of what you just discussed, the reduction in sperm count that seems to be
ongoing and possibly accelerating and the impact on male?
Is there any impact on female endocrine reproductive system from, from chemicals?
What, what role does, does toxicity have on the story that you just laid out?
The big issue, which we're wending slowly through is that without toxicity, we have a
serious problem because women are choosing not to have children.
Okay.
Uh, and looking backwards, we believe toxicity has not played that big a role.
However, in recent years, we do believe toxicity is finally beginning to bite and it's biting in two
ways.
Endocrine disruption, messing with your hormones, clearly reduces your sex drive point one and
point two clearly interferes with your ability to have children easily.
So on the point one, do we know how it reduces your sex drive?
Hormones are basically your sex drive and you, you screw around with them.
It is very easy to imagine.
So it's basically like changing my, uh, 28 year old self.
Although I'm a man, uh, into my 58 year old self, uh, overnight with, with endocrine disrupting
chemicals, that sort of impact on your drive as an example.
Yes.
And they, you know, you can test this with mice and rats and so on, but my, my favorite horror
story, it happens to be one of the few peer reviewed articles on, on this topic in Japan,
8,000 young people between 20 and 40 or 20 and 50.
And, and they, um, among many questions they asked, how many of you have had no sex of any
kind unquote in the last 12 months, 45% of the men and approximately 45% of the women, but 55% of the
young men between 20 and 29 to which one can only say, holy cow.
55% of 20 to 29 year olds in Japan had not had men had had no sex of any kind for 12 months.
It could be contributed to by massive increases over the last 40 years.
And in their parents, by the way, these are, uh, epigenetic effects that pass through to your children.
And it's just been accumulating at a dreadful rate for really for the best part of a hundred years.
Uh, but massively since World War II.
So this has been the sleeping, ticking population implosion that's been happening for a long time.
We were, we're now just becoming aware of it.
So you were saying, setting aside the desire, like the economic reasons why women don't want
to have children.
We talked about that earlier.
And now on the endocrine disrupting toxicity side, number one is it changes your hormones
to want to have sex and want to have children.
And then two, it actually limits your ability to have children, which is what the sperm count drop.
Yes.
And, um, the sperm count drop is about the future.
In the past, I, I reckon back in hunter gatherer days, we probably had 140 units.
And by the time they start to academically measure these things in 1972,
it's down to about a hundred.
Today, it's 30,000.
A hundred units of what?
Of, of sperm per milliliter.
Okay.
It's a lot.
You know, we produce massive quantities.
Like 50 million sperm, right?
Right, right.
But they have to run an obstacle course, which is fairly prodigious.
And it has never been that trivial for many people to have children at the drop of a hat.
But the more you have, the easier it is.
The other thing that comes down with the sperm count, which I believe has come down from probably
140 to 35.
It's a quarter of what it was.
First of all, we were over-engineered, Nate.
So I like to say, like a good Victorian bridge, you know, they didn't know quite
the breaking stress, so they made them really, really strong.
And they still stand today.
And we don't need that much.
We don't need 140 units until you get to 50.
It's completely academic.
So it's only in the last 15, 20 years it began to have any effect at all.
But in the last 15, 20 years, we have quickly gone from almost no couples having a problem,
a few technical problems, the way people are constructed slightly off kilter, a handful,
to 15% of all young couples needing help according to the World Health Organization.
However, they didn't say, because they're not looking for political trouble, they didn't say,
and this has kind of sprung out of the ground in the last 15, 20 years.
In other words, it's moving very fast.
And of course it's moving very fast.
Our sperm count is dropping at 2.6% a year, according to Shana and Levine.
Okay.
So that 15% is of couples that separate from the first part of this conversation,
these are couples that actually want to have sex and want to have children.
And are having trouble.
And are having trouble.
And people who wanted to have children before basically got them, and now 15% do not.
But with the sperm count down to a quarter and still falling at technically an accelerating rate,
the decline rate this century is 2.6.
The decline rate in the 30 years of the last century was about 1.5 or 1.6.
So we're actually declining at an accelerating rate.
At a rate, 2.6, that will halve your sperm count in 26 years.
Now, so in 26 years, the median will be down to 15, 17, 18 units, maybe 20.
At that level, it won't be 15%.
It may be 50.
We have no way of calculating this, but it stands to reason that this is going to be a power law, doesn't it?
That you can easily stand a drop from your hunter-gatherer levels.
You can take some increased trouble now, but as you get towards chronic deficiency,
you rapidly approach zero ability to have unassisted babies.
So have you seen the movie Children of Men?
Yes, of course.
Is this the sort of future that you're envisioning, potentially?
No, it's not going to be abrupt like that, and it's not going to be inexplicable like that.
We are going to understand exactly what's going on, as we can do now.
We're going to see it working through at different rates through more or less every country, as we can do now.
We will obviously take technical responses.
Our ability to do better and more frequent IVF techniques,
fertility clinics, etc., will become, I suspect, a very big deal.
And so we will not kind of go out on that level without a struggle.
But we will go out, in my opinion, unless we do two pretty straightforward, easily understood things.
Detoxify the environment and detoxify capitalism.
It may be difficult politically, but it is very easy.
You have to ban all seriously toxic industrial chemicals and toxic plastics.
Not difficult.
We lived quite well without most of these.
And you have to find substitutes that are acceptable.
You have to find bio-derived materials.
Even if you engineer microbes and bacteria to take it out of the air.
I am sure that will happen in the time we have available.
You can do it.
Now, whether we'll do it or not is another matter.
And how quickly we do it is the ball game.
But this is not like climate.
Climate is a global.
We're all in it together.
One guy's bad behavior is everyone's bad behavior.
But toxicity is local.
The guys who behave well will have healthier lives and will live longer.
The guys that behave badly because they're capitalist, hyper-capitalist that won't give an inch,
they will have less healthy lives and they will live shorter.
I now have so many questions.
So I will give you my word.
I'm going to ask them one at a time.
So as you know, Shauna is a friend of mine.
I spoke with her recently and asked her what is her new thinking around fertility and toxicity
in the last few months.
And her answer was one world, one health.
In other words, the number of species that are being affected by fertility drop
is roughly 2% a year, which tracks humanity's problem.
And there's no significant difference in geography.
So if humans are impacted this way, Jeremy,
what about every living thing on the planet?
How is their fertility impacted?
Do we have any thoughts or knowledge or research on this?
Yeah, sadly we do.
I have to reluctantly confess that having dealt with these kinds of
semi-painful factors for my entire life, they never got to me.
It's only in the last couple of years I begin to be periodically somewhat disturbed
by our complete disregard and also the speed at which the damage is increasing
and the problems are moving.
But if we take insects, it turns out that humans and insects are particularly sensitive.
Insects, just because biologically that's the way they're made,
the slightest little trace of a nicotinoid in the water system and they die by the millions.
Humans, because although we may be fairly rugged,
we uniquely amongst species live with our nose absolutely pressed up to toxicity.
We eat fruit and vegetables in particular covered in toxic pesticides designed to kill insects,
plants, and fungus. Hardly surprising it would do a job on us. And actually,
the great majority of them dripping in PFAS, the chemicals that never go away in nature.
And everything around us, carpets and etc., and the dental floss we use, everything is dripping in
toxins. The plastic we wrap our food in,
leeches, toxins into our food in case we need it anymore. So we have a special problem and it's
showing up in our fertility. Insects are particularly sensitive and it's showing up in their fertility,
and they have lots of other problems. Dividing up the nature into little patches, little islands is a
killer for them and other animal life and so on. And climate change will also pose a bigger problem
to them than it does to us. But insects play a particular role. My colleague Jamie and I spent
three hours with E.O. Wilson not that long before he died and it was, I must say, a wonderful experience.
But all the insect experts completely believe that without insects, we run a risk of the whole of
nature losing the plot, of just disintegrating, and leaving no material chance of survival for humans.
The problem is they couldn't prove it. It's infinitely complex and they never had any money.
But they all profoundly believed it as he did. That's the problem with a lot of the issues that
we're discussing on this podcast and in your research is by the time we can absolutely prove
it without a doubt, it'll be too late to mitigate it and change it. And it's game over, as you said.
So let me ask you this. Shoshana believes that much of the endocrine disrupting chemical
problem that causes the infertility crisis and the hormones is from plasticizers like phthalates
that make things soft and pliable. But when you were on this show last year,
you suggested it could be more from agricultural chemical residues in our food. Have you two placed
a friendly wager on that? And is there any new information either way?
And by the way, there is probably a third group I understand who think that PFAS play
a very big role. And I'm somewhat sympathetic to all three groups. However, I base mine on a couple of
small, terribly insufficient studies. An insufficiency wreaks havoc with academics, less so with me. I try and
just look at the data for what it is. These two studies were done by Harvard and Mass General,
which has a reasonable claim on being the best hospital in America. And they were small studies.
And they were done quite recently, 10, 15 years ago. And in study one, they got a few hundred,
that's all, a few hundred, I think 800 men. And for six months, they self-reported on the toxins
they add on the fruit and vegetables. At the end of the six month window, the sperm count of the worst
eating quarter was half of the least bad quarter. None of them had fully organic, which I wish,
much harder to do by the way, but I wish they had because they might have been 50% higher than that.
But in any case, two to one. The following year, or I think actually two years later,
they did a very similar study looking at women who presented themselves to the fertility clinic.
And it really wasn't many, maybe 120. They self-reported on the toxicity of the food,
fruit and veggies they ate. And the best quartile, the least bad quartile, had, I think it's 67%,
quote, successful live births. The worst quartile, 37%. And in all cases, the quartile order was the
one you would expect and the same for the guys. That is shockingly powerful data. And when you think
of what these damn chemicals are, and when you look at them individually, you have to say, why wouldn't
they be lethal? Pregnant women are imbibing these pesticides, these killers. Why would it not have
that effect? So I am inclined to believe it's logical that they would have an effect. I have been taught
by people like Shana that the sensitivity in the womb is many multiples, sometimes hundreds of times
more than when we're rough and tough outside the womb. It's exactly the result I would expect. And
it's the result these two little studies show. The fact we live in a world where they can't afford to
study the most important things in life, it seems, is a separate topic. Well, it's so, I mean,
I can't remember the numbers, but I'm guessing you do. In your draft paper on toxicity and the future,
I think you referenced that there's 250,000 different chemical compounds that are potentially
toxic. And like hardly any of them have been tested for risks to humans, let alone the combinatory,
when you have multiple chemicals in the same, in the same formulas, is it along that those lines?
Absolutely. As far as we know, they've tested none in combination. But for example, all we know is
that Roundup is much more toxic than glyphosate. I thought Roundup was glyphosate.
No, no, absolutely not. Roundup has the active ingredient, the official active ingredient is
glyphosate, but it has additives, mixes, and so on, which are several of them ferociously toxic.
And the net effect is Roundup in total is much more dangerous than glyphosate on its own.
That is absolutely typical. And the EPA does not require you to test Roundup in total. It requires
you to test glyphosate, the quote, active ingredient. The fact that other additives also happen to be toxic
and active is not required for testing. Is toxicity a threat to capitalism itself?
In fact, I am thinking, I think I had that title. We changed the title at the last minute and I sent
you a rough draft and, and, uh, my title is increasing toxicity and the threat to capitalism,
uh, and, uh, and, um, and life itself. But, um, of course it's a threat to capitalism. For capitalism to
prosper, you need 2.1 children, and you need them to be healthy, ideally well-educated and
hard charging and ambitious. And we do some of those things, but not all of them. But my, my argument in
the paper and from now on in life is that you not only have to detoxify the planet, which is
theoretically easy, but you have to detoxify capitalism, which is going to take generations
and will never be easy. And by that, I mean, you have to end up with the culture, capitalism or whatever,
recognizing that we live on a finite planet. We can't have wasteful growth or massive growth
in anything for extended periods of time. That is simple math. And that we have certain commons
without which we fail. We must have plentiful, clean, fresh water, non-toxic. We've got to have
non-toxic air that doesn't also warm our environment and kill us off that way. We've got to have clean
soil that is full of bacteria, full of life of all kinds, which guarantee higher quality food,
more nutritious, and absolutely non-toxic. Regenerative Ag will do that. And of course,
in the end, we need it to be sustainable. I don't think it's on the cutting edge like toxicity is,
although they overlap a bit. But I think we have to save ourselves on toxicity first
and look after some of these second derivative problems as we can.
So you famously come from a financial analysis background. Let me ask you a very financial
bottom line question. In the coming decades and beyond, can you envision corporate balance sheet
that evidences that we can have healthy bottom lines on a sick, depleted planet? I mean, at what point
is there an inflection and awareness from the business sector on these issues out of their own
necessity for survival of profits? I mean, how soon do toxicity and climate start to impact the bottom
line of corporations? Of course, they're impacting the bottom line now. It's costing us hundreds of
billions on a global basis, both climate change and toxicity already. It's ruining our health and the
health costs are mounting at a ferocious rate. And as I say, the terrific thing, the one advantage
about toxicity is that it's local. And if the EU or Denmark or China one day really start to move fast,
ban all the toxins, they will very, very quickly get the benefit of better health and better lives.
I say in the paper, which you notice, no doubt, that if you go back 35 years or 70 years,
the Swedes live two years longer than Americans say live a healthier outdoorsy life. But today it's six
years. And as I semi-joke, my estate is willing to bet anybody by 2050 it will be eight or longer
because we are diverging and we will diverge rapidly. If we defend every toxin because we make a lot of
money, as we do with, say, nicotinoids banned almost everywhere in the world, but not banned in America,
and a teaspoon of which will kill literally millions of bees, we will pay a very high price.
But at least we'll be able to see it. So I think Grantham Foundation should get behind the best
people so that they can set an even better example. Whatever barriers they have, let us think about how
do we get over those barriers. This is not the case in climate change. You have to go for the aggregate
problem. But in toxicity, I think you should go for the best example because the best example will
break the intellectual bank, won't it? If they're living 12 years longer and their health budget,
this is capitalism, if their health budget and government and politics has fallen to half hours
and falling fast, that is awfully attractive. And that may, in the end, move us in time.
Except in the United States, over 20% of our GDP is healthcare. So both healthcare, worsening health
outcomes and worsening climate disasters in a society with surplus are actually good for GDP, yes?
Yeah. And America is really dominated by hyper-capitalism.
And we have a near monopoly of the super-aggressive, fast-moving, infinitely rich organizations.
And we have far and away amongst the free rich economies, far and away the greatest influence
of corporations in government. And particularly in regulatory bodies, which basically they tend to
control. So those institutions designed to help agriculture behave itself, now help major agricultural
companies make the most money. And some of it is inadvertent, but some of it is not. Some of it is
blatant influence. And if we move very slowly, we will pay the price. An environmentalist might say,
okay, big deal. So you want to behave badly on toxicity, you'll tend to die off. They want to behave
better, they'll do better. Now, China is very interesting, obviously very big and very different.
China came quite slowly to certain issues, including general pollution and including
climate change. They were not quick. I once wrote a quarterly letter jokingly addressed to them. But
when they picked it up, like a lot of things, they move at China speed and they flash past everybody
until today where they make 80% of this, 90% of that. On and on and on it goes. 50% of every EV made
today is being made in China. And there's a great variety and there's a lot of technology. They are no
longer copying us. They are leading the way in a lot of these new technologies now. I think within
five years, probably is my guess, since they're full of scientists in their top levels, they will
realize the critical significance of toxicity and population problems, and they will act. And we will see
them pretty soon slashing and burning through toxic chemicals and plastics, banning them here and
banning them there in a way we can't even fantasize about. And when they do, unlike climate change,
where they move at the aggregate speed of the whole world, however fast they move, they put in more solar
panels last year than America has ever put in as the richest country in the world. But in this case,
they won't move at the average speed. They'll move at the speed of their individual progress and they
will move incredibly fast, I guess, and their health and longevity will improve incredibly fast.
So this is existential, the toxicity crisis to the world. It is a global
issue. It is a global commons. But as you're saying, toxicity might be changed locally in the country
that it's relevant, but isn't it possible? Are you hopeful that toxicity, endocrine disrupting, chemicals,
chemical pollution, the drop in testosterone, the drop in sperm count, the change in hormones,
all of that could finally be a nonpartisan, bipartisan wake-up call? Because Republicans
who dismiss climate change sure enough care about testosterone and sperm count and having children,
I would imagine. So is there hope that this could be a bipartisan issue that gets traction?
Yes. There are a lot of promising signs. The right-wing seem to be quite upset with the fact
they're getting poisoned. And I can't say I blame them. So this does have more community of interest.
It's also much more personal, isn't it? Toxic cancer, sperm count, the masculinity of your
male offspring. These are very personal right, left-wing issues for any parent and so on.
And I suspect it will get traction and will escalate very rapidly. I am certainly hoping so.
I'd love to get back to the paradox that in the end, we need to get our population down.
We wouldn't have chosen to do that, but by some miraculous unintended consequence,
which is toxic environment and toxic anti-natal capitalism, we are getting there. And now the
problem is, we seem to be having too much of a good thing. We're dropping so fast in countries like
South Korea and Japan, that if it spreads, we will find it very, very difficult to stabilize these
countries. And China being of course, the co-equal largest country in the world is a prime example.
You can't imagine the stress they will have because they not only have
four grandparents per grandchild, 1.0 fertility, but they have a chronic shortage of fertile women
because of the one-child policy.
Exactly the 20 to 40-year-olds are the one-child group, and they are tilted 15% to men.
So everyone has a problem with fertility, everyone around them, but they only have a regular shortage
of fertile women. China has a special Chinese induced shortage of fertile women times a miserable
fertility rate. It's double jeopardy. So they will be aging, inverting the pyramid faster than anyone
on the planet, possibly. I know that you and other philanthropists are helping
Shauna Swan get this message out, and is the message gaining traction?
Given the speed and danger of the problem, it is shocking how slowly it's moving. I am guessing
that China will pick it up because they have many more scientists in their structure of politics,
of government, than we do, than almost any Western country. And they have a history of doing that in
climate change, and that could change everything. But at the moment, it's creeping along like a snail.
It is a cause of considerable stress because I've spent my life trying to promote neglected problems,
but there's never been one like this, where it's much the most serious, much the fastest moving,
and much the most disregarded. It seems impossible. I gave a talk to the Boston Security Analyst Society,
and separately, the New York Security Analyst Society, in which I, among other things,
introduced the question of toxicity and population problems. And they practically fell asleep,
to which my response was, okay, so 50% reduction in sperm count in 50 years
doesn't get your attention. Would a 100% reduction in 100 years do it?
It might not, though, because that's nottheir job depends on their quarterly bonus or their yearly bonus.
You'd think, however, they might have a passing interest in the well-being of their own children
and grandchildren. This is no longer requiring you to worry about your distant descendants. It's
requiring you to worry about your children and grandchildren. It's become immediate. They will
have bad health. A lot of us have had bad health because we live too close to a toxic chemical plant
or something. These have huge consequences. And as Shauna and others will have told you,
the epigenetic effect of many of these endocrine disruptors means that your children pay a price,
and quite probably, your grandchildren. It's certainly the case in studies on other animals.
So, Shauna is now working on determining if sperm count decline can be remedied at the household level
by cleaning out identifiable endocrine-disrupting chemicals, EDCs in kitchens, closets, garages,
medicine cabinets, and the like. Food, food, and food. And food, and food. And I understand the
philanthropy from your network is helping with that project. Have you heard about how this is going,
and what are you hoping that that research will discover? No, I haven't. I don't want to speak
for them yet. It's still preliminary. Okay. But I know they're good people. I know it's a sensible
topic. And that's what our foundation is meant to be funding. Well, she has a movie coming out next
year. And ahead of that movie, I'm going to do a podcast with her on the findings. Wonderful.
Yeah. Yeah. I also have plenty of issues that haven't come up yet. And one of them that the
average viewer will not realize is that one of the interesting characteristics of a sperm count is that
it can be measured in a way almost none of these things can be measured. And secondly, it is about
the most accurate predictor of future general health and longevity. We are not prepared to say
that it is definitively the best predictor, but it may be, and it's one of the best. Wait, if you,
so if you determine, if you measure a man's sperm count, um, that itself is a predictor of their
future health. I am not saying that. Okay. And that may be the case, but I suspect it will not be.
What I am saying is if you have two societies, Denmark with a 20% higher sperm count, it will
have significantly higher health and longevity. In other words, a reflection of the society and
the stress put upon it, whether it applies at the individual level, I don't know. It may.
You mentioned cancer earlier, um, in, in passing, but beyond fertility, does messing with these
endocrine disrupting chemicals affect human health in other ways that we haven't discussed?
We know that chemicals in general have a lot to do with, um, being overweight and all the problems
that go with that. Parkinson's appears to be correlated with the use of pesticides and,
and one or two notorious, uh, chemicals, um, which I'm forgetting the three initials, darn it. Um,
but they go back to the 1920s. Isn't this amazing that there's just so many human technological
inventions that solve problems that came from prior human technological inventions?
Yes. Someone said, how, how could we possibly deal without them? And I said, you're kidding yourself.
The, the year before we introduced a toxic, uh, pesticides, we lost about a third of our crop.
And last year we lost about a third of our crop. That all that has happened. If you look at the long
sweep of history is that you use more and more expensive chemicals that the typical farmer can't afford.
And, uh, you still lose a chunk of the crop because among other things, the pests become immune to your
expensive pesticides. And you have to use more at more cost or several at more cost.
And if you give up now, you lose your whole crop. So this has not been satisfactory, but if you give
up completely and you go to regen ag, which we will, everybody will be regen ag. If we survive
a hundred years from now, we will be sustainable and the food will be much more nutritious and totally
non-toxic and the soil will be rich. And, and that is the consequence. If you have rich soil, well
nurtured, you will have much more nutritious food. They have found in some cases that the nutrition of
various mass produced vegetables and so on is down to like a quarter of what it was in, in many of the
nutrients that you would. So, so the calories are still there, but the micronutrients are missing.
And indeed the calories often go up because as the balance of, of ingredients tilts towards
carbohydrates and so on, uh, you're getting in the end, more sugar and less nutrient.
So is there evidence on endocrine disrupting chemicals on intellectual and emotional
development, uh, impulse control, human intelligence, things like that?
Being an academic comes with certain disadvantages. You have to be a whole lot more careful.
A financial analyst is kind of trained to look at the data, recognize that you'll make mistakes,
do the best you possibly can with the data. And that's what I try and do.
That's why you're a, that's why you're a very important guest for this podcast because
So I had no trouble extrapolating backwards in the sperm count and a few years ago,
extrapolating forward. I took Haggai Levine, the co, the co boss of the, of the main study
of the meta study. And I took his expression that the growth rate was not slowing. If anything,
it was accelerating. And I said, okay, then clearly for the seven missing years,
we should take the same average rate of the past, which was just under 2%. And then as it turned out,
it was 2.7 because it had accelerated, but academics can't do stuff like that. They won't do stuff like
that. So they can be years behind making, making a reasonable best guess. And if you're slightly,
if you're pretty careful, your best guess is highly likely to be accurate. For example,
we extrapolated backwards to World War II from 1972, when the academic study started,
and we said, tell you what, it will go back at half the rate that it has been going on.
But just remember between 1945 and 72, everybody smoked endocrine disruptor. Everyone was surrounded by
DDT, vicious endocrine disruptor, and everyone was surrounded by terrible smoke and smog in London,
which is terrible in every way, including endocrine disruption. So we knew it was terrible,
but we took it back at half the average rate. And frankly, it has to be better than no guess at all.
If someone said it was actually every bit as high, that would be very unsurprising. But the fact that
it would be nothing is impossible. So who's in charge of this? Like who's,
whose responsibility or, or who will champion this? If, is this still an information deficit
problem or is there a- It's a chronic information deficit problem. And I'm proud to say Grantham
Foundation has played some role in sponsoring not one, but seven organizations whose job description in
various fields is propagating information, including one called Spun, that is trying to gather all the
information on micro-rhizal organisms in the soil. Loosely speaking, mushrooms and related stuff that we
begin to understand do so much in spreading resources and communicating and so on. We are talking as we sit
about the need for just such an organization or two to deal with toxicity. And I have no doubt with any
luck, three people will, will call in to tell us after this, that such an organization exists, which is
fine, but it has been hiding its light under a bushel because we haven't found them.
So if you were the toxicity czar of the next administration, how would you even begin
to structure and think about, um, this challenge with a long-term plan? What would be some of the
broad arcs of, of what you would look into and what, what things you would start?
I'm inclined to say, Nate, that's over my pay grade.
Um, I can imagine what I would- It's over everyone's pay grade.
If I was an emperor of China, I would get a, a hit squad of 10 or 20 or 50
important scientists and give them six months to come up with a list of the worst 20% of all
pesticides and industrial chemicals that should be phased out within the next year or two.
So it's a power law, right, right there. We get, we get rid of 80% of the damage with just 20% of the
chemicals plus or minus maybe. Yes. Yes. Let me just say, by the way, that
there are 10,000 chemicals used in, in cosmetics and related, uh, bodily stuff. And, um, in the EU,
they have banned 1400, which if they banned the worst 1400 might be a pretty darn important contribution.
Canada, I believe has banned about 450, which is pretty cheesy. And America has banned 11, not 1100, 11.
Well, if 450 is cheesy, what is 11? Suicidal would be strong, but, uh, near suicidal would be pretty
accurate. I mean, it is going to increase our ill health, lower our life expectancy with something
approaching absolute certainty. So this is, this is also, I mean, this is a risk to life on the planet,
but this is super existential and urgent. And now for the United States of America,
toxicity, endocrine disrupting chemicals almost sound like an antidote to overshoot to me with a giant
speed bump in the near term that we have to navigate. It's just a different flavor
of great simplification. So let me ask you this, is it top down scientists and emperors and politicians
that are going to become aware of the risks to society and do things, um, in partnership with
corporations? Hard for me to imagine that, or is it individuals that, uh, in, you know, thinking about
themselves, their kids, their grandkids, life on earth, is it going to be a political awakening and
movement that hell no, EDC's go sort of thing or some combination, or how do you visualize, uh,
an awakening in consciousness about the threat of toxicity to our future?
What I'm looking for is a few countries or regions will set such a good example,
will get such a good payoff that that will be the thin end of the wedge and that will happen.
And in the end, it will be successful. The question is always, as with climate change,
the speed and the damage that is done. And one has to remember the biggest pain
to, uh, escaping from toxicity and population stress is climate change. And the biggest stress
to climate change is toxicity and the shock to the economic system. And that's one I have to spend
a sentence on. Wait, wait a minute. The biggest threat to climate change is toxicity?
Yes, because if toxicity stresses the population the way it will, and that in turn stresses economic
growth, we will very quickly and easily feel poor. We have just seen in the last few years,
how easy it is to make the average voter feel disappointed and feel poor and feel that they
really, uh, don't want to spend that much money on climate change because they can't afford it.
That climate change is 50 years from now. And I'm having trouble feeding myself and my children now.
And so if you feel poor, you don't have the money to do a proper job on climate change. And by the way,
when you finish the trillions of dollars, the hundred trillion dollars that it, that would be a real
bargain to detoxify the industrial system, you are faced with the need to extricate two and a half
trillion tons of excess CO2 that if you do not take out, the oceans continue to rise and the climate
slowly gets worse. And if you mean for the climate to get rapidly better, you have to extricate that CO2.
It's a dead weight. You don't get to drive a sexy electric car. You don't get healthier. You just have
to take it out of the air. And, and it's a lot of money. And if you are feeling poor because your number
of workers has imploded like Japan or South Korea, and your number of old fogies has exploded, uh,
like Japan and South Korea, uh, then you won't feel you can afford the necessary action to move fast
enough on climate change. And it may get out of control and tipping point starts. So you can
see how closely these two stress factors are related.
I do see that. Um, although I've been using different language to describe it, but let me ask
you this. Um, what are your thoughts on the degrowth movement? Those that care about the environment
and, uh, inequality and want the world to consciously degrow, um, our consumption and our GDP,
uh, ultimately for a healthier environment.
I completely sympathize with them.
One has to admit though, it falls into the category of urging people to be better people,
to, to be kinder and wiser and nicer and more logical and look further into the future.
Our results in the past, typically on this have been that
you get one or two or 3% of the people who are responsive. And, um, in Japan, you might get three
times there, but, um, it's not typical. And, uh, we are over millions of years bred to be pretty darn
selfish and, and struggle for ourselves and our family. And, and that's it. So I suspect that that
is a very big ask. And I noticed that some of the best climate people refuse to talk about degrowth
and any cost.
I know that you, um, understand and agree with what I'm about to say, but I just want to point
it out. Most of these things that you're predicting, it's assuming that everything else stays equal,
which, which it may not, uh, the wars and the financial situation and politics. So assuming that
everything else stays constant, that trend is something that you predict.
Yes, exactly. And, and there's, I see I'm, I'm managing to knock off most of my points here on my
crib sheet. Um, but, but one of them is an interesting tidbit about China and the one child policy.
When we were back in the 1960s and seventies, the club of Rome and related people made the case
that we couldn't afford to grow indefinitely at that kind of warp drive, which was, you know,
three or 4% a year. And, and that we would very quickly, et cetera, et cetera, just for the record,
they were remarkably accurate in almost every way, but, but one, and that is, they said the growing
population would bring us to our knees. Now, just as a average mathematician, I can guarantee you
that had it continued, it would of course brought us to our knees, but it in fact changed. And I can
tell you how many people back in 1960 or 70, uh, predicted that the population would, would rise to a
peak, uh, in 1961 of, of 2% growth a year on the planet in population and would then start to decline
and, and would then start to plummet. And that is nobody. I do not think it was an available insight.
That was so unexpected and so out of the range of what people were thinking about.
And, and that is what happened is, is we peaked at, in 1961, the global growth rate in humans.
Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. 2.1%.
Then drifted down, but continued to grow rapidly.
Right.
Uh, and until in a few decades, it will start to decline. It's already in babies, as I told you,
declined for 10 years. Yeah.
We peaked 10 years ago and it's dropping, you might say like a rock. Um, anyway, how many countries
had enough gumption to say, of course, they're right. We can't have perpetual growth. We can't keep
on growing people. My old favorite thing, 3000 years of the Egyptian empire at 1% growth.
And trust me, you have 9 trillion times as many people. One, one lousy percent a year for 3000
years multiplies you by 9 trillion. And now you can check it on your iPhone. When I first said that,
you could not. Okay. 9 trillion times guys, for just as long as the Egyptian empire was more or less
in its full glory. It is a pretty simple, straightforward, you can't do it.
So, um, are you advocating for young people today, uh, to have more children? Or do you think it's a
good thing that overall people are having fewer children, uh, for our U S listeners and beyond?
We've got to get the population down. We're lucky, miraculously lucky. It's going to go down. The only
risk is that it goes down here and there so fast that they disintegrate with very disturbing effects
on, on global peace, perhaps, and so on and so forth. Russia is a particular problem in that its
population is imploding and emigrating, et cetera, et cetera. China's a particular problem. Also,
they will be really stressed at this rate in, in as little as 30, 40, 50 years, they will be in real
stress. So to be clear, you're more worried about baby depletion than you are about oil depletion.
I am worried that baby depletion will become so rapid in certain areas that very quickly
those countries will cease to be functional. And as I said, I think South Korea has probably gone one
step too far because there's one issue we haven't really talked about. And that is what a scientist
would call inertia, that when you get a cultural system, it can be very hard to change. When my
wife and I and everyone we knew were deciding to have children, we didn't decide to have children.
We just did it because that's what families did. You had a couple and then you sat down and decided
whether you would have a third or a fourth. That's how it worked. Did you say earlier that the average
woman, not the average, or no, you said the average mother had four children like 50 or 60 years ago?
No, I actually misspoke and corrected myself. The average woman had four children. For every woman
who didn't have any, there was someone who had five. Right. Wow. And that number now is two.
The global number today, I think is technically 2.3. Right. And it peaked almost twice as high
at four and a bit and dropping rapidly. I mean, I read your paper and I talked to you about this in
the past, but this conversation has really changed my thinking on some of these issues. You're doing a lot,
Jeremy, on all your different initiatives, um, climate, especially, uh, endocrine disrupting,
toxicity, uh, all the things, but you're a oasis in the wilderness with, uh, elite people that were captains
of industry and finance or your, your background, uh, and your means, uh, which I know you're, you're
contributing a lot to these, these efforts. Give us your umbrella pitch to other humans in positions
of privilege about the stakes of our times and their potential role in it.
Yeah. Because we've been around for a long time and we've made a lot of progress and it's only now
that we are actually faced with not bullshit, serious existential risks. And unfortunately they've
come as a package because of the massive growth of China, they went from 5% to 50% of iron ore and coal
and lots of important things. We've begun to hit the boundaries of bountiful resources. And that was
pretty clear over 10 years ago that we had run out of the cheaper forever plentiful supply, and we're
going to be stressed. And then we have climate change moving quite fast where anyone can see
that the damage increment from year to year, particularly a flooding, by the way, severe
flooding was always going to be the most dependable feature. I'm happy to say we've been writing about
that for 20 years. It was always going to be the number one, uh, ahead of, of droughts ahead of forest
fires. And it has been, it's been shockingly painfully. Because warmer air holds more water
moisture and concentrate. Because it's 5% more water vapor in the air. It guarantees heavier downpours.
Yeah. So it doesn't guarantee there'll be more hurricanes, but it guarantees that they will have
more water. And if they stall like they did in North Carolina, then there's hell on wheels in a way.
And once in Houston where it will drop, you know, 10 inches for three days in a row. And, uh,
it will flood anywhere, whatever the configuration.
What I'm doing with this work is the, the first thing is to educate and communicate our metacrisis,
uh, in a scientifically tethered, um, apolitical, even non-prescriptive way. So people understand how
these things fit together. And now we're, we're, um, including endocrine disrupting pollution in,
in that story. The second category is all the, the interventions of bend, uh, not break for society.
And one of those I'm calling it for now, the 1500, which is to change the consciousness or values or
have an awakening of some of the 1500 most influential people in the world, even 5% of them
to devote not only their financial capital, but their networks, their skills, their creativity,
their inventiveness towards solving these issues. So I, I was just asking you to,
well, that was a good kick. Um, because that is such an important issue. And at the Grantham
Foundation, it's our job, number one, you know, can we help fat cats understand that, um, their
experience with technology, their resources, their network, as you say, uh, that they could make a
difference. The average guy has a very hard time making a difference, but they, they have an easy
time if they choose and, and they should choose because this threatens immediately. It threatens
their children. It threatens their grandchildren. And it's already destabilizing the world.
You may not realize this, but the growth rate of, of the planet has slowed down the economic growth
rate. The growth rate in Europe has slowed down so that it's limping along at 1% down from three.
And the U S is bragging here and there, and the economist is bragging on our behalf that we,
we look sensational. We only look sensational by comparison with poor old Europe and elsewhere.
We are way down from where we used to be. And a big component of that are, are these problems,
mainly a decrease in the supply of workers increase in medical costs and, and so on. And, um, it will
continue to get worse and toxicity moving faster and, and more threateningly. They really need to get
behind them because a dozen really influential rich people could change the outcome could save years
just as the oil companies by their brilliant propaganda have, have cost us 10 or 20 years
on climate change. We need some rich, brilliant people to save us 10 or 20 years on toxicity.
And toxicity is easy in comparison because it's local. So it, all we have to do is get behind one
or two countries and really make a brilliant example. And maybe China will do that if we're really lucky
and we'll move at China speed and make it clear to everybody how important it is and how successful
it can be. You know, it may be on climate change that we will get paid for our good work. It is certain
that we will get paid for our good work on toxicity. That is trivial. What, what do you mean by get paid?
You'll get healthier. You'll live longer. Everything will improve and it will be quick.
You don't have to wait 20 years. Yes. You are suffering from your last 20 years worth of
imbibing toxins, but you will start to get healthier immediately. Clean up the air,
take out the particulate matter, clean up the food, clean up your environment in the home,
get rid of your, your gas stoves and so on. And you will instantly improve your health.
Is the toxicity issue, um, similar to the Exxon mobile, uh, um, public oil companies in that
there will be, uh, a public benefit to cleaning up, but there will be a corporate interest
antagonistic Lee opposing these things like DuPont or, or some other corporations whose business it is to
create these chemical compounds. Is that going to be another big hurdle with lobbyists and all that?
Yeah. Yeah. I mean, um, that's how it works. That's how the capitalist system works. Milton Friedman
explained to everybody that we had no responsibility towards the social wellbeing, no responsibility
therefore to our grandchildren, uh, only responsibility to our shareholders to maximize,
um, short and intermediate term profits. In other words, uh, we had a responsibility to become
sociopaths as corporations, because that's what a sociopath does. They have no interest in anybody
but themselves. That's a sociopath. So these corporations are sociopathic and, and everyone
has bought into Milton Friedman. And if you, if you did altruistic expenditures, you're quite likely to
get sued by your stockholders. Has a corporation ever had a very profitable product that they volunteered
was dangerous to the longterm and took off the market. I don't think so. The only answer is different
institutions or better prices where the prices of the pollution and the social costs that right now
we're putting on the commons and the future generations is included in, in the prices that
consumers pay and corporations, uh, include. Yes. Well, there's one great advantage about climate
change and that is the technology has been so brilliant that often
the replacement far from being expensive is simply better. I think in toxicity, you simply
have to ban them. They're not going to do it voluntarily, but Europe has shown, yes,
you can ban nicotenoids. We don't, but, but most countries in the world do. And my attitude is,
okay, dudes, you don't want to ban them. Pay the price. If they ban them in Europe and Denmark and
China, they will live longer and you will not. That's your choice. In the end,
it doesn't make that much significance. It makes a lot of significance to the locals
and therefore the locals should get their act together and make sure that they are not the
worst country on the planet because we are set to be the worst country on the planet at the moment,
perhaps fighting it out with North Korea on these kinds of issues. That was my next question.
Um, it just seems to me that on a maturity wisdom in service of the greater good, uh, ranking that
we're a couple of years junior to our, uh, senior high school colleagues in, in, in Europe. Why is it
that on these things, on these important issues, the United States is so near the bottom of, of the class?
I think we have a particular pernicious form of capitalism, which gives immediate feedback,
very efficient. Um, it's a very efficient form of capitalism, but it absolutely does not allow for
recognition of the commons recognition of long-term wellbeing. It's the price you pay for being
efficient. You make more money, you make it faster and you pay a longer term price. And you know that I,
my hero worship, uh, Professor Hicks. And, and one of the reasons he was the most important British
economist after Keynes. And, and the reason I admire him so much is basically because of this
simple definition of a profit. A profit is what you have left over at the end of the year,
having protected everything that you started with. And, um, anything you produced, et cetera, et cetera,
minus the cost to what you started with. Which means if you use resources,
you have to reckon, what's the cost of replacing copper? Basically you can't. What's the cost of
replacing oil? Basically you can't. What, what is the cost of detoxifying the environment that you just
toxified with your PFAS? It is many, many multiples of the profits that you claimed. We, if we wanted to
go back and make our environment and our lives as clean and with the same equivalent resources as we had,
we have not made any money for at least the last few decades. We are running at a fairly substantial
loss. And what is happening is we society will bear the loss and they, the corporations are making the
short term profits. Well, and other species and generations will bear the cost. Absolutely. This
is not a conversation where we spent much time on the environment, but, uh, you may know that as far
as we can tell, most species, animals, insects are down 50 to 70% in sheer biomass, the weight
of all the elephants, the weight of all the flying insects. They are not only down, but just like our
sperm count, if anything, the rate of decline seems to be still accelerating. So let me understand this.
I, um, let's set aside for the moment that we know that there is a bill to be paid because of our prior
actions. But I'm hearing from you in our prior conversation that you are a believer in capitalism
for the longer term, but it's a kinder, gentler, uh, more holistic
capitalism that has wider boundaries, um, different values and, and better prices,
uh, that include the negatives in, in addition to the positives. Is that a fair summation?
I'm not sure. The FDR used to talk about the need for a policeman on the corner of Broad and Wall
that, uh, you, you needed rules and regulations for the stock market. You needed rules and regulations
for capitalism. Capitalism. I've always liked to say there's a million things better than,
than a, than a central government can do. It's so infinitely complicated, although with AI and
billions, trillions of, of times improvements in, in quant skills, you just might be able to
regulate in the future. But in any case, in the past, only capitalism could deal with the complexity
of pricing, the cost of materials, etc., etc., even though they totally ignored second and third order
effects. They totally ignored, uh, the, uh, finite nature of the resources they were using up.
But I do think the key is the policeman on the corner of Wall and Broad, that you need regulations.
Capitalism is not designed to look after the commons. There is no mechanism at all. It's not that they're
trying and failing. It's not on their agenda. They're not even raising the issue. If you want
to look after our long-term well-being, it has to be a central government. They can leave everything
else alone, with my blessing. If only they look after water, soil, air, and 2.1 babies.
And the 2.1 babies, I would not have said 10 years ago. Now I realize that that is a part of the
commons. You can decide not to have children, but if there are no workers, society will collapse around
you. So in addition to water, uh, soil, uh, healthy ecosystems, you believe that 2.1 children is part
of the commons. If you do not, if you fall below 2.1, you just phase fairly rapidly out of business.
That is simple math. Every generation gets smaller until it disappears. There is absolutely no substitute
for 2.1. So either way, it would be like a thermostat. If we're at 1.1 or 3.1, you, you think
there's gotta be some policy in, in society to head towards 2.1. At 3.1, you end up like my ancient
Egyptian example with millions of miles of bodies on top of each other. And, uh, at 1.1, you go out of
business in a stunningly few number of generations, partly because we have no experience at managing
downwards. How do you manage a strip of 20 stores and five are shuttered? I mean, for the, for the
other 15, it's hell on wheels. It's like managing Detroit. How do you close down parts of the railroad
system, parts of the grid, parts of this, parts of that, whole towns in Japan? This is a problem
we have no experience at, beginning to in Japan, maybe. And we know is many times more difficult.
Managing for growth is a piece of cake, isn't it? You can let capitalism just get on with it.
But, uh, managing backwards is, is a threat, uh, to everything, including, as I say, critically,
our willingness to address climate change, which is expensive.
So we need to continue to grow and burn some carbon in order to have the brainpower
and stability to address the carbon crisis.
No, I don't know. I think if we pushed ahead rapidly, we will very quickly have, uh, renewable
energy. That is the least of our problems. It is going to be much harder to, uh, to detoxify
capitalism so that it becomes a kindler, as you say, a gentler variant. Um, and I think you can only
really do that by, uh, government fiat, and you can only get government fiat by a fairly massive level
of support from the general public. It has to be fairly massive because the super powerful companies
and financial elite can so punch beyond their numbers. Yeah. And they have disproportionate
influence. So you have to outnumber them, outvote them, and make sure we start to have governments
that are prepared to reasonably look after the long-term future. And they do a much better job,
let's face it, in, in Scandinavia, in, in Holland, in, in most of Europe.
Well, I'm, I'm certainly hopeful that Shauna's work, uh, and your work, um, will raise awareness
to the general population of the importance, uh, of a bipartisan, nonpartisan response to
the danger from endocrine disrupting and other chemical pollution. Um, I asked you on your,
your first episode here about a year ago, the magic wand question and other typical questions
in our first interview. Is there anything major that's changed in your thinking or your advice,
uh, to listeners in, in the past year? It has been a fairly unpleasant year. Um,
I have to admit, because the perception of the speed of the damage in climate change was so impressive.
And, um, the recognition of the tipping points in climate change and how they could get beyond our
control at any minute, like the, um, the AMOC or the, whatever they call that, what we used to call
the Gulf Stream. The Atlantic meridional overturning circulation. Yeah.
Yeah. Uh, it could happen anytime with, with disastrous consequences from which we cannot go back.
At the same time, we've been struggling with toxicity, realizing on everything we turned over,
that it was a bigger problem moving faster and possibly even more neglected than we thought,
approaching zero interest. You know, I asked a question in my paper that you had that,
and what is the corporate response to this giant rapidly moving problem? I think the answer is nil.
They have no response. It's not on their agenda. They're not talking about it at board meetings.
It's a complete non-issue in my opinion. I might be amazed to find that that is wrong. I would
certainly hope it's wrong, but I'm pretty damn confident that it's not.
Is your, um, nerd-like qualities act as a anesthesia to the magnitude of all this stuff?
Cause this is pretty fricking heavy, what you're discussing.
Um, it often does.
Does it? Okay.
Yeah. And, um, getting out in the, the most amazing autumn, uh, fall of, of all time, isn't it?
We've just had.
Yeah. I mean, amazing and, and scary.
We've just turned 60 days of perfect weather in, in Massachusetts.
Yeah.
Let it be said that climate change is not entirely without its local benefits on occasion. And we just had it.
And walking in the woods, I must say, or clipping briars or clearing your brain.
I mean, I'm playing a good game of tennis. You, you can feel pretty, pretty darn cheerful.
And I do, and, and I have a great family and these good things, but do I worry more for the well-being
of, of, of society and America than I did a year ago? Yes, I do.
I do too. Um, I know you are so busy and so committed to helping on all these things.
So, um, our viewers probably just see this little glimpse of you, but for a long time, you've been
a champion for these, these, uh, overlooked risks, especially with earth's environment.
So thank you for that, Jeremy. And do you have any closing words, uh, for our viewers today?
I would just reiterate what you brought up. And that is if by some miracle, one or two super rich,
smart, reasonable people wander into this zone of yours and, and see this and other podcasts of yours,
that they realize that they can make a difference, that it doesn't necessarily need that big a push
to move some of these agenda items or some of these technologies. And for God's sake, jump on board.
But because if you don't soon, it might be too late.
Thank you, sir. We, uh, we shall speak again. And, um, I'm hoping that the paper that your staff sent me
will be available in the next six weeks or so to put online and share with others, uh, because then we'll,
we'll bookend that with this, uh, podcast and people can read it and share it.
We'll try and do it in the next couple of weeks, actually.
Thank you so much, Jeremy.
No, it's a pleasure. You're welcome. Bye-bye.
If you enjoyed or learned from this episode of the great simplification,
please follow us on your favorite podcast platform. You can also visit the great simplification.com
for references and show notes from today's conversation. And to connect with fellow
listeners of this podcast, check out our discord channel. This show is hosted by me, Nate Higgins,
edited by no troublemakers media and produced by Misty Stinnett, Leslie Batlutz, Brady Hyen, and Lizzie Sirianni.
