Stanford University.
Thank you.
Thank you, Ryan.
Thank you, everyone, for coming this evening.
And for me, coming from New York, it is getting in the evening hours.
And I'm usually a day person and work better during the day.
So I hope you'll forgive me if I fall asleep as I'm doing some of the presentations.
But what I'm going to be doing today is share with you much of the work and research.
My research team and I have been doing at Teachers College at Columbia University,
where we've been studying the manifestation dynamics and impact of microaggressions,
everyday microaggressions upon marginalized groups in our society.
I'm concentrating this evening primarily on racial microaggressions,
but almost any marginalized group in our society can be subject to microaggressions.
Women, LGBTQ individuals, people with disabilities, they can all be subject to microaggressions.
Microaggressions have similar psychological processes and dynamics,
but what distinguishes one group from another are the themes that come with them.
For example, what we find is that microaggressions directed towards African Americans
have many instances of criminality, dangerousness.
For LGBTQ individuals, we have a theme that is quite unique to it that deals with sinfulness.
And so the themes do differ, although the dynamics that I'm going to be talking about today
are something that are very similar when we begin to study microaggressions.
Now, I know it's shameless of me to have my two books.
Actually, it's three books, but I'm showing it.
Microaggressions in Everyday Life is the book in which the content of this evening
comes primarily from that book.
For some of you who want more information on it, you can get hold of that book.
Microaggressions and Marginality is the book in which many of my research team members
began to talk about other marginalized groups, and it's an edited book with many other groups,
all the way from international students to poverty and class microaggressions,
and they're individual chapters in case some of you really want to get into other forms
and expressions of microaggressions.
And then lastly, this came out today, by the way.
Actually, it was released early.
It's the culmination of our microaggression research that studied why people have so much difficulty
honestly talking and dialoguing on race, gender, and sexual orientation.
What hangs them up?
Why are they so anxious, defensive, and protective in terms of talking about that?
And we naturally progressed to that because what we found was that almost all difficult dialogues
on race, whether it be in the classrooms, in the public forum, watching it even in interactions
and the, you know, among neighbors, what we found was that almost all micro, I mean, all difficult dialogues
were triggered by microaggressions, unbeknownst to the people.
And this, using much of the work when I work with educators, teachers, about how to understand and facilitate
difficult dialogues on race because there is another whole area, layers of understanding,
that are important for us to look at.
I am dedicating almost all my presentations now to Maya Angelou.
And she has had a profound influence upon my life, reading her writings, her poetry, hearing her speak, and so forth.
And many of you know that she passed away in May 2014 of last year.
And oddly enough, it was on that day that I did finish my race talk in the Conspiracy of Silence book.
And it was almost like she was telling a future generation of other people to carry on her work.
I also am very indebted to her because one of the things that doesn't get acknowledged is that the concept of racial,
gender, sexual orientation, microaggressions are not something new.
These observations of behaviors have been made by everyone.
In fact, Chester Pierce, African-American psychiatrist at Harvard, was among the first to talk about racial microaggressions.
And so microaggressions to publish articles on it.
But like I was telling one of you earlier today, that he was a victim of microaggressions in the sense that his work was ignored.
And no one knew much about it because they did not consider it legitimate or worthy of exploration.
But microaggressions are very common.
And I'd like to share with you where I first began to hear this with a passage, two passages of a poem from Maya Angelou.
And many of you know it, Still I Rise.
And these are the two passages that I think are very important and significant.
You may write me down in history with your bitter, twisted lies.
You may tread me in the very dirt, but still like dust I'll rise.
You may shoot me with your words.
You may cut me with your eyes.
You may kill me with your hatefulness, but still like air I'll rise.
Now this has so much symbolic meaning to people of color.
Primarily because we see that our lives have been filled with bias, discrimination, and prejudice.
And still we have been able to rise and overcome it.
And that's what she is saying here.
But secondarily she actually is talking about microaggressions.
You may write me down in history.
How are people of color portrayed in curriculum even today?
Represent micro invalidations, micro insults, and micro assaults upon people of color.
But they are, you know, people doing it are unaware of that.
She also talks about nonverbal forms of microaggressions.
You may shoot me with your words.
Those are verbal.
You can say things that are hurtful.
Or you can cut me with your eyes.
Your nonverbals tell us how you disapprove of us and are dismissive in that particular way.
And this really goes to the heart of something that James Jones wrote about in terms of the African proverb.
The true tale of the lion hunt will never be told as long as a hunter tells the story.
And what I would like to talk about this evening are microaggressions that represent the rest of the story.
The story that is untold, unheard, unspoken, or attempts to silence it.
That is the story and the racial realities of people of color that I would like to share with you today.
Before I get to some concrete examples of microaggressions, let me briefly and quickly define them.
Microaggressions are the everyday slights, insults, and validations that people of color experience in their day-to-day interactions with well-intentioned individuals who are unaware that they have engaged in a microaggressive act that
may prove harmful or invalidating to the person that is being presented here.
And this is one of the greatest challenges of getting white brothers and sisters to understand what racial microaggressions are.
Because racial microaggressions oftentimes are invisible.
They are invisible to the perpetrator.
And one of our goals in terms of education and training is to make the invisible visible.
That is the ultimate goal because you cannot correct something if the person doing it doesn't believe that it has occurred.
Now, let me give you three primary examples that outline the everyday expressions of microaggressions.
And that on all three of these, many of you might think that big deal.
These are small, insignificant things.
Why make such a big thing of it?
They're harmless, trivial in nature.
And what I'm going to try to share with you is that far from being harmless, insignificant, and trivial,
microaggressions have major impact on the psychological well-being and inequities that occur in terms of education, employment, and healthcare.
It is not what you're going to oftentimes think about in racism.
It is not the overt racists, the white supremacists, those who directly, I don't like them and wouldn't want to be around them,
but they are less likely to have the impact upon the standard of my living than well-intentioned individuals who go to the voting booths
and vote for candidates or who decide how to educate people, who to hire.
These are the individuals that are unaware that their biases are being delivered in a way that is quite harmful.
One of the examples that many individuals, if you go to the Internet and Google microaggressions,
you will read many examples given by Latinos, Latinas, and Asian Americans about language issues of microaggressions.
And it happens to me quite often.
I can tell you that years ago when I first became aware of this was when I was coming back.
I was flying into Washington, D.C.
I was getting out of the cab and paying him.
He turned to me and said,
you know, you speak excellent English.
And I said to him, thank you, I hope so, I was born here.
Now this is something we're going to talk about tomorrow with the graduate students,
about how you handle microaggressions when they occur.
I'll come back to the example shortly to give you some idea about why that represents a microaggression.
But this is built upon the same thing that evening after I made a presentation to the audience.
You know, how people from the audience afterwards want to come up and talk to you about the presentation.
One white woman came up to me and said, Dr. Su, that was really interesting.
And I'm involved in adopting a Korean child and we got into it.
And then she said to me, by the way, Dr. Su, where were you born?
And I said, oh, I was born in Portland, Oregon.
Then she said, no, no, no.
Where were you born?
And I said, Portland, Oregon?
You know, doubting it.
And she said, no, no, no.
What country were you born in?
And I said, the United States.
And she turned beet red, was embarrassed, politely excused herself and left.
Now these two examples, both the cab driver and the white audience member, committed a microaggression.
First of all, it's important to note that they were not mean, evil individuals.
The cab driver was complimenting me.
The woman was wanting to make a personal connection with me in terms of finding out who I was, where I'd come from and so forth.
But the metacommunication, and this is the characteristic of microaggressions,
there is oftentimes a communication that is quite conscious and overt, but is undermined by a metacommunication that contradicts it.
The metacommunication in both of these examples are that you are a perpetual alien in your own country.
Can you see that?
You are a foreigner.
You are not a true American.
Those are the messages that were impacting me.
And when that happened, I began to think about my childhood, going to school.
How elementary school teachers never talked about Asian Americans, the contributions of Asian Americans.
But the only time they talked about Asian Americans were when they talked about Asians in Asia.
And she would often, my teacher would oftentimes turn to me and say, Daryl, when they were studying a unit in China,
Daryl, what is it that you people celebrate during this holiday?
How do you do it?
And I would say, I don't know.
I mean, I felt like, should I know?
Yeah, I am Asian.
You know, it really got in my head.
But the teacher did not recognize, in some sense, that I was an American as well, as much as she did.
But, you know, these are all messages that are given.
Now, microaggressions can also be nonverbal.
And we'll talk about a lot of them, especially when we give the example of Barack Obama, how we can respond nonverbally that indicates bias and insulting in nature.
But I'd like to move to this example of an environmental microaggression.
I gave this as an example earlier to the medical school deans and administrators.
And what I gave was an example that years ago, I did training and all week, I didn't do all week.
Mine was a half day.
But it was an all week event that included many people that they called in and they had, you know, they had seminars.
They had films that they showed.
There was, you know, dances, food always came into play.
And my role was to talk to all the deans about diversity issues.
But I remember as I stood before the group and looked around the room, I noted that every single one of the deans, unless I was wrong, appeared white.
And primarily white men, except for women who were the assistant deans in the room as well.
And so when it got time for me to speak, I remember getting up in front of the group and saying, as I stand before you this morning and scan the room, I noticed that the majority of you or overwhelming number of you are white.
And they shuffled, you know, shuffled about.
And I said, this is not white male bashing or anything, but do you know the message you are sending to a prospective faculty or student of color?
And there are three messages that environmentally you are sending.
You are not welcome here.
Two, if you choose to come here, you will not be comfortable.
Three, if you persist in coming here, there is only so far up in the hierarchy you can go.
As a student of color, you may not graduate.
As a faculty of color, you may not get promoted and tenured.
Those, whether you intend it or not, that is the environmental microaggression.
And that environmental microaggression may create a hostile, invalidating campus climate for people of color.
And so it can be verbal, nonverbal, environmental.
What is the impact of racial microaggressions?
I want to talk to you, read these narratives for you, two of them.
Because these narratives will point out what I consider to be one of the primary dynamics of microaggressions.
That they represent a clash of racial realities.
Let me read this one.
This comes from an African American male.
It gets so tiring, you know.
It sucks you dry.
People don't trust you.
From the moment I wake up, I know, stepping out the door, that it will be the same day after day.
The bus can be packed, but no one will sit next to you.
I guess it may be a good thing, because you always get more room.
No one crowds you.
You get served less.
When they serve you, they have this phony smile and just want to get rid of you.
You have to show more ID to cash a check.
You turn on the TV, and there you always see someone like you being handcuffed and jailed.
They look like you, and sometimes you begin to think it is you.
You are a plague.
You try to hold it in, but sometimes you lose it.
Explaining doesn't help.
They don't want to hear.
Now, this is another important point.
He is saying that well-intentioned people don't really want to hear.
And we can get to that very shortly.
Even when they ask, why do you have a chip on your shoulder?
Shit, I just walk away now.
It doesn't do any good explaining.
Now, I want you to ask these questions as we go on this evening.
Is life as hard as this black man describes?
Is he exaggerating or misreading the actions of others?
Is he oversensitive or paranoid?
Is he right in concluding that others don't want to listen to his explanations?
Why is he so angry and resentful?
Do you believe him or not?
If not, what are your reasons?
And if we have time, we're going to try to address some of these that represent this clash of racial realities that oftentimes happens to people of color.
Here's another one from an award-winning journalist, Thomas Lee.
He says, I went to Fridley to interview the president of a large manufacturing company.
I arrived a few minutes before noon and told the receptionist at the front desk I was looking for the president's executive assistant.
Oh, are you delivering food?
She asked.
It wasn't the first time I was mistaken for a Chinese food delivery guy.
In college, I had arrived at my girlfriend's dorm with dinner, and the front desk dude assumed just that.
I was embarrassed to be sure, but let it go.
That's the burden of being a Chinese American with a pechant for baseball caps, jeans, and takeout food.
Yet the receptionist's inquiry stunned me.
I was wearing a dress shirt, black slacks and a dress shirt.
True, I was sporting a backpack and sunglasses, but how many food delivery guys whip out Kung Pao chicken from a Gap bag?
After realizing her error, the receptionist offered a rather clumsy explanation.
I only ask because the executive assistant always orders food, she said.
Nice try, lady.
At least she didn't speak extra slowly and offer a tip.
Now, this is the experience of many Asian Americans that in classrooms, what happens is that their white classmates speak real slowly to them as if they don't speak English or have good command of it.
These are other questions.
Have you ever mistaken a person of color for a service worker?
I think most of us have.
And what does it say about us that we do that?
Or as a white person, have you ever been mistaken for a service worker?
What were your reactions?
How did you handle the situation?
Did you make up an excuse?
Were you offended?
When microaggressions occur and you try to point it out to the perpetrator, one of the dominant reactions is defensiveness.
And people try to cover up rather than recover.
And we'll talk about these issues.
Now, one of the things that I will again point out is that if I was to give you a survey about stereotypes of African Americans, Asian Americans, Latino Hispanic Americans, and so forth, most of us would cognitively say, no, I don't believe that.
No, they aren't more lazy.
No, they aren't more lazy.
You know, on and on.
But it is the unconscious, insidious forms of bias that are outside the level of conscious awareness that comes out in the behaviors and actions that we experience here.
The, there are, you know, one of the things that I would, these are, really, actually, that should be number four.
These are four examples of the macro impact of what I believe to be the working of microaggressions.
The death of Trayvon Martin.
I believe that George Zimmerman, and this is not a conscious belief that he might have, but thought that he was a suspicious looking person up to no good.
The death of Michael Brown, dangerous and violent.
Blacks are dangerous and violent.
The death of Eric Gardner, and why he was freed by the grand jury that African Americans are less trustworthy.
These are all, even the stand your ground rules, favor, you know, you can, police officers oftentimes justify their shooting issues.
My, my life was in danger.
I feared for my life.
That situation actually gives cover to potential microaggressions because many people fear African American men.
And so the stand your ground and the shooting, that this gives cover and excuse for these issues to occur here.
Microaggressions are brief and everyday daily verbal, behavioral, or environmental indignities.
They can be both intentional or unintentional.
Our research concentrates primarily on the unintentional forms of microaggression because we find that they are much more powerful and potent in terms of creating disparities.
They communicate hostile, derogatory or negative slights and validations and insults to an individual or group because of their marginalized or socially devalued status in our society.
Microaggressions are subtle, stunning, often automatic verbal and nonverbal exchanges that are put downs.
They occur quickly.
In fact, when microaggressions occur to me, not only am I stunned and think about, did what I think happened really happen?
By the time I think, trying to think about what I'm going to do about it, it's over.
The situation has, you know, and that's what some of our studies find that over 50% of people of color do nothing primarily because it's over by the time they try to think about a response that they would have.
They're described as subtle insults delivered through dismissive looks and gestures, tones of voice towards marginalized groups in our society.
Simply stated, microaggressions are brief everyday exchanges.
In the classroom, students often describe microaggressions as a pattern of being overlooked, under-respected, and devalued because of their race.
And microaggressions happen in the classroom.
Our studies also are beginning to show that a lot of microaggressions are delivered by well-intentioned professors.
More so, oftentimes, than the classmates that occur or occur in this particular situation.
When they occur, they do several things.
They present a highly charged situation.
Now, people of color, when they experience or hear a microaggression, know what it is.
Our well-intentioned, many of our well-intentioned white brothers and sisters have no idea what just happened,
but they sense something wrong.
They sense the tension, the anxiety, but they cannot put their finger on what has just happened.
And if you are not just a student, but a professor in which a microaggression occurs,
and you want to make it a learning opportunity, if you do not understand and cannot put your finger on what a microaggression,
what just happened, then you can't facilitate a learning opportunity for your students when they come on.
There's another interesting observation I've made that students of color often talks about.
When a microaggression occurs to, let's say, in this case, a Latino student, and if you really had a videotape taping the reaction of the room,
it goes completely beyond the head of many white students.
But students of color will look at one another.
They make eye contact.
It's almost like, yes, that really happened.
See, that's one of the things that we noted.
When a microaggression occurs, the people who have the power will say, no, you're just being over too sensitive.
Now, the validation that occurs that maintains your sanity is that you can see the eyes of students of color making contact with each other,
and we know what it means.
That really happened.
What are we going to do, or what are you going to do about it?
This is a really important element.
In fact, one of the most common responses that I have gotten about the work that we've done creating the taxonomy on microaggressions has been that they have thanked me and my research team for the work on microaggressions,
because it now provides them with a language to describe their experiences,
and that they no longer believe that they are crazy, that this is something that is going on.
That's the power, because when I talk about microaggressions to people of color, it's not new to them.
They've experienced it, but it feels so good, doesn't it, to hear it and to be able to label it.
Now, many of our white brothers and sisters don't like it, because in some sense, if they accept the definition of microaggressions,
they have to entertain the notion that I have done it.
Now, if it was simply changing a behavior or act, that would be okay, but it's more than that.
You know, and this is one thing that I don't like education and training teams teaching people what a microaggression is,
preventing them from doing it and doing something else.
The primary reason is that microaggressions are not isolated from the worldviews that one has.
In fact, microaggressions are reflections of worldviews of superiority, inferiority, inclusion, exclusion, normality, abnormality.
But they are just simply outside the level of awareness of the individual here.
Like I was saying, perpetrators, whether teachers or students, are often unaware that a microaggressive event has occurred.
And this is part of what we need to do in education and training.
Gender microaggressions.
A female resident physician wearing a stethoscope is mistaken by medical students for a nurse.
This happens at the Columbia Medical School where, you know, women, interns and residents always say that.
That they're always approached by, may I speak with the doctor?
I am the doctor.
What?
Really?
You know, this type of, and the hidden message is that women should occupy nurturing and not decision-making roles that they are less capable than men.
And this is something conditioned in women from the time they are born.
I mean, I, this morning, again, I shared with individuals those early studies about, in elementary school, pre-K through 12, where teachers would ask a question and the students would raise their hands.
Interesting.
Interesting.
The study found that the majority of teachers asked the male students to provide the answers.
And this was true even for a female teacher, that they tended to select male students to provide the answer.
Now, this does several things.
It elevates the, what is it, the status and intelligence of men.
Males have the answer.
And it tends to say women are less competent and capable.
And these are the messages that occur constantly in microaggressions so that they may become internalized or operate in such a way that Claude Steele calls stereotype threat, which is not an internalization process, but they can have those impact here.
Male students in private refer to a female teacher as bitchy, while male counterparts are described as decisive and confident teachers.
This is not just in academia, by the way.
In all the work that I've done with business and industry, they give tons of, women employees give tons of examples.
One example they gave is that if a white male manager comes into the team and is angry at the team for not making a deadline, he will pound the table and says,
no, we're going to work through the weekend unless you're able to produce that report on my desk by tomorrow morning.
And what they say is that people may grumble, but they'll say, what a decisive, forceful leader we have.
I want to be on his team.
When a woman does the very same thing and pounds a table, have that on my report and on and on, what a bitch.
You know, that's the perception.
Or even thirdly, if you have a black man, do the same thing.
What a hostile, angry, impulsive, out of control.
This is something very important that we need to understand, that even when the behaviors might be the same,
they are perceived quite differently from certain forms of bias.
Another one, sexual orientation.
You've heard this term before.
One of my former students, Kevin Nadal, Dr. Kevin Nadal, wrote a book called That's So Gay,
Microaggressions Directed at LGBT Individuals.
But the term, that's so gay, is frequently used in education.
You know, among young students to describe things as being weird, strange, deviant.
This one gets me.
You know, being in counseling and therapy.
A lesbian client reluctantly discloses her sexual orientation to a straight counselor trainee by saying that she was, quote, into women, end quote.
The counselor indicates she is not shocked by the disclosure because he once worked with a client who was, quote, into dogs, end quote.
Now, you know, he's trying to reassure this client that he can work with her.
Do you understand?
And yet, the analogy he uses is bestiality.
You know, the equation of sexual orientation with pathology that goes on here.
Other socially devalued groups, like I was indicating, you've heard this.
When students bargain over the price of a book, they'll say, don't try to Jew me down.
You know, Jews are stingy and so forth.
This one is very interesting.
A blind student reports that teachers, staff, and fellow students raise their voices when speaking to him in class.
This is common among visually impaired blind individuals.
Richard Keller, director of disability at Teachers College, is completely blind.
Legally, you know, just has no sight.
He says that when he is introduced by others as the director, they will come up to him and say, good morning, Richard. How are you?
And he simply responds by saying, I can hear perfectly well, thank you.
You know, because what is happening here is that the person's disability becomes defined to every aspect of the person's life and functioning.
These are some micro aggressive themes that people, you know, students, staff, and faculty, women, and people of color report.
Experiencing the campus climate as isolating, alienating, extremely stressful, risky, and invalidating.
This is, you know, a lot of this work comes from Dan Salazano.
Is that how you pronounce it?
Amado at UCLA in terms of campus climate and the hostility that goes on.
They often being the only one that leads to feeling of isolation and loneliness.
And this happens in the business world as well.
And the feeling of being the only one and isolated increases as you move up the occupational ladder.
Because fewer and fewer of us are at the top.
They lack mentors who possess knowledge of the minority experience.
They have their intelligence, competence, and scholarship devalued and considered illegitimate.
They have their racial or gender identities assailed.
They experience elevated levels of stress and distress.
They are subjected to what they call bias criteria for graduation, promotion, and tenure decisions.
And they have many, and this comes primarily from black faculty that talk to us.
They have many more white students and colleagues question their qualifications or credentials or status to hold the title professor.
These are things that occur.
And they are never said, you know, as to what's going on.
One black participant in our study talked about when he was lecturing in his class,
that this white female student would constantly look through her book and say,
I can't find that here.
What are you, you're giving us that information?
Where is it in the textbook?
And he felt that this was, unless it was written in the textbook,
his credibility was something that was being questioned here.
There are six basic assumptions that I want to quickly talk to you about that form the basis of microaggressions.
One of them is that we have all been socialized into a society in which there exists individual institutional and societal biases associated with race, gender, sexual orientation.
If you look at the history of the United States on issues of race and racism, it is the history of racism.
That's strong.
People get sometimes very angry with me.
But I tell them that racism is not individual acts here.
How else do you explain the enslavement of African Americans, the taking away of land from the indigenous people of this country, the incarceration of Japanese Americans?
These were whole governmental actions.
And as a result, it is very important that we realistically acknowledge what our history is like.
Now, in all good and all fairness, we also have to balance it with the issue that there has always in the United States been groups and individuals who have been anti-racist, fought against it, so that there is a balance.
But what I'm trying to do is get people to realize that these things happen and that we, in some sense, live in a society in which many of those biases and assumptions are communicated to us through the mass media, through education, through significant others in our lives.
Not necessarily by words, but by actions and deeds in which this occurs.
And this leads to really the second basic assumption.
None of us are immune from inheriting the biases of our ancestors, institutions, and society.
And I make this a very important point because for me to believe that I have been born and raised in the United States for decades without inheriting the racial biases of this society, my ancestors and the institutions, I believe is the height of naivete or arrogance.
And that these things are important for us, and that these things are important for us to begin to acknowledge, to break down the defensiveness when we are confronted with individuals who tell us that we have just hurt them through a microaggression.
Because, and we try to defend it against, no, I'm a good, moral, decent individual.
Now, I believe that we are, I believe that all of us are good, moral, decent individuals, but we have been socially conditioned and inherit biases that hurt others.
And rather than, you know, confiding that, if somehow we can begin to acknowledge this, this becomes very important for us to look at.
The third basic assumption is that it is not old fashioned racism, sexism, and heterosexism that is most harmful to people of color, women, LGBT persons,
but the contemporary forms known as microaggressions.
Most of us, like I was saying, when we think about racism, we think about the overt racists, the white supremacists, the Klan, the skinheads.
These are the individuals that we think about.
And granted, these individuals can do harm, but they don't do the harm that microaggressions do, and I'll get to that very shortly.
And I don't ever want to meet a white supremacist by myself, but I am less really scared of that individual than the impact of well intentioned individuals.
The fourth one is that the characteristics of these forms of bias are their invisible, unintentional, and subtle nature, usually outside the level of conscious awareness.
Remember, in our taxonomy, we identified three forms of microaggressions.
A microassault that is most common to old fashioned racism, calling someone a Jap, a chink, nigger, or something like that.
They're direct overt and fairly conscious.
Microinsult, which strikes at the core of one's racial ethnic identity.
And microinvalidation, which invalidates the experiential reality of the person of color.
What we find is that the most damaging types are those that are outside the level.
In fact, there's been a number of studies done about, you know, and people saying that they have an easier time dealing with an overt racist who is clear about the status of people of color than a white liberal who you don't know where they're at.
And the field, and Jack Davideos' work is really crucial to this.
Again, read some of his work where he finds that, you know, when team productivity, I'm digressing now.
In team productivity, if you have, let's say, a racist and an employee of color working together and time them in terms of how quickly they solve the problem, then they have two individuals who are of mixed race but are working together and don't have bias or prejudice.
And one white liberal who has implicit bias and attitude working with a person of color.
The groups that have the least amount of bias solve a problem quickest.
The group that solves a problem second is the overt racist and the white, I mean overt racist and the person of color.
The ones that solve it, you know, at least are, you know, the individuals who experience themselves as good.
And when they ask them, well, why is it that you had so many, and the employee of color would say, well, I don't know, we were dancing around all these, you were wasting time.
As opposed to the overt racist, I know where you come from, you know where I come from, this is how we solve the problem.
Which was a very interesting study that they did.
Racial, gender, and sexual orientation microaggressions create psychological dilemmas for the perpetrator and recipient because they represent a clash of racial, gender, and sexual orientation realities.
And again, I go to the fact that the racial reality of people of color is simply different.
If you ask people of color and ask white citizens how far we have improved in race relations, the numerical percent gap is huge.
You know, during the OJ Simpson trial, remember?
When they asked the public, white and black, whether police misconduct came into it, overwhelming 90% of white people said, no, police misconduct, no.
But African Americans, over 80% entertained the notion that police misconduct has occurred.
You're seeing different racial realities being played out.
And racial microaggressions, and going back, for example, to the two opening narratives, this black man is saying that it happens.
And most people around him say, oh, you're exaggerating.
You're just oversensitive.
You're paranoid.
And the last one, microaggressions create a hostile and invalidating climate for marginalized groups.
Because it saps their spiritual and psychic energies, causes psychological difficulties and problems, and creates things.
Now, this is, I'm going to stop here after this slide, because I just got noticed that we've got a Q&A session coming up.
But this is why, when we first published the article, and our taxonomy on microaggressions, many of my white colleagues wrote in letters to the American psychologists saying that our research team was making a mountain out of a molehill.
That a put down insult that a white man experiences is no different from that of a person of color.
And we went back to the research literature, and we outlined a number of different things.
What makes microaggressions based upon gender or race so harmful is that microaggressions are constant and continual without an end date.
If someone is rude to you, not because of your race, it's over.
You're disturbed.
You're angry.
It's over.
But for people of color, it's a constant experience we have from the time we are born until the time we die.
Microaggressions are cumulative.
Now, you know, yeah, why should I get upset when someone says, Daryl, do you speak good English?
I mean, Daryl, they may see you as not a part of this country, but let go of it.
It's such an insignificant, trivial thing.
Don't make a mountain out of a molehill.
What we tried to do is that microaggressions are cumulative, and anyone can break the camels, the straw that breaks the camel's back.
That it's an ongoing, cumulative.
Microaggressions are difficult because you have to discern double messages that are being sent.
No, I didn't mean that at all.
Why are you so upset?
You know, and by virtue of that, you create another microaggression, which is invalidating one's experiential reality.
Microaggressions are constant reminders of a person's second-class status in this nature, and you get tired of it, having to constantly be put there.
Microaggressions symbolize past historic injustices.
The incarceration of Japanese Americans, the enslavement of Afro, all of these symbolize.
And to tell me, Daryl, let go of it, is to tell your Jewish brother and sister, forget the Holocaust.
That is what the important thing, and that's what makes microaggressions so harmful and damaging.
Okay, thank you very much.
I appreciate you.
Thank you.
For more, please visit us at stanford.edu.
