Welcome, everyone. This is the second in the Department of Mathematics lecture series.
It's all about math. My name is Kumar Murthy and I'm the chair of the Department of Mathematics.
Many of you will be familiar with the department, either because you're students taking courses in mathematics
or faculty interacting through seminars and other events, but for those of you who are new to the department
and perhaps even to the university, let me say that the department, together with the Fields Institute for Mathematical Sciences,
has a formidable presence in research in mathematics and in related fields.
And we also undertake a very large teaching mission. The department teaches about 14,000 students a year,
which is a very significant proportion of the total student population at U of T.
And through this series, this lecture series, it's all about math, we hope to reach out to the public,
including alumni, students, faculty, and to the general public, to share with them some of the amazing intellectual treasure
that is rooted in mathematics and related fields. More and more of our life is being touched by mathematical ideas
and is being shaped with the help of mathematics. Whether it is the linear algebra on which Google and other search engines are built,
the polynomials over finite fields that make your CDs and DVDs work, or the elliptic curves that enable secure electronic transactions,
mathematics is certainly finding its way into more and more aspects of daily life.
Whether we take up math as a subject of study and specialization or not, it's probably a good idea to develop some kind of appreciation
of the way in which it is affecting and reshaping our world. It's all about math. This series aims to bring speakers
who can shed light on the bigger perspective of what mathematics is to help us develop a broader appreciation.
And today's speaker is no exception to that. John Horton Conway, born in 1937 in England, is a prolific mathematician
who has made deep contributions to the theory of finite groups, knot theory, number theory, combinatorial game theory,
and coding theory, to name a few. He's also well known in the field of recreational mathematics, notably the invention of the game of life.
He has an amazing ability to express deep mathematical ideas in ordinary language that makes them accessible to everyone.
Conway is currently professor of mathematics at Princeton University. Over the years he has received many, many honors,
in particular the Burwick Prize in 1971. He was elected a fellow of the Royal Society of London in 1981,
and was the first recipient of the Polya Prize in 1987. He is the subject of a recent biography,
Genius at Play, by Siobhan Roberts, who is here somewhere. Yes, over there, yes. Published in Canada by Penguin Random House.
And I believe Siobhan actually has a few copies of the book available, so after the lecture you can purchase them
and have John autograph them for you. So let us then sit back and prepare to enjoy a wonderful treat
as John Conway speaks to us about surreal numbers.
Okay, thank you. It's a little bit hard to follow an introduction like that. So, well, just thank you.
What I'm going to tell you is really, I think, the greatest surprise of my mathematical life, I'm going to tell you about it,
I started off trying to understand something of the game of Go, and ended up discovering the largest collection of numbers,
well, inventing, somebody said, discovering more numbers than anybody else ever did.
Which, since that includes Cantor and Dedekind and various other people, is quite something.
And I think it's deserved, actually. I just, I mentioned, I discovered them. I didn't invent them or anything.
I'm firmly on the sort of Platonist side of the philosophical spectrum for mathematics.
What I was trying to understand was the game of Go. Now, I never did succeed in understanding the game of Go.
Let me say that straight away. But I noticed one or two things about it.
It's played on a huge, well, comparatively huge, 19 by 19 square, roughly.
It's not actually square. The Japanese really make it deliberately just a little bit non-square, but never mind, it doesn't matter.
And you place your Go counters, called stones, on intersections of this board.
I'm just, one player places black stones, and this color is called black, whatever color it actually is.
And the other color white. And, well, there are certain rules.
It doesn't very much matter what the rules are. The rules are actually quite difficult to understand because, well, because they're difficult to understand.
After a time, most of the board is filled up. I'll just sort of squiggle on it.
Now, suppose we're at this situation where there are four empty regions, which I've labeled A, B, C, and D.
Then the rules of the game force you effectively. You can only put a counter in one particular place, and that will either be in A or in B or in C or in D.
And your move only affects the region, only directly affects, anyway, the region that you put your counter in.
If you're the white player, you put a white counter in. If you're a black player, you put the black counter in.
And you leave the other ones alone. Now, that gives rise or exemplifies the notion of a sum of games.
So let me draw you another picture, which is supposed to illustrate the sum of chess and do you call it checkers here or drafts as we call it in England?
Checkers, okay. Checkers, okay. So here's the board for one of these things, you know.
This is the sort of checkers game. And then here's the board for the chess game set up as they are fairly near the beginning.
I'm no good at drawing people. So I will pretend the two people have just left the room for the moment.
The players are called left and right. Oh, sorry. That's the player called right. That's his chair.
I have a slight convention that left is male and right is female. They're sometimes called lefty and Rita.
There's nothing prejudicial or no statement is made of any kind by giving them sexes.
It just helps with the pronouns. You say he, she, and you know which player you're talking about rather than saying the player left and the player right and so on.
Okay. And the way you play the sum of these two games chess and checkers or checkers and chess is when it's your move, you make a move that would be legal for you.
If that were the entire game and you leave the other game alone and you leave the other game alone and if you know then your opponent chooses possibly independently of whatever you chose behaves in the same way makes a move which would be legal for her.
Let me just sort of try and introduce these conventions a little bit at the time if that were the entire game.
And you might have a situation where one player makes five consecutive moves in the checkers game and doesn't touch the chess game at all.
And then suddenly notices, oh, it developed into a rather threatening position in the chess game. I'd better make a move there.
I hope you understand this. The moves you make, if there's a camera just focused on one particular game, it sees a rather unusual game where the players do not move alternately.
Fine. Now what happened was I was in Cambridge University at the time and then the British go champion became a research student at Cambridge in the math department.
And he used to bring in his go playing friends occasionally and they played go. Okay.
And Cambridge being what it was, people would stand around and discuss the moves and try and work out why this one was better than that one and so on.
What it did for me was decide to study what I later called the theory of partisan sums of or sums of partisan games, which I intended to study for quite some time, but never got around to it.
The theory of sums of sums of games was first developed for what are nowadays thought of as nim-like games independently by Peter Michael Grundy in England and Roland Sprague in Germany.
And what they found out was that any impartial game, impartial is now a technical term, it means the players have the same legal moves as each other.
Not very many games have that property, neither checkers nor chess does. The players have exactly the same legal moves.
These two games have a rather different property, which is their moves are related by a sort of symmetry.
If you turn the board around, you know, roughly speaking, you'll see that the black moves are really rather like the white moves.
But impartial means rather more than that. It means that the black moves are exactly the same as the white moves, the black legal moves.
Anyway, for impartial games, the theory says, the Sprague Grundy theory says that every impartial game is equivalent in a certain sense to a nim-heap.
And then, in particular, that applies to the sum of two nim-heaps. And that's that. So there is, and since nim-heaps are characterised by integers, non-negative integers to be more precise,
that means there must be an addition operation on integers, which, you know, it's a kind of sum. It's not the usual sum.
For instance, the sum of a nim-heap of size 3 and a nim-heap of size 5 is equivalent to a nim-heap of size 6.
We say the nim-sum of 3 and 5 is 6, another kind of sum, or just 3 nim-5 is 6.
And once you know that operation on integers, and then exactly who wins a single nim-heap, you know everything.
Perhaps I should say that the rule in nim that I'm treating is the so-called normal play rule, which is that if you don't have a move, and it's your turn to move, you lose.
And so who wins a single nim-heap? Oh, well, I should tell you, in nim, it's the last player who can move that wins,
because his opponent then has no moves, and until then, each player has a legal move.
And for a single nim-heap, it's very easy to see who wins. It's the player about to move if that nim-heap doesn't have size 0,
and it's the player not about to move if it does. Anyway, so that's enough about impartial games.
That theory was discovered by these two people independently, essentially between 1930 and 1940.
I'm not sure who came first. Okay. But I wanted to, I had wanted to generalize that theory until it discussed what I called partisan games.
I originally called them unimpartial. Impartial is a bad word to use in mathematics, because it suggests it means not partial,
and in mathematics there are all sorts of partial things, and it usually means a little piece of a full thing,
and it doesn't mean that over here. So I decided to change the name, and I think it was Richard Guy who suggested partisan,
and partisan, which is really quite a nice one. So the opposite of partisan is impartial. Partisan means that the moves are allowed to depend on who's making them.
Okay. Well, it was the greatest surprise in my life when I started studying these games with the intention of learning about Go, and instead I discovered this enormous world of numbers,
which I call surreal numbers, which I call surreal numbers. No, I didn't call it that. I'm trying to claim the credit.
Donald Knuth wrote a little book called Surreal Numbers about the theory. And it's an excellent name because it suggests several things.
The two most important things is that in some sense they are super the real numbers. The real numbers are sort of writ large, you might say.
That's one meaning. The other meaning is it carries a hint that they are a little bit bizarre. That meaning is also appropriate.
Okay. Okay. Well, that's enough introduction. I hope some of you know something about Dedekin's construction of the real numbers.
It doesn't very much matter if you don't, but I'll just sketch it briefly.
Dedekin takes the rational numbers as given because they're distinctly easier to understand than the real numbers.
And then he says each irrational number cuts the real line between the rational numbers that are smaller than it and the rational numbers that are greater than it.
Let's take the number pi, for instance. Well, pi is greater than 3.
So we put 3 on the left. Oh, and it's, of course, a stronger remark is that it's greater than 0.
Oh, yes. And it's also greater than minus 73. And, oh, I forgot all these fractions. It's greater than 3 and 1 eighth.
That's a tighter inequality. Anyway, we put all the irrational numbers that are less than pi on the left.
This is a so-called Dedekin cut. And the numbers, the rational numbers that are greater than pi on the right.
And then we've got Dedekin's way of thinking about pi. If you sort of understand the logical theory of the rational numbers, and you understand set theory, which is no mean understanding, then this gives you an understanding of the real numbers.
What happens with the surreal numbers, and I didn't design it like this, I just found this to be the case, is that you do Dedekin's sections right from the start.
You don't start with the rational numbers. Forget the rational numbers. Okay? I hope you've obeyed that. You don't know anything about the rational numbers anymore.
Because... And then you just listen to me. And you... Every number... When I say number, I mean surreal number. I didn't invent that word. I wish I had. It's a wonderful name.
It's a wonderful name. Every surreal number is got... Every number, let's say, is obtained by taking some previously known real numbers... Surreal numbers, I'm sorry, and putting them on the left.
And some other ones and putting them on the right. And then every number that you put on the left must be less than every number that you put on the right.
So we have to learn what less than means. And then that determines a number, a new number. How can that possibly be? This guy must be talking nonsense.
You see, how does the business get started? You're very quiet.
Well, what happens... Oh, by the way, I should say that if you're putting the numbers a and b and c on the left and d and e and f on the right, that's the notation I use for the resulting number.
So, open curly bracket, a, b, c dot dot dot, slash, down slash, vertical slash, d e f dot dot dot, and so on.
Well, initially... Remember, always we have to put some previously investigated numbers on the left and some others on the right.
uh initially there aren't any previously investigated numbers so the earliest number
we build so to speak is this one nothing on the left nothing on the right that's the number that
i call zero that's the definition well it's one definition of zero good now i've got zero
uh i haven't told you yet what less than means and i'm not going to for just a moment
um but it's clear already from what i have said that this is a number because every number on the
left is less than every number on the right there aren't any numbers on the right so i don't have to
check any cases at all to check the statement i just made so this is a number now oh i'm sorry
what a pity i wanted to put it over here
this is a number that i call one every now and then i say that one is the simplest number greater than zero
zero is equivalent so to speak to this notation now i'm going to try your patience quite a lot
in this lecture by leaving things hanging um until i can later explain things and this one
is the one i call minus one which is the simplest number less than zero
um okay well for the moment let's understand that if we uh define a number by some particular case of
this general thing then that number will turn out to be greater than the numbers on the left
and less than the numbers on the right and then oh yes well we can we can get going now you see
there's a number here which in which zero and one are on the left oh sorry and nothing is on the right
this is this is the simplest number greater than zero and one but if it's greater than zero and one
then if all goes well it will be sorry if it's greater than one it will be greater than zero and one
that's that sort of statement has to be proved it's one of the irritating things i mentioned
that we'll assume before it's proved so t two is equally the simplest number greater than one
um okay numbers have lots of different definitions that's a crucial way in which the theory i'm expounding
differs from you know the standard sort of theory uh over here uh we have uh this number the simplest
number less than minus one which is also less than zero so i could give it another name analogously to
this and this number is minus two and in fact the whole theory is symmetric uh you know you can sort
of almost begin to guess now i hope what the definition of minus a number is here
zero and one a number and we will be able to prove that zero is less than one when we've defined less
less than and this is then a number it turns out that a good name for it is a half now this business you
can't just do what you like here although i'm appearing to do what i like here um there are some numbers here
uh zero slash a half and a half slash one uh zero slash a half is a quarter a half slash one is three quarters
you might be a little bit worried and say where is a third gone to well this hasn't been born yet it
gets born a lot later than the numbers we've just mentioned for quite some time
um okay so after quite some time that then we we get uh a tree an infinite tree
um which looks like this oh i'll go quite some distance out here
um that too
um
you can probably appreciate already from what i've written where the general number in this lot goes
to but it doesn't stop uh
uh
over here there's a number uh which is got by putting zero one and two dot dot dot on the left
and nothing on the right that is the simplest number that's greater than all positive integers
it's actually the simplest number greater than all positive integers i understand that the french
didn't make the mistake the english made in their mathematical language um positive the word for
positive in french positive includes zero um and i propose to use that word in mathematical english too
so the positive integers are the ones i've written down here i hate saying non-negative integers to define
things by a negative property by saying they don't have a negative property is really awful they have
a positive property okay um so this number is a number that wasn't discovered by humanity for
really quite a long time it's the first of cantor's infinite ordeal numbers
okay everybody else stopped counting before they got to omega cantor carried on okay if we carry on down
here we'll get uh the number uh zero slash one a half a quarter comma dot dot dot dot um it turns out
when we've defined multiplication oh my dear i haven't defined even addition yet oh well i've got a lot to fill
in uh that when we've defined multiplication it turns out that this number is the multiplicative inverse of
omega now cantor never defined uh inverses for his ordinals he didn't even define subtraction
unless it just happened to happen that you know but um the first number well that's that's uh
greater than omega is not one two dot dot dot omega slash blank and this is omega plus one and we could
strike out all the finite ones now because if you've got omega on the right it's greater than
not one two dot dot dot dot so this this next number here omega plus one is equally omega slash blank
oh you can't see it can you tell me can you see it now
yeah okay uh okay well you probably can't see the left hand side of the page now but you already know
roughly what it looks like um okay if we alternate going left right here and then left and then right
and then left and then right zumpf we get the number zero
one on the right i go back and put a half on the left i go back and put three quarters on the right i go
back and put five eighths on the left i go back and put whatever number of sixteenths it is
eleven sixteenths on the right and so on that number is two thirds
so two thirds does get born in this system it just doesn't get born at any of the finite stages
okay equally one third does equally pi and the square root of two and lots of other numbers that
you know and i trust you love but as well as those oh yes i better sort of draw the surreal line
surreal line is a lot bigger than the real line
here's zero and then one and then these are all spaced at distance one from each other and
here's negative one and so on and then here is omega now omega is not the limit of these numbers
oh dearie no how naive of you uh omega minus one comes before omega and it's greater than all these
finite integers as well and so is omega minus two and so on and not only that how about this number
zero one two dot dot dot dot omega a half omega oh sorry i didn't say that omega omega minus one
omega minus two dot dot dot and that's a half of omega
um and then there's a quarter omega and an eighth of omega and so on and then there's uh this number zero one
uh and guess what this is it's a square root of omega now you've got your taste of what the surreal numbers
are like uh they form an absolutely enormous world of numbers
when i discovered them which i remind you was an accident i was trying to understand the game of go
um i went round in a sort of permanent daydream for about six weeks
um every now and then i enter that day daydream again but this it usually wears off after about five
minutes now but um initially i felt like uh who is it stout quarters in a poem by keiths i think
um you know he walked across the continental part of america it's really in the southern part of latin america
i think and he got to seeing the the pacific ocean and he was monarch of all he survived surveyed
uh here was this enormous world of numbers and nobody had ever seen it before john i said to myself
you know what you're looking at now what you're imagining nobody else has ever seen
uh i fancy uh that cantor had a similar feeling when he discovered the infinite ordinal numbers
uh just imagine what that was like it was must have been a greater feeling i think than the feeling i had
and the feeling i had was pretty exhilarating i'll tell you um but for cantor nobody else had ever counted
beyond the infinite just think of that you know there's an amazingly large world of ordinal numbers
and here's the guy who discovered them you know cantor went crazy he was institutionalized several
times during his life he died in a lunatic asylum in halley in 1918
um
um it's not terribly meaningful to ask what made him crazy uh it's the blame has sometimes been put on
chronica chronica basically thought that uh cantor's work on the infinite numbers was sort of nonsense
uh it's not a feeling we have nowadays but it was a legitimate feeling at the time you know
chronica made this famous statement god made the integers all else is the work of man
um and he attacked um cantor really quite viciously uh for his mathematical ideas
uh it has usually been assumed that there was anti-semitism mixed in with that uh it's interesting
and it's possible cantor's name after all is jewish uh however it's not as obvious as all as as all of
that cantor's grandparents had actually converted to christianity and cantor himself
one of the interesting things about it is he was very interested in scholastic exercises
uh the kind of stuff which we characterize mischaracterized probably we caricature
as when we ask how many angels can dance on the head of a pin or something or on the point of a pin
maybe um uh you know an intense preoccupation with infinitesimal numbers and
also conversely with infinite numbers um i would feel that uh well let me say this
cantor was quite a pugnacious person he had a great argument with veronese
the famous italian well really the founder of the italian school of algebraic geometry
um veronese had occasion to introduce infinitesimal numbers into his work essentially
now i don't think i'll follow that up i was going to say a few sentences about the way in which they
used in algebraic geometry um and cantor thought analogies to chronica that uh veronese's infinitesimal
numbers were just nonsense uh that's really because he had discovered the infinite numbers and they were
real things you know the uh well i've not i've been speaking about his ordinal numbers but his cardinal numbers
uh follow on and many people here of the cardinal numbers before the order numbers and the cardinal
numbers are the sizes of real mathematical sets uh and veronese's numbers are just formal infinitesimal numbers
and you know we talk about abstract nonsense in mathematics and formal nonsense and so on
uh that's what very nice these numbers were and cantor said so in no uncertain terms um okay
so i happened to sort of in a way uh you know cantor is one of my really great mathematical heroes we all
ought to have cantor as a mathematical hero he has had more influence on the way mathematics is done
than anyone else not only that his influence is not just on you know the thing that you might know
about the creation of set theory and we discuss everything in terms of sets nowadays we formalize
mathematics in terms of sets but cantor founded the deutsche mathematische gesellschaft he founded the
international mathematical union which conducts the international congresses um he wanted to make
sure that i mean he socialized unionized perhaps i should say mathematics um
he wanted to make sure that the international congresses particularly the first one would be a success
the international congress it wasn't at all clear that the french would come canto uh went and visited
poincaré and poincaré said effectively well i'll come but i can't speak for my colleagues i'll try to
persuade them to come and then when the congress opened no french delegation that was a terrible thing
i'm tearing up now because after a time the french delegation marched in with
pangaré holding the flag and about 20 people came in and everybody burst into spontaneous ovation
anyway that's an aspect of cantor's influence on mathematics that you might not have been aware of
when i speak to people normally they don't know that they know about his set theory
they know about all sorts of other things
so you'll have gathered that i quite admire cantor
in 1988 or 9 i think it was i visited berlin for a time and
at that time the wall was still up the berlin wall
and i'm sorry i think these stories are more interesting than the mathematics that i was going
to go on so i'll tell them don't worry too much um yes i visited berlin
the um
the wall hadn't yet come down
while i was in berlin
uh in west berlin uh in west berlin which i remind you was entirely surrounded by east germany
and in particular east berlin
um
they said to me would you like to go and speak at humboldt university that was the east university in
east berlin
uh while you're here i think i said something about my interests in cantor and so on i can't remember
i certainly did later so i said yes i would like to go to humboldt
got in
one of the s-bahn trains the so to speak the subway system in berlin that was interesting very interesting
uh the tracks were used by both east berlin trains and west berlin trains
the east berlin trains only stopped at east berlin stations the west berlin trains only stopped at west
berlin stations
i was in a train once which was west berlin train and i was going from somewhere in west berlin to
somewhere else in west berlin and the train suddenly stopped as an east berlin station
and the doors which were automatic opened and we froze because only comparatively you know a few
months earlier or something somebody had tried to escape from the uh from the east you know by one
of these trains and being shot so we just froze in our seats and i should say there's armed guards ran
up and stood outside the the train doors then after a time mercifully the doors closed again and we went
off i there was one place where you could legally change provided you had the right pieces of paper
and on the occasion i spoke in humboldt university i changed there i've forgotten which station it was
um and i had an invitation you know from an official paper with various stuff stamped and signed and god
knows what else and i gave my talk in humboldt university and while i was there i mentioned my interest in
cantor and they said oh well while you're here would you like to go to halle to see where he died
this was a sort of repetition of you know while you're in west berlin would you like to go to humboldt
university and now we're i'm in humboldt university would you like to go to hell so i said yes i'd quite
like that like that and now this was a little bit tricky we piled into a fairly large car from the east
of course east berlin you were allowed to go into the rest of east germany but there was a place where
you know this was stopped and somebody asked us for information you know i just kept very quiet um
you know and anyway we drove off we got then to this uh former lunatic asylum
which was now some kind of um warehouse or something uh we peered in the windows the windows were dusty
we saw nothing that reminded us of cantor you know except the building itself we we went and had some
cafe and kukran and some local little eating place and then we drove back my god what is the time
i think i was told to aim for roundabout now wasn't i uh well i didn't aim
i was a sort of undirected missile and i'm sorry about it but anyway it was interesting
the surreal numbers are absolutely fantastic things knuth wrote a little book about it before i did
called surreal numbers and i recommend you to look at that if you want to do seriously there was a
special session of the joint meetings most recent joint meetings which were in seattle i think and i
forgot to go um anyway um you know what the surreal numbers look like now oh i didn't tell you how
to add them i will tell you how to add them forgive me for telling you how to add them um it's the
way you add games uh that's surreal numbers really are games in a game you have a number of left options
and a number of right options in in the game a half zero is the left option the only left option one is
the only right option numbers are games um if you want to add two games
both given by definitions of this type gl slash gr
you either move in g and leave h alone the move you make in g must be one of the left options from g the
you know you know or you leave g alone and move in h
and if you're the right player you do the same except that you make a move legal for right
if um
yes i was just wondering whether i can possibly manage to define what it means for g to be less than or equal
to h it's a little bit tedious but it's all these definitions have the property
that they are always the simplest thing you'd expect you see what do we know about g plus h
and think think of numbers i mean but it's working for games as well
um what we know about g is that it's bigger than gl and less than gr oh so g plus h should be bigger than
gl plus h if things are going to work the way we sort of expect them to work and and so you know we
know about g plus h that it's got to be greater than these things and less than these other ones
um that doesn't say it will be when we've written down the definition of what greater than means
oh it turns out that that is true the definitions are always this is a wonderful feature about the theory
everything is the simplest thing it could possibly be that's an absolutely wonderful thing about the
theory i found this theory in my wonder year of 1970 uh approximately shortly after i found my big
simple groups um it's the uh the most astonishing thing and i think the best thing i've ever discovered
it's absolutely wonderful and uh now you can pick out the real numbers the real numbers are those things
i'll give you the definition they're bounded by integers in other words a real number is a number
that's to say a serial number that's between two integers and um
um it's equal to g is equal to g minus one over n for all n slash g plus one over n in other words if
you move it infinitesimally you get a different number no sorry if you move it not infinitesimally you get
a different um never mind um and uh in in my book on numbers and games i found it a rather nice thing to do
to pretend that the numbers came first the numbers are really defined as particular games and
um and um and uh the the definitions which i've every now and then apologized for not giving you
know the definitions and the first theorems about them only take a few pages after those few pages you
know that the surreal numbers form a field and you have some idea how big it is
uh if you live with it for 10 years you get a slightly better idea of how big it is um it's absolutely
enormous and i love the fact that i just got it by trying to understand the game of go by playing games
essentially that's what i've done all my life i've played games and um every now and then discovered
something interesting as a consequence okay that's it
well thank you very much for those comments true to form um uh professor conway has told us a little
bit about the ideas of surreal numbers and made it look very gentle and very approachable but hidden
behind that there's quite a bit of uh theory and uh uh and depth uh i'm also happy i disagree with
that he would have to yes thank you also for sharing some of the uh personal uh feelings and anecdotes
about uh cantor and other mathematicians so much appreciated we have some time for questions if
somebody wants to to raise a question yeah yeah can you say a little more about the addition could you
define the addition of g plus h but then you have other additions in the definition too so there's some
more addition going on yes all the yes that that's a very valuable point really all the definitions of
this subject are inductive and moreover they are really transfinite inductions
uh now transfinite inductions differ from mathematical inductions with which you know most people are
more familiar in a mathematical induction you start with a base case often taken to be one but i prefer to
take zero so you say you know the property holds of zero and then if it holds of n it holds of n plus one
in transfinite inductions it's rather different uh you say if it holds of all simpler things then it holds of
the thing you're discussing that's the inductive hypothesis and you don't need a base case so let
me tell you what it amounts to in the in the number case or the game case if a property holds of g
g provided it holds of all g l and g r the options of g then it holds for all g that's the nature of
induction um in set theory that becomes the following thing which is usually stated in a terribly stupid
opaque way so don't don't read the things that tell you it in in the wrong way just buy it from me um
in set theory in uh the the assertion is if you have a property that holds of a given set
provided only that it holds of all members of that set then it holds of all sets
that's the axiom that should be called the axiom of set induction and now look at it
it's very interesting why don't we need a base case uh let's take this my definition of zero blank
slash blank so to speak there aren't any games simpler than zero so whatever property you like
it holds of all games simpler than zero so not being any it holds vacuously so if it's an inductive
property in the sense in which i mentioned it then holds a zero so the case of zero is no different to
the case of omega in the case of omega if you have this transfinite induction property transfinite
inductive property it it reads if a property holds of zero one two dot dot dot then it holds of omega
well now you're proving the thing inductively you've done cases zero one two three and so on
and so case omega follows it's a really wonderful thing the the same property that makes transfinite
inductive arguments work from zero you know which mathematical induction doesn't is the same as the
property that makes them capable of dealing with transfinite numbers or trans or infinite sets
i think that's an absolutely wonderful thing and it shouldn't be disguised the way it usually is
the way it is um yeah do you have any other questions or comments let's have a rude comment from somebody
um could you elaborate on how the surreal numbers are related to the sum of games
the real the surreal numbers are actually our games a half is the game in which left can move to zero
and right can move to one in order to understand that more fully okay let me show you the tree
of moose well first of all here here is the game zero it has an initial position and it's illegal to make
any move okay okay here is the game one it has an initial position and only the player called left can move from that
position and after left does move from that position nobody can move the games over here is
um here is the game a half left can move from the initial position at the bottom left can move to zero and
end the game right can move to one after which left can move to zero that ends the game so all the things
i gave as examples of numbers are really games that was important to me and that gives the definition of
addition straight away it also gives the definition of inequalities um let me just say when a game is
uh well sorry i've defined negation i mean i i you you sort of appreciate you just make the moves
legal for left that were previously legal for right and vice versa that's the definition of minus h say and
now g minus h is the sum of g and minus h okay that converts games into an additive group uh but also um
here's uh the definition of inequalities uh g
g is greater than h if and only if the player left wins g minus h no matter who starts
h is greater than g well you do it the other way around if the player right wins no matter who starts
h is equivalent to zero if the second player wins no matter who starts
h is incomparable with zero this is not a totally ordered group of games if in the other case which
is when the first player to move wins no matter who starts the their inequalities and you'll notice
that they come from games they are natural in terms of games the entire additive theory of numbers
is the theory of games under addition uh okay well no it extends to the theory of games a game is called
a number if it has a version in which all its left options in which really you make the situation worse
for yourself by making a move in other words all the left options of g are less than g and all the right
options of g are greater than g if it's comparable with its left and right options so that's what
numbers are um and all those definitions are pretty natural in terms of games when it comes to
multiplication it's not all that easy to think of it took me about two years to think of the correct
definition i had the the what the answers were i could tell you what the product of any two numbers was
i didn't have a good definition for it which i found later on um so it really is true that um
i discovered the surreal numbers this massive uh ordered field of numbers which contains the ordinals oh yes
it contains it contains the wheels it contains the wheels you've roughly seen how it contains cantor's
order numbers and it's a field so it contains you know things that cantor never dreamt of
and in fact sharply disagreed with the infinitesimal things like the inverse of omega
um and it just came from games playing games not not really playing games analyzing games analyzing
children's games um i am his many of you will know the game called dots and boxes
french people call it the game of the polytechnic in paris because it surfaced there shortly after
napoleon sent it up here's what you you do in dots and boxes you alternately join two dots
in either the horizontal or the vertical direction
you know these are the players moving alternately
if however you draw the third line of a box your opponent can but doesn't have to complete that box
and sign his name x
oh but then he must have another go whether he wants to or not
uh okay so he has another go and so on and and um then whoever gets most boxes wins
i'm prepared to play anybody from this audience
10 games of this tiny game of dots and boxes the four box game
subject to the rules that you choose each time whether you want to be first or second player
and if you win any one of those 10 games you're the winner of the tournament
perhaps i shouldn't have said i'm prepared to play anyone if somebody has played me
me before i want them to keep their big mouths shut
okay come on good enough
so at the beginning of your lecture you introduced the subject of serial numbers as
that you discovered more numbers than anyone else so yeah that's not not something i said by the way
somebody said that's at the system
that presumes that you found some way to figure out exactly how many of these there are you found
that's an interesting question i glided over it and you know which was perhaps a bit illegal of
me or improper um you see in the sense of cardinal numbers you know which would be the usual way of
comparing two infinite sets this is nonsense uh the collection of all
surreal numbers is the same size as the set theoretic universe uh in in the sense of cardinal number
but in there are other senses rather analogous to measure theory for instance
in which well you know the cantor set has uh the same cardinal as the set of all real numbers but it's
got zero measure it's infinitely thin it's that kind of comparison that i was talking about in saying
you know making my boast which wasn't originally my boast
when you have played with the surreal numbers you'll appreciate what i mean i mean it
it's just mind-blowing that's why by the way i often wonder whether that's what blue cantor's mind
i mean he didn't discover the same things but he did the same type of thing and his discovery was much
bigger much better i mean i don't mean bigger in size really i mean much more surprising much a much
greater advance on previous things because he seriously considered infinite collections
and compared them and found there were horrendously many of them
i mean it could have been the thing that drove him crazy i don't say it was
hopefully i'll see this right but i was wondering if you'd thought about the consequences of
instead of someone choosing one of the end games or the end domains of the go board to make one move
if they instead made a move in each of the domains yeah yeah yeah um yes i thought of all that um
in my book with
with belle camp and guy
there is um there is a chapter called how to play
how to play a number of games that i can't quite a lot of games in a dozen different ways
those ways included what you just described where you move in every component
they that's called the conjunctive component compound
the disjunctive compound is the one i've been discussing now where you move in just one
the selective compound is where you move in however many you like
and then with each of those there's a natural way of of determining the ending
and a slightly less natural way let me say what it is for the conjunctive compound if you're playing
a conjunctive compound and one of the games ends then if you play it literally as a conjunctive
compound you can't move in that one anymore so they get whole games over but that seems a bit
short so to speak so the continued compound continues on after any individual game has ended
uh you know you just play whichever games are left so there's the continued com conjunctive compound
then the shortened selective compound should the selective compound normally ends only when the whole
lot of them end but the shortened selective ends when any one of them does and so on this amounts to
when when we take all these variations into account that gives 12 different ways of compounding games
and for the impartial games um we give a theory for each one that's
uh that's a bit dishonest i mean there are one or two cases where we couldn't find the theory
i can't remember what they were and um for these compounds were you able to go back to thinking of
them as numbers still no no no we think of them as what they are that by the way is a
uh a thing that people uh often wonder you know what's the appropriate kind of number for this or that
or something uh that's certainly not the way i think i think what's the answer you know what's the answer
to this theory i was very very surprised when for the um disjunctive compound i should call it now
uh you know which is the one i've been talking about the for the disjunctive compound of partisan games
the answer turned out to be contain the theory of surreal numbers but not all of it by any means
the theory of these games is much much larger than the surreal numbers but um i was very very surprised
the situation is we don't impose our own ideas on the problem of what the solution looks like we found
out you know what the solution actually does look like in the case of the selective compounds
the numbers have some relevance to it they're not the complete answer by any means
um in the case of the other compounds i was mentioning the solutions are um
well they're sort of interesting but they're sort of just combinatorially interesting which i'm afraid
i'm using when i say just combinatorially i'm afraid i'm using it in a pejorative sense you know
there's no great theory going on there it's just the kind of thing you would expect if you tinker with this
sort of stuff um the the surreal numbers were just ah you know i i can't convey it it's so big you know
and the games are bigger than the surreal numbers you see if you take there's a game which i call star
which is zero slash zero now the additive theory and comparison and so on all those definitions continue
to work for games um and star turns out to be uh incomparable with zero less than every positive number
and greater than every negative number that doesn't tell you all there is to know about it um star plus star
is zero is of order two it's its own negative but then there's another game zero slash star that i called
up up turns out to be greater than zero but less than every positive number and i remind you when i say
every positive number i always mean every positive surreal number it's less than one over omega it's less than
one over omega to the omega it's less than a little up it's less than all those tiny tiny tiny little
numbers in fact it's what we call a tiny game um there are much tinier games
and there's there's a game up is actually tiny sub zero there there is a tiny sub x for any x
including x being a game as well as a number um there's a game played with dominoes on a chess board
where if the it's played on a two by four rectangle of the chess board uh its value is tiny two tiny two is
terribly terribly terribly small um let me just quickly say say how you play domineering on a chess
board left puts the domino in in the north south direction and a domino covers exactly covers two
squares of the chess board right puts her domino in the east west direction and if you can't put the domino
in because there isn't enough room when it's your turn you lose
so you see on a one by one chess board the value is zero because there's not enough room for a domino
i started with one by one because i rather expected you'd start with one by one
i prefer to start with zero by zero in which is even less room for your domino
um if you have a um a one by two domino then that's worth one or minus one depending which way around
it is if you take an l-shaped chess board uh which which are three squares verticals forming the
what what do i call it the trunk of the l oh no let's call it the never mind uh and then two
squares across at the bottom let's call it a foot instead because then we can talk about the heel
and the toe and everything that turns out to be worth a half i mean it's it's a game it's not just worth
half half it is a half you know it's the game a half yeah two copies of that l yes here it is
if this is the space
left on your chess board then it's exactly equivalent to one
one and so if we add the negative of one here's the negative of one this is a half plus a half minus
one that's zero i just discussed the case of zero uh in the case of zero in you know the earlier cases i
gave there wasn't enough room to put a domino in and so the first player lost that's the definition of zero
so in this game here the first player loses this theory is actually useful for playing childish games
and you know catch me on my own and play 10 games of dots and boxes on this thing and
um listen i'll pay you to play me okay it's clear we're really getting warmed up now and i think you'll
agree with me that uh no matter how uh simply and transparently uh professor conway has presented uh
the idea of serial numbers there's lots going on behind the scenes yeah there's more than meets there
yeah certainly so uh on uh behalf of the department of mathematics let's uh thank professor conway for
an excellent and stimulating talk
we have a small token of appreciation for for him oh my
and while he ooze and oz about that let me just remind you that he's speaking again tomorrow
at four o'clock in the regular departmental colloquium please join us for that
and i also remind you that uh there will be copies of his book available not my book
uh yes copies of shobhan is the author uh but it's a book about uh about him and uh they will be seated
here and you are welcome to uh get your copy and have john sign it for you once again thank you for
coming and let's thank our speaker again
