Welcome everyone to the lectern. The video you're about to see is a discussion with James Filler.
James's book, Heidegger Neoplatonism and the History of Being, has had a profound impact on me
and I had the great pleasure of getting to talk to James about the core argument of his book
that tries to reorient us away from thinking of the world primarily made up out of individually
existing things that enter into interactions and into relations with each other and argue
instead that relationality is itself more primordial, more fundamental to understanding
the nature of reality and why intelligibility, the fact that reality is informative and makes sense
to us, is a good and fundamental way for tracking what is most real. James and I talk about his core
argument, we talk about Neoplatonism, we talk about Heidegger, we talk about possible convergences
between his argument and what we see happening within physics and biology. Part of the point of
this video is to raise James' profile. James deserves to be more well known. I consider his work central
and crucial for the pivot point we are at in history right now. So, sit back and I hope you will enjoy
this discussion with James Filler.
Welcome everybody to an episode of The Lectern. I am really excited about this. This is a long time coming
and James and I have had a near miss where we almost met in person and then we've had some
off-camera discussion and we both realized that we could carry on a very good public conversation
together. And for those of you who don't remember, this is a book I have been promoting almost everywhere
where I do any work of any philosophical depth, which is his amazing book, Heidegger Neoplatonism and the
history of being relation as ontological ground. And this is the one and only James Filler here. So
welcome James. We're here to talk about your book, but first maybe just tell us a little bit about
yourself and how you came to write this book. Well, it's kind of a long story. It was my second
go-round at pursuing a PhD. The first time was in Catholic Université Leuven in Belgium and things
didn't quite work out there. And a few years later I went back to pursue my PhD in philosophy at the
University of Georgia. And of course you have to come up with a dissertation topic and so I was wrestling
with that. And I don't really remember how, but the idea of being as relation, the problem that arises
after Descartes is always, you know, kind of nod at me a little bit, you know, mind, body, how do we,
how do we know anything at all? How do we, how do we avoid solipsism?
And this came to me. I don't know how, don't remember how, but it did. And that ended up being
the topic of my dissertation. I was kind of scared when I proposed it because nobody at the
university was really, that was not really anybody's wheelhouse. But I got a good friend of
mind to, to guide, guide me through it. And I was worried that it was going to be too big because I,
my vision was to start with the pre-Socratics and go all the way up through contemporary Heidegger,
of course, and even, even beyond touching on process philosophy and relational ontology beyond
Heidegger. And unfortunately they were up for it. I did have to cut it down. It was
220,000 words when I finished and they made me cut it down to 170.
Palgrave made me cut it down even further to 120. So, so on. So yeah. So, and that's how it came about.
At least logistically.
Oh yeah. So I think when we spoke last time, you said that you're taking at least some of that
excluded material and you're putting it into a second book that you're working on right now.
Yeah. Substance ontology and the crisis of reason should be out
December, January. That's what Amazon keeps saying.
Of this year.
Yeah.
Oh, I'm looking forward to it then.
I'll send you a copy. They give me six. I'll send you one.
Please, James. I would love that. Thank you very much.
Sure.
Uh, yeah. My book just came out, Awakening from the Meaning Crisis. It's on, it's on Amazon and available
right now. Um, so, um, I'm very much looking forward to that. And maybe what we can do is we can,
I want to go through the first book, um, and then, uh, you know, ask some, uh, exploratory questions
of you, um, and elusi, uh, questions sort of for further elucidation. And then maybe we'll get a
chance to touch on, uh, what, like sort of, you can give us a bit of a preview of what the argument's
going to look like in the second book. So, uh, the place I'd like to start is, uh, you've got this
core argument, uh, for that, uh, that's, and I mean, uh, there's, there's a historical argument,
but there's also what you could call a conceptual argument. The conceptual argument is something
along the lines that there doesn't seem to be any way of getting relations out of substance
understood in the Aristotelian sense as the bearer of properties, that which corresponds to the
subject and the subject predicate logic, uh, that sort, that sort of model. So please,
everyone note that we don't mean sort of substance as it mean is understood today, just as stuff.
It, it has this more distinct meaning and have it as it's independently existing thing that can bear,
uh, predicates in some fashion. Is that fair enough for our discussion, James?
Yeah. I think the independence aspect of it, that it's independent, uh, was important for me.
Yeah. Coming to this.
Yes. And of course that became sort of paramount. There was a tension within
Aristotelianism between the theory of knowing that seemed to involve the universals. And then
this idea that reality was made up of substances that were radical individuals, if I can put it that
way. And yeah. And the nominalists seem to have chosen to privilege the, the radical individuals over,
like over the real patterns in the world kind of thing. But you're, you're making an argument that's
not specifically directed at nominalism. I've seen a lot of those arguments and those are important
arguments. But what I found intriguing about your argument was that, no, no, you didn't do any of
that. You went right at sort of the, what if I can call it, the logic. And maybe you could give sort
of that core argument about what I know, I know.
I did it once. I'm not sure I can do it again.
Well, maybe, you know, I've, I've read it several times and I've taught it in a couple of courses.
I've used your book frequently. Well, let me, let me, how about this? I'll try and I'll probably
mangle it and then you'll be able to correct it. How about that?
Okay.
So the idea is you've got an Aristotelian ontology and it's a very, it's an ontology that to give
credit to Aristotle sort of sits well with our common sense. Our language divides the world up into nouns
and verbs or, you know, and, and, or at least subjects and predicates. And, you know, there are
things, um, and, and then, and then the idea is the properties belong to the things that, you know,
they're proper to the thing, um, that sort of idea. And then the, the problem you have is where are
relations in that ontology? Um, if you try to make the relation a property of a substance, then it seems
like you don't need anything more than the one thing in order to have the relation. And yet
relations are quintessentially between things. They require a multiplicity for their existence.
And of course that will work either for this thing or, you know, this, you know,
that's a completely symmetrical argument. Um, and then if you try to say that the relation somehow
exists, uh, uh, independently of them, you have the problem of, yes, but where does that actually sit
in that ontology? Uh, because the ontology says that what are, what exists are substances
and predicates. And then third, you need relations to have anything happen or to make anything knowable.
And so it seems we need to make a decision here. We can't get relations out of substances. We need
relations. We, as soon as we start talking about with them, we're already granting them an independent
existence. Well, why not understand relations as, uh, what exists primarily and the things or the relata
are actually located or have their ontological location within a relational field. Did I do justice to
your argument? I think, you know, I, I saw you talk about this on a podcast. I can't remember which
one, but I was, I was really pleased because when I made the argument initially and when I was coming
up with it and when I was writing it, I was like, I hope this is clear. I hope this makes sense. I
hope. And, and when I saw you discuss it, I was like, well, yay, it, it, it clearly does make sense.
Cause that's pretty much it. The only thing I would add is, um, the part of the problem that I found is that
to be independent in the first place required a relation. Right. Right. Because to be independent
means there's something you're independent from. Yeah. Yeah. Yes. Yeah. So, um, it had to be,
it had to be prior to the independence. And I thought of that, and you know, because you talk
about Heidegger, it's not unfair to talk about it. I thought about that even in sort of the,
the primary notion of standing out existence. And that is a right, that, that, that is an inherently
relational notion in and of itself, that very notion of existence. And I've sort of supplemented
that, this argument, and I want to know if, if you're okay with it. I thought one of the strong
implications of your argument, uh, and I think you, you, I mean, especially when you go into the
Christian, the Cappadocian fathers, uh, you know, the idea that the logos, that intelligibility itself
is an inherently relational notion. Uh, it doesn't make any sense, uh, to talk about things making sense
without there being, uh, relations. And that has, I think that's entailed by the,
we need relations in order for there to be knowledge kind of, uh, argument.
Yeah. I think, I think that's, I think that's fair. I find it's when I teach, um,
Heraclitus and Parmenides, normally when I teach, especially my intro courses,
I always start with Heraclitus and Parmenides because, um, Heraclitus is the philosopher. If
everything's constantly changing, or at least that's the way he's presented, I think he's more nuanced than that.
Yeah, I do too. But he's, that's the way he's presented. And Parmenides is the, the one,
nothing changes, nothing, you know, it's all eternal. Heraclitus, as he's understood clearly,
has a problem. It makes knowledge impossible because everything's both true and false. Plato makes this
argument when, you know, Iotatus, and I think that's right on that understanding of Heraclitus.
But Parmenides has the same problem. If everything's only one, then there's nothing to know.
Mm-hmm. That's right.
Knowledge requires a knower and a known. Um, and so there already has to be a multiplicity
if you're going to have knowledge at all. So Parmenides has kind of the same problem.
So how do we get past that?
So I then do, I make a convergent argument, uh, that's sort of more cog-sci based,
which is the idea, the notion of information, which of course overlaps between cognitive science
and physics. And the idea of information is inherently relational. It is a relation between
events, uh, relation between alternatives. Uh, information is an integration of, uh, identity
and differentiation. It's, and you know, and without information, not knowing isn't possible,
cognition isn't possible. And then we're getting, and then you get fundamental ideas that are emerging
in physics, uh, that, um, that you can't make any clean distinction between energy and information.
And energy is also a relational notion. Relativity is relational notion. Entanglement is a relational
notion. Uh, the fact that the, the, uh, the non-duality of, uh, light as particle and wave is inherently.
So our physics also seems to be driving down to the conclusion that at the bottom, the ground of,
I don't like to talk about bottoms, but sort of the ground of things is, you know, relationality.
And does that sit well with you? That sort of convergence argument that it, it seems like it
should, uh, let me press a little bit more before I let you answer. Because, you know, if this argument
is about, your argument is about sort of our fundamental ability to, uh, conceive of an ontology
and physics is in some sense pushing towards that, or is at least regulated by that ideal,
then your argument should bear. And we should see that sort of coming to fruition
as in, within sort of fundamental physics. Yeah, I think, I think that's fair. Uh,
I find the idea of, uh, entanglement, uh, very interesting, uh, especially in, uh, I'm a bit puzzled
by it, not sure I quite understand it, but, uh, the idea that things affect things at vast
distances like that, that's, that's something I find really interesting and like to know more about
it. Well, and the, the important thing that's coming now is, and I mean, this really would
strengthen your argument is the idea that space, time, all that, the, the, the thing that was taken to
be the container for all the substantial things is now itself thought to be emergent from the inherent
non-spatial, non-temporal relationality of entanglement. Uh, Pass does, is talking about
this stuff in his new book entitled, by the way, The One, uh, where he's arguing that to return to that
idea, uh, the Neoplatonic sense of The One is where physics needs to go in order to try and get past its
impasse as it's trying to reconcile, uh, relativity, uh, and quantum mechanics together. So I find it
exciting that you've got sort of your work that's coming out of the ancient tradition and working at
a very, uh, you know, pure ontological level seems to be converging, you know, top-down conceptual with
this bottom-up, um, uh, uh, uh, empirical work. I thought, I thought that lends a lot of plausibility to
your case. Thank you. That would be interesting for me to learn more about the physics because I don't
know near enough about it. So I wanted, I wanted to go on there. So there's two things that, uh, come to
my mind and they're related. Um, and the first is I'm unclear in the book, uh, whether or not pure
relationality is that which lies beneath relations and relata or whether or not it is itself kind,
some kind of relation. Um, okay. I'll let you answer. Go ahead.
Yeah, I think, you know, I think that's, uh, I don't know.
Interestingly when I, or maybe not interestingly, but interestingly to me, when I started it, it was
the idea that relation was, uh, fundamentally and ontologically prior to all relata. Um, but as I
kept thinking about it, um, and as it, it converges with Plotinus cause, uh, for Plotinus, the one
emanates because it just overflows. There's just much of it. It desires. Uh, I think that's his word is
desires, um, to overflow and, uh, relationality has to relate something. It seeks to relate something.
Yes. Um, so there has to be relation. There has to be something that it relates. Um, and this is
where I think, you know, you brought up the Cappadocian fathers. This is where I think the
understanding of the Trinity really kind of came together for me. Um, but if it's going to be
ontologically prior to, to independent relata, then it has to be a relata that's itself relation
and pure relationality. Yeah. And, uh, so yeah, I think the answer is both.
Well, that's probably the answer I was looking for, because it struck me that one could make
a symmetrical argument that I couldn't see. I could run a filler type argument about
I couldn't get relata out of pure relationality either. Um, I was trying, you know, you know, you,
you have the thing, you know, the Neoplatonic thing about, you know, it, it, it relates to itself,
but the problem with that, and this of course bedeviled the ancient Neoplatonists is, you know,
yeah, but how does, where did that come from? Right. Uh, you know, uh, because this bending back on
itself seems to require like a space or something other than it, it requires an otherness, uh, through
which, uh, and, uh, and, and, and, and you see this showing up in Neoplatonism as the endless
intervention and mediations, right? Of, you know, you get more and more intermediates trying to some,
how square the circle of getting, um, difference out of identity and other things like that. Now,
you make it very clear, and I think you're right, that this relationality is deeper than identity and
difference. And I take that to actually strengthen the point I'm making. If it is deeper than identity
and difference, if it's that er, relationality, then I don't see how you can get the relata out
of the relations either. I think you need, like, I think it has to be, like you say, both and neither
kind of thing. So I, yeah, like I was going to say something, but I was just going to get myself in
trouble because I was going to end up being incoherent and losing so much stuff. Well, the, the reason I
mentioned that is because, um, uh, you know, this leads to sort of a non-dual, uh, understanding of
what we're talking about here. And that means that I see a lot of resonance. You went into the
Cappadocian Fathers and that's a completely legitimate thing to do. And we'll come back to
that. Uh, your book has had quite a huge influence on, um, several Christians that I know, largely because
I pointed that your book to them. Um, I think it was actually instrumental in my friend, uh, Jordan
Hall becoming a Christian. Um, that's a blessing. So, um, but I see the same language, especially if
you, if we grant at least prima facie, this plausibility of this non-duality, right? This, this,
this is very similar to the way, you know, Nishita and Nishitani, uh, in the Kyoto school
described Shunyata, right? It's, it's, and you know, it's, it follows on Nargajira that it's empty,
even of emptiness. Like it's, it's deeper than like the emptiness is not absence. It's deeper than
absence and presence. Right. And it, and it's that kind of idea. And it's, it, it's this, it, I, I,
I, I mean, who knows? Cause we're getting at the depths of the limits, I should say,
of our conceptual abilities here, but those, what you were arguing for granted what we've just
discussed and what I see in the Kyoto school's discussion of, especially of aspects of Zen
seem deeply, deeply convergent to, to me. I, I think so too. One of my, one of my regrets is my
deficiency in Eastern, uh, philosophy. I don't, I've, you know, studied a little bit, but I, but,
but not, not near enough. I think there is a, uh, I saw on one of your podcasts, you were talking
about the book and you said, I'm a, you said, I'm a pluralist. I'm not sure Filler would agree with me
or not. Uh, well, I'm not really so much a pluralist, but I do agree with you at the same time.
Mm-hmm. Because, uh, I do think the Eastern, I do think the Eastern way of thinking, um,
is closer to this relational. Yeah. Apology than Western, certainly than Western is. Um,
my, I don't want to use the word intuition because that has a different meaning, but my feeling is that,
uh, it's still too indefinite. Uh, it, it dissolves things too much. Um, uh, one of the things I think
is important about the Trinity is that there are still a lot in it, uh, and, uh, you know, the Father,
Son, and Holy Spirit. And, uh, I could be wrong, clearly. Um, but I think, uh, the Eastern understanding
of this ends up being too, um, too much nothingness. I don't know. I mean, uh, I don't know either.
Uh, you, you do, I mean, you do have the Buddha, the Dharma, and the Sangha understood ontologically,
like the Father and the Son and the Holy Spirit. Um, and, and they, they map on also pretty readily to,
you know, where the Father is more towards being, and the, the Son is the Logos, his intelligibility,
Dharma is like that. And then you have the Spirit participation, and that's the Sangha. And you,
you, I, I'm not, I'm not, I'm not, I'm not Huxley. I'm not saying they're saying the same thing. I,
I understand. But I do think when we move towards ultimacy, uh, a kind of convergence, uh, does seem
apparent between these two. Uh, I've been sort of, it's not just me. You see in the Kyoto school,
something like Zen Neoplatonism starting to take shape, where you have people like Nishita
and Nishitani talking about Zen, but they're clearly aware of the Christian Neoplatonists,
especially, uh, Eckhart, and also given your argument, Heidegger. And I, I totally take your
argument to be well-made, that Heidegger is basically a Neoplatonist without acknowledging it.
Um, and I, I think, uh, well, I, I, I don't, maybe that's a little too strong. Maybe you wouldn't
want to put it that way, but I think you, you come close to saying something like that.
I do. And I think it's interesting because, uh, there was this, there's this quote I, I put in the,
it's in the book and my dissertation where Heidegger was, um, I think Heidegger doesn't really
understand what he's getting at. I think he's seeing something that he, that he, that he really is,
is struggling to figure out how to express. Um, cause there's a story, uh, where he's reading,
I think it's Suzuki. Yeah. Yeah. If I'm not, if I'm not wrong. And he, he's reading the guy and he
tells a friend of his, this guy's saying what I've been trying to say my entire career.
Yeah. Yeah. And he's, you got the dialogue with the Japanese other, and you've got a whole bunch of
things. There's a couple of books on, uh, Heidegger and Asian philosophy and Heidegger and Asian
influences. He was not totally ignorant of this stuff, uh, at all.
Later stuff, he, he deals, you know, he's, he's dialoguing with them. Yeah.
Explicitly. He's, he's dialoguing with them. So, so that's interesting, but, um,
first of all, let's, so let's put a pin in that, that we've got that there and thank you for, uh,
well, part of what I'm doing is checking in that I'm using your work well. I mean, I'm trying to do
stuff beyond it beyond what you did, but stuff that you would at least say, well, that's a
reasonable thing to try and do with my work. So that's good. I'm glad to hear that. Yeah.
The one that a lot of people, uh, I think are very interested in is, and I mentioned, uh, already
Jordan, uh, Jordan Hall, uh, as you make a very strong case for mapping this realization
of reality as this primordial relationality, non-dual relationality or something like that.
I'm trying to come up with an adjective that qualifies it the way we've discussed it.
Right. And the Christian, I'll use the Greek word because the modern word is too trivializing the,
the Christian, uh, symbol on of the Trinity. Right. Uh, and, and, and the idea that again,
I'll try your argument and then you tell me, uh, first of all, I want to praise you. That was the
first time I've ever seen a presentation of the Trinity that I thought was insightful and wasn't just
conceptual mess. That's right. Right. Uh, I mean, you, you have to, you have to be patient with me
because, you know, whenever you try and read through you, all the attempts to interpret the
Trinity get declared heresies, right? All the attempts to resolve the tension. And then people then
just say endlessly like spiraling stuff. Uh, but then you laid it out in a way that I found, uh, insightful.
So the idea is we have this realization and I'm using that the way I use that word, both senses,
right? Uh, ultimate reality, having this nature. And then the Christian symbol on captures that with
the Trinity where, uh, each one of the members is a relata, but that relata is inherently relational
because each of, uh, is this the right word? The titles, I think maybe that's fair. Each of the titles,
right? Yeah. Yeah. Okay. Thanks. Each of the title. Yeah. Each of the titles is an inherently relational
term, father, son, uh, Holy spirit. Um, and then, and, and, and, and then the idea is,
uh, you know, each one represent, you know, things like being and intelligibility and participation
and how they're all interwoven. And then you make the very good exegetical historical argument
that this was taken very clearly into, uh, Orthodox, uh, theology, especially the Cappadocian
fathers and was, uh, quite strongly preserved in what has come to be called Eastern Orthodox Christianity.
Um, I, a friend of mine, Bishop Maximus is reading your book and we're going to, uh,
we're going to talk about it now that to me was, and I, James, I'm not attributing anything to you.
I know you weren't necessarily trying to do any kind of apologetics, but that's a powerful argument.
And I, and I, this is not an insult or this is not some sort of judo move. That's a powerful argument
for Christianity. Well, I'm not going to deny that there was at least a apologetic hope, uh,
in making the, uh, um, you know, in making the, it was, it's a work of philosophy. That was my goal.
I was getting a PhD that, but certainly there was a hope that I would come up with something that
was persuasive and that, that did, because I agree with you that the discussions of the Trinity
have been mostly nonsensical. You either have too much difference or too much identity and, and,
you know, you can't really, and then you end up just saying, oh, well, it's a mystery and we can't
understand it, which ultimately is true. Uh, like, you know, to cover my kind of backside a little
bit, I put the quote in the, in the book, you know, St. Gregory, uh, I think it's the theologian.
Can't remember which one exactly. So at any attempt to delve into the understanding,
the Trinity will lead to madness. And, uh, and there's some truth to that. And so that was my
little caveat, say, look, I'm not now, if this is radical, I, I, I renounce it, but this is the way
I see it. It would be a hard case to make you out as a heretic, given your closeness to so many people
that have been declared Orthodox. I mean, I don't think you're in any danger. Um, I mean, this is a
powerful idea that there's some there that we, we, we get this notion, uh, uh, of the nature of reality,
fundamental reality as fundamentally, you know, non-dual relationality. And then we have a way of
imaginally apprehending it. And, you know, I don't mean that word dismissively. Imaginally is very
important in my epistemology. We have a way of imaginally apprehending it and participating in it
with this symbol on of the Trinity given to us by Christianity, which is like, that's very,
very powerful. And I can see why, uh, I mean, uh, I, I, I will be a little bit vulnerable to
hear and say that, that calls to me, uh, in a very strong way. Um, I don't think I could be a
Christian. I think I, unlike you, I would be immediately declared a heretic and I don't, I don't
want that job. Uh, but, uh, what, what, I'm sorry, I'm stumbling because all that, and I mean,
everything I just said, it still strikes me that this is not how most of Christianity is presented
or even understood. Well, it's certainly not the way Western Christianity is presented and
understood. Yes. I'm going to make a deliberate, I did already, I'm going to make a deliberate
exclusion of Eastern Orthodoxy. Uh, clearly, uh, you, I, you, that case is made strongly in your book.
So let's talk about Western Christianity then. Yeah, I think, um,
one of the, okay, I don't know if this addresses the issue or not. Um,
um, well, Protestantism, uh, I mean, clearly to me, my wife who was a Lutheran before we got married
and she became Orthodox, uh, kind of gets mad at me for, for saying this, but I think it's true.
It's, it's clearly true. Martin Luther stood before the, the council and said, you know,
I have to obey my own conscience. And, uh, that once you make that move, uh,
uh, you're making, uh, you're becoming independent arbiter of what is true. And, and you see that
in Protestantism with the constant fracturing into all these different groups, it's almost where it is,
well, it's whatever my individual interpretation is. And, and, and that's authoritative and normative,
and, and there's no real, real way to, to counter that. Um, I think, well, forgive me if I'm wrong,
but I think Catholicism is, is kind of fall, uh, following that same path. I don't think it started
in that, that path so much, but I think, I think it's following in that path, especially, uh,
contemporary, uh, Catholicism. There's a tension there. I think I see conservatives fighting against it,
but I think, I think, I think it's going that way. Um, one of the ways I understand the difference,
and this may not be helpful to anybody but me, is Orthodoxy, um, has an ancient mindset.
It, it, it understands things in an ancient way of thinking. Uh, Catholicism understands
things in a medieval way of thinking with the feudal system and, and, you know, all that kind of
stuff. And Protestantism is modernity. Yeah, very much modernity. But, uh, but modernity and the
medieval, uh, because one thing that's not thrown out with the scientific revolution, you still,
you'll see, you still see it in Newton, is the, is the substance ontology and the subject
predicate logic of Aristotle dominating all the way through. And I take it, you don't say it directly in
the book. Uh, uh, although you, you make use of Heidegger, who does make this kind of critique,
that that substance ontology and the subject predicate logic that goes with it is one of
the things that drives us towards this kind of, you know, these, the isolated autonomous individual.
I mean, the autonomy becomes the, the quintessential thing of the enlightenment of the, the European
enlightenment. And that seems to me to just be a Cartesian internalization of the notion of
Aristotelian substance, if I can put it that way. Yeah, I think that, I think, um, but, uh,
but I would probably say Descartes just recognizing something that was already there.
Oh, that's what I'm saying. I'm saying it's running all the way from Aristotle all the way through
in, in, in, in, in a deep way. Um, do you, so, I mean, you make this argument about the,
the divide, the divide, the, the diverging paths. And so, and this is a little too simplistic,
but at least for purposes of getting the discussion going. So it's, it's kind of like
you're arguing that Eastern Christianity basically chooses to follow the Neoplatonic path and go the
way of relationality and Western Christianity chooses to go down the path of Aristotle and the
substance ontology. And the fact that it leads to nominalism and Protestantism are evidence for your
argument. Is, is that fair to say that? Yeah, I think it's, I, I, I might, I, I know I'm putting
you on the hot seat a little here, but, but yeah, I think it's absolutely fair. And I really do want
to say that. And I do think that's true, but I'm, I'm not sure every Orthodox, uh, theologian would
appreciate being, uh, labeled Neoplatonic. Um, well, they should, um, I mean, I, I, I, I mean, if, if,
if, if Dionysus and Maximus are important, um, and, and then you're a Neoplatonist in some,
and Bishop Maximus doesn't disagree with that. He thinks that Christian Neoplatonism is a
transfiguration of pagan Neoplatonism. I'll give you that. I think there's some, I think there's
something emergently new about it. Uh, but I still think it's a form of Neoplatonism, uh, through and
through. I agree. So that's interesting because that goes towards some of, uh, um,
the later part of the book and right where you, you then say that, you know, Heidegger is coming
along and he's trying to break out a subject predicate logic. He's trying to break out of
substance ontology. He's trying to break out of the whole Cartesian, all the disastrous,
all the disastrous dichotomies, right? And he's trying to get to this and he's getting to this notion
of Aletheia and being, right? And all of this. And then you make, I think, a very convincing argument
that he's basically feeling his way back towards this Neoplatonic version, uh, uh, that vision,
I should say, that we're talking about here. But now I get a sense, and I'm gonna be having sort of,
uh, uh, an ongoing dialogue with, um, Johannes Niederhauser about this, but there's other people
too, like Rakowski and others, but I get a sense that Heidegger can't get there because he's got
this antipathy towards Plato. Um, what do you think? Um, I'm not as familiar with his book on
Plato as I ought to be. Um, but, uh, yeah, I think there's, whether it's an antipathy towards Plato,
I know he, um, at least I, my understanding is he explicitly rejects Neoplatonism. Yeah. Um,
which is a little ironic, and I think, um, he explicitly rejects it and implicitly embraces it.
Yeah, exactly. Exactly. But I think it's his own conceptual limitations that, um, prevent him from,
from seeing what he's actually trying to make, that he's trying to make. Um, whether those are,
are he still too bound up in substance? Um, maybe he's still too bound up in the Aristotelian
understanding of relation, which I think is, is, is a problem with a lot of current process and
relational. Yeah, we'll come to that in a sec. I want to bring that up. I'm wondering also if
Nietzsche's, you know, deep influence on, uh, on Heidegger and even Kierkegaard's influence on
Heidegger may also prevent him from giving the Neoplatonic view a fair shake. Possibly.
Yeah. Yeah. Be worth, worth exploring.
So towards the end, and, and I know you don't have, you don't give much space to it, so I, I don't
want, I'm not going to limit to you to what you said in the book, because I know you're going to
do more, I, I, sorry, I hope and suspect you're going to do more in the second book around this.
You sort of step back and say, of course, there are existing relational ontologies already. There
are process relational, uh, thinkers. A lot of Whiteheadians understand themselves as process
relational, um, thinkers. Now, here's a question I have before you get to your criticisms, uh, about,
uh, because, and I want you to bring them up, but it seems to me though that they are, they are
putting their finger on something that was lacking in ancient Neoplatonism was Neoplatonism tends to
creak towards that Parmedian static kind of ontology, and the Whiteheadian process philosophy understands
this relationality is inherently creative, flowing, ongoing in some way, and also therefore brings it
a little more closely to the physics I was talking about earlier.
Yeah, uh, I saw, I caught this in one of your podcasts too, where you were talking about it
being too static and not dynamic, not sufficiently dynamic. Um, and I was, you know, I think I just
came across that last night or the night before, so I'm still kind of working with that. Um,
it, I think, okay, let me ask the question. Why is dynamism important?
Because I think the dynamism is important because I think that you do need the self-organization,
the self-relation, the self-organization, the emanation and emergence, the, to make the
platonic world, the Neoplatonic worldview work. I think that's fundamental. And the fact that that
shows up in the very grammar of our cognition, cognition is inherently bottom up, top down.
So the grammar of intelligibility, the grammar of being like, this is inherently dynamical,
self-organizing, right? And if, and if they have a fundamentally participatory relation,
you can see the argument on making this, like it, it go, you get a very strong epistemological,
ontological coherence if you bring that dynamic self-organization into it.
So the, so the emanational nature of Neoplatonism itself is a dynamism.
Well, but it's also, you know, it's emanation and emergence because it's of course,
procession and return. It's right. Right. And the, and the later Neoplatonists,
especially Erogena, right. And take pains to try and like, get that to be equi, like not just
this way, because they, they, they're trying to vary. And I, I think I agree with them. They're
trying to avoid kind of a Gnosticism where, you know, the emanation is a degrading, a Plotinus
thinks matter is evil. Right. And they're, they're trying to stay away, uh, uh, from, and I agree with
that. I, any ontology that's going to make physicality evil or embodiment evil is one I'm
going to criticize deeply. And so I think one of the, what, one of the things that acts as a
bulwark against that in Neoplatonism is to really make sure you properly emphasize the dynamic nature.
Okay. I wouldn't, I wouldn't disagree with that necessarily. Um, but I think there's a,
uh, I would, I don't like the word static, but I think it may be accurate. Um, but I think there has
to be a, uh, a field within which that dynamism occurs. Um, I don't believe anything comes out of
nothing. Uh, you know, I'm kind of committed to that ex-NeoNeal. Um, so there has to be,
it has to already be there in some sense in order to become what it's going to become. And that's
what I think the underlying field of relationality is. I, I, I get that. And I think field is a good,
is a good metaphor. I, I like that. It's, it, and is that part of the problem you have with,
so one issue that sort of, uh, and I, I might be unfair to Whiteheadians. Whitehead is a very
complex thinker, uh, you know, and I've been reading him very deeply and trying to understand,
but one of the things that sort of is like, you know, and this is part of Plato's critique of
Pratelus, not of, not of Heraclitus, I don't think. Right. Uh, which is if everything's purely
flowing, knowledge is impossible. Uh, it's because there's nothing to know because the
moment you knew it, it, it has ceased to be kind of thing. Um, and so there would be no intelligibility,
which means, and intelligibility is our primary sense of realness, comparative intelligibility.
Is it something like that, that, that there's got to be something other than process at work?
I think no. Uh, and again, uh, you know, all these people deserve fuller attention from me. Um,
but what I saw, what I see, that my primary complaint about what they're doing is their
understanding of relation. They're still understanding relation as, as having to be between two things.
So it's, it's a poncho. So, so you end up with this infinite regress of Rolotta that just keeps
going down and down and down and down and down. And I, and I saw that in Whitehead too, with his
understanding of event. Um, I, I have a similar critique of Whitehead, which is he, and I think
this lines up with what you just said. Is it the ontological principle that, uh, potent, uh,
possibility and potentiality are completely dependent on actuality, that actuality has an
Aristotelian priority. And that's always bothered me because, you know, I read Bracken's book,
because in the East, it's exactly the, that you have an exactly symmetrical intuition, right?
With, uh, you know, it just says, no, no, you have to have, in order for there to be any actuality,
there has to be a field of possibility that's real, right? And, and, and you need something,
and I take Plotinus to be arguing that, well, maybe not Plotinus, uh, but some interpretations
of Plotinus, uh, I gotta be really careful here, um, that what we're talking about when
we're talking about ultimate reality is something that holds together actuality and possibility
in some deep way. And, and I, and I've all, because
if you make potentiality own completely dependent on actuality, you do have the problem of, right,
understanding
if there are laws, and I mean that both scientifically and just ontologically,
laws differ from descriptions in that you require, they, they are counterfactual supporting.
So, a description just says how things are, a law says how things can be even if they are not that
way now. Okay.
Okay.
Counterfactual supporting. The counterfactuals have to be true. They have to be real. They have to be
real alternatives. They have to be real in some, there has to be something that makes them true.
And it can't be our idea about them because they're laws, right? This is the realist interpretation of
laws. And so you, you need, you need something real, again, in possibility that is just as real as
events happening, um, in actuality. Could that be, um, going back to a Neoplatonic understanding,
and to be, to be honest, you know, this is, my mind just runs off. Um, I think I'm a little bit
unfair to Aristotle in, in my book. I think he's more complex than I present him. I think his substance
understanding, his ideas and self-thinking thought, uh, being pure actuality, and all other
potentialities are striving for, um, um, I think is, kind of mitigates the substance, um, thing that...
I don't think so. I disagree with you on that. I think it's, I think, I think it enshrines the
subject-predicate logic as ultimate. Well, you know... Thought-thinking, thought-thinking
is him attempting to keep the subject-predicate logic as ultimate.
Yeah, and my, my professor, Edward Halper, uh, EGA, kind of argued the same thing, that the
self-thinking thought is radically simple, simple oneness. Um, and I had a discussion with him in
class once, and I said, well, if I'm gonna make my argument, then there has to be some multiplicity
in self-thinking thought, you know, because a cabinet's not a, a cat. Uh, so there, if,
if that's gonna be the ultimate form of all things, that all things are fine there,
pure actuality, and there still has to be a multiplicity in there. And I went away saying,
yeah, yeah, yeah. Um, but then I thought about it, you know, one of those moments where a few days
later said this, um, if you understand function as critical to form, and I think Aristotle does,
um, then there already is a, uh, fundamental multiplicity in self-thinking thought because
it has two functions. It thinks and it moves. It's also the prime mover. So if it's got two functions,
then, then there has to be a multiplicity in the actuality within self-thinking thought itself. Um,
which I never talked to Halper about that again, but, um, that's, that's something.
Yeah. Like I say, I'm still, I still like Plotinus' critique of that, that it still, it still falls
away from ultimacy because you need a principle explaining what holds the, it together. There's an
implicit, I think there's an implicit dynamic. I mean, maybe what you're saying is that, you know,
God, the unmover, has some ultimate form, um, uh, of self-organization that keeps it all together.
And then I find that problematic because then you're once you're once you're, you are one step
below the one, which is, you know, the fount of all possible forms kind of thing. Um, yeah.
So anyways, um, uh, that was a tension. I'm sorry. No, no, no, no, no, don't apologize. I'm enjoying
this. This is what I want to be doing. I mean, some of this gets into very nuts and bolts things,
and some people following this might be going, well, what, what does it matter? Well, it, it matters in that,
right. These, these, these, as we said earlier, this, right, this isn't ivory tower stuff. This
ramifies back out into fundamentally different interpretations and therefore different historical
pathways of Christianity in very, very powerful ways that affect lives even today. Um, and it's not
just arcane stuff. We're talking about, we're talking about kind of like the, the conceptual genetics
of a lot of, uh, a lot of European thought in, in really important ways. There's, there are deep
ethical implications. Yeah, exactly. And, um, that's something that I can see possibly working out
as, uh, relational ethics. Uh, I think, I think if you come at reality with this substance understanding,
then I, as an independent existence become supremely important or that, but that, you see,
but that, that's exactly the problem. And, you know, and, and, and the Protestant Cartesian ideal
of the, uh, individual conscience or the cogito ergo sum, right? This is actually flying in the face
of cognitive science. I'm doing a lot of work on the nature of rationality. We don't work well,
monologically. We, our rationality, no, there's a lot of work going into this. We work dialogically.
Our rationality is designed, uh, to work dialogically. That, how it operates. And we are
malforming it and therefore tending to make it malfunction when we limit it to a monological
way of being. Okay. Uh, yeah, this is, this is, uh, this is something that came up as I was watching,
um, uh, your, your lecture at, uh, uh, uh, uh, I always, I had it, like, um, Savannah,
Raulston, Raulston, Raulston. I keep wanting to say Rawlings, Raulston. Yeah. Um, yeah, the, the, one of the,
a couple of things, um, let me try and get my thoughts coherent. One of the things that, um,
shocked me and, you know, kind of slapped me in the face when I first read Aristotle
long, long ago was, um, and on the soul, he talks about, uh, the mind becoming what it knows
when, when, when, um, so there's a union between the knower and the known and not just, uh,
metaphorical union. Uh, it's an on real ontological union. Yeah. Uh, it's, I think it's part of his
argument why the brain can't be the mind, why the mind and the brain have to be separate.
Um, so that kind of, uh, really kind of like, wow, that's weird. Uh, and, uh, which kind of leads
when I teach my classes, I, um, and we talk about reason, I say, there's two kinds of reason.
There's discursive reasoning, which ends up being, uh, deductive and inductive. You see that in,
and there are other things, but I think they can be subsumed under, um, one of those two models.
Uh, and there's non-discursive reasoning. Um, this non-discursive reasoning, reasoning is an immediate
grasp. And I think it's what Plato's talking about when he talks about the philosopher leaving the
cave. And yes, I agree. Noesis. Yeah. And, um, and I think,
I think that has to be what Aristotle is getting at when he talks about the mind and, uh, its object
being one, this non-discursive reasoning is this ontological union with what I know is this, um,
it's the difference between knowing my wife, knowing my wife and knowing a person who's called
my wife. Yes. Knowing things about my wife and knowing my wife. Um, so I think that's important.
And I think that's, I think this is my, my criticism of the enlightenment is that's what it lost.
I make a very similar criticism. I talk about that, uh, there are multiple ways of knowing,
and of course in, in ancient Greek thought, you see this even captured in different, uh,
Greek terms. There of course is, there's something analogous to propositional knowing,
which becomes to the forefront, um, and, and becomes tyrannical. Um, it, it, it holds, uh, like
a monopoly on our understanding of knowing. And then of course there's knowing how, and some
philosophers have acknowledged this, uh, procedural knowing. And what's interesting in cognitive
science is each of this ways of knowing has a different sense of realness and a different kind
of memory, uh, associated with it. There's perspectival knowing, knowing what it's like
to be you, you know, like, and this intrinsically involves consciousness. And then there's this
deeper participatory knowing, knowing by being coupled to, uh, participating in the same principles
and patterns. It hasn't, as you say, it's an ontological joining, um, that's, uh, uh, and,
and what's happening in cognitive science, or at least what's called 4E cognitive science, is
these non-propositional kinds of knowing are coming to the fore as, and, and, and that's a basis for a
critique of the enlightenment reduction of all the kinds of knowing to merely the propositional kind
of knowing. No, it's interesting. And what it, what this also holds out, James, is the possibility
that if there is genuinely a structure of emanation and emergence to cognition, and now, and I don't
mean just propositionally, given what I just said, and there is this emanation and emergence relation,
and then the knowing is a relation of participation and coupling, then you have strong transcendence,
the kind of stuff Plotinus talked about, where we can, we can know and therefore be at different
levels of realization, both how we are realized as agents and how the world discloses itself
as an arena for action to us. And I think that is very spiritually significant.
Yeah. I mean, it's mystics. That's what the mystics are after.
I think so. I think so. And what's interesting is, I'm teaching a course on the cognitive
science or religion is, you can, the, the, the, now, I think, I'm going to, well, I'll defend this,
I'm turning it into a book. You can make a very plausible, rigorous argument from within very rigorous,
you know, cognitive science, analytic philosophy, that for what I just said, that converges with this,
with the mystical vision. And then if we have the possibility of a kind of philosophy that was
exemplified in people like Plotinus, but is very hard to find more recently, maybe Spinoza as a,
as a, as a more, somebody within modernity that was able to do that at the same time kind of thing.
Right.
So tell me a little bit more, because we got a little bit, I forced a digression.
You said it, and, but I want, I want to give you more, more space about it. You think the process
philosophers are still bound in some way to the substance ontology?
Oh, I hadn't thought of it in those terms.
Well, they seem to still, if I understood you, you seem to be saying they're still prioritizing
the relata over the relations, and that's ultimately a substance ontology, isn't it?
You're right. I agree with you. And I just, at least today I was, maybe when I wrote the book,
I was doing those terms, but today I wasn't. I was thinking of it as being stuck with Aristotle's
understanding of relation, but that is founded upon his, and I think I do make this argument in the
book. That's founded upon his understanding of substance. Yeah. But how can relation itself
be a substance? Yeah, I agree. And, and so that, that just throws all sorts of wrenches,
I think, in the framework right there. But yeah, I think that's what they're, I think they are still,
I think they're trying to get out of it, but they're, I think it's their commitment to this,
okay, we'll call it substance understanding of relation. I call it prosti, because that's the
Greek word that's used towards a thing. Yeah, yeah, yeah. Yeah, and like I said, I think,
and that's how we got on the digression. I think that reverberates with this, the prioritization,
the absolutization of actuality over possibility, right? I think those two, those are the two,
the two things that sort of press against me when I look into Whitehead's process relational
philosophy. I think some of the more recent Whiteheadians are moving out of it. I think
Bracken in The Divine Matrix is really trying to break free from it, although he still falls into
it in places. I think some of the other people are trying to get free. It's very, it reminds me,
only by analogy of your point about Heidegger, that there feels like there's this turning and
groping and moving towards something. It would be good if there was a more continual, explicit dialogue
by people like somebody, I think, who has the talent and the expertise like Matt Segal to engage with,
you know, with the Neoplaton, like a much more explicit dialogue between, right, the Neoplatonic
vision as presented by you and what the more recent process philosophers, I think, is best
exemplified in his work, are trying to do. Matt, if you happen to watch this and you want to have
a discussion with me about that, I would, I would dearly like that. Jim, we're coming towards the end,
we sort of covered off a lot of this book. Now, so I would like to move to you giving us sort of a bit of a
pricey about the next one and what we can expect for it, and I'm very eager for it.
Well, as we've talked about, it's the missing part of the first book. The first book was intended
to go much more deeply into both sides of the path, but space limitations made me pick,
pick, pick a path to focus on. And so the, the substance path got short shrift. This, this book
picks up pretty much with the Scholastics and goes from the Scholastics through Descartes in a much deeper
and, you know, where I say one or two lines about Aquinas or whatever, that's all expanded into to an
argument basically justifying my claim. And I think, I think the problem, I think the problem with
scholastic understanding of God is that it, uh, embraces this substance notion and turns God into
this, uh, radical one simplicity that, um, and it's interesting because, um, you know, Anselm's,
Anselm's ontological argument, the proslogion, uh, is interesting. He's, he starts making
all these arguments because God has to be that in which nothing greater can be. No.
Then which nothing greater can be thought. Um, and he gets to chapter 15 in that, and he says,
Oh, well, God, you're so great. You know, we can't think about you at all because we can think about
something that can't be thought of at all. And, you know, you have to be that, or you're not that
then which nothing greater can be thought. But then he goes right back into conceptualizing God.
Yeah. Um, and he gets to the end of it and he, he makes these arguments for why God has to be one
and has to be simple and all these. And then he tries to talk about the Trinity and it ends up just
be, well, we can't understand that part of it. It's a mystery. Yeah. So I think, and I think that
I will say infects, uh, the rest of, um, scholasticism, this. That's interesting. One simple
understand. And that's essentially what I'm trying to show that, and it does pick up with
the scholastics. I can't, I think Parmenides actually, because I argue that Parmenides is the
first to see being its substance terms. And so it deals with Parmenides. Then I move into the,
the scholastics and then end with Descartes, uh, the collapse of that whole, um,
um, framework, ontological framework. So it's really just, uh, expansion of, of, of that part of,
uh, the book you've got there, which they made me cut out.
Well, I, and so I, I, but I think it's good. I mean, I, I look forward to seeing the more
explicated critique of the substance scholastic line. Um, and are you doing like you did in this
book where there's a weaving between philosophy and Christian theology? You mentioned Anselm,
for example, is that taking place? Well, the scholastics are Christian, so,
so, um, so yeah, I mean, but I think it's, what's the word I want to use? Less favorable view of the
Christian perspective. Ah, I see. Um, well, I mean, I disagree with the viewing God is this
substance in this substance way. I, I, I, I would expect so given the argument in this book. I mean,
how that would be, um, so, but I hope so. Maybe. I don't know. That's my answer. We'll see.
Do you think, I mean, so not just my work, Bracken in the divine matrix, this, this, this way of
thinking, given what we said earlier about possible deep, uh, I like the term, uh, you've heard me use
it dialogos between, for example, Zen and Neoplatonism at this deep level. Do you think this
could afford a kind of lingua philosophica whereby these traditions could perhaps enter into,
uh, and I'm reading these like Cobb and others where Buddhists and Christians and, uh, and, and,
and Jews and Christians and Buddhists are all, and, and they're, and you can tell part of what they're
doing is struggling for, uh, struggling for a shared vocabulary, a shared grammar without
making anybody prematurely commit to the, you know, right. They're, they're trying not to confuse
entering into good faith dialogue, uh, with, you know, what they can be mutually transformative with
some crypto way of trying to proselytize. And so they're struggling to come. And I've, I,
I, I feel called to that task, not because I'm a Christian or a Jew, but because I, I, I think
there's, uh, the, there's a meaning crisis and coming up with this kind of grammar and vocabulary,
this lingua philosophica could help us get back to that deep dialogical rationality that we need
if we're going to properly, um, you know, address it and respond to it. Um, do you think that, that
your work is consonant with that project? Well, I'd be happy if it, if it is, that would be,
that would be nice. Of course, uh, my own goal in writing was just to help me understand. Yes, I, yes.
But, uh, that would be, be great. Um, I want to ask this. I'm, I understand the need for a common
vocabulary, but one of the problems I see is, um, and you can correct me again if I'm wrong,
the problem between the East and West understanding each other is they just don't think alike.
Yeah. Um, it's hard for a Westerner to understand Eastern and me being Westerner because the Eastern
philosophy just isn't thinking like we did. What I'm hoping is that the difference is this relational
understanding of mythology and that'll give us a way to think similarly. That, that, okay,
so that's exactly my point. And then I would say, uh, and we also have exemplars. We have,
you know, we do have the Kyoto school that was doing it. Um, and there's also the fact that
Westerners can come to think in a way that is consonant with Asiatic philosophy if they're willing
to undertake the practices that go along with the philosophy. Uh, right. I don't disagree with that.
And, um, and so, um, uh, this of course is because the non-propositional matters so much,
uh, you know, and I have been doing Taoist and Buddhist practices for, uh, three decades. Um, uh,
and so, uh, I, I'm not, I'm not saying I'm the only one or something ridiculous like that.
There are many people like this now that understand, uh, you know, my friend Evan Thompson
for as a clear example too. Um, uh, I think you're right. I think it's difficult. And I
think if we think we can simply sort of logic, the beliefs against each other, uh, we're not,
we have to, we have to, I think you're right. We need, we need this much more expansive
geometry of thought. If you'll allow me a way of talking coupled to a willingness to take on each
other's practice in deep seriousness, you see this also from the, you know, from the West,
you had people like Thomas Merton and John Maine and others who were taking up Buddhist practices.
And John Cobb is, you know, and, and back and forth, uh, people like that. I think that does
make, uh, uh, a genuinely mutually transformative, uh, dialogos possible between them. And I think your
work, well, this is, I'll, I'll be stronger. I am trying to make use of your work within that project.
That would be a fine, acceptable use of my work. I'll be very happy for that. Um,
one other thing I wanted to add about that whole thing is, um,
it's another thing that struck me as I was reading, uh, Plato. Um, and I wrote about this and that,
uh, this, uh, in the paper, uh, published in Episteme, uh, what is it? Recovering Plato,
A Platonic Virtue Epistemology. I have it. I haven't read it yet, James. I've read a lot of
your stuff. I've got it. I haven't read that yet. I'm sorry. That, that's okay. Um,
was I was reading the, the Mino once it, it, you know, the two, two passages in the Mino struck me.
One where, uh, Mino says, um, you know, Socrates offers a definition that he would accept a virtue.
And Mino says, well, that's, that's stupid, Socrates. He said, what would you say if somebody
said, you know, he said, shape is, uh, that which follows color. And he said, well, that's stupid,
Socrates. What would you say if someone says they don't understand what shape is any more than they
understand, you know, what color is any more than shape? And he says, well, if they're a disputatious
debater, I will say, I've given my answer and it's up to you to refute it. But if they are friends
as we are, then I have to, um, which says, okay, there's, this is where I came up with my idea of
virtue of epistemology. The kind of character we are affects whether we can, we can learn or not.
And then you get the digression where he's talking to the slave boy and, you know, showing that he,
you know, already knows how to square or square or double the square. And he gets to the slave
boy with the point where he says, well, I don't know Socrates. I don't know how to go. And Socrates
turns to Mino and says, have we harmed the slave boy? No, we benefited the slave boy because now he's
prepared to learn because he's admitted he doesn't know. Humility is essential to, to our ability to
acquire wisdom. And, um, this is something I'm seeing a lot in our society now. And I find it
really troubling, uh, lack of humility, a lack of willingness to listen to the other side. Yeah.
I agree so much. We can't get anywhere. We're just going to go further and further
into our own little solipsistic, you know, box if we do that. And that is what I think, you know,
Plotinus said is matter. Um, I think it's individualism. The more, the further we become a
self independent of everything else, the less we become human. And, uh, and, uh, so that's part
of the problem I see. I agree. The West lacks humility. I, I, I, I, yeah, I've spoken repeatedly about
the deep relationship between humility and wisdom and, uh, between humility and, um, addressing some
of the deep profound biases that drive our self deceptive behavior. Um, I, you have a staunch,
uh, companion and I, like you, I, I, I, I, I, I believe in a virtue epistemology and a virtue ethics
in a deep way. Um, um, I, I take seriously issues like the demarcation problem. You can't really,
when you look at the products, you can't really distinguish science from pseudoscience. You have
to look at the producers and are there, are they engaging in good faith or, and I'm using this term
in Frankfurt sense, or are they bullshitting, right? Right. And, and, and that's, that's what you pay
attention to. That's what you look at. Um, and so, uh, I'm in complete agreement with you about that.
And, and I do think, and this goes back to the point I was making earlier, um, what we're talking
about here isn't arcane because that notion of a radically autonomous, think of these words,
autonomy and authenticity, right? Uh, and, you know, finding discussion, right? And that,
I agree with you. They have become pathological in our society. There, there's a, there's a proper
way in which they enter into, you know, there's a, there should be a proper tonus between
individuation and participation. Uh, because of course we don't want totalitarian collectivities
or something like that either, but where, with the way the West is going, um, uh, it's,
it's become pathological. I agree. We've lost the dialogical and, and I will make a strong claim
now here. I know you're more modest in your claims, but I've made a lot of argument and,
you know, some, even some publications, I think to the degree to which we lose the dialogical,
we actually lose the rational in a profound, profound way. And when we lose, yeah. And I think
that, I think that dooms us, um, in a, in a very important way. James, what's the title of the second
book? Substance Ontology and the Crisis of Reason. Yes. That goes so much with what we just said.
That's beautiful. That's beautiful. Um, it's already on Amazon. Surprisingly, that surprised me.
Pardon me. It's already, uh, you can see it on Amazon. You can't buy it yet. Can you pre-order it?
I think you can pre-order it, but you're going to send me a copy. You said I will send you a copy.
I'm looking forward to it, James. Don't tell anybody, but you can probably download it from
Library Genesis. You can get this book from Library Genesis. Right. Well, maybe so.
And save a hundred dollars. Well, at least the prices come down, you know, uh, and, uh,
and I recommend getting the book. It's a beautiful book. I recommend very, very strongly reading this
book. Um, James is, is really important thinker and, um, uh, we all need to raise James's profile.
He's going to be modest and I'm going to embarrass him by saying this. Uh, but, uh, James should,
he does not have an academic position that suits his talent and his devotion and his character.
And he should have that. And we need to raise his profile. I'm doing everything I can within the
academic world and I will continue to do so, but anything anybody can do in order to, uh, to make
James more well known, make, have people read his book, talk about it. Let's get more and more people
talking with James, talking about James's work. Um, as you can also see by his demeanor and how he shows up
in this conversation, he's a, he's a good soul. Um, it's somebody we should have no problem getting
behind. And I would like to do whatever I can to make, uh, James more prominent so that we can
increase the chances of him coming to belong where he belongs. Um, and so I ask anybody if they know
anything, if they can do anything virtuously, of course, um, that, uh, they, uh, they, they let me
know or they, they reach out to James, uh, James, I want to now take this opportunity to one, one more
time, uh, promote this book, um, and say it's, it is, it is an important book, really important book.
Um, and, uh, to say that you and I of course are going to keep in touch, uh, but I hope you and I
could also have another public discussion like this at some point. Certainly. Just let me know when
we're working out. I like to give the people I'm talking to the opportunity to have the last word.
Is there any parting thoughts you'd like to leave our listeners with? Oh, no, I think I've said
everything. All right. Thank you so much, my friend. This has been a great pleasure.
Thank you, John. Me too. Thank you for watching this video.
We're going to continue the practice of releasing free videos like this on YouTube a little less
frequently. I'm trying to rein in how thinly I have been spreading myself. I need to do this.
Maybe some of you have seen the reasons that I've made public on videos released on behalf
of the transition to the lectern format. Many of you would like to follow up this in more detail and
depth. You will find links to those following videos that are for patrons only and the links to
that will be found in the notes to this video. Thank you very much. Take good care.
