So I think I've seen a set-up system for this many years ago, but I've got no idea, I've
completely forgotten how to do it. So what is this? So this is a way of demonstrating
Lissageu figures, L-I-S-S-A-J-O-U-S, which were first described in the 19th century using,
I believe, actual pendulums, which is really quite tricky. It's much, much easier to do it
electrically. So all you need are two signal generators, preferably as identical as you can
get, but it's not the end of the world if they're not. These are just two old ones that
we don't use for much else. And an oscilloscope, no reason on the Facebook why you can't use
a digital one, but I find they can sometimes be a little bit tricky in certain situations,
so I prefer to go a bit old school at this point. And the only other thing that matters
is that it's got to have, whatever sort of oscilloscope you use, it's got to have an XY mode.
On this CRO, it's a button. Sometimes it might be an extra setting on the time base, maybe
just beyond the longest time base setting.
And so what does that do, this XY thing?
Well, normally, if I switch XY off and turn the time base down, normally, of course, the
X deflection, or the X position of the dot on the screen, is determined entirely by the
CRO. The CRO sweeps the dot across the screen, and then the voltage on one or other of the
inputs is what makes the dot move up and down. So the Y deflection is determined by the inputs,
and the X position is determined by the time base. As soon as you put it onto XY mode,
all that happens now, the time base is now completely irrelevant. It's completely disconnected.
And what happens now is that one of these inputs is determining the X position, and one of them
is determining the Y position. So let's see which one's which. Let's turn this signal generator
up. So my top signal generator is deflecting the dot vertically, as you can see.
And that's just showing that, effectively, the size of the amplitude there, or effectively,
the voltage displayed is a bit like the output on the signal generator.
Exactly. It's as if you turn the time base off normally.
Yeah.
So that's giving me three squares, whatever that might be. I think six volts, because
it's two volts per division at the moment.
Yeah.
If I turn that one down and instead turn the lower signal generator up, on XY mode, it now
makes the dot move left to right. So it's almost as if you've just turned the oscilloscope screen
through 90 degrees.
Yeah.
Now, the fun comes when you put both of them on simultaneously. Now, at the moment, I've
got them very slow, so that you can see the individual oscillations, but we'll soon speed
that up in a minute. So if I turn that one up, so it's got an amplitude of plus or minus about
three squares, and then turn this one up to be the same, it starts moving in the X and
Y directions simultaneously. Now, to start with, it looks like a circle, and that's nice
and lovely, but if we carry on watching it, we'll probably find that over time, it will
start to get more and more elliptical, and then it will eventually become a diagonal line.
Now, if it were a diagonal line in that direction, that would simply mean that the two power supplies
are absolutely in phase, because as this one goes that way, that one goes that way, and vice
versa, so you'd get a diagonal line like that. If they were 180 degrees out of phase with
each other, it would be a diagonal line in the other direction. The fact that we're getting
something that's more or less a circle suggests that they are currently either 90 or 270 degrees
out of phase. If I start going to much higher frequencies, then you'll get a much better
feeling for the shape. So instead of having it at one hertz, which is what each signal generator
is at at the moment, if I set them both to one kilohertz, and just turn the amplitude down a little
bit so that you can see it better on the screen, you'll see that we've got, oh, they're about out of phase,
but they're coming into phase. Right now, they're in phase, and now they're going slightly out of phase
again, because with the dials as they are, I can't get them absolutely perfectly. So the frequencies are
almost the same, but not quite perfect. Absolutely. And interestingly, according to the dials,
they're not quite the same. You can see that the dials are not perfectly positioned. So this one looks
to me like about 1.05 kilohertz, whereas this one looks pretty much bang on 1.00 kilohertz.
Yeah. If I get to the virtual now, you get it perfect if you have to. Absolutely. And then once you've got
that, that's nice, and you can talk about measuring phase. This is actually a very quick and easy way
for electronic engineers to measure phase between two signals. It's actually easier to do it this way
than sometimes it is to do it many other ways. So they do actually have a practical use. You can then
start to try different ratios of frequencies. So if I turn one of these down to half a kilohertz,
so I'll leave this one at one kilohertz and turn that one down to half a kilohertz.
It's a bit tricky to, on this signal generator at least, to get it exactly right. But with a bit of trial
and error, we can hopefully get it. There we go.
Ooh, that's nice. So it looks like some kind of 3D shape moving.
Yeah, the 3D movement is entirely within your head. It's an entire optical illusion. It's not that I've invented a 3D
CRO fun though that might be. It's entirely in your own head, and you might, they start to get quite
hypnotic, you might be able to look at, as you continue to look at it, you might be able to convince
yourself that it's turning one way, but then you might be able to convince yourself that it's
actually turning the other, which just proves that it is a complete optical illusion. The fact that we've
got a loop that way tells us which signal generator is running faster than the other, because if I swap
them over, if I go from 0.5 and one kilohertz to the other way around, so I'll put that one back to one
kilohertz, and then I'll turn the bottom one down to half a kilohertz, we'll get the same shape,
but it's now flipped through 90 degrees. And to me it looks like it's going clockwise, but you know.
That might look clockwise, if you move your head in a particular way, you might, oh yeah,
I've now managed to convince myself it's going the other way. But no, it's anti-clockwise now.
Yeah, total optical illusion. And you can try, you can then have hours of fun trying all sorts of
different ratios. Nice fractional ratios are good. If you just, if you just randomly do it,
you'll just get something like that, which might be, you might find aesthetically pleasant,
but it's slightly more fun to get ones that are maybe a bit more like that. That's quite nice. And by
counting the number of loops in each direction, you can work out what the ratio is between these
frequencies. Of course, there's no way of working out what the absolute values are, it's just purely
for getting ratios. So there you go. Listenshoot figures. Beautiful.
Speaker 1
Speaker 1
Speaker 6
Speaker 6
Speaker 12
Speaker
Speaker 8
Speaker
E
Speaker
Speaker
Speaker
Speaker
Speaker
Speaker
Speaker
Speaker
Speaker
Speaker
Speaker
Speaker
