The New York Times calls him arguably the chief ideologist of the Silicon Valley elite.
Mark Andreessen on Uncommon Knowledge now.
Welcome to Uncommon Knowledge, I'm Peter Robinson.
After growing up in New Lisbon, Wisconsin, which has a population today of 2,523, Mark
Andreessen majored in computer science at the University of Illinois and then moved west.
In 1993, Mr Andreessen co-founded Netscape, which made available the first widely used
browser almost instantly, making him a major figure here in Silicon Valley and he has remained
a major figure ever since.
In 2009, Mr Andreessen and his investing colleague Ben Horowitz launched the venture capital firm
Andreessen Horowitz, which today has more than $40 billion under management.
Here at Stanford, Mr Andreessen participates in the Hoover Institution's Emerging Technology
Review.
Since the election last November, Mr Andreessen has been spending only half his time here
in Silicon Valley, spending the other half at Mar-a-Lago where he has been advising Donald
Trump and his friends Elon Musk and Vivek Ramaswamy.
Mark Andreessen, thank you for joining me.
Thank you, Peter.
It's great to be here.
Okay, Mark, let's begin by taking a brief look at a video.
It's morning again in America.
Oh, there we go.
And under the leadership of President Reagan, our country is prouder and stronger and better.
Why would we ever want to return to where we were, less than four short years ago?
It's the hair on the back there and not go up.
It's still powerful, isn't it?
Sorry, is that 84?
That's 84.
That's the reelection campaign.
So, the 1970s, a decade of economic stagnation, the erosion of our position in the Cold War,
the national humiliations of Vietnam and Watergate, then Reagan is elected.
And by 1984, the economy has begun to expand.
We've begun to rebuild our military.
There had been a rebirth of patriotism.
And that video, although it may look sappy to us today, rang true enough to the American
people that they gave Reagan 49 out of 50 states when they reelected him in 1984.
Serious question.
A national renewal.
Can we do it again?
I mean, I see no reason why we can't.
We have to want to.
You know, I was a kid when that, I was 13 when that came out, so I only had a vague awareness
of what was going on, but we certainly can.
I mean, look, we have the preconditions for all of it.
We have, you know, we have the people.
We have everything.
We have the people.
We have the resources.
We have the geographic security.
I mean, we have all of these capabilities.
I mean, it's actually amazing if you look right now.
We are the major Western economy that's growing, right?
So, like the UK and Germany and Canada, they've stopped growing and they're probably shrinking,
right?
And so, like, notwithstanding all of our many issues, we've continued to grow.
We continue to be the beacon of capitalism and enterprise and entrepreneurship.
The smartest people in the world definitely 100% still want to come here.
You know, we're now leading the world in AI.
Like, you know, and then energy, like, I mean, we have, you know, it's this running joke.
It's like every time there's like one of these doom, you know, headlines of, you know, the,
you know, the U.S. is going to run out of, you know, some rare earth mineral and lithium
or something.
It's like, you know, the joke is like some farmer in North Dakota stumbles over like
a new $2 trillion deposit in his backyard.
Like, we have apparently unlimited natural resources.
Like, there's no, like, we have, you know, overwhelmingly the dominant, you know, military machine
in the world.
Like, for all of our issues, we have all the preconditions for, you know, golden age.
A golden age.
Yeah.
All right.
We'll come back to that.
In the meantime, you have some explaining to do.
The presidential candidates Marc Andreessen has supported.
This is all public.
I did a little research on you, Marc.
I mean, you may have tried to tidy things up.
You being you, I doubt that you have, but this is still very much on the record.
Hold on.
I got to hack Wikipedia.
Go ahead.
Bill Clinton.
Yes.
Al Gore.
Yes.
John Kerry.
Barack Obama.
Yep.
Hillary Clinton.
Yep.
And Donald Trump.
Mitt Romney.
All right.
In 2012.
But yes.
Yeah.
But that trajectory exactly from actually, I mean, I sort of entered, you know, business
in 94, but I knew Bill Clinton and Al Gore quite well and supported them in 96.
And then, as you said, Gore in 2000, all the way up to Hillary in 16.
Okay.
So, from a very loyal Democrat to a MAGA Republican, how come?
What happened?
Yeah.
So, things changed.
Yeah.
So, the way I describe it.
You changed or things changed?
So, I wonder what in your thinking changed and what, I mean, there are plenty of people
who say, I didn't leave the Democratic Party, the Democratic Party left me.
Ronald Reagan used to say that.
Yeah.
So, how does the environment and thinking?
Both of them.
Comment.
Would you please?
Yeah.
I mean, I think the members of the key Trump team are former Democrats, right?
Donald Trump is a former Democrat.
Bobby Kennedy.
You go right down the list.
Tulsi Gabbard.
You know, there's a lot of these people.
So, there's a broad-based phenomenon.
But anyway, so we'll talk about that.
So, the way I describe it is, look, I came up in the 90s.
You know, I grew up in the Midwest.
I, you know, I have, you know, sort of very firm kind of understanding memory of what it's
like to, you know, kind of grow up in a, you know, sort of the polar opposite environment
of California.
Right.
But I moved to California.
I became a full-blown, you know, Californian, fully assimilated, adapted.
But the way I would describe it is, it was just sort of assumed that if you were in
Silicon Valley in high tech in the 90s, it was just assumed, Clinton-Gore heyday, it
was just assumed that there was what I now call the deal with a capital D. And nobody ever
said it out loud, but it was just assumed.
Right.
And the deal was, you can be a high-tech entrepreneur.
You can build all this amazing technology.
You can build a successful company.
You can create lots of jobs.
The technology makes the world a better place.
It's great.
You take the company public.
You make a lot of money.
At some point, you take the money and you donate it to philanthropy.
And right, and that's the total arc.
And then when you die in your obituary, it's like he was an entrepreneur and a philanthropist
and all of his, you know-
The Silicon Valley circle of life.
The circle of life.
And it's just like, it's great.
It was a great deal because it's like you get to do what you want.
You get all the material benefits.
You get all the professional satisfaction out of executing in your field.
You get all the material satisfaction out of financial success.
And then you get all the psychic moral satisfaction out of-
And the government leaves you alone.
And the government-
You have more than enough scope to do what you need to do as an entrepreneur.
Yeah, well, and that and also, you know, as you may recall, the Clinton-Gore administration
was extremely enthusiastic about high-tech.
Yes.
And so I have a thousand stories in those days.
But one is, I was actually one of my little claims to fame.
I was the third wheel in the first presidential webcast.
So Bill Clinton and I did the first presidential webcast, presidential internet town hall, I think in 1996.
And, you know, it was like a big deal in those days to do that.
Right, yes.
He could not, and he called me afterwards and he was like just like completely thrilled by the whole thing.
It was so fantastic.
And of course, Al Gore literally, you know, Al Gore literally, you know, he got a lot of flack later for-
Saying that he invented the internet.
Well, so, but this is the thing is he never actually, so here I'll defend Al Gore's honor.
Okay.
He never said he invented the internet.
He said he took the lead in the Senate in helping to create the internet, which is actually true.
He was the creator, sponsor of the legislation in the 80s that created what was known as the NSFNet, National Science Foundation Network, which became the internet.
That is the internet backbone and that, and then also the National Supercomputer Centers, which, and I bring it up because that's how I was able to do the work that I did, which is by the time I showed up at Illinois, we have the National Supercomputer Center and the NSFNet backbone that he had funded.
And it was very important to your work that those things already existed.
Yeah, they had to.
Those were the preconditions for everything that followed.
Preconditions.
And so Al Gore, like, you know, I think deserves tremendous credit for what he did, but the point is he was super enthusiastic about it and has always been a giant supporter of technology.
Right.
And so these people just thought that it was just absolutely fantastic.
And then, you know, Democrats all the way through the 2000s, you know, as the Democratic Party started to clearly move left, Obama was still generally a big supporter of tech and American business.
And, you know, he liked what we were doing.
And then you may remember in 2012, I don't remember in 2012, 2012 at the time, Obama's re-election, it was, the headlines were all, this was the first internet election, first social media election.
And it was literally, the headlines literally were social media saves democracy because social media is what caused Obama to be able to raise so much money online and to be able to beat, you know, the evil
fascist Nazi Mitt Romney.
Right.
And so literally the press was like glowing in support of social media.
Facebook was great for democracy, the whole thing.
By the way, the Arab Spring also happened at the same time and again, universal positive press coverage.
So up until 2012.
So to your point, you're reminding me of something.
I knew somebody who was a very close friend of Mitt Romney and who was an investor out here in Silicon Valley.
And Romney said, the Obama operation is killing us on tech and in particular campaign tech.
Apparently, the Obama people had it all sorted out so that they could give volunteers a piece of software on their smartphones.
They could go door to door and ask five questions and they would know whether that person was already supporting Obama, so you don't spend more money on him,
or committed to Romney, so you don't spend money on him, or a maybe in which you want resources.
And the Romney people had nothing like that.
And my buddy's job was to come out here to Silicon Valley and recruit engineers to build something for Romney.
And engineers wouldn't work for the Republican.
Right.
It was so uncool.
Yeah, 100%.
Okay.
Yes, no question.
You're not remotely surprised by that story.
Well, this goes back.
So the long arc here is Silicon Valley.
There was a big Republican contingent in Silicon Valley in the chip era.
Right.
50, 60, 70s.
So by the time I got here, there were these guys who were mostly retired at that point, who were kind of the-
David Packard worked for Richard Nixon as Deputy Defense Secretary, as I recall.
Yeah.
So these guys were already in their 70s and 80s.
I met some of them, but I didn't know a lot of them.
This is sort of the transition of Silicon Valley from chips to software was kind of that handoff.
By the time I got here, basically, everybody below the age of 50 was a Democrat, which sort of foreshadowed the future of the state,
as the state was going through its transitions.
And so, yeah, so basically like, and basically everybody I knew bought into the deal.
Like essentially everybody I knew did this.
And by the way, it's like, it's a tremendously heady thing to buy into, to become part of, because it's just like, it's amazing.
You're like this incredibly lionized tech founder.
You're getting invited to the White House.
Everybody loves you.
By the way, the press loves you.
It's all great.
The philanthropy, they love you for that.
Like the whole thing is just like this audit, and you get to, you know, Davos and Aspen and-
You get to get rich and have your vanity flattery.
It's amazing.
By the way, the government is supporting you, right?
And if you have a problem, and there's like a problem in a foreign country, and they're like, you know, coming at you on something,
or there's some crazy tax or something, the US government will actually go to bat for you.
Or if, you know, there's some weird trade war thing or whatever, your stuff gets seized to support, the State Department will step in.
And so the government's like on the side of American business.
And then, you know, and this was the trade, you know, in retrospect, this was the trade that the Democrats made in the 90s, right, to become pro-business.
You know, this is sort of a reflection of how Clinton brought the Democratic Party back from the craziness of the 60s and 70s,
was to get them in a point where they were not fighting, literally fighting capitalism, right, every day.
And so it worked great.
The meshing was great.
And the meshing basically worked great up until 2012, and then basically started, basically it was after Obama's reelection.
Really, what I picked up, my experience was starting in 2013 is when things really started to unravel.
Okay.
And so how do you pick it up?
You're in 2013, well, as I said, you've been a major figure in Silicon Valley, famous man, wealthy man since the 90s.
How do you pick it up in 2013?
You're investing and you discover your entrepreneurs are starting to run into difficulties they didn't used to run into.
There's something more vague than that.
There's a vibe.
Describe what it felt like.
What are you picking up in 2013?
So in retrospect, I was on the front end of picking up the change.
I didn't understand what was happening, but I was on the front end of picking up the change.
But you felt something.
I felt it.
And the reason I felt it is because I was so involved in the consumer internet companies of that era, and in particular the social media companies.
I see.
And so I was on the Facebook board.
I was an angel investor in Twitter, angel investor in LinkedIn.
You know, I was involved in all these, you know, basically all of these companies, all these new social media companies.
You know, and I was super close, you know, I knew YouTube inside out.
And, you know, so I sort of knew how all these things operated.
I knew all the people.
And I was in the room for a lot of the conversations.
And basically it was in 2013 is really like when the employees started to activate.
And so you started to get basically this employee activist movement like that.
And that was a big thing.
And of course, in retrospect, I know what happened, which is you had a generation of radicalized college kids sort of from, you know, basically.
So basically, if you back up further, it was basically some combination of like 9-11, the Patriot Act, and then the Iraq War, and then the global financial crisis, and then Occupy Wall Street.
Whatever happened during that sort of 10 year period radicalized the college kids before they moved into industry.
But then they showed up and they were starting to populate these companies in 2012, 2013, 2014.
And then they then activated a lot of their older contemporaries in those companies, the older cohort members who wanted to be cool and with it.
And so, and we know this.
It started with the kids then.
It started with the kids.
And the very specific thing that happened with the social media companies is that was the beginning of the whole thing with hate speech and misinformation.
So that was the whole thing, because up until then, it was the Internet is a Wild West.
We love it because it's a Wild West.
It makes all these things possible.
It's fantastic.
It's great.
It's working.
It's pro-democracy.
It's pro-free speech.
You know, the State Department, the Obama State Department had this like giant push to expand free speech right all through the rest of the world, right?
At the same time that they discovered it would be a really good idea to censor American speech right on social media, right?
So there was this amazing, remember net neutrality?
Yes.
This big push from the left to make sure that big companies couldn't censor Internet speech.
And so there were years and years and years of anybody who was on the side of censoring Internet speech was against net neutrality and was the Antichrist.
And then it literally that flipped and became anybody who wasn't pro-Internet censorship was Antichrist.
And net neutrality vanished as an issue.
The two issues that have vanished completely from the political stage are net neutrality and money in politics.
They're just gone as like mainstream left-wing issues.
They're just, you know, it's money in politics is after Hillary outspent Donald Trump three to one and lost.
Like that was it for the anti-money in politics issue.
Right.
So there's this term in Hollywood retcon where you do retroactive continuity.
You go back and you sort of change a story so that it's all consistent later.
And so there was the free speech retcon.
There was the net neutrality retcon.
There was the money in politics retcon.
Anyway, so this all kicked off in 2013.
I was in the room at some of these companies for the original discussions on defined hate speech, defined misinformation.
You know, of course, assurances were, you know, everybody was like completely confident that these were very, you know, straightforward, easy things to define.
And of course, they wouldn't, you know, begin a long slide towards political censorship, you know, which is precisely what happened.
But like, but this is really important.
That slide started in 2013.
That started before Trump.
That started way before the primary process.
That started way before the general election.
It really kicked off then.
Got it.
Got it.
So what did you make of Trump first time around?
Like every, so this is the thing is, you know, I'm reading the New York Times.
I'm watching MSNBC.
Like I'm like anybody else, like in my, in my class and station.
And I'm just like absolutely horrified and like, oh my God.
That man is an outrage.
What about the norms, right?
Like, you know, the, the, the whole thing.
And, and, you know, like I said, I supported Hillary in, in, in 2016.
And, you know, my, my, my, and frankly, my thought at that point was traditional awful is better than radical awful.
And so like, you know, when push comes to shove and look like, you know, and Hillary, you know, look, like Bill Clinton, I thought had been great.
And like I said, and for tech, he'd been super enthusiastic.
And so I'm like, you know, presumably his wife is, you know, and then, yeah.
And then basically, you know, I, you know, relatively quick, well, not relatively quick.
It took a few years, but, you know, certainly by 2018, 2019, I was starting to, you know, really wonder what was going on because things started to get really weird, as you know, all through tech.
And then, you know, basically after 2020, in the last four years have been completely insane.
And if I had not already figured out which way was up by 2018, 2019, certainly the last four years did it.
You had enough.
Yeah.
Okay.
Yeah.
Let's jump to the present.
Doge, the Department of Government Efficiency, your buddies, Elon Musk and Vivek Ramaswamy are heading it.
And you yourself are participating as you've called yourself an unpaid intern.
Yes, correct.
Yes.
You may go get me a glass of water at some point.
Yes.
Again, let's start with a very brief video.
And this is a video that Elon Musk retweeted.
It turned, to my surprise, it turns out to be a couple of minutes of an old interview I did with Milton Friedman.
Yes.
So here we go.
14 is a lot for television.
So I want to just go right down the list quickly and have you give me a thumbs up or thumbs down.
These are cabinet agencies.
Department of Agriculture.
Abolish.
Gone.
Oh, man.
Department of Commerce.
Abolish.
Gone.
Department of Defense.
Keep.
From 14 departments down to four and a half.
To basic fundamental functions.
Four and a half.
What are its fundamental functions?
Preserve the peace.
Defend the country.
All right.
Provide a mechanism whereby individuals can adjudicate their disputes.
That's the Justice Department.
That's the Justice Department.
Protect individuals from being coerced by other individuals.
The police function.
Right.
And now this is both the central government and the state and local governments.
The police function is primarily local and central.
Right.
And those are the fundamental functions of government in my opinion.
Okay.
So, as I said, Elon Musk, there I sat with Milton Friedman in the 1990s and asked him to go through the cabinet departments.
And he whittled them down from 14 to four and a half.
And Elon Musk retweeted that under the heading, the Doge Agenda.
Okay.
Now, I'd like to ask about the Doge Agenda, but let me let you in on a little secret.
When Ronald Reagan ran in 1979, he called for the abolition of the Department of Education, which, by the way, only got up and running in 1979.
So, it's not as if this thing was some storied inheritance from the gloried past in American history.
Nothing.
It was a brand new federal bureaucracy.
And when Ronald Reagan took office, Ed Meese, who is the person who told me this story, went up to Capitol Hill and encountered one Republican senator after another who said, you can't do that.
In just a year, they had already figured out how to use that cabinet department to give benefits to their constituents.
And now they wanted to protect it, not eliminate it.
All of which is to say, what do you boys think you can actually get done at Doge?
High spirits, huge intelligence is about to smack into practical politics.
Yeah.
So, and as you may know, you probably also know there was a Clinton-Gore initiative called Reinventing Government that was also very, do you remember this?
Remember this?
Dimly.
Dimly.
Dimly.
There was a famous moment where El Gore went on, David Letterman, when he was the top late-night talk show host.
And he went on with one of these famous, he went on with a $600 shatterproof Pentagon ashtray.
Which they call Ash Receivers Tobacco Desk Type.
But this is a quality item.
Yeah.
Right.
You know, the $3 ashtray that cost $600 bucks and it's shatterproof so it can operate in military zones.
And of course he went on there with his safety glasses and hammer and proceeded to shatter on Letterman's desk.
Right.
And say, you know, the game is up and we're going to go cut all this.
And then of course, you know.
Didn't happen.
Well, to give it a little credit, you know, the budget did balance.
You know, they did get to a balanced budget at some, they got into surplus for a brief period.
So maybe some stuff happened.
You know, Reagan did some stuff.
Although, correct me if I'm wrong, I think the government was bigger when Reagan left office.
Well, I can tell you a little bit about that.
Yeah.
So Reagan, as you know, this is one of the things that we're going to come to here in talking about Doge.
There is the discretionary budget.
Right.
That is the bit that the Congress gets to vote on every single year.
The Pentagon is a big part of that.
Reagan was able to hold, and these days the discretionary budget is a little under one third of the entire federal budget.
Yeah.
So overwhelmingly it's welfare programs, Medicare, Social Security is the big one.
Yeah.
Reagan was able to hold the discretionary budget to about one percent growth over eight years, which in real terms was a minor cut.
Right.
But that was huffing and puffing and constant labor.
And what he could never get control of was the non-discretionary budget, which of course had been legislated in years past and grew according to, neither he nor Congress had any control over that, which is going to be a problem for you boys.
Right.
Okay.
So there's that.
There was also, I can remember this because I wrote speeches for it in the old, there was also a government commission on waste, fraud, and abuse.
Peter Grace, J. Peter Grace, a very distinguished, very lovely man, very distinguished New York banker, of a kind that this generation is gone, just like David Packard, belonged to an earlier era.
And of course he hired people and they went around and discovered all kinds of absurdities that the federal government was paying for.
There was some sort of national program for beekeepers or something.
But it only was waste, fraud, and abuse if you looked at it the way Mr. Grace looked at it, which was as a businessman and a citizen.
If you looked at it the way a politician running for reelection looked at it, it wasn't waste, fraud, or abuse.
It was very effective in buying votes.
And so that stuff went almost nowhere as well.
So what you boys are up to now has been attempted, although I must say, not with quite this level of bravado.
And not with Elon.
And not with Elon.
Not with Elon.
So I'll start by saying I'm not a spokesperson for the Doge, so I'm not going to represent.
I'm just going to give you my views.
Elon Musk and Vivek are both very capable of speaking for themselves.
Yes, I would let them speak for Doge.
Yeah, so look, number one is, yeah, people have taken swings at this in the past.
That's certainly true.
The factors you described are certainly true.
Having said that, there are some differences.
And so one is, it's a whole bunch of things to talk about.
But one is, there's sort of three, the way to think about it is there's like three threads here.
There's head count, there's spend, and those are related but different.
Right.
Separate threads.
And then there's regulations.
And then there's an intertwining of the three of them that has become salient as a result of the recent Supreme Court decisions on executive authority and the so-called Chevron deference.
Right.
So there's been a set of Supreme Court decisions recently in which the power of the executive branch to basically have agencies that promulgate their own regulatory regimes and then staff and spend against those regulatory regimes without, you know, basically being expressly authorized by Congress to do that.
Like the Supreme Court, you know, basically just made that decision that that now is something that can be used to turn these things off.
An argument.
I am so, I wasn't, I haven't, in all the press.
Yeah.
I haven't yet noticed that Doge was paying attention to the end of Chevron deference.
Yes, correct.
That you guys have cottoned on to that and intend to make use of it.
Yeah.
That decisions get made by Congress.
Yes.
And the President of the United States and not by federal agencies.
Yeah.
That's huge.
Congratulations.
In fact, let's end the show right now.
So to start with, by the way, Vivek, I give Vivek a lot of credit on this.
Good for him.
Vivek has talked about this publicly and there's some excellent, there's, by the way, there's some excellent legal scholars who are around the Doge process who are contributing to this.
So, so, so like an argument, like, and I think it's a very serious argument.
An argument is if there is an agency that is either, either itself should not exist, which we'll come back to in a second, because, or there's activities at the agency that should not be happening or there's regulations that the agency is enforcing.
There is a, I think, very strong argument to be made that is actually necessary for the executive branch to stop doing those things in order to come into compliance with the Supreme Court rulings.
Oh, excellent.
Right.
Oh, excellent.
Which is the opposite.
Oh, excellent.
Which is the opposite valence of what everybody assumes.
Yes.
Yes.
Yes.
So, if you look at the proactive change, it's like, no, we're doing what we're literally required to do.
You just flipped the burden of evidence.
You flipped the burden.
Burden of proof, I should say.
Burden of proof, exactly.
And, of course, you know, the Chevron, these Supreme Court decisions have had no effect like that up until now, but that's, of course, because this last administration has had no desire at all.
Right.
They wanted a new Supreme Court.
Yeah, exactly.
And so, but, you know, but this administration has the opportunity to do this differently.
Pop quiz, Peter.
How many federal agencies are there?
Too many?
Yes.
127 is some figure I read.
No, it's at least, it's like in the range of like 450 to 500.
Are you serious?
There is a claim going around.
There are now 15 cabinet departments.
I looked that up after seeing this.
Well, we now have this, we have this new innovation.
I don't know when it came out in the last decades of the, so the concept of an independent agency.
Oh, yes.
And like, I've read the Constitution.
Independent of everything, including the Constitution of the United States.
It's outrageous.
I've read the Constitution and there is no provision in there for an independent agency.
By the way, you know, there are federal, there are executive branch agencies that have their own internal courts.
Yes.
They have their own judges.
I've read the Constitution.
That's number in there.
Correct.
Right?
And so, there's a rumor going around.
I don't know if it's true.
There's a rumor going around that nobody actually knows the number of federal agencies.
That there's no actual individual person who actually knows the answer.
One is because there's just so many of them and there's like, there's new ones created every year.
But the other is, we have all these fuzzy things now.
You know, the CFPB is like the canonical example right now.
We have these sort of-
CFPB is the Consumer-
Consumer Finance Protection Board.
Established by Senator Elizabeth Warren.
It's sort of considered Warren's agency.
Yeah, exactly.
And it is nominal, I don't know the exact legal terminology, but it's nominally an independent
agency under the supervision of the Federal Reserve.
Right.
She tried, she wrote the legislation specifically so that no president of the United States could
fire the director of the CF, whatever it's called.
CFPB.
Correct.
Which is unconstitutional on the face of it.
On the face of it.
Unambiguously.
It's still a unit of that.
I don't know if that happened.
I don't know the exact state of that, but it's the unit of the Federal Reserve.
The constitutionality of the Federal Reserve has always been a very interesting question.
Correct.
The ability for the president.
You're good.
I'm really, okay.
Keep going.
I'm not saying these are easy answers, but these are important questions.
Right, right.
Just asking the questions gets you a long way.
Yes.
Exactly.
And so you have all of the, you know, it's like you have all, you know, these are the same
issues that come up when people talk about like special prosecutors and all these things,
which is just like, all right, it's, you know, it may be a good idea in theory.
It's literally not in the constitution.
What are we doing?
Right.
The constitution is very clear.
The president's the chief executive, you know, the chief law officer of the United States.
Correct.
That there is no provision in there.
So anyway, so there are all of these agencies and components of the government that have just
sprawled out.
Basically, a friend of mine, Curtis Yarvin, has this great line.
He says, we are living under the 80 year evolution of FDR's personal monarchy, but without FDR.
Right.
And so, because FDR, of course, is the guy, you know, with the New Deal.
And so he could create, you know, he turned the federal government from this, you know,
basically this small overlay thing into this giant sprawling bureaucracy.
And then it basically has continued to expand and morph and mutate under its own power.
And anyway, so we do seem to have a Supreme Court that wants to, you know, kind of pull this back in.
So there's, so anyway, so yes, there's an opportunity to do this.
The Doge team has, I think, very clever ideas on all three of the threads that I described,
on spend, on headcount, and on regulation.
I'll just give you one example.
Sure.
Headcount.
You know, so the federal government, well, here's another pop quiz.
This is how many people work for the federal government.
How many people work for the federal government?
So as I recall, the Pentagon is a uniform force of about two million and another million
and a half civilians.
And then the federal government, actually, the headcount hasn't expanded that much for 20 or 30
years, as I recall.
It's about two and a half or three million in Washington, D.C., civilian bureaucrats.
Is that right?
How many contractors?
Oh, no.
Okay.
Unknown.
Unknown.
Unknown.
Unknown.
Unknown.
Unknown.
Unknown.
Unknown.
Unknown.
Unknown.
Unknown.
I mean, it's about 25%, isn't it?
It's like 25% on average.
Lower than San Francisco.
Yes.
It's basically that Washington, D.C.
federal building complex is basically a ghost town.
The security agencies are still full time.
The other agencies are not.
And the extreme cases, you have certain agencies that are all the way down to a day a month.
And there were, this is true, there were collected bar in some of the agents.
This is the other thing is that some of the agencies employees are unionized at the federal
level.
And there were collective bargaining agreements struck in some of these agencies where they
literally, during COVID, got the right to never come back to work.
And one of the ones that I'm aware of, an agency I know well, they literally come back to work
a day a month.
And so what the employees do is they come back a day a month, but they pair the days.
And so they come back for two days every two months.
Wow.
And so, and it's just like you ask any CEO in corporate America, like, how is this whole
thing going?
What are your employees doing?
And every CEO will tell you, like, what on earth is happening?
Are these people working?
And so, so does, does the president of the United States have a legal authority to order
people back to work?
Does it count to be an employee of the federal government if you're not in the office?
Okay.
So, so that, so, so there's.
All of this is just beautiful.
There's a ton of threads like that that they're going to plan.
All this is beautiful.
Really, truly beautiful.
However, Doge is an advisory commission.
True.
I believe this is the way the president has set it up as an advisory commission.
It has a sunset date.
Yes.
It ends on July.
It goes out of business on July 4th, 2026.
That's right.
I'm happy.
I like sun setting, anything to do with the federal government.
Yeah.
But where do you and Ilan and Vivek get the authority to make anybody do anything, including
Congress to pass enabling legislation, including the president to write executive orders?
Right.
Or, given what little background I have in Washington, what I immediately, before you can get John Thune,
the leader of the majority leader in the Senate to introduce legislation.
He'll have political people looking at all the political ramifications.
And there's going to be some senators.
Oh, I don't know that you stepped on the toes of my constituent here.
And the politics is going to start at you guys.
Right.
Right.
So, I'll give you one more.
How do you get stuff actually done?
Can I give you one more first?
Please.
Okay.
So, I forget the exact term, but there's a legal term.
So, the constitution authorizes, you know, it says Congress authorizes money for the executive
branch to spend.
There is a, I forget what, is it called the rescission?
There's a legal term that basically means that the executive branch is also not allowed
to spend less than Congress appropriates.
True.
True.
I have a recommendation, which is that you look at the 1974 legislation that removed
from Richard Nixon, or removed because of Richard Nixon, the ability of the president,
which at that point had been traditionally accepted, to impound funds.
That's right.
Impoundment.
Impoundment.
Impoundment.
We want more impoundment.
We want to get back to impoundment, correct?
Right.
Impoundment.
Yes.
Impoundment.
I forget which way it goes, but impoundment is the concept that the president legally is
required to spend the money that's appropriated.
The president is not allowed to save money.
Right.
The president is not allowed to spend less money than Congress has appropriated.
Right.
Once again, if you read the Constitution, it doesn't say that.
Right.
This has been an issue of significant constitutional debate over the last four, you literally
sense that happened, and there have been, you know, Wikipedia, there's lots of arguments
back and forth on this.
Right.
I don't know if this is the kind of thing that the Supreme Court would look at.
Might be a good idea.
Right, so.
But the President of the United States, I mean, you don't have to be a genius in political
science to construct the argument, which is that there's only one man or woman,
one person who faces the entire country in an election and therefore can be said to represent
a national, as opposed to all these little parochial interests, a national interest in an overall
ceiling on the federal budget, and that is the President of the United States.
Correct?
Yeah, so that's the answer.
Okay.
So that's the answer.
And the answer, and by the way, to be clear, I'm not Doge.
I'm an unpaid intern.
Yes, yes, yes.
But we're having fun, Mark.
Details, details.
And then it itself is not getting set up as a permanent agency.
Right.
It doesn't have the authority to execute on everything we're talking about.
Okay.
But the White House does.
The executive branch does and the President does.
Okay.
And so it will be, as it should be, it will be a decision of the President on what he
wants to do with these recommendations.
You know, the people being staffed into the positions, you know, so the new head of OMB
is very, you know, has talked publicly about being very aligned with this.
The new head of OPM is actually a partner of ours that's going in there.
He's very aligned with this.
And so they will, the executive branch will have the execution capability to be able to
do this, but it's at the President's deference and, you know, we'll see what happens.
But from what you have seen on your many visits to Mar-a-Lago, this has the personal
interest and support of the President-elect of the United States.
Yeah.
He said so repeatedly.
He was asked the other day and, you know, he constantly, he always gets asked, like,
you know, do you still support Elon?
And he's, you know, at least, you know, so far 100% of the time, you know, he's fully
supportive.
And so he's, yeah, he's, he's greenlit this.
I mean, look, Elon has been living at Mar-a-Lago, right?
You know, like, so, so, you know, so they're, they're doing this.
And so look, it's, I've full deference to the President.
He'll, he'll do what he wants.
This is there.
Let me give you one more, one more thing on this though.
And this goes to what's happening more broadly in the environment.
And this is, this is one of the reasons why you have all this panic now about the
de-censorship of the internet is that you'll recall.
So I'm sure the Grace Commission tried to explain to the public what was happening
with federal spending.
I know Al Gore tried to, he went on Letterman and tried to articulate it.
You know, Ross Perot at one point was trying to do it with the flip charts and all these
things.
But there's all, oh, we had a Senator Proxmire out of Wisconsin for a long time.
Oh, yes, of course.
He had the Golden Fleece Award.
He would come out every year with like the crazy spending things.
But it was always like when Proxmire used to do it, it was always like, oh, it's just
like two minutes once a year on, you know, NBC News.
Of course, what does Elon have and what does Vivek have and what the rest of us have now is we
we now have the ability to actually actually ventilate this information in public.
Right.
We have the ability to actually show and demonstrate this and actually expose this
to the public view on both sides.
Number one, here's all the stupid stuff.
Like here's all the stuff that clearly just like you're being taken for a ride on.
Right.
And then the other side is, by the way, you know, with corresponding cuts, here's
the money that's being saved that's going back, you know, into the taxpayer pocket.
And so there's, you know, PR is the old, it's beyond PR.
It's not PR anymore because PR kind of applies to going through the press.
Those days are over.
This is going to be direct interaction with the public.
Mark, we've just been through a decade now in which we were told again and again and again
that Donald John Trump represents a danger to democracy.
Yes.
You are describing a renewal of democracy.
Renewal of democracy.
Yes, 100%, clearly.
All right.
100%.
Okay.
I just wanted to check.
Yes.
I just wanted to check.
Yes.
And this will be the key.
This will, I mean, just as an observer, I'd say this will ultimately be the key.
The key ultimately is going to be the direct relationship with the president with the people.
That is ultimately going to be the key.
And if the people are on board of the president, you know this, if the people are on board of
the president, the president has tremendous power.
That gives the president the ability to get a lot of what he wants done through Congress.
If the president doesn't have the support of the people, Congress can roll him arbitrarily.
And so, you know, Reagan knew this, by the way, FDR knew this.
Like all the good presidents knew this.
Trump 100% knows this.
And, you know, he does this every day and he's going to, you know.
If you can bring the country with you, you can go anywhere.
Yeah.
That's right.
18 months ago, you published a 5,000 word essay called the Techno Optimist Manifesto.
Let me quote you.
We are told that technology takes our jobs, reduces our wages, increases inequality, and
is ever on the verge of ruining everything.
But our civilization was built on technology.
Technology is the glory of human ambition and achievement, the spearhead of progress,
and the realization of our potential.
It is time, once again, to raise the technology flag.
Okay.
Apart from anything else, there are not a lot of people in Silicon Valley who write as well
as that.
There we go.
Can I, I'd like to ask how we raise the technology flag with regard to several specific issues.
But first, I just want to circle back to the president elect.
Mm-hmm.
He's 78 years old.
He grew up in an old fashioned borough of New York, Queens.
He made his start in his career in bricks and mortar.
This is a man who made his money by pouring concrete.
Does he understand technology?
Does he, does he, does he feel it the way you feel it?
Or, and it would be good enough if he simply said, there's something important here.
I may be not quite the right generation or quite the right background to get it, but I'll
let Andreessen and Musk handle it for me.
Yeah.
So, where are we with this?
My analysis would be, he is world class on real estate and on communications.
And those are sort of his foundational skills.
And those are, you know, he's world class on both, which is like, probably the first person
in the world to be world class on both of those things, right?
The real estate industry is not historically known for its great communicators.
Here, you've got somebody who does both of those things incredibly well.
He, as a consequence of his knowledge of real estate, and by the way, his also involvement
in the communications industry, where he was, you know, one of the huge winners of the last
20 years with what he did, you know, with what The Apprentice, which is this, you know,
a very large business.
He very, very deeply understands business.
And, you know, as you know, one of the questions always, you know, in Washington is like, wow,
there's a lot of lawyers running around.
And wow, there are very few people here who have actually held a job in the private sector.
And there are very few people here who have ever actually run a company or been responsible
to investors or had customers, right?
And so he is also a, you know, one of the most successful business people, you know, of our time.
So, you know, I would say those are like three very powerful skills.
And then I think what you learn, especially when you're good and for sure when you're good at real estate
and when you're generally good at business as he is, I think you learn how to do, you know,
what we call systems thinking.
Like you have to, I mean, you know, these large real estate, I mean, my father-in-law was, you know,
was sort of a Trump, you know, kind of generational peer in real estate.
John Arriaga.
John Arriaga.
And like talking to John, like when John put up one of these towers or one of these campuses
or when Trump put up, you know, one of these giant hotels or whatever, like these are large-scale systems projects.
Like, you know, there's many, many dimensions.
There's many things that can go wrong.
There's a lot of things that have to line up.
There's huge management complexity to it.
By the way, there is technology change because you've got all these things coming at you and solar and, you know,
all these new things coming in and all these requirements.
And so, and you've got to like manage these.
One of the things these guys, my father-in-law always told me and Trump clearly was the same way,
is you've got to manage these things hands-on because they can always go sideways.
And any given day, you know, you're sitting there bleeding out money if people aren't doing the right thing.
And so, they're good.
He's very good, I think, world-class at thinking things through systematically.
And we were talking before about, there's this video going around today of him talking about the water situation in California.
Yes, yes.
On Joe Rogan, like what was that six months ago or whatever.
I said, why didn't you have no water?
Because the water isn't allowed to flow down.
And at the time, you know, it's one of those classic Trump things where at the time everybody's like,
why is he going on and on about the water situation in California?
And then, of course, in the last three days as we, as we talk, you know, LA is burning down.
And if you listen to what he talked about with the water situation in California, it's like, yeah, that's all correct.
Like, he is exactly 100% correct.
He did the same thing, by the way, if you remember in the first term when he diagnosed the German energy situation.
Yes, yes.
To the face of the German diplomatic corps at the United Nations.
You people are going to become dependent on Russia, and that will be a disaster for you.
And it has been a disaster.
And it has been.
And if you go back and you just, if you forget who did it, or if you just read the transcript and you read it,
you're just like, wow, that was a really good five, it was an extremely precise and accurate five,
and very prescient five-minute analysis of this system's problem, which is where is the energy coming from?
How is it going?
What's going to happen here?
What happens to the return of nuclear?
Same thing in California, what happens to the water and this and that, you know, the whole thing.
And so he's like really good at wrapping his head around these things.
I would say at energy, this is the other thing is he's now obviously been president for four years.
And so he learned about things to enormous depth.
And so he, you know, like I'm not an energy guy, but my energy conversation with him, he's extremely sophisticated.
The energy people I know, know that he's sophisticated.
So he wraps his head around these things, I think very quickly and easily.
And so I don't, you know, I don't expect of him that he's going to be coding, you know, large language models in his spare time.
But I think he very, very, he's extremely capable of being able to understand these things.
And I think actually does quite well.
Okay, so let's go, you mentioned energy several times there.
Let's go to raising the technology flag on energy, nuclear energy.
A quarter of a century ago, there were 104 nuclear plants operating in the United States.
Today, there are just 94 and the average age of a nuclear plant in the United States is 42 years.
Yeah.
How does the techno-optimist respond to that fact set?
So this is the great tragedy of the domestic policies of the Nixon administration, right?
Of the Nixon administration.
The Nixon administration.
So Richard Nixon, you know, Richard Nixon saw the energy crisis coming and, you know, it developed in his second term, started getting underway.
And he announced something he called Project Independence.
And he said, this is ridiculous.
We can't be running on fossil fuels from the Middle East.
This is crazy.
It's entangling us and all this, you know, crazy foreign stuff like we need to stop.
You know, we're the United States.
We can power ourselves.
And so-
On which he was correct.
Yes, of course.
He's completely correct.
He declared, he declared Project Independence.
Project Independence was we're going to build a thousand new nuclear power plants in the United States by the year 2000 and go completely independent.
So we're going to, and we're going to cut the entire grid over to nuclear production, electrical consumption, by the way, corollary, electric cars.
And so, and by the way, green, like corollary, no more carbon emissions, right?
We're going to have a thousand nuclear plants, no carbon emissions, completely green, nuclear plants put out water.
You know, a small amount of easily contained waste, but we're going to build those.
And, you know, and we were building nuclear power plants, you know, as you know, in the 50s, 60s, 70s, but by the 70s, we started to have these new technologies like computers where you could see a way to build much more efficient and much safer plants.
Right?
And so, so, so we had, so, so he announced that and then he created the Environmental Protection Agency and he created the Nuclear Regulatory Commission.
Which shut down the, which would shut down a project which had it gone forward would have changed everything.
Yes.
And they, they, those agencies prevented, prevented Project Independence from happening.
Okay.
So can I, I think this is a brilliant stroke and that is because it occurred to me, my own little head in the middle of the night one night, I was tossing and turning and thought, hey, wait a minute.
And here's the, hey, wait a minute.
The first nuclear submarine was commissioned in 1955.
Right.
Which means that the United States of America, which has nuclear powered vessels of all kinds, has been building and operating small nuclear reactors for six and seven decades.
Yeah.
Right.
And has the systems down so well that these things can be operated by 19 year old kids who haven't even gone to high, finished their high school degree.
Yeah.
And the technology is owned by the American taxpayers.
Yes.
Why aren't we using this?
Where are they?
So as you know.
And by the way, the military is exempt from the Nuclear Regulatory Commission.
Right.
Right.
Okay.
So they just do it.
And as you know, literally what they do is they take 19 year old kids and they train them on how to be nuclear engineers.
Yes.
And then they send them out on six month whatever.
Underwater.
Underwater.
Yes.
And as far as I'm aware, there's never been a nuclear incident.
That's my understanding.
Yeah.
Yeah.
The other amazing thing about that, by the way, it was pre-DEI.
Of course.
Like, just imagine how amazing it is given everything we know today that you could actually do this without the enormous benefits of DEI.
Imagine what you could do with DEI.
Now you're being subversive.
Quite possibly.
Anyway, so the more serious part.
In those days, as you know, they also, because they knew they could do them in substance, so therefore they just assumed that they would also do them for airplanes.
Right.
They were nuclear powered airplanes.
That I did not.
Do you remember the Tom Swift novels?
That I remember, yes.
Yes.
I'm reading them with my nine year old.
And it's the very first Tom Swift.
There's multiple generations.
Tom Swift is Tom Swift boy inventor.
Right.
These novels basically for kids.
They were like the, whatever, Harry Potter of the time or something.
But there's this great series from the 50s with the second generation Tom Swift.
And they're great.
And it's like, you know, Tom Swift invents this and that.
You know, he invents all these things and you get to, and then has adventures based on them.
And so they're very exciting.
Exciting books.
But the very first book is Tom Swift and his flying lab.
And of course the flying lab is a triple decker 747, you know, thing with this vertical takeoff and landing powered by its own nuclear power plant.
I see.
And you just assumed, of course, of course, of course you put a nuclear, because, and if you put, by the way, a nuclear plant in a plane, of course you could have a 747 that takes off vertically.
And by the way, in the book they literally take the thing up to like 30,000 feet and they just park it and they just hang in midair and hover for three hours and have lunch.
Which you can do.
Which you can do.
And so we've, yes, this is it.
And by the way, this technology is, for people concerned about carbon emissions, this technology is the silver bullet.
It is.
Like we are, we have.
So am I, is the general feeling, my general feeling correct, that if we unleash technology, we use the free market, we use the government, what the government has already discovered and intelligent, that there are all kinds of problems we already know how to solve.
We know how to solve.
We totally know how to do this.
And to your point, most of the plants, most of the nuclear plants that we have today are now 30, 40, 50, 60 years old.
We know how to build much better versions of this.
Of course we do, yes.
Like we know how to build much more sophisticated versions of this.
And by the way, so do the Japanese and others.
And so the new plants would be much better than the old plants.
They would be much safer.
We know exactly how to, we know exactly how to do this.
My personal, my devious plan, my devious plan is we should reincarnate Project Independence.
We should build a thousand new civilian plants.
We should do the Nixon plan, cut everything over.
But here's my way to get it done politically, which is we give Charles Koch the contract.
And the reason is because it accomplishes everybody's goals.
He would do it.
You'd better give us two sentences on who Charles Koch is.
Charles Koch, as people know, the Koch brothers was always a misnomer.
I mean, there were brothers, but really it was, when people think about the Koch brothers.
Charles Koch was the businessman of the brothers.
Charles Koch, the genius of the family, and is the guy who ran Koch, still runs Koch Industries,
which is one of the largest companies in the country, one of the largest private companies in the world.
It stands out in American business history, as I recall, if I think, I think I have this correct,
that Charles Koch and his brothers inherited a modest, successful but modest company from their father,
and built it into a company which, last time I checked, had revenues of, well, I don't know whether it was revenues or market.
It's a company that's worth a hundred billion dollars.
I believe that that's correct, as of a few years ago, and did it without ever borrowing a penny.
That's right.
They did it entirely on reinvesting profits.
And they reinvest, by doctor, under Charles' leadership, they reinvest 90% of profits every year.
Okay.
So why is he going to be interested in nuclear?
By the way, I don't know what it's worth, but I suspect it's much bigger than that.
It's very large.
I think it's very large and very successful if it were to go public.
But yeah, look, I mean, Charles is one of the, and he, Charles is number one,
Charles is one of the genius businessmen industrialists of our time.
He also became, of course, a major force in politics.
He and the Koch brothers got tarred with this, you know, they're fascist Nazis,
even though, as you probably know, Charles is a libertarian.
Yes.
He's a libertarian free market guy.
He's a melee.
He and melee basically, right, have sort of identical, Milton Friedman, he's a libertarian.
I've interviewed him on this program.
Yeah.
He's also just a wonderful human being, you know, really, you know, warm and genuine,
incredibly open, wonderful guy.
But so my idea is you give him the contract to do it because number one, he'd do a great
job because it's one of the best, one of the best industrialists in the world.
And then two is, so he would win because Koch Industries would, you know, be building,
rebuilding the power system for the U.S.
And then the Democrats would win because they'd make Charles Koch care about climate change.
And not just that, but actually solve it.
All right.
And so everybody would get both what they most hate and most want.
Now, when I have floated this idea in Washington up until now, I haven't gotten a lot of takers,
but, you know, maybe it's time to bring it up again.
Mark, I'm going to try to extend this theme of problems we already know how to solve it
if the techno-optimists are permitted to address the problem.
And that is, now this is a flyer.
I don't know that I'm right.
That's the border.
Oh, yeah.
During the Biden administration, custom services recorded 11 million encounters,
releasing about 2.5 million into the country to avoid processing.
The government also admits, admits some 2 million gotaways.
So that makes, by the government's own admission, at least 4.5 million illegal entries into the United States
during the four years of the Biden administration.
Okay.
On top of which I note that as far as I can tell,
Donald Trump in his first term only built 80 original miles of border wall.
He refurbished wall and, and, but only, but set all that aside,
don't we have ground sensors, drones we can put up?
We can, of course it lies within the ken of the United States of America to control its own border
using the technology that we already possess.
Am I wrong about this?
Yeah.
Well, let me tell the story of this company called Andrel.
Andrel.
Andrel.
Which you've invested in?
Which we've invested in.
Okay.
So the founder of Andrel is this super genius, real life Tony Stark kind of character,
the Howard Hughes of our time, real life Iron Man named Palmer Luckey.
Palmer Luckey.
Who's this like super genius from, from Orange County.
And he, and we knew him really well because he was the founder of, of Oculus,
which the VR company that then Meta bought.
Meta bought.
We were investors in that.
And so he's, this is, you know, he's got two, two giant wins in a row, in a row here.
And basically he used the money from, from Oculus to basically start,
to start Andrel with a bunch of his partners.
And the, and, and they, they launched the company in right, when the, when the Trump stuff in 2016 reached like White House.
Criticality.
And everybody was going like completely bananas.
You know, Palmer shows up and he's like, oh, I know how to solve the border problem.
We do basically sensor.
We do basically mesh networks with sensor towers on the, on the, on the border.
And then with drones, you know, doing oversight.
And then we do what's called sensor fusion, where you, you have all these different dispersed sensors.
And then you bring them together on a single screen.
And then, and then you can tag individual people and you can watch them come across.
And you can use it for.
If there's a problem, you can miss sending the, the, the, the personnel to solve.
Yeah, exactly.
Or, or by the way, you can send in a drone, right?
A drone.
And, you know, and look like the border for anybody who works in the border, what they'll
tell you is look like there's, there's one thing, which is border enforcement.
And there's a lot of questions wrong to do with that.
But the other is like, people get in real trouble on the border.
Yes.
And they're like, they're dying.
They're dying.
They're, they're.
Starvation and like.
Heat exhaustion.
And so forth.
And so like.
With the drone, you can find somebody who's in trouble and help them.
And bring them water.
Like, and bring them water.
Or by the way, the other problem is child, you know, child trafficking.
And so it's like, you know, how about, let's get eyes on a potential child trafficking.
You know, if there's like a two adults and 20 kids.
Okay.
Let's get eyes on that so that we're ready.
You know, so we can go get the kids.
Right.
And so they're, so obviously you, you, you want to know what's happening, but, but this
literally was like, this was like right in the teeth of the build a wall kind of moment.
And so, so, so Palmer, Palmer comes, comes in and pitches us and goes through the whole
thing.
And literally it's just like, oh my God, this is like the genius of all time.
We have to invest in this company.
And his business plan is to use technology to hunt Mexicans on the Southern border in
2016.
And we're just like, oh God, like, you know, we just like basically have a heart attack.
And, and to our, to our discredit, we flinch and we don't, we don't make the investment.
Andrel goes on.
And actually it's interesting.
Andrel was actually not very successful in that program under Trump, because it turns out Trump being
a real estate developer, he actually wants, wants, wants, wants a wall.
And by the way, he still does.
And, you know, and I think this time he's, by the way, this time he'll get it because
now he knows how to do it.
But, you know, as you know, he ran into a lot of roadblocks in the, in the first term,
still built quite a bit, but, but, but hit roadblocks anyway.
So, so, so, so Palmer's like, all right, fine.
Like, whatever, whatever.
And so he, what he started doing is he took that technology and he used it to start building
defensive systems for the military.
And so for example, you have, you have, you know, a military base in the middle of nowhere in
Afghanistan or whatever, and like, you know, you have all these potential threats coming
at you and you have the exact same problem, perimeter security problem.
And so they, they started deploying sensor networks and, and fusion, sensor fusion and
drones and all these things to be able to defend military bases.
And then the most amazing, one of the most amazing things I've ever seen happened,
which is, and Palmer was like a, in the valley was like a pariah, right?
He was like excoriated.
He was like constantly being smeared and slandered for being a horrible fascist Nazi,
like being like the worst person imaginable, like all this stuff.
Um, and then this like incredibly, and he couldn't get invited to industry conferences
and people just said all these horrible things.
Um, the day Putin invaded Ukraine, the political valence went 180 degrees in a day.
And Palmer became a hero of every liberal in Silicon Valley.
Um, because now Andrew is going to, like, there's two things that we know.
There's two things every good American liberal knows.
We absolutely must not defend the American Southern border.
And we absolutely must defend the Ukrainian border.
Yes, yes, yes.
We must, right?
The whole Ukrainian border, right?
Um, and so, and, and, you know, and, and Andrew in that time had become a very successful company.
And by the way, had, it was doing increasingly sophisticated defensive military systems.
And by the way, now it's actually doing offensive military systems.
It's actually up, up, up to and including like full, full weapons systems.
Um, and so it, it became, it became, all of a sudden that technology became super relevant to, um,
to the Ukraine situation.
As you know, the Ukrainian battlefield has been a revolution in military technology.
Yes, yes.
With the drone stuff.
And, and, you know, and so like all, all of Palmer's theories are coming true.
Ukrainian kids operating drones shut down the Russian Navy in the Black City.
That's right.
It is an astonishing achievement.
Okay.
And they take out these, these, you know, these main battle tanks.
Which brings me to, if I may, just, again, your feel for it.
If I'm still with the, with the, with the, uh, the techno, techno optimist manifesto.
This notion of raising the technology flag.
Another problem.
We may not have it.
It's larger.
It's more and more, but in this administration, is Donald Trump, is Doge, is somebody saying,
get me a Palmer Luckey as deputy secretary of defense.
We have to, or here again, this is Robinson's little way of thinking of it.
Extremely elementary, but it goes like this.
The Chinese outnumber us.
Yeah.
And they almost will.
The Chinese have a big enough economy to spend what they want to on defense now.
And by many counts, they've already got more surface vessels than we have.
They're working on submarines.
On and on it goes.
Our only sustainable advantage over the Chinese.
Our only sustainable advantage is going to be technological innovation.
And so we have to have a Pentagon that knows how to move quickly on innovation.
And somehow we're over there, is able to overcome the cultural divide between straight-laced colonels,
who run the requisition programs, and the Palmer Luckeys of the world, who walk,
who build their companies wearing Hawaiian shirts and Converse sneakers.
But we, we ought to be able to do that.
Yeah.
So that you may know, the guy going in is deputy secretary of defense.
So number two, who's like the chief operating officer for the Pentagon, is Steve Feinberg.
Right.
I don't know.
Oh, sorry.
So Steve Feinberg was the longtime head of Cerberus Capital Management.
So he's one of the world's leading private equity.
So he's already on this.
He's already on this.
He's already on this.
He's already on this.
And then he ran actually the...
This is the most good news I've had at this table in a long, long time.
Oh, yeah.
He's great.
Okay.
So this is probably...
I think he is...
I mean, look, and they've had capable...
Ash Carter, who passed away, was a friend of mine.
But I think Steve is probably the best person in that role since actually David Packard,
who was in that role, I believe.
And Steve is like an incredible operator and very aware of these things and very steeped
in this world.
Okay.
And he ran the Presidential Intelligence Advisory Board in the first Trump term
and is kind of fully integrated in.
And then I'll just tell you, without naming names of people that haven't been announced,
but a lot of very smart people are putting up their hands and going in.
Excellent.
And by the way, to your point, this is a great example.
The issues are just starting, right?
So the Ukrainian battlefield is a revolution.
By the way, there's also like all kinds of, you know, unfortunately...
Unfortunately, Ukraine being the tragedy that it is, people are learning a lot.
The nature of war is changing.
Unfortunately, the same thing is happening with Israel and Gaza.
You know, a lot is being learned.
This is what happened.
I can't remember, but some famous general said war is a test to see who can learn faster.
So the military is one of these amazing things where in peacetime they're training and they're preparing
and they have all these theories, but they're not being tested.
Correct.
They don't have customers.
There's no mark to market in peacetime.
You don't know.
Right.
When you know, unfortunately, is when you go to war.
And that's when all the learning happens.
And so there's learning happening there, learning happening in Ukraine, there's learning happening in Israel and Gaza.
And then, you know, if something kicks off with China, there will be a very rapid learning very fast.
I would just pose to you a challenge into the system is like it, for example, it's not clear sitting here today with what we know.
It's not clear that like surface naval vessels are actually useful.
Correct.
Right.
Because like...
Somebody has to figure this out.
Exactly.
And like aircraft carriers are open.
Like there's a bunch, you know, there are entire military doctrines of not just us, but many other players.
I asked someone I probably shouldn't name because he doesn't, I don't know whether this was in confidence.
I asked a former admiral the other day, if shooting begins over Taiwan, how close can American aircraft carriers get?
And he said, American aircraft carriers must stay 1,000 miles away from any hostile activity.
The Chinese have already pushed the surface perimeter out 1,000 miles.
Anyway, to your point.
And then, you know, hypersonics are coming and then drones are coming.
Exactly.
And we're at the...
This is why it's very important that these people be good to your point.
The drone thing is just at the very beginning.
Because like the Ukraine stuff, it's primarily, there's a lot of hobbyist drones and there's these low end drones.
But like the drones are going to get very sophisticated and they're going to get manufactured in much higher quantities.
And so every time you see a drone today, just think of that, think of that actually being 1,000 drones.
Right.
And then you have all, you know, so there's going to be this massive...
So what is...
Like what does even a naval destroyer do against 1,000 incoming drones that are all armed with bombs big enough to like blow a hole in the side of it?
You mentioned Ukraine.
Ukraine, I think, has been weaponizing jet skis.
Jet skis?
Jet skis.
I think that was part of the attack they did on the Russian surface fleet was they turned commercial jet skis into drone bombs.
Okay.
And so there's all, you know, it's a long conversation we had about, you know, there's all kinds of ways to win here.
But like these questions all have to be looked at.
The entire system needs to get adapted.
Being a democracy, we have trouble getting in front of these things.
Which, which, which brings me to a few sort of last questions for you, Mark.
Sure.
And for the first couple, let me play devil's advocate.
You, Elon, Vivek, David Sachs, you guys are all acting from the highest motives, but I'm playing devil's advocate here.
You're moving very fast.
You're really moving fast.
Those federal workers whose jobs we want to eliminate, they all have mortgage payments.
They all have families.
All of this technology, there are winners and losers.
I mean, I'm perfectly open to the argument that over time technology creates jobs.
But when Uber came along, taxi drivers lost their jobs.
And now self-driving vehicles are the next wave and Uber drivers are going to be in trouble.
Okay.
So, all that said, here's another brief video.
And this also comes from the interview I did all those years ago with Milton Friedman.
But listen to Milton Friedman.
Okay, Milton Friedman, if you are made dictator for one day, the next day the American government...
No, I wouldn't.
No, no.
I don't want to be made dictator.
You wouldn't.
I don't believe in dictators.
Okay.
I believe we want to bring about change by the agreement for the citizens.
I don't believe in arbitrary rule.
Let me put it this way then.
Your proposal...
If I can't persuade, if we can't persuade the public that it's desirable to do these things,
we have no right to impose them even if we had the power to do it.
If we cannot persuade our fellow citizens to support changes, we have no right to make those changes.
Are you and Elon and Vivek and David Sachs, are the doge boys down with the political program of engaging in persuasion
and bringing your fellow citizens with you day by day by day as all of this goes forward?
So I want to check myself out of this a little bit.
You're an unpaid intern, I know.
I appreciate you keep trying to rope me in a position of formal authority and power here,
but again, I want to stress both parts of that, unpaid and intern.
All right.
So I'm not signing up for what you're saying myself.
I will say, look, I think Elon is a world-class communicator, obviously.
Vivek is a world-class communicator, obviously.
Trump is maybe the best communicator of our time.
And so they'll do.
I'm highly confident that the three of them, in whatever combination, whatever form that they decide they're going to be able to do it,
Can I just go back to your thing, though, on technology change, unemployment?
Of course.
Because this is the thing.
So you probably know this.
Economists, there is actually a way to measure the pace of technology change in the economy.
There's a way to measure it and put a number on it.
And with related to everything, both the positives and negatives of technology change, including job replacement.
Is this Paul Romer's?
Productivity growth.
Paul did a lot of work around this, but the basic economic concept is productivity growth.
All right.
Productivity growth is the quantitative measure of technology change.
There's a few other things that lump in, but fundamentally it's about technology change.
And really what it is, is it's a metric for how quickly an economy year over year is able to produce more output with less input.
Right?
And then you can go either way on that, but fundamentally that's the lever.
And if technology can't, just the thought experiment, if technology can't be used to produce more output with less input, what's the point?
Right?
If it's not good at bringing down jobs or bringing down costs and increasing free spending power and increasing demand in the economy, then what's the point?
Right?
Then it's just a game or something.
Right?
And so productivity growth is the metric that captures the actual impact.
And productivity growth, therefore, is the metric that captures, for example, the downstream impact on employment.
Okay.
For good or for bad.
Right.
Another pop quiz.
Have we been living, if you look at the sweep of American history and sort of history of capitalism, history of Western capitalism,
have in the last 50 years, we've been living in an era of high productivity growth, which is to say an area of furious technological change and future shock.
And oh my God, look at all these amazing things and what an impact they're having.
Or we've been living in an area actually of historically low productivity growth with very little progress.
Our friend Peter Thiel has persuaded me that it's the latter.
It's the latter.
Well, it's for sure.
Because it's in the number, you can see it in the numbers.
It's demonstrable.
It's demonstrable.
And so, and specifically what happened is basically between, there's a long backstory here, but basically between in recent history, between call it 1920 and 1970,
that 50 year arc productivity growth throughout the economy moved much faster, was two or three times higher.
And then basically starting around the time I was born, right around 1971, basically it took a permanent downshift and it never recovered.
And it wobbles a little bit during recessions, it takes up a little bit because people get more efficient, but it's basically been,
it's been, it's been generationally low now for two generations.
And so.
So the whole game.
Yeah.
Excuse me.
This, this comes to a question I was about to ask.
When Ronald Reagan, again of that morning again in America, when Ronald Reagan took office, federal debt, the total federal debt as a proportion of GDP was about 32%.
Right.
Today, 126%.
Right.
The whole game.
Yeah.
Is going to be getting productivity growth up, correct?
Well you have to, well so you have to, exactly.
So you have to get productivity growth up because that's where economic growth comes from.
Productivity growth is what causes economic growth.
Right.
The reason productivity growth causes economic growth is because if you can generate more with less, then you can take things today that cost $100 and then you can get them instead for $90, $80, $70, $60.
And then the consumer or the business has additional spending power that they can use to buy new things.
That is the mechanism of economic growth.
Right.
That is the actual mechanism for why economies grow or whether they don't grow.
If productivity growth goes to zero, there is no growth, there is no economic growth.
If productivity growth is high, you will have lots of job transformations.
You will have lots of jobs being created and destroyed, but you will have a growing economy.
And you will have basically an economic heyday in which there's opportunity everywhere.
And people will look at it and you see, you know, there have been times like this.
The mid 90s had a little bit of this.
The mid 80s.
You remember like when there's a surge of economic growth, everybody like gets really cheerful.
Well, that's as a consequence of productivity growth.
It's that morning again in America.
What happened was that by 1983, the stock market started to recover and by 84, the economy itself is starting to grow and grow really briskly.
I think 84, 85, the number was up to 6% for something like eight months.
Right.
And people were cheerful.
People felt it.
That's right.
And so if you care about the country and if you care about the people of the country, what you want is growth.
You want economic growth.
In order to get economic growth, you need productivity growth.
Things are going to change, but you're going to have the growth such that people are optimistic and see lots of opportunity for themselves and for their children.
The enemy is not technology driven unemployment.
The enemy is no growth.
The enemy is no growth.
The enemy is to end up where the UK and Germany and Canada have worked themselves into, which is no growth.
Because what happens and then you think about the translation from economics to politics.
What happens in-
People start ripping themselves apart, ripping their countries apart.
Zero sum politics.
Yes.
If you have zero sum economics with no growth, you have to have zero sum politics.
Because the only way for anybody to get anything is to take it away from somebody else.
In a high growth environment, you have positive sum economics, which means you have positive sum politics.
You have a sense of possibility and opportunity and awakening and growth and excitement.
Right.
And people are like, wow, this is fantastic.
And I can't believe all the opportunities.
And I can't believe how fast my standard of living is advancing.
And I can't believe the jobs that are opening up to my kids.
And so if we got, this is where the narrative on this goes sideways.
If we got what people think is the apocalyptic nightmare of rapid technological change, which is to say rapid productivity growth.
We would have a boom economy like you've never seen.
And we would have people be the happiest they've ever been in their entire lives.
Like that is precisely what we should be going for.
And by the way, anybody who's listening to this, who's concerned about either left wing populism or right wing populism.
This is the answer.
This is how you defend populism.
The way you defend populism is you grow.
Okay.
So I'm going to repeat the question that I asked at the very beginning, but this time a little more seriously.
As I said a moment ago, when Reagan took office and worked those changes, federal debt was only 26% of GDP.
And now it's 122%, I correct myself.
Excuse me.
I think it was 32%, now it's 122%.
In 1980, our adversary was the Soviet Union.
And the Soviet Union was bad and dangerous.
It had nuclear weapons.
But its economy was essentially negligible.
Throughout the entire Cold War, I looked this up the other day, throughout almost the entire Cold War, the number of Soviets who studied in the United States was just 50,000.
China, there are 250,000 students, Chinese nationals studying in this country right now.
Your friend Elon Musk sold 650,000 Teslas in China last year.
A single factory, it's almost, it's really a city, a single factory produced almost all of the 218 million, if I recall, iPhones that Apple sold around the world last year.
We can't live without China in some way.
People will attack me for putting it that baldly, but this is going to be a trick.
In some ways, it's more formidable than the Soviet Union was.
So I put it to you, we are in some ways in worse shape, more polarized as a country.
The federal government has metastasized, as you said.
We're deeper in debt.
We're facing a more formidable opponent in China.
Do you really believe we can pull it off?
Is there a chance for a national renewal?
Well, let me say first, both of those problems are even worse than you presented.
So as you're probably aware, the national debt is growing at a pace of a trillion dollars per 100 days.
And so this is one of the things that, you know, this has been, this problem has been building for a while, but you know, these last four years, like all, whatever governors were there before just like got completely taken off.
And so we've been spending money like it's going out of fashion.
So, you know, a trillion dollars every 100 days.
Yeah, Thomas, Thomas Massey, who's like, you know, one of the only Libertarian members of Congress has, he's an MIT engineer, really brilliant.
And he made himself a lapel debt clock counter.
Right. And so when you talk to the numbers, when you talk to Thomas, it's worrying the increase in the national debt.
And his last time I talked to him, he said he needs to re-engineer it because we're at whatever, 37 trillion.
And we're adding, you know, another trillion every 100 days.
And the pace of adding because of the compounding, the pace of adding is accelerating.
So it's going to be 90 days, 80 days, 70 days.
Interest payments now exceed the Pentagon budget.
Correct. Exactly.
And there's no, there's no upper bound on where they can go.
And of course, this is the classic cycle that you can get into, which is, you know, the more that compounds, the higher rates rise, the more you're starving the real economy.
Right.
And then, you know, and then you get in this cascade where, you know, there's, you know, as various economies discover repeatedly in the world and we've discovered in the past, you know, you can get in these spirals that are really bad on interest rates and inflation.
So Thomas's challenge for, I think, over the holidays was to re-engineer this clock to add another digit so that it's going to keep working when it hits 100 trillion.
So like that train is like moving and, you know, we could have a long conversation about the legislative process has really broken down with these giant omnibus, you know, kind of bills that get dumped on people's desk, you know, the day before they're supposed to leave.
You know, there's 200 pages, you know, with 12 hours to read and process, you know, that you have to vote on or literally, you know, you're, you know, they tell you you're, you know, killing sick children and all this stuff.
And so like, this is like a very big, speaking of the Doge, this is like a very big problem.
Right.
And then look, the China thing, the China thing, the problem is compounding.
And I'll just tell you where I'm worried right now where the problem is compounding.
So you mentioned like the sort of iPhone assembly, and that's a big deal.
But basically, there have been, there's three industries that sort of follow phones that are kicking in right now.
So one is drones.
And it's sort of in a bizarre turn of events, the Chinese basically own the global drone market for all basically the consumer drones, all the cheap drones, which by the way, numerically then are the drones that all the militaries also use in overwhelming numbers.
And something over 90% of all drones used by the US military are made in China.
And the thing is, it's not just a company.
Could you get to the cheery part, please?
No, no, it gets worse.
It gets worse.
It gets worse.
It gets worse before it gets better.
So the drone thing is not just a company.
It's an entire ecosystem.
So it's all of the componentry.
We have a drone company that's been trying to compete with the Chinese company.
Number one, the Biden FAA has been trying to kill us this entire time, trying to do all kinds of things to make sure that American drone companies can't succeed as part of their war on tech.
It's like literally just another in the long list of ways that they've been just trying to absolutely kill us.
But two is China has figured this out.
And so the US has been sanctioning AI chips going to China.
China is now sanctioning.
They sanction our drone company for the battery because the battery is made in China.
Right.
And so they have like significant leverage, not just for the drones, but for the entire supply chain.
They have cards to play.
They have cards to play.
By the way, the drone supply chain is very analogous to the car supply chain.
It's a lot of the same kind.
A self-driving electric car is very similar to a drone or for that matter to an iPhone.
It's an electrical mechanical device, but it's a lot of the same kind of battery technology, chip technology, sensor technology.
So they now have their version of what the Germans used to have, which is the sort of the thousands of mid-market companies that make all the parts that go into a car.
But the German ecosystem is still making them for old internal combustion cars.
The Chinese ecosystem is making them for electric cars and self-driving cars.
And of course, that means the new Chinese cars that are coming out are really good.
And they have a giant advantage on cost.
And they are starting to bring to market cars that are equivalent in quality to Western cars at a third or fourth the price.
So that's coming.
And then the big one that follows phones, drones and cars logically is robots.
And so we are on the verge of the actual robotics revolution that we've all seen in science fiction stories forever.
And the Chinese are ahead of us there?
Oh, 100%.
Now, we have the leading, but this is important.
We have the leading software.
We have the leading R&D.
We have the smartest.
I'm convinced we have the smartest robotics AI people.
We have a bunch of companies.
We still have the best people.
We have the best people specifically for the design of the systems.
But we don't have anything resembling the manufacturing capability at all.
And again, it's not just whether a company can build a robot.
It's whether you have the thousands of companies that make all the components that go into robots.
An example, you've seen these videos of the Boston Dynamics robot dog.
Yes, yes, yes.
And they're not a very aggressive company going to market.
Those are like $50,000 products and you can go buy one.
China has an equivalent product that, by the way, looks extremely similar and behaves extremely similar.
And among its capabilities, it can climb stairs.
It can do back flips.
It can stand on its hind legs.
It can climb and descend inclines.
You can put wheels on it.
It can shoot at like 30 miles an hour.
It can lock the wheels and climb stairs with the wheels on.
By the way, it also is hooked into a large language model.
So it talks to you in a very nice, very plummy voice.
It will teach you quantum physics, full voice control.
The price point is $1,500.
Right?
Now- Cheer me up.
Cheer me up.
So this is all coming.
So step one is clarity.
Right?
And then, by the way, everything we've just been talking about is also upstream from all the military applications.
Right?
Because it's that same supply chain that then goes into everything we talked about in the military.
And so, like I just say, this is like a very fundamental thing that we have to confront.
And having this very fragmented approach where we, on Tuesdays, hate the domestic American technology industry and are trying to kill it.
And on Thursdays, think we're going to somehow develop some sort of competitive response to China on cars or on, you know, weapons in the future.
Like we have had, there has been no coherence.
One of my favorite questions to ask in Washington is, okay, what's the whole of government strategy on technology?
Of course.
Zero.
The whole of government strategy on China.
You know, zero.
Right?
It turns out the president matters.
Yes.
And so, yes, this is precisely why this all matters so much.
Like this has to be directly confronted.
We and our companies are enthusiastic at signing up to solve these problems.
And the president-elect-
But we need a government that wants to work with us in this.
Donald John Trump is alive to all of us.
Yes.
A hundred percent.
No question.
And he is and then his people are.
And they, yes, this stuff they understand.
Mark, would you close our conversation by reading this excerpt from your essay, The Techno-Optimist Manifesto?
I'd love to.
We believe in the romance of technology, of industry, the romance.
The eros of the train, the car, the electric light, the skyscraper, the microchip, the neural network, the rocket, the split atom.
We believe in adventure, undertaking the hero's journey, rebelling against the status quo, mapping uncharted territory, conquering dragons, and bringing home the spoils for our community.
We believe that we have been and will always be the masters of technology, not mastered by technology.
This is a really key point today.
Victim mentality is a curse in every domain of life, including in our relationship with technology.
Both unnecessary and self-defeating.
We are not victims.
We are conquerors.
We believe America and her allies should be strong and not weak.
Economic, cultural, and military strength flow from technological strength.
A technologically strong America is a force for good and a dangerous world.
We believe in greatness.
Mark Andreessen, thank you very much.
Peter, a pleasure.
For the Hoover Institution and Fox Nation, I'm Peter Robinson.
Thank you for joining us.
Thank you for joining us.
Thank you for joining us.
