Mark Soms, it's great to be speaking with you today.
Good to be here.
Let me start off by saying it's been a real pleasure preparing for this episode. Your take
on dreams, consciousness, the role of feelings, and your integration of psychoanalysis and
neuroscience is quite unique and really refreshing. So to begin, can you give our audience a bit of
a background on what drew you to the study of the mind and how you got started?
I've worked this out in retrospect. I think it started in early childhood, although it wasn't
in early childhood that I sort of consciously made this decision. I think that a clear line can be
traced from when I was four going on five, my older brother named Lee, he fell off a three-story
building and fractured his skull and sustained a hemorrhage in his brain. And, you know, thank
heavens due to the wonders of modern medicine, neurosurgery in this case, he survived and came
back home, but he was never the same person. He was radically changed as a personality. And,
you know, to a young kid, it's very, well, probably to anybody, but to me as a young kid,
it was very disconcerting. I couldn't fathom how this could be, you know, that this chap looked like
Lee, but he wasn't Lee. And, you know, sort of where is my brother and who's this guy?
So that got me thinking, I think, earlier than for, I think most kids think about these sort of things
one way or another at one time or another, but it got me thinking about them a little bit earlier and
in a little bit more kind of concentrated away about how, what is the relationship between ourselves,
our sentient beings, you know, and our bodies and in particular, our brains? How does it come about
that I am a bodily organ, you know? And, and what is the, what is the nature of the relationship
between these things? So although, as I say, I didn't decide there and then I'm going to become
a neuroscientist, I think it's pretty clear that that's what set me on this path. And so there you
have it. Right. And you started off your, you know, your journey of investigating the mind through
neuroscience specifically, right? It was the physical aspect of how, how this brain organ,
you know, how it brings about consciousness from your experience, starting out in that field.
You know, I understand that when you started out, there was a little bit of frustration because you
felt that certain things were missing in this field. What was that experience like? What did you feel
that was missing in those early days? It is, it's correct what you say that I studied neuroscience and
therefore I'm studying, you know, a physical organ, but, but this particular physical organ is special.
It, it has, it has a property that no other physical thing that we are aware of has, namely that it is,
there is a subjective experience to being the brain. You know, you can't speak about what is it like to be
a light bulb, you know, what is it like to be a table? It's, it's a nonsensical question,
but in the case of the brain, clearly there's an inner subjective phenomenal experiential aspect. So
although it's true that neuroscience is a physical science, you know, surely this astonishing property
of the brain is doing something, you know, surely, surely it's there for a reason. And that was why
I was disappointed. The branch of neuroscience that I was focused on is called neuropsychology.
Okay. Also called behavioral neuroscience, you know, cognitive neuroscience. It goes by various names.
But, but the point is I was particularly studying the relationship between mental functions and brain
functions. And yet the way in which it was being taught, and I'm speaking here of the late nine, I mean, the early 1980s.
I came into the field in 1980. And, um, at those days, you know, there was literally no reference
whatsoever to subjectivity. Um, so I was learning about mental functions, but, um, it, you know,
I might as well have been learning about respiratory functions or digestive functions. You know, it was
the, the functions of the brain, uh, treated in exactly the same way as you would treat the functions
of the heart, uh, or the lungs. You know, it's just this, this thing out there, um,
Right.
The mechanism of which operates like this. So when we speak of mental functions, it would be the
functions of memory, the functions of visual perception, the functions of language, but at no
point did anybody, uh, even raise the topic that to remember, you know, is an experience, uh, to see
is an experience. Um, and when I asked my professors, uh, you know, they would show me these information
processing diagrams and I would ask them naively, but, but where is the, where is the person that
actually receives all this information? Where does it come together as an experience? And the answer
was literally, you know, don't ask questions like that. Um, you know, those are those, those sorts of
questions are bad for your career. Uh, and, and that is the heart of the matter. It's that subjectivity,
the essential nature of the mind is an embarrassment to science, uh, because science strives for
objectivity. Um, and so you have to exclude, uh, literally exclude the mind from science, uh, if you're,
if you're going to rule out of court, uh, this subjective point of view. And, uh, so that, that,
uh, so it's a neuro psychology has to exclude the psyche, um, if it's going to follow the normal,
the normal, uh, um, um, strictures, uh, which is, which were firmly in place in the 1980s.
So that's why I was so frustrated. It was, I, you know, I was this, this, this fabulously interesting
mystery, you know, of how mind and brain, uh, relate, uh, was just sort of swept under the
carpet. And we just, we just treated the mind, uh, the way we treated the mind is the same way as we
would treat how the computer processes information. And yet there's this fundamental difference between
a mind and a computer. Uh, as I said a few minutes ago, you know, there's nothing it is like to be a
computer, one assumes. Right. I think this dilemma that exists in the study of the mind, psychology,
neuroscience, that we're studying the subject and there, there's an inherent dilemma in that where
the scientific method, this striving for objectivity only gets you so far. And you include a quote of
Oliver Sacks in your book that goes, neuropsychology is admirable, but it excludes the psyche.
It excludes the experiencing active living eye. And I understand that it's exactly this problem that
prompted you to venture into psychoanalysis. So I'm interested, how did you make this transition?
What did this time in your life look like and why specifically psychoanalysis?
Uh, yeah, that quote of Oliver Sacks is, uh, is just wonderful. He wrote that in 1984
and, uh, I immediately struck up a correspondence with him because that described my experience
exactly. Um, because, uh, uh, consciousness, which is pretty much the same thing as subjectivity,
um, was, um, to, to use the Latin term scientia non grata, it was not, it was not welcome, uh, in,
in neuroscience. Um, the only way I could study it those days was, uh, the, the one aspect of
consciousness that was respectable was sleep and waking. You know, the, the, the brain mechanisms
were regulating sleep versus wakefulness. Of course, the main difference between sleep and
wakefulness is you're conscious when you're awake. Um, and so it was through that little narrow, um,
uh, window that I was able to, uh, bring this topic, uh, uh, you know, bring myself in contact
with this topic. And, um, the, when I said the thing that distinguishes sleep, uh, from wakefulness
is that you are conscious when you're awake. I did not say, and you're unconscious when you're asleep
because there are times during sleep that you are conscious and that's when you're dreaming.
So, um, that was, that was my trick. I thought, okay, I'm allowed to study sleep and wakefulness.
So let me study sleep and let me study this curious aspect of sleep, um, which, um, which, uh,
uh, can't be called wakefulness because you're asleep and yet you're conscious. Um, so, so, so my,
my doctoral research was on brain mechanisms of dreaming. Um, now, uh, I told you what my professors
said to me when I asked them the naive questions that I did. Um, so, uh, I was, um, my attention was
caught, um, by, uh, open seminar that was being taught, uh, at my university by a professor of
comparative literature, not a scientist. Okay. And, uh, the seminar was on Freud's
interpretation of dreams, this famous book of his on the interpretation of dreams that he published
in 1900. So I attended that seminar because it was open to all faculties. Um, and, uh, because,
you know, yeah, I was somebody who was actually willing to talk about the content of dreams,
the, the, the experience of dreams, you know, the subjective, uh, aspect of, of dreams. And,
uh, I was really just sort of attending out of interest, trying to, you know, sort of floundering
about trying to find somebody who would tell me something about the experiential aspect of things.
And I was just absolutely blown away, not only by this. I mean, he was a very brilliant teacher,
this chap, uh, his name was Jean-Pierre Delaporte. Uh, but, but, but also by the fact that he said to us,
uh, the people in this seminar of his, that you can only understand Freud's theorizing about dreams,
um, if you read an earlier thing that he wrote in 1895, uh, which is, which is, which he never published,
uh, which was, which was a manuscript that, that, uh, when it was published after Freud's death was just,
was given the title Project for a Scientific Psychology. And, and this was written while
Freud was still a neuroscientist. And he was trying to, trying to, um, speculate really about what the
brain mechanisms might be, uh, whereby these mental phenomena, truly mental phenomena, because,
as I said, he was not embarrassed by subjectivity. He, his approach was experience exists. It's part
of nature. Look, yeah, we have it right now. We, you know, we're observing it empirically.
Right. It's a fact.
Yeah. So, so, um, his, his approach was to adjust scientific methods to the objects of study,
rather than to, you know, to adjust the objects of study to scientific methods, which requires us to
leave out subjectivity. So, so, you know, the fact that for, I didn't even know Freud was a neuroscientist.
And so this, this manuscript of his just absolutely fascinated me because, you know,
there he was a hundred and, you know, what years ago, although at that stage in my career, it was,
it would have been 90 years before, uh, I read that, that, uh, that paper of his, um, you know,
there he was trying to do exactly what I was asking my professors about sort of what, what kinds of
brain mechanisms make experience possible. And, um, so that's what interest got me interested in
psychoanalysis, realizing that, um, that Freud was a neuroscientist, that he had tried to do this
without the, the tools we have today. Uh, and I thought, well, there you have it. That's going to be my,
my, my, uh, my path in life is I'm going to continue along that road. I'm going to try again,
90 years later, uh, using the tools we have today, uh, to see, um, you know, uh, what progress can we
make trying to address the questions that, that, that Freud had started with. So, um, in order to
properly, uh, uh, uh, uh, base myself, uh, you know, to use, if I'm going to use that starting
point of Freud as a foundation and try and bring it into, uh, modern science, uh, then I need to
properly immerse myself in this theory and, and this method, you know, called psychoanalysis. And so
that's why I decided to train in psychoanalysis to my colleagues, horror and my, you know, one of them
said to me, it's like an astronomer studying astrology. Oh my, oh my. That just shows you the,
the misunderstanding, you know, of the misplacement of subjectivity itself. So you, you're in
psychoanalysis at this point, you know, you're immersed in these ideas and you're exploring dreams.
Can you give us, you know, give the audience a bit of history on the study of dreams from,
from Freud's interpretation of dreams and his wish fulfillment theory to the different opposing
theories that came up in neuroscience afterwards. And then, you know, your research on the brainstem
that showed that Freud really was right. Yeah. I, you must remember that training in psychoanalysis
involves, uh, it's not just learning, um, a theory and learning, uh, a method. It's also requires you
to submit yourself to psychoanalysis. Right. So, so I, I, a very big part of my, um, education in that
field was the privilege of being psychoanalyzed myself. And there you have firsthand experience,
of these sorts of things, um, and, uh, including dreams, you know, so what I was reading, um, or had
read in Freud's interpretation of dreams had been taught by that, uh, uh, comparative literature
professor and all of that. You know, I, I then had, you know, the, the most immediate, um, basis for
forming a judgment about whether this is all nonsense or not. Um, so it was, it was quite something,
uh, to, to be able to see how, because Freud's theory, I mean, let's be, let's be honest,
it's not exactly self-evident, you know, it's not, it's not immediately, um, compellingly plausible,
uh, Freud says, you know, that this is what Freud claims, that, um, behind every dream, there is an
attempt to fulfill, uh, a very heartfelt wish, you know, that there's a, there's a strong motivational
drive behind each dream where the dreamer is trying to represent as fulfilled, uh, some, some heartfelt
desire. And, um, if you look at the content of your dreams, uh, that doesn't seem to square, uh, with,
with our everyday experience, you know, it's, um, most dreams are far from gratifying, uh, they're
bewildering at, at best and frightening at worst. Um, so, so, uh, you know, that, that, that's why
the experience of, of, of analyze, of having your own dreams analyzed, you know, was quite an important
part of it. Because, you know, what most people don't, uh, sufficiently heed, uh, is that Freud is not
saying the dream is, is a fulfillment of a wish. He's saying that there's a hidden wish that, you
know, you're, that, that is attempting, uh, to come out and then the dream process disguises it and,
you know, does all sorts of things which, again, um, make people, you know, find it hard to believe that
all of these gymnastics are going on in our mind. Right, right. So, that was the psychoanalytic side
of it. Um, the, the, as I said, when Freud invented all of this stuff, you know, there was no, um, it was
based purely on psychological study of, of patients. Uh, there was no neuroscientific methods, uh, uh, to
speak of, uh, whereby we could get any direct access to what's going on in the brain. So, so after Freud's
death, um, we started, uh, we neuroscientists started to study what's going on in the brain during sleep and
during dreams. And, um, to cut a long story short, it was discovered that there's, that there's a
process called REM sleep, rapid eye movement sleep. Um, and it happens automatically, uh, roughly every
90 minutes. Uh, and it's driven by a brain chemical called acetylcholine. Uh, and this just arouses the
brain, you know, every, every 90 minutes, it just sort of like boots up, uh, reactivates, uh, the full brain,
and during this time, as we understood it on the basis of the work that was done, uh, by scientists
over the fifties, sixties, seventies, into the eighties, which is when I came into the field,
was that it's a automatic, uh, you know, because it happens every 90 minutes, these cells just start
firing. Um, there's nothing to do with psychological dynamics, nothing to do with what happened between
you and your mummy. Right, right. It's just going to happen, uh, like clockwork. Um, and the part of
the brain, uh, that generates this arousal has got no motivational function. Uh, it's, it's just random
noise. Uh, and so, uh, as, as Alan Hobson, who was the main authority in the field at that time, put it,
he said that the forebrain makes the best of a bad job. It just sort of joins, joins the dots. Um, and, uh,
that's why dreams are so bizarre and nonsensical and impossible. Um, and that seemed, you know,
that's from a purely neuroscientific point of view, that seemed, that seemed perfectly plausible.
The problem is that the research that Hobson, uh, built upon and did himself was all, uh, almost all
of it. In fact, pretty much all of it was done in, in cats and rats. Okay. Um, and, you know, I feel
very sorry for those cats and rats, but from a scientific point of view, the big problem is
that you can't study their dreams. You can only study the physiology, you know, so in human beings,
you wake human beings up during REM sleep. They say, I'm dreaming 90% of the time, wake them up
outside of REM sleep, uh, only 10% of the time do they say they're dreaming. So that correlation was
made in humans who can speak and say, I am dreaming, you know, why I was dreaming. Um, but once that
correlation had been made in humans in order to do the neuroscience, you know, where you have to poke
around, snip around, uh, and, and stimulate and so on, um, the, the work was done in other animals
that also have REM sleep and all mammals have REM sleep. And so, so the, the, the poor, uh, victims
of that research were cats and rats. So I, I thought, well, if we're going to study the experiential aspect
of this, because remember that was my whole starting point was I was interested in the
subjective aspect of brain function. So, um, I shifted attention to human beings. Obviously I
didn't do experiments on their brains. Uh, I, I waited for experiments of nature, namely brain disease.
So patients who had strokes and tumors and so on, uh, I had a very large number of patients,
uh, 360 odd patients, uh, with groups of them with damage in different parts of the brain.
And I was wanting to see, you know, what happens to the experience of dreaming, uh, when, uh, the part
that generates REM sleep is damaged, uh, but also what, what happens to the experience of dreaming, uh, when,
when other parts of the brain are damaged. So we can sort of put together just as we do, uh, with,
with other mental functions I wanted to do with, with dreaming, like we did with language, like we did
with memory, like we did with vision and so on. I wanted to piece together what the contribution of
the different parts of the brain are, uh, to, to the experience, the qualitative phenomenology of dreaming.
And, um, that was when I made two very surprising discoveries. Uh, we're, we're now moving into the 1990s, by the
way. Um, the, the, um, the one was that patients with damage to the part of the brain, uh, that generates
REM sleep, um, in humans, just as in cats and rats, uh, you damage that part of the brain, REM sleep stops.
But dreaming does not. These patients, I mean, to my absolute dismay, um, these patients continue to
report dreams, um, despite the complete absence of REM sleep. And, uh, the, the second really surprising
finding was that there was another group of patients with damage in an entirely different
part of the brain from the part that generates REM sleep. When there was damage in that part of the
brain, they lost dreams, but, but, but REM sleep persisted. So what that showed, we call that,
we call that a double dissociation of function. What it shows is that the, that dreaming and REM sleep
are two separate functions. They correlate with each other. They occur at the same time,
but they're not the same thing because you can lose the one and retain the other, uh, in both
directions. So, so, so that's now, uh, I mean, I, I gather from what you said beforehand about me
telling you about Freud's theory of dreams. The, the really important part of all of this
is that the area of the brain, which when damaged leads to a complete cessation of dreaming, uh, the,
the, the, the, which was not the part, the acetylcholine, uh, um, generating part that generates REM sleep,
but rather a dopamine mediated, uh, brain circuit, uh, which has everything to do with motivation. In fact,
there's this really big ticket motivational system of the mammalian brain. So, so that, um, you know,
that was, uh, really a strong, um, uh, vindication that Freud's psychological observations, that there
was this powerful, wishful, um, uh, motivational urge behind the dream process, um, as, as, as, as, uh,
as unlikely as that seems from just the surface phenomena of dreams. Freud said, when you probe,
you know, into the person's thought processes, uh, you find that what lies behind these, uh,
strange experiences, uh, that we call dreams is this strong motivational urge. The fact that I found
that this, that the brain's strongest motivational circuit is the one that drives dreams, uh, made me
think that, wow, you know, we neuroscientists, oh, Freud and apology big time. Absolutely. No,
to learn, you know, 90 years later to have actual physical evidence that it's exactly these circuits,
this seeking system, you know, this motivational moving towards a goal dopamine hit system that's
actually activated during dreams is incredible. And from what I understand, it wasn't, um, lightly
accepted, it wasn't easily accepted at first, uh, these findings, uh, as you said. Yeah. Well,
um, it wasn't only because it, um, it flew in the face of everything that we'd learned over decades
about REM sleep. And you can imagine, uh, you've spent your entire career studying brain mechanisms
of REM sleep. Um, who, why should REM sleep be interesting? Well, it's because when that's when we
dream, you know, uh, and, and then to find, you know, that after all, uh, the, the mechanism of REM
sleep is not what generates dreams, that that's not going to be welcomed just because it's, it leaves
egg on your face. But the other reason it wasn't welcomed is precisely because it seemed to vindicate
Freud. And, um, you know, you're, you're not, it's not the easiest way to win friends and influence
people by saying, you know, I think perhaps we made a mistake for it might've been right after all.
Right. Right. I mean, I think this goes to the core of the issue where the scientific method is
pristine, but at the end of the day, we have scientists who are all human and we all have
our biases and our prejudices. So even when confronted with facts, you know, if someone, uh,
doesn't prescribe to a certain, uh, to a certain belief, then, you know, they can,
they can interpret the facts however they wish. So already here, you know, we're seeing this
interest in the brainstem and this understanding that these different circuits, you know, these more
primal circuits, um, have a lot of influence on us. So more recently in your latest book,
The Hidden Spring, you've examined the wider question of the source of consciousness itself.
And that's no small endeavor. Um, I'm fascinated by your take of how feelings and emotions are at
the core of our conscious experience. But before we get into your research on the topic, can you give
the audience the lay of the land, if you will, on how the study of consciousness has been pursued up
until now and why this problem is such a hard one? First of all, we have to be grateful that the
problem of consciousness became a respectable problem in neuroscience in the first place.
Absolutely.
Because remember when I entered the field, it was not. And, and we have more than anybody else,
we have to thank Francis Crick, uh, the chap who discovered the, the double helix, you know, the,
the, the, the, the structure of DNA. Um, he, because he had such impeccable credentials,
you know, he could afford to take the risk and say, come on, you know, let's, let's try and tackle
this problem now. Um, we, we've got the tools, uh, let's, let's, let's face the problem of consciousness
head on. And he, he, he did that from the mid 1990s. And, uh, which is roughly when I, when I was
completing my dream research, or at least my, the first great tranche of my dream research.
And, uh, he's, he's, his approach was, we need to identify what he called the neural correlative
consciousness, NCC. Um, and he said, uh, let's look at vision. Uh, why did he say, let's look at vision?
Well, it's because, um, look at your consciousness now, what is it dominated by? It's dominated by vision.
Um, you know, visual consciousness is very prominent in our consciousness.
And, uh, also, uh, we know a great deal about the brain mechanisms of vision. Um, a, a, a, a large
part of the cortex is given over to visual, uh, processing. So Crick said, if we can crack the
problem of how visual consciousness comes about, then we can generalize it to the other forms of
consciousness. And I say, again, I think that was a perfectly reasonable place to start. It's
understandable why he did. Um, and so what is, what his basic approach was is we need to look at
what differentiates visual processing when it's conscious from visual processing when it's
unconscious. And, uh, because there is such a thing as unconscious visual processing, there's
the famous phenomenon of blindsight that you have patients who have damage to the visual cortex,
who therefore are blind. In other words, they have no visual consciousness, but they still
deftly navigate around obstacles in their path, um, because they can see them. They just don't know
that they can see them. They're seeing that they're processing the information unconsciously,
just like a camera can. A camera, the camera on your computer or on your phone can process visual
information, but, uh, but it can't see in, in, in the conscious sense of having visual qualities.
Um, so Crick was saying, let's, let's see what is, what happens in the brain only when it's
consciously seeing, as opposed to when it's just unconsciously processing visual information.
And the difference is in the visual cortex, uh, that that's, uh, that's why blind sight,
which is due to cortical damage, uh, leads to a loss of conscious vision, uh, but you still have
unconscious vision. So that was what the lay of the land was more or less. When I, when I started
to enter that fray, it was, we were all trying to answer, uh, my colleagues were all trying to answer
the question of how does the brain generate consciousness focusing on, on visual perception.
Okay. And, you know, there's this, uh, very famous paper, uh, by David Chalmers,
the hard problem of consciousness, where he, you know, he highlights what the hard problem is,
but he also mentions the easy problems. And he talks about these approaches of, um, you know,
taking these segments of consciousness, these different functions, such as visual processing.
And he says, that's an easy problem. That's an information processing system that we can
understand, you know, input and output. Um, and he, he highlights this hard problem.
So I'd love if you could tell us a little bit about that and why it is such a difficult problem
to explore. Well, the, the easiest way to explain that is to use the, uh, there's a famous story told
by another philosopher that, that, uh, Chalmers draws upon. His name is Frank Jackson. Um, and
Jackson coined this thing called the knowledge argument in which he's, I'm going to simplify
what he said, but, uh, he said, basically imagine a visual neuroscientist named Mary,
who knows everything there is to know about the functional mechanism of vision. In other words,
at the physiological, even the physics level, you know, the photons of light impacting on the cells
of the retina, uh, where those, uh, you know, uh, uh, light waves are transduced into neural impulses
along very specific nervous pathways. And Mary knows all of this stuff. She knows everything we know
about the mechanism of visual information processing. Um, but Mary is blind. Uh, this is,
this is the rub in this argument. And so she doesn't know what it's like to see. And says, um, Frank
Jackson, if, uh, the gift of sight were suddenly to be bestowed on Mary, she would learn something
utterly new about vision, namely what redness is like, what blueness is like, uh, what it, what it actually,
what the qualities of visual experience are like. And indeed that there is such a thing as visual
experience because, uh, uh, uh, Jackson's argument is, uh, firstly, that nothing about what she knew,
the knowledge that she had about visual information processing, nothing about that prepared her for
what it is like to see. In other words, nothing in there explained the qualities of visual experience.
Uh, and, and indeed it didn't, it didn't explain why there has to be something it is like to see at all.
Because let us not forget, as I said earlier, cameras, uh, computers, telephones, they can see also.
Uh, in other words, they can also process visual information and recognize things and classify things
and so on. As you know, your phone can do that. Um, but there's not something it is like to be a phone.
Um, and so, so Chalmers was saying, this is the hard problem. The normal approach to
neuroscience, which is you specify the mechanism that explains the function. He says, it doesn't
work when it comes to experience because look at what happened to Mary. You know, she, she specified
the mechanism until, you know, down to the nth degree, but it, it didn't tell her anything, uh,
about what it is like to see. And so says Chalmers, you know, we need a different, this is why it's a
hard problem. The easy problem is to delineate the function. The hard problem is to say yes, but why is
there something it is like, um, to experience that function? Uh, and, and so that, that, that's the,
that's the thing that, that has become the holy grail of neuroscience, that problem. It's the biggest
problem in neuroscience, if not the whole of biological, if not the whole of science, um, you
know, this question, how, how does, how does subjective experience arise out of a mechanism?
Right. And what do you think in the approach today where we're focusing a lot on cognition,
you know, and higher cortical functioning, what in your experience, you know, studying areas like the
brainstem and studying emotions, um, you know, the work like Pankseps and Damasio's, what led you to
the idea that emotions are first and foremost, the core of consciousness? Can you tell us about how
you came to this idea and what evidence you found that pointed you in this direction?
Yeah. Well, how I came to the idea, uh, first of all, is I told you that, uh, in my dream research,
I was led to the, to realize that this, uh, what we call the seeking system for short, the mesocortical
mesolimbic dopamine system, uh, which arises from a nucleus in the brainstem called the ventral
tegmental area. It's a very primitive thing. It's a, I mean, all vertebrates have got one of these,
you know, uh, uh, they, uh, this is the system that drives the dream process. It's an intensely
motivational and emotionally, uh, charged, um, assist, uh, function that this system performs.
Um, and it's, it's the, the, the ventral tegmental area is just one in a set of nuclei in the brainstem
that we call the reticular activating system. And, uh, why is it called the reticular activating system?
It's because it activates the forebrain. So, um, it is the, it is the essential power supply for
consciousness. And we've known this for a long time. We've known since the middle of the 20th century
that if you damage that area or disconnect that area from the cortex, then the lights go out. I mean,
you're, you're in a coma. So, um, although all of the, the it's, it's understandable, as I said,
that Crick would start with visual cortical functioning, um, and our own, our own consciousness
is dominated by, uh, visual perception and, and the cognitive processes that flow from it and the
other perceptual modalities, you know, that this it's, it's, it is understandable that we would start
there. The crucial fact is that all of that is secondary. Uh, the, the, the, the, the, the,
the conscious processing of that cortical information is only rendered conscious by virtue of the fact
that it's activated from the reticular activating system. Now we used to think that that was
something like a power supply in, in the sense that a television set needs to be plugged in at the wall.
You know, if it's not plugged in and switched on, it's not going to do any televisual anything that,
uh, but that doesn't mean that the power source at the wall is, is really the source of television.
It's just a necessary prerequisite that in you got, it enables you to have a television set that does
televisual things because it has to be powered up. That's what we thought the reticular activating
system was. But as I told you, uh, the, the, the seeking system doesn't just power up your, your
forebrain. It gives it a very particular motivated, energized. I mean, if you upregulate dopamine,
you go into a manic state and eventually into psychotic state, you know, and if you upregulate
or downregulate all of these chemicals that come from these brainstem arousal systems,
it doesn't just switch on or switch off the lights. It switches on or off very particular intense
affective states. Affect means feeling states, you know, things that feel good or feel bad,
but, but feel good or bad in particular ways. So things like fear and rage, um, and, and seeking,
you know, which is this exploratory curiosity and interest, um, and lust, uh, you know, and separation
distress and, and, and all these things, you know, all of these very, very basic, uh, emotional states.
That's what the reticular activating system generates, not just a light switch that generates
affects. So now, if you put together these two facts, number one, that this is the prerequisite,
necessary, a source of any kind of cortical conscious experience, and two, uh, the fact that
it generates a quality, uh, and content of experience, which is quite different from the cortical type,
namely feelings, um, that suggested to me two things. Number one, we shouldn't look to the cortex
because that's secondarily rendered conscious by the primary source of consciousness, which is in the
brainstem. And, uh, by the same token, we shouldn't be focusing on visual consciousness because visual
consciousness is only possible if it's powered up from below by this affective kind of consciousness.
In other words, we have to feel our way into our visual information processing, um, in order for
it to become conscious. So that's why I decided to look, um, uh, for all of those reasons to look,
to the brainstem instead. And when I say I decided, I have to say, uh, it wasn't me alone. I was,
I was, I was guided in that direction by my great friend, uh, now sadly deceased friend and, and, uh,
and collaborator, Jaak Panksepp. Uh, I was also, uh, deeply impressed and influenced by another, uh,
colleague, uh, Antonio Damasio, who came to the same conclusion, uh, in, in Jaak Panksepp's footsteps,
uh, that, that the, the basic form of consciousness, the foundational form of consciousness,
is feeling. And, um, you asked me what the evidence for that is. Uh, well, I, you know, I,
I rehearse all that evidence in my book. Um, I, I've, I've, I've, I've, uh, mentioned already,
you know, that if you damage that area, the lights go out completely. Uh, now, uh, to add to that,
if you stimulate those structures, you generate intense feelings. The most intense and wide range
of feelings can be generated by stimulating those deep brain stem structures, the, the reticular
activating system. Nothing like that happens when you stimulate cortex. Um, if you take brain images,
what we call positron emission tomography or PET imaging, uh, of the brain when people are in
intense affective states like, like rage or joy or fear or sadness, um, and you look where, where is the
brain activity that's generating these states? In other words, where is the highest metabolic turnover?
It's in the brain stem, not in the cortex. In fact, not at all in the cortex. It's all,
all in the subcortex and all, and, and the epicenter of it is in the brain stem. Um, I already mentioned
the chemistry. You know, what few people realize is the, the mainstream of psychiatric medications,
in other words, medications for, for modulating emotions, because you know, these are emotional
disorders, um, antipsychotics, antidepressants, anti-anxiety drugs, and so on. They act on the,
on the, on the neuromodulators that are sourced in the reticular activating system. So for example,
antidepressants, SSRIs, where you increase the availability of serotonin. Serotonin is sourced in the
reticular activating system. Dopamine, uh, which we spoke, we spoke about earlier, which is the,
the, the, the big-ticket item when it comes to dreams, um, is also the big-ticket item when it
comes to psychosis. You know, that other delusional and hallucinatory state like, like dreams. Um,
and antipsychotics block dopamine. Um, uh, uh, uh, many anti-anxiety drugs, uh, block norepinephrine,
and that's sourced also in the reticular activating system. So that's the sort of evidence,
you know, that you, that if you damage it, all, all consciousness goes. If you stimulate it,
you don't generate wakefulness, you generate rage or despair or fear, you know, specific,
intense emotional states. If you image the brain when you're in those emotional states,
uh, you see that's where the activation's coming from. Um, and when you manipulate the chemistries
of those circuits, um, uh, then, you know, you, you, you're manipulating these feeling states.
So that's all of that. Uh, and none of that applies to cortex. The, the, the cortex thinks
about these things, uh, but the feelings themselves, the raw basic ingredients, uh, of the, the, remember,
I can remember it. Don't lose sight of the fact that this is prerequisite for all cognitive
consciousness. All cognitive consciousness is predicated on this affective arousal. So, you know,
that's the evidence for it. The most striking of all of the evidence is that if you look at,
at, uh, human beings who born with no cortex, if the cortex was the seat of consciousness,
those kids should be in a coma. Um, or at the very least, they should be in what we call a
vegetative state, which is defined as non-responsive wakefulness. In other words, they should be black.
There should not be anything it is like to be them. Uh, and that's just not the case. Those kids,
uh, they, not only do they wake up in the morning, in other words, they're conscious,
but they are emotionally responsive. They respond with all of the basic emotional, uh, uh, the things
I've just been talking about, things like anger, uh, and sadness, and fear, and, and happiness,
and playfulness, and, you know, these sorts of things. These kids show all of these emotions
in situationally appropriate contexts, um, even though they have no cortex at all. So, you know,
there's just, there's just oodles of evidence that raw feelings, the most basic form of consciousness,
do not require cortex to come about. Um, and, uh, uh, uh, uh, everything points to the reticular
activating system of the brainstem. Also, another little nucleus down there, uh, called the periaqueductal
gray or P-A-G. Right, right. No, I think it's so important to understand that while our conscious
experience, you know, we might be thinking that our thoughts are our conscious experience,
these affective states, they completely color our consciousness, our experience, and they change
also, you know, as we move in the world, they change what's salient to us, right? They, they change
what pops out at us, what's, what's, what becomes apparent to us, these different affective states.
And I think what's so important to understand also, this being the source of consciousness, is that
all animals, right, all mammals have these universal emotions, these same brain circuits, and
that they've evolved for very purposeful reasons, right? They're very sophisticated and built in.
And in our Western world, we value analytical, rational thinking, and we think that emotions
are just fluff, but they're, they're very, very sophisticated in this sense, right? They're very
evolved. Um, so I'd love if you could give us a little bit of an outline, you know, what is the
difference between feeling and thinking, right? What, what is the distinction there? Um, how are they
integrated? Um, and then we'll, I'd love to unpack emotions in general a bit later.
Yeah. So let me say, first of all, that, um, it is again, understandable that we would use human,
you know, our own experience as our starting point. But if you think about it in evolutionary,
biological terms, you know, it's kind of crazy to think that consciousness starts with us.
Um, right. You know, especially in light of what you've said about, about, um, these, the, the,
these primitive emotional states, uh, in animals, it's clearly, uh, obviously the case, um, you know,
that for example, dogs get angry and get scared, uh, you know, and show separation distress and so on.
You know, anybody who's got a pet cat or a pet dog, you know, knows that of course they, they have
feelings. Um, but when you look at what those feelings are about, uh, think about what I've
just said, you know, what, what is fear? Uh, it means that I'm in danger, uh, of coming to, to physical
harm, you know, that I might die. Uh, this is a biological matter of great importance, whether you
survive or not. Um, and rage, you know, if you don't stake your claim on the resources in the territory,
um, you know, and you, you, you can't fight for your, for your stake, uh, you know, then, uh, you,
you're, again, you're not going to survive. You have to be able to be frustrated by people or, or
animals, other conspecifics, you know, getting in the way and preventing you from getting your share.
Um, separation distress for us mammals, we, we can't look after ourselves when we're born. Uh, we,
this is the defining feature of mammals is we have to be suckled.
Right.
And so we need to attach to somebody who looks after us. And if we don't, you know,
it's a separation distress is an expression of, again, a basic survival mechanism. And, you know,
so the, and the same apply. So the idea that feelings, uh, and emotions are fluffy things,
I mean, nothing could be further from the truth. They are, they are much more important to our survival
than analytical philosophy, you know? Um, and, uh, so although it's understandable, we started with
this highest, most complex form of consciousness that exists in nature, namely our own, you know,
surprise, surprise, we put ourselves at the center of it. Um, you know, really it was the wrong place
to start. We should have started with these much more elementary forms. And, and despite the bad breath
that feelings get, uh, as I hope I've just explained, they are fundamentally important biologically.
And so it's no surprise, uh, to learn that consciousness started with these primitive
feeling states, um, which actually drive the engine of the mind. You asked me, what is the
relationship between, uh, between feelings or affects as we call them technically and cognitions?
Basically this, that feeling, um, is a demand on the mind to perform work. In other words,
there's a problem here. You know, I am in danger. Uh, I am separated from my caregiver. I have a
frustrating obstacle in my way, preventing me from getting what I need. I got to do something about
that. So feelings like fear and rage, uh, and, and, uh, and panic, uh, these feelings are demands
on the mind to perform work. In other words, here's a problem that you've got to solve. Cognition
is that work. It's the work demanded by the, by the, by the affects. So, you know, so again,
please note the hierarchy, you know, first comes the need, which you feel. Secondly, comes the
response to that need. Okay. Let me think my way through this problem. And, uh, that's in a very,
very small nutshell, um, is the essence of the relationship between the two. Now, a crucial point
in the cognitive side of things is no say in the affective side, it's good and bad, you know, feel
good feelings and bad feelings tell you if things are going well or badly, you know, you're going in
the right direction or the wrong direction. Um, in cognition, uh, the, the equivalent of good and bad
is more like correct and incorrect. You know, it's like, this is logical. This is illogical. This is
rational. This is irrational. This is true. This is false. These are the cognitive sort of equivalents
and they are rooted in a value system. You know, you have to, where, where do these ideas come from?
You know, where do these abstractions come from? Any kind of choice has to be rooted in a value
system, which says what's better and what's worse. Otherwise it's random. You know, there's no basis
for making a choice if both are equally valuable. So feelings are our most basic value system, which
reflects by the way, the value system upon which the whole of life is based, namely is good to survive
and bad not to. Okay. This is the, this is the thing that drives the whole of evolution
and the whole of life. And so those feelings then dictate whether your cognitive plans are working
or not. In other words, if I can put it in a pithy formulation, if things are working out as expected,
that's good. In other words, if your plans are coming to fruition. Right. You're moving towards the
goal. Yeah. That feels good. Um, that's why it is good. It's because it means your needs are going to be met.
Right. And if uncertainty prevails, in other words, if cognitively you, you, you don't get it,
you can't solve it. Uh, it's, this is bad. It's bad because, you know, it's actually a matter of
life and death ultimately. It means you haven't solved the problem. The number one problem being,
how do I meet my, my biological needs? So, so, you know, that's, that's the essential, uh,
nature of the relationship between, between feelings, um, and thoughts.
Right. I imagine, you know, mammals having these instincts as well, but also, you know,
the single cell organism, you know, moving, you know, through space and trying to get, you know,
to the things that it needs and these value instincts, these value signals, um, you know,
indicating whether we're moving towards survival and reproduction or not, you know, they're at the base
of everything. And with us, it's just a little bit more complex and trying to understand our emotions
and, you know, everything's nested in a value hierarchy. Uh, there's trade-offs between our
needs. So the whole study of emotions and the problem solving that arises around them becomes
a little bit more complicated, but, you know, at the root we have, have the same systems operating
within us. Yeah. To get, uh, the, the name of Freud back into the conversation, uh, let us not forget
that these needs conflict with each other. Right. So, so, uh, that's also why we, as much as I'm saying
that the higher cognitive capacities of the human brain, um, are not the starting point of consciousness,
nevertheless, I'm very grateful to have a human brain, um, because, you know, we have, we have the
unique capacity to be able to, uh, resolve all of these, in all of these complexities. And the most
important thing, you spoke about a single cell, um, the simpler, uh, creatures, um, simpler organisms,
they solve life's problems by reflex. In other words, they've got one and only one solution.
You know, if, if, if, if everything, uh, you know, if, if all I've got is a hammer, then everything looks
like a nail. And so they just, you know, it's like, they just do the same thing. And if they're in an
uncertain situation, in other words, a situation for which that reflex is not the correct solution,
or that stereotyped instinctual behavior is not the correct solution, they have no alternative.
That's the only thing they can do. So consciousness is not, is not right at the very beginning of life.
Uh, the, the, the problem of how to stay alive is there right at the beginning of life.
But what feeling adds is this capacity for choice. In other words, imagine you're in,
you know, normally respiratory control. Let's take that example. It's, it's autonomic. You're not
conscious of your need for oxygen. Uh, but now you enter into an unpredicted situation, like you're in
a carbon dioxide filled room. Suddenly you become aware of your need to breathe. That's a bad feeling.
Okay. That's negative affect as we call it. That's the demand for work. You've got to do something.
And now you've got, you've never been in a burning building before, let alone this particular one.
So you don't know what to do. This is what feeling is for. If you make the right decision,
like you, you, you go downstairs and you feel now I can breathe. That's a good feeling. It tells you,
you're going the right way. If you go upstairs and there's less oxygen up there,
you feel more air hunger, more suffocation alarm. So the feeling tells you you've made the wrong
cognitive decision. So the, so the, the feeling underwrites the capacity for choice and for
voluntary behavior. So it's in, in the evolutionary series, um, it's only when feeling evolved, this
extended form of homeostasis of, of how, of how to meet our biological needs, which enables choice.
Uh, that, that is, that is where, where the dawn of consciousness is to be located.
Okay. And I'm wondering, you know, with this understanding that emotions are at the core of
consciousness, what kind of research would you like to see happening in the future, you know, in the,
in the near future with this new understanding around consciousness, around neuroscience as well?
I think that, um, you know, that's such a big question. There's so much that needs to be done,
but I think that the principle, um, is that we need to recognize that all of this cognitive machinery,
all of these, I mean, it's brilliant that we got fantastically, uh, uh, uh, sophisticated tools,
both technical tools and conceptual tools for understanding visual processing, auditory processing,
language processing, memory processing, et cetera, et cetera, et cetera. We, we, we tend to sort of like,
um, the, the, the, the, they become kind of rarefied, you know, that we, we forget that the only reason
that we have all of this cognitive machinery is because we have to learn, cognition is there for
learning how to meet our biological needs? So I think that we will never properly understand
how those cognitive functions, uh, uh, work if we don't understand that they are ultimately rooted in
meeting biological needs. Um, and, um, so that when you say what kind of research would I like to see
happening? I'd like to see a more embodied, a more biologically plausible, uh, uh, uh, a more,
a more sort of also what, what, uh, you know, I mentioned my colleague, Jack Panksepp earlier,
many, many people accused him of being anthropocentric. They said, I mean, uh, of being, uh, uh, uh,
anthropomorphic. They, they say, you're eating animals as if they're humans. You know, you, you,
you're speaking about their minds. Like laughing rats and all sorts of things like that.
And what, what Jack said was I would rather be accused, um, of being rather than anthropomorphic
towards animals. I want to be zoomorphic towards humans. In other words, we are ultimately, you
know, a species of animal and that you won't understand how our cognitions work and even what
they're there for. If you don't see us as part of the greater sort of, um, family, uh, of, of, of,
of living things. Um, so I think understanding these circuits and these emotions, you know,
for instance, play and mammals, right. And, and rough and tumble play and how, how necessary that
is for little children and how we're treating them with ADD and all of these problems, you know,
that we're solving that if we understood the root, you know, of the matter, we'd, our approach would
be completely different. I mean, all we have to do is look at our own lives. You know, what matters
is how we feel. Right. It's, uh, it's, it's the, it's the heart of the matter. I'd love to ask you,
you know, um, before we wrap up, you know, looking back, what advice would you give your 20 year old self
starting out? Um, well, actually, uh, the advice I would give myself is the advice that I took except
nobody gave me that advice. Uh, it is don't, don't be, don't be sidetracked from the, the, the, the
naive questions that interested you in the first place. You know, I think I was far from being the,
the, the, the only neuroscientist who came into the field, uh, expecting to be, you know, engaging
with these profound mysteries. I mean, what's more important than, you know, what brings me about?
How do I come into existence? This sentient experiencing self is a massively important
scientific question. How does that happen? Um, and yet, you know, you get it beaten out of you
in grad school and told, you know, embarrassing questions. So I think, I think that's my advice
is, you know, don't forget why, what fascinated you, what motivated you in the first place. Don't be,
don't shy away from naive questions. They are the most important questions. And, um, and that's,
that's what I, that's what I advise my students, uh, you know, uh, uh, today. And, um, if I can take
a slightly different approach to your question, since you mentioned play and it is true, mammals
need to play. We need to play. Like we need to eat and drink. We need to play. And, um, so I would,
another, another piece of advice I would give is, although it's very important, you know, in life that
you've got to face up to all of these problems. I told you, you know, life is all about meet,
solving these problems, learning how to meet your needs in the world. One of those needs
is a need to have fun. So you must also enjoy yourself, you know, while, while you, while you're
facing up to all of life's realities, we have to face up to, to facts, especially unwelcome facts,
because they're there, you know, even if you don't look at them, they're still there
and they're still having their effects. But life isn't only about solving life's problems. It's
also about enjoying yourself. Brilliant. Brilliant. I will personally take those two pieces of advice.
Mark, it's been an absolute pleasure speaking with you today. Thank you so much for coming on
the Bigger Picture podcast and sharing your work with us. Thank you.
